A previously healthy 23-year old, Caucasian man was admitted for the first time 19 years ago (1997), at the age of 23 with a 4-week history of upper right abdominal pain, loose stools and fever. Three months previously he had made a 5-week trip through Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia. Laboratory testing revealed elevated inflammatory parameters and a slightly increased gamma-glutamyltransferase . Ultrasound of the abdomen demonstrated a vaguely defined area in the right liver lobe compatible with an abscess and Entamoeba spp. cysts were detected in a stool sample, supporting the diagnosis of an amebic liver abscess. On admission no specific antibodies against E. histolytica were detectable using an ELISA method. The liver abscess was not aspirated. The patient was treated with metronidazole followed by diloxanide furoate with good clinical response. Serology for E. histolytica was positive one month later. Six months later, stool examination by microscopy for cysts was negative.
Four years later (2001) the patient was admitted with a 10 cm large abscess high in the liver with a 5-day history of spiking fever and malaise. Since 1997 he had travelled once to Nepal and Bangladesh in 1999. The patient was again diagnosed with an amebic liver abscess, which was supported by positive serology results. Treatment was initiated with metronidazole. However, fever persisted and after 5 days percutaneous drainage of the abscess was performed. In the aspirate no trophozoites of E. histolytica were found and the bacterial cultures remained negative. The recovery hereupon was uneventful and a 10-day course of metronidazole was followed by diloxanide furoate for 10 days. Ultrasound of the liver demonstrated complete resolution of the abscess 6 months later.
Finally, three years ago—with a twelve year interval (2013)—the patient was admitted for the third time with a 5-day history of spiking fever and upper abdominal pain. Two years earlier, in 2011, the patient had been in Thailand for one week and had made short trips to China (in 2006, 2009 and 2012). Laboratory examination revealed increased levels of inflammation markers and computed tomography (CT) showed an abscess of 5 cm in the right liver lobe with small satellite abscesses. For the third time the diagnosis of amebic liver abscess was made, based on positive serology results and the detection of E. histolytica in a stool sample by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Treatment was started with metronidazole. Initially the patient responded well and was discharged on day 5. After 10 days of metronidazole, paromomycin was started. One week after discharge, the patient was readmitted with persistent low-grade fever and abdominal pain. C-reactive protein concentration had decreased (46 mg/L), but slightly increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase (42 U/L) and gamma-glutamyltransferase (129 U/L) were noted. A new CT-scan revealed a subtle increase in the size of the abscess with subcapsular extension . Percutaneous drainage was deferred because the clinical condition improved. The patient subsequently made an uncomplicated recovery and has remained in excellent condition to date. There were no indications of immune deficiencies. Normal amounts of T- and B-cells, immunoglobulins and complement factors were found . In addition a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test was negative.
Stool samples of the patient’s wife, who accompanied him from the first amebic abscess episode onwards, and their 2 children were investigated for E. histolytica. The wife tested positive for E. histolytica by PCR examination of the stool, but E. histolytica serology was negative. She was treated with paromomycin 500 mg tid for 10 days.