A 67-year-old female was referred to our hospital due to the finding of a hepatic mass after an ultrasonography (US) for elevated serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP). Her past medical history was positive for diabetes for the last seven years, which was well-controlled by oral hypoglycemic drugs. Her family history was noncontributory. The laboratory investigation showed no elevation of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) or protein induced by vitamin K absence/antagonist-II (PIVKA-II). Hepatitis B surface antigens and hepatitis C antibodies were negative. The aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 21 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 20 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was 184 IU/L, and γ-GTP was 109. The total bilirubin level was 0.75 mg/dL, the albumin level was 4.6 g/dL, and the prothrombin time was 12.0 s (INR, 0.93).
The US revealed a 14 mm well-defined, hypoechoic mass in the posterosuperior subsegment of the right hepatic lobe (segment 7). Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 17 mm well-defined tumor that was enhanced in the arterial phase and washed out in the portal and delayed phase . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), T1-weighted fat suppressed imaging showed low intensity at the tumor of S7. T2-weighted imaging showed high intensity at the tumor. In Gd-EOB-DTPA enhanced MRI, the tumor was enhanced in the arterial phase, and there was low signal intensity in the hepatobiliary phase .
Based on the above findings, HCC was suspected. We performed a subsegmental resection of the liver.
The macroscopic findings revealed that the tumor was visually not apparent . Microscopic findings showed that the tumor was surrounded by thin fibrous capsule . The lesion was composed of cells with a microvesicular cytoplasm, and these were aligned in alveolar or trabecular arrangements in a similar manner to features of the adrenocortical tissue . Therefore, we thought it was not HCC, suggesting the possibility of an adrenal rest tissue of the liver or a metastatic clear cell carcinoma of the kidney, although no mass was detected radiologically in the kidney, and a malignant tumor was not detected in the adrenal cortex.
Thus, we performed immunohistochemical staining. The tumor did not stain for liver marker Hep-per-1, AFP, and glypican-3, which are usual markers for HCC, and it did not stain for CD10, which is a diagnostic marker of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Additionally, the cells were negative for cytokeratins (AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, CK7, and CK19). In contrast, positive staining was observed for inhibin α, melan A, synaptophysin, and CD56 but not chromogranin A . The Ki-67 proliferation index was less than 1% in the tumor cells.
Thus, the final histopathologic diagnosis in this case was an adrenal rest tumor of the liver.