A 41-year-old Indian female first presented to the outpatient clinic complaining of a tender lump over her right parieto-occipital region. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head was done, revealing a small, well defined lytic lesion of the skull extending from the inner table to the outer table. The initial impression was that the lump was consistent with sinus pericranii .
She presented to an outside hospital 1 year later with left shoulder pain weakness and numbness of both lower extremities. On examination, power in both lower limbs was 4 out of 5 but there were no motor deficits in her upper limbs. There was mild sensory deficit to light touch and pain over her left cervical segment 8 (C8) and thoracic segment 1 (T1) dermatomes. There were no cerebellar signs or higher mental function deficits. No lymphadenopathy was clinically evident and biochemically there were no abnormalities. A contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her cervical spine was done, which showed an extradural lesion extending from cervical segment 7 (C7) to thoracic segment 2 (T2) occupying the left posterolateral spinal canal. She underwent a C7 to T2 laminectomy, excision of lesion and instrumentation of the spine. The histological diagnosis was that of RDD.
She subsequently presented to our institute 2 months after surgery with numbness extending from her left mid torso to her left leg. A contrast MRI scan of the brain and spine was done. It showed enhancement in the first and second thoracic segments’ left lateral recesses and neural foramina likely representing postsurgical changes in the absence of residual tumor. It also revealed the previously noted osteolytic lesion involving the right posterior parietal bone, which now had extradural and extracalvarial enhancing soft tissue components . However, she was asymptomatic from the cranial lesion, erthyrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was not elevated, there was no lymphocytosis, and gamma-globulin levels were normal. In addition, the lesion was isolated and small, thus conservative management was adopted and she was placed on outpatient observation with close follow-up.
A follow-up MRI of her brain and spine was done 4 months later, which showed resolution of the enhancement seen at the region of the spinal lesion. The brain lesion showed marginal increase in size but as the patient continued to remain asymptomatic, we elected to continue observation with close follow-up and interval imaging.
Her subsequent follow-up MRI brain at 6 months now showed a significant interval increase in the size of the right parieto-occipital extraaxial dural-based enhancing soft-tissue lesion. Dimensions were approximately 2 × 3.2 × 1.7 cm in maximum orthogonal dimensions. It also showed an interval increase in protrusion into the underlying right cerebrum with significant interval development of vasogenicedema in the right parieto-occipital lobe, extending to reach the right atrial subependyma. The lesion was transcalvarial with a subgaleal component, which also shows interval increase in size . Biochemically, she had markedly raised lactate dehydrogenase levels (LDH) (1198, reference: 222-454 U/L) and lymphocytosis.
The patient was due for outpatient review a week after the MRI brain, but in view of the finding, she was quickly contacted to assess her clinical state. She had, however, presented to the emergency department with headaches, neck stiffness, increasing drowsiness, and nausea, and was thus admitted for treatment. She was treated with dexamethasone 4 mg three times a day and analgesics. Her symptoms subsequently improved. We decided to take her for surgery because of the increasing size of the lesion, vasogenic cerebral edema secondary to the lesion as evident on her scan, and evidence of raised intracranial pressure (ICP). She underwent a craniotomy and excision of the lesion. The tumor was found to be an intradiploic tumor eroding into surrounding soft tissue superficially and deep with dural involvement and extension into the brain. The lesion was excised en-bloc and the calvarial defect was closed with an acrylic cranioplasty. The patient made an uneventful recovery. On last follow-up, a month after surgery, a first time positron emission tomography-computed tomography (CT-PET) was done to assess for residual disease or recurrence and also screen for systemic disease. This showed successful removal of the intracranial lesion with no other systemic lesions.
Histopathology showed the lesion to be involving both the inner and outer tables of the skull as well as the dura mater. There was nodular proliferation of foamy histiocytes, with admixture by lymphocytes, plasma cells and neutrophils, with numerous foci of sclerosedstroma. Immunohistochemistry staining of the histiocytes was positive for S-100 and CD68 and negative for CD1a. In the dura, the histiocytic proliferation showed intervening foci of sclerosedstroma . These findings were highly diagnostic of RDD.