A 7-year-old previously healthy male presented to an outside emergency department (ED) with severe left hip pain and inability to bear weight after a wrestling injury. He reported a history of influenza 2 weeks prior, which was treated with Tamiflu and had resolution of flu symptoms. Radiographs of the pelvis identified a 2-cm oval lucency in the left femoral neck. Initial labs showed ESR 10 (s) and CRP 6 (mg/l) with WBC 10.6 (μl). Concern for septic arthritis was low in the setting of normal inflammatory markers. Given his recent history of influenza, the patient was discharged home with a diagnosis of toxic synovitis. He was advised to take NSAIDs and follow-up with an orthopedist for presumed toxic synovitis and with orthopedic oncology for evaluation of the lucency seen on X-ray.
The patient returned to the ED 3 days later with continued inability to bear weight and severe pain which was not relieved by NSAIDs. Radiographs were repeated which showed widened joint space in the left hip and a well-defined lucency in the left femoral neck, presumed to be a unicameral bone cyst (UBC). A septic arthritis work-up was performed given the progression of symptoms and worsening pain. Repeat labs showed ESR 12(s), CRP 9 (mg/l), and WBC 13.3 (μl). The patient was sent for an ultrasound-guided hip aspiration with cell count, gram stain, and cultures. He had symptomatic relief after aspiration and was discharged with 1-week orthopedic follow-up. The hip aspirate results showed no white cells present on the gram stain, with no growth on the culture.
The treating physicians at the time did not suspect infection based on these studies and the patient was not started on empiric antibiotics. The patient continued with severe pain, so his parents sought a second opinion with the author of this paper. On examination, the patient was afebrile, refused to bear weight, and had severe pain with any attempted hip range of motion. New pelvis radiographs were taken that showed a cystic structure without a sclerotic border at the left femoral neck ( and ). The patient was referred to the ED for repeat labs and MRI with and without contrast. At this time, the differential diagnosis included a tumor, infection, and a pathologic fracture. The MRI results were inconclusive in differentiating between tumor versus infection. Findings were not consistent with UBC or pathologic fracture. A CT without contrast showed the lesion had a sinus tract exiting the femoral neck ( and ) and the patient was diagnosed with a Brodie’s abscess.
He was brought to the operating room for debridement of the abscess and joint arthrotomy. A c-arm was used intraoperatively to identify the location of the abscess and it was possible to feel the space when the curette entered the abscess. The bone lesion was curetted, antibiotics lavage was performed, and a wound vacuum was placed. Aerobic, anaerobic, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures obtained from the bone in addition to a broad range bacterial polymerase chain reaction (run in Mayo Laboratory, Rochester, MN) were all negative. Bacterial culture from hip joint fluid was also negative. Histopathology of synovial tissue showed benign fibroconnective tissue with mild chronic inflammation; no bone was seen in the specimen. Two days postoperatively, the wound vacuum was removed, a repeat intraoperative washout with antibiotics was preformed, and the wound was closed. He was treated with intravenous clindamycin for 6 days and discharged on oral clindamycin. Clindamycin monotherapy was chosen to achieve coverage against MRSA, effectively treat S. aureus, the most common cause of osteomyelitis in the patient’s age group, and allow for an easy transition to oral antibiotics. Given focal infection and no signs of sepsis, clindamycin was an appropriate antibiotic choice. In total, the patient completed a 3-month course of clindamycin.
One week postoperatively, he had a full hip range of motion, was fully weight-bearing with a slight limp, and had resolution of pain. Radiographs obtained 9 days postoperatively showed the lytic lesion in the left femoral neck after debridement. At 2-week post-operative, the patient’s limp had fully resolved, and he began strengthening exercises.
At 6-month follow-up, he had no clinical complaints but the lesion was still seen on radiographs, so an MRI was obtained to further assess the lesion and determine the need for bone grafting. MRI revealed a 2-cm cyst on the anterior femur < 50% diameter of the bone, therefore not increased concern for the structural integrity of the femur. At 1-year follow-up, two view pelvis X-rays were taken showing a resolving cyst in the anterior left femur which appeared smaller than previous X-rays. At an 18-month follow-up, the patient had a full range of motion, no pain, and had resumed full activities with no restrictions. At this time, two-view pelvis X-rays showed a resolved cyst . This patient will be followed annually until he reaches skeletal maturity.