The patient was an 80-year-old woman with no past history of head injury, sinus thrombosis, or infections. She initially noticed redness of the sclera in the right eye and consulted a local ophthalmologist. Three months later, she was referred to our hospital. The right eye showed chemosis and swelling of the eyelid. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed exophthalmos and swelling of the right superior orbital vein (SOV). She was initially followed on an outpatient basis. One month later, symptoms including chemosis, facial swelling, and gait disturbance were found to be worsening and she was admitted to our hospital.
Neurological examination showed mild ataxia of the left lower extremity and dysarthria. A full range of eye movement was seen, and the patient did not complain of diplopia.
T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a hyperintense lesion on the right side of the upper pons and the right SOV was dilated . T1-weighted MR imaging of the same region showed good contrast enhancement with gadolinium . Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) showed normal signal (not shown). The patient gave written informed consent before angiography and treatment.
Cerebral angiography showed CS-DAVF supplied by the dural branches of bilateral internal and external carotid arteries, draining into the right SOV and petrosal vein .
Because superselective catheterization through the petrosal sinus up to the pathologic shunt points was not successful, transvenous embolization was technically difficult. And then the TAE was attempted. We used polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles of 250–420 μm as embolic material and embolized bilateral accessory meningeal arteries. Radiotherapy was performed 2 weeks after TAE. Total dose was 34 Gy delivered in 17 fractions. These techniques have been described in detail previously.
Eyelid swelling resolved within a few days after TAE and gait disturbance had not deteriorated by discharge. Follow-up MR imaging about 5 months after therapy showed resolution of brainstem edema and swelling, leaving a lacuna in the right side of the pons . Left hemiparesis was dramatically improved. We confirmed complete disappearance of the lesion on MR imaging 5 months later . The patient refused follow-up angiography. As of the time of writing, the patient remains in a good clinical condition with no evidence of recurrence after the 18-month follow-up.