A 73 year old male Caucasian patient was admitted to the neurological intensive care unit because of fever, headache, neck stiffness, drowsiness, and general malaise. The patient had been well until two days before admission. Relevant comorbidities included coronary artery disease and a myocardial infarction three years ago. The patient was a retired farmer but still helped his son who had taken over the family business. Recently, he had been taking care of a sick horse suffering from an upper respiratory tract infection with purulent nasal discharge compatible with coryza contagiosa equorum (“strangles”). On physical examination, the patient was awake but confused and had nuchal rigidity. He had tachycardia with a heart rate of 126/min, fever (38.8°C), and an oxygen saturation of 96% while breathing 6 liters of oxygen/min. On auscultation of the chest, crackles were heard over both lungs. Chest radiography showed bilateral perihilar infiltrates. A systolic murmur was present at the right sternal border.
Results of routine laboratory tests showed leukocytopenia (3,580/μl; normal range 4,000-11,500/μl), thrombocytopenia (106,000/μl; normal range 160,000-400,000/μl), elevated C-reactive protein (116.9 mg/dl; normal <5 mg/dl) and procalcitonin levels (2.5 ng/ml; normal <0.5 ng/ml). A computed tomography scan of the head revealed no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis yielded an elevated leukocyte count (575/μl, normal <4/μl), an elevated protein level (6,229 mg/dl, normal < 500 mg/dl), and an elevated lactate concentration (13.8 mmol/l, normal range 1.21-2.09 mmol/l). A CSF sample and blood cultures were taken for microbiological examination.
An antibiotic and antiviral regimen with ceftriaxone, ampicillin and aciclovir was initiated empirically. Furthermore, as an adjunctive treatment, glucocorticoids were administered (10 mg dexamethasone intravenously, 4×/d, for a total of 4 days).
Gram staining of the CSF specimen revealed neutrophils, cell debris and Gram-positive cocci laid out in (short) chains . Cultures yielded many large colonies of beta-hemolytic, catalase-negative cocci which were also detected in the blood cultures . The strain expressed the group C Lancefield antigen (Streptex; bioMérieux) and was identified as S. zooepidemicus by biochemical testing (API20 Strep, bioMérieux). The strain was sensitive to penicillin G, amoxicillin, ceftriaxone, erythromycin and vancomycin and resistant to clindamycin. A diagnosis of S. zooepidemicus meningitis was made. Based on these findings, aciclovir and ampicillin were discontinued and ceftriaxone was administered for a total of 21 days. After initiation of antibiotic therapy, the patient’s body temperature returned to normal levels within 24 hours. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe degenerative changes of the aortic valve with no signs suspicious of endocarditis, however. On the second day after admission, the patient reported to permanently see a black spot in his left eye’s central visual field. His visual acuity rapidly decreased to “hand motion” vision. An ophthalmological examination revealed signs of endophthalmitis and the patient eventually underwent vitrectomy. A vitreous specimen yielded no bacterial growth. Thereafter, his general condition improved steadily and he was discharged after a total of 21 days to a hospital specialized in rehabilitative care. On final examination, the only remaining neurological deficit was a markedly impaired visual acuity of his left eye.