A 13-year-old Caucasian boy with well-controlled attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder presented with 1 month of progressive bilateral lower-extremity pain and weakness. He had difficulty standing from a sitting or crouching position due to bilateral buttock and leg pain. He described his pain as sharp, radiating through the buttocks in a sciatic pattern. He denied abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or hematochezia. He had no bowel or bladder incontinence or retention and denied numbness or paresthesias. Associated symptoms included fatigue and an 8-pound weight loss (3.6 kg, then at the 4th percentile, Z = −1.74) without fever or a change in appetite.
On examination, he was afebrile with normal vital signs. He appeared cachectic with reduced muscle bulk. He had no rash, palpable lymph nodes, joint swelling, or oral ulcerations; he had no murmur on cardiac examination. Bilateral hip and knee strength was reduced (4/5, both flexion and extension), though distal lower extremity strength was preserved. Pain was exacerbated with both passive and active movement of his hips. When walking, his gait was waddling, antalgic, and wide-based. He had preserved reflexes and sensation to light touch and proprioception throughout.
Initial testing was notable for an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 4.0 mg/dL; normal 0–1 mg/dL), markedly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 78 mm/hour; normal, 0–15 mm/hour), normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL; normal, 12.4–16.3 g/dL), and hypoalbuminemia (3.1 g/dL; normal, 3.6–5.1 g/dL). He had normal platelets, electrolytes, liver enzymes, and creatine kinase levels. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and full spine, electroencephalogram, lumbar puncture (basic indices as well as oligoclonal bands), and electromyogram with nerve conduction study were unremarkable. An abdominal ultrasound was negative for any solid mass, infiltrative tumor, or abscesses. Screening for vitamin deficiencies was negative. His pain and mobility slowly improved with physical and occupational therapy over 4 days, so he was discharged home with close follow-up of his weight and nutritional status.
Four weeks later, he returned with acutely worsening symptoms of bilateral lower-extremity pain and weakness, and his weight had not changed. He continued to show evidence of systemic inflammation with elevated CRP (peak 4.99 mg/dL; normal, 0–1 mg/dL), elevated ESR (peak 92 mm/hour; normal, 0–15 mm/hour), and normocytic anemia (9.9 g/dL; normal, 12.4–16.3 g/dL). On physical examination, he was noted to be ill-appearing, with cachexia, bilateral lower-extremity proximal weakness to resistance, and a positive Gower sign, as well as low-amplitude chorea evident in the face, the tongue, and the upper extremities more than lower extremities (Additional file : Video S1). The focality of his buttock pain (bilateral, 3–4 cm lateral to the lumbosacral junction) suggested the need for MRI of the pelvis, which demonstrated symmetric, bilateral abnormal marrow signal in the medial iliac bones and greater trochanters .
This marrow infiltrative process prompted whole-body MRI to evaluate for oncologic, infectious, metabolic/toxic, and rheumatologic etiologies. No mass lesions were identified; however, there were multiple foci of abnormal marrow signal in the bilateral distal fibular metaphyses and epiphyses and left tibial epiphysis , and a subtle abnormality in the proximal left radius. Whole-body positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed normal metabolic activity in these areas of abnormal MRI signal. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy showed evidence of histiocytic chronic inflammatory changes , though stains were negative for malignancy, including Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
Infectious evaluation included bacterial [cat scratch disease (Bartonella henselae) and brucellosis (Brucella spp)], mycobacterial (tuberculosis and nontuberculous mycobacteria), fungal (coccidiomycosis, histoplasmosis, and aspergillosis), viral (Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency virus), tick-borne (Lyme disease), and parasitic (toxoplasmosis and Trichinella) etiologies. Specimens sent for culture and other infectious evaluations, including blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, bone marrow biopsy, and bone biopsy from the right femoral lesion were all negative.
The presence of chorea triggered evaluation for toxic and metabolic etiologies, as well as various systemic autoimmune diseases, such as acute rheumatic fever (ARF) and systemic lupus erythematosus. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a normal PR interval, and echocardiogram was negative for valvular disease that would suggest ARF. Comprehensive urine drug profile and serum heavy metals screen were negative. Evaluation for Wilson’s disease was negative (normal ceruloplasmin level). Review of his prior brain MRI confirmed the absence of atrophy or focal lesions associated with chorea.
A 3-day calorie count showed intake of 150% of his caloric needs with concurrent weight loss. He underwent endocrine evaluation for increased catabolic states (for example, hyperthyroidism or Addison disease), but thyroid function and cortisol levels were normal.
He had a normal stooling pattern without hematochezia, making typical gastrointestinal infectious processes less likely, confirmed by negative stool culture and ova/parasite studies. He had further assessment for malabsorption as a reason for caloric losses, including qualitative fecal fat and stool reducing substances that returned normal. Although no gross features of his stool suggested intestinal inflammation or overt bleeding, given his persistent weight loss, systemic inflammation, and anemia, he was screened for IBD with fecal calprotectin. This returned markedly abnormal at > 1250 mg/g (normal, < 50 mg/g), which prompted further direct visualization with endoscopy. This revealed diffuse inflammation in the stomach, duodenum, and ileum, and throughout the colon .
Histologic examination of endoscopic biopsies revealed chronic inflammation in the stomach and acute inflammation in both the small and large intestines. Microscopic ulceration and cryptitis were seen throughout the intestines, and within the small intestines there was villitis associated with villous blunting; in sum, these features were consistent with IBD. Given his small bowel involvement, Crohn disease was favored over ulcerative colitis. He had been treated with scheduled nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for 5 days immediately prior to this endoscopy. Given that his weight loss predated this exposure, his NSAID exposure was brief, and his inflammation included both chronic features and was longitudinally extensive, NSAID enteropathy was judged to be a less likely cause. Similarly, his markedly elevated calprotectin level predated this NSAID exposure.
On synthesis of all relevant findings, including chronic bone marrow inflammation, systemic sequelae of inflammation (weight loss, fatigue, and chorea) in the absence of findings supporting a neoplastic, infectious, or toxic etiology, he was diagnosed with chronic nonbacterial osteitis (CNO) and inflammatory bowel disease. First-line treatment for CNO is scheduled NSAIDs, but NSAIDs are contraindicated with active colonic inflammation. Thus, his therapy was escalated to adalimumab, a monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), in an attempt to address both of his inflammatory conditions. After 6 months of twice-monthly adalimumab therapy, his pain and weakness had completely resolved, his weight resumed his prior growth trajectory at the 30th percentile, and his chorea had resolved. His labs and imaging also normalized, including prior bone marrow changes on whole-body MRI. Eighteen months following presentation, he remained in good health with no alternate diagnoses suggested.