A 63-year-old male developed fever and backache after acupuncture 27 d prior.
The patient was diagnosed with a herniated lumbar disc 31 d prior to admission and underwent acupuncture, but his backache gradually worsened. On the 4th d after acupuncture, the patient developed a fever, but he did not pay attention to it and took antibiotics (which the patient could not describe). During the next 4 wk, his fever sporadically recurred and backache gradually worsened.
The patient had a history of pneumonia 7 years prior but denied having tuberculosis. He also denied having a history of diabetes; however, after our examination and blood glucose monitoring, he was diagnosed with diabetes. The patient denied having a history of other diseases.
The patient was born in Hangzhou and resided there for many years. He denied exposure to epidemic water and residence in an epidemic area. He had a history of smoking for 25 years (at present, 10 cigarettes/d). Furthermore, he denied a history of alcoholism, special dietary hobbies, and exposure to toxic and harmful substances, smuggling, endemic diseases, occupational diseases, and special chemical and radiation exposure. He had no familial history of hereditary disease or genetic predisposition to disease and had no immediate family members with infectious diseases.
The patient was conscious but tired, with pressure pain at the low back, no obvious pressure pain in the lower lumbar region, no radiating pain and numbness in both lower limbs, a negative Lasegue sign, normal muscle strength in the lower limbs, no elicitation of pathological signs, and normal walking gait.
A blood test was conducted after admission . The other tests and results were as follows: T-cell test for tuberculosis infection, negative; tuberculosis smear, no antacid bacilli detected; blood routine aerobic culture for 5 d, no bacterial growth observed; hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e antigen, and hepatitis B core antibody tests, positive; and urine and stool tests, normal.
Multiple preoperative and postoperative blood infection indices, including percentage of neutrophils, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein level, were conducted .
Preoperative images: Computed tomography revealed destruction of the 9/10 thoracic vertebrae . Normal thoracic vertebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed large patchy T1 image hypointensity, T2 image isointensity, and fat suppression image hyperintensity in the 9/10 thoracic vertebrae . Infectious disease of the 9/10 thoracic vertebrae was considered.
Thoracic vertebral contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed thoracic vertebrae physiological curvature, fair sequence, and smoothly arranged vertebrae. The 9/10 thoracic vertebrae had large patchy T1 image hypointensity, T2 image isointensity, and fat suppression image hyperintensity. With stenosis of the intervertebral space and thickening of the surrounding soft tissue, no obvious abnormal signal was detected in the tube, and there was a high possibility of tuberculosis considering the infectious lesions of the 9/10 thoracic vertebrae .