A 28 year old woman with a 24th -week intrauterine pregnancy gravida 2 para 0 was admitted to the emergency department of the referring hospital with chest and back pain. Ultrasound diagnostic demonstrated pericardial effusion and a dissection membrane in the ascending and descending aorta . The patient was immediately transferred with the diagnosis of a DeBakey Type I Aortic dissection. Further comorbidities included arterial hypertension, renal insufficiency stage 4 with a history of kidney transplant 2014 after preeclampsia after childbirth 2007, among others.. Initial consensus was found to minimise the operative risk for the mother and to perform surgery leaving the fetus in vivo and choosing an optimal operative strategy with a mild hypothermia and arch inspection to limit the period of circulatory arrest to an absolute minimum. After conferring with the pregnant mother however, she decided to deliver the baby via caesarean section despite the early phase of prior to aortic repair. To minimise the perioperative risk of bleeding the patient consented to an operative hysterectomy before heparinisation for the establishment of extracorporal circulation.
Surgery was performed on the day of diagnosis in a collaborative manner, with induction of general anaesthesia immediately prior to caesarean section performed via a Misgav Ladach operative technique and subsequent supracervical hysterectomy. The fetus was immediately transferred to the neonatal paediatricians, the initial body weight was 690 g with an APGAR 2/4/6 and a naval pH of 7.19.. After semi-closure of the abdomen we proceeded with the surgical treatment of the aortic dissection. Arterial cannulation was established via the right subclavian artery, mild hypothermia was targeted and exposition of the aorta and supraaortic vessels was achieved. Aortotomy demonstrated the dissection reaching into the acoronary sinus, the right and left coronary sinus showed no signs of dissection. After resection of the dissected aorta to the sinotubular ridge and application of Bioglue® (Cryolife Inc. Kennesaw, U.S.A) for stabilisation of the dissected noncoronary Sinus a pledget strip stabilised supracoronary ascending aortic replacement using a 28 mm Vascutek Gelweave vascular prosthesis was performed. After reaching the aimed 28 °C temperature, circulatory arrest was established and selective antegrade cerebral perfusion was administered over the brachiocephalic trunk and the left common carotid artery. The left subclavian artery was snared down by tape to reduce subclavian steal. Inspection of the aortic arch showed however no entry site in the ascending aorta or the transverse arch, even distal to the left subclavian artery as far as visible. A possible retrograde type A dissection had to be postulated as possible cause of the aortic pathology. A rapid decision had to be made as to whether to extensify the procedure in form of a frozen elephant trunk procedure to occlude possible entry sites in the descending aorta, or to secondarily visualise the tears of the descending aorta via computed tomography and secondary treatment of the underlying pathology. The less radical approach was chosen and a hemi-arch replacement was performed in a circulatory arrest of 21 min using SACP for 12 min, INVOS® (Somanetics, U.S.A) monitoring showed no hemispheral differences in saturation. Postoperative echocardiographic examination demonstrated trivial aortic regurgitation. After adequate haemostasis was achieved the gynaecologists were contacted for definitive closure of the abdomen.
The initial postoperative period showed no complications and subsequent computer tomography of the aorta was performed. This demonstrated multiple entry sites in the descending aorta approximately 6 cm distal the left subclavian artery, with adequate perfusion of the visceral arteries and a narrowing of the true lumen following the origin of the left subclavian artery . The transplanted kidney was anastomosed to the left common iliac artery with adequate perfusion. The decision was quickly made to treat the descending aorta via an endovascular stentgraft to obliterate possible retrograde perfusion to the aortic arch. Under general anaesthesia percutaneous access to the right common femoral artery was achieved. After pre-placement of sutures of Prostar XL® closure device (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), a 10F sheath was introduced and angiograms of the thoracic and abdominal aorta were performed with a pigtail catheter. A super-stiff guide wire (Back-up Meier, Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA) introduced through the pigtail catheter ensured the correct position of the guide wire in the true lumen. Consequently a Valiant Captivia thoracic stent graft (32/32/157 mm, 22F, Medtronic) system was introduced into the aortic arch and implanted in such a fashion that the covered part of the stentgraft started just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. The control angiogram showed adequate sealing of the descending thoracic aorta and improved flow to the true lumen of abdominal aorta . The control CT examination 5 days later showed improved flow in the true lumen and abdominal. Furthermore no dissection could be demonstrated in the aortic arch.
Further hospital stay was uneventful without neurological sequelae and the patient could be discharged to the rehabilitation centre on the 18th postoperative day. The baby could be definitively extubated on the 24th postoperative day, he required phototherapy due to hyperbilirubinemia, the patent ductus could be successfully treated by Ibuprofen and the baby could be discharged home safely with a weight of 2015 g and 43 cm height after a 3 month hospital stay.