A 61-year-old heterosexual male of Moroccan origin was diagnosed with primary mediastinal non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Other than hypertension treated with amlodipine he had no medical history. Viral serology prior to starting therapy showed previous hepatitis B infection, HIV screening was negative.
The patient was refractory to rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (R-CHOP). Second line therapy with rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine and cisplatin (R-DHAP) had to be abandoned after one cycle because of invalidating tinnitus. Rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin and etoposide (R-ICE) was started with an increase in tumor activity and volume on positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) after the first cycle. In August 2013 the patient was hospitalized for high dose cyclophosphamide for stem cell mobilization. Treatment continued with low-dose BEAM (bis-chloroethylnitrosourea 60 mg/m2 on day 1, etoposide 15 mg/m2 on day 2,3,4 and 5, cytarabine 2 × 100 mg/m2 on day 2,3,4 and 5, and melphalan 30 mg/m2 on day 6) followed by autologous stem cell rescue, resulting in a partial response. We repeated low-dose BEAM followed by stem cell infusion and obtained stable disease on PET/CT. After the second cycle we noticed blue, round lesions on the left forearm and both legs, slightly elevated and sensitive with pressure . Skin biopsies were taken. Microscopy showed a normal epidermis, but the dermis showed many small vessels in clusters with swollen endothelial cells . Immune-histochemical staining was positive for HHV-8 and negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV). The diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma of the skin was made. Serology confirmed a negative HIV status. Review of the CT scans showed no evidence of visceral sarcomas. After 1 week of ganciclovir because of a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CMV, treatment continued with full dose BEAM (bis-chloroethylnitrosourea 300 mg/m2 on day 1, etoposide 200 mg/m2 day 2–5, cytarabine 2 × 200 mg/m2 day 2–5, and melphalan 140 mg/m2 day 6) and autologous stem cell transplantation. During hospitalization no new skin lesions appeared.
Two months later more skin lesions appeared on the lower legs. PET/CT at that moment showed a fibrotic lesion in the anterior mediastinum with volume decrease and complete resolution of metabolic activity. The patient was consolidated with 40 Gy radiotherapy. During this treatment additional lesions appeared on the lower legs, his general condition was cumbersome. A new biopsy confirmed the previous diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma. CD4+ count at that time, 3 months after the last HCT was at 82/mm3. Later, the spreading of KS stopped and on day 182 after HCT CD4+ count rose to 156/mm3.
Nine months after transplantation, counting 227 CD4+/mm3 in peripheral blood, skin lesions gradually disappeared . A new CT scan confirmed complete response status of the lymphoma.