A 70-year-old man was transported to our hospital via ambulance due to orthopnea. He reported general fatigue and dyspnea in the preceding five days and was taking medications for hypertension, dyslipidemia, and diabetes mellitus. There was no prior history of heart failure or ACS. His family history was unremarkable.
On arrival, blood pressure was 131/62 mmHg. Heart rate was remarkably low at 35 beats/min. No cardiac murmur was auscultated, however there were moist rales in the lower lungs bilaterally.
A previous ECG sent from his practitioner showed normal sinus rhythm without conduction abnormality . The admission ECG showed complete atrioventricular (AV) block, complete right bundle branch block (CRBBB), and left axis deviation . CK and troponin T enzymes were elevated . Echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle, severe hypokinesis of the anterior ventricle, and decreased ejection fraction (35%). There were no significant valvular abnormalities. We diagnosed him with ACS, HAVB, and congestive heart failure. A temporary pacemaker was immediately placed, followed by emergent coronary angiography (CAG). As Fig. shows, there were multiple lesions, including severe stenosis of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA), 99% stenosis of the distal RCA with Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grade 2 of the distal RCA flow, total occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD), and severe stenosis of the distal circumflex artery (Cx) at the obtuse marginal (OM) and posterolateral branches. A collateral channel from the right ventricular branch of the RCA to the LAD was also observed.
First, we performed primary PCI to the proximal LAD occlusion. Drug-eluting stents (DESs) were implanted in tandem (3.5 × 24 mm and 2.75 × 38 mm) from the left main trunk (LMT) to the mid portion of the LAD. Subsequently, kissing balloon dilatation was performed between the LMT–LAD and the Cx at the OM branch. Although intraaortic balloon pump insertion was necessary because of hypotension during the dilatation, the LAD improved to TIMI grade 3 flow . However, Mobitz type 2 AV block with left bundle branch block (LBBB) persisted ; therefore, we performed additional PCI in the RCA. The distal and proximal RCA stenoses were treated with 2.0 mm and 2.5 mm balloon angioplasty, respectively. Because of slow flow phenomenon in the proximal RCA, intracoronary injection of nitroprusside and nicorandil was required to achieve TIMI grade 3 flow. Then, we implanted 3.0 × 24 mm and 2.5 × 38 mm DESs in tandem in the proximal RCA , after which the ECG improved to normal sinus rhythm with CRBBB . The prolonged QRS interval also normalized within three days after the primary PCI .
The temporary pacemaker was removed, and cardiac rehabilitation therapy was initiated. We additionally prescribed an ACE inhibitor, beta blocker, statin, and two types of antiplatelet agent with a proton-pump inhibitor. On the 28th hospital day, follow-up CAG and an electrophysiologic study were performed: the coronary stents were patent, and the AH and HV durations were normal at 97 msec and 45 msec, respectively. Although rehabilitation for his bilateral knee osteoarthritis was necessary, he was discharged from the hospital without cardiac symptoms on the 46th hospital day. During follow-up examination at our clinic, he remained free of complications for more than six months. Further revascularization of the Cx was not necessary.