A 59-year-old African American woman who was a former smoker presented to our hospital with a 3-month history of worsening urinary symptoms, including voiding difficulties and one episode of gross hematuria. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, cerebrovascular disease with residual right hemiparesis, and end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis. She also underwent remote left adrenal adenoma excision and was remotely treated for invasive mammary carcinoma by surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy. The patient declined chemotherapy. The patient had a smoking history of 30 pack-years, but she had quit smoking approximately 20 years ago after receiving a diagnosis of cerebrovascular disease. A review of her social and environmental history did not indicate exposure to any other known toxins or carcinogens. The patient denied any family history of cancer and reported that both her parents had died of “old age.” The patient is living with her husband, who is her primary caregiver and provides physical and social support.
The patient’s medication list at this presentation included metoprolol (25 mg) for hypertension, calcium acetate (667 mg three times daily) for renal failure, and simvastatin (40 mg) for hyperlipidemia. The patient was also taking omeprazole (40 mg) for gastroesophageal reflux disease, polyethylene glycol for constipation, paroxetine (30 mg) for anxiety and depression, and latanoprost 0.0005% eye drops for glaucoma. Her diabetes was under dietary control.
A review of systems was negative for nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, and diarrhea. The patient denied cough, chest pain, and shortness of breath. The patient’s vital signs at this presentation were stable, with a blood pressure of 110/40 mmHg, pulse of 65 beats/minute, and oral temperature of 98.4 °F. The patient was well nourished, oriented, and used a wheelchair for mobilization. Her physical examination revealed a well-healed surgical scar over her right breast and hemodialysis scars on her upper extremities. No palpable lymph nodes were detected. Her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no wheezing, rales, or rhonchi. Her abdomen was soft and nontender with positive bowel sounds and no hepatosplenomegaly. Her neurological examination revealed residual right hemiparesis and slurred speech. Urinalysis confirmed microscopic hematuria with a large amount of blood. Her complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count of 6900/μl, hemoglobin of 12.4 g/dl, red blood cell count of 4.01 × 106/μl, hematocrit of 38.7%, and platelet count of 198,000/μl. The patient’s liver function tests revealed total protein of 6.0 g/dl, albumin of 3.3 g/dl, direct bilirubin of 0.6 mg/dl, and total bilirubin of 1.7 mg/dl, with normal alkaline phosphatase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase at 65 IU/L, 11 IU/L, and 21 IU/L, respectively. The patient’s basic metabolic panel was maintained by continuous need for hemodialysis three times per week, given her history of end-stage renal disease. A urine culture yielded more than 10,000 colony-forming units per milliliter of Escherichia coli, which was treated conservatively.
A computed tomographic (CT) urogram revealed a 3-cm polypoid bladder mass involving the posterior inferior bladder wall near the neck. The patient underwent transurethral resection of bladder tumor. Histologically, the hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides of the bladder tumor showed flat, cuboidal to columnar cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm and a hobnail appearance, organized in tubulocystic and papillary patterns . The neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for CK7, CA-125, and AMACR; focally positive for CK20, P53, and CEA; and negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) . A diagnosis of stage T3N0Mx clear cell (mesonephric) carcinoma of the urinary bladder was made.
Subsequently, after the diagnosis of the CCCB, a staging chest CT scan revealed a 6.4×7.1-mm nodule in the right upper lobe. The patient did not complain of respiratory symptoms at the time the mass was detected. This was followed by a transthoracic core needle biopsy. On the basis of histology, the pulmonary nodule demonstrated a glandular architecture with mucin production (positive staining with mucicarmine and periodic acid-Schiff with diastase) . The neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for CK7, napsin A, and TTF-1 and negative for CK20 and CA-125 . Genetic testing revealed ARID2 and KEAP1 genomic alterations. A diagnosis of mucin-producing adenocarcinoma with clear cell features, consistent with lung primary, was rendered on the basis of the morphological, immunohistochemical, and genetic profile of the tumor.
The patient subsequently underwent a radical cystectomy (RC) with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and hysterectomy. A tumor measuring 3.5×2.0×1.7 cm was noted within the bladder neck and appeared to be extending into the upper urethra. The tumor was tannish gray, firm, and homogeneous. Microscopically, the invasive clear cell (mesonephric) carcinoma extended focally into the perivesicular tissue. The remaining parts of the specimen were negative for malignancy. The patient was treated with adjuvant radiotherapy in two 6000-cGy doses in 20 and 15 fractions each, 18 months apart, as hypofractionation radiation cycles aimed at the lung nodule. The patients’ medications were adjusted accordingly to metoprolol (XL 50 mg), amlodipine (10 mg) and aspirin (81 mg) were added for hypertension, and bisacodyl replaced her previous medication for constipation. She had multiple complex medical and surgical presentations and received a multidisciplinary departmental approach in her management. She is doing well 3 years following the diagnosis of CCCB. The pulmonary nodule was radiologically stable in size on the most recent follow-up CT scan.