A 71-year-old female was admitted to the emergency department (ED) due to acute chest pain. The patient complained of intense stabbing chest pain, which had started 6 h earlier, worsened by deep inspiration, without relieving factors. She denied syncope, dyspnoea, fever, cough, and other relevant symptoms. While the patient was waiting for medical observation, pain had spontaneously improved.
Medical history was remarkable for a percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy in 1993, due to rheumatic mitral stenosis, followed by cardiac surgery in 2010 due to restenosis, leading to mitral valve replacement with a no. 27 Medtronic Hall mechanical valve prothesis. Reoperation due to aortic rheumatic disease was also required in 2018, and the patient was thus submitted to aortic valve replacement with a no. 19 St Jude mechanical valve, along with tricuspid annuloplasty. Other relevant comorbidities included a history of permanent atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, and asthma.
Patient denied tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. Her chronic medication consisted in warfarin-target international normalized ratio (INR) of 3, furosemide 40 mg daily, pantoprazole 40 mg daily, and bronchodilators. Monthly INR records documented a therapeutic INR (in range) in the last 5 months.
Emergency department examination revealed high blood pressure (171/80 mmHg), normal heart rate and no respiratory distress signs. There was no significant jugular venous distension. Femoral and radial pulses were palpable and symmetric. Cardiac auscultation was irregular, with a loud clicking mechanical prothesis sound and a mild (I/VI) aortic systolic murmur. Bilateral basal crackles were audible on pulmonary auscultation. Chest wall palpation did not reveal any tender areas. There was mild peripheral oedema, with no visible signs of hypoperfusion.
Blood analysis showed a normal haemogram, serum electrolytes and renal function, an INR of 2.7 and mildly elevated lactate dehydrogenase (573 IU/L, normal range: 120–246 IU/L) . C-reactive protein levels were also normal. There was substantial elevation of Troponin I at admission, with a decreasing pattern after serial measurement (6582 > 4825 ng/L, normal range <75 ng/L).
Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation (∼60 b.p.m.), borderline right axis deviation, poor precordial R-wave progression, and a slightly prolonged QTc interval, with visible U waves (see , ). Chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly, visible mechanical aortic, and mitral prosthetic valves with signs of previous sternotomy, along with an intriguing linear radiopaque image above the level of the aortic valve ( and , ). This finding was initially overlooked in the ED.
Bedside echocardiography showed bi-atrial dilatation, normal left ventricular dimensions with mild increase in wall thickness, no regional contractile dysfunction and preserved left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 60%). Dilation of the right ventricle was also noted, with mild longitudinal systolic dysfunction. There were no signs of significant aortic or mechanical prothesis dysfunction. Moderate functional tricuspid regurgitation and a high echocardiographic probability of pulmonary hypertension were evident. Proximal ascending aorta dimensions were normal, with no visible dissection signs. There were no apparent intracardiac masses nor pericardial effusion (see , and and ).
The patient was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit for monitoring and cardiac invasive coronary stratification, due to suspected non-ST segment elevation acute myocardial infarction.
On the next day, patient underwent invasive coronary angiography, showing a right dominant circulation with no coronary atherosclerotic lesions. A radiopaque linear image, resembling an intracardiac needle, apparently lodged in the interventricular septum, was clearly seen, accompanied by an apparent fistula between the septal branches of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the right ventricle, presumably caused by this foreign body ( and ). Cinefluoroscopy revealed normal motion of both mechanical valves (see , ).
After careful evaluation of the patient’s previous imaging examinations available, a radiopaque foreign body was identified below the level of the diaphragm in a chest radiograph taken days after TEPW extraction, and before patient discharge from the surgical centre in 2018 ( and , ). Compared with a chest radiograph taken while the patient still had the TEPW in place, it appears that the length of this foreign body is significantly smaller compared with the needle used to fix the TEPW in the first chest radiograph . This finding raises the suspicion that the needle actually broke, and that the distal end was retained in the subcutaneous tissues after TEPW extraction. This foreign body was not present before cardiac surgery in 2018.
Computerized tomography cardiac scan was then undertaken to assess the anatomic position and relation of this foreign intracardiac body with the cardiac chambers, coronary arteries, and great vessels. Cardiac CT confirmed the presence of a linear structure, with attenuation coefficient consistent with metallic material, with approximate dimensions of 3 × 44 mm. The proximal end of this foreign body was located intracavitary, inside the left atria, near the ostia of the atrial appendage, running a course towards the anterior septum, initially with an epicardial location (running behind the LAD and the origin of the left circumflex artery), and then perforating deeply into the basal anteroseptal segment of the left ventricle ( and , , ).
The patient remained asymptomatic during the entire admission. However, serial chest radiographs demonstrated migration of the foreign body upwards across the chest during hospitalization ( and , , ), without apparent cardiovascular complications. The patient was eventually transferred to the cardiac surgery department of another hospital, for foreign body retrieval and repair of the perforated cardiac chambers.