A 71-year-old lady with type II diabetes mellitus, treated with insulin, presented in February 2004 with acute renal failure due to bilateral ureteric obstruction and hydronephrosis. Six months prior to this acute admission, the patient was treated empirically with fluconazole for a histologically proven necrotising Candida infection of the bladder. Her acute obstruction was managed by the insertion of bilateral nephrostomy catheters. On the day of the procedure she developed rigors, vomiting and right loin pain despite antibiotic cover with amoxicillin (500 mg tds). She was pyrexial (38.9°C), her inflammatory markers were increased (WBC 23.2 × 109/l, neutrophils 21.8 × 109/l, CRP 300 mg/l) and her renal function compromised (creatinine 333 μmol/l). The blood and nephrostomy urine cultures grew a non- albicans Candida species. The pre-morbid history suggested that the current non-albicans Candida isolate might be an azole-resistant strain and on the basis of her acute renal failure, the patient was commenced on empirical intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome 1 mg/kg/od). The organism was subsequently identified as C.glabrata with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole and itraconazole MIC fluconazole 16.0 mg/l, itraconazole 1.0 mg/l) but susceptible to amphotericin B (MIC 1.0 mg/l), caspofungin (MIC 0.5 mg/l), voriconazole (MIC < 0.03 mg/l).
The patient was treated for four weeks with iv liposomal amphotericin B during which time her left nephrostomy tube was replaced by a ureteric stent. Four months later she was readmitted to the hospital for an elective right ureteric stent insertion but she developed a severe urosepsis (temperature 39.4°C, WBC 45.5 × 109/l, CRP > 300 mg/l, creatinine 407 μmol/l) during the procedure which was abandoned. AmBisome (1 mg/kg/od) was given shortly after the procedure but did not prevent the need for intensive care support. Blood cultures and urostomy urine again grew the azole resistant C.glabrata. Due to the recurrence of Candida sepsis despite previous treatment with amphotericin B and because of her acute renal failure it was felt that a different class of anti-fungal agent with good activity against C.glabrata and minimal nephrotoxicity should be used. Amphotericin B was therefore stopped after three days and replaced by iv caspofungin (70 mg loading dose, 50 mg od). Caspofungin was continued for 12 days during which time her blood and catheter urine became sterile and her inflammatory markers and temperature normalised.
However, as the stenting of her right kidney was unsuccessful, attributed to multiple intra-renal strictures and irregularity of the urothelial outline, a percutaneous nephrostomy tube was inserted to allow long-term drainage. This time AmBisome was given one day prior to the procedure and continued for a total of 11 days during which time no sepsis occurred. Nevertheless, nephrostomy fluid analysis revealed large numbers of pus and yeast cells and again grew the azole resistant C.glabrata. Because of the persistent C. glabrata infection of the renal pelvices, despite treatment with iv liposomal amphotericin B followed by a course of caspofungin, it was felt that active local irrigation with amphotericin B was necessary to reduce the fungal load and to ensure that the antifungal agent achieved the site of infection. Five ml of conventional amphotericin B (Fungizone, 200 μg/ml) was instilled into the nephrostomy tube which was then clamped for 30–60 minutes at a time. This procedure was repeated four times daily for four days. A urostomy sample of urine taken 48 hours later continued to grow C. glabrata and treatment was therefore repeated for a further five days in combination with iv liposomal amphotericin B. Subsequently the urine sterilised and routine monthly urine cultures remained negative. The patient has had no further recurrence of the Candida infection during a 16 month follow up.