A 32-year-old woman presented with dark shadows in the right eye for 3 consecutive days with decreased vision. She had no history of trauma or other illness. However, the patient had a brief history of severe coughing before the onset of vision loss. The best-corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 0.5. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed grade III anterior chamber blood cells and grade III vitreous hemorrhage in the right eye, clear borders of the optic disc, a reddish color, and an approximately normal retinal vessel diameter and alignment; a large cyst was visible on the nasal side of the retina, protruding into the vitreous cavity, with well-defined borders, peripheral retinal limitation of superficial detachment, and a large amount of hemorrhage vaguely visible within the cyst. The left eye was essentially normal. The intraocular pressure was 12 mm Hg in the right eye and 14 mm Hg in the left eye. The large cyst was located in the nasal region of the optic disc from 1:00 to 5:00 . There was extensive well-defined retinal detachment at the posterior border of the cyst and massive hemorrhage within the cyst. B-scanning revealed vitreous clouding in both eyes, posterior vitreous detachment in the right eye, and retinal detachment in the right eye (cyst not excluded) . Orbital magnetic resonance imaging showed a long T1 and long T2 signal shadow on the nasal side of the lens level of the right eyeball, with a wide base attached to the wall of the ball. The diagnostic imaging opinion was as follows: Consider detachment of the retina with subretinal effusion . Ultrasound biomicroscopy showed a right anterior chamber axis depth of 2.60 mm, a left anterior chamber axis depth of 2.63 mm, and turbid aqueous humor in the right eye. Macular optical coherence tomography showed a diffuse reflex in the macular region of the right eye and nasal retinal detachment. Optical coherence tomography of the optic nerve showed peripapillary retinal detachment in the right eye . The diagnosis was retinal detachment of the right eye, retinal cyst of the right eye, and retinal split of the right eye. After 3 months of blood circulation and other supportive treatments, the patient’s hemorrhage was significantly absorbed, but the size of the cyst did not change significantly. Consequently, the patient then underwent scleral ring ligation with external pressure combined with external drainage of the intracapsular fluid; however, we did not find any retinal clefts preoperatively or intraoperatively, the patient’s right best-corrected visual acuity was restored to 1.0 after the surgery, and the retina was well restored .