The patient was a 57-year-old Japanese male diagnosed with GS (thymoma and hypogammaglobulinemia), myasthenia gravis with anti-striational antibodies, and type 2 diabetes. Prednisolone (PSL) and tacrolimus (TAC) were used to treat the myasthenia gravis for more than 5 years, and his thymoma was removed at the age of 27 years. His father had been treated for lung Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. The patient smoked for 27 years (since his twenties) and was a social drinker. He had worked in specimen processing at a specimen inspection company. His daily routine involved spending most of the day in bed and required assistance with his wheelchair and meals.
The patient presented with fever and back pain 1 month before his outpatient visit at the Department of Neurology. He was hospitalized during his regular visit, at which point blood and sputum samples were collected for culture, and he was administered tazobactam/piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC) and immunoglobulin by his primary care physician. The sputum smear was positive for acid-fast bacilli; chest computed tomography showed a suspected lung NTM infection and lumbar intestinal abscess, and magnetic resonance imaging revealed spondylitis (lumbar segments 1–2) during hospitalization . Infective endocarditis was not detected by transthoracic echocardiography. Mycobacterial infection was suspected, and blood culture was performed on day 5 of hospitalization. His general condition and vitals were stable, and the TAZ/PIPC treatment was continued while awaiting empirical therapy for Mycobacteria. Two days later, blood and sputum cultures revealed the presence of Mycobacterium abscessus, resulting in a diagnosis of disseminated NTM infection.
The patient was transferred to the Department of Infectious Disease and was screened for immunodeficiency. He tested negative for HIV-specific antibodies, and the blood samples sent to Nigata University tested negative for anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies. The conclusive diagnosis of M. abscessus subsp. massiliense infection was the result of a combination of 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and nucleic acid chromatography of the RNA polymerase B and hsp65 genes. He underwent a lumbar biopsy on day 8 after hospitalization and was prescribed empiric therapy with imipenem (IPM)/cilastatin, levofloxacin, and azithromycin. The antibiotics were continued since M. abscessus was also detected in the biopsy tissue, urine, and stool cultures.
The patient developed a gastrointestinal (rectum and descending colon) perforation on day 15 of hospitalization and underwent surgery (high anterior resection, left hemicolectomy, colostomy, and abdominal drainage). Despite the continued use of antibiotics, his spondylitis worsened. Minocycline (MINO) and linezolid (LZD) were included in the antibiotic regimen on day 17 and 24, respectively. Finally, after levofloxacin was substituted with sitafloxacin (STFX), the antibiotic combination of IPM/CS, STFX, azithromycin, MINO, and LZD was continued . Although the sensitivity of M. abscessus subsp. massiliense was detected by microdilution [, ], the strain showed a different susceptibility towards each antibiotic , and the patient’s general condition worsened. The patient and his family were informed of the treatment options, and after obtaining consent, he was moved to palliative care. He passed away on day 49 in the hospital.