A 67-year-old man presented to the emergency room after the acute onset of neurologic deficits. The patient arose from bed with new-onset dizziness, left leg paresthesia, and gait abnormalities. His gait was described as “left-leaning” and ambulating was associated with the feeling of imminent syncope, although no syncopal episodes were reported. The patient also endorsed a frontal headache, in which he described as similar in intensity and quality to previous headaches. No symptoms were present the previous day or evening before bed, and the patient denied any previous reports of these symptoms, with the exception of chronic headaches. Medical history was significant for hypertension and hepatitis C; he was being treated with ledipasvir/ sofosbuvir at the time of evaluation. Family history revealed a brother who died suddenly from a brain aneurysm.
In the emergency room, there were no significant physical examination findings, including no focal neurologic deficits. CT brain revealed a 5 mm hyperdensity in the third ventricle, concerning for hemorrhage or neoplasm. MRI brain confirmed the presence of a cystic lesion in the third ventricle, which appeared to arise from the roof of the third ventricle posterior to the foramen of Monro. The foramen appeared patent bilaterally, and consistent with this, there was no associated ventriculomegaly. DWI did not reveal areas of restricted diffusion, making a cerebrovascular event unlikely, and MR angiogram was normal with the exception of a fetal posterior cerebral artery. There were no aneurysms, or arteriovenous malformations appreciated on MRA. The patient was determined to be neurologically stable, with likely an incidental finding of a colloid cyst. It was, therefore, recommended that he be expectantly managed with follow-up scans and was advised to seek immediate care if there was an abrupt change in neurologic status.
The patient was seen in the clinic for follow-up at 3 months at which point repeat imaging revealed the same cystic lesion unchanged in size, appearance, and location . He remained neurologically stable, and his examination was unremarkable. One and 2 years later, he was seen in follow-up again with similar results . His surveillance was extended to 2 years at which point his imaging revealed a lesion 2.5–3 mm in size, with a hyperintense appearance consistent with involution of the colloid cyst .