A 35-year-old African American man with a past medical history of sickle cell disease presented to our hospital by transfer from an outside hospital. Clinicians at the outside hospital originally saw him when he had a 2-day history of fever with a maximum temperature of 103 °F. The patient also complained of worsening headache, neck pain, and shortness of breath. He was admitted for suspicion of sepsis. During the evaluation process, the clinical condition of the patient worsened with increasing shortness of breath, intensifying headaches, and increasing neck pain. The patient received a lumbar puncture, the results of which were indicative of meningitis. The patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging, which revealed a possible Arnold-Chiari type I malformation and a cervical cord syrinx with associated myelitis. The patient was transferred to our hospital, and, upon arrival, he was paralyzed from approximately the level of C4 to the feet.
The patient has a history of sickle cell disease, pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular enlargement, likely secondary to the sickle cell disease. He previously had a transthoracic echocardiogram that did not show any intracardiac shunting but did show a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50–55 %. He was taking a beta-blocker and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor for blood pressure control. He did not have any other significant history. On arrival to our hospital, the patient appeared toxic and in severe distress. The patient had moderately altered mental status but was able to follow conversation. He complained of worsening diplopia and decreasing vision from his right eye. His physical examination was significant for abnormal sensation below the level of C4 and decreased motor strength in all four extremities.
The patient was found to have elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels, which increased from 0.9 to 4.0 mg/dL over a couple of days, likely due to acute kidney failure. The patient also had a decreased potassium level of 2.9. The patient was found to be anemic, with a hemoglobin of 6.1 g/dL, likely due to his underlying sickle cell anemia, and received a transfusion of 3 units of packed red blood cells. The patient had an elevated white blood cell count of 30.0 x 103/µL. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.23, partial pressure of oxygen of 115 mm Hg, bicarbonate level of 16.8 mEq/L, and base excess of −9.5 mEq/liter.
The patient’s single-view chest x-ray showed bilateral lung interstitial edema, left lung pulmonary parenchymal opacity, and left pleural effusion. A magnetic resonance imaging study of the cervical spine showed fluid collection from C2 through C5 that was indicative of an intramedullary cord abscess, with edema extending to the level of C7 . Magnetic resonance imaging studies of the thoracic and lumbar spine were unremarkable. A magnetic resonance imaging study of the brain showed right frontal lobe subacute infarcts, most likely within the right anterior cerebral artery territory, likely due to the underlying condition of sickle cell disease, and mild caudal herniation of the cerebellar tonsils was observed. A computed tomographic study of the thorax showed bilateral lower lobe areas of atelectasis or consolidation, suggestive of pneumonia.
Upon the patient’s arrival at our hospital, the concern was for worsening mentation, weakness, and sepsis, secondary to Streptococcus meningitis with an intramedullary abscess from C2 through C5. The patient was placed on high-dose intravenous steroids to reduce spinal cord swelling. He was placed on azithromycin, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin for broad antibiotic coverage. Concerns for pneumonia versus influenza arose because of findings in the chest x-ray obtained upon admission, and the patient was placed on oseltamivir. An arterial line, a minimally invasive hemodynamic monitor, a central venous catheter, an endotracheal tube, and a mixed venous oxygen saturation monitor were placed. Daily procalcitonin and C-reactive protein levels were obtained to monitor for treatment response. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid cultures were obtained. The patient was placed on a bicarbonate drip for metabolic acidosis but continued to have declining renal function. The patient was subsequently placed on continuous renal replacement therapy.
Two days after admission, the patient underwent surgery to treat his Arnold-Chiari type I malformation and drain his intramedullary abscess. During treatment, he underwent posterior cervical laminectomy from C2 to C6-C7, myelotomy with microscope and CO2, drainage of the intramedullary abscess, duraplasty of the Arnold-Chiari type I malformation and cervical cord, drain placement, and intraoperative somatosensory evoked potentials and free-run electromyography. A midline incision was made from the spinous process of C1-C2 down to C7. The lamina from C2 to C7 was then subsequently removed. The dura was opened, and the exposed cord was observed to be extremely vascularized, with the cerebrospinal fluid appearing infected. A midline myelotomy was performed from C4 to C6, opening the syrinx, and the purulent material was evacuated with significant irrigation. Then the dura and the dural canals were closed, and a drain was placed.
The patient was placed on cervical spine precautions. His blood cultures that were obtained from the outside hospital were found to have Streptococcus pneumoniae that was sensitive for ceftriaxone, which was empirically continued for a total duration of 1 month. Cultures from the syrinx and blood cultures obtained on admission did not have any growth. The patient was continued on intravenous antibiotics and steroids. He started to have improving mental status, sensation, and motor function. He underwent postoperative magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine 1 day after surgery, and the scans showed postsurgical drainage of the syrinx and laminectomy of C2-C6. Another magnetic resonance imaging study, obtained on postoperative day 8 , showed slight improvement from the first postoperative study. The patient was extubated on postoperative day 5. At the end of his hospital stay, the patient did not have any signs or symptoms suggestive of sepsis. He had a decline in his white blood cell count as well as his procalcitonin level. He continued to experience decreased neurological function, with no sensation below the level of L2 and paresis of the bilateral lower extremities and left upper extremity. He had a nearly complete recovery of renal function after a trial of continuous renal replacement therapy. He was discharged to an inpatient spinal cord injury rehabilitation facility on postoperative day 12.