A 42-year-old pregnant Iranian woman, Gravid 3 para2 live2, at 30 weeks of gestation was referred to the obstetric emergency department of Vali-Asr Hospital (Birjand, Iran) by the emergency service in December 2020. She was suffering from acute-onset severe abdominal pain followed by nausea, vomiting, hypotension, and dizziness. She had two healthy children, her previous pregnancies were uneventful, and she declared no postpartum complications during her previous gestations. She had no history of cigarette smoking or alcohol consumption, and her marriage was consanguineous. Moreover, she was living in a deprived remote village around Birjand City (Southern Khorasan Province, Iran) with very low socioeconomic status.
Upon her arrival, her body mass index, blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, oral temperature, and peripheral oxygen saturation in room air were 22.6 kg/m2, 70 mmHg, 130 beats per minute, 14 breaths per minute, 36.9 °C, and 98% ,respectively. Her skin and mucosal membranes were completely pale, and urinary output was less than 50 cc per hour. She was lethargic, but neurological examination did not reveal any focal neurological deficit and corneal reflex was symmetrically present in both eyes. Obstetrical examination revealed increased fundal height in excess of a term uterus and also uterine hypertonicity. No evidence of ruptured membranes or external vaginal bleeding was evident. Although on digital vaginal examination the cervix was too high posteriorly positioned to be touched by digits, it seemed unripe and closed. Moreover, continuous fetal heart rate monitoring revealed fetal bradycardia.
As the patient was hemodynamically unstable, resuscitation was initiated with a bolus of 2 L Ringer’s lactate solution immediately and blood tests were sent. Two units of packed cells were cross-matched. After stabilization, owing to persistent fetal bradycardia, as low as 80 beats per minute, she was emergently transferred to the operating room for cesarean section delivery by impression of massive occult placental abruption. Under general anesthesia, the abdominal cavity was accessed through a low midline incision. We encountered with lateral wall of the uterus and left broad ligament. As the uterus was levorotated approximately 90°, a severely congested dark-purple uterus with many dilated tortuous vessels on its lower segment was seen and no uterovesical peritoneal reflex could be identified. Subsequently manual exploration revealed an additional 180° uterine dextrotorsion. Hence, abdominal wall skin incision was expanded to upper umbilical level and the uterus was detorted. Subsequently, a male baby weighing 1150 g was born through a Kerr uterine incision. Unfortunately, the 1-minute Apgar score was 0 and resuscitation was unsuccessful. Umbilical cord blood gas analysis showed severe metabolic acidosis (pH 6.95) and base excess of 16 mmol/L.
It is worth noting that, after detorsion, maternal central and peripheral circulation began to improve rapidly and myometrial layer color changed to near normal, but when the uterine wound was closed, the uterus became atonic. Uterotonic agents (0.2 mg of intramuscular methylergonovine plus 30 international units of intravenous oxytocin)were administered, and owing to moderate anemia (hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dL) detected in her initial laboratory tests, 2 units of packed cells were transfused. Platelet count, coagulation study (prothrombin time, partial prothrombin time, and fibrinogen level), and liver and kidney function tests were all unremarkable. Fortunately, despite anemia, all other laboratory tests, including serum electrolytes, serum aminotransferase, serum creatinine, and coagulation study, were within normal limits post-operation period, and her hemoglobin level reached 10 g/dL.
Interestingly, we could not find any pelvic abnormalities such as congenital anomalies, uterine fibroids, pelvic or adnexal masses, adhesion bands, fetal malpresentation, or any report of vigorous fetal movements prior to symptom onset. However, parietal peritoneum and broad ligaments seemed too loose. In the postoperative period, physical examination and detailed history were taken. No additional significant data were found out except for moderate low back pain; magnetic resonance imaging had revealed lumbar disc herniation 2 years ago. Moreover, her height and body mass index were 1.7 m and 22.6 kg/m2, respectively; she showed increased skin elasticity, joint hypermobility in upper extremities, and trivial exophthalmos. On vaginal examination based on pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POP-Q) classification, third-grade anterior and second-grade posterior compartment prolapse were evident; vaginal wall had increased elasticity, and no episiotomy scar or perineal lacerations were observed. In fact, no episiotomy had been made in either vaginal birth, and her previous newborns weighed nearly 3 kg. She received low-molecular-weight heparin 40 mg subcutaneously daily after 24 hours postoperation. On the basis of these systemic manifestations, connective tissue disorders, mainly Ehlers–Danlos, were highly suspected. However, as she was illiterate and living in a remote deprived village, she refused any further investigation, and on the second day postpartum, she was discharged from the hospital on her own request without any complication and was recommended to continue thromboprophylaxis for an additional 7 days. Subsequently, skin sutures were removed on the 12th postoperative day, and she did not come back thereafter. Unfortunately, we were not even able to contact her via phone to have an interview-based follow-up visit. It should be emphasized that, despite refusing to have her pictures taken and undergo further assessments, she gave us informed consent to publish this information.