A 59-year-old heterosexual Caucasian man presented with recurrent and profuse rectal bleeding. Past medical history was remarkable for an ischiorectal abscess, with no apparent predisposing conditions, which was incised and drained. Eventually our patient had developed an anal fistula which was managed with Tisseel® (a surgical adhesive composed from fibrinogen and thrombin). Later a seton, a length of suture material looped through a fistula to keep it open and allow pus to drain, was inserted. The seton was exchanged and tightened on three occasions and eventually was extruded. Physical examination at that time showed no remaining fistula. Our patient was investigated with a gastrointestinal series and colonoscopy which were negative for inflammatory bowel disease and malignancy.
At lymphoma presentation, the history was otherwise unremarkable; in particular, there was no history of noticeable lumps, unexplained fevers, drenching sweats, or weight loss. There were no symptoms related to cytopenia. General physical examination was unremarkable, with no palpable lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. Digital rectal examination showed scarring of his right peri-anal area and a small, tender, ulcerated mass was palpable in his anal canal at the nine o'clock lithotomy position. There was no blood on the examining glove. Laboratory investigations showed his complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, liver panel, calcium, and lactate dehydrogenase levels to be within normal range. A serum protein electrophoresis showed no monoclonal protein; however there was a slight decrease in the gamma fraction at 8 g/L (lower limit of normal 10 g/L). A screen for hepatitis B and C was negative, as was serology for varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus and HIV.
Our patient underwent a colonoscopy which showed a normal colon apart from a 5 mm polyp at 20 cm which was hyperplastic by pathologic examination. At the ano-rectal junction, a hypervascular cauliflower-like mass of 3 mm was seen and biopsied . Histopathological examination demonstrated abundant atypical large lymphoid cells with lesser numbers of plasma cells. The atypical lymphoid cell population consisted predominantly of plasmablasts with rounded nuclei, coarse chromatin, small nucleoli and multiple mitotic figures. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the atypical cells were negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, CD20, CD30, CD45, CD56, BCL-2, BCL-6, CD45 , CD20 , CD79a. Furthermore, we could not detect any restriction of immunoglobulin light chains (kappa or lambda), or expression of immunoglobulin heavy chains IgG, IgM, IgD; however there was cytoplasmic expression of IgA. In contrast, the neoplastic cells were strongly positive for MUM1, epithelial membrane antigen, CD38, CD138 and EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) . There was no expression of LANA-1. The proliferation index by Ki-67 immunohistochemistry was approximately 70%. The results were consistent with a diagnosis of PBL.
Staging investigations included a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, which showed no evidence of lymphoma in these other sites. A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy was negative for lymphoma. Our patient was staged as Ann Arbor 1A (Additional file : Table S1), and was low risk according to the International Prognostic Index. Our patient subsequently underwent gallium scanning, which showed increased activity in his right inguinal region (2 cm), suggestive of gallium avid lymphoma.
Our patient was treated with three cycles of CHOP chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone), in full doses and on schedule, followed by involved field radiation therapy to the ano-rectal region, pelvic nodes, and right inguinal nodes. The chemotherapeutic regimen and radiation therapy were well tolerated by our patient and no complications were reported. A CT scan done following therapy showed complete resolution of previously detected abnormalities. CT scanning at six months from lymphoma diagnosis showed no evidence of recurrence. Most recent clinical follow up was done five years from diagnosis with rectal examination and colonoscopy showing ongoing remission.