A 25-year-old male patient (175 cm, 107 kg) was admitted to our university hospital, after he presented in another emergency department 13 days after receiving a first dose of mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccination Spikevax (mRNA-1273, Moderna Biotech, USA). Chronologically, the patient’s symptoms developed as follows: immediately after vaccination he developed pain at the injection site. Additionally, he developed headache 2 days after the vaccination, and fever of up to 38.7 °C after 3 days. To ameliorate the fever, he took 500 mg of acetaminophen once. On day 4, he developed what he called a “rash” covering his abdomen and both legs. The same day, his urine color changed towards an “orange” tone and became foul smelling. During the following days, headache and fever waned, but progressive fatigue as well as exertional dyspnea developed. On the day of admission, he still had malaise, and woke up with a severe headache (numeric rating scale 7/10). That day, he vomited once with an empty stomach, and had persisting nausea the remaining day. Later in the other emergency department, he experienced word-finding difficulties, which he attributed to anxiety. He denied taking any other medication except for acetaminophen, drinking alcohol or using illicit drugs, which could have triggered the episode of aTTP. He had no family history for hematological, autoimmunological or kidney diseases.
On the initial examination, the only notable finding was petechiae on both legs, which was the “rash” the patient described. The initial laboratory diagnostic showed Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia (Hb 7.4 g/dL, LDH 999 U/L, schistocyte count 2.1%, haptoglobin < 0.1 g/L), low platelet count (29/nL), and elevated creatinine (1.5 mg/dL, eGFR 63.8 mL/min/1.73m2).
In summary, thrombotic microangiopathy was present, and a presumptive diagnosis of aTTP was made. This was supported by high PLASMIC score of 6 points, predicting a high risk of 72% of ADAMTS-13 (A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase with a ThromboSpondin type 1 motif, member 13) deficiency. PLASMIC score was developed to identify those patients with low platelet count and signs of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA), who have low ADAMTS-13 activity < 10%. This is important, because those patient will benefit from immediate plasma exchange treatment .
Due to the combination of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, headache and thrombocytopenia, an important differential diagnosis was vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT), which is described as a rare adverse event of adenoviral vector vaccines, but not mRNA-based vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. Since neurological examination and head computer tomography were unremarkable, and no clinical signs of cerebral or peripheral thrombosis were present, we did not anticoagulate the patient with argatroban, but only performed routine testing for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (Milenia QuickLine HIT-Test, Milenia Biotech, Gießen, Germany), and sent out additional specimens for heparine-induced platelet activation (HIPA) and platelet-factor 4 enhanced platelet-activation test (PIPA), which are described elsewhere [, ]. All tests returned negative. Additionally, cranial magnetic resonance imaging including magnetic resonance angiography were performed to exclude cerebral sinus venous thrombosis (CSVT). Secondary reasons for TTP such as viral infections, autoimmune disorders, hematological or solid organ malignancies, as well as Shigatoxin-producing enterohemorrhagic E. coli as trigger for typical hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) were ruled out. Complement investigations showed normal C3 and C4 levels and ruled out anti-factor H antibodies. Functional assays showed normal activity of the classical and the alternative pathway. A mild increase of soluble terminal complement activation fragments (C5b-9) levels indicated concomitant low grade complement activation. In conclusion, we classified this as autoimmune TTP.
After a suspected diagnosis of aTTP was made, the patient received daily plasma exchange with substitution of 2.5 L fresh frozen plasma and steroid pulse therapy of 250 mg prednisolone daily for the first 3 days after admission. Additionally, caplacizumab (10 mg s.c. once daily) was started the second day after admission and continued until now (day 46). Plasma exchange was discontinued after 4 treatments since thrombocyte count normalized on day 3. Steroid therapy was tapered quickly to currently 6 mg daily. One week after admission, ADAMTS-13 activity returned highly suppressed (< 1%), with highly elevated ADAMTS-13 antibodies (72.2 IU/mL) as well as decreased ADAMTS-13 antigen, which confirmed the suspected diagnosis. Since ADAMTS-13 antibodies were detected, a diagnosis of autoimmune TTP was made, and immunosuppressive therapy with rituximab (1000 mg) was initiated 1 week after admission and repeated 2 weeks later. The patient was discharged 8 days after initial admission and is in continuous follow-up in our outpatient clinic. Hemolysis stopped after 12 days, and creatinine stabilized at 1 mg/dl after 2 weeks of therapy. The main clinical events, diagnostic and therapeutic measures are summarized in Fig.. Additional medical therapy includes candesartan (4 mg b.i.d.) for arterial hypertension, Vitamin D (1000 IE once daily) and pantoprazole (20 mg once daily) for prophylaxis against osteoporosis and gastric ulcer as well as cotrimoxazole for prophylaxis against pneumocystis pneumonia. Over a month after initial admission, the patient is in good general health and most laboratory values normalized as shown in Table . Clinical signs of TTP such as petechiae dissolved and did not reappear. Since ADAMTS-13 activity is still < 1%, the patient is still receiving caplacizumab once daily . Since ADAMTS-13 antigen is severely diminished, we suspect that the patient developed depleting ADAMTS-13 antibodies .
The patient reported full adherence to therapy, which is supported by normal thrombocyte count despite ADAMTS-13 activity < 1%. As a result of steroid treatment, the patient developed steroid acne and as a suspected adverse event of cotrimoxazole treatment developed elevated liver enzymes. Since steroid therapy is tapered rapidly no specific therapy for steroid acne was started, but cotrimoxazole was paused after 2 weeks.
We recommended to withhold second vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 for two reasons. On the one hand, the patient has a low risk for severe course due to first successful vaccination and young age. On the other hand, due to current rituximab treatment, the response to vaccination will be severely reduced at the moment.
Regarding the initial presentation, the patient described that he can neither fully remember the situation in the emergency department nor the fact that he wrote cryptic text messages to his girlfriend or had word finding difficulties. Regarding the therapeutic measures, the patient reported that his “vitality” returned after the third plasma exchange treatment, but that those treatments were uncomfortable, since he developed chills. After discharge, the patient recognized increased strength and insomnia, as well as acne, but no weight gain.
Initially, the patient was worried that he could develop further deterioration of kidney function including dialysis. Now, he is confident that he will regain his normal health with medication and is not afraid between the appointments anymore.