A 40-year-old Indian woman presented to our outpatient department with complaints of a lump in her left breast noted four months prior to presentation. The lump gradually increased in size and was non-tender. There was no history of nipple discharge. The patient denied any hormonal therapy or family history of breast disease. A physical examination found our patient to be obese and in no acute distress. A breast examination showed her left breast to be pendulous with a 6 cm × 5 cm × 6 cm irregular, firm mass fixed to the overlying skin in the midline above her left nipple. There was no nipple discharge or skin dimpling. There were no palpable axillary lymph nodes. Her right breast and axilla were found to be normal. The remainder of the physical examination was noncontributory. A mammogram of her breast showed a well-defined mass measuring 5 cm with lobulated margins and areas of calcification closely resembling bone. In addition, fine egg shell calcification around the tumor was also noted. A core needle biopsy was taken from the breast lump which was reported as osteosarcoma of the breast. Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen, serum alkaline phosphatase and a bone scan were all within normal limits. Our patient was prepared for surgery and a simple mastectomy was performed. The histopathological examination revealed a tumor consisting of highly pleomorphic oval- to spindle-shaped cells arranged in sheets and bundles separated by fibrocollagenous tissue . The tumor cells had hyperchromatic nuclei and some showed mitotic figures. The stroma showed lymphocytic infiltration and areas of osteoid formation . Areas of hyaline matrix were intermingled, with vacuolated cells showing cartilaginous differentiation. The picture was suggestive of osteosarcoma of the breast in a pre-existing phyllodes tumor showing areas of chondroid differentiation. The immediate post-operative period was uneventful and our patient was discharged on the fifth post-operative day after removal of the suction drain. Five years post-operatively our patient is doing well and is in regular follow-up.