In December 2013, a 65-year-old Saudi woman presented to us with the complaint of painful lump over the occipital region of scalp. She had noticed this lump for 6 months and it was increasing in size over 2 months; she was taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but with minimal improvement. Her previous medical history was not significant, and she denied any history of trauma, smoking, or weight loss. Past surgical history revealed that she had undergone total thyroidectomy and lymph node dissection for follicular variant papillary thyroid carcinoma pT2N1bM0 in June 2006. Postoperative thyroglobulin (TG) was 2.4 ng/mL. Subsequently, the patient was given radioactive iodine ablation 150 mCi in August 2006.
On physical examination, she was found to be in good general condition, and her vitals were stable. Head and neck examination revealed a hard fixed and tender mass of size 4 cm × 4 cm in the occiput without any ulceration of overlying skin, and the rest of the systemic examination was unremarkable. Clinical differential diagnosis was meningioma, sarcoma, giant cell tumor, or metastasis.
Hematology, renal and liver function tests, serum electrolytes, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and thyroxin were found to be within normal limits. Serum TG levels were markedly elevated, ie, 3,064 ng/mL (normal: 5–25 ng/mL). Whole body iodine scintigraphy was nonavid. Head and neck computed tomography (CT) showed a large left occipital bone mass of size 5.7 cm × 1.9 cm with intracranial extension and was extending superiorly to involve the parietal bone. Another intracranial dural-based lesion of size 2.6 cm × 2.3 cm was also found at the top of the splenium of corpus callosum . Magnetic resonance imaging and CT–positron emission tomography confirmed the findings of CT imaging. Fine needle aspiration of calvarial lesion confirmed the malignant follicular cells of PTC.
The patient was operated in January 2014; however, surgical attempt for complete resection of both lesions was foiled by perioperative profuse bleeding. Histopathology of the dural lesion revealed follicular pattern with numerous colloid-filled follicles with characteristic nuclear features of papillary carcinoma (enlarged and elongated nuclei and nuclear grooves), and immunopositivity for thyroid transcription factor-1 and cytokeratin 19 confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic follicular variant PTC . Genetic testing revealed a BRAF V600E mutation. After successful recovery, patient was treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Total dose of 5,400 cGy in 27 fractions over 6 weeks was given to both lesions. The treatment course was completed without any significant acute toxicity. Due to radioactive iodine refractory disease, the patient was started on sorafenib (Nexavar; Onyx Pharmaceuticals, Emeryville, CA, USA, and Bayer Healthcare, Wayne, NJ, USA) 400 mg orally twice daily after the completion of radiation therapy. At 8 months of follow-up period, the patient was doing well with stable skull mass and decreasing pattern of TG levels (37 ng/mL).