A 51-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of persistent erection that had been present for approximately 36 hours after he ingested 20 milligrams (mg) of tadalafil followed by penile self-injection with approximately one milliliter (mL of Trimix, a compound containing alprostadil, papaverine, and phentolamine. He had no history of erectile dysfunction. Neither medication had been prescribed to him, and his intention was to achieve a sustained penile erection to facilitate prolonged sexual activity with a group of people. There was concomitant use of an unspecified quantity of alcohol as well as intranasal cocaine. The patient reported mild discomfort and some difficulty passing urine due to his prolonged erection, but reported he was still able to void. He denied hematuria, dysuria, or penile discharge. There was no past history of malignancy or hematologic disorders. His medical issues included stable human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease and reported compliance with antiretroviral medication (emtricitabine-tenofovir); there was no history of hypertension.
On examination the patient did not appear to be in distress; his demeanor was consistent with mild intoxication, but he was fully alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation. His initial vital signs were notable for hypertension, with a blood pressure of 161/104 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate of 88 beats per minute, and an afebrile temperature of 36.1 degrees Celsius. His penis was erect and engorged; glans and spongiosum were soft without tenderness to palpation. The examiner was unable to bend the shaft due to rigidity. The testes and vas were nontender.
Initial laboratory evaluation included normal hemogram and renal function; urinalysis showed three white blood cells and six red blood cells per high-powered field. Urologic consultation was requested and ice packs were applied to the penile shaft for several minutes without response. Aspiration of the corpora was performed. Penile venous blood gas (VBG) was remarkable for pH of 7.00 (reference [ref] range 7.31–7.41), partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 88.4 mm Hg (ref range 40–52 mm Hg), calculated venous oxygen saturation of 8.0 % (ref range 75%), and lactic acid level of 14.4 milllimoles per liter (mmol/L) (ref range 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), consistent with ischemic priapism. After local anesthetic, corporal injection of phenylephrine 500 μg/mL, diluted in 10 mL of normal saline, followed by aspiration and irrigation with an additional 10 cubic centimeters (cc) of sterile saline, resulted in gradual detumescence. A compression dressing was then applied to the penile shaft. The patient reported no discomfort after the procedure; blood pressure on discharge was normalized to 124/81 mm Hg. The patient was given instructions to remove the pressure dressing in 24 hours and abstain from sexual intercourse for a minimum of seven days.
On follow-up in urology clinic 11 days after his presentation to the ED, the patient reported ability to achieve normal erections; he was noted to have minimal ecchymosis at the base of the penile shaft. He was advised to refrain from using erectogenic medications in the future.