A 66-year-old Caucasian female was referred for evaluation of subclavian artery aneurysm causing distal embolization and hand ischemia.
Her medical history was notable of hypertension and hyperlipidemia without notice of renal insufficiency. She was an ex-smoker, had myocardial infarction 20 years earlier, bilateral femoropopliteal bypasses (15 and 8 years earlier) and operative repair of right common femoral artery pseudoaneurysm 4 years earlier. A computed tomography angiography showed aneurysm of extrathoracic segment of left subclavian artery. A multidisciplinary team (MDT) decided upon endovascular treatment. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed 9 cm long fusiform aneurysm of left subclavian artery extending into left axillary artery, with a maximal diameter of 13 mm . Since transfemoral approach was to be avoided due to previous bilateral groin surgeries, a 10 × 150 mm stentgraft (Viabahn, Gore, USA) was placed via a left brachial artery approach. Tubular graft was chosen based on diameter of non-diseased artery with a 1 mm difference in diameter of proximal and distal landing zone. During the procedure, the patient received 5000 IU of Heparin. Postprocedural course was uneventful, the patient was on low molecular Heparin for three days and was discharged with recommendation of dual antiplatelet therapy (Clopidogrel 75 mg/day, Aspirin 100 mg/day) for six months. The patient had a follow-up at GP office which showed good clinical outcome, as well as duplex sonography one month after the procedure which showed good graft patency.
The patient returned 3 months later with a sudden onset of left arm pain and pallor. Ultrasound showed complete graft thrombosis. The patient confirmed that she was not taking the prescribed antiagregation therapy regulary. Angiography via left transbrachial approach confirmed stent graft occlusion. After graft recanalisation, AngioJet PMT was performed after thrombus lacing with 10 mg of t-PA, with a total aspiration time of 180 s . Postinterventional angiography showed good graft patency . A total amount of 60 ml of nonionic contrast media was used. At the end of the procedure, the patient became agitated, with blood pressure 230/120 mmHg, chest pain and vomiting, they were transferred to intensive unit where myocardial infarction was excluded. The patient became oliguric with elevated serum creatinine of 285 μmol/l (prepocedural serum creatinine was 120 μmol/l, eGFR 41 ml/min/1.73m2). Blood tests at 48 h postprocedure showed significant drop in hematocrit (0,433 L/L to 0,284 L/L) as a marker of intravascular hemolysis as well as elevated LDH (1521 U/l), AST (303 U/L) and ALT (165 U/L). Due to AKI and continuous rise in serum creatinine , urgent renal replacement therapy was initiated. The peak value of serum creatinine was 827 μmol/l on 7th postprocedural day. After 4 session of haemodialysis within 2 weeks, the patients’ renal function entered a polyuric phase and subsequent recovery without further need for hemodyalisis. Renal duplex sonography showed normal renal vasculature. Urine tests showed no signs of nephritis. No co-medication or concomitant disease was identified as a probable cause of renal failure. The pretreatment level of pottasium was 4,7 mmol/L, which was within the normal range. On final discharge, the patient was anticoagulated with Clopidogrel 75 mg/day. During 12-months follow-up, the left subclavian and axillary artery remained patent. Unfortunately, the patient died 12 months after PMT due to traumatic incident.