A 63-year-old man presented for evaluation and treatment of asymptomatic lesions on his distal upper extremities. His past medical history was significant for nephrolithiasis and hypertension, for which he had been taking amlodipine and triamterene–hydrochlorothiazide for many years. He also had a history of a basal cell carcinoma and a squamous cell carcinoma on his arms; both were excised 5 years earlier, and there has been no recurrence. The patient had scaling of his eyebrows 20 years ago which had spontaneously resolved; he otherwise had no prior history of seborrheic dermatitis. He had no recent sunburn or rash on his face.
Cutaneous examination showed erythematous scaly plaques on his bilateral forearms from just above the elbow to the dorsal hands. There was no scaling or erythematous lesions on his scalp, face, chest, or back. Based on clinical morphology, the diagnosis of actinic keratoses was established.
After a discussion of treatment options, including liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, and topical agents (diclofenac, 5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, or ingenol mebutate), the patient elected to proceed with topical 5-fluorouracil 5% treatment. The initial treatment was twice daily for 7 days to be repeated every 2 months until his 6-month follow-up visit. He had an excellent response to treatment, with erythema and crusting of his actinic keratoses after the first treatment. At completion of therapy, mupirocin 2% ointment was used twice daily until the area returned to normal.
Four and six months after the follow-up appointment, the patient retreated the forearm actinic keratoses with 5-fluorouracil 5% cream twice daily. On the seventh day of therapy in each treatment cycle, he noted asymptomatic erythema and scaling on his face. Cutaneous examination revealed erythematous scaling plaques involving the glabellar areas, malar cheeks, paranasal regions, upper lip, and perioral region with extension to the chin . His arms showed hyperpigmentation in sun-exposed areas on his arms bilaterally. There was diffuse scaling and superficial desquamation of the extensor forearms bilaterally .
The 5-fluorouracil was discontinued, and mupirocin 2% ointment was applied to the forearms twice daily. Both arms and face promptly returned to their normal appearance, the latter without topical intervention.
Laboratory evaluation revealed normal complete blood cell count, including white blood cell count. His serum chemistries, including liver function, were normal. Evaluation of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) enzyme showed a normal genotype. The three most common variants that have been consistently associated with 5-fluorouracil toxicity are c.1679T > G, c.2846A > T, and c.1905 + 1G > A [, ]; none of these gene mutations were detected in this individual.
Correlation of the history and morphologic features established a diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis-like eruption on the face secondary to topical application of 5-fluorouracil at the distant site of his bilateral forearms. The patient had elected to challenge the initial observation with repeated treatment, which resulted in similar consequences, confirming the suspicion that the reaction was caused by 5-fluorouracil.
Despite the repeated development of seborrheic dermatitis-like facial eruption after applying 5-fluorouracil, the patient was curious about this adverse effect. Therefore, 2 months later, he elected to treat his buttocks twice daily with 5-fluorouracil. After 5 days of therapy, there was no reaction on his buttocks or his face, so he discontinued the medication.
He subsequently proceeded to again treat his forearm actinic keratoses. However, since the facial eruption had occurred after 7 days of therapy, he only treated his forearms for 5 days. During the fourth day of application, he developed similar erythematous plaques and scaling on his face with this shortened treatment regimen. The 5-fluorouracil was stopped on the fifth day, and the seborrheic dermatitis slowly resolved.