A 57-year-old right-handed male presented with progressive right hearing loss, disequilibrium, occasional difficulty swallowing, and right facial numbness. CT and MRI showed a right cerebellopontine angle tumor extending from the interpeduncular cistern to the foramen magnum. An audiogram revealed moderate right sensorineural hearing loss. Neurological examination demonstrated right decreased hearing, right facial numbness, and a positive Romberg sign.
Noncontrast CT of the head revealed a hypodense right cerebellopontine angle mass extending from the interpeduncular and ambient cisterns to the foramen magnum [ and ]. The tumor also infiltrated the right Meckel’s cave. There was compression of the brainstem with effacement of the fourth ventricle but no hydrocephalus . There was no abnormality in the adjacent bone to suggest hyperostosis. MRI showed a 5.2 × 3.8 × 5.5 cm (anteroposterior × lateral × craniocaudal) T1-weighted hypointense, and T2-weighted hyperintense mass [ and ]. The three-dimension fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition (FIESTA) sequence revealed the tumor also extended into the right internal acoustic canal . The mass displayed intermediate diffusion signal when compared to adjacent CSF . Gadoterate meglumine contrast injection did not reveal an apparent enhancement. There was a faint enhancement around the tentorium but no significant enhancement within the tumor . Computed tomography angiography revealed displacement of the basilar artery and the posterior cerebral arteries .
A posterior petrosal retrolabyrinthine approach with retrosigmoid and temporal craniotomies was used for the surgical approach in a staged operation (approach and resection in different days). After orotracheal intubation, the patient was placed in a left lateral decubitus position. Bone landmarks and neuronavigation were used for surgical incision planning. Facial nerve monitoring was placed. Incision and opening were made in a layered fashion, and the retrosigmoid and temporal craniotomies were performed as described in Graffeo et al. (2018). With the aid of a surgical microscope, the presigmoid retrolabyrinthine part of the approach was performed. There was no dural opening. The bone flap was reattached, and the incision was closed accordingly. The patient was extubated and was observed on the neurosurgical floor.
Two days later, he returned to the operating room for resection of the tumor and was positioned as described above. Neuromonitoring, including brainstem auditory evoked potential, was utilized for ipsilateral facial, glossopharyngeal, and accessory nerves. The incision and the bone flap were reopened. The retrosigmoid dura was opened in a curvilinear fashion, and the CSF was drained from the cisterna magna to relax the posterior fossa. The tumor was identified as a greyish mass with moderate vascularity and soft consistency, and resection was performed with an ultrasonic aspirator. In the posterior fossa, the vestibulocochlear, facial, and lower cranial nerves were identified posterior to the tumor, whereas the abducens nerve was found within the tumor. The trigeminal nerve was displaced superiorly against the tentorium. The infratentorial portion of the tumor was completely resected through the retrosigmoid part of the approach. The presigmoid and the temporal dura mater were opened, and the tentorium was divided after ligation of the superior petrosal sinus. The trochlear nerve was identified entirely within the tumor and preserved, and the oculomotor nerve was displaced medially by the tumor. Tumor resection was completed except for a small portion in the Meckel’s cave. The dura mater was closed primarily in the temporal and retrosigmoid areas, and the mastoid was reconstructed with fascia lata and fat graft. A lumbar drain was placed to minimize CSF leak postoperatively.
He had a right partial forth, and sixth nerve palsies and mild facial weakness (House-Brackman 2) after surgery. A postoperative CT scan is shown in . The lumbar drain was removed 3 days later, and he was discharged home. The facial weakness resolved during the hospital stay, and the partial forth and sixth nerve palsies improved within 6 weeks after the operation.
Grossly, the tumor appeared tan to pink. Microscopically, the tissue had lobulated architecture, mixed with prominent loose myxoid microcystic background and minor angiomatous changes. The lobulated component contained meningothelial whorls . The cells showed an indistinct membrane with uniform nuclei, and the eosinophilic cytoplasm with no inflammatory cells infiltrate. There was no frank anaplasia or significant atypia. There was a clear arachnoid plane between the tumor and the brain parenchyma with no evidence of brain invasion. The tumor stained for Vimentin, glial fibrillary astrocytic protein (GFAP), and Cyclin D1, with low Ki-67 (<2%), and with an epithelioid reticulin pattern . The tissue was diagnosed as microcystic meningioma, the WHO Grade 1.
A systematic review of the literature for minimal or nonenhancing meningioma was conducted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis guidelines. Search items including “nonenhancing meningioma,” “unenhanced meningioma,” and more broadly “enhancing meningioma” were entered into the online databases PubMed and web of science. The search returned 652 total peer-reviewed articles, and each item was reviewed to evaluate for cases with minimal or nonenhancing meningioma. Screening guidelines included recoverable English-written articles with basic demographic and radiographic information, including images to support the interpretation of radiographic features. The last query was 04 April 2020. Selection and reporting biases are acknowledged. Cystic and necrotic meningioma was excluded from the review. Minimal enhancement was defined as faint or hardly noticeable contrast enhancement on radiologic images or interpretation. Seven articles, including case reports and case series, had 14 verifiable cases included in the systemic review .[-,,,,] The average age was 48.1 years, and the majority were female (71.4%). Convexity meningioma was the common location at 57.1%. Two cases involved skull base, and one case involved the lumbosacral region. All cases had a faint or nonenhancing meningioma. Microcystic meningioma was the most common histological type at 85.7% (12/14). Clear cell and fibrous meningioma were other histological types of meningioma, respectively . Two patients had radiotherapy for adjuvant treatment.