A 62-year-old man with a history of type 2 diabetes presented with fever that started 5 days ago. Cough, fatigue, or abdominal pain were not present. At admission, the body temperature was 36.7 °C, and the patient was diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infection by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. Vital signs on presentation revealed heart rate of 76 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, and blood pressure of 117/65 mmHg. A chest computed tomography scan showed ground glass-like shadows multiple consolidations in the both upper lobes . The initial peripheral blood sample showed that the coagulation function was normal and the LDH was 274 U/L . The patient had no history of valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation or urinary system disease. The electrocardiogram indicates sinus rhythm. The creatinine value is 71 μmol/L. Urinalysis results are normal. The rest of the physical examination was also unremarkable.
According to the fifth edition of Chinese New Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Infection Treatment Plan Guide , the coronavirus pneumonia diagnosed was classified as mild type. He agreed to be given routine antiviral treatment and glycemic management of diabetes. Three days later, the patient developed shortness of breath and the symptom gradually worsened. The blood gas analysis showed an oxygenation index result of 172. After a regimen of 4-day course of methylprednisolone and ceftriaxone, his physical condition showed a significant improvement. On day 12 of hospitalization, the patient reported sudden-onset severe pain in the left waist. Abdominal and urinary color doppler ultrasound at that time showed no abnormalities. Two days later, laboratory tests displayed significantly elevated d-dimer level of 1008 ng/ml, creatinine level of 116 umol/L, and LDH level of 576 U/L. Urine routine showed urinary occult blood 2 + and protein 2 +. Table shows the results of the second peripheral blood test. The enhanced CT scan revealed the left renal artery embolism and threatening ischemia . The electrocardiogram of this patient showed sinus rhythm, and there was no history of cardiac valvular disease and atrial fibrillation, which did not support cardiogenic embolism, so it was diagnosed as renal artery thrombosis, resulting in acute renal artery embolism. Although the patient did not have obvious contraindications to thrombolysis, thrombosis occurred in the renal artery branch, interventional procedures were difficult and risky. The patient was diagnosed as renal artery thrombosis 48 hours after the onset of symptoms, and thrombolytic reperfusion therapy may not be beneficial. The patient had not received any anticoagulant therapy before. Considering that the process of renal artery thrombosis involves platelet activation and aggregation, clopidogrel antiplatelet aggregation therapy (clopidogrel 300 mg with 75 mg daily) and nadroparin calcium (3800 IU/q12h) anticoagulant therapy were given. Three days later, clopidogrel combined with rivaroxaban was used to maintenance therapy. The patient was discharged from the hospital after 1 week of anticoagulation therapy, with disappearance of lumbago, negative lumbar percussion pain, reexamination of D-dimer and renal function, and normal urinary routine. After that, the patient continued to receive the above anticoagulant regimen for 3 months. After 3 months, the patient returned to the hospital for reexamination, indicating that the renal function was normal.