A 21-year-old female presented to Dr. Wahidin Sudirohusodo General Hospital, Makassar, Indonesia, in September 2021 with a chief complaint of weakness on the right side of her body, in addition to right-sided hypoesthesia and occasional headaches.
The complaints were first experienced 3 mo prior, with sudden onset, while the patient was performing her daily activities as a college student. She also recalled other symptoms upon onset, such as headache, transient vision loss, slurred speech, and vomiting. At the time, she experienced a brief period of loss of consciousness and was treated conservatively at her local health care center due to lack of imaging modalities.
The patient had no prior history of trauma, infection, hypertension, diabetes, or stroke.
The patient had no significant personal or family history to disclose.
On presentation at our center, her vital signs were normal. The neurological bedside examination revealed a GCS score of 15, no meningeal signs, and good cognitive function. Her cranial nerve assessment was within normal limits. The motor strength assessment showed weakness on the right side with a strength score of 4 on the right upper and lower extremities. The right extremities also showed increased tone and physiologic reflexes. No pathologic reflexes were observed. The exam also showed right sided hypoesthesia. Autonomic function was within normal limits.
Laboratory tests, chest X-rays, and electrocardiography exams showed no abnormal findings.
The first imaging examination was a non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) scan performed a few days after the onset, at the patient’s regional hospital. The exam revealed an intracerebral hematoma of the left cerebral hemisphere . Due to the rise in COVID-19 cases at the time, her referral to Dr. Wahidin Sudirohusodo General Hospital for further investigation and definitive therapy was delayed based on her family’s decision, and she was given conservative treatment.
A head CT angiography was performed approximately 2 mo after onset, revealing the presence of an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) on the left frontal lobe with a feeding artery from the left anterior cerebral artery, draining into the superior sagittal sinus.
We performed a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) on the patient a few days after her admission in our center . The DSA confirmed that the bAVM fed off the left pericallosal artery, with two draining veins, one towards the cortical vein while the other has undergone stenosis. We graded the AVM as a Spetzler-Martin Grade II AVM.