A 59-year-old Caucasian male with a medical history of asthma and gastroesophageal reflux disease, who is never a smoker, presented to the oncology clinic for evaluation and management of recently diagnosed neuroendocrine tumorlets after a left upper lobe wedge resection. Approximately 1 year before this visit, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan was done for the workup of severe coughing spells, flushing, and diarrhea that were interfering with his daily activities and work. The CT scan showed innumerable pulmonary nodules and irregular nodular opacities throughout the lungs, and the majority were stable from prior imaging, but one of which was new in the medial left upper lobe, measuring up to 15 mm . The patient eventually underwent a positron emission tomography scan, which showed multiple nodules in the left lung exhibiting variable degrees of abnormally increased tracer activity, including the new nodule in the medial left upper lobe on the recent CT scan . The patient was eventually seen by cardiothoracic surgery, and they decided to do a left upper lobe wedge resection for diagnosis. Immunohistochemical stain for AE1/AE3 performed on block A3 suggested entrapped benign acini/glands within the granulomatous inflammation with no evidence of malignancy. Special staining for acid-fast bacillus and Grocott’s methenamine silver performed on block A3 were negatives for acid-fast bacilli and fungal organisms, respectively. Immunohistochemical stains for chromogranin and synaptophysin performed on blocks A5 and A6 were positive within the lesional cells of interest, consistent with neuroendocrine hyperplasia/tumorlets . The granulomatous inflammation appeared to be causing most of the lesion. In addition, neuroendocrine proliferations were small (2 mm or less) and most likely an incidental finding. The patient got referred to an infectious disease service that worked up fungal infections, and all the workup was negative. After that, he got referred to the oncology clinic for further evaluation and management of the neuroendocrine tumorlets. Positron emission tomography scan was repeated and showed bilateral pulmonary nodules overall similar in size. Many of these pulmonary nodules had an uptake similar to or slightly higher than the blood pool. The nodule with the most avid radiotracer uptake was located within the superior and medial left lower lobe, measuring up to 15 mm . Brain magnetic resonance imaging was done and showed no signs of metastasis. All biochemical testing, including VIP, insulin, cortisol, somatostatin, and 5-hydroxy indole acetic acid, showed normal levels, but the glucagon levels were mildly elevated. The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary thoracic tumor board setting, and a decision was made to start a trial of octreotide according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. One month after treatment, the patient came for a follow-up and reported significant improvement in his symptoms of diarrhea and cough after taking octreotide. He also felt an improvement in his quality of life.