A 38-year-old Chinese woman was found to have blood pressure instability at 21 wk of gestation and was admitted to our hospital for pre-eclampsia.
The patient became pregnant following in vitro fertilization and embryo transplantation (IVF-ET). Three embryos were transferred into the uterus and only one embryo survived. In early pregnancy, the patient had recurrent episodes of fresh vaginal bleeding. On admission, the couple was informed of the high probability for a poor obstetrical outcome with complications; however, they wished to continue the pregnancy.
The patient (gravida 2, para 0) denied having had hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease. The patient denied having had hepatitis and tuberculosis. Moreover, the patient denied a history of food and drug allergy.
The patient denied a history of drug abuse, smoking, and drinking. The patient denied a family history of genetic disease and cancer.
The patient’s blood pressure at admission was 160/87 mmHg, and heart rate was 115 bpm. Her temperature and pulse were normal. The fetal heart rate was 140 bpm.
At 13 wk and 3 d, the measurement of serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) rose to 271600 IU/L, and the result of the Down’s syndrome screening showed a low-risk status. At 21 wk and 4 d, her serum β-HCG level rose to 510427 IU/L, which was abnormally high for the corresponding gestational age.
An ultrasound sonographic examination at 55 d of gestational age revealed a single live intrauterine fetus of 7 wk and 4 d, and a blood clot beside it. At 10 wk and 3 d, an ultrasound examination revealed a single live intrauterine fetus of 10 wk and 3 d with a suspected partial hydatidiform mole. However, at 13 wk and 3 d of gestational age, vaginal bleeding disappeared and an ultrasound examination merely revealed a single live intrauterine fetus. At 21 wk and 3 d, a transvaginal sonographic examination revealed a single live intrauterine fetus of 21 wk and 4 d. The left part of the placenta was composed of multiple cystic areas, measuring 126 mm × 42 mm × 114 mm . Two days later, enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a single live intrauterine fetus and abnormal intensified signals at the left part of the placenta with no clear demarcations between the myometrium and placental tissue . The chest computed tomography result was normal.