A 45-year-old woman with acute abdominal pain presented to the emergency ward of a private general hospital in Babol, northern Iran, on May 4, 2015. Her pain had originated in the epigastrium and had an incremental trend for two days prior to her admission. She had also experienced nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite during that time.
The patient had a history of chronic abdominal discomfort and upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGIB) due to gastritis. She also reported that she had taken oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) for approximately 5 years, many years earlier. On examination, her vital signs were all normal: blood pressure 125/75 mmHg, pulse rate 78 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, and oral temperature 37.3°C. Her abdomen was not distended on inspection. There was a mild generalized tenderness, as well as severe tenderness in the upper part of the abdomen, prominently the epigastrium, but there was no rebound tenderness or guarding. Complete blood count, basic metabolic profile, coagulation tests, and liver function tests were all within normal limits. B-HCG was negative.
There were no abnormal findings on the upright chest film and abdominal x-ray. Ultrasonography revealed a 92 × 42 × 72 mm solid ovoid mass with exophytic features, originating from the anterior border of the left lobe of the liver. Abdominopelvic CT scan with contrast media demonstrated a 100 × 64 mm lobulated oval mass showing central necrosis in the anterior aspect of the abdomen, suggesting a mesenteric mass lesion, such as gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), as the first differential diagnosis.
Due to her past history of UGIB, she underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy by a gastroenterologist, and no mass or ulcer was observed. However, there was mass effect, most probably gastric compression due to an extragastric mass lesion, with a remote possibility of a submucosal lesion. Her colonoscopy was normal.
On her second day of admission, she had a low-grade fever and decreased hemoglobin (from 10 to 8.3 g/dL). According to the clinical and paraclinical findings, the unknown etiology of the mass, the possibility of malignancy, and the risks of bleeding and hemoperitoneum, we decided to perform surgical management.
In the operating room, under general anesthesia (GA) and with full monitoring in the supine position, exploratory laparotomy was performed. A large, multilobulated, dark red mass was discovered attached to the anterior edge of the left lobe of the liver by a vascular pedicle. It had undergone torsion on its pedicle. The mass was removed simply by legating the pedicle. Macroscopically, it measured 10.5 × 8.8 × 7 cm and weighed 316 g.
The histopathological analysis confirmed a huge pedunculated hepatic hemangioma, with marked vascular congestion and focal hemorrhagic infarct, with no evidence of atypia. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course, and was symptom-free. She was discharged from the hospital three days after surgery ( - ).