A 57-year-old female with bronchial asthma presented to the emergency department (ED) with a 1-week history of worsening shortness of breath, fever, and intermittent nausea. She also reported left lower extremity pain and swelling. Her husband had similar symptoms. On initial evaluation, she was hypoxic and tachycardic. Her blood pressure was 90/67 mmHg, heart rate 111 b.p.m., and saturation 96% on 4 L of oxygen through a nasal cannula. Physical examination was significant for clear breath sounds and left leg oedema. ECG showed sinus tachycardia, incomplete right bundle branch block, and Q waves in lead III . Laboratory work-up was pertinent for leukocytosis of 27.35 × 109/μL, absolute lymphocyte count of 0.27 × 109/μL, creatinine 2.2 mg/dL, lactic acid 6.8 mmol/L, troponin-T 0.21 ng/mL, probrain natriuretic peptide (pro-BNP) 8969 pg/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 266.9 mg/L, and ferritin 3233 ng/mL. Chest X-ray did not show any acute cardiopulmonary pathology. A rapid COVID test in the ED was negative. A venous duplex scan of the left leg revealed a large occlusive thrombus in the left femoral and popliteal veins. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a large mobile filling defect in the right atrium (RA) partially prolapsing into a dysfunctional right ventricle with positive McConnell’s sign (; , Video S1). Left ventricular ejection fraction was preserved. The patient was started on levophed infusion. Given that the patient was in shock with an imminent risk of a catastrophic event in the case of embolization of the right heart mass, the decision was made to proceed with emergent percutaneous aspiration with the Angio-Vac system (Angiodynamics Inc., Latham, NY, USA) rather than intravenous or catheter- directed thrombolysis which would have minimal effect on a large thrombus.
The patient was intubated prior to the procedure. Intra-operative transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed a large mobile mass in the RA . The right internal jugular (IJ) vein and common femoral vein (CFV) were cannulated under ultrasound guidance. After performing right heart catheterization and pulmonary angiography (, Video S2), a 24 Fr dry-seal sheath was advanced into the RA through the right IJ vein for introduction of a suction cannula. A 19 Fr extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) cannula was placed in the upper inferior vena cava through the right CFV for reinfusion of blood. The AngioVac catheter was then advanced through the right IJ sheath and multiple runs of aspiration were performed with extraction of a large organized thrombus (; , Video S3). TOE showed resolution of the thrombus; however, embolization of small thrombi was noted in the right ventricle and pulmonary artery. Post-thrombectomy, the patient further decompensated, with systolic blood pressure dropping to 50 mmHg and heart rate to ∼40 b.p.m. CPR was initiated and maintained for 5 min with the standard ACLS protocol. Repeat haemodynamics showed elevated RA pressures of 20 mmHg (baseline 12 mmHg) and mixed venous oxygen (MVO2) of 42% along with an akinetic right ventricle on TOE, findings consistent with acute RV failure. At this time, the 19 Fr cannula in the right CFV was upgraded to a 24 Fr sheath, and an Impella RP (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA) was inserted in the pulmonary artery for RV support . The arterial blood pressure waveform showed an immediate increase in systolic blood pressure from <50 mmHg to >120 mmHg after Impella placement, as demonstrated in , Video S4. Also, there was significant improvement in MVO2. The right IJ cannula was removed and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) in stable condition.
COVID PCR was reported positive the following day, and the patient was started on hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin. She was anticoagulated with intravenous heparin. Further hypercoagulability and malignancy work-up was planned. She remained haemodynamically stable with consistent improvement in her MVO2 and RV function on post-operative days 1 and 2. Repeat echocardiogram showed resolution of the thrombus and improvement in RV contractility . Her further ICU course was essentially uncomplicated besides acute renal failure requiring temporary haemodialysis. She was successfully weaned off the Impella and it was subsequently removed on post-operative day 4. The patient was extubated on day 5 and transferred to a routine ward. She was eventually discharged in a stable condition with home care on day 23 of hospitalization.