M.S., a previously healthy 13 years old girl injured as a result of gunshots and grenade blast. She sustained injuries to her face and extremities. She was initially treated by a primary care physician of the IDF. The nearest hospital to the place of admission was a civilian hospital located about one hour drive away. While waiting for the ambulance for evacuation, resuscitation efforts were started. GCS was 15; she was restless due to severe pain. Systolic blood pressure could not be measured and the heart rate was 163 beats per minute. Her injuries included: 1. Active hemorrhage from open large wounds on the right knee (Mangled extremity severity score (MESS) 8). 2. Open fractures of left elbow and right thigh 3. Active hemorrhage from the left forearm and RT. Knee due to gunshot wounds. 4. Open superficial wounds on the forehead, right eye and face. Interventions included: Arterial tourniquet to the left forearm that was converted to hemostatic dressing during the secondary survey and a C-A-T tourniquet was applied to the right thigh. Dressing with antibiotic ointment to the wounds on her face was also applied. A peripheral intravenous catheter was established and adult dose of tranexamic acid (1 g) was administered in 500 ml of Hartmann solution. The IV line was pulled out by the restless patient and in order to assure a secure and rapid line for resuscitation a tibial intra-osseous catheter (B.I.G produced by PerSys Medical) was established. Due to severe hemorrhagic shock one unit of FDP (distributed as a powder, produced by LyoPlas in Germany) (250 ml about 5.5. ml/kg) was reconstituted and then administered. Intra-osseous Morphine was also administered for pain control. No colloids, or other blood products were administered until hospital arrival. No laboratory workup was performed until after arrival to hospital. Upon arrival to the hospital, oxygen saturation was 98%, the blood pressure was 106/80 and the heart rate was 127 beats per minutes. During her 3 weeks hospitalization surgical repairs of her open fractures were performed. Since her return to her homeland M.S. was lost to follow up.