A 63-year-old man with significant ischaemic FMR and NYHA functional class IV symptoms, on maximally tolerated medical therapy, was referred for inability to wean off inotropic support while in an intensive care unit (ICU) setting for several days (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support INTERMACS III) with clinical evidence of low cardiac output state (acute on chronic kidney failure, hepatic dysfunction, and respiratory failure). Upon transfer, he was confined to bed (for the previous 22 days), afebrile, with blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg, heart rate of 90 beats/min (on dobutamine infusion), and pulse oximetry of 95% on 40% FiO2 via face mask. Cardiovascular examination was notable for a 2/6 apical systolic murmur, with signs of decompensated heart failure (low cardiac output and volume overload).
The past medical history was notable for premature coronary artery disease and acute myocardial infarction at age 48 (conservative treatment). The most recent coronary angiogram revealed patent left main, occlusion of the mid left anterior descending, atheromatous left circumflex and right coronary with 70% stenosis of the posterior descending artery. Following this, surgical revascularization was performed (see Summary figure) with use of both internal mammaries as grafts, along with aneurysmectomy of the left ventricular apex. Other comorbidities included chronic kidney disease (maximum creatinine level of 3.0 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate 21 mL/min/1.73 m2) and obesity (body mass index 30.4 kg/m2).
The differential diagnosis for intractable heart failure was attributed predominantly to the underlying severe ischaemic cardiomyopathy, and stage IV chronic kidney disease, with an uncertain contribution from the concurrent functional mitral regurgitation (due to body habitus and difficult transthoracic imaging, the MR was initially determined as moderate). Coronary angiography was not performed given recent arterial revascularization, lack of angina pectoris, and borderline kidney function at risk for contrast nephropathy.
Pertinent laboratory tests (on transfer for transcatheter edge to edge repair—TEER) included B-natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 1.328 pg/mL (<100 pg/mL), INR 1.44 (0.80–1.20), albumin 2.9 g/dL (3.4–5.0 g/dL), total bilirubin 1.8 mg/dL (0.3–1.2 mg/dL), gGT 114 U/L (<73 U/L), urea 98 mg/dL (19–49 mg/dL), creatinine 2.3 mg/dL (0.7–1.3 mg/dL), sodium 137 mg/dL (132–146 mg/dL), Hs troponin 79 ng/L (<47 ng/L), and CK-MB 1.80 IU/L (≤5.0 IU/L).
A chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly and interstitial pulmonary oedema .
Transthoracic (difficult study due to obesity) and ultimately transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) revealed a dilated left ventricle (end-diastolic diameter 72 mm), with an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20% while on continuous dobutamine infusion (see , ). A severe, centrally directed MR jet (evident on TOE), originating from across the coaptation zone in the A2-P2 area, was attributed to annular dilatation and decreased leaflet mobility in systole (Carpentier types I and III-b) (, , , , and ). The MR was considered disproportionate with an effective regurgitant orifice of 80 mm2 and a regurgitant volume of 76 mL. Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 60 mmHg.
A right heart catheterization for confirmation of the adverse haemodynamics was considered, but due to the presence of left bundle branch block (LBBB), and the unstable clinical status, this was not performed.
The calculated Society for Thoracic Surgery mortality for mitral valve replacement was estimated at 9.48% with a morbidity/mortality score of 40.4%. The Heart Team decision was to proceed with mitral TEER using the Pascal P10 (Edwards Lifesciences) in an attempt to treat the pathology with a single device (width of 10 mm). Usage of the Wide MitraClip G4 or of the Pascal Ace (width of 6 mm) might have required positioning multiple devices for an optimal result increasing procedural complexity.
Left atrial haemodynamic tracings revealed giant V waves of up to 65 mmHg (mean LA pressure 32 mmHg) . A single Pascal device (P10) was implanted in the A2-P2 area (, , and ), resulting in a double orifice valve with mild residual MR ( and , , and ), without stenosis (mean gradient 3 mmHg at a heart rate of 70/min). The final left atrial haemodynamics revealed V waves of 14 mmHg (mean pressure 10 mmHg) . Changes in pulmonary vein flow were also observed ( and ) with restoration of forward systolic flow.
The patient, as a result, had an abrupt clinical improvement allowing weaning off inotropes and was discharged on post-operative Day 4. A cardiac resynchronization and defibrillator pacemaker was electively implanted 2 weeks later.
Medical therapy could then be further up titrated and, with improved kidney function, sacubitril/valsartan was initiated. At the 1-year visit, the patient reported no rehospitalizations for heart failure, and he was in NYHA functional class II. The echocardiogram revealed minimal residual MR (see , and ), with an LVEF of 20–25%. A BNP level at 14 months post-procedure was 104 pg/mL. At the 4-year follow-up, the patient remains clinically compensated while on guideline-directed medical therapy including carvedilol 12.5 mg twice daily, sacubitril/valsartan 49/51 mg twice daily, and eplerenone 25 mg once daily.