A 45-year-old woman with a long history of taking immunosuppressant methotrexate (MTX) for RA visited a clinic with a chief complaint of nasal congestion and bleeding. She was then referred to our department for the purpose of further examination and treatment for a suspected tumor in her left maxillary sinus. There were no other symptoms including trismus, so oral intake was possible. A plain CT at the first visit showed a soft tissue shadow with total peripheral destruction of the left maxillary sinus bone. Although progression to the intraorbital and subcranial fossa was also observed, no abnormal findings were found in the internal and external pterygoid muscles. Any other cranial nerve involvement was not observed. The tissue biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma, with various imaging tests, including PET-CT, leading to a diagnosis of left maxillary sinus cancer cT4aN0M0 (a). Considering her age, she underwent radiation and intra-arterial cisplatin (CDDP) infusion therapy (RADPLAT) from the viewpoint of functional preservation and cosmetic aspects. While irradiating a total RT of 70 Gy, a total of 5 doses of CDDP 120 mg/mm2 were administered at a ratio of jaw artery:sacral artery:transfacial artery = 6:3:1. Complications during treatment included leukopenia G3, gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and loss of appetite G2, mucositis G3, and dermatitis G2. Two months after the end of treatment, while MRI confirmed CR, the STIR image showed a high signal intensity area in the left lateral pterygoid muscle group (b). During this period, conjunctivitis G2 also developed. The MRI taken 4 months following the end of treatment showed an increase in the high signal intensity area of the lateral pterygoid muscle (c), with the development of corneal perforation G4 as well. A skin ulceration with bone exposure emerged 5 months following the end of treatment (d). Six months following the end of treatment, she was admitted to the hospital due to trismus (1 fingerbreadth or less), significantly restricting oral intake. A contrast-enhanced CT examination confirmed a ring-shaped contrast effect within the left lateral pterygoid muscle, raising suspicions of abscess, tumor recurrence, and muscle necrosis . Since the culture results of pus in the mouth showed only Penicillin G (PCG)-sensitive bacteria such as Methicillin-Susceptible Staphylococcus Aureus (MSSA), Sulbactam/Ampicillin (SBT/ABPC) 1.5 g/time/day × 4 times was initiated. This significantly improved the inflammation according to the blood test findings; however, no improvement of the pterygoid muscle lesion was confirmed in the contrast-enhanced CT examination performed on the eighth day of hospitalization. Therefore, endoscopic drainage and biopsy were performed under general anesthesia. When the sphenoidal sinus fossa was opened by piercing through the medial wall of the left maxillary sinus , a small amount of pus was observed. However, there was no abscess formation. Based on the intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis and lesion appearance, muscle necrosis was primarily suspected; therefore, not all lesions were removed.
The permanent pathological result was muscle necrosis, with no recurrence observed. Although Citrobacter freundii (with PCG sensitivity) was detected in the pus, no signs of infection were observed after postoperative antibiotic administration. Following surgery, rehabilitation by conducting opening training by hand and opening training with the use of Heister improved the mouth opening from 5 mm to 11 mm at 2 months following surgery, enabling dietary intake. As of now, 18 months following treatment, the trismus persists, and the patient can only take liquid food. However, no recurrence of cancer was observed.