A previously healthy 39-year-old female presented with numbness in the left hemiface for two weeks. She denied history of vascular risk factors, malignancy and certain medication. Also, she denied recent history of COVID-19 infection or COVID-19 vaccination before the symptom onset. At first, she had developed multiple vesicles and crusts with oozing, localized to the left side of the upper lip three weeks ago. The skin lesion did not accompany pain and improved without specific treatment after 5 days. However, in a few days, abnormal sensation (i.e., numbness) newly developed on her left hemiface. Her initial sensory symptom covered three divisions of the trigeminal nerve. At the time of consultation to our hospital, sensory disturbance involving the V2 and V3 divisions of the trigeminal nerve was aggravated, whereas numbness in the V1 division was improved. Headache, fever, or neck stiffness were absent on admission. Neurological examination revealed decreased sensation of pain, temperature, and crude touch in the left hemiface involving the V2–V3 divisions of the trigeminal nerve. Corneal reflexes and other cranial nerve evaluations were normal. Other neurological deficits were also absent. Gadolinium-enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high signal intensities and asymmetrical thickening with enhancement along the cisternal segment of the left trigeminal nerve. Additionally, brain MR angiography showed multifocal stenoses in the M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery and the cavernous portion of the left internal carotid artery. Facial nerve conduction study and blink test were normal. Routine serologic tests including blood cell count, and inflammatory markers (i.e., C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate) were all within the normal range. The results of serologic testing for tumor markers and autoimmune markers including rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody was negative. Moreover, symptoms and signs suggesting systemic vasculitis were absent. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed mild pleocytosis (22 cells/µL) with a normal protein level (35.2 mg/dL) and glucose ratio (0.7). However, CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for specific anti-viral antibodies including herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicella zoster virus, and human immunodeficiency virus was negative. CSF culture also did not identify a specific pathogen. CSF oligoclonal band was negative and CSF/serum IgG ratio was within the normal range. CSF cytology did not reveal malignant cells.
A tentative diagnosis of trigeminal neuritis as a complication of HL involving the CNS was made considering the clinical, neuroradiological, and laboratory findings of the patient. Therefore, intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 h) was administered for 10 days associated with intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) for 5 consecutive days. Symptoms improved rapidly during the period of steroid pulse treatment and intravenous acyclovir administration. At the time of discharge, slight paresthesia remained, but it gradually improved, and at a follow-up 1 month later, it was clearly improved. Brain MRI at the 3-month follow-up demonstrated resolution of previously identified high signal intensity lesions with enhancement and multifocal intracerebral arterial stenoses. .