A 31 years old right hand dominant gentleman presented to our orthopedic specialty clinic with fracture distal end radius on left side. On further evaluation, there was deformity in ipsilateral shoulder joint and asymmetry was present as compared to opposite side. There was an anterior globular bony swelling palpable with well defined margins. Transmitted movements from humerus were present confirming it to be bony humeral mass. There was wasting of deltoid muscle as compared to opposite side. Range of motion were flexion upto 170 degrees , extension up to 10 degree , internal rotation up to L3 , and external rotation up to 30 degree and abduction up to 120 in both active and passive movements, further movements were restricted and mildly painful. Patient did not have any history of significant trauma to shoulder in past. However he gave a history of seizure attacks three years back following which he had shoulder pathology. He had taken antiepileptic treatment; however no treatment was taken for the shoulder. There were no further epileptic episodes and he was taking antiepileptic treatment. Radiographs of shoulder joint were taken which confirmed anteriorly dislocated humeral head . Further views of shoulder joint were taken to check for any bony changes. They didn’t show any significant abnormality. CT scan showed anteroinferior dislocation with neocavity with pseudojoint formation (,,). Chronic hillsachs lesion was also seen. MRI Scan showed anteroinferior shoulder dislocation with intact rotator cuff muscles (,) Since the patient had good functional range of movement we explained him the treatment options. He opted for non surgical line of management. Hence was given shoulder mobilization exercises. Presently patient is being followed up with no fresh complaints and maintained join movements.
Anterior dislocation of shoulder unlike posterior dislocation is most commonly traumatic in nature. The mechanism of anterior dislocation following trauma is that greater tuberosity abuts against acromion when arm is abducted and extended, causing leverage forces leading head to come out of glenoidcavity . Posterior dislocation secondary to seizure attack is caused due to imbalance between strong internal rotators and weak external rotators and deltoid. The cause of anterior dislocation following seizure is postulated to be direct trauma due to collapse of patient hitting the floor . Anterior dislocation of shoulder is commonly missed after seizure because of its unusual occurrence, post seizure drowsiness and subsequent medical management.
The term chronic dislocation of shoulder is applied to condition where there is loss of recognition of injury for at least 3 weeks or 4weeks . Many authors have described chronic dislocation with varying amount of duration at presentation. Rowe and Zarin presented eight patients with anterior dislocation with seven patients presenting at 3 week to 2 year interval and one patient at 10 year duration . Goga presented 31 patients with chronic anterior dislocation with longest duration of failed recognition at 2 years . Postacchini and Facchini presented five patients with 6 weeks as longest duration of failure of diagnosis.
Mansat et al showed five patients with 6 weeks to 3 years as the duration of missed diagnosis. Mancini et al presented a case with 24 years of missed anterior shoulder dislocation . Our case presented 10 years after the dislocation.
Treatment options for neglected shoulder dislocation include observation, manipulation, open reduction with or without allograft reconstruction, bankarts repair, capsulolabial repair and arthroplasty [, ]. Surgical treatment for chronic dislocations is usually advocated for better functional outcome, however the results can be poor and unsatisfactory.
Very few cases describe chronic dislocation of shoulder with good functional range of motion which were treated nonsurgically. Table shows epidemiological details of patients reported with asymptomatic neglected anterior shoulder dislocation. Essi et al showed a case with 15 years old neglected anterior shoulder dislocation in a 35 year old lady with good functional range of movement and neocavity formation leading to preserved movements . Similar neocavity formation seen in a case described by Mancinni et al with 24 years of neglected dislocation ion a 74 year old lady with low functional demand . Jerosch et al presented a case of a young male with preserved movements 4 years after missed diagnosis. This case didn’t show neocavity formation, but had a large Hill Sachs lesion which locked the head in dislocated position. In our case we found neocavity formation with large hill Sachs lesion.