On April 02, 2021, a 5-year-old Chinese boy visited our hospital with complains of a progressively growing mass under the skin of his right foot for 1 year. The boy was born at full-term after an uncomplicated pregnancy with a birth weight of 2.8 kg. At 4 years of age, his parents noticed a hard mass under his right foot, with no signs of redness or swelling over the skin. The family visited a local hospital, where radiographs revealed ossification of the right foot. Further investigations were recommended, however, the patient’s parents refused and requested only observation at the time. Over the following year, the mass grew, however, it was manageable during mechanical loading. The boy was healthy prior to this.
Physical examination at our hospital revealed that the boy was 102.5 cm tall (-2 SD) and weighed 14.5 kg (-2 SD). He was a slim, right-handed boy with Tanner I pubertal development and no signs of mental retardation or developmental delay. A comprehensive subcutaneous mass was palpable in sole of the right foot, which extended to the Achilles tendon and caused minimal limitations in ankle movement. The mass could not be precisely localised. The remainder of the physical examination results were normal.
The serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphates were found to be normal. An anteroposterior radiograph of the right foot showed long sheets of opacification across the plantar aspect of the foot and heel, some opacified sheets were continuous with metatarsals and tarsal bones . Axial computed tomography (CT) images revealed ossification in the right foot between the second and third metatarsals, which was continuous with the foot bones. Three-dimensional CT revealed progression of the ectopic ossification . X-ray screening was performed to identify other sites of heterotopic ossification, small areas of intramuscular ossification were observed at the superior margin of bilateral proximal humerus . Additionally, a limited radio-dense lesion was noted in the right popliteal fossa .
Soft-tissue ossification-causing rheumatic diseases, such asjuvenile dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and systemic sclerosis, were ruled out as the patient showed no systemic clinical features and tests for autoantibodies were negative. There was a high suspicion of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) due to the massive heterotopic ossification. FOP was ruled out because the patient showed no signs of inflammatory soft tissue swelling or malformed great toes. The large heterogeneously ossified mass, progressive nature of the lesions, and normal laboratory findings prompted a clinical diagnosis of POH. AHO was unlikely, as the patient did not exhibit any other characteristic anomalies of AHO despite the short stature.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed to confirm the diagnosis. A de novo heterozygous inactivating mutation (c.175C > T, p. Q59X) was identified in exon 2 of the GNAS gene. This is the first reported case of such a mutation leading to POH. Physical therapy was recommended to preserve movement. The ossified lesion continued to grow slowly over the following year.
We performed a comprehensive literature search using the search string: (Progressive Osseous Heteroplasia) OR ((Heterotopic Ossification) AND GNAS)) AND ("1999/12/31"[Date—Publication]: "2022/01/01"[Date—Publication]). A total of 166 articles were retrieved from PubMed, one additional article was identified through an online search engine. After eliminating duplicates, 164 studies were included. Subsequently, 112 articles were deemed irrelevant based on the title and abstract and were excluded. Thereafter, 22 articles were excluded for various reasons . Finally, 30 articles, which included 40 patients (22 female), were analyzed, the clinical and genetic features are summarized in (Additional file : Table 1) [, , , , –].