A 54-year-old man was brought to the emergency department with sudden left back pain and macrohematuria without the occasion of trauma. His medical history included hypertension, a parotid carcinoma, and renal calculi. Abdominal and pelvic enhanced CT showed a left parenchymal renal rupture and perirenal hematoma with a duplicated renal pelvis . The size of perirenal hematoma was about a width of 55 mm, a height of 150 mm, and a depth of 105 mm. In addition, there was no hydronephrosis in the upper half of the left kidney. A ureteric calculus of 11 mm was found at the vesicoureteral junction with an incompletely duplicated ureter . No benign or malignant tumors were observed in the perirenal hematoma and extravasated urine. The ureteric calculus and atrophy of the lower half of the left kidney were detected in a follow-up CT of the parotid carcinoma performed 10 months before . At this time, there was no urologic consultation regarding ureteric calculus. A self-discharged urine cytology was negative. The diagnosis was parenchymal rupture of the lower half of the left kidney caused by an obstructive ureteric calculus in an incompletely duplicated renal pelvis and ureter.
At this point, the vital signs of the patient were stable (blood pressure 144/78 mmHg, heart rate 103 beats per min, and body temperature 37°C). The hemoglobin level was 13.1 g/dL (normal range: 13.1–16.3 g/dL), blood urea nitrogen was 19.3 mg/dL (normal range: 8.0–20.0 mg/dL), and creatinine level was 1.17 mg/dL (normal range: 0.65–1.09 mg/dL). We attempted retrograde pyelography and ureteral stenting using a cystoscope with a fluoroscopic guidance under sacral anesthesia. Retrograde pyelography revealed a bilateral incompletely duplicated renal pelvis and ureter. A ureteral stent was placed in the lower part of the renal pelvis to remove the urinary tract obstruction, and to improve pain and mild renal dysfunction .
The patient was treated with bed rest, hemostatic agents, and empirical antibiotics. The day after admission, his hemoglobin level slightly decreased (10.3 g/dL). However, transfusion was not required because hematuria did not progress, and his vital signs were stable. His left back pain improved over time, and a follow-up CT on the fifth day of hospitalization did not show an increase in the hematoma. He was discharged 1 week after admission. There were no complications during the follow-up, and the hematoma had decreased . After confirming the disappearance of the hematoma, the patient underwent transurethral lithotripsy at another hospital approximately 6 months after discharge from our hospital. The ureteral stent was removed 4 weeks after we performed transurethral lithotripsy.