A 39-year-old right-handed man had sudden onset of unsteady gait, right-sided hemihypesthesia and failure of speech. His medical history was significant for arterial hypertension for the past 2 years and a past history of smoking. ESR had been noted to be elevated (55 mm/hour) for the past 18 months, without any known reason. His initial examination was remarkable for dysarthria, discrete right hemiplegia and gait ataxia. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 3. Also, marked hypertension (170/90 mmHg) was present on both sides without a blood pressure difference. Radial pulses were not diminished. Pulse was 85 beats per minute.
The head CT showed a demarcated infarction in the left middle cerebral artery territory. A subsequent MRI scan also revealed a subacute left-sided pontine infarction. Magnetic resonance angiography demonstrated no abnormalities of the cerebral vessels . While transcranial and extracranial ultrasound was normal, abdominal CT showed an aneurysm of the infrarenal aorta with a diameter of 4.8 cm and a marginal thrombus . CT angiography of the coronary arteries was normal. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography and hypercoagulability state (proteins C and S, factor V Leiden mutation, homocysteine level, and lupus anticoagulant) were unremarkable. Laboratory studies revealed increases in ESR (46 mm/hour), CRP (47 mg/l), C3-complement levels (194 mg/dl) and hypergammaglobulinemia (1.11 g/dl). MPO/P-ANCA, C-ANCA and rheumatoid factors were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid protein level (94 mg/dl) was increased without intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins. For suspected arteritis and to detect systemic inflammatory disease, whole body scans in one session on a dual modality positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography system were performed 60 minutes after intravenous administration of 243MBq 18F-FDG. PET and CT images were reconstructed in coronal, sagittal, and transverse planes .
The inflammatory vascular lesion was evaluated using the standardized uptake value (SUV) of 18F-FDG accumulation as an index. F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (18F-FDG PET-CT) revealed intense 18F-FDG accumulation in the carotid arteries (maximal SUV = 3.55), ascending aorta (SUV = 4.52), and the abdominal aorta cranial to the aneurysm (maximal SUV = 4.65). No 18F-FDG accumulation was observed in other sites. The patient was given intravenous high-dose bolus prednisone followed by pulse cyclophosphamide, which resulted in a favorable clinical course and normalization of the ESR (4 mm/hour).
In a follow-up 18F-FDG PET-CT study after 2 months the patient revealed reduced wall enhancement in the aorta (maximal SUV = 2.93) and in the left carotid artery (maximal SUV = 2.47) under immunosuppressive therapy. Unchanged increased glucose utilization was found in the right carotid artery (maximal SUV = 3.6). MRI and magnetic resonance angiography showed no abnormalities besides the infrarenal aneurysm at this time .