A 31 year old lady, mother of three children, presented to the endocrinology clinic with an eight year history of hyperprolactinemia. Her prolactin levels at that time were found to be high, and according to the patient the MRI was normal and showed no evidence of a pituitary tumor. However these reports were not available to us for verification. She admitted to having been non-compliant with bromocriptine (BRC) 2.5 mg twice a day as had been prescribed to her due to tolerance issues. It is unclear as to how closely her prolactin (PRL) levels had been monitored.
She had been taking BRC regularly for the last 3 months along with progesterone injections for withdrawal bleeding. PRL was 1300ng/dl (1.9 – 25 ng/ml). On physical examination, her body mass index (BMI) was 29 kg/m2. Visual fields were full by confrontation. Breast examination revealed expressible galactorrhea. There was evidence of acanthosis nigricans. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was advised which showed a Pituitary Macroadenoma measuring 2.2 cm × 2 cm × 1.3 cm with minimal suprasellar extension, involving the right cavernous sinus with encasement of internal carotid artery and extending into the optic canal abutting the optic chiasm superiorly. Due to cost issues with cabergoline (CAB), she was given another trial of BRC starting with a low dose with the intention of raising it up to 2.5 mg thrice daily within a month.
Since PRL levels remained high necessitating a dose build up of BRC and the patient still complained of intolerance to BRC, CAB was started at a low dose of 0.25 mg once a week. Due to persistently high PRL levels, CAB was increased to 0.5mg twice weekly. Any efforts to increase the dose further failed since the patient was unable to tolerate it. PRL dropped to 40ng/dl after eight months of CAB initiation. Her menstrual cycles returned to normal. A repeat MRI demonstrated the pituitary mass which had now decreased to 2.0 × 1.7 × 0.7 cm. Patient improved symptomatically as well as biochemically.
Twenty months after her initial presentation to us, the patient conceived. Because of the fact that she had macroprolactinoma, she was advised to continue CAB at 0.5mg once weekly. She was also given supplemental folic acid 5 mg once daily and Meclizine for morning sickness. A viable pregnancy was confirmed with ultrasound and patient was referred for antenatal care.
Fetal Nuchal thickness ultrasound performed at 13 weeks to screen for major chromosomal abnormalities was normal. MRI was repeated in the second trimester in order to assess the tumor size. MRI without contrast demonstrated further reduction in the tumor size, pituitary mass now being 1.8 × 1.0 cm. It was decided to continue CAB throughout pregnancy to ensure further reduction in tumor size until delivery and to hold CAB during postpartum period to allow for an adequate interval of breastfeeding. Perimetry was repeated every three months to check visual fields which remained normal. At 25 weeks of pregnancy, patient complained of headaches not effectively relieved with analgesics and therefore CAB was reduced to 0.25 mg weekly.
At 28 weeks of gestation, patient developed generalized pruritus and dark urine. Liver function tests (LFTs) showed raised levels of ALT (SGPT) = 281 (< 34 IU/L), AST (SGOT) = 220 (< 31 IU/L) and Alkaline Phosphatase= 211 (42–121). Total and direct bilirubin levels were within the normal range. Ultrasound of liver and gallbladder was normal. Hepatitis profile was also normal. Diagnosis of cholestatic jaundice was made (serum bile acids are not available in our laboratory). Patient received Urodeoxycholic acid 500 mg at thrice daily dosage. CAB was continued at 0.25 mg weekly throughout this time period.
At 37 + weeks of gestation labor was induced due to obstetric cholestasis. She had an assisted vaginal delivery due to abnormal fetal heart rate during the second stage of labor. A live baby boy weighing 3 kg was delivered with an Apgar score of 8 at 1 and 9 at 5 minutes. Her postpartum period was uneventful. Serum ALT levels checked after 10 days of delivery were normal. To allow breast feeding her Cabergoline was stopped. Her Prolactin level after 6 months of delivery while she was breast feeding her baby and was off cabergoline was 61.4 ng/ml. As she opted to continue breast feeding her baby further she was not advised to restart cabergoline. Her baby is doing well one year postpartum. The patient continues to remain amenorrheic since she delivered. Her follow up with a repeat Prolactin level is awaited.