The case involved a 62-year-old postmenopausal woman without any personal or family medical history. The patient underwent a left mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy for left breast cancer. A pathological examination revealed the following: invasive ductal carcinoma, pT2 (22 mm), nuclear grade 3, pN0, estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) negative, and pT2N0M0 stage IIa.
On day 1, the patient was administered a chemotherapy regimen consisting of docetaxel (75 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2), together with dexamethasone (6.8 mg). The patient was administered oral dexamethasone (8 mg) on days 2–4 and subcutaneous PEG-G on day 3. On day 10 (day 8 after PEG-G administration), the patient complained of intermittent high fever (up to 39.4 °C); the fever persisted even after the administration of levofloxacin (LVFX), which was prescribed for febrile neutropenia. In addition to fever, the patient developed other symptoms, including loss of appetite and shortness of breath, and visited our hospital on day 13 (11 days after PEG-G administration). At admission, the patient’s body temperature was 39.2 °C. Laboratory examination revealed a high neutrophil count (14,000/μL) and elevated CRP (42.78 mg/dL) without any other abnormalities. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 76 mm/h. The levels of anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), serine proteinase 3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA), and rheumatoid factor were within normal limits. To rule out viral infections, we performed an antibody test for human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1, cytomegalovirus, and human parvovirus B 19, which were all negative. No bacterial growth was observed in blood and urine cultures .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan on pre-operation showed no abnormalities around the aorta . At the time of admission, CT scanning revealed soft tissue thickening with weak enhancement around the wall of the thoraco-abdominal aorta, aortic arch and left subclavian artery . From the patient’s clinical course and imaging data, we suspected G-CSF-associated aortitis. At that point, we could not rule out infection because we had no results of autoantibodies, viral antibody tests, or blood or urine cultures, so we continued antibiotics. On day 8 after admission, the patient’s fever resolved spontaneously and the neutrophil count and CRP level decreased to 3185/μL and 17.88 mg/dL, respectively. Based on the results of the autoantibody test, viral antibody test, and blood and urine culture tests at admission, the patient was considered not to have an infection, and antibiotics were discontinued. Corticosteroids were not administered because of the patient’s general improvement. 10 days after admission (20 days after PEG-G administration). The thickening around the aorta was reduced on CT scanning .
Chemotherapy was then discontinued and hormone therapy started. No recurrence of aortitis was observed for 15 months.