A 15-year-old boy presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital complaining of recurrent orthopnea and palpitations.
The patient started to experience orthopnea 6 mo prior to presentation. The orthopnea episodes recurred with increased frequency, and he started to have palpitation episodes 4 mo prior to presentation. He was prescribed oral diuretics and digoxin at the outpatient clinic, although his symptoms did not resolve. Sacubitril/valsartan was added to his therapeutic regimen 1 mo before presentation; however, the palpitations and orthopnea episodes became even more frequent. Six hours prior to presentation, he experienced persistent palpitations and shortness of breath.
At the age of 3 years, the patient was found to have significantly elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and creatine kinase (CK) levels when he had a check-up for an unknown fever. His peak serum CK level was > 20000 U/L, and gastrocnemius biopsy revealed swelling and dystrophy of the skeletal muscle, with partial replacement of muscle by fat and fibrotic tissue. A clinical diagnosis of muscular dystrophy was established after genetic testing of dystrophin showed a deficiency at exons 48, 49, 50 and 51. He was regularly followed at the children’s hospital and treated with nutrients and steroids; however, the medication did not alter his disease progression. He had difficulty running and developed toe walking 5 years prior to presentation and required hand assistance to push himself into an upright position when arising from the floor (termed the Gower’s sign) 4 years previously. In the past 3 years, he has been completely confined to a wheelchair. Although lasting for no more than 2 min, he experienced chest tightness several times in the past 3 years, especially when he developed a cold or became tired.
The patient’s mother gave birth to him at the age of 36 years. The patient learned to walk at 15 mo, and his language development was consistent with his peers. The patient’s mother was proven to be the carrier of the dystrophin gene defects.
The patient’s body temperature was 37.4°C, heart rate was 202 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute and blood pressure was 97/78 mmHg. The breath sounds were normal, and no wheeze or rales were heard in both lungs. The heart rhythm was irregular, and no obvious murmurs were auscultated. On percussion, the cardiac borders were enlarged on both sides. The muscle strength of the upper extremities was grade 4 at the distal part and grade 2 at the proximal part, while the muscle strength of the lower extremities was grade 0, with apparent gastrocnemius hypertrophy.
The patient’s laboratory findings revealed a serum CK level of 3374 U/L, CK-MB level of 75 U/L and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) level of 0.168 ng/mL. The alanine aminotransferase level was 245 U/L, the AST level was 170 U/L, and the creatinine level was 16 μmol/L.
Electrocardiograms recorded in the Emergency Department revealed a fast heart rate in the form of atrial tachycardia with Wenckebach block, and the patient was then hospitalized for further observation and treatment. Echocardiogram and cardiac magnetic resonance images are shown below.