Patient, aged 18 years old, male, reported to the Department of Periodontics with the chief complaint of unaesthetic swelling of the gums in the maxillary and mandibular regions of the teeth since 4 to 5 years. Extraoral examination revealed cheilitis . Intraoral examination revealed generalized severe gingival enlargement covering up to the middle third of the clinical crowns. Gingiva was red, oedematous, and friable, with the absence of stippling, and easily bleeds on provocation. Gingival enlargement extends from teeth 14 to 27 in the maxilla and 37 to 43 in the mandible . Minimal local deposits were found in the mouth. There was no loss of attachment; however, generalized pseudo pockets ranged from 6 mm to 8 mm were recorded. The medical, dental, and personal history of the patient was noncontributory. Investigative hematologic examination did not reveal any significant findings. There was a negative Nikolsky's sign with no cutaneous lesion. Excisional biopsy was done to rule out PCG.
Histopathological examination revealed parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium of varying thickness with regions of thinned-out epithelium and sharp rete ridges . Connective tissue was composed of dense diffuse chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate predominantly of plasma cells, lymphocytes, collagen fibers, and endothelium lined blood vessels. Above features were indicative of plasma cell gingivitis. The immunohistochemistry study further confirmed the lesion with the aid of kappa and lambda light chain reactivity . No relevant radio graphical finding was present.
After diagnosis, treatment was planned as phase I therapy followed by external bevel gingivectomy procedure under local anesthesia. The procedure was explained to the patient, and consent was taken. Postsurgical healing was satisfactory, and no recurrence was observed at consecutive follow-up visits. Follow-up of the patient was done at 1 week, 2 weeks, 3 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 8 months . Gradual decrease in lip swelling was observed .