The patient was a 31-year-old man with a chief complaint of cough, while his medical history and comorbidities included diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, urinary tract stones, chronic kidney disease, pancreatic glucagonoma, and duodenal gastrinoma. Physical examination findings revealed obesity with a BMI of 34 and blood testing indicated mildly elevated inflammatory response, hypercalcemia, mild renal dysfunction, and a high glycohemoglobin level. Chest X-ray showed decreased permeability in the left middle and lower lung fields . Chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed a giant hypoabsorptive tumor with a maximum diameter of 23 cm in the left thoracic cavity compressing the left lower lobe and heart , while F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) showed heterogeneous FDG uptake consistent with the same area (SUVmax = 3.3) . Based on these imaging findings, the giant tumor in the left thoracic cavity was suspected to be a chronic expanding hematoma, solitary fibrous tumor, or neurogenic tumor. As for other complications, the patient possessed a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor and parathyroid tumor along with hyperparathyroidism. In addition, a family history showed that his father suffered from MEN1. Although genetic testing could not be performed due to a lack of patient consent, MEN1 gene mutations are not essential for a diagnosis of MEN1 , and based on the clinical findings and familial information, a diagnosis of MEN1 in the present case was determined.
To control hypercalcemia, resection of the parathyroid tumor was initially performed. Three weeks later, surgical resection of the giant thoracic tumor was performed for diagnosis and treatment, during which stand-by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was prepared for intraoperative circulatory instability. First, the 5th intercostal space was opened and a huge tumor covered with a white capsule was observed in the thoracic cavity, leading to suspicion of a solitary fibrous or neurogenic tumor. Because of the large size, it was difficult to obtain a clear view, thus the 6th rib was removed and an additional chest opening was made in the 7th intercostal space. The tumor had relatively sparse inflammatory adhesions to the chest wall, while adhesions near the vertebral body on the caudal side of the tumor were strong, indicating a pleural tumor arising from this site. There was no grossly apparent bony invasion, and the pleura was dissected to the vicinity of the vertebral body, and the tumor was removed. Post-extraction left lower lobe re-expansion was good and there was no evidence of reperfusion injury (see Additional file ).
The excised tumor was 25 cm in its greatest diameter and weighed 3 kg. Macroscopic findings showed a yellowish-white mass surrounded by a capsule, along with internal septal structures and mucus . Hematoxylin–eosin imaging indicated a spindle-shaped tumor cell proliferation, with a mixture of fibrous and mucus components . Immunostaining was negative for epithelial, vascular, lymphatic, and neural markers, and positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), a smooth muscle marker. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 1% and positive findings for mucin 4, a marker noted in LGFMS cases and related mesenchymal tumors , were noted . These findings led to a diagnosis of LGFMS, and the resection margins were negative. Postoperative lung expansion was good and the patient was discharged without complications. At three years after surgery, there was no evidence of disease, and we will continue to follow the patient every 6 months, including any local recurrence.