A 39-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with 3 months of unintentional weight loss and 2 days of worsening epigastric pain. On initial presentation to the outside hospital, he was afebrile, tachycardic to 108, hypotensive to 80/39, tachypnoeic to 24 with oxygen saturation 100% on room air. His physical examination on arrival was notable only for diffuse hyperpigmentation. His initial work up revealed a slight leucocytosis to 10.3 × 109/L (reference range: 4.0–10.0 × 109/L), sodium of 128 mmol/L (reference range: 136–145 mmol/L), C-reactive protein elevated at 3.1 mg/dL (reference range <0.30 mg/dL), B-type natriuretic peptide pro (proBNP) of 1,428.0 pg/mL (reference range <125 pg/mL) and a negative troponin. He was resuscitated with 4 L of normal saline without improvement in his blood pressure. His initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia and low voltage without electrical alternans . His chest X-ray showed increased bilateral interstitial markings without any focal infiltrates. Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) was negative for pulmonary embolus but revealed a trace pericardial effusion. An initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) before intubation demonstrated a mild-to-moderate pericardial effusion without evidence of right atrial or ventricular collapse , mildly increased right atrial pressure as evidenced by IVC diameter measuring <2.1 cm and collapsing <50% with a sniff. There was also increased variation of mitral inflow velocities on which the official report did not comment . Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was estimated by visual assessment to be preserved at 55–60%. The patient became progressively altered requiring intubation for airway protection. Despite these interventions, he was acidotic to an arterial pH of 7.04 and had a pulseless electrical activity arrest for 6 min requiring Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support, after which return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. He subsequently required three vasopressors and was airlifted to the medical intensive care unit at a tertiary care centre for further management.
The patient arrived to our unit on norepinephrine 3 mcg/kg/min, phenylephrine 9 mcg/kg/min, and vasopressin 0.03 mcg/kg/min. Repeat TTE showed evidence of tamponade physiology including a large circumferential pericardial effusion measuring 2.6 cm and diastolic collapse of the right ventricular free wall ( and ). Respiratory variation in inflow velocities is more difficult to interpret in an intubated patient ( and ). A left-sided pleural effusion was also noted on TTE, whereas a right-sided pleural effusion was noted on transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). His TEE also showed mild global hypokinesis with LVEF decreased to 40–45%. The patient underwent emergent pericardiocentesis with the removal of 200 mL of serosanguinous fluid ( and ) leading to improvement in his haemodynamics. The patient arrived at the cath laboratory and pressors were titrated during the procedure to support perfusion. About 1 h after completion of the pericardiocentesis, the patient had been weaned off phenylephrine but remained on norepinephrine and vasopressin. His repeat ECG continued to show low voltage.
Given the unclear aetiology of his tamponade, a broad infectious and autoimmune work up was sent . His thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was elevated to 30 μIU/mL (reference range: 0.27–0.42 μIU/mL) with a T3 of 67.3 ng/dL (reference range: 72–153 ng/dL) and a free T4 of 0.34 ng/dL (reference range: 0.8–1.7 ng/dL). His random cortisol was <0.05 μg/dL and his cosyntropin stimulation test revealed an elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and undetectable cortisol, leading to a diagnosis of primary adrenal insufficiency. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed slightly atrophic adrenal glands bilaterally. Further autoimmune work up was significant for an elevated antinuclear antibody (1:80, dense fine speckled), as well as an elevated thyroid peroxidase antibody and 21-hydroxylase antibody level. High-dose corticosteroids and levothyroxine were initiated on hospital Day 3, and the patient showed marked improvement; he was extubated and weaned off all vasopressors by hospital Day 4. The combination of autoimmune adrenal insufficiency and autoimmune thyroid disease confirmed a diagnosis of APS 2.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for 12 days (6 of which were in the intensive care unit). Repeat TTE on hospital Day 2 and Day 4 demonstrated bilateral pleural effusions. Following the pericardiocentesis, electrocardiogram continued to show low voltages. The patient’s LVEF recovered to 55–60% by hospital Day 7. He was discharged home on hydrocortisone 20 mg in the morning, hydrocortisone 10 mg at night and levothyroxine 125 mcg daily with close follow-up.
Twelve weeks later, he presented to the hospital with pleuritic chest pain, upper abdominal pain, and nausea and was readmitted briefly with pericarditis. CTA showed small pericardial effusion with pericardial thickening and trace bilateral pleural effusions noted, whereas TTE showed trivial pericardial effusion without evidence of haemodynamic compromise. The patient was treated with intravenous fluids, stress dose hydrocortisone, ibuprofen, and colchicine before being discharged home with outpatient follow-up.