Male, 8-month-old patient, weighting 11 kg, living in the city of São Paulo (São
Paulo), was hospitalized in the pediatric emergency room presenting with laryngeal
inspiratory stridor associated with suprasternal notch and subdiaphragmatic
retraction, classified as severe (score 11) in the Westley’s scale . He evolved to severe acute respiratory
failure, presenting respiratory frequency (RF) of 70 breaths per minute (bpm) and
heart rate (HR) higher than 200 beats per minute (bpm), requiring tracheal
intubation and being referred to the pediatric intensive care unit (ICU).
As personal history, the child was born in a C-section, at term, and was intubated
for 17 days in the pediatric ICU due to early respiratory distress. He presented
with tracheal extubation failure caused by high respiratory distress in that
hospitalization, evolving without intercurrences after that period.
In the pediatric ICU, dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg/day) was introduced on the first day
of hospitalization, and the patient remained in mechanical ventilation, requiring
ventilator support: fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2): 0.25; inspiratory
time: 0.79 seconds; RF: 30bpm; positive end expiratory pressure: 5 cmH2O;
pressure support: 14 cmH2O; pressure control: 16 cmH2O; and
current volume: 85 mL. He remained intubated, on midazolam (0.2 mg/kg/h) and
fentanyl (2 mcg/kg/h), without the need for vasoactive medication, remaining
clinically stable. Six days after hospitalization, flexible bronchoscopy was carried
out to assess the conditions of the mucosa before indicating extubation, since the
patient had been intubated for six days without signs of tracheal peri-cannula
ventilator escape. Bronchoscopy revealed “major mucosal edema, involving the
intratracheal cannula” , so the
choice was to maintain the tracheal cannula, without progression of bronchoscopy
through the trachea. The infant was intubated, stable, on dexamethasone and
medication for sedation and analgesia. Seven days after bronchoscopy, he
demonstrated signs of escape through the tracheal cannula, shown by auscultation and
observed in the monitor of the ventilation equipment (Servo-i®, Maquet,
Rastatt, Germany). A new flexible bronchoscopy was carried out for the supervised
extubation. Bronchoscopy showed “larynx with discrete posterior wall edema, with
good mobilization of vocal folds and air escape between the tracheal cannula and the
larynx”.
For the programming of the tracheal extubation, a thoracic X-ray was performed and
did not show any abnormalities nor arterial blood gas (pH: 7.50; pO2: 120
mmHg; pCO2: 32 mmHg; sodium bicarbonate: 21 mEq/L; base excess: +1;
SatO2: 98%). Tracheal extubation was conducted and the use of nasal
oxygen catheter began, with 2 L/minute, presenting with mild laryngeal stridor, with
improvements after inhalation with one ampoule of budesonide (0.25 mg). Forty-eight
hours after the extubation, the patient evolved to severe acute respiratory failure,
with major laryngeal stridor, vacillation of the wings of the nose, and increased HR
until 167 bmp, and RF of 39 bpm, indicating a new tracheal intubation. The choice
was to start support with high-flow nasal cannula (Optiflow Junior®,
Fisher & Paykel, Auckland, New Zealand) at 15 L/minute, FiO2: 25%, with
significant improvement in the respiratory situation, as well as reduced HR and RF
. The infant was comfortable in
the high-flow nasal cannula, preventing tracheal reintubation.
The patient remained with the high-flow nasal cannula for nine days, and showed
improvements in high respiratory discomfort. There was a transition from the
high-flow nasal cannula to nebulization with oxygen at 2 L/minute for one more day,
being discharged to pediatric nursery in good clinical conditions.
Before discharge, since the patient presented with persistent laryngeal stridor, and
because of the previous history of intubation for 17 days, and extubation failure in
the neonatal period, a new flexible bronchoscopy was performed to investigate the
after-effects in the airways, showing “hyperemia of the larynx and subglottic region
with edema and granular surface”.