A 67-year-old female with endometrial adenocarcinoma with known metastases to the liver and spine underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingooophorectomy, omentectomy, and radiation therapy. Postoperatively, the patient developed malignant right ureteral obstruction with hydronephrosis requiring ureteral stent placement. Five months later, she returned to the hospital with worsening back pain. The spine MR revealed abnormal signal enhancement ventrally between the L2-L4 levels consistent with osteomyelitis, L2-L3/L3-L4 discitis, and left psoas muscle phlegmon. Interventional radiology (IR) percutaneously drained the abscess, and cultures grew Bacteroides fragilis and Streptococcus mitis.
Over the next 5 months, she was readmitted 3 times with recurrent infections despite multiple oral and IV courses of antibiotics. The CT urogram of her abdomen/pelvis revealed a right ureteral fistula extending to the psoas muscle. Blood cultures revealed Bacteroides vulgaris, Enterococcus faecalis, and Aerococcus urinae. Despite the placement of a diverting percutaneous nephrostomy and exchanging ureteral stent, the infections persisted. Urine cultures showed Citrobacter, Candida tropicalis, and mold speciation consistent with Fusarium species.
Sixteen months after original stent placement, she was readmitted with the right lower extremity weakness and increased urinary incontinence. The MRI demonstrated progression of her osteomyelitis and discitis from L2-L4 with significant osseous destruction of L3 and spinal cord stenosis due to osseous retropulsion. A nephroureterogram with stent exchange demonstrated a worsening ureteropsoas fistula with contrast extravasation into the osteomyelitic cavity within the L3 body (i.e., progression to ureterovertebral fistula) . Multidisciplinary discussions led to: (1) a right nephrectomy with distal ureteral ligation for definitive treatment of the fistula and infection control and (2) an anterior L3 corpectomy with interbody fusion (L2-L3/L3-L4) and posterolateral fusion at L1-5. Tissue culture obtained during this single-session surgery revealed Enterococcus faecium and Candida glabrata. Postoperatively, her motor examination remained stable, and she was discharged to a rehabilitation center on antibiotics where she continues to recover.