The 10-year-old boy was referred to our hospital for fever and arrhythmia. The boy was Gestation 1 Parturition 1 (G1P1) and had been delivered by caesarean section after 40 weeks of gestation. His birth weight and height were normal (3900 g, 50 cm), and there was no history of asphyxia or birth trauma. He was born with skin hyperpigmentation. The child was susceptible to infection. An atrial septal defect was found by ultrasonography when he was one year old, and atrioseptopexy was performed. He had intellectual disability and was unable to communicate. The blood glucose levels before admission were unavailable, and whether he had suffered prolonged neonatal hypoglycemia was undetermined. His parents were non-consanguineous without recognizable abnormalities.
Medical examination: He had a tall stature, height 162 cm (+3.5 SD), weight 48 kg. Skin pigmentation was evident throughout the body, especially the penis and the joints of the fingers and toes . His heart rate was 140 beats per minute with arrhythmia. Testicular volume was about 10 ml, and the patient’s penis was 12cm in length and 9 cm in circumference. No armpit hair or public hair was observed. Laboratory examination revealed low plasma cortisol levels, and the plasma ACTH was elevated . Thyroid hormone and androgen levels were low, while The glucose, electrolytes and renin levels remained normal . Based on these laboratory test results, congenital adrenal insufficiency was suspected. After obtaining the consent of the family members, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for congenital adrenocortical hyperplasia (including CYP21A2) gene was performed. However, no pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutation was identified. We then performed whole-exome sequencing, and the results showed the proband to be homozygotic for c.712C>T/p.H238Y in MC2R. variants come from both parents Sanger sequencing corroborated this.
CNV-seq was performed to identify any possible copy number variations, and no phenotype relevant to CNV was found. Thus, the diagnosis of FGD1 was made according to the clinical phenotypes and genetic testing. Oral hydrocortisone was administered at a dose of 12 mg/m2 body surface area, delivered in three doses. Oral euthyrox was started at a dose of 50 µg/d. After the infection and arrhythmia were treated, he was discharged from the hospital. His serum cortisol levels returned to normal, while ACTH levels remained above normal levels as of one week after discharge.