The Mobile Emergency Service (SAMU) brought a 20-year-old caucasian male victim of gunshot wounds to the Emergency Service of our Institution. On the scene, he was hemodynamically unstable, with Blood Pressure (BP): 90/60 mmHg and a Heart Rate (HR):130 bpm. The transference to the Emergency Service took 30 min and the pre hospital staff provided 500 ml of crystalloid solution. He denied illness and reported drug use (marijuana).
At admission, he remained hemodynamically unstable. Examination of the respiratory system revealed diminished breath sounds throughout the right hemithorax, without adventitious sounds with ipsilateral subcutaneous emphysema. The BP upon admission was 100 × 40 mmHg and HR: 116 bpm.
There were three gunshot entrance wounds with abrasion rings: one in the right thoracoabdominal transition and two other periumbilical ones . He also had a back exit wound. He received medical care according to the protocol recommended by ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support). After placing an oxygen mask (10 liters/minute), the patient was monitored. Two peripheral large venous accesses were punctured, and he received 500 milliliters of physiological solution (SF0.9 %). The laboratory tests (blood typing, hemoglobin, and blood reserve) were performed. In addition, a 38 French intercostal drain was inserted on fifth intercostal space in the right thorax, because of an hemothorax in the right, connected to an underwater seal bottle that immediately began to bubble. Three hundred milliliters of blood poured into the bottle, causing a subsequent stabilization of BP and HR. A chest X-ray, performed in the trauma room, provided a good location of the chest drain.
The patient was taken to the operating room and placed on the operating table in the supine position for an exploratory laparotomy. During the procedure, it were identified several lesions in stomach, duodenum, pancreas and jejunum. There were three stomach injuries: two on anterior wall and other one on the posterior wall; three duodenal injuries: one in the first duodenal portion, other penetrating one on second duodenal portion ; a grade II head pancreatic injury and two penetrating jejunum injuries.
The first duodenal portion injury was Grade II and the second duodenal portion one was Grade III.
The small intestine transfixing lesions were six centimeters apart from each other at 10 cm from the Treitz angle .
At this time, the patient was hemodynamically stable -following satisfactory response to volume replacement- with no acidosis on arterial blood gas analysis. Then, it was chosen to perform definitive surgery rather than damage control: debridement and primary suturing of the duodenal injuries; bypass through duodenal diverticulization - partial gastrectomy with Billroth II reconstruction and enterectomy with entero-enteroanastomosis and full drainage of the cavity. Catheterization of the duodenal papilla was also conducted, with pancreatography, excluding Wirsung duct injury .
The anesthetic time was four hours and forty minutes. The patient received two Units (IU) of red blood cell concentrate, 7300 ml of crystalloid and 500 ml of colloid, with 900 ml diuresis in the intra-operative period.
The patient presented good evolution, being discharged from the ICU on the second post-operative (PO) day, the thorax drain being removed in the third PO. The patient progresses with low output pancreatic fistula resolved in the sixth PO, receiving oral diet the next day, with discharge conditions in the 10th PO. The patient returned for an outpatient visit after 15 days with no complaints.