A 95-year-old woman with a past medical history of iron deficiency anemia, asthma, colorectal adenocarcinoma status-post hemicolectomy, and collagenous colitis presented in late autumn with altered mental status during the COVID-19 pandemic. She had been social distancing at her daughter’s home in the northeastern United States and was brought to medical attention due to weakness, confusion, and an unresponsive episode in the days preceding admission.
On presentation, she denied all symptoms and was only oriented to self. At baseline, she had no evidence of cognitive impairment and was able to complete activities of daily living. On admission, vital signs were notable for intermittent tachycardia, tachypnea, and high fever (103.6 °F, rectal). On exam, she was anxious appearing and found to have diffuse expiratory wheezing. No rashes were noted.
In the emergency department, serum studies revealed low hemoglobin (9.2 g/dL, baseline 11.8 g/dL; reference range 12.0–18.0 g/dL) and new thrombocytopenia (112 × 103/µL; reference range 140–440 × 103/µL). A computed tomography scan of the head and a chest radiograph were unrevealing. SARS-CoV-2 RNA and other respiratory viruses were not detected on a nasopharyngeal specimen. Peripheral blood cultures were obtained, and she was empirically started on vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam.
On hospital day one, dropping hemoglobin (8.3 g/dL), new leukopenia (3.2 × 103/µL; reference range 4.0–10.0 × 103/µL) with reduced absolute lymphocyte count (300/µL; reference range 1.0–4.0 × 103/µL), and worsening thrombocytopenia were found (43 × 103/µL). Figure summarizes cell count measurements obtained during the hospital course. Additionally, a markedly elevated D-dimer level was uncovered (32.21 mg/L; reference range ≤0.95 mg/L). Given continued suspicion for SARS-CoV-2 infection, a repeat nasopharyngeal specimen was obtained and returned negative. Antimicrobial therapy was narrowed to cover for community acquired pneumonia.
At this point, the diagnostic approach was framed around finding a unifying reason for new pancytopenia, fever, and elevated D-dimer. The index of suspicion was initially high for SARS-CoV-2 infection given the lymphopenia, fever, and elevated D-dimer along with ongoing wheezing and tachypnea; [, ] however, two negative tests made this less likely. In general, pancytopenia can result from infectious etiologies, infiltrative metastases, nutritional deficiencies, autoimmune conditions, hematological malignancies, or drug reactions . The differential diagnosis for elevated D-dimer overlaps with that of pancytopenia and includes malignancy, venous thromboembolism, advanced age, and infection .
Our patient’s high fever and acute presentation prompted infectious causes to be considered. In the absence of immunosuppressive medications or active malignancy, her immune status was only compromised by her advanced age. She lacked a significant travel history, and the differential diagnosis for infectious causes of pancytopenia was narrowed to bacterial sepsis versus tick-borne illness. Upon obtaining further history from the patient and her daughter, it was noted that she had been exposed to several dogs at home, and they were known to have ticks.
Given her new thrombocytopenia and leukopenia accompanied by persistent fevers, a peripheral blood smear was ordered, and parasites consistent with Ehrlichia spp. were identified. The elevated D-dimer was multifactorial in the setting of advanced age and systemic infection, but a pulmonary embolus was possible and she intermittently required supplemental oxygen. A computed tomography angiogram of the chest was ordered and revealed right segmental pulmonary emboli. D-dimer (5.37 mg/L) level remained elevated on hospital day two.
After finding the acute pulmonary emboli, an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter was placed by interventional radiology, and a heparin infusion was started the following day. During her treatment course, an episode of melena and need for ongoing anticoagulation prompted an esophagogastroduodenoscopy which revealed small arteriovenous malformations that were treated with ablation. No episodes of melena occurred during the remainder of her hospital stay.
By hospital day 7, her platelet (248 × 103/µL) and white blood cell (8.7 × 103/µL) counts had normalized, and her anemia had improved (hemoglobin 9.0 g/dL). She was discharged home on doxycycline and apixaban. Two weeks later, she was seen in an out-patient setting and had been doing well.