A 78-year-old Korean woman visited our hospital complaining of hoarseness, which had developed 1 month previously. Our patient had an unremarkable medical history except she was taking antihypertensive medication. Flexible laryngoscopy detected a mass approximately 1 cm in diameter on the posterior wall of her subglottic region that blocked approximately 80 % of her trachea . Neck computed tomography, without limiting her vocal cord movement, was performed owing to the suspected malignant tumor in her subglottic region. A well-localized 1 × 0.8 cm polypoid mass was detected in the posterior wall of her subglottic region .
Our patient underwent a bronchoscopic biopsy using a bronchus endoscope. Examination of the specimen showed the presence of epithelial and myoepithelial cells. Consequently, a tracheostomy and laryngeal microsurgery were performed under general anesthesia for a final biopsy and complete excision, with consideration given to the signs and symptoms of tracheal obstruction.
A laryngeal microscopic examination revealed the round 1 × 0.8 cm protruding mass at the bottom of the interarytenoid space. Above this, the 0.8 × 0.8 cm mass protruded like a spire. Complete excision of the masses was possible using a carbon dioxide laser because there was no adhesion between the masses and the surrounding larynx .
The gross findings of a histopathological examination were of ash-colored masses and a microscopic examination showed a tube-shaped structure composed of two layers. The inner layer was an oval or round monolayer of cells and the outer layer had polygonal cells with transparent cytoplasm . Because the transparent myoepithelial cells in the outer layer showed weak-positive immunohistochemical staining for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and p63, and the epithelial cells were strongly positive for low molecular cytokeratin, epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma was diagnosed .
There were no complications, and our patient was discharged from hospital 10 days after surgery. Although additional radiation treatment was planned to prevent local recurrence, our patient refused this treatment. At the time of writing, her condition is being monitored by our outpatient clinic. There were no unusual findings 1 year after surgery.