A previously healthy 75-year-old woman complained of severe headache of the bilateral frontal area, accompanied by blurred vision and mild left eyelid ptosis for 3 days. She had upper respiratory infection symptoms (cough and sneezing) 2 weeks prior to presentation. She developed arterial hypertension (210/100 mmHg) at the emergency room (on the 4th day after symptom onset). Neurological examination showed left eyelid ptosis and limited extraocular movements horizontally in the left eye with the pupil sparing . There were no sympathetic signs, such as miosis and anhydrosis, nor any long tract signs. A computed tomography-angiography (CTA) excluded cerebral aneurysm or other compressive lesions of the oculomotor nerve. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed T2-weighted hyper-intense signal abnormalities in the occipital lobes bilaterally , appearing iso-intense on diffusion-weighted imaging, with an increase of the apparent diffusion coefficient, consistent with vasogenic edema. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of PRES. Because of persistent headache and elevated systolic blood pressure, amlodipine and olmesartan were administered. However, the conditions did not improve until nimodipine, 30 mg 4 times a day, was added. On the next day, partial ptosis of the right eye developed, followed by bilateral oculomotor and trochlear nerve palsy. Generalized hyporeflexia with bilateral flexor plantar responses was noted. The Romberg test was positive. The finger-nose-finger and heel-knee-shin tests were bilaterally impaired, and an ataxic gait was present. On the 6th day, the patient experienced weakness of the lower limbs bilaterally (MRC: 3/5) and could no longer stand. The partial ptosis of the right eyelid progressed to complete ptosis, and both eyes showed complete external ophthalmoplegia. A test for acetylcholine receptor antibody was negative. Additional laboratory studies, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, complement factors C3 and C4, antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-dsDNA, rheumatic factor, thyroid function, estrogen, FSH, LH, cortisol, ACTH, prolactin, HbA1C, hepatic, and renal function, were within normal limits. Antibodies against gangliosides (including GQ1b) were not checked because of unavailability. Cerebrospinal fluid examination demonstrated albumin-cytological dissociation (protein: 66.6 mg/dl, white cell count: 0/μl, glucose: 66 mg/dl (serum glucose: 114 mg/dl) and albumin: 39.69 mg/dl) and an elevated IgG index (0.84). A panel of CSF analysis, including cytology, bacterial culture, fungal culture, and serological titers of viruses including CMV, HSV1, and HSV2, etc. all showed negative results. A nerve conduction study revealed loss of sensory nerve potentials of the bilateral sural, medial, and ulnar nerves. Motor nerve conduction studies showed demyelinating and eventually axon sensorimotor polyneuropathy , which compatible with acquired demyelination neuropathy. Needle electromyography was unrevealing. On the 8th day, the patient had altered consciousness (Glasgow coma scale was E3V4M5) and an extensor plantar response on the left. Hypoxia, uremia, Wernicke’s encephalopathy, Addison’s disease, hepatic encephalopathy, and alcoholism were excluded on the basis of physical and laboratory findings; however, euvolemic hyponatremia (Na:119 mEq/L), compatible with syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), was noted. Other co-morbidities for hyponatremia or SIADH including malignancy, intracranial infection, hemorrhage, lung disease…etc., have been excluded in our patient. A diagnosis of Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis with overlapping GBS and SIADH was made. Alternate day plasmapheresis was instituted for five times and the hyponatremia was gradually corrected. Her consciousness level and ophthalmoplegia improved gradually, and she could open her eyes on the 13th day. The patient received an intensive rehabilitation program and showed progressive improvement of neurological deficits. She could walk with cane and showed mild lower limb weakness (MRC: 4/5) on the 17th day. She was discharged on the 21st day with residual mild weakness and dysesthesia of the lower extremities. Two months later, she had completely recovered.