A 53-year-old African-American male with a past medical history of HIV with CD4 count of 27 and undetectable viral load, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, colitis status post hemicolectomy, polysubstance abuse who presented with fever of unknown origin. Notably, the patient has had two prior admissions three months before this presentation. On his first admission, he was diagnosed with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, responsive to Caplacizumab and prednisone. His hospital course was complicated by intermittent persistent fevers, which was eventually attributed to drug fever. There was consideration of DRESS syndrome during this admission although the patient did not have eosinophilia, which one study suggests is present in 97% of patients with DRESS syndrome . Patient was discharged home but readmitted two weeks later with failure to thrive and was found to have neutropenic fevers of unknown origin. He underwent extensive workup for infectious etiology. CT chest showed persistent stable pulmonary nodules for which bronchoscopy was performed with lavage cytopathology significant only for colonized rare candida spp. He was found to have Epstein–Barr virus viremia. However, with no clear source he was treated empirically for hospital acquired pneumonia. He was discharged after resolution of his fevers to subacute rehab.
Ten days after discharge, he was readmitted for recurrence of neutropenic fevers, with absolute neutrophil count 532. Extensive workup revealed persistent fevers, splenomegaly, bicytopenia, elevated LFTs, ferritin, triglycerides, and soluble IL-2 receptor, meeting the 2004 hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) criteria . Lymph node biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of EBV associated lymphoma . Bone marrow biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of immunodeficiency associated large B-cell lymphoma with EBV associated HLH . Patient was treated with a combination of steroids, rituximab, tocilizumab, and chemotherapy. Initially, the patient’s status improved but unfortunately the patient ultimately expired 5 days after intensive care unit (ICU) downgrade due to refractory septic shock secondary to multidrug resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae.