Our patient was a 64-year-old Caucasian man referred from an outside hospital for evaluation and treatment of obstructive jaundice secondary to a periampullary mass. Patient informed consent for publication of findings was obtained during admission. Prior admission to the outlying hospital had occurred 5 days before transfer following presentation with jaundice, fatigue and bilateral lower extremity edema.
Hypoalbuminemia, refractory severe hypokalemia, uncontrolled new onset diabetes mellitus, and anemia were associated findings. New onset diabetes mellitus was diagnosed 3 weeks before developing jaundice. His medical history was significant for gout, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, osteoarthritis, degenerative disk disease, erectile dysfunction, and two episodes of idiopathic pancreatitis 15 years earlier. Glycosylated hemoglobin measured an elevated 7.5%. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed at the referring institution before transfer. Biopsies returned a diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumor, not otherwise specified. The patient was then transferred to our hospital. His serum potassium remained low despite all replacement efforts. Hypoalbuminemia worsened to 1.6 gm/dL. Serum glucagon was measured using Siemens' Double Glucagon Antibody and found to be depressed (37 ng/L; normal 40-130 ng/L). The serum serotonin level (< 25 ng/mL) was low (normal 90-195 ng/L) and the vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) level (< 30 pg/mL) was within normal limits (normal < 100 ng/L). Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was normal at 1.1 ng/mL. Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was markedly elevated at 233.5 U/mL. Computed tomography revealed a 3.2 cm by 1.9 cm hypervascular mass in the medial duodenal wall juxtaposing the pancreas. Three hepatic lesions appeared consistent with metastasis.
Exploratory laparotomy was performed. Five perihepatic lymph nodes appeared suspicious for metastatic disease; they were surgically excised and examined by frozen section. Three of these five lymph nodes were positive for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. Two liver masses each less than 1 cm were identified by intra-operative ultrasound. Each lesion was wedge resected and pathologic examination confirmed metastases. Pancreaticoduodenectomy was indicated and performed due to lymph node and hepatic metastases. Pathology specimens stained positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, and glucagon. The tumor mass was 4.5 cm and infiltrated through the duodenal wall into the pancreas. Extensive angiolymphatic invasion was noted.
The patient's post-operative course was complicated by respiratory aspiration, disseminated candidiasis with candidal sepsis, wound infection, disseminated varicella, atrial fibrillation, acute renal failure and a subhepatic intra-abdominal candidal abscess. Discharge to a rehabilitation center occurred on post-operative day 53. Results of the multidisciplinary gastrointestinal tumor board recommended close monitoring with long-acting octreotide.