A 40-year-old Japanese man, a truck driver, suffered multiple traumas during a road car crash that severely damaged the front part of his truck. While he was trapped in the driver’s seat, his lower-right limb was strongly pinched against the dashboard for 8 hours until he was saved by a rescue team. He was then transferred to an intensive care unit (ICU) at Mie University Hospital, a tertiary academic medical care center.
He was fully alert and complained of severe pain, along with numbness and weakness, in his right limb. A full-body computed tomography scan revealed multiple rib and lumbar compression fractures. His right lower leg had no fractures; however, the muscles in his lower leg were significantly swollen after the prolonged compression. After placing intramuscular catheters to monitor the intra-compartment pressures of his lower limb, the trauma team found that the pressures in the anterior, posterior, medial, and lateral side compartments had risen to ~ 50 mmHg. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed as having ACS, and quickly underwent a fasciotomy of his right lower limb. The fasciotomy wounds were left open , and were cleaned daily and wrapped in a dressing containing an antibiotic ointment.
After the fasciotomy, the neurological deficits of his right limb were gradually restored and the pain intensity was reduced, made manageable by opioid treatment for at least for 4 days .
He exhibited rhabdomyolysis with increased levels of serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and acute renal failure, possibly due to the ischemia reperfusion injury associated with ACS . His CPK level progressively decreased and returned to normal levels on day 10, indicating resolution of the rhabdomyolysis. Acute renal failure temporarily required hemodialysis for 5 days, and he subsequently recovered.
The pain at the fasciotomy wounds on his right leg was well managed for 4 days (days 1 to 4), as shown by the score of 5 points on the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) for pain (0–10) , via intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (IV-PCA) fentanyl at a dose of ~ 12 μg/kg per day . On day 5, owing to the onset of nausea, IV-PCA fentanyl was discontinued and replaced with a drip infusion of acetaminophen. However, as acetaminophen could not sufficiently control the pain, IV-PCA fentanyl was resumed along with antiemetic agents on day 6. On day 8, as our patient’s pain at the wounds intensified, we observed the appearance of defective granulation and necrotic tissue at the site of the fasciotomy despite adequate infection prevention. In addition, the wounds exuded a foul odor and were strongly suggestive of infection . To control the wound infections, debridement of the infected necrotic tissues was performed.
Although the wound infections appeared to be under control with antibiotics and debridement, our patient continued to complain of severe pain both during and between procedures, as shown by the NRS of 6–10 points. The pain experienced was self-described as if being stabbed with a pin or a needle or, alternately, a numbness resulting in a dull sensation. The pain began abruptly, irrespective of body movement, and lasted for approximately 1 hour. A dose of IV-PCA fentanyl to manage the pain was progressively increased up to 35 μg/kg per day from day 10 to 13. He also presented hyperalgesia of his right limb beginning at day 10. In addition, nausea and poor appetite worsened as a side effect of high-dose fentanyl, and he experienced loud snoring and excessive daytime sleepiness due to opioid-induced respiratory depression; as such, he was administered oxygen to prevent hypoxia. We consulted with an in-hospital pain control team about a pain management strategy to replace/complement opioid administration. They confirmed the presence of opioid-refractory severe pain and hyperalgesic states, and proposed the use of VR analgesia.
On day 14, he was provided with an immersive VR using the Samsung Gear Oculus headset fitted with a Samsung Galaxy S7 phone loaded with the AppliedVR (AVR) healthcare platform (AppliedVR Inc., Los Angeles, CA 90067, USA), which delivers various VR analgesia program modules. Of 20+ VR programs designed to distract and/or relax, the program “Dream Beach” was selected according to our patient’s preference for the sea. The VR program simulates the experience of being at the beach beside a calm sea on a sunny day. Each session lasted for 30 minutes and three sessions were administered over 2 days. The VR analgesic proved effective, as his pain rating fell dramatically from 10 to 6 points. On day 15, the second day of VR administration, its analgesic effects proved so successful that bolus infusions of IV-PCA fentanyl were no longer required. On day 16, the pain rating scale remained 2 points under a baseline IV-PCA infusion of 8.8 μg/kg per day fentanyl, and as the wound pain became manageable, he was transferred from the ICU to a general surgery ward at a secondary care hospital. At day 28, after the fasciotomy, he was free of opioids and the wounds were closed using split-thickness skin grafting.