An 18-month-old boy (individual III-1 in Fig. ) was referred to the Sainte-Justine University Hospital Center’s Bone Health Clinic for suspicion of rickets. A chest X-ray, initially done to rule out pneumonia, revealed incidental findings of humeral metaphyseal widening and cupping of anterior costochondral junctions suggestive of rickets .
The toddler was the first-born child at term to a Cuban father and Canadian mother with weight and height at the 50th percentile. Psychomotor development was appropriate for age and independent walking was reached at 14 months. The mother reported that the child presented an occasional waddling gait and frequent falls. He had recurrent asthma-like episodes but no signs of bone pain or fractures. He had a normal diet for his age and was supplemented with daily 400 IU of cholecalciferol. His height curve followed the 1srt centile.
While the maternal past-medical history was non-contributory, the proband’s paternal family history was notable for short stature. His father (individual II-2) was born with occult spina bifida and was followed by a pediatric endocrinologist for short stature during his childhood in Cuba. The father’s adult height is 165 cm (4th percentile, -1.7 SD). We were unable to obtain the father’s Cuban medical chart or pediatric X-ray images. Extended paternal family history revealed short stature in multiple family members including two sisters of the paternal grandmother who are described as having a height of less than 150 cm (individuals I-3 and I-4). Clinical assessment of extended family members was not feasible as they currently reside in Cuba. Our proband has a 10-month-old brother (individual III-2) that has been recently evaluated. He did not show any metaphyseal changes neither clinically or radiologically and his growth was at the 15th percentile. Moreover, his genetic testing was negative for the MMP13 missense variant found in his brother and father.
Physical examination revealed typical signs of rickets with bilateral genu varum, rachitic rosary, enlarged wrist metaphyses and non-ossified anterior fontanelle. Height for age was at the 0.4th percentile (-2.6 SD), below his familial target (172 cm, 25th percentile) and height velocity was decreased (10 cm/year - normal height velocity for this group age is 20 cm/year).
An irregular and cupiliform aspect of the femoral neck was reported on pelvis X-ray . On knee X-ray, wide and irregular metaphyses resembling a fine-tooth comb were also described in distal femoral, proximal tibial and proximal right fibular metaphyses yet bone mineral density (by Lunar prodigy, GE) was in the normal range for age and gender. Initial laboratory findings revealed eucalcemia, euphosphatemia with suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH), normal urine calcium on creatinine ratio and TmP/GFR . He had normal renal and liver function tests and celiac screening was negative. Vitamin D status was sufficient with 25(OH)vitamin D level at 82 nmol/L. Serum levels of 1,25 (OH) vitamin D, vitamin B6 and C-terminal FGF23 were all in the normal range . The initial serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity level was low, suggesting hypophosphatasia as a possible differential diagnosis.
A genetic rickets panel at Prevention Genetics covering fully the coding and splicing regions of 7 genes, and including the ALPL gene was requested and revealed a heterozygous variant of unknown significance (VUS) in DMP1, c.1466G > A; p.Arg489Gln. We determined that the heterozygous DMP1 VUS in our patient was not causal of metaphyseal anomalies for 2 reasons: (1) Only homozygous loss of function variants in DMP1 cause severe hypophosphatemic rickets with autosomal recessive inheritance [–], and (2) our patient’s phenotype did not correspond to the DMP1 hypophosphatemic rickets phenotype previously described.
Additionally, the radiological diagnosis of rickets was unlikely since physes were not enlarged and metaphyseal band’s density was normal. Knowing that the genetic rickets panel was non-contributory, and that skeletal dysplasia can present as metaphyseal anomalies, a spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia genetic panel at CTGT was ordered (covering fully the coding and splicing regions of 54 genes). Noted variants included a single heterozygous variant in HSPG2 (Exon 70 c.9326delA/His3109Profs*16) and a single heterozygous variant in RNU4ATAC (transcribed region n.48G > A). These genes are associated with Schwartz-Jampel syndrome and Roifman syndrome respectively, which are autosomal recessive disorders (i.e. both alleles require pathogenic variants) with very different manifestations from those presented by the proband. However, the panel revealed a heterozygous missense VUS in exon 2 of MMP13, c.216G > C/p.Gln72His in the proband. Segregation studies revealed the same variant in the father’s sample (individual II-2) confirming the autosomal dominant inheritance. The variant is predicted to be deleterious based on the following: (1) Amino acid (AA) 72 is highly conserved between species (2). This AA borders other AAs affected by known pathogenic variants in MMP13 leading to MAD (3). Multiple pathogenic prediction scores as DANN: 0.996, CADD: 24.4 and SIFT4G: 0 [, ] considered the variant as damaging The variant is not present in gnomAD (v2.1.1).