A 30-year-old pregnant woman (gravid 2, abortion 1 and non-consanguineous marriage) was referred to us at 26 weeks of gestation because of her fetus dysrhythmia. Extrasystoles of bigeminy premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) were the cause of dysrhythmia . In addition, a contractile outpouching of 7 mm × 10 mm was found in the left ventricular apex . It was diagnosed as a diverticulum due to its synchronized contraction with the main left ventricular chamber. The diverticulum was connected with a broad neck to the left ventricle and had a low-velocity color flow in it (Additional file : Video S1). Given the persistent fetal dysrhythmia, sotalol 80 mg twice a day was initiated for the mother. In the fetal screening examination, no additional extracardiac anomaly was reported. No evidence of cardiac failure or hydrops was noted either. At 32 weeks of gestation, follow-up echocardiography revealed persistent dysrhythmia as PVCs in more than 50% of the time of the test. The LV systolic function and ventricular myocardial performance index were within the normal limits. Hence, it was decided not to continue sotalol. Moreover, an AMVT was identified below the main mitral valve with two leaflets connected to the same papillary muscles by separate chordae tendineae. Leaflets movement and E/A ratio in pulse wave Doppler were similar to the main mitral valve Doppler tracing. Accessory and main mitral valve diameter at the age of 35 weeks of gestation were 6.8 mm and 6.7 mm, respectively. Both valves had simultaneous phases of movement. There was no evidence of valvar regurgitation and LVOT obstruction. The mother's past medical history was unremarkable. She did not report the consumption of any teratogenic drugs or being affected by any viral infections during gestation. Fetal growth scans were normal in the course of pregnancy, and hydrops did not occur either. A baby girl with an Apgar score of 9 and birth weight of 3.1 kg was born at the age of 39 weeks by normal vaginal delivery. She was transferred to NICU for further work-up and monitoring. The electrocardiographic (ECG) tracing after birth was in normal sinus rhythm without any evidence of dysrhythmia. Post-delivery echocardiography confirmed the presence of accessory mitral valve, while the LV apical diverticulum faded away. At 4-month follow-up the infant was free of arrhythmia and LVOT obstruction. She was treated with aspirin, and periodic follow-up was recommended.