A 39-year-old female non-smoker was admitted to Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University, Japan and received continuous care for Kartagener syndrome. The patient was previously admitted to a hospital for productive cough, yellow sputum, and nasal congestion. Chest computed tomography showed bronchiectasis and nodular shadows in both lungs, in addition to situs inversus.
The family history of the patient included nasal disorder (eldest brother) and situs inversus (second elder brother expired at 24 days old). The parents of the patient were cousins. Biopsy of the patient’s mucosa in the nasal cavity was performed in the otorhinolaryngology department. Based on the pathological findings, family history, and a triad of chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus, the physicians reached the diagnosis of Kartagener syndrome. Moreover, the patient had been diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and had received treatment with macrolide antibiotics, inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting β2 agonists, and tiotropium.
Chest X-ray examination performed in our hospital showed an infiltrative shadow in the right upper lung field suggesting atelectasis of the right upper lobe and tram lines with nodular shadows in both lung fields . The computed tomography images revealed an endobronchial massive shadow at the ostial site of the right upper lobe bronchus and atelectasis of the right upper lobe . Bronchoscopic examination identified an obstructing mass at the orifice of the upper lobular bronchus . Although biopsy failed to achieve a definitive diagnosis, the mass was surgically resected because neoplastic disease was suspected and airway obstruction required surgical intervention. The parts of the right lung chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa were concomitantly resected. Surgery included the resection of the right upper lobe and the right lower lobe with a preserved right S6 region through anastomosis between the right B6 and the right main bronchus due to situs inversus. In the resected lung, an opalescent tumor was observed at the right bronchus . Microscopically, the tissue specimen revealed a polypoid tumor infiltrating into the bronchial cartilage at low-magnification . Histopathological analysis of the tumor provided evidence of mucoepidermoid carcinoma . Common driver oncogenes and biomarkers in the tumor were negative for mutations in the gene encoding epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) or rearrangements in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)/c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1)/rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene (RET) genes, or the expression of programmed death ligand (PD-L1). The CRTC1-MAML2 gene fusion was not analyzed in this case. The carcinoma arising from a bronchial gland was 1.6 cm × 1.4 cm in size and invaded into the bronchial cartilage; however, it did not extend outside the bronchus. There was no vascular invasions or metastases to the lungs or lymph nodes. The surgical margin was negative for carcinoma. The right lower lobe showed histopathological findings consistent with Kartagener syndrome (e.g., included alveolar wall thickening, organizing pneumonia with inflammatory cell invasion, bronchiectasis, and enlarged alveolar spaces). Following surgery, the patient has been free of relapse with a decreased incidence of pneumonia.