An otherwise healthy 45 year old woman was referred to the Allergy and Immunology clinic after developing acute onset dyspnea, lip swelling, and generalized urticaria with ibuprofen use requiring treatment with intramuscular epinephrine in the emergency department. She previously tolerated ibuprofen, naproxen, and acetaminophen without reaction or adverse event and had no history of urticaria, angioedema, asthma, or nasal polyps. There were no other identifiable cofactors including alcohol consumption, acute illness, or exercise.
Her symptoms were reproducible on graded drug provocation test (DPT) to ibuprofen. Shortly after her final dose (cumulative 200 mg), she developed diffuse urticaria. High dose H1-antihistamines was given, however her symptoms quickly progressed to subjective throat tightness and irritation. Her vital signs and physical examination remained unchanged. Epinephrine 0.5 mg was administered intramuscularly and symptoms quickly resolved.
She returned to clinic for a graded DPT to ASA. Doses were given at 30 min intervals. She tolerated her first 2 steps (5 mg, 60 mg) without incident. 15 min after her third dose (100 mg), the patient reported subjective pruritus of her neck without objective overlying skin changes. 10 min after this assessment she developed prominent urticaria of the face and neck , audible voice hoarseness/change in voice quality, and subjective throat swelling and irritation. Repeat vital signs were unchanged from pre-challenge measurements. Epinephrine 0.5 mg was administered as well as prednisone 50 mg and high dose H1-antihistamines. Her symptoms improved within 5 min , and completely resolved after 1 h of close observation. 15 min after symptom resolution (almost 2 h after consuming her last dose of ASA), the patient developed a new rash, clinically distinct from her previously noted urticaria. The rash was erythematous, blanchable, non-pruritic, and flat . She had no associated cardiac, respiratory, or gastrointestinal involvement. In context of her progressive symptoms, despite previous medical therapy, she was administered additional epinephrine 0.3 mg. Her skin lesions improved shortly afterwards and did not recur.
At her subsequent appointments she successfully passed both graded DPTs to acetaminophen (cumulative 650 mg) as well as celecoxib (cumulative 200 mg). She was advised to avoid all other NSAIDs, to wear a medical alert bracelet, and to carry epinephrine auto injectors. ASA desensitization was advised if indicated in the future for cardioprotective or cerebrovascular indications.