The patient was a 14-year-old Chinese boy who had a positive interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) result at the age of 5 years after being in close contact with his grandfather, who had active tuberculosis. At the age of 9 years, he was admitted to a large-scale pediatric hospital for "dizziness and headache" and was diagnosed with severe hypertension caused by polyarteritis involving the renal arteries. He was treated with antihypertensive drugs but was not administered any antituberculosis drugs for M. tuberculosis infection at that time. It should be noted that the patient had received the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccine as a child in China.
The patient initially complained of fever, cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, and weight loss for 1.5 months before presentation, with subsequent development of pain on the right side of his chest. On presentation, he was admitted for shortness of breath after failed outpatient antibiotic treatment for presumed pneumonia.
Upon admission (March 2019), the patient presented with fever, cough, shortness of breath, and chest pain on the right side, with a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min and a heart rate of 100 beats/min. His blood pressure was 216/112 mmHg, and subsequent measurements revealed a blood pressure gradient between the upper limbs, with 170/80 mmHg recorded on the left arm and 220/120 mmHg on the right arm.
Cardiopulmonary examination revealed rough breathing sounds in both lungs and vascular murmurs in the left part of the neck and left supraclavicular fossa. Chest computed tomography indicated uneven high-density shadows of patchy, stippled, stripe, and nodular shapes in the upper and lower lobes of the right lung, thickened adhesions in the adjacent pleura, and enlarged and calcified mediastinal lymph nodes . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed congestion and edema of the bronchial mucosa in the upper lobe of the right lung, and the surface of the B3 subsegment bronchial mucosa was covered with a cheese-like substance. A T-SPOT. TB test returned positive results again. His bronchoscope alveolar lavage fluid sample tested positive in the Xpert MTB/RIF test (Cepheid, USA), and rifampin resistance was not detected. The M. tuberculosis complex was discovered in bronchoscopic alveolar lavage fluid by high-throughput sequencing.
Induced sputum was sent for acid-fast bacillus smear three times, and all the results were negative. Sputum for MGIT 960 culture (BD, USA)was positive. A drug sensitivity test (DST) was performed and found to be sensitive to isoniazid, rifampicin ethambutol and streptomycin. The remainder of an extensive infectious workup showed negative results. Therefore, the patient was placed on a four-drug anti-tuberculosis regimen that included rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for the treatment of confirmed active tuberculosis. Laboratory examinations on admission showed that he had a white blood cell count of 5.5 × 109/L (normal range, 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) with 54.2% neutrophils, hemoglobin level of 126 g/L (normal range, 130–175 g/L), platelet count of 286 × 109/L (normal range, 125–350 × 109/L), hypersensitive C-reactive protein level of 31.6 mg/L (normal range, 0–4 mg/L), procalcitonin level of 0.077 ng/mL (normal range, 0.02–0.05 ng/mL), and PaO2, 81 mmHg (80–100 mmHg). Biochemical examination showed that his alanine aminotransferase level was 10 U/L (normal range, 9–50 U/L), and his aspartate aminotransferase level was 16 U/L (normal range, 15–40 U/L). His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 28 mm/h (normal range, 0–15 mm/h). Cerebrospinal fluid findings showed leucocyte count of 3 × 106/L (normal range, 0–8 × 106/L), lymphocyte of 100%, protein of 0.26 g/L (normal range, 0.15–0.45 g/L), glucose concentration of 3.05 mmol/L (normal range,2.5–4.5 mmol/L), chloride of 121 mmol/L (normal range, 120–130 mmol/L).
Two months after discharge, the child's fever, cough, chest pain, and shortness of breath were alleviated, and this was reflected in radiographic images of his lungs. However, he began experiencing numbness and weakness of the right limbs, and his mouth was askew on the right side; his blood pressure also increased up to 220/120 mmHg. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) of the head showed patchy, spot-like, long, T2 signal shadows in the right basal ganglia and around the left lateral ventricle . A diagnosis of recent cerebral infarction was then rendered. During hospitalization, he was administered cattle encephalon glycoside and ignotin injection for nourishing the cranial nerves; urapidil, nifedipine, and terazosin for lowering blood pressure; and aspirin for antiplatelet effects. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the head, neck, chest, and abdomen was performed to evaluate his vasculitis. CTA showed active disease, localized thickening of the vascular wall at the initial segment of the left vertebral artery with moderate-to-severe stenosis of the lumen and mild stenosis of the lumen at the initial segment of the right vertebral artery and the branches of the middle cerebral artery . The lumen at the initial segment of the left subclavian artery was slightly narrowed, the vascular walls at the proximal and middle segments were diffusely thickened with local lumen occlusion and moderate stenosis, and the distal lumen was slender. The wall of the thoracic-abdominal aorta was slightly thickened and had multiple calcifications, whereas the lumen was slightly narrowed. Luminal stenosis became apparent at the beginning of the abdominal trunk, and the initial portion of the bilateral renal arteries was also obviously narrowed . Considering the apparent high activity and extensive vasculitis changes that may be caused by immune damage in the patient, glucocorticoid, methotrexate, and tocilizumab injections were used to control severe disease.
After 3 months of standard treatments, the patient’s clinical symptoms improved to some extent; however, he was still unable to move his right lower limb at liberty. Laboratory examinations showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 10 mm/h, a blood pressure of 150/85 mmHg, and mild anemia (hemoglobin level of 115 g/L, normal range: 130–175 g/L) but no other abnormalities. The patient completed 9 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment in December 2019. His clinical symptoms and lung findings improved considerably, and sputum for acid-fast bacillus smear and MGIT 960 culture was negative. After 1 year of treatment for TA, the administration of methotrexate and tocilizumab injection was discontinued, and the oral dose of the glucocorticoid was gradually reduced to 5 mg. The patient was still undergoing antihypertensive therapy at the time this report was written. He is being managed by different rheumatologists as his condition stabilizes.