A male, in his early fifties, and heavily immunosuppressed with history of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL) was initially treated with ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) chemotherapy, and later, GDP (gemcitabine, dexamethasone, and cisplatin) chemotherapy, followed by autologous stem cell transplant (SCT) for relapsed HL one-year post-completion of initial chemotherapy. The patient was maintained on the CD30 antibody–drug conjugate Brentuximab until he was noted to again have HL disease progression, for which he underwent an allogeneic SCT 1.5 years post-autologous transplant. His post-transplant course was complicated by Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV) reactivation and associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD), requiring repeated courses of rituximab (twelve doses overall) and graft versus host disease (GVHD) of the skin, gut, and possibly lung, requiring multiple doses of prednisone.
The first episode of COVID-19 infection was one-month post-allogeneic SCT, prior to the diagnosis of PTLD. There were no other microbiological findings in the patient’s lungs. Shortly thereafter, the patient required rituximab for EBV reactivation, followed by recurrent episodes of EBV reactivation and CT-confirmed PTLD, leading to further courses of rituximab. Initial presenting symptoms of COVID-19 were mild upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) symptoms, and Bamlanivimab was received. However, four months after the initial infection, the patient was admitted to hospital with progressive cough and shortness of breath. Upon admission, the patient again tested positive for COVID-19. Treatment included Remdesivir, dexamethasone, and Bamlanivimab with good response. Six months later, the patient developed a progressive chronic cough and was eventually hospitalized (fourteen months after the initial COVID-19 infection) with shortness of breath and new diffuse bilateral lung consolidations. This admission, treatment included sotrovimab along with another course of remdesivir and dexamethasone. Despite initial improvement in respiratory status, the patient developed worsening renal dysfunction and shortness of breath along with progressive lung infiltrates, leading to respiratory failure and ultimately death. Pulmonary issues were multifactorial, including chronic COVID-19 infection, possible lung GVHD, and cardio-renal syndrome. The timeline of COVID-19 lineages, disease symptoms, and treatments received is summarized in Table .