A 30 years old male patient presented to the hospital with a 2-day history of high-grade fever and headache. Headache was diffuse, moderate to severe in intensity, associated with pain and stiffness in neck, photophobia and vomiting. Condition was not associated with blurring of vision, double vision, vomiting, loss of consciousness or convulsions. There was no history of sore throat, cough, ear pain, ear discharge, motor weakness, sensory weakness, hearing difficulty, altered level of consciousness, abnormal jerky movements or skin rashes. Patient also reported persistent colorless discharge from nose and postnasal drip for 4 months. There was no history of ear fullness, persistent headache or head trauma. Patient was non-smoker and there was no history of alcohol use.
6 weeks ago, patient was discharged from hospital after being treated as bacterial meningitis. The CSF examination for viral PCR and bacterial gram stain/culture was negative. He was treated with a 14-day course of intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone. He had complete recovery of symptoms without any neurological sequalae. During hospital stay at that time, he underwent MRI head which showed large bony defect in the sellar floor with soft tissue in the anterior aspect of the sella with infrasellar extension into the left sphenoid sinus ). Neurosurgery and otorhinolaryngology teams were consulted, and an elective endoscopic endonasal/open repair of the skull base defect was planned as outpatient after resolution of meningitis. Patient still had persistent rhinorrhea during this presentation as he did not undergo repair of bony defect of sellar floor.
Physical examination revealed a young adult well oriented to time, place and person. He was febrile with temperature of 38.9 degrees Celsius. Pulse, blood pressure and respiratory rate was normal. There were no skin rashes or scratch marks. GCS was 15/15. He had normal cranial nerves, motor and sensory examination. Neck stiffness, Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs were positive. Cardiovascular, chest and abdominal examination was normal.
Complete blood count revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis with raised C reactive protein. Urea, creatinine, electrolytes and liver function tests were normal. Lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed high white blood cell count with predominance of neutrophils, high protein and low glucose . Viral PCR of CSF was negative. CSF culture showed gram negative coccobacilli identified as Pasteurella multocida sensitive to ceftriaxone, ampicillin and penicillin. Blood cultures were negative. After confirmation of the organism, a retrospective history of contact with dogs, cats or other animals was taken which revealed that he often used to feed stray cats who lived around his house. However, there was no history of cat scratches, bites, licks or kisses on any part of the body. Patient was treated with IV ceftriaxone 2 g twice a day for 14 days with complete resolution of his symptoms. He was offered surgical correction of his skull defect, but he preferred to do it in his home country. He was discharged with advice to avoid contact with dogs and cats till surgical correction of bony defect of skull.