A 53-year-old female patient was admitted to the Neurotrauma Surgery Department of Jilin University First Hospital on September 13, 2019, due to intermittent fever for 6 d and unconsciousness for 4 d.
Initially, the patient was admitted to a local hospital as a result of hypertensive disease; 1 day after admission, she had fever, with the highest body temperature of 38.8 °C; 2 d later, the patient had sudden unconsciousness. Emergency head MRI revealed the fester-traditional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) level inside the posterior horns of bilateral lateral ventricles, the fester diffuse weighted imaging (DWI) showed a high signal, and the apparent diffusion coefficient map showed a low signal . Thereafter, the patient was transferred to the Neurosurgery Department to receive emergency extraventricular drainage. Multiple CSF bacterial cultures after surgery revealed negative results, and the local physician empirically administered vancomycin treatment to the patient. After surgery, the patient was in continuous narcosis, and her family visited our hospital to seek further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient had a past history of hypertension for 10 years and received oral antihypertensive drug therapy, but no ideal control effect was achieved. In addition, the patient had had dental caries for 3 years, and she did not receive systemic treatment after the medulla oblongata treatment 1 month prior.
The patient had a free personal and family history.
Physical examination upon admission showed that the patient was in narcosis with no autonomous respiration. The Glasgow Coma Scale score was E3V1M4. Extensive lesions and loosening of the second molars in the bilateral mandibles were found. CSF culture and next-generation sequencing of pathogenic microorganisms were carried out after admission. The intraventricular CSF culture results were negative, while pathogenic microorganism next-generation sequencing suggested Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Solobacterium, Prevotella, Dialister, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Fusobacterium hwasookii, Porphyromonas endodontalis, Solobacterium moorei, Prevotella intermedia, and Dialister pneumosintes .
Head MRI revealed a quasicircular liquid signal opacity in the left cerebellum. The adjacent brain stem was compressed, the fourth ventricle became narrower, and ventricular hydrops accompanied by paraventricular edema was observed . Spinal MRI revealed stripe-like long T1 and long T2 signals in C7-T2 spinal canals .