An 84-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with a diagnosis of STEMI. His medical history was significant for atrial fibrillation, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cerebral infarction. He had reported repeated episodes of chest pain over a period of 1 week and was referred to our hospital after complaining of chest pain lasting several hours.
Upon admission, his blood pressure was 102/66 mmHg, his heart rate was 124 beats/min, and atrial fibrillation was noted. He was in acute decompensated heart failure (Killip class III) and experiencing worsening oxygen desaturation despite the use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation. Endotracheal intubation was performed in the emergency department.
His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation and terminal T-wave inversion in leads V1 through V5. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated severe left ventricular impairment in the anteroseptal and apical areas, together with severe aortic stenosis and moderate aortic regurgitation.
Urgent coronary angiography showed severe tandem stenosis from the proximal to mid-left anterior descending coronary artery . The patient underwent primary PCI with vasopressor support; drug-eluting stents were successfully deployed from the left main trunk to mid-left anterior descending segments of the artery. Post-intervention, the patient’s systolic blood pressure gradually decreased despite the combined use of dobutamine and noradrenaline. He eventually went into cardiogenic shock, with an increasing arterial lactate value.
Repeat TTE revealed that peak aortic jet velocity was 4.2 m/s, aortic valve area was 0.5 cm2, and the left ventricular ejection fraction was 30% . We decided that intervention was necessary to improve the patient’s haemodynamic state. We obtained ECG-gated cardiac computed tomography and decided to perform TAVI using a transfemoral approach . We anticipated that some form of mechanical circulatory support would be necessary if, after TAVI, shock was sustained.
First, balloon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV) was performed to facilitate the insertion and deployment of the aortic bioprosthesis, with a 20-mm Inoue balloon (Toray Medical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) which does not require rapid ventricular pacing during dilatation. Then, a 29-mm CoreValve Evolut PRO (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) transcatheter aortic valve was smoothly inserted and deployed without repositioning . Despite the successful TAVI, the patient remained in cardiogenic shock requiring considerable catecholamine support. The Impella CP device was deemed to be appropriate because it significantly augments cardiac output and has a high efficacy in left ventricular unloading. We inserted the Impella CP device into the left ventricle, paying careful attention not to interfere with the new valve, by using fluoroscopy and transoesophageal echocardiography guidance to ensure that the device was positioned properly .
After insertion of the left ventricular assist device, the patient achieved haemodynamic stability, and his catecholamine dosage was gradually reduced. Weaning of the patient from the Impella CP was successful on the 8th day post-admittance, and he was extubated on the following day. He required continued hospitalization for bacteraemia and Clostridium difficile colitis, but he was transferred to a community hospital for rehabilitation 35 days after admission.
The patient visited our outpatient clinic 3 months after admission and reported no symptoms of heart failure. Follow-up TTE showed improvement of the left ventricular ejection fraction and normal functioning of the aortic bioprosthesis.