A 76-year-old Caucasian man presented to his physician with a history of dry cough of a few months’ duration associated with fatigue, loss of appetite, and weight loss of more than 18kg (40lb). On further workup, multiple lung lesions were found on fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) scan , which on biopsy and pathologic review were due to Castleman’s disease. He was negative for HIV and HHV-8. He was referred to the Clinical Center for Targeted Therapy (Phase I Clinic) at MD Anderson Cancer Center for further treatment. His medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, diverticulosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and benign prostatic hypertrophy, for which he had recently undergone transurethral resection of his prostate. His family history was significant for lymphoma and prostate cancer in his brother, breast cancer in his sister, and small bowel cancer in his mother. He had last smoked cigarettes when he was in college and drank socially. He was living with his wife and had four children, all in good health. His medications included tamsulosin, simvastatin, omeprazole, and a multivitamin.
He was started on siltuximab, previously known as CNTO 328, a chimeric, human–murine anti-IL-6 antibody that binds and neutralizes IL-6 with high affinity (dose = 11mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks). This treatment was given as part of a trial previously reported, and all procedures including consent were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the MD Anderson Cancer Center Internal Review Board . He tolerated the treatment well and although he complained of intermittent fatigue, he was able to ride his bicycle up to 16km (10 miles) in a day. FDG-PET/CT scans showed significant improvement in his lungs, but worsening mediastinal disease after approximately 5 months, consistent with a mixed response . In order to elucidate the reason for mixed response, a needle biopsy was performed that showed a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with non-caseating, ill-defined granulomas and scarring consistent with sarcoidosis. Prednisone 50mg by mouth daily was started, which was tapered to 5mg daily. This was intermittently restarted at least two more times, but he was maintained on a dose of 2.5 to 5mg daily for most of his subsequent course. Siltuximab was continued. A subsequent FDG-PET/CT scan showed near-complete resolution of lung and mediastinal disease, and he has continued to receive treatment for 3.5 years without serious adverse events. He has regained the 18kg (40lb) lost before treatment and is actively bicycling about 48 to 64km (30 to 40 miles) per week.