A 52-year-old female with no past medical history presented to the ED with bilateral hand swelling and pain for two days. The patient reported that a few days prior she had strained her left shoulder while holding a rope to help somebody cut down a tree. She presented to an outside hospital, was diagnosed with a rotator cuff tear, and was given IV morphine in the left upper extremity. Subsequently, she developed left hand swelling. She went back to the outside hospital, received IV morphine in the right upper extremity, and developed right hand swelling. The patient denied any direct trauma to her hands. The pain was only alleviated by placing her hands in cold water. In addition, she endorsed atraumatic left knee swelling. The patient endorsed smoking marijuana and a remote history of methamphetamine use but denied any current tobacco, alcohol, or IV drug use.
On arrival, the patient was afebrile with an oral temperature of 36.6° Celsius, tachycardic to 110 beats per minute, and had a blood pressure of 142/106 millimeters of mercury. Exam revealed puffy edema on the dorsal side of the bilateral hands extending to the wrists with mild erythema bilaterally over the dorsum without overlying induration or fluctuance. Range of motion of fingers and wrists was intact bilaterally but somewhat limited by swelling. There was no pain with micromotion of the wrists. Sensation was intact with strong bilateral radial pulses, brisk capillary refill, and soft compartments. Exam of the left knee revealed mild erythema and edema over the distal thigh with warmth over the knee. There was full range of motion of the knee but pain at extremes of motion. The dorsalis pedis pulse was strong, and the compartments were soft.
Initial differential diagnosis included rheumatologic conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus, infectious etiologies, and allergic reactions to receiving IV morphine. Given the multiple sites of arthralgias without any direct trauma, and minimal erythema with intact range of motion, rheumatologic conditions were at the top of the differential. The appearance of the edema without significant erythema or induration was less consistent with cellulitis. Intact range of motion with arthralgias in multiple locations pointed away from septic arthritis in a patient without a history of IV drug use. Necrotizing soft tissue infection was also unlikely given absence of fever, pain out of proportion, crepitus, or bullae.
Laboratory studies revealed a white blood cell count of 20,000 per millimeter3 (K/mm3) (reference range: 4.5–10 K/mm3), 22% bands (0–9%), complement reactive protein (CRP) 631.2 milligrams/liter (mg/L) (0–4.9 mg/L), and rheumatoid factor 45 international units/milliliter (IU/mL) (0–13 IU/mL). Radiographs of the bilateral hands and wrists revealed no acute fracture or dislocation but showed diffuse soft tissue swelling.
Given the laboratory studies of leukocytosis, bandemia, and a very elevated CRP, IV ceftriaxone and vancomycin were started out of concern for bacterial infection. Point-of-care ultrasound was performed, which demonstrated bilateral wrist effusions and fluid surrounding the extensor tendon sheaths.
Orthopedic surgery was consulted and performed bilateral wrist arthrocentesis with aspiration of purulent fluid. Synovial fluid analysis for the left and right wrist demonstrated nucleated cell counts of 37,200 cells/microliter (cells/μL) (reference range: 13–180 cells/μL) and 36,850 cells/μL, and percentage segmented neutrophils of 92% (reference 0–25%) and 98%, respectively. Arthrocentesis of the left knee was also performed, and synovial fluid analysis revealed a nucleated cell count of 24,000 cells/μL and percentage segmented neutrophils of 90%. Computed tomography (CT) of the bilateral upper extremities showed bilateral extensor tenosynovitis and multiple abscesses on the dorsal hands.
The patient was admitted to the inpatient service for extensor tenosynovitis and septic arthritis and ultimately was taken to the operating room by orthopedic surgery. Operative findings showed left extensor tenosynovitis in hand compartments three and four and right extensor tenosynovitis in compartments two, three, and four with tenosynovectomies performed. The bilateral septic wrist joints and left septic knee joint were irrigated and debrided. Wound cultures and blood cultures showed no growth of either bacteria or fungus. The Neisseria gonorrhea test came back negative. Inpatient broad-spectrum antibiotics were continued, and she was discharged on hospital day 10 with a three-week course of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.