A 48-year-old male general physician was referred to our unit from a neighbouring hospital with a non-united fracture of the right proximal humerus . The injury was sustained as a result of falling down stairs and was initially managed conservatively for 3 months. There was minimal callus formation with symptoms of fracture union and there was a potential stress line in the distal fragment 4 cm below the fracture. His past history comprised osteopetrosis resulting in fractures of the left femur, left radius and ulna, the latter managed operatively. Open reduction and internal fixation was decided for the fracture of the humerus under general anaesthesia (GA) and axillary block. A delto-pectoral approach was used to expose the fracture. The bone ends were found to be bleeding satisfactorily but there was no medullary canal. Drill holes were inserted for a short distance. The cortex adjacent to the fracture was petalled with osteotome. A 2.5 mm high-speed steel (HSS) drill bit (Synthes, UK) was used with saline cooling. A drill motor with low speed and high torque was used. The drill was frequently removed from the bone to clear the flutes of dense accumulated bone swarf and saline irrigation was used at all times. The holes were then over-drilled with a standard drill bit to the required 3.2 mm to accept a 4.5 mm screw. A standard 4.5 mm cortical tap was used, frequently reversed and withdrawn for cleaning. A standard 3.2 mm drill was used to attain the right diameter. A plate of sufficient length was used to reach beyond the area of the stress line. It was possible to achieve a secure hold with all the screws. After reduction and fixation, Bone Morphogenic Protein-7 (BMP-7) paste (OP1, Stryker, UK) was applied around the fracture site before closure. The BMP Ossigraft (OP1) was prepared and applied all around the fracture site. A support sling was used for 6 weeks although limited active assisted mobilisation was started on the second postoperative day. After 3 months, there was good evidence of callus formation and fracture healing along with a full range of motion at the shoulder joint.