A 38-year-old Caucasian housewife was referred to the IVF and Reproductive Genetics Center, Moscow, for fertility preservation. She and her family lived in a small nearby town with normal ecological conditions. There was no history of serious illness in her family. She used barrier contraception and had never been pregnant. She had never smoked or consumed alcohol.
She had regular, 25–28-day menstrual periods. Her past history revealed that she had undergone laparoscopy and unilateral right adnexectomy due to a large papillary mucinous cystadenoma, 10 cm in diameter. Ten years later, a new cyst, 4 cm in diameter, was diagnosed on the contralateral ovary. Laparotomy with partial ovarian resection was performed. Histological examination again revealed mucinous cystadenoma. She was otherwise healthy, height 166 cm and body mass index (BMI) 24.7.
On admission, physical and neurological examination yielded no pathological findings. Gynecological examination was unremarkable. Blood pressure was 115/75 mmHg, resting heart rate 78 beats per minute, and temperature was normal. Full laboratory tests (complete blood count [CBC], basic, complete metabolic and coagulation panel) were in the normal range. Test results for HIV antibodies, hepatitis B antigen and antibodies, hepatitis C antibodies, Lues serology, toxoplasma and cytomegalic virus antigens and antibodies were negative. Polymerase chain reaction was negative for human papillomavirus (HPV). Pap smear test was normal. Her blood type was O, rhesus (Rh)-negative. Coombs test was negative. Her hormone profile on day 3 of the cycle was as follows: anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) 0.35 ng/mL; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 6.9 IU/L; LH 8.9 IU/L; prolactin 190 mIU/L; thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 1.77 mIU/L; testosterone 0.77 nmol/L. Vaginal ultrasound (U/S) on day 7 of her cycle showed a normal sized uterus. Left ovary was 34×23×22 mm containing an 18×16 mm cyst and five small antral follicles. Her 30-year-old partner had normal sperm parameters. His routine serology tests were negative.
In accordance with Russian legislation, ovarian stimulation in women with ovarian tumors (even small) is prohibited. Therefore, a natural cycle IVF was commenced, but no oocyte was retrieved.
In order to improve results and obtain oocytes without stimulating the ovaries, we decided to conduct an IVM cycle. A total of three successive IVM attempts were performed.