A 35-year-old primigravida with a monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy presented in the operating room (OR) for an elective caesarean section at 36 weeks of gestation. The patient had a BMI of 26,6 Kg/m2 and a history of hypothyroidism, but her medical history and the pregnancy course were otherwise unremarkable (ASA class II).
On arrival at the operating room, she underwent a lower segment caesarean section under spinal anaesthesia performed with hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5% 10 mg plus sufentanil 5 mcg and morphine 100 mcg intrathecally administered. The surgery was uneventful, without the need for vasopressors after neuraxial anaesthesia. Conversely, a tendence towards hypertension (mean arterial pressure persistently above 100 mmHg) was detected. Oxytocin 5 units in slow bolus and then 20 units by continuous infusion in 3 h were given to prevent uterine atony. Two healthy female babies were born (first baby’s Apgar scores of 7–9 and second baby’s Agar scores of 9–10 at 1 and 5 min).
Ninety minutes after the end of surgery, patient experienced fatigue and dyspnea in the Post-Anaesthesia Care Unit (PACU). She presented with an acute haemorrhage due to retained placenta and was urgently transferred to the OR for surgical exploration. Laboratory tests were preoperatively carried out and preoperative and postoperative tests are displayed in Table ; they eventually confirmed only a reduction in hemoglobin level. Surgery was conducted under general anaesthesia with rapid sequence induction (Propofol 2 mg/kg and Rocuronium bromide 1,2 mg/kg) and maintenance with intravenous opioids (fentanyl 300 µg) and halogenated anaesthetics (Sevoflurane 1–1,5 MAC). Two large bore 14-gauge IV catheters were inserted; high-volume fluid resuscitation (ringer’s lactate solution 3000 mL + albumin 5% 500 mL), supplemental 20 units of oxytocin and 400 µg of rectal misoprostol were required. Due to the coexistence of preoperative anaemia and an estimated blood loss of 2500 mL, three units of red blood cells were given, together with fibrinogen concentrate (2 g) and tranexamic acid (1 g). A Bakri balloon was also inserted and maintained for the first 24 h after surgery. At the end of surgery, residual neuromuscular block was antagonized with sugammadex 2 mg/kg (160 mg).
After emergence from general anaesthesia, a prolonged postoperative observation in PACU was accomplished by the attending anaesthesiologist. Blood tests confirmed anaemia (Hb 6.7 g/dL) and revealed severe thrombocytopenia (PLTs 40 × 10^9/L), hypofibrinogenemia, acute kidney injury (AKI) (K-DIGO stage 1, serum creatinine 1.4 mg/dL), hyperkalemia and a slight increase in transaminase level. One additional red blood cell unit was given, together with fibrinogen (2 g). Within a few hours, the patient progressively developed hypoxemic respiratory failure. A chest radiograph documented bilateral perihilar patchy opacities, and a diagnosis of pulmonary oedema was made. Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) with a full-face mask was provided and the patient was transferred to ICU.
At ICU arrival, the patient appeared alert and oriented, still tachypneic, tachycardic and hypertensive (sinus rhythm heart rate: 112 bpm, invasive blood pressure: 148/97 mmHg). NIV and high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy (HFNC) sessions were initially required. Serial chest x-ray and lung ultrasound assessments both confirmed signs of interstitial fluid accumulation and pleural effusion, together with a right perihilar infiltrate, primarily suspected of alveolar oedema, albeit a pneumonia could not be definitely ruled out. Hypertensive crisis and fluid overload were aggressively treated with a combination of beta and alpha adrenergic blockers (labetalol 0,3 mg/kg/h by continuous intravenous infusion for the first 24 h, bisoprolol 2,5 mg twice daily for the first 48 h, doxazosin 2 mg twice daily), central sympatholytics (methyldopa 250 mg twice daily for the first 72 h, transdermal clonidine 5 mg by the third day), diuretics (furosemide 20 mg three times daily), calcium antagonists (amlodipine 5 mg twice daily). In addition, a short course of empirical beta-lactam therapy for community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed.
On the first day of ICU admission, the patient complained about blurred vision and visual disturbances. An ocular fundus examination revealed bilateral exudative retinal detachment, and a corticosteroid treatment was initiated (intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg daily for three days).
Blood tests were sent, confirming anaemia, thrombocytopenia, AKI, and revealing an increase in LDH level, a reduction in C3 and haptoglobin level, and a normal value of C4 and ADAMTS13 . Direct Coombs test and schistocyte count were also normal. Antiphospholipid antibodies (including lupus anticoagulant, IgG and IgM antibodies to cardiolipin and to β2 glycoprotein I) were not detected. A diagnosis of atypical Haemolytic Uremic Syndrome was made and Eculizumab 900 mg was administered via intravenous infusion. The patient also received anti-meningococcal B, anti-pneumococcal, anti-Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccination.
During the next few days, the patient’s respiratory condition gradually improved, so that after the first 36 h standard oxygen therapy was sufficient. She remained hypertensive despite a massive antihypertensive therapy, forced diuresis, and negative fluid balance. Due to the persistence of severe anaemia, she received several blood transfusion units. The patient spent 5 days in ICU before being transferred to the Department of Internal Medicine.
During the hospital stay, her clinical condition progressively improved and vital parameters and fundoscopic examination returned to normal. Prophylactic antibiotics against bacterial meningitis were continued up to two weeks after vaccination. A multigene panel (C3, CD46, CFB, CFH, CFI, DGKE, ADAMTS13) did not reveal pathogenic variants associated with genetic aHUS. The patient received Eculizumab 900 mg twice more (once per week IV administration), attaining hematological and renal remission. She was eventually discharged from hospital 16 days after admission.