A 50-year-old man, who was diagnosed with Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML M1), developed sudden decrease in vision in his left eye after three cycles of intravenous cytarabine and daunorubicin. An MRI scan done two days after the onset of the symptoms was unremarkable. As his general condition was poor, further investigations and treatment were deferred at this point. He was started on oral prednisolone at the dose of 1mg/kg/day three weeks after the onset of decreased vision. Prednisolone was subsequently tapered and stopped, and he was referred to our centre for further management.
He presented at our centre, six weeks after the onset of symptoms, with a best corrected visual acuity of 20/20 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Colour vision, tested using Ishihara pseudo-isochromatic plates, was defective in both eyes. He had a relative afferent pupillary defect in his left eye. The intra ocular pressure was normal in both eyes. The vitreous was clear; there was pallor of both optic discs with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.3. Foveal atrophic changes in an early ‘bull’s eye’ pattern were noted in both eyes .
No evidence of active neuritis or infiltration of the optic nerves was found on review of the MRI scan of the orbits . Automated perimetry revealed peripheral depressed points in the right eye and constriction of the visual field in the left eye with a small temporal island of vision . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed thinning of the retinal nerve fibre layer in both eyes (left eye > right eye) . OCT of the macula confirmed thinning and alteration of the foveal contour in both eyes . Fundus fluorescein angiography showed window defects with mottled hyperfluorescence in the parafoveal region in both eyes. Late staining of the disc was noted in both eyes with no leak at the macula or disc . Electrophysiological tests were not performed as these were not available at our centre.
A diagnosis of presumed chemotherapy-induced optic neuropathy with maculopathy was made. The patient underwent another cycle of chemotherapy with a different set of drugs, followed by bone marrow transplantation. There was no further deterioration of vision, or progression of optic nerve and macular changes as documented by fundus photography, OCT and automated perimetry, in either eye over a six-month follow-up period.