A 69-year-old Italian man came to our hospital for treatment of a 5-mm fistula at the proximal third of the anterior region of the tibia. He was affected by chronic osteomyelitis because of an exposed fracture that had occurred 40 years ago. Plain x-rays showed an osteolytic area above the wound . In the first years following the trauma, he had undergone many osteosynthesis surgical interventions and antibiotic regimens. The patient was self-sufficient, in good clinical condition, and had no comorbidities. The neurovascular status of his affected leg was intact. In 1994, he had undergone a bilateral inguinal herniotomy, and in 2000 he had had a hemorrhoidectomy. He contracted hepatitis C virus during his first hospitalization after the trauma.
Scintigraphy confirmed the presence of an intraosseous infective process in the involved region . A swab culture of the fistula was positive for Bacteroides fragilis and Corynebacterium striatum, so the patient underwent therapy with metronidazole (500 mg by mouth every 6 h). After 30 days, the fistula had increased in size, and fibrotic tissue, perilesional erythema, and malodor were present. We recommended to the patient that he undergo amputation of the knee, a treatment that he refused. Therefore, he underwent a surgical toilet of the osteomyelitic hotbed, and inflammatory tissue and macerated bone were removed. The bone defect was treated with bioglass . The surgical wound was closed without any skin grafting. The result of an intrasurgical swab culture was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We started the patient on a multiple-antibiotic regimen with amikacin (500 mg intravenously every 12 h), meropenem (2 g intravenously every 8 h), and ciprofloxacin (500 mg by mouth every 12 h). After 2 months of inpatient care, a fulminating budding formation was observed on the wound margins. A biopsy revealed that it was a squamous cell carcinoma . The patient underwent whole-body computed tomography (CT), which revealed bone lesions and soft tissue masses. His neoplasia turned out to be T3N0M0; according to the American Cancer Society guidelines, it was at stage III . He underwent a wide-margin surgical debridement and bioglass removal . After 2 months, the malignant lesion recurred locally , and we performed a below-the-knee amputation.