A 46-year-old Asian man presented with 5-day history of absolute constipation, vomiting, and central abdominal pain. Besides that he had no known comorbidities and an unremarkable family history. In the past he had similar complaints for which he was managed conservatively. At 4 months prior to his presentation he had a computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen for similar symptoms; the CT scan showed ileal thickening for which he was given empirically a 3-month course of anti-tuberculosis therapy (ATT) but his symptoms did not resolve.
On this occasion, an examination revealed a dehydrated patient with pulse of 104 beats/minute and blood pressure (BP) of 130/70 mm. He had abdominal distention and central abdomen tenderness and hyperactive gut sounds. A digital rectal examination was unremarkable and so was a systemic examination. His baseline workup showed blood urea nitrogen of 32 mg/dl and creatinine of 1.2 mg/dl.
Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) of his abdomen showed mildly dilated thickened jejunal and ileal loops which were encased in a thick fibrocollagenous membrane pushed in the center of his abdominal cavity with collapsed loops of large bowel; the findings were suggestive of sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis/abdominal cocoon .
He was initially managed conservatively with intravenously administered fluids and nasogastric tube which resulted in some relief of his symptoms and his pulse of 74 beats/minute. Because of the fact that he came from an area where tuberculosis (TB) is a highly prevalent disease and previously he was empirically treated for abdominal TB, he underwent colonoscopy which showed normal terminal ileum, colon and rectum .
His case was discussed in a multidisciplinary team, which included a radiologist, gastroenterologist, and gastroenterology surgeon, and he was planned for diagnostic laparoscopy, followed by laparotomy in case it was not abdominal TB or a malignancy requiring medical management only.
A diagnostic laparoscopy using 10 mm infraumbilical port in a vertical fashion, confirmed that entire small bowel was encapsulated in membrane and it was all plastered in the center of his abdomen. Hence, a decision was made for midline laparotomy, in which thickened sclerosing membrane encapsulating loops of small bowel was removed and whole small bowel was freed and run until ileocecal junction. His stomach appeared thickened while his colon appeared grossly unremarkable .
Postoperatively he remained well and was discharged on fourth postoperative day, when he was tolerating an oral soft diet. However, he was again admitted on third day after his discharge with complaints of vomiting and relative constipation. He was kept nil by mouth (NPO) and on parenteral nutrition. Along with conservative management he had a short course of hydrocortisone 50 mg thrice daily for 7 days, which was tapered off later; he responded very well and he was discharged in a stable condition on oral soft diet with normal bowel movements.
He was followed up in clinic after 10 days and he was tolerating a soft diet with normal bowel movements; his stitches were removed in clinic. Later, a histopathology report showed fibrocollagenous tissue with mild chronic inflammation and mild patchy increase in IgG4-positive plasma cells.
He was seen twice as an out-patient at 3-month intervals and appeared asymptomatic; he was advised to have further follow-up only if required.