A 40 year old woman, gravida 10 para 9, unbooked, presented to the emergency room, severely ill, complaining of severe acute abdominal pain since 1 hour. According to her given expected date of confinement, she was 35 weeks and four days of gestation. On admission, she had no history of medical disorders or trauma. Generally, she was very pale, conscious, agitated, hypotensive and with severe tachycardia (Pulse 120/bpm; BP 90/50 mmHg, Temp 37.5°C). Abdominally, marked tenderness and rigidity all over the abdomen was found, fetal heart sounds showed severe bradycardia 100/bpm. Vaginal examination revealed no bleeding and the cervix was closed, firm and posterior. Laboratory studies, included a complete blood cell count, chemistry, coagulation profile, and arterial blood gases, were undertaken. In view of her clinical presentation, as BP was decreasing and the pulse was increasing, the provisional diagnosis was query placental abruption or rupture uterus. Rapid infusion of 2 L of crystalloid was started. Cesarean section was done immediately, there was no signs of placental abruption as the placenta was upper, posterior and fully attached to the uterine wall. She gave birth of a baby boy (2.2 Kg), Apgar score (1,6,8), admitted to the NICO. After closure of the uterus, the pelvis and abdomen were explored. A huge retroperitoneal haematoma was found extending behind the descending colon. The general and vascular surgeons were called, they advised conservative treatment as the haematoma was neither expanding nor pulsating. The abdomen was closed and 2 intra-peritoneal drains were left. During the operation she received 4 units FFP, 2 units blood 4 units of packed cells and remained haemodynamically stable. The patient was kept in recovery room for close monitoring. Within one hour BP dropped again to 100/60 mm Hg, pulse increased to 110/bpm, blood was coming from the drains and the patient was deteriorating. Both surgeons were called again for re-assessment; they decided to re-explore the abdomen. The retroperitoneal haematoma was found to be expanded via the left paracolic gutter, the posterior peritoneum over the haematoma was opened. A voluminous retroperitoneal haematoma (about 3000 ml blood and clot), due to an undiagnosed totally avulsed left kidney, was found. There was severe bleeding from the hilar vessels. The bleeding vessels were clamped and the urologist was called and shared the operating team. A decision of nephrectomy was taken, after a committee, as the left kidney was severely damaged and as a life saving procedure. The urologist tried to feel the other kidney but he failed because of the extensive haematoma. During re-exploration she received, 6 units packed cells, 6 units FFP and IV fluids. After closure of the abdomen the patient was found to be anuric. The urologist preferred to do cystoscopic examination versus right ureteric catheterization but he failed to visualize the right ureteric orifice. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound was done at the theatre and failed to visualize the right kidney. The patient was transferred to ICU, anuric, under sedation on ventilator. She stayed anuric for 2 days in the ICU, after that she was transferred to the postoperative ward. Her postpartum recovery was uneventful apart from progressively increasing kidney function tests. CT was done in the second postoperative day and confirmed the absence of right kidney. She was discharged after 10 days from admission and a haemodialysis twice sitting per week was scheduled for her. The patient now is waiting for compatible kidney transplant. Histopathological report revealed degenerative aneurysmal changes of the renal artery and acute tubular necrosis of the left kidney.