A 23-year-old, Caucasian, right hand dominant male, otherwise healthy, was seen in the emergency department after a skateboard accident. He reported falling onto his dorsal left proximal forearm and experienced immediate pain in the area without other injuries. Physical examination was notable for tenderness over the proximal radius and ulna and limited pronosupination secondary to pain. Plain radiographs demonstrated non-displaced but slightly comminuted, short oblique fractures of the proximal third of the radius and ulna (, ). After discussion with the patient and his family, the decision was made to place the patient in a long arm cast (, ) and follow-up in the clinic in 1 week.
On follow-up, the patient had satisfactory pain control, and the cast was appropriately in position. A hole was cut into the cast so that an ultrasound bone stimulator could be used to promote healing. The stimulator was positioned equidistant between the two fractures. The patient reported some mild increase in fracture site pain in the 1st week with the bone stimulator, but this abated after a few days. The next follow-up visit was 3 weeks later (4 weeks post-injury), and the patient reported significantly improved pain. The cast was removed, and his examination was significant for restoration of pronation and supination to 70 degrees each. Imaging demonstrated appropriate healing of the fracture with callus without displacement or malalignment (, ). Another long arm cast was placed for an additional month, at which time the fractures were completely clinically healed, so a removable splint was placed. With the cast off, the ultrasound stimulator could be placed directly over the fracture sites, one at a time.
On his final follow-up visit, the patient was 3 months out from his injury. He had been continuing to use the bone stimulator and reported no pain. On examination, he had 90 degrees of pronation and supination; wrist extension was 60 degrees and wrist flexion was 80 degrees, all of which were similar to the opposite side. Imaging demonstrated healed radius and ulna fractures with no malalignment (, ). Given these findings, the patient was told to return to baseline activity with the exception of a custom forearm shell splint for skiing and to return to the clinic as needed.