A 35-year-old Congolese immigrant male was admitted to Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital with a 1-week history of colicky abdominal pain, abdominal distension, 3 days of non-bilious vomiting, and failure to pass stool and flatus. He also had difficulty in breathing that worsened over 5 days. There was no significant past medical history of previous abdominal surgeries, trauma, or chronic constipation. He did not report a similar presentation in the past. The patient had a right chest drain inserted by a junior house officer on admission after mistaking the distended right chest for a pneumothorax. The chest drain did not drain anything and there was no bubbling seen in the water seal chamber. This was later reported to the senior medical officer and a point-of-care lung ultrasound was carried out.
The patient was alert, lying in bed with his knees flexed, having difficulty breathing, sunken eyes, dry mucous membranes, blood pressure of 130/96 mmHg, and a pulse of 97 beats/minute. There was no conjunctival pallor or jaundice. His temperature was 37.0 °C and his respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, with oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 86% on room air.
The right external jugular vein was distended. The chest was hyperinflated on the right and with reduced expansion on the right. There was mild tenderness, right-sided asymmetry on respiration, left tracheal deviation, and the apex beat was in the sixth intercostal space, left anterior axillary line. There was hyperresonant percussion note over the right side of the chest with normal resonance over the left side of the chest, as well as absent breath sounds over the right side of the lung, vesicular breath sounds heard over the left side of the lung, and no added sounds. The heart sounds were normal, with no added sounds.
The abdomen was moderately distended and not moving with respiration. There were visible bowel loops in the left upper quadrant. No organomegaly. No peristaltic movements were seen. On palpation, the abdomen was tender, and tense but without guarding or rebound tenderness. Absent bowel sounds on auscultation. A digital rectal examination revealed an empty rectum with no mass in the lumen.