A 57-year-old African-American female presented with hyperpigmented plaques on the face, scalp, arms, hands, buttocks, legs, and feet. She has had similar lesions over the past fifteen years and described them as burning, itchy, and painful.
There were dermal papules on the perinasal and periocular areas. The ears displayed plaques with adherent scale and follicular plugging in both conchal bowls and preauricular regions . The anterior hard palate had diffuse erythema and a small ulceration distally. The dorsal arms and anterior lower legs had multiple 1-4 cm dyschromic annular plaques exclusively in sun-exposed areas with central scaling and hyperpigmented, slightly rolled borders . Induration was present in most of the lesions .
She had been diagnosed with systemic sarcoidosis twelve years prior as well as hypertension and congestive heart failure eight years earlier. Her medications included aspirin, metoprolol, and ibuprofen as needed for pain. The patient reported a history of lupus (unknown subtype) in her maternal aunt and sarcoidosis in her maternal sister and two uncles.
Laboratory studies included complete blood count with differential, complete metabolic panel, brain natriuretic peptide, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and angiotensin-converting-factor (ACE). The only abnormal values were an ESR of 41 mm/h (reference range 0-30 mm/h) and ACE of 73 nmol/mL/min (reference range 9–67 nmol/mL/min).
Given the patient’s history of long-standing lesions; photodistribution; and the presentation of plaques with dyschromia, atrophy, follicular plugging, and raised borders, a diagnosis of CCLE was favored. While the patient had a past medical history of sarcoidosis, her current lesions appeared classic for CCLE and both conditions were present in her family history. Given the information and clinical presentation, a biopsy proved necessary as a purely clinical diagnosis was not adequate.
Two punch biopsies were taken from a plaque on the left arm and sent for histopathology and direct immunofluorescence. Pathology exhibited non-caseating granulomas with multinucleated giant cells and a few lymphocytes at the periphery typical for sarcoidosis. Stains for acid fast bacilli and fungi were negative. Direct immunofluorescence studies were negative. While the cutaneous morphology strongly favored CCLE, there were no histologic findings to support this diagnosis. The patient remained on topical corticosteroids and oral hydroxychloroquine. On one-month and three-month follow-up visits, she had slow but significant improvement in her cutaneous symptoms.