A 27-year-old Indian male was admitted to the Royal Adelaide Hospital in Adelaide, Australia, in August 2021 with a right middle cerebral artery acute ischaemic stroke (AIS). He had no significant medical history, was systemically well, and had lived in Australia since 2014. He awoke with left arm/leg weakness. On initial examination, he was afebrile and in sinus rhythm, with a moderate left facial droop, hemi-hypoesthesia, and mild left-sided neglect. Multimodal computed tomography (CT) brain imaging demonstrated a proximal right M2 occlusion with a moderately sized perfusion lesion (a–c). He was initially treated with aspirin and clopidogrel (endovascular thrombectomy and/or thrombolysis were precluded by mild symptoms and prolonged time from last-known-well to presentation).
On day two post-symptom onset, he developed a junctional bradycardia with absent atrial contraction, suggesting a cardioembolic source for his AIS. On review, the inferior aspect of his CT angiogram demonstrated a mediastinal mass. Given the small infarct volume on magnetic resonance imaging and strong clinical suspicion of malignancy-related cardioembolism he was changed from aspirin and clopidogrel to apixaban (5 mg twice daily).
He underwent a CT Chest/Abdomen/Pelvis which demonstrated a large superior mediastinal mass causing superior vena cava obstruction. Given chronic (asymptomatic) bronchiectasis, tuberculosis was an initial diagnostic consideration and he was placed in isolation on full respiratory precautions. Following subsequent clinical deterioration (below) review of imaging further disclosed a 70 mm × 15 mm left anterior thigh superficial fascia lesion without inguinal or subdiaphragmatic lymphadenopathy, and multiple subtle sclerotic metastatic-appearing lesions throughout the axial skeleton and sternum (a–f).
Pathology results are shown in . Transthoracic echocardiography showed a distorted aortic root with a mass in the interatrial septum towards the aortic root, with probable extension along the roof of the left atrium suspicious for neoplasm or infection. Left ventricular ejection fraction was normal (approx. 65%) with no mitral or aortic valvular abnormalities. Left atrial size was reduced due to the mass, with flow turbulence. Right ventricular size and function were normal.
On day 3, the patient deteriorated neurologically, with progressive left hemiparesis and obtundation culminating in bilateral fixed and dilated pupils. Repeat non-contrast CT (d) demonstrated a large right parietal intraparenchymal haemorrhage with intraventricular and subdural haemorrhagic extension, obstructive hydrocephalus, 17 mm of midline shift and both parafalcine and uncal herniation. He received emergency right hemicraniectomy with haematoma evacuation and intracranial pressure monitor insertion.
On day 4 of admission, a left thigh lesion was noted on further radiological review, then palpated and biopsied. The patient was started on empiric meropenem (2 g 3 times daily) and voriconazole (6 mg/kg twice daily) therapy. Biopsy cultures ultimately grew A. flavus complex.
On day 6 of admission, there were no clinical signs of neurological recovery and he met clinical criteria for brain death . Autopsy showed disseminated A. flavus complex infection involving the brain, mediastinum and left thigh. Angioinvasive right middle cerebral artery embolism with infiltration of the right frontoparietal brain parenchyma was present as the cause of haemorrhagic transformation, presumably embolic from aortic invasion. The 120 mm × 80 mm superior mediastinal mass-forming A. flavus complex infection demonstrated necrotising granulomatous and eosinophilic inflammation encasing the aorta, right pulmonary artery and the superior vena cava, and infiltrating both atria and right ventricular myocardium and endocardium. The 80 mm left thigh soft tissue lesion was confirmed to be granulomatous A. flavus complex mass.