A 40-year-old female with negative smoking and medical history was admitted with productive cough, progressively aggravating dyspnea on exertion, and recurrent pulmonary infections for the previous 2 months. The chest X-ray showed total atelectasis of the left lung , and the thoracic CT-scan revealed a mass of the left hemithorax, which probably originated in the mediastinum and extended to the whole left pleural space . The mass showed heterogeneous density containing soft tissue elements, fat, cystic areas and foci of calcification, which is the classic imaging appearance of a benign teratoma on CT. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to specify the anatomic relationships and confirm the tumor morphologic features. The MRI yielded useful information about the vital structures of the mediastinum, whether invaded or externally compressed by the tumor. Specifically, the MRI confirmed a round, non-homogeneous, well circumscribed mass of a 12 cm diameter, exerting compression on the mediastinum great vessels and the left hilar structures (vessels and airway) . The bronchoscopy found stenosis of the trachea by external compression, and narrowing in the foramen of the left main bronchus resulting in difficulty in the insertion of the bronchoscope. The mediastinal tumor markers (α-fetoprotein and β-human chorionic gonadotropin) were both normal. As the findings of CT and MRI suggested a benign teratoma, a complete resection was contemplated. Since the mass was supposed to be respectable, surgical management was first in the priority list of therapeutic options. The cytological examination through transcutaneous needle aspiration or biopsy of the tumor were considered redundant and were omitted, because of the dispersion risk and the necessity for total removal so as to ameliorate the respiratory function and re-expand the left lung. Moreover, needle biopsy allows examination of only a small amount of tissue and may be inadequate for definitive diagnosis . As already underlined in the literature, diagnosis and therapy rely on surgical excision, and even with large sized tumors whose complete resection is impossible, partial resection still relieves symptoms, frequently without relapse . Pulmonary function tests were impaired: FVC 1.19 (36.7% of predicted) and FEV1 1.01 (41.5% of predicted), whereas a-FP, βCG were normal.
The patient underwent a total resection of the mediastinal mass via a left posterolateral thoracotomy. Entry into the pleural space was performed through the fifth intercostal space, and, because of the tumor large size, extension of the incision was necessary to obtain safe visualization of the cavity and proceed to tumor mobilization. Approaching via left thoracotomy makes access to the mediastinal structures difficult but permits control of the whole hemithorax up to the hilar structures. Many adhesions existed with the left pulmonary artery, the left main bronchus, the pericardium, the aorta, and the diaphragm, and a combination of blunt and sharp dissection for the division was applied uneventfully. Because of difficulty in the mobilization of such a huge mass, a purse string suture permitted aspiration of sebaceous content via a small incision in the wall. As the size diminished, manipulation was facilitated. The tumor, excised en block, was white-gray colored, well circumscribed, and thick capsuled. A tube thoracostomy was introduced, the collapsed left lung was easily re-expanded, and the patient was extubated. The patient recovered well from the operation and was discharged on the 2nd postoperative day. Preoperative atelectasis of the left lung was totally resolved , and the pathological examination revealed a benign mature teratoma with dermoid cyst characteristics, containing sebaceous and gelatinous material. Two years later, the patient is doing well out of recurrence.