This is the case of a 56 year old Caucasian man from Montenegro whose cancer history began in April 2009 after the appearance of progressive abdominal pain due to a retroperitoneum mass measuring 5 × 8 cm. The patient’s past medical record showed no relevant illness. He was an ex heavy smoker and did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. In May 2009 he underwent surgical removal of the abdominal mass achieving a complete margin negative (R0) resection. Histological findings of lesion specimens highlighted a low-grade de-differentiated liposarcoma. He then began follow-up. In November 2011 a computed tomography (CT) scan detected a new retroperitoneal lesion measuring 5 × 10 cm whose imaging features clearly suggested relapsed liposarcoma. He therefore underwent another radical surgery and the second histological examination supported the diagnosis of G2 de-differentiated liposarcoma with myxoid areas. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis for oncogene murine double minute 2 (MDM2) status highlighted the amplification as highly specific diagnostic markers .
After only three months, a new recurrence occurred and owing to the brief relapse-free time he was not considered suitable for additional surgery. Accordingly, he was treated with chemotherapy including three cycles of doxorubicin followed by three cycles of ifosfamide. In spite of chemotherapy, the lesion progressed rapidly reaching 16 × 10 cm and extending into the pre-aortic seat of the retro-peritoneum space. In April 2012 the patient was referred to our Institute and underwent second line chemotherapy with trabectedin at a dose of 1.5 mg/m , administered as a 24-hour continuous intravenous infusion repeated every 21 days. Intravenous premedication was normally used before trabectedin administration and included dexamethasone 12 mg, palenosetron 250 mcg and chlorphenamine maleate 10 mg. Due to the previous chemotherapy treatment, we decided to use prophylactic peg-G-CSF (granulocytes colony stimulating factor) administered the day after chemotherapy. Chemotherapy was well tolerated for the first three courses, and no abnormalities regarding hematological, liver and muscle enzyme levels were present. At this time, the patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 0 and stable disease was documented by an abdominal CT scan examination. Due to no alternative therapeutic options, we decided to continue chemotherapy with trabectedin. Two weeks after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, the patient began to complain of sudden weakness, difficulty walking and diffuse muscle pain. Some days after he was confined to complete bed rest as the muscle pain became unbearable. For these reasons, the patient was urgently admitted to our ward and parenteral hydration and symptomatic therapy were initiated. Laboratory tests found G4 pancytopenia and a marked increase in liver lytic enzymes. At the same time, serum levels of myoglobin, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) showed an increase respectively of eighteen, eight and four times over the upper normal range value . The absence of abnormalities on electrocardiogram and echocardiography ruled out cardiac etiology for the increased serum level of these enzymes. No kidney function injury was present. Due to these clinical and laboratory features, our conclusive diagnosis was of rhabdomyolysis induced by trabectedin.
As the patient had this unusual muscular side effect after the fourth cycle of trabectedin, we explored possible sources that could trigger the potential trabectedin-induced rhabdomyolysis. He did not report any trauma or muscular overexertion. Due to the absence of co-morbidity, the patient had not received any other drugs during treatment with trabectedin. After further questioning in a non-threatening fashion, the patient informed us that he had been taking a commercial folk medicine preparation of chokeberry juice (Aronia melanocarpa) daily during the last course of trabectedin and in the 2 weeks after.
One week after hospitalization and stopping intake of chokeberry extract, CPK and other markers of myolysis slowly returned to standard range and the patient felt a progressive recovery of muscle strength.
The patient was discharged on day 14 when blood transfusion and parenteral hydration gradually reduced general toxicity. A progressive mobilization of the patient was obtained as well as a complete normalization of the laboratory findings .