A 36-year-old, healthy male was accidentally sprayed over the face and trunk with the liquid form of DMAB . He kept on working and did not take a shower until > 1 hr later. He developed dizziness, nausea, vomiting, sore throat, limb numbness, slurred speech, slow motion, lack of concentration, and ataxia by the next morning, 13 hr after exposure. He was admitted to a local hospital, where a normal brain computerized tomogram was noted. Because of worsening clinical conditions, including “masked” face, irritability, awkwardness, and rocking from side to side while sitting on the bed, he was transferred to our hospital 3 days later. Physical examination revealed some abnormal neurologic findings. The patient was oriented as to time and place but was easily distracted. His speech was slurred. Normal muscle power was noted for all four limbs. He could stand on a wide base with assistance but deviated to both sides when attempting a tandem gait. Impairment on finger-to-nose and heel-to-knee tests was also noted. He denied any medical problems such as hypertension, diabetes, and neurologic diseases. He smoked one pack of cigarettes per day and drank alcohol occasionally.
A routine laboratory work-up including complete blood cell count, electrolytes, blood sugar, and hepatic and renal function tests was performed. Mild hyperventilation, with arterial blood gas of pH 7.510, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 30.6 mm Hg, partial pressure of oxygen 100 mm Hg, and bicarbonate 24.7 mmol/L, was found. No drug history, including use of herbal medicine, was noted for the last 3 months. Urinalysis did not detect any illegal drugs, central nervous system-acting drugs, or other medications. Normal blood and urine lead, mercury, and aluminum levels were also noted.
Eight days after chemical exposure, the patient’s electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed diffuse background slowing, indicative of a mild diffuse cerebral dysfunction. Tests of nerve conduction velocity (NCV) for the left-side limbs were normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the eighth day showed a symmetric increase in signal intensity on FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery), T2WI (T2-weighted intensity), and DWI (diffusion-weighted images), but low signal intensity on T1WI without postcontrast enhancement at bilateral cerebellar periventricular areas . A steroid was prescribed for treatment of the possible acute inflammatory effects on neurons. The patient was discharged with stable neurologic function after 6 days of observation.
The pateint was readmitted to our neurology outpatient clinic 18 days after chemical exposure due to difficulty in walking and climbing. Physical examination revealed that the deep tendon reflexes of both knees were areflexic. Muscle power was mildly decreased in the distal and proximal parts of the upper right leg. Lower leg weakness and drop foot were also found bilaterally with muscle power of grade 2/5 in the right foot and 3/5 in the left foot. A nerve conduction study on the 29th day after poisoning showed decreased NCV and complex muscular action potential (CMAP) amplitudes for the left median, left ulnar, left peroneal, and left tibial nerves. H-reflex was absent bilaterally. Sensory conduction and sensory evoked potential tests of the nerves of the upper left and lower left limbs were normal. A brain MRI on the 37th day after poisoning showed that the previous lesions in the cerebellar dentate nuclei region had subsided .
With active physical therapy, the patient could walk straight on a wide base 2 months after poisoning. No dysmetria was noted on the finger-to-nose test, but heel or toe gait was impaired. The muscle power was grade 3/5 in the flexor and extensor of the right foot; 4/5 in the flexor and extensor of the left foot, and others were all 5/5. Weakness in the flexor and extensor of both feet still remained. A repeat EEG was normal. A repeat NCV study revealed no change in polyneuropathy with motor predominant axonal degeneration. The patient receives regular outpatient followups. He still walks with a clumsy gait and has difficulty with hand-grasping activity.