A 79-year-old man became aware of paralysis of his left fingers 2 years earlier. He was diagnosed as having cervical spondylotic amyotrophy and underwent a percutaneous endoscopic cervical posterior herniotomy at another hospital. However, after his surgery, his left finger became completely paralyzed. Furthermore, from 6 months after the initial surgery, he became aware of paralysis of his right upper extremity, gait disturbance, and dropped head. One month of conservative treatment using collar immobilization was used at the other hospital. Despite the treatment, his symptoms did not improve, and ultimately he presented to our hospital. He had a history of hypertension and diabetes. At his initial visit, he had a severe chin-on-chest posture . Neurological examination revealed severe paralysis of his right-side deltoid, biceps, wrist extensor, finger flexor (MMT grade 3), finger extensor (MMT grade 2), and abductors (MMT grade 1). By contrast, his left side upper extremity showed almost complete paralysis. The deep tendon reflex was increased at his lower extremity bilaterally, although it was absent at his upper extremity bilaterally. Because of sustained clonus of his ankle joint bilaterally, he had severe spasticity and could not walk unaided. However, sensory dysfunction was not observed. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score was 9.5 points. X-ray images showed severe kyphosis at the upper thoracic level. The center of gravity line from the head to C7 sagittal vertical axis (CGH-C7 SVA), which measured the deviation of the center of gravity of the head-plumb line (extending from the anterior margin or the external auditory canal) was 135 mm. The C2–C7 angle showed 2° lordosis. Otherwise, the C2–Th5 angle showed 38° kyphosis. Pelvic incidence was 44°, lumbar lordosis was 49°, and C7 sagittal vertical axis (C7-SVA) was 0 mm from the whole spine X-ray image. As the result, he had dropped head due to cervical and upper thoracic kyphosis and thoracolumbar sagittal balance was maintained . MRI and CT myelography revealed spinal canal stenosis at the level of C5–6 because of ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine and C6 root compression on the right side because of a foraminal osteophyte . Although paraspinal muscle intensities were not observed in MRI, serum CK was increased to 584 (U/L). Electromyography showed chronic denervation at lower cervical level (C5–C8) and myogenic pattern at the paraspinal muscles was not observed that suspected the possibility of secondary myopathy. Parkinsonism was not also observed. Diabetes neuropathy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), myopathy, and Parkinson’s disease were excluded by the neurologist because of nerve conduction velocity and findings from electromyography. From the neurology, imaging, and electromyography findings, we diagnosed the pathogenesis of the DHS in this patient as follows: C5–6 anterior horn damage caused DHS as a consequence of back muscle atrophy at the C7 to upper thoracic levels and paralysis of the right finger; right side C6 anterior root damage caused paralysis of the deltoid and biceps; and the C5–6 pyramidal tract sign caused severe spasticity of the lower extremity bilaterally. Despite conservative treatment by collar immobilization, neither the DHS nor paralysis were improved. Therefore, surgical treatment was chosen. A C2–Th5 posterior fusion with C3–C6 laminoplasty and C5–6 foraminotomy on the right side were performed. Immediately after surgery, the complaint of dropped head was improved significantly and bilaterally finger motion was improved slightly. The neck position was maintained and the patient could walk using a circular walker mobility aid at the final follow-up 1 year after surgery. The JOA score was improved up to 10.5 points and the recovery rate of JOA was 13%. At the final follow-up, X-ray imaging showed CGH-C7 SVA decreased to 50 mm and C2–Th5 angle increased to 4° lordosis . Unfortunately, the patient died of pneumonia 2 months after the 1 year follow-up.