We present the case of a 50-year-old Caucasian woman with a vertebral metastasis of a less well differentiated thyroid cancer, who was followed over a three-year period clinically and by spinal FDG-PET and I-131 SPECT imaging after initial surgery. Table chronologically summarizes the treatment modalities, corresponding laboratory test values (thryotropin (TSH) and Tg level) and MI results (FDG-PET and I-131 SPECT) for different time points during follow-up.
Our patient presented to our facility with progressive spinal cord compression. An MRI scan revealed a vertebral metastasis at the T11 level with intraspinal extension compressing the spinal cord. Our patient was operated on via a bilateral posterolateral approach, allowing for tumor resection and stabilization of her vertebral column by Cementoplasty and a posterior arthrodesis. A histopathological examination concluded 'metastasis of a less well differentiated thyroid carcinoma', which was confirmed after total thyroidectomy (follicular thyroid carcinoma pT2 pNx). Following her first radioiodine therapy a post-therapeutic scan revealed multiple lung metastases and further bone metastases at the L3 level, os ilium and left femur; therefore the tumor was staged as M1 (lung, bone). During follow-up our patient received five radioiodine therapies (5.3 to 5.7 GBq each) in total over a two-year period.
During the follow-up period our patient was regularly monitored clinically and by means of a tumor marker (thyroglobulin), PET-CT ([F-18]-FDG) and post-therapeutic SPECT (I-131). Clinically and neurologically our patient was stable over three years of follow-up. Post-therapeutic radioiodine scans showed decreasing uptake in most Pulmonary lesions but remaining uptake in spine lesions . Her stimulated thyroglobulin blood levels dropped from 2356 μg/L at baseline to 939 μg/L following the last radioiodine treatment. However, even after finishing five radioiodine cycles Tg remained on a pathologically increased level, indicating some neoplastic activity. FDG-PET imaging showed slight but remaining hypermetabolism in the lungs whereas in SPECT imaging Pulmonary hyperfixation of I-131 disappeared, most likely indicating dedifferentiation. On the spinal level, SPECT images showed persistent hyperfixation at the operated level (T11) and even higher fixation at the spinal process of L3 suggestive for remaining, more differentiated metastases. FDG-PET, however, showed no hypermetabolism, which correlated with the stable neurological examination results .
After thorough interdisciplinary discussion, despite the remaining I-131 uptake it was decided not to operate again on our patient's spine as she was completely asymptomatic; conventional imaging also remained stable and the neurological risk seemed to be too high for the thoracic level. During further follow-up our patient remained neurologically stable.