A 9-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital with left-sided hydronephrosis for one week.
Due to abdominal pain, the patient underwent an ultrasonic examination in the out-patient department and was diagnosed as having "left hydronephrosis". It was suspected that the left side had the indication of a renal malformation. He was admitted to the hospital with "left hydronephrosis".
The patient exhibited abdominal flatness, a soft abdomen, normal bowel sounds, no varicose veins in the abdominal wall, no tenderness, no rebound pain, no abdominal masses, and slight percussion pain in the kidney.
The following characteristics were observed via an ultrasound (abdominal) exam-ination: The left kidney was enlarged (with a size of approximately 12.6 cm × 6.3 cm × 5.5 cm), the cortex was thin (with a thickness of approximately 1.0 cm), the pelvis was visibly separated, the lower part of the pelvis was obvious and separated within a range of approximately 7.8 cm × 5.9 cm × 5.4 cm, and the upper part of the pelvis was separated, both before and after treatment, with a diameter of approximately 2.2 cm. The size and morphology of the right kidney were normal, with a uniform cortical echo, a clear renal internal structure, no separation of the renal pelvis, and no clear occupying lesions. The upper segment of the left ureter was dilated (approximately 2.6 cm wide), and no significant dilation was observed in the middle and lower segments. No dilation was observed in the right ureter. Bladder filling was optimal, the wall was not thick, but smooth, and there was no abnormal echo inside of the kidney.
The following characteristics were observed via an intravenous pyelography : No positive stones were observed in the abnormalities of the ureters and the bladder on both sides. After the injection of the contrast agent, bilateral ureters and bilateral kidneys were developed. The left renal pelvis was dilated, and the calyx was blunt. The right renal pelvis was not enlarged, no filling defect was observed, and the calyx cup was sharp. The bilateral ureters showed no stenosis or dilations. The bladder was filled, but no defect was found.
The following characteristics were observed via a nuclear medicine examination (ECT): The excretion from the left kidney was not smooth, and the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was slightly reduced. The right kidney function was generally normal. The following results were obtained: After the intravenous injection of a "pellet" tracer, a renal blood perfusion and the dynamic imaging of renal function were immediately performed. The renal blood perfusion imaging and curve exhibited normal renal perfusion. The renal function curve showed that the aggregation segment of the left kidney was available and that the peak time was delayed, thus showing a parabolic curve. The right kidney could be clustered and cleared. The GFR was as follows: 25.47 mL/min for the left kidney and 47.42 mL/min for the right kidney. Based on the kidney image, the left kidney had an irregular morphology, and the size and shape of the right renal shadow were acceptable.
A magnetic resonance examination showed that the left renal pelvis and ureter were significantly dilated, the widest part of the ureter was approximately 29 mm, the left ureter was stenosed in the middle part, the right renal pelvis, calyces, and ureter were not abnormally stenosed or dilated, and no stones were observed.
For the treatment of left renal duplication, kidney seeper, and left ureteral dilation, retroperitoneal laparoscopic nephrectomy and ureterectomy were performed under general anesthesia.
Patients were placed into the right lateral position. After an incision of the upper lumbar triangle was performed in the abdominal cavity, an indicator finger and a balloon expansion were used to establish the pneumoperitoneum . The pressure was observed at 10 mmHg. A 10 mm trocar and laparoscopic lens were inserted, and two trocars (10 mm and 5 mm) were placed in the lower lumbar triangle and the twelve costal tips, respectively.
The left upper kidney was smaller than normal, and the pelvis and ureter were both larger than normal. The junction of the posterior renal fascia and the psoas major muscle was cut open with an ultrasound knife and extended to the upper pole of the kidney. No independent blood supply was found in the lower left kidney. The adhesion between the anterior fascia of the kidney and the posterior peritoneum was separated in the forward position. The peritoneum was broken, and a 5 mm trocar was placed under the xiphoid process, in order to allow for exhaust. The arteries and veins of the left kidney were exposed. The left upper kidney shared the main renal artery with the left lower kidney. There was no obvious boundary between the upper kidney and the lower kidney. The artery clamp was used to block the renal artery. The dilated renal pelvis was cut open, and the colorless clear liquid was absorbed. The duplex kidney was resected along the junction of the pyoid sac wall and the renal parenchyma with an ultrasonic knife. A 1-0 barbed wire was used to continuously suture the renal section, and the renal artery clamp was released. No obvious bleeding was observed. The renal artery was blocked for 40 minutes. The ureters of the left upper kidney and the left lower kidney converged below the level of the iliac crest. The ureter of the left lower kidney became significantly thinner at the junction, and a hemlock was used to clamp the lower kidney ureter. The lower left kidney and ureter were removed from the body with an 8 cm bag and were rinsed. No obvious bleeding was found during the reexamination period. The negative pressure drainage tube was retained in the retroperitoneal cavity and was drilled out of the body under the trocar in the lower lumbar triangle. The following sutures were utilized: A 3-0 absorbable line intermittent suture for the abdominal wall muscle, a 4-0 absorbable line inter-mittent suture for subcutaneous tissue, and a biological protein adhesive for the skin. A pull film was used to tighten the skin of all of the incisions, and a dressing was used to cover the incisions.
The patient was safely returned to the ward postoperation, with 100 mL of bleeding and no need for a blood transfusion. The left lower kidney and ureter were sent for pathological examinations.
The postoperative recovery consisted of diet, optimal consciousness levels, and good spirits. After a conventional anti-infection treatment, a total volume of 116 mL of the postoperative peritoneal drainage was drained (which was clear after bleeding), and the drainage tube was extracted on the third day after the surgery. On the sixth day after the surgery, the patient met the discharge indications and was discharged for treatment. The following pathological diagnoses were made: Lower left atrophy of the renal parenchyma, decrease of glomerular number with fibrosis, decrease of renal tubules in several regions, epithelial hyperplasia of the collecting tubes, and inter-stitial fibrous tissue hyperplasia with lymphocyte infiltration. The renal pelvis was dilated, the mucosa exhibited chronic inflammation, the epithelium underwent atrophy and became thinner, and the subepithelium underwent interstitial fibrous tissue hyperplasia, which conformed to the hydronephrosis change. There was also ureteral cystic dilation, with chronic inflammation of the mucosa.