A 56-year-old Caucasian man with type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura status post splenectomy in 1979, and remote testicular cancer status post orchiectomy and radiation therapy in the 1970s was admitted with 2 days of progressive fatigue, exertional dyspnea, low back pain and cranberry-colored urine. He had been started on metformin 500 mg twice a day 4 days previously for type 2 diabetes but called in to his physician the following day with complaints of "palpitation, heavy breathing, and tossing and turning last night" after taking the metformin, which he declined to continue. Two days before admission he was seen at an outside emergency room with hematuria and anemia; he was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection and started on oral ciprofloxacin. His other medications were pantoprazole, levothyroxine and glyburide. On the day of admission, vital signs were temperature 37.1°C, pulse rate of 133 per minute, respiration rate of 32 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 155/84 and pulse oxygen 94% on 6 liters O2. Physical examination was significant for respiratory distress, scleral icterus and generalized jaundice. There was no jugular venous distention and no enlarged thyroid gland or lymphadenopathy. His lungs were clear, heart sounds were distant, his abdomen was soft without masses or enlargement of organs, he had no rashes and no peripheral edema. Mild lumbar and thoracic spinous tenderness was noted; neurological examination revealed mild lethargy but otherwise normal mental status, with no focal findings. Laboratory studies were significant for hemoglobin of 6.6 g/dl, which had dropped from 14.7 g/dl 4 days before, total bilirubin 6.6 mg/dl (direct 2.7 mg/dl), reticulocyte count 3.51%, lactate dehydrogenase 4829 U/l, and haptoglobin less than 6 mg/dl, all consistent with severe hemolysis. The direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test (DAT) was positive for anti-IgG and negative for anti-C3. The peripheral blood smear on admission significantly showed no schistocytes; 4% immature granulocytes and 4% nucleated red blood cells (RBCs) were noted. Other significant findings included marked leukocytosis to 46.1 K/cmm, acute renal failure, elevation of troponin-I and marked transaminase elevations (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1711, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 806) with normal international normalized ratio and alkaline phosphatase. Blood and urine cultures showed no growth. Despite treatment with corticosteroids and transfusion of packed RBCs, the patient became increasingly dyspneic and agitated, complained of abdominal pain and developed hypotension followed by cardiorespiratory arrest approximately 8 hours after admission. Over the next 4 hours he was treated following the advanced cardiac life support protocol for recurrent bouts of pulseless electrical activity and asystole, with worsening hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. Despite transfusion, hemoglobin was noted to have declined to 3.3 g/dl. The patient died approximately 12 hours after admission.