A 67-year-old man visited the emergency department of our hospital for “repeated fever for more than 10 d”. The patient did not present with any signs of abdominal pain or vomiting.
For more than 10 d, the patient had chills and a fever (38.3 °C) due to a cold. The patient took some medications (unspecified by the patient), and his symptoms were slightly alleviated. He experienced repeated episodes of chills and fever in the afternoons, with a maximum body temperature of 38.8 °C, along with occasional nausea and vomiting of the gastric contents. His symptoms were not alleviated after vomiting or taking oral cold and flu medications. Therefore, he came to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) performed at the outpatient clinic revealed a liver abscess. The patient was admitted to the hospital for treatment on April 15, 2020. Since the onset of the disease, the patient had a poor appetite, a normal urine output, and no significant weight loss.
The patient had a history of coronary stent implantation due to occlusion of the descending branch of the coronary artery (myocardial infarction) in 2008. After the operation, he began taking oral medications, including clopidogrel (Plavix) 75 mg qd, simvastatin 10 mg qd, and aspirin 100 mg qd. He had discontinued the aspirin on his own accord 1 mo prior to his visit. Additionally, his history included cerebral infarction, which occurred in 2019, and the muscle strength in his left arm and leg was rated grade 4 and grade 3, respectively, after admission to our hospital.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
The patient was conscious with stable vital signs: Body temperature, 36.4 °C; pulse rate, 83 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 130/80 mmHg. His abdomen was soft, with tenderness in the upper right quadrant. No rebound pain was noted, and muscle tone was normal. The liver was not palpable under the costal margin. Pain was induced in the liver region on percussion. No oedema was noted in either lower limb.
Blood analysis revealed the following: White blood cell count, 6.90 × 109/L; neutrophil percentage, 84.4%; haemoglobin, 122 g/L; and platelet count, 316 × 109/L. The procalcitonin was 0.61 ng/mL. Biochemical analysis revealed the following: Total protein, 70.3 g/L; albumin, 27.5 g/L; creatinine, 50.9 mol/L; urea nitrogen, 3.12 mol/L; prothrombin time, 15.6 s; prothrombin activity percentage, 57%; activated partial prothrombin time, 44.4 s; and D-dimer, 1.25 μg/mL. The findings of routine urine and stool examinations were normal, as were the findings of electrocardiography and chest X-ray examinations .
CT images showed multiple low-attenuation masses with unclear boundaries in the right lobe of the liver. A lesion measuring 9 cm × 8 cm was located in the upper posterior segment of the right lobe. A diagnosis of a liver abscess was considered .