A 66-year-old female with a medical history of previous smoking and chronic depression had recently been prescribed 6 weeks of oral metronidazole 500 mg three times daily along with amoxicillin and clavulanic acid for pleural empyema. After 34 days of treatment, she noticed paresthesia of toes and fingertips. On day 36 of treatment, she had a seizure with loss of consciousness, facial contractions, shivering of the arms, and prolonged awakening. She was brought to an emergency department where physical examination, ECG, and brain CT were normal, and was discharged without neurological consultation. The following days, she felt unwell and on the day 45 of metronidazole treatment, a second seizure occurred, after which she was admitted to our Department. The husband had witnessed a few minutes of unconsciousness accompanied by contractions of the upper extremities and biting of the tongue followed by prolonged reawakening. Both seizures had been preceded by nausea and a tightening epigastric sensation. Neurological examination revealed decreased sensation of touch distally on upper and lower extremities but was otherwise unremarkable. Point-of-care arterial lactate upon admission was elevated (6.3 mmol/L). EEG, ECG, and blood samples, including kidney and liver function, hemoglobin and coagulation factors were all normal, except marginally elevated leukocytes and platelets (respectively 11.5 × 109 cells/L and 484 × 109 cells/L). Brain MRI with gadolinium contrast was performed the day after admission and showed only slight cortical atrophy; however, interpretation was impaired by poor image quality due to movement artefacts. Over the following 5 days, the patient further developed multifocal myoclonus, cognitive impairment as well as truncal and limb ataxia. Moreover, she had several focal seizures in her face and arms. On day 7 after admission, clinical suspicion of metronidazole-induced encephalopathy arose, and metronidazole was discontinued. Lumbar puncture showed normal protein, glucose, and cell counts. Brain MRI with gadolinium contrast was repeated on day 8 after admission, and metronidazole encephalopathy was confirmed as the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence showed characteristic symmetrical hyperintense signal changes in the pons and dentate nuclei . The patient reported improvement 3 days after discontinuation of metronidazole. The patient was discharged 17 days after admission. At this time, she had completely recovered except decreased sensation of the feet. The sensory disturbances were ascribed to metronidazole-induced polyneuropathy, and the patient was referred to nerve conduction studies. Follow-up brain MRI 6 months later showed complete remission of the hyperintense signal changes in the pons and dentate nuclei .