A 24-year-old female was admitted to the emergency room after a motor vehicle accident caused by a witnessed generalized seizure while driving. An initial computerized tomography (CT) scan of the head showed a left temporal intraparenchymal hemorrhage , thus the patient was started on levetiracetam and transferred to our hospital. Her Glasgow coma scale was ten on arrival to our center (E3 V2 M5). A second CT scan of the head was performed revealed an increase in the size of the intraparenchymal hemorrhage and adjacent mass effect, with 6 mm of midline shift. A cranial CT angiography showed thrombosis of the left transverse and sigmoid sinuses extending into the internal jugular vein [ and ]. Her only additional injury was a left ankle fracture requiring conservative treatment. The patient was taking oral contraceptives and did not have a personal or family history of known bleeding or clotting disorders. Her social and medical history was unremarkable. The patient underwent emergent left craniotomy with evacuation of the temporal intraparenchymal hemorrhage and placement of a subdural intracranial pressure monitor. Postoperatively, she was admitted to the ICU, presenting a 4+/5 paresis in the right upper limb and mild motor dysphasia after anesthetic wean that recovered completely the following days. A postoperative CT scan showed resolution of the midline shift and an appropriate evacuation of the temporal hemorrhage . A low-dose heparin drip was initiated to treat the cerebral venous thrombosis 48 h after the surgery and transitioned to full dose the following day.
The patient’s initial blood test revealed pancytopenia that worsened over the 1st days: the initial white blood cell count was 2 × 10/l, with a red blood cell count of 3.43 × 10/l, platelets of 13 × 10/l, and a hemoglobin count at 10.6 g/dl; blood test results 2 days after admission showed a white blood cell count of 1.7 × 10/l, a red blood cell count of 2.14 × 10/l, platelets of 10 × 10/l, and a hemoglobin count at 6.7 g/dl, therefore, the patient received one unit of red blood cells. A peripheral smear displayed features suggestive of APML. Initial testing for Factor V Liden, prothrombin gene mutation, hepatitis C panel, HIV, antinuclear Ab, anticardiolipin IgG/IgM/IgA, beta-2glycoprotein G/M/ IgA, MTHFR, and JAK2 V617F was all negative. A bone marrow biopsy was performed on the 4th postoperative day.
The fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of the bone marrow sample revealed dual fusion signals in the 15;17 probe set, indicating PML/RARA fusion and confirming the diagnosis of APML. The treatment with arsenic trioxide was consequently started, and the heparin drip was switched to subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) at a therapeutic dose 2 weeks after the surgery. She experienced a progressive neurological recovery with complete resolution of the motor dysphasia and right upper limb paresis, and is currently completing the antineoplastic treatment with good response.