A 67-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) via emergency medical services (EMS) after an initial call for chest pain. On initial assessment by EMS personnel, she complained of both chest pain and back pain that had been ongoing for several days. While en route to the ED she had sudden onset of paraparesis and increased emotional distress. There was no report of any recent trauma. Review of systems was otherwise negative.
Her initial exam revealed blood pressure of 165/99 mm Hg and otherwise normal vital signs. Pulses to all extremities were 2+, warm and well perfused. Strength was 5/5 in bilateral upper extremities, left lower extremity was 4/5 and right lower extremity was 0/5. Reflexes were normal in the upper extremities and on the left lower extremity but were absent on the right lower extremity. Initial laboratory studies including complete blood count, coagulation panel and basic metabolic panel were unremarkable, except for a mildly elevated high-sensitivity troponin of 23 nanograms per liter (ng/L) (reference range less than 12 ng/L), which did not have a significant change on repeat evaluation.
Imaging studies of the chest, abdomen, pelvis, and spine were obtained. An initial portable chest radiograph identified prominence of the aorta, which was attributed to technique. Computed tomography (CT) angiography of the aorta revealed an intramural hematoma extending from just proximal to the left subclavian and extending into the abdomen and including the renal arteries ( and ). No dissection flap was identified, but there was a potential ulceration described as “tiny” in the thoracic aorta. Spinal and brain CT imaging did not reveal any acute abnormalities.
Cardiothoracic and vascular surgeons were emergently consulted. Initial plans were developed for blood pressure control using clevidipine; however, after establishing concern for spinal cord ischemia (SCI) the recommended treatment was to maintain a goal mean arterial pressure (MAP) between 70–90 mm Hg to optimize spinal cord blood flow, as perfusion to the dominant segmental arteries was presumed to be impaired due to pressure from the hematoma.
The patient was rapidly admitted to the surgical critical care unit where a spinal drain was placed to reduce intrathecal pressure and promote perfusion from both the involved and uninvolved segmental arteries to the spinal cord by optimizing the perfusion gradient between systemic and intrathecal pressure. After drain placement, the patient had mild improvement in her weakness of the left lower extremity but persistent weakness of the right lower extremity. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) drainage was maintained for approximately 48 hours and weaned without neurological worsening. During her intensive care unit course she had additional improvement in right lower extremity strength. She did require clevidipine early in her course and norepinephrine infusions during sleep to keep MAP within the 70–90 mm Hg range. Use of both antihypertensive and pressors enabled the team to strike a balance between the risk of uncontrolled hypertension causing further intravascular hematoma formation and providing optimal perfusion to the spinal cord during the period of critical collateral formation. At the time of discharge from the hospital the patient had persistent, right-sided lower extremity weakness, but was able to perform activities of daily living with assistive devices.