A four-year-old female child from a rural background of Haryana presented to Pediatric Surgery outpatient department with complaints of abdominal lump for previous one month and bleeding per vaginum off and on for 7 days. She had started having pain abdomen for last 4 days as well which was sort of continuous. There was no history of fever or any alteration in bladder or bowel habits. There was no relevant past medical or surgical history. On examination, the patient was afebrile, moderately nourished and stable hemodynamically. Abdominal examination revealed a hard, non-tender, unevenly surfaced lump of about 20*20 cm with indistinct margins present in and involving pelvic, bilateral iliac, umbilical, bilateral lumbar and epigastric quadrants of the abdomen . It seemed to arise from the pelvis as the lower limit of the lump could not be reached and was movable to some extent in supero-inferior and lateral directions. Systemic examination, all hematological and routine investigations were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a large, lobulated, solid-cystic, pelvic lesion measuring 20*18 cm extending upwards and involving major part of the abdominal cavity. On abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), there was a large lobulated, mixed (solid & cystic) heterogenous signal intensity space occupying lesion in abdomen & pelvis measuring 19.2 * 16.0 * 19.2 cm; most likely a teratoma . The patient was taken up for surgery and was operated upon by the first author who has an experience of 14 years of managing pediatric and neonatal surgical cases in the only government tertiary care centre of the state catering to a large population of patients. On abdominal exploration, there was a large lobulated mass arising from and involving the right ovary and occupying almost the whole abdomen. There was about 50 ml of clear serous fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Bilateral fallopian tubes and uterus were free from any obvious tumor infiltration . Right oophorectomy with excision of the attached mass along with adjoining segment of the right fallopian tube was done. The cut section of the mass showed multilobulated grey-white necrotic and hemorrhagic areas with some cystic areas as well . The post-operative period was uneventful. Histopathological examination of the submitted mass confirmed the diagnosis of immature teratoma and yolk sac tumor . The resected segment of ipsilateral fallopian tube was free from tumor infiltration. Patient was discharged on fourth post-operative day in fair health. She is on a regular 3 monthly follow-up in outpatient department for last one and a half year. She is asked about any new complaint and investigations in the form of complete hemogram, urine examination, liver and kidney function tests, chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasonography are done on each visit. There is no evidence of any tumor recurrence till the last visit 1 month ago.