A man in his late 70s (76-year-old) had a history of left kidney stones, hypertension, and early-stage gastric cancer. He had been diagnosed with left hydronephrosis and left and right renal cysts 15 years ago; however, his urine occult blood test results were negative, and he was under observation. In September XXXX, he visited the Department of Hepatology, Biliary and Pancreatic Diseases because he was aware of a bulge and pain in his left abdomen. At that time, he was referred to the Department of Urology because ultrasonography showed marked exacerbation of the left hydronephrosis. CT showed marked enlargement of the left kidney and bladder dilatation. He underwent urinary catheterization for suspected aggravation of hydronephrosis due to urinary retention; however, the hydronephrosis did not improve. Nephrostomy, cystocentesis, and drainage were performed in October. The patient showed improvement, but in January XXX1, fever and hematuria developed. Imaging studies revealed suspected hemorrhage in the left renal cyst. Although there was no clinical evidence of malignancy, the left kidney was in a non-functional state, and nephrectomy was performed in March. During the period between urological consultation and surgery, cytological examination was performed with four types of materials: nephrostomy urine, renal cystocentesis fluid, indwelling catheter urine, and bladder lavage fluid. However, urothelial carcinoma could not be diagnosed preoperatively. The patient was pathologically diagnosed with urothelial carcinoma (pT4) arising from the renal pelvis . Three months after the surgery, liver and lung metastases appeared, and chemotherapy was administered. The patient died 5 months after surgery.
For renal cyst puncture fluid, specimens were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min, and the sediment was smeared using the grating method. For nephrostomy urine, catheter urine, and bladder washing, specimens were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min, and 2% polyethylene glycol and 70% ethanol were added to the sediment, followed by cell collection and smearing using an autosmear.
Atypical cells with enlarged nuclei and irregular nuclear shapes were observed in the inflammatory background with hemorrhage . Because of the small number of atypical cells and high degree of cellular degeneration, it was difficult to differentiate between benign and malignant cells. Finally, the cells were judged to be atypical.
Among the large amounts of necrotic material, inflammatory cells, and red blood cells, atypical cells with enlarged nuclei and uneven nuclear size appeared in small clusters . The presence of vacuolated, pale cytoplasm led to a diagnosis of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. An additional smear was prepared, and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining was performed. The cytoplasm was negative for PAS staining, which is unusual for clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Immunostaining using the cell transcription method showed that atypical cells were positive for GATA3 and negative for PAX8, indicating that the cells were not renal carcinoma. Cell atypia was too mild for suspicion of high-grade urothelial carcinoma, and the cells were judged to be atypical. In addition, intracytoplasmic lumina (ICLs) were observed in some atypical cells.
On the hemorrhagic background, there were slightly large clusters of degenerative atypical cells , similar to those in the renal cyst puncture fluid, as described above. These atypical cells showed enlarged and irregular-shaped nuclei with nuclear maldistribution. Since the possibilities of those degenerative change could not be excluded out, the mildly hyperchromatic cells were cytologically diagnosed merely as atypical.
On the hemorrhagic background, some atypical cells with a slightly higher nuclear-cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio than the previous test results were observed . These atypical cells were suspected to be high-grade urothelial carcinoma, as they showed increased nuclear chromatin, irregular-shaped nuclei, high N/C ratio, nuclear maldistribution, and nuclear enlargement. Because only a small number of cells appeared, it was judged as suspicious for malignancy.
Since ICLs were found in the renal cyst puncture fluid, we focused on the ICLs and performed specimen recirculation. ICLs are classified as type A, with secretions in the lumen, or type B, without secretions . The number and type of ICLs appearing were measured in nephrostomy urine, renal cystocentesis fluid, indwelling catheter urine, and bladder lavage fluid. The results of recanalization showed no ICLs in nephrostomy urine, but they were found in specimens of renal cyst perforation fluid and urine from indwelling bladder catheters .
The excised left kidney was 165 × 90 mm, 339 g, and the excised material consisted almost entirely of masses . On the circumferential surface, a substantial cystic whitish mass was observed, and most of the renal parenchyma was replaced by these neoplastic lesions . Both the renal pelvis and ureter were dilated, and no obvious stenosis was noted. Histologically, the tumor showed diffuse growth of spindle-shaped, round to polygonal, highly atypical cells with large irregular nuclei in a plump to irregular pattern . Some of the lesions were clearly keratinized and differentiated into squamous epithelium . Intraepithelial carcinoma was also observed in the renal pelvis. The non-neoplastic pyeloureteral epithelium and intraepithelial carcinoma were near each other, and although direct continuity was not apparent owing to epithelial shedding, it was thought that there was continuity . The intraepithelial component of the tumor extended into the ureter. The tumor invaded the perirenal adipose tissue from the renal pelvis across the renal parenchyma and left adrenal gland, which was resected at the same time. The left ureteral margin was negative. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CK7 and p63, partially positive for CK20, negative for PAX8 and vimentin, and were diagnosed as high-grade urothelial carcinoma (pT4) with squamous differentiation . The distributions of high-grade urothelial carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are shown in Fig. c.