A 72-year-old man presented to our department with a sudden headache. Neurological examination on admission revealed a Glasgow coma scale score of 15 (E4V4M6). No neurological deficit was observed, and the World Federation of Neurological Surgeons score was Grade I. Computed tomography of the head revealed subarachnoid hemorrhage, classified as Fisher Group 3. Emergency cerebral angiography of the left internal carotid artery revealed that the left anterior cerebral artery coursed anteromedially and downward after division from the internal carotid artery, turned in an extreme acute angle, headed upwards, and ran posteriorly over the corpus callosum as a pericallosal artery. The anterior communicating artery was not visualized, and the Heubner artery branched from the A1 segment. Based on this characteristic course, we suspected it to be a PPOA . A 4-mm saccular aneurysm was found at the inward corner of the hairpin turn of the PPOA. No other abnormalities causing bleeding were observed .
Based on the findings, we diagnosed the condition as subarachnoid hemorrhage due to a ruptured aneurysm of PPOA. The patient had emphysema before admission, and ventilatory defect developed after administration of general anesthesia. Therefore, a direct open approach by craniotomy was considered difficult, and endovascular surgery was performed.
A 7 Fr Launcher (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was placed in the left internal carotid artery from the right femoral artery, while maintaining the activated clotting time >200 s under administration of systemic heparin, and 4.2 Fr ASAHI FUBUKI (ASAHI INTEC, Aichi) was guided to a C2 portion of the internal carotid artery as an intermediate catheter. From there, the Excelsior SL-10 reshaped J microcatheter (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was guided into the aneurysm with Transend EX platinum (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). A cage was formed with Axium PRIME 3D (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Three coils were inserted into the aneurysm, and nearly complete occlusion was achieved [ and ].
Postoperatively, the patient showed no symptomatic cerebral vasospasm and was discharged from the hospital 1 month after surgery without neurologic deficit. Cerebral angiography before discharge showed favorable embolization of the aneurysm.