A 48-year-old woman developed tinnitus and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Nasopharyngoscopy examination and biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, thus, she received the anti-tumor therapy of a combination of docetaxel, cisplatin and fluorouracil (TPF: docetaxel used on the first day at 75 mg/m2, cisplatin used on the first and second day at 75 mg/m2 and fluorouracil used from the first day to fifth day at 500 mg/m2) which was repeated every four weeks. The patient complained of visual loss in the right eye two weeks after the first cycle of chemotherapy, and she received the second cycle of chemotherapy as planned.
One week later, she visited an ophthalmologist for the first time because of progressing vision loss, and visual acuity was tested (VOD: visio oculus dexter, for the right eye; VOS: visio oculus sinistra, for the left eye). Her visual acuity had a decrease of 0.6 in the right eye (VOD = 0.4) compared to the original value (VOD = 1.0), and the relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was tested for the right eye. She had a history of high myopia and amblyopia in her left eye evidenced by the low visual acuity (VOS=CF/25 cm, meaning that she could only count fingers at the distance of 25 cm ahead). The current vision impairment in her right eye therefore seriously affected her quality of life. Ophthalmoscope examination and fundus photograph showed optic disc edema, fuzzy boundary and linear hemorrhages in the right eye . Typical fundus changes of high myopia were observed in the left eye, such as atrophic arc around optic disc, fuchs spot and tigroid fundus . The cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provided evidence of no tumor involvement in orbits and central visual pathways . The long optic axis of the left eye is a typical feature of high myopia eyeball . The patient received neurotrophic drug treatments including mecobalamine and citicoline. Three weeks later, the visual acuity in the right eye decreased to 0.3 and the signs of optic disc mentioned above also existed.
About one week after the third cycle of chemotherapy, she visited the ophthalmologist for the third time. The VOD was determined to be 0.3. The optic disc edema subsided, the upper part of the optic disc became gray and residual retinal hemorrhage was located on the inferior rim. Macular pucker, depigmented macules and hard exudate were observed in the macular area . The optic disc optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the right eye showed that the thickness from the internal limiting membrane to the retinal pigment epithelium (ILM-RPE) at the superior side and nasal side was thinner than that in normal eyes . Visual field (VF) examination of the right eye indicated severe visual field defects . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) as the most important assistant examination revealed an early phase capillary underdevelopment at the nasal and superior temporal area of the optic disc and a late phase capillary fluorescein leakage . Thus, a diagnosis of NAION was made for the right eye, and gradually reduced high-dose oral prednisone along with neuroprotective drugs were used for treatment. Meanwhile, retrobulbar injection of compound betamethasone (1 ml) combined with eye drops of ocular hypotensive agents were given to the right eye.
One month after finishing three cycles of induction chemotherapy, concomitant intravenous antitumor therapy with radiotherapy was started. Due to the suspicious ocular toxicities of cisplatin, Nimotuzumab, a targeted agent, was recommended as an alternative treatment. The patient made the fourth visit to the ophthalmologist, and the VOD of the right eye was determined to be 0.4. The optic disc edema subsided with clear boundary, but the color of the optic disc was still gray . OCT showed the secondary macular epiretinal membrane . The VF improved obviously compared with the image three weeks ago, which means the function of the optic nerve had been partially repaired . The ERG results of the right eye showed that the amplitudes of a-type and b-type wave, as well as P1-type wave were almost normal, suggesting the normal function of the retina . The incubation period of P100-type wave in P-VEP test was lengthened, indicating that the function of optic nerve was partially impaired .
After finishing radiotherapy, the patient had not been treated with chemotherapy for 3 months. She made her follow-up visit at the ophthalmic clinic and the VOD improved to be 0.5. Moreover, the color of the optic disc was not as gray as before while the macular epiretinal membrane still existed . The amplitude and incubation periods of P2-type wave from the right eye were almost normal in F-VEP-1HZ test, which signified that the function of the optic nerve had been mostly repaired . About 7.5 months after chemotherapy, the patient’s visual acuity remained at VOD 0.5. The VF of her right eye improved dramatically . The results of ophthalmologic examinations during her follow-up period are presented in Table .