A previously healthy 10-year-old boy without relevant past medical history suddenly suffered headache and vomiting. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed a bleeding in the right thalamus associated with intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus. Contrast-enhanced brain CT scan was performed but was not conclusive to detect a vascular pathology . Clinically, he was alert, without motor or sensitive impairment. Digital subtraction angiography showed a ruptured right thalamic AVM with a maximal diameter of 3.9 mm, with a single feeder arising from the right TTA, an intranidal aneurysm and a single draining vein to the right superior thalamic vein and internal cerebral vein .
Endovascular treatment was decided. Under general anesthesia, the right femoral artery was approached and a Chaperon 6F guide catheter (Microvention Terumo, Tustin, CA, USA) was advanced over a 0.035-inch guidewire into the right internal carotid artery. Then, a Magic 1.2F microcatheter (Balt, Montmorency, France) over a 0.007-inch Hybrid microguidewire (Balt) were navigated into the right PcomA. A superselective injection showed the nidus fed by a single-feeder arising from the TTA of the PComA. Under road-mapping, the TTA was catheterized without complications. A new superselective angiogram showed the AVM nidus, an intranidal aneurysm, the blush of the right thalamus and a single draining vein to the superior thalamic vein. Due to the thalamic blush and the high risk of infarction, the transvenous approach was decided. Thereafter, the right femoral vein was approached and a 6F Envoy (Codman, USA) guide catheter was navigated over a 0.035-inch guidewire into the right internal jugular vein. Under road-mapping, the detachable tip microcatheter Sonic 1.5F (Balt) over an Hybrid 008 microguidewire (Balt) was navigated through the transverse sinus, straight sinus, right internal cerebral vein, and right superior thalamic vein to the AVM nidus, and the microcatheter tip was placed as close as possible to the AVM nidus. Once in the correct position, precipitating hydrophobic injectable liquid (PHIL 25%; Microvention, Tustin, CA, USA) was injected manually during a period of 10 min and a total obliteration of the nidus was achieved . Immediate control angiogram showed the absence of the nidus and under fluoroscopy the cast of the embolic agent was in accordance with the nidus.
Immediate brain CT scan was done and no bleeding was detected . After the procedure, the patient was awaken and without neurological impairments. He was discharged home on the 2nd postoperative day. One-month follow-up showed a clinically intact patient with Modified Rankin Score of 0. Six-month angiographic follow-up revealed no nidus.