A 52-year-old multiparous African American woman presented from an outside hospital after syncope. The patient had a 2-day history of heavy vaginal bleeding passing large clots and suprapubic pain. She denied any vaginal pain, dysuria, hematuria, or frequency. She had a remote history of a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy secondary to leiomyomata.
The initial pelvic examination revealed blood clots in the vagina along with a friable, fibrous ulcerated lesion on the anterior suburethral vagina, just left of the midline measuring 4 × 2cm. The lesion was actively bleeding and necrotic, but did not appear to extend beyond the sidewall. Biopsies of the specimen were insufficient for diagnosis revealing blood and necrotic material. A computed tomography scan revealed a soft tissue mass within the lumen of the vagina and an enlarged lymph node located within the right ovarian chain . A staging positron emission tomography scan was performed revealing hypermetabolic activity in the mass and of nodes in the bilateral distal common, left external and bilateral internal iliac chains.
On hospital day (HD) 2, the patient underwent an examination under anesthesia with repeat biopsies. With improved visualization, the ulcerated mass was noted to be 4.5 × 2.5cm in the mucosa of the anterolateral vagina left of the midline parallel to the urethra. Beyond the lesion, inspection of the surrounding vaginal anatomy revealed otherwise normal vaginal mucosa. The parametria and cul-de-sac were normal and smooth bilaterally. Based on this examination and clinical presentation, concern was for vaginal squamous cell carcinoma. However, the pathology was again non-diagnostic.
During HDs 3 through 5, the patient’s bleeding had decreased significantly, and she was asymptomatic. On HD 6, a second examination under anesthesia again revealed biopsies negative for malignancy. A Tonsil clamp was placed into the urethra and visualized through a breach in the vaginal wall around the vaginal mass. The urology service was intraoperatively consulted, and the diagnosis of urethral diverticulum at the 5 o’clock position was confirmed. Cystoscopy confirmed a urethral defect toward the right distal aspect and another area of communication near the 7 o’clock position. The diverticulum was then excised, and a multilayered repair over the Foley catheter was performed.
On postoperative day 9 the patient re-presented with bleeding. An examination under anesthesia revealed several rejected sutures in the necrotic tissue. These were removed, and interrupted mattress sutures were placed to reapproximate the tissue. Final pathology revealed benign squamous mucosa.
In the urology clinic 2 weeks later, a voiding cystourethrogram was performed revealing no extravasation from the urethra or bladder. A physical examination revealed proper vaginal healing and no defects.