The patient was a 29-year-old female, a herder by occupation. The place of residence was a traditional husbandry area. About 3 months before admission, the patient developed a mass on the left neck with no obvious incentive, with a diameter of 2 cm and no obvious tenderness. The mass gradually increased within 3 months, and by the time of admission, the mass had grown to a size of 6 × 5 cm. One month after the appearance of the mass in the neck, the patient found that a mass with similar characteristics also appeared in front of the left shoulder joint, and gradually increased to an area of 5 × 4 cm on admission . The patient had no other systemic specific complaints or positive signs, no family history, and was admitted to the hospital 5 years ago for surgery for a breast abscess. Diet and sleep were normal and there were no manifestations of wasting disease. X-ray and CT examination found that the patient's cervical vertebrae were mildly lateralized to the affected side, and the left clavicle showed swelling bone destruction, combined with cystic masses in the surrounding soft tissues, considering the possibility of echinococcus granulosus cyst . There were sporadic nodules in both lungs of the patient, some of which were cystic, and the rest were calcified . Consider that the patient is more likely to suffer from pulmonary echinococcus. Since there was no significant discomfort, the patient decided to treat the skeletal lesion first and treat the pulmonary hydatid with medication and follow-up. Serological examination (colloidal gold) suggests that the patient's serum is positive for anti-Echinococcus granulosus natural antigen antibodies: anti-EgCF antibodies( +), anti-EgP antibodies( +), anti-EgB antibodies( +), anti-Em2 antibodies(-). There were no specific manifestations in the rest of the patient's blood examinations. After discussion by the medical team, it was decided to treat the patient with surgery and remove the clavicle completely. Surgery process: After general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position with a pillow to elevate the shoulder of the affected side. A horizontal incision of about 10 cm in length was made with the cyst at the front of the shoulder joint and below the outer clavicle (hereinafter referred to as the lateral cyst) as the center, and the skin and dermis were incised layer by layer. A cyst with a size of about 8 × 6 × 5 cm was seen under the skin. blunt dissection . Subsequently, the same surgical incision was made with the cyst in the anterior chest wall and the medial clavicle as the center. Exploration revealed a cyst about 10 × 4 × 3 cm in size (hereinafter referred to as medial cyst), wrapping the medial side of the clavicle and extending to the sternoclavicular joint . Cut the surface of medial cyst and see several daughter cysts of different sizes inside. Remove the daughter cysts one by one and then remove the remaining external cyst . After that, the lateral cyst was completely removed from the root . Careful exploration showed that there were no residual cysts in the subcutaneous cavities on both sides, and the lateral and medial cysts were not connected under the skin. The incision was soaked in 20% hypertonic saline for 30 min . Next, separate the adhesion around the clavicle, expose and disconnect the acromioclavicular joint and sternoclavicular joint, and pay attention to protecting the branches of the supraclavicular nerve . Pull out the complete clavicle from the medial incision , rinse with hypertonic saline again, and then close the surgical wounds on both sides layer by layer. Inspection of the resected cyst and clavicle. An increase in clavicle volume is seen, with several bony cortical defects in the anterior aspect of the sternal end, the anterior aspect of the acromion end, and the area where the posterior subclavian groove joins the conoid tubercle, with significant local thinning of the bone cortex of the lesion and several daughter cysts visible inside . The excised bone tissue specimens are sent for pathological examination. Foreign body granuloma formation is observed next to the bone cortex, and the characteristic endocyst structure of the hydatid cyst is seen within the local granuloma, including the outer cell-free laminar compression-like structure and the inner germinal layer, with fibrous tissue proliferation and histiocyte aggregation in the background . The Patient's postoperative subcutaneous drainage device was removed as scheduled, and the wound healed well without secondary infection. The patient was given oral albendazole at 20 mg/kg per day according to body weight in 2 oral doses for 1 month after surgery, for a total of 5 courses of treatment with a 1-week interval. The patient was instructed to perform functional exercise of the left shoulder 2 weeks after surgery. At the one-year postoperative follow-up, no new cysts were found locally. The patient expressed satisfaction with the treatment effect. Except for the inability to engage in prolonged or strenuous weight-bearing activities, the patient believed that the function of her upper limb could meet the basic needs of life.