A 33-year-old woman with a 27-year history of poorly controlled focal seizures and focal seizures evolving to bilateral convulsions presented to our clinic. She had multiple prior hospitalizations resulting in the addition, deletion, or dose adjustments of several antiseizure drugs (ASDs). Her ASDs at the time of presentation included phenobarbital 60 mg in the morning and 90 mg at night and levetiracetam 1500 mg, topiramate 150 mg, and lacosamide 200 mg twice daily. She could not tolerate clobazam or valproate (the latter due to elevated liver functions).
Prior to this episode, the patient had 2 hospitalizations in the same month. During the first, she was given propofol and midazolam to control SE, which resulted in hypotension and respiratory failure managed successfully with fluids and mechanical ventilation, respectively. During the second admission, she presented with focal seizures and was found to have NCSE on EEG successfully treated with an IV ketamine infusion of 0.5 mg/kg/h that was tapered off over 2 days. The day after discharge from that hospitalization, she had recurrence of a generalized tonic-clonic seizure at her residence, which lasted approximately 45 s. After termination of her generalized tonic-clonic seizure, she remained confused with development of unilateral facial and eye jerking. She was unresponsive for 10 min until she reached the emergency department (ED).
In the ED, the patient’s mental status was waxing and waning with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 10. She also had subtle bilateral eye twitching with occasional left gaze deviation and left beating horizontal nystagmus. Eventually, she developed intermittent bilateral upper extremity subtle jerking movements and the Glasgow Coma Scale score improved to 14 with mild confusion.
The patient had no seizure precipitants such as infection, stress, sleep difficulties, or medication noncompliance. Her noncontrasted magnetic resonance imaging and head computed tomography were negative for structural abnormalities. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid was negative for an infectious etiology, and her paraneoplastic panel, done during a hospitalization within the past month, was negative. Her metabolic profile was negative for any electrolyte disturbances, and her drug screen was negative. ASD levels were within the therapeutic ranges.
The patient’s STAT EEG showed rhythmic 2.0- to 2.5-Hz delta activity with occasional spike-and-wave morphology consistent with electrographic seizure . The electrographic and clinical findings were consistent with NCSE, and she was admitted to the neurology intensive care unit. In view of the hypotension and respiratory failure associated with prior anesthetic medications and previous good response with ketamine, IV ketamine infusion was started and titrated to 1.25 mg/kg/h. Enteral ketamine was initiated on hospital day 2 (1 day after IV ketamine was started) and increased each day to a final dose of 250 mg twice daily. Enteral ketamine was prepared according to a previously developed protocol by the Mayo Clinic Department of Pharmacy. Ketamine infusion was decreased starting on the same day as initiation of enteral ketamine and subsequently titrated off by hospital day 5. Table depicts the electrographic, clinical, and ketamine administration events from admission to discharge.
After termination of NCSE, the patient received a vagal nerve stimulator and was subsequently discharged home with enteral ketamine 250 mg twice daily, phenobarbital 60 mg in the morning and 90 mg at night, levetiracetam 1500 mg and topiramate 175 mg (increased from 150 mg) twice daily, and perampanel 2 mg at night started on day 3 of admission after discontinuation of lacosamide.
For the next 6 months, the patient had no major episodes of SE and did well except for 3 brief hospitalizations for breakthrough seizures. Her seizure frequency decreased more than 50% with the addition oral ketamine and perampanel. No adverse events or dissociative symptoms were noted. She discontinued enteral ketamine after 6 months by tapering its dosage by 50 mg over a 10-week period. As of her 14-month follow-up visit in our epilepsy clinic, she has had no further events after discontinuing oral ketamine.