A 46-year-old male patient was examined in May 2015 due to tympanic effusion and right-sided hearing loss. The patient had a history of diabetes insipidus centralis of unknown aetiology, diagnosed in 2008. A 18F-fluoro-D-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography /computed tomography (PET/CT) showed multiple FDG-avid lesions in the skull base, the temporal bone, the mandible and maxilla, but no lesions outside the head and neck area. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the same region showed a mass in the right-sided infratemporal fossa, erosions of the skull base and the alveolar ridge.
Due to the osteolysis of both the upper and lower jaw, the patient was transferred to our clinic. Here we conducted a cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) to determine the extent of the osteolysis. Clinically, an exposed alveolar ridge and ulcerative granulation tissue was present in region 45–47 and in the left upper jaw . Past medical history revealed that multiple teeth had been extracted by different dentists, and that the extraction sites showed prolonged or incomplete healing.
Initially, the MRI showed an infiltrating mass in the central part of the right medial infratemporal fossa. There were osseous defects in other areas of the skull base and in the lower right alveolar ridge.
The PET/CT of the skull, showed complete obliteration of the right middle ear and the mastoid cells as well as a soft tissue swelling in the external auditory canal of the right temporal bone. Further, a soft tissue lesion was seen in the right-sided skull base involving the temporal bone. FDG-PET/CT confirmed increased metabolic activity of the lesions in the right infratemporal fossa, in the tip of the mastoid and in the right horizontal mandibular ramus Fig. ). The localization of the other lesions is shown in Fig. . The biggest and most important lesion was situated in the right skull base with lysis of the petrous apex, the otic capsule, clivus, carotid canal, hypoglossal canal, jugular foramen and expansion in the retrostyloid space. No other clinical factors were present and there was no evidence of metabolically active local lymph nodes.
As the low-dose CT scan from PET/CT did not allow sufficient assessment of the mandibular bone structures, a CBCT was performed at our clinic (Accuitomo 170, Morita, Japan). The CBCT showed significant bone loss in the right mandible up to the level of the inferior alveolar nerve. In the left upper jaw, a complete resorption of the alveolar ridge was seen .
As the MRI showed a necrotic tumour in the region of the petrous apex, this area was selected for biopsy. Due to the delicate location of the bone lesion between the temporal bone and the middle ear, a preliminary computer assisted transnasal biopsy was carried out by the ENT department. The biopsy was taken from the pharyngeal recess in the right nasopharynx next to the petrous apex. Biopsy samples showed respiratory mucosa fragments with chronic and partially purulent inflammation with focal eosinophilia. No evidence of malignancy was seen, ancillary histochemical stainings showed no evidence of fungal infection. A second, more extensive excisional biopsy showed soft tissue with chronic inflammation and marked eosinophilia . At high power magnification mononuclear histiocytic cells with irregular nuclei admixed with small lymphocytes and eosinophilic granulocytes were observed, raising suspicion for a histiocytic disorder. Immunohistochemical stains highlighted expression of CD1a, Langerin (CD207) and S-100 , consistent with the diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Molecular studies showed absence of mutations in Exon 15 of the BRAF gene (i.e. no BRAF V600E mutation), instead a 6 base pair deletion in exon 3 of the MAP2K1 gene (p.E102_I103del) was found. A bone marrow biopsy ruled out infiltration by LCH. Lumbal puncture revealed no evidence of malignant cells.
Diabetes insipidus centralis, which was persisting since eight years, was defined as having been caused by the LCH. The interdisciplinary tumour board, based on the extension of the disease with affection of the skull base, decided to treat the patient with chemotherapy (Cytarabine). As this disease is rare in adults, there is currently no randomized clinical trial in adults and no therapeutic standard is defined. Retrospective data indicates that Cytarabine is more effectively compatible in adults with LCH with predominant involvement of the bone and the central nervous system compared to the pediatric standard of Vinblastin/Prednison . Prior to this treatment, tooth 48 was extracted due to extensive perifocal bone resorption. The chemotherapy was conducted with Cytarabin (150 mg/m2 day 1−5 intravenous during one hour, repetition day 29). Further a PET/CT was taken two and six months after the start of the chemotherapy. After that, PET/CT’s were taken every 6 months. After six cycles of chemotherapy, the patient clinically showed complete soft tissue healing and stable bone lesions in the CBCT . FDG-PET/CT showed a significant metabolic response of lesions . Overall, the patient primarily received 12 cycles of chemotherapy, and due to residual activity, another six cycles of chemotherapy. Two years after diagnosis the patient is in good general condition with no signs of recurrent disease.