A 29-year-old right-handed female with no previous medical condition has presented with sudden onset right-hand pain, swelling, and stiffness at the MCPJ level for 4 days. She denied any history of trauma, fall, recent repetitive athletic activity, or a feeling of a sudden snap sensation involving her hand.
She had a history of similar symptoms in 2012 at the level of the distal interphalangeal joint, where she was diagnosed with reactive arthritis and treated with oral penicillin. She claims to have had a similar presentation the following year and was treated with antibiotics. She has no family history of similar symptoms and no record of any inflammatory diseases in the family. However, she has a habit of continuously snapping her fingers.
In addition, she complained of diffuse bluish discoloration of the fingertips and joint pain when exposed to cold temperatures. She is a medical doctor, but her routine job involves typing on a computer. She also has a longstanding habit of cracking her knuckles.
Upon examination, she had moderate swelling and tenderness over the dorsal aspect of the right third and fourth digits, with maximum tenderness over the level of the metacarpal heads . Furthermore, an active range of motion causes pain and discomfort more pronounced with active extension. Her left hand was not swollen and was non-tender. Flexion at the MCPJ produced pain and ulnar dislocation of the extensor tendon at that level of the third and fourth digits in both hands. Moreover, she had ulnar dislocation of the extensor tendon of the right fifth digit. In full extension, the extensor tendons were centralized. She was treated conservatively by strapping the third and fourth digits, and a wrist splint was applied; she improved within 5 days.
Blood investigations were also done, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibodies, which were all negative. Plain X-rays at the time showed no fractures, dislocation, bony erosions, or arthritis.
A specialist musculoskeletal radiologist performed a dynamic ultrasound. A 15-MHz linear transducer was used. Focal zone, imaging depth, and post-processing parameters were optimized for musculoskeletal imaging. The common extensor tendon dorsal to the MCPJ in the affected finger and the same tendon in the contralateral asymptomatic finger were either passively or actively flexed or extended. A pad made of a towel and a large amount of transmission gel were used ( and ). The ultrasound images established the presence of the sagittal bands in all extensor tendons bilaterally. The diagnosis of bilateral sagittal band rupture was confirmed with the images showing ruptured bands in multiple digits of both hands. Radial sagittal band rupture was seen in both hands’ third and fourth digits, in addition to ulnar sagittal band rupture in the fifth digit of the right hand. The extensor tendons of the first and second digits were intact bilaterally. Moreover, the thickness of the sagittal bands was measured and confirmed to be within the normal range, which measured 1–2 mm, and preserved a normal morphological appearance. No signs of the inflammatory process could be appreciated to involve the tendons or the underlying joint. Bilateral hand magnetic resonance imaging was done and showed the presence of sagittal bands in all digits .
At the 12-month follow-up, the examination revealed reduced swelling and a full range of motion of the hand joints. However, the extensor tendon dislocation at the level of MCPJs persists.