We report the case of a 47-year-old white male smoker with a family history of lung cancer. No major comorbidities were reported. Initially, he presented with sudden dyspnoea on exertion, without any other symptoms such as fever, weight loss, or night sweats (B symptoms in lymphoma clinical presentation). The haemodynamic parameters were stable (BP 140/90 mmHg, HR 70 b.p.m.) and the physical examination was normal. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed right axial deviation and high T waves in precordial leads. He underwent chest computed tomography (CT) for suspicion of pulmonary embolism (PE). Computed tomography imaging showed a filling defect ∼22 mm in diameter at the origin of the pulmonary artery causing severe stenosis. Although the patient was started on anticoagulant therapy, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) confirmed a fixed 17 × 13 mm sessile mass at the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT), just before the pulmonary valve, and severe stenosis of the pulmonary artery main trunk, with a maximum gradient of 100 mmHg and a mean gradient of 68 mmHg (n.v. maximum gradient <36 mmHg).
The right ventricle was mildly dilated, hypertrophic, and showed a mild decrease in contractile function . To investigate the nature of the lesion, the patient underwent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which characterized the sessile mass as a 13 × 53 mm fibrous vegetation next to the anterior leaflet of the pulmonary valve that extended to the pulmonary bifurcation . For the high suspicion of a neoplastic origin, the patient underwent 18fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT. Unexpectedly, PET showed an area of intense glucose uptake at the superior lobe of the left lung, in the subpleural region. The patient was re-admitted with a second CT that showed persistence of the pulmonary artery mass despite anticoagulant therapy with warfarin (2 months) and no peripheral filling defects of the pulmonary arteries. The CT also revealed a 7 cm-wide solid neoformation at the superior lobe of the left lung. An ultrasonography (US)-guided biopsy of the lung parenchymal area was therefore performed. The pathology report was consistent with a pleomorphic high-grade sarcoma. A team including an US specialist, a cardiovascular surgeon, an oncologist, and a pathologist was assembled to decide the best therapeutic management. No surgical approach was possible, so the patient was started on first-line chemotherapy including doxorubicin (25 mg/m2 per day, Days 1–3) plus ifosfamide (10 g/m2 over 4 days), with mesna (0.5 g/m2 by intravenous bolus before ifosfamide, 1.5 g/m2 concurrent with ifosfamide, and 1 g/m2 orally 2 and 6 h after completion of ifosfamide infusion) and pegfilgrastim (6 mg subcutaneously, Day 5) as support, in 3-week cycles, up to a maximum of six cycles. After 3 months, the clinical condition of the patient worsened, with chest pain and rest dyspnoea occurrence. The restaging CT and MRI showed no change in the size of the pulmonary artery mass , but an increase in the size of the pulmonary mass, which now reached a diameter of 18 cm . Moreover, a new lesion was observed in the inferior lobe of the right lung. According to response evaluation criteria in solid tumours (RECIST), the patient was considered to have progressive disease, and therefore, a second line of chemotherapy was started, consisting of gemcitabine (900 mg/m2 on Days 1 and 8) and docetaxel (70 mg/m2 on Day 8) in 3-week cycles. After 5 months, the patient died.