A 54-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in a comatose state. Radiological examinations revealed a subarachnoid hemorrhage from a ruptured aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery. She underwent urgent external ventricular drainage positioning followed by cerebral angiography, resulting in a successful occlusion of the aneurysm with endovascular coiling. After the procedure, she developed a status epilepticus, which was efficaciously treated. A cerebral angiography showed a moderate distal vasospasm and an MRI demonstrated an ischemic area in the left precentral frontal lobe with no clinical correlation. She was discharged and transferred to a rehabilitation hospital.
Seven months later, a follow-up cerebral angiography showed a recanalization of the aneurysm, which required retreatment. At that point, she had also developed severe hypertension and was able to suspend antiepileptic treatment. During retreatment, intravenous nimodipine was administered because of ongoing vasospasm throughout the procedure. Endovascular treatment was prolonged due to a complex vascular anatomy: after unsuccessfully attempting to perform a stent-assisted coiling procedure, a coiling-only procedure was carried out, thus resulting in a much larger volume of contrast medium administration. Final sequences documented no vessel occlusion or emboli. The patient emerged from general anesthesia with severe right hemiparesis and complete aphasia. A postoperative CT scan showed an edematous area in the left cerebral hemisphere, an abnormal subarachnoid contrast enhancement zone (probably secondary to contrast extravasation) and a focal left parasagittal frontal hyperdense area . A new CT scan performed at about 20 h after a neurological deflection showed a new left parasagittal frontal hypodense area at the vertex and in the left precentral gyrus (territory of the middle cerebral artery). It also showed a resorption of the subarachnoid hyperdensity, supporting the hypothesis of contrast medium extravasation due to disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) . An EEG showed a significant epileptic activity, whereupon the patient was administered antiepileptic drugs.
During the following days, her speech and right hemiparesis gradually improved, although she could only compose short sentences and was still not able to walk autonomously. An MRI performed at 6 days revealed a hyperintense signal on FLAIR sequences in the left cortical precentral gyrus (as in case of vasogenic edema), corresponding to a hyperintense signal on DWI sequences with no alteration of the ADC maps, thus excluding any signs of new ischemia . An MRI performed 6 months later showed the same radiological alterations .
After 6 months of rehabilitation, the patient improved clinically, being left with a mild dysarthria and a mild right monoparesis, but having regained the capacity to walk and live autonomously.
The patient’s clinical course and radiological findings suggested a possible permanent neurotoxic effect of contrast medium during coil embolization.