A 34-year-old North African man, with a medical history of BD, presented to the Emergency Department in February 2022 with a two-week history of haemoptysis and dry cough. He had no signs of active BD and was not on any medical treatment. Blood pressure at admission was 110/70 mmHg; heart rate was 100 b.p.m.; and oxygen saturation was 99%.
Upon physical exam, a tricuspid regurgitant murmur was revealed. There were no signs of right-sided cardiac failure. NT-proBNP was 737 ng/L (<125 ng/L). C-reactive protein was 88 mg/L (<5 mg/L). A thoracic contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a right posterior basal segmental artery aneurysm measuring 12 mm of diameter, associated with multiple arterial thrombi in the segmental and sub-segmental arteries of the inferior lobe. The COVID-19 PCR assay was negative. The patient was initially treated by embolization with a favourable clinical response. He was discharged from the hospital with azathioprine 2 mg/kg/day, oral corticosteroids (1 mg/kg), and rivaroxaban 20 mg.
Two months later, he was readmitted to the pneumology department for recurrent haemoptysis. A new thoracic CT scan showed a left segmental pulmonary embolism, resolution of the aneurysms, and hypodense material in the right ventricle compatible with a thrombus. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) confirmed the diagnosis of multiple endocavitary thrombi: the largest one of 41 × 16 mm located at the level of the free wall of the right ventricular attached to the lateral region of the tricuspid annulus, one at the level of the right ventricular apex, and one of 18 × 14 mm in the right atrium close to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve ( and , ). Left and right ventricular systolic functions were normal, and there was a moderate tricuspid insufficiency.
A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 7 days later and confirmed the presence of two large thrombi—one of 16 × 13 mm in the right atrium and one of 34 × 11 mm attached to the lateral trabeculations of the right ventricle ( and , and ). Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was of 45% with diffuse hypokinesia and a discrete left lateral subepicardial delayed-hyper-enhancement suggesting a sequela of myocarditis. Treatment with a vitamin K antagonist (VKA)—acenocoumarol—was initiated and the patient was dismissed.
The patient was readmitted 2 months later to the department of cardiology for New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class 3 dyspnoea. A TTE was repeated showing persistence of right cardiac thrombi in spite of well-conducted VKA treatment. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 40% with diffuse hypokinesia. Given the persistence of cardiac thrombi, VKA was replaced by intravenous unfractionated heparin and aspirin 80 mg was added for its antithrombotic action. Bisoprolol 2.5 mg and lisinopril 2.5 mg twice a day were added to the therapy. UFH was administered for 2 weeks, daily monitored by the APPT. Acenocoumarol was reintroduced, and the patient was discharged on VKA.
After 3 months, the patient was asymptomatic at the cardiac ambulatory follow-up, with a TTE demonstrating an obvious decrease in the size of the two thrombi, hypertrabeculation of the right ventricle and a high insertion of the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve inducing a moderate tricuspid insufficiency mimicking an Ebstein disease (ED) . The LVEF had returned to normal. A new cardiac MRI showed in comparison with the previous examination: a nearly complete resolution of the cardiac thrombi, new onset of subendocardial delayed-enhancement of the right ventricle suggesting myocardial fibrosis and an improvement of the LVEF (50%) . There were no anomalies of implantation of the tricuspid valve, and there was persistence of left lateral subepicardial delayed-hyper-enhancement suggesting a sequela of myocarditis.
The patient was still treated by VKA, aspirin, azathioprine, and oral corticosteroids. Bisoprolol and lisinopril were discontinued at the patient’s request.