A 43-year-old Caucasian man with history of premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and mild-moderate left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with normal LV dimensions on echocardiogram performed at an outside institution was admitted from the clinic after a second opinion with a chief complaint of increasing palpitations over a period of 2 months. The patient did not smoke, denied chest discomfort, shortness of breath with daily activities, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and orthopnea. There was no history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, coronary artery disease (CAD), and no family history of premature CAD or stroke. The patient also did not have a recent history of severe illness, respiratory or otherwise, or travel outside of the United States.
On physical examination, the patient appeared physically fit in no apparent distress. The vital signs were temperature 97.8 F, blood pressure 137/71 mmHg, heart rate 45 beats/min (bpm), respiratory rate 18 breathes/minute, and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. There was no jugular venous distention and no carotid bruits. Lungs were clear to auscultation. Palpation of the heart was unremarkable. The heart rate was regular with an occasional premature beat. The first and second heart sounds were normal, and no murmurs, rubs, or gallops were appreciated. The abdomen was soft, nontender, nondistended, with no hepatosplenomegaly. There was no peripheral clubbing, cyanosis, or edema. No skin lesions were noted.
Laboratories were notable only for hyperlipidemia ; cardiac troponin T, creatine kinase (CK), CK-myocardial band, and brain natriuretic peptide were all within normal limits. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a junctional rhythm with frequent PVCs and a right bundle branch morphology . Repeat echocardiography was notable for mild-moderate dilation of the left ventricle, with overall mild-moderate reduction of LV systolic function with an ejection fraction (EF) of 40%. The basal-to-mid inferoposterior wall was akinetic, and the inferior wall and apex were severely hypokinetic. The LV wall thickness was normal and the right ventricular (RV) size and function, atria, pericardium, and pleura were each normal. A standard Bruce Protocol exercise stress test was carried out to assess for potential underlying etiology that led to the patient’s ECG findings with exercise . The patient exercised for 15 min and 15 s, achieving a maximum heart rate of 160 bpm (90% of the maximum predicted for the patient’s age) and blood pressure of 166/70 mmHg. No ischemic symptoms or ST-segment changes were noted. There were multiple PVCs present during exercise with triplets and three 5-beat runs of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) during the recovery period.
A diagnostic right and left heart catheterization with coronary angiography was performed. The filling pressures (mmHg) were as follows: right atrium 10/9, right ventricle 28/4, pulmonary artery 26/10, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 14 with ventricular waves to 18, LV end diastolic pressure 12, aorta 126/76 with no gradient on pull-back across the aortic valve. The wave forms were not suggestive of a restrictive pattern. Coronary angiography revealed no significant CAD .