A 76-year-old woman with diabetes presented with abdominal enlargement below the umbilicus. A cutaneous fistula with the purulent discharge was noted on the left side of the umbilicus. On physical examination, the patient was afebrile and presented slight abdominal tenderness. Urine analysis revealed pyuria (10–19/hpf), whereas laboratory tests revealed a slightly elevated white blood cell count (9,800/μL). However, levels of C-reactive protein (0.01 mg/dL) and tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, 0.50 ng/mL; cancer antigen 19–9, 6.39 U/mL; alpha-fetoprotein, 1.3 ng/mL) were within normal limits.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-enhanced mass in the lower umbilical area involving the rectus abdominis muscle and showed high uptake (SUV max = 16.49) on 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) CT , suggesting malignancy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the mass was isointense on T2-weighted imaging and hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging . Furthermore, the mass was connected to the restiform structure, which was supposed to be the urachus . The mass had an irregular medial surface and was connected to the small intestines; this arrangement was suspected to be an invasion of the greater omentum and small intestine . Collectively, these findings suggested a urachal carcinoma that had invaded the small intestines. Cystoscopy revealed no apparent tumor or swelling suggestive of a submucosal tumor. Additionally, the urine cytology result was class 2.
Surgical resection of the tumor was performed after urachal carcinoma was diagnosed. Subcutaneous adipose tissue around the cutaneous fistula was resected; however, no obvious neoplastic lesions were found. When the rectus abdominis muscle was divided at the midline, a hard mass was noted on the peritoneal surface. The mass adhered tightly to the ileum, at 340 cm from the ligament of Treitz; therefore, partial resection of the small intestines was performed. As the tumor did not extend to the bladder, partial resection of the bladder dome was not performed.
On pathological evaluation, the ileal mucosa was observed at the border between the tumor and the ileum and protruded without an accompanying muscularis propria; thus, the structure was considered as a pseudodiverticulum. Additionally, this pseudodiverticulum had been infiltrated by neutrophils and formed an abscess . There was no evidence of neoplastic lesions at any of the sites evaluated. The pathological diagnosis was abdominal wall abscess caused by perforation of an ileal diverticulum. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient had not experienced a recurrence of abdominal wall abscess 12 months after surgery.