The patient was a 53-year-old man who was referred to our hospital because of an abnormality at a medical checkup. He did not have a medical checkup for more than 5 years. He sometimes had a feeling of mild chest tightness. Chest X-ray showed an abnormal mass in the right pericardial region . Physiological and laboratory examinations were normal. Tumor markers, including soluble IL-2 receptor, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP), were within the normal ranges. He had no remarkable medical history or history of trauma. He smoked one pack of cigarettes per day.
Preoperative computed tomography (CT) showed a large, superior-to-anterior mediastinal, fluid-filled and well-demarcated cyst. The cyst extended from the superior mediastinum caudally on the right atrium to 18 cm in size. The anterior–posterior component measured 5.6 cm. There were septations and spotty calcification, but no solid component in the cyst, which had a slightly greater CT attenuation than water . The remainder of the findings were unremarkable. Chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the lesion had a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and no findings of hemorrhaging or a solid component . Radiologically, the provisional diagnosis was a cystic thymoma, thymic cyst, lymphangioma, cystic teratoma or pericardial cyst.
Despite the mild state of his symptoms, we decided to surgically remove the cyst because of the possibility of the coexistence of varied malignancies or the induction of critical manifestations if it ruptured, including hemorrhaging or compression of the surrounding structures. Total thymectomy under mediastinal sternotomy was performed with the successful removal of the intact cyst. During the surgery, a well-encapsulated and thin-walled cyst filled with serous fluid was observed in the superior-to-anterior mediastinum that adhered to the internal thoracic artery but did not invade it. We did not need to divide any thoracic major vessels because the cyst was separated from them. The tumor was 15 × 8.5 × 2 cm in size with grayish-white discoloration . The cut surface revealed a multilocular cyst in the right upper pole of thymus . In addition, a microscopic examination of the tumor showed that the cyst was lined by cuboid cells and underlying loose connective tissue with remnants of thymic tissue . Immunohistologically, the epithelial lining of the cyst was diffusely positive for calretinin, and there was cytoplasmic positivity for cytokeratin 7 and calretinin , confirming mesothelial differentiation. Similarly, the septum was made of cuboidal cells with the same immunohistological findings as the cyst wall. No malignancy was identified.
Based on these findings, the pathological diagnosis of intrathoracic mesothelial cyst of the mediastinum was made. The patient was discharged without any post-operative complications 7 days after the operation, and was followed up for 2 months post-operatively without any recurrence.