The case presented is a 62-year-old man, sexually active with the occasional intake of Tadalafil 5mg. His past medical history was unremarkable. In particular, he did not have any thromboembolic risk factors. He had a normal body mass index (BMI), and he did not have a smoking habit.
He presented to the emergency department of our Institution for severe dyspnoea, fatigue, and dry cough. On presentation, his temperature was 39°C, his heart rate was 75 beats/min, respiratory rate was 25/min, blood pressure was 130/75, and SpO2 was 78%. A nasopharyngeal swab specimen was obtained showing SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Due to worsening hypoxia despite the supplemental oxygen, an attempt to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) was carried out. A chest CT scan showed diffuse and bilateral ground-glass thickening, negative for pulmonary thrombus embolism. SARS-CoV-2-related pneumonia was diagnosed.
The patient’s condition continued to deteriorate, and he was subsequently treated with supplemental oxygen via a heated high-flow nasal cannula.
Three days after admission, due to worsening respiratory dynamics, the patient required orotracheal intubation after sedation with etomidate, fentanyl, and rocuronium. PCMV (pressure-controlled mechanical ventilation) and prono-supination cycles were started, and sedation was maintained with propofol and fentanyl.
After 21 days, an attempt to extubation failed and a percutaneous tracheostomy was performed.
During the long hospitalization, amine support with norepinephrine had to be set up several times. Moreover, multiple cycles of target antibiotic therapies were administered.
The patient underwent cycles of conventional continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration due to his critical status with acute kidney failure.
From a cardiological point of view, echocardiology showed slight septal hypertrophy with neither pathological dilatation nor valvulopathy nor pulmonary hypertension, normal contractility, and preserved global systolic function.
The patient required blood transfusions and on one occasion a reaction with erythema and hypertensive elevation was recorded.
During the patient stay in intensive unit care (ICU), he was noted to have an erection of unknown duration.
On urological examination, the corpora were approximately 70–80% rigid, without glans tumescence.
At the time of the urological consultation, the patient’s blood tests showed moderate leukocytosis (11.59 x109/l) with neutrophilia (10.20 x109/l), hemoglobinemia 101.0 g/l, hematocrit 29.9%, albuminemia 29.9 g/l, PCR 154.0 mg/l, procalcitonin 9.08 µg/l. The ionogram was regular except for a slight hypermagnesemia (2.9 mg/dl); coagulation tests showed a slight decrease in prothrombin time and aPTT, fibrinogen 6.84 g/l and D-dimer 5600 µg/L.
Ongoing therapy included midazolam 3mg/h, propofol 80mg/h, enoxaparin 4000UI twice a day, fentanyl 0.5 µg/kg/h, rocuronium 5mL/h, furosemide 60mg die to have a diuresis of 150mL/h.
Initial corporal blood gas was consistent with ischemic priapism with pH 7.142, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) 81.8 mmHg, and 19 partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2).
Subsequently, 16-gauge needles were placed in bilateral corpora cavernosa with trans-glandular access, and other 2 blood gas analysis of the corpora cavernosa were carried out .
Corporal aspiration was performed with injection of 200 μg of intracavernosal phenylephrine resulting in detumescence.
Throughout his hospitalization, he experienced no further thromboembolic complications, and priapism did not reoccur.
After 98 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged with a rehabilitation program and clinical follow-up.
The patient reported complete erectile dysfunction. A dynamic penile US was performed showing normal echogenicity of the corpora cavernosa and regular response to extracavernous injection of Alprostadil 5 mcg, with the satisfactory erection of approximately 40 minutes.
The patient currently achieves a satisfactory erection by taking as needed a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor at minimal dosage.
Hormonal status was assessed demonstrating luteinizing hormone 5.37 U/L, follicle-stimulating hormone 20.5 U/L, testosterone 352 ng/dL.