A 70-year-old man presented with a worsening headache. The patient was suffering from aggravated dementia, diplopia, right dysplasia, and gait disturbance for 6 months. On hospital admission, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor in the sella turcica; however, neurological and ophthalmological examinations did not reveal apparent visual loss. The diplopia was confirmed through vertical and horizontal eye movements. The revised Hasegawa dementia scale (HDS-R) and functional independence measure scores were 22 and 109, respectively. Laboratory tests revealed that pituitary hormone was normal. Further MRI revealed homogeneous tumor enhancement, intratumoral hemorrhage, and the tumor extended into the clivus. The cerebrum and cerebellum were atrophic and superficial cerebral siderosis was confirmed in both hemispheres . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) did not reveal cerebral aneurysms, vascular stenoses, or vasospasms and whole-spinal MRI did not reveal any bleeding lesions. In addition, computed tomography (CT) angiography and digital subtraction angiography did not reveal cerebral aneurysms or vascular malformations. Therefore, the preoperative diagnosis was a nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma with apoplexy.
The patient underwent extended transnasal endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery in the supine position under general anesthesia. After preparing a pedicled nasal septal flap and opening the sphenoid sinus, we found a thin wall in the sella turcica and clivus. A dural incision was made and the tumor containing the acute and chronic hematomas was exposed . To preserve the pituitary stalk and gland , the tumor was removed along the margin between the tumor and the arachnoid. During tumor removal, part of the arachnoid was torn due to its adhesion to adjacent nerves and arteries. After nearly total tumor excision, except for the tissue around the nerves or arteries, we confirmed that the arteries were intact. Hemosiderin was observed on the cerebral surface [-]. The abdominal fat tissue was placed in the removal cavity to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage. The sella turcica and clivus dura were closed using the fascia and a nasal septal flap to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
After surgery, the patient remained intubated and unconscious. Postoperative CT imaging on postoperative day 1 showed pneumocephalus and low-density areas in the bilateral insular and frontotemporal cortices, with no intracranial hemorrhage . The patient underwent the CT imaging on the postoperative day 1, 5, and 7. Postoperative pneumocephalus gradually decreased while the low-density areas were visualized. On postoperative day 5, as the patient’s respiration became stable, the patient underwent an MRI examination. An MRA examination was performed to identify the cause of the postoperative low-density areas. MRI and MRA revealed acute ischemic lesions in the left thalamus, bilateral insulae, caudate nuclei, and temporal and frontal cortices [ and ], with diffuse vasospasm in the bilateral middle cerebral arteries which was not observed preoperatively. The vasospasm was identified also in the distal middle cerebral artery . Further, CT angiography, cardiac echography, carotid artery sonography, and lower limb sonography did not reveal any embolic source. The patient was extubated 7 days after surgery, but his impaired consciousness persisted. Electroencephalography revealed continuous generalized delta and theta activity accompanied by spike waves, suggesting nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE). In addition, a gradual increase in the ventricular size indicated hydrocephalus. The patient was administered levetiracetam (3000 mg daily) and underwent lumbar peritoneal shunt surgery. Although the patient was able to communicate, he was listless with persistent severe cognitive impairment (an HDS-R score of 12). The mean functional independence score was 45. Meningitis did not occur postoperatively. Postoperative hypopituitarism such as adenohypophysis and diabetes insipidus did not occur either. The patient underwent a gastrostomy due to insufficient oral intake on postoperative day 49. Following gastrostomy, the patient was transferred to another hospital to continue rehabilitation therapy at postoperative month 4.