A 41-year-old male who experienced sudden visual loss in both of his eyes five days prior to presentation was referred to our clinic. He had a history of hypertension and experienced an acute rise of blood pressure (200/150 mmHg) five days prior due to forgetting to consume his antihypertensive drugs.
The best-corrected visual acuity using the Snellen chart and manifest refraction were, respectively, 20/50 and –1.2550º in the right eye and 20/32 and –0.75110º in the left eye. The ocular examination results including the anterior segment, intraocular pressure, and vitreous examination using slit lamp biomicroscopy and Goldman applanation tonometry were unremarkable in both eyes. The relative afferent pupillary defect was negative. Optic disc swelling, flame shape hemorrhages especially around the optic disc, arterial narrowing, vessel tortuosity, cotton wool spots, hard exudates deposition in the nasal part of the macula together with multiple deep orange spots indicating Elschnig spots were revealed in both eyes in the fundus examination [Figure 1]. Multiple imaging procedures were performed for the patient.
Irregularity and wrinkling of the retinal surface, slight retinal thickening, subretinal fluid, hyperreflective deposits with posterior shadowing compatible with hard exudates in the inner retinal layers, and some irregularity at the level of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells and the choriocapillaris layer were observed in the SD-OCT of both eyes.
The hypo-autofluorescence area identified around the optic nerve head (coincident to retinal nerve fiber layer edema), with some scattered hypo-autofluorescence images (coincident to flame shape hemorrhages) and multiple hyper-autofluorescence images particularly in the temporal portion of the macula were all illustrated in both eyes in the fundus autofluorescence imaging [Figure 1]. Optic disc leakage, multiple hypo-fluorescence imaging in the early phase continuing with central hypo-fluorescence and marginal hyper-fluorescence in the late phase coincident with Elschnig spots and some points of blockage in the hemorrhage spots were seen in the FA [Figure 1]. In the FA, only the leakage of the optic nerve head was identified.
In the fovea imaging, the disruption in the normal tapering pattern of the superficial and deep capillary plexuses especially in the inferior nasal and superior temporal of the fovea compatible with the ischemic areas were prominently defined. These findings were marginally revealed in 67 the FA [Figures 2 & 3]. Similar findings with less severity were observed in his left eye [Figure 4]. The 68 Elschnig spots were also revealed at the choriocapillaris level (30 μm below the RPE) in the form of 69 hypo intense spots in both eyes [Figure 2].