A 68-year-old Caucasian male was brought to the emergency department by local police due to suicidal ideation with plan and intent. The patient has a diagnosis of major depressive disorder with multiple involuntary psychiatric hospitalizations. The patient’s family history is unknown. He had been prescribed citalopram (20 mg daily) and bupropion (extended release 300 mg daily) upon discharge from a psychiatric hospitalization 1 year prior, but he had not been taking these medications prior to this admission due to self-reported lack of efficacy. The patient has multiple medical comorbidities including uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, benign prostatic hyperplasia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. His medical conditions were being treated with his home medications, which include insulin glargine, insulin lispro, metformin (1000 mg daily), and lisinopril (20 mg daily).
On admission, his labs were unremarkable except for a mild normocytic anemia (hemoglobin: 12.6 × 103, mean corpuscular volume: 88.6 μm3) and thrombocytopenia (108 × 103) both of which he has had chronically for at least 2 years based on our records. His white blood cell count (WBC) was 4.5 × 103, and his absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was 2.6 × 103 on admission. On hospital day 1, he was started on his home medications and citalopram (20 mg daily) due to a positive response from a previous hospitalization. Bupropion was not used this hospitalization. Additionally, a Foley catheter was inserted due to urinary retention. The patient continued the same medication regimen and continued to have severe suicidal ideation for hospitalization days two through eight. On hospital day nine, the patient continued to endorse severe depressive symptoms and suicidal ideations and plan, necessitating more aggressive medication management to address these symptoms, which the patient agreed to. Levothyroxine 125 micrograms daily was added to his regimen. On day ten, further augmentation was started with aripiprazole 5 mg daily.
The patient responded well to the augmented regimen based on daily assessments showing improved mood and decreased suicidality. However, on hospital day 13, hypotension prompted a lab work up due to concern for sepsis as the patient had an indwelling Foley catheter since admission. These labs (day 3 of aripiprazole use) were unremarkable except for WBC count of 3.3 × 103 and ANC of 1.3 × 103 . Due to concerns of neutropenia, complete blood count (CBC) with differential was repeated the next day which showed no appreciable change. At this point, an internal medicine consult was sought and citalopram, aripiprazole, levothyroxine and lisinopril were held per consult recommendation (5 days of aripiprazole use total). Laboratory work up for other causes of blood dyscrasias included negative screenings for chronic infections [human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis], normal serum levels of albumin, vitamin B12 and folate. However, a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) with nucleolar pattern and titer of 1:40 was found.
His WBC and ANC continued to demonstrate a downward trend for the following 2 days, to as low as 3.0 × 103 for WBC and most concerning of all an ANC value of 0.7 × 103 on day 17. Despite the abnormal CBC’s, the patient was asymptomatic for signs of infection throughout his hospitalization. On day 19, citalopram and lisinopril were restarted due to an uptrend in ANC. Levothyroxine was restarted once his ANC returned to baseline (2.8 × 103) on day 21. By day 21, the patient was discharged as he was no longer endorsing suicidal thoughts, his neutropenia had resolved, and he was in remission from depression. No additional pro re nata (PRN) medications were administered this hospitalization.