The case patient was a 40-year-old man with a cystic lesion on his right adrenal gland, as confirmed by CT, who had been observed in our hospital for several years. We decided to remove the cyst because it exhibited a growth tendency and we could not rule out the possibility of malignancy. The cyst measured 10 cm in diameter on CT just before the surgery was performed .
The patient was placed in the left lateral position. Figure shows the positioning of the ports intended for an intraperitoneal approach. First, a 20-mm transverse incision was made below the right costal margin on the midclavicular line; the endoscopic port was placed on this incision. Subsequently, other ports were placed with the use of an endoscope: 12- and 5-mm surgeon ports on the line parallel with the border of the rib arch and two 5-mm assistant ports on the superior part of the iliac crest and the right side of the umbilicus.
After performing a Kocher maneuver to expose the inferior vena cava, we incised the peritoneum from the caudal side of the liver through the surface of the inferior vena cava to the caudal edge of the cyst. Lifting the liver and upper pole of the kidney allowed us to identify the central adrenal vein and to control it with metal clips. Detaching the cyst from the psoas muscle and the surface of the liver revealed that we could not observe the cranial aspect of the cyst because of the cyst itself. To address this difficult situation, we inserted a SAND balloon catheter (Hakko Shoji, Tokyo, Japan) through an assistant port. After puncturing the cyst and aspirating some inner fluid through the inner needle of the SAND balloon catheter to prevent overflow, we inflated the distal balloon inside the cyst and the proximal balloon outside the cyst in sequence to hold the cyst wall with these balloons. Removing the inner needle led to complete discharge of the inner fluid of the cyst . This procedure allowed us not only to externally collect the fluid from the cyst, for which malignancy had not been ruled out, without any leakage to the operative field but also to pull out the cyst so as to easily perform adhesiolysis with a good field of view . Finally, the adrenal gland, including the cyst, was placed in a retrieval bag and extracted from the 20-mm endoscopic port incision without additional excision. The operating time was 220 min, and the calculated blood loss was 10 mL. The pathological finding showed lymphangiomatous endothelial cyst without malignant features.