The 6 year old female was born at term to consanguineous parents after uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 2800 g (−1.2 SD), length and occipitofrontal circumference at birth were not recorded. Other 3 male siblings are healthy with no symptoms suggestive of FBS and no other family member with diabetes mellitus. First hospitalization was at age 17 month for evaluation of inadequate weight gain and abdominal distension. Her weight was 6600 g (−5.3 SD), length 69 cm (−3.3 SD) and occipitofrontal circumference 43 cm (−2.6 SD). Physical examination showed hepatomegaly and doll-like face. Laboratory findings included high serum triglycerides, mildly elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, low phosphorous and elevated alkaline phosphatase. She had polyuria >6 ml/kg/h, massive generalized aminoaciduria, phosphaturia and glucosuria. Serum ammonia, lactic acid, calcium, parathyroid hormone and 25-hydroxyvitamin D were normal . Abdominal ultrasound revealed hepatomegaly and minimal calcification of both renal calyces. Radiological findings included generalized osteopenia and rachitic changes. Genetic analysis showed that the patient is homozygous for the mutation R301X (C>T) in exon 7 of the GLUT2 gene. Treatment included anhydrous phosphate (Joulie’s) solution 5 ml given every 4 h, 5 times daily (0.75 g/24 h), alpha D3 drops (alphacalcidol) 1 µg/day, galactose-restricted diet and uncooked cornstarch 1.6 g/kg given every 6 h during night time to prevent hypoglycemia. Metabolic acidosis was mild and did not require treatment.
The clinical phenotype was characterized by improvement of growth parameters with age. Rickets resolved with normalization of serum phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and triglyceride. She still shows laboratory findings of renal tubular dysfunction including polyuria, massive aminoaciduria, glucosuria and phosphaturia.
At age 6 years, her weight was 18 kg (−0.8 SD) and height 107 cm (−1.6 SD) . Physical exam showed mild hepatomegaly and renal ultrasound showed resolution of calyceal calcifications.