A 14-year-old male patient, referred to a referral hospital service in Curitiba City,
Paraná State, Brazil, for investigation. He was born at 38 weeks, weighing 3,500 g,
measuring 52 cm, and head circumference not informed. Mother denied consanguinity.
The child sustained his head at 4 months old, sat without support at 6, crawled at
9, walked at 1 year and 4 months old and spoke at 2 years old. Until then, the
patient had an appropriate development for his age.
The earliest sign of developmental change was speech regression, which started after
2 years of age. Speech was completely lost at 3 years and 6 months old. During this
period, frequent falls occurred, and the worsening of balance was progressive. The
loss of balance became more constant, making mobility very difficult.
Subsequently, the patient presented psychomotor agitation, hyperactivity, insomnia,
and loss of urinary and anal sphincter control. He evolved with a progressive
worsening of behavior, with crises of psychomotor agitation increasingly serious and
frequent, accompanied by obstinacy, periods of aggression, restlessness and a rapid
decrease in attentional capacity. It demonstrated stereotypes, such as cutting paper
and hitting cans over and over again. At 7 years of age, he presented coprophagia
and spread feces on his own body. He was diagnosed with ASD at the age of 6 and, at
the age of 8, he started to be monitored in a special school. He was administered
risperidone, amitriptyline, clonazepam, fluoxetine and periciazine, but with no
adequate response. At the special school, he attended occupational therapy and
speech therapy, both of which were unsuccessful.
At the beginning of the case, despite the falls, he was able to walk with the aid of
crutches, but at 12 years and 11 months old he suffered a complete loss of function.
There was also a decrease in his swallowing capacity, until the point in which he
needed assistance from a nasogastric tube for nutrition. At the age of 13,
gastrostomy was inserted to give him food. As his condition evolved, the behaviors
of hyperactivity and aggressiveness decreased, with a gradual and progressive
transition to drowsiness since the age of 9, and the intense drowsiness occurred
around 12 years of age.
In the previous morbid history, there are reports of recurrent respiratory tract
infections. However, there is no history of fainting or seizures, nor a family
history of genetic, neurological, psychiatric or cardiovascular diseases.
On the physical examination, his weight was 25 kg (Z score: -3.81), his height, 125
cm (Z score: -4.05), body mass index of 16 (Z score: -1.26) and head circumference
of 53 cm (Z score: -1.33); coarse facial features, saddle nose, thick lips,
sinophris, short neck, macroglossia, prominent forehead, dry and thinning hair; and
osteotendinous reflexes 3+/4+, claw hands, spasticity in lower limbs and joint
stiffness. Ophthalmological examination as normal, extrinsic eye movement apparently
preserved, with bilateral positive red reflex, fundoscopy/retinal mapping without
abnormalities.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the skull showed slight dilation of the lateral
ventricles and the third ventricle, with diffuse thickening of the diploe and
volumetric decrease in the cerebral hemispheres. Magnetic resonance imaging of the
total spine showed an inversion of the physiological cervical curvature, diffuse
morphostructural alteration of the vertebral bodies and wedging of their plateaus,
promoting the radiological aspect of the bullet-shaped vertebra. Diffuse disc
dehydration associated with a slight reduction in intervertebral spaces and small
intrasomatic disc herniations (Schmorl’s nodules) of chronic aspect in the
contiguous plateaus.
The echocardiogram identified hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with significant left
ventricular hypertrophy and moderate diastolic dysfunction, mild double aortic
lesion and moderate aortic insufficiency. The electrocardiogram showed left
ventricular overload. Abdominal ultrasound revealed liver with normal contours,
regular echogenicity, and echotexture, but enlarged dimensions.
The patient had increased urinary glycosaminoglycan excretion, with elimination of
heparan sulfate. Laboratory tests showed glycosaminoglycans=127 µg/mg creatinine
(reference value 44-106). The diagnosis was confirmed by evidence of deficiency of
the alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase enzyme. Laboratory tests showed:
N-acetyl-glucosaminidase dosage: not detected (reference
value=10-34). Acetyl-CoA glucosamine-N-acetyltransferase: 11 nmol/17 h/mg protein
(reference value=14-81).