The proband is a 30-year-old female of Pakistani ethnic origin and a product of consanguinity; her parents are distant cousins. Her family pedigree is depicted in Fig. . The prominent feature was that a sister (III:1) had developed a high-grade parietal lobe astrocytoma aged 10 years but died from a metastatic primary adenocarcinoma of the caecum aged 20 years. The proband (III:3) presented aged 24 years, with painless bleeding per-rectum (PR) and iron deficiency anaemia. This was investigated by colonoscopy at which 10 colonic tubullo-villous adenomatous polyps with low-grade dysplasia were excised. Further clinical investigation was prompted by her unusual presentation. On examination, she had two distinct CAL lesions, one on her right arm and one on her left leg. Both CAL lesions had irregular edges with foci of hypopigmentation within areas of hyperpigmentation . She also had widespread lichen planus mostly concentrated to her lower limbs, and a dermoid cyst on her left lower back.
Initial investigations were for MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP) and Lynch syndrome given the early age of onset of polyps, dermatological manifestations, and very early onset family history of CRC. Direct sequencing of lymphocytic tissue for MUTYH did not reveal any mutations. All tissue analyses performed are summarised in Table . Initial immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis was deemed inconclusive for Lynch syndrome due to perceived poor technical quality of PMS2 staining; there was universal absence of PMS2 antibody uptake in tumour and control tissue.
A pelvic ultrasound scan was performed later that year when the patient reported symptoms of bloating. This revealed malignant-looking bilateral ovarian cysts. Bilateral ovarian cystectomy revealed grade 1/grade 2 endometrioid adenocarcinomas affecting both ovaries. Peritoneal washings demonstrated the presence of adenocarcinoma cells. The proband’s tumour phenotype is summarised in Table . Immunohistochemistry was repeated on ovarian tissue; 0% tumour positivity and 0% control positivity for PMS2 was established. Microsatellite instability analysis demonstrated the ovarian tumour to be microsatellite instability-low (MSI-L). Sanger dye terminator sequencing of lymphocytic tissue identified that the proband was homozygous for the PMS2 founder mutation NM_000535.5:c.1500del (p.Val501TrpfsTer94) in exon 11, and a diagnosis of CMMRD was made . The described PMS2 mutation NM_000535.5:c.1500del (p.Val501TrpfsTer94) leads to a downstream stop codon at the 94th amino acid, creating a truncated protein. Given the lack of protein expression on IHC, it is likely that truncation leads to nonsense mediated decay with no protein product. The variant has been seen twice on the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAc) with a frequency of 0.0000165, which represents 2 of 30,610 individuals tested.
The proband underwent full staging surgery with a total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO), and partial omentectomy. No residual ovarian disease was present, which corresponds to an International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics FIGO Stage 1c (Grade 2) endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the ovary. An incidental, synchronous FIGO Stage 1a (Grade 1) endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the endometrium was identified during routine post operative histological examination of the uterus. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not used.
The proband was then initiated on an 18-monthly colonoscopy-surveillance program and advised to take daily aspirin (75mg-150mg) for chemoprevention against MSI-H CRC. In total, the proband has had 37 adenomatous large bowel polyps excised; three of these were high-grade dysplastic tubular adenomatous polyps of the rectosigmoid that were identified and excised as part of her surveillance programme following diagnosis. She was also initiated on oestrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (HRT) following unsuccessful vasomotor menopausal treatment with venlafaxine.
The following year she developed nausea and vomiting, and as a result, an urgent oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy was performed. Gastric biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the body of the stomach and confirmed it was a primary tumour that did not represent recurrence . She was treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by total gastrectomy and completion of omentectomy, with the excision of 0.5 cm of the lower oesophagus and 1.3 cm of the duodenum. This revealed a poorly differentiated primary gastric adenocarcinoma (T3N2M0) with diffuse widespread infiltration through the muscularis propria into the subserosal tissue. Four lymph nodes showed evidence of metastatic adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry analysis for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 was performed on 4μm formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue sections using the automated Ventana BenchMark ULTRA IHC/ISH Staining Module (Ventana Co., Tucson, AZ, United States) together with the OptiView, 3′ diaminobenzidine (DAB) version 5 detection system (Ventana Co., Tucson, AZ, United States). 0% staining intensity for an MMR protein was regarded as negative expression of that protein.
Microsatellite instability analysis was performed on ovarian tumour tissue using the Promega MSI analysis system v1.2 (Wisconsin, United States). The MSI Analysis System includes fluorescently labelled primers for co-amplification of seven markers including five mononucleotide repeat markers (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24 and MONO-27) and two pentanucleotide repeat markers (Penta C and Penta D). The mononucleotide markers were used for MSI determination, and the pentanucleotide markers were used to detect potential sample mix-ups and/or contamination. In addition, control lymphocytic tissue from the proband was analysed using the same platform.
Peripheral lymphocytes were utilised for genetic sequencing. Mutations in the MUTYH (formerly known as MYH) and MMR genes were searched for using dye terminator Sanger sequencing on ABI Genetic Analysis of the exon regions of the coding sequences. Sequence analysis of exons 2, 4, 6, 7, 13 and 14 of the MUTYH gene was used to detect common Indian and Pakistani mutations (p.Tyr104Ter and p.Glu480Ter) and common European mutations (p.Tyr179Cys and p.Glu396Asp). The reference sequence for the MUTYH gene was NM_001128425.1. All 19 exons in MLH1, 16 exons in MSH2 and 10 exons in MSH6 were sequenced in both directions. Analysis of mutations in the PMS2 exon coding sequence was complicated by presence of multiple pseudogenes corresponding to exons 1–5 of PMS2 and a single large pseudogene encompassing exons 9 and 11–15 of PMS2. Exon 11 particularly had a high homology to the pseudogene. Long range PCR was performed first to amplify PMS2 (and not the pseudogene PMS2CL) prior to Sanger sequencing. Multiple ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was used to detect dosage abnormalities in exons 1–11 of PMS2 using kit P008-B1 [MRC-Holland]. Due to gene conversion and technical issues, analysis of exons 13–15 was not performed. The reference sequence for PMS2 was NM_000535.5.
Tissue analysis results are summarised in Table . Of note, the initial IHC staining of polypoid tissue and non-malignant control tissue was deemed inconclusive due to absent uptake of the PMS2 antibody in both the polypoid tissue and control tissue; this was attributed to poor technical quality of the staining. This delayed diagnosis until subsequent IHC analysis of the ovarian tumour, which established 0% immunopositivity for PMS2 in tumour tissue and control tissue. This prompted DNA sequencing of lymphocytic tissue, resulting in diagnosis of the proband as homozygous for the founder PMS2 mutation NM_000535.5:c.1500del (p.Val501TrpfsTer94) in exon 11.