A 55-year-old male presented to the outpatient clinic with generalized headaches and blurred vision for 1-month’s duration. He noted progressive worsening of the headaches, and they were particularly harsh on mornings, graded as 7/10 severity. They were not associated with nausea/vomiting, fever or seizures. His blurred vision prevented him from driving, and he noted that it had progressively declined. He had no known medical comorbidities, and the remainder of his history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a fit-looking man who was haemodynamically stable. He was oriented to time, place and person and had a normal gait. Sensorimotor examination did not reveal any deficits. Pupillary assessment was within normal limits, at 3 mm and reactive to light and accommodation bilaterally. There were no gaze palsies or ophthalmoplegia, and no evidence of Parinaud’s syndrome. Visual acuity was reduced to 20/40, but visual fields were spared. Fundoscopy was positive for mild disc oedema.
The patient had an urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain done which demonstrated non-communicating hydrocephalus. There was obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow through the aqueduct of Sylvius secondary to a pineal region tumour measuring 20 × 15 × 25 mm. It was isointense to the surrounding parenchyma on T1-weighted imaging, demonstrating homogenous contrast enhancement post-gadolinium administration.
Differential diagnoses of pineocytoma, germ cell tumour and metastasis were considered. Computed tomography scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis did not reveal any evidence of malignancy. Hematological investigations including and serum germ-cell markers (alpha-fetoprotein, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, placental alkaline phosphatase) were within normal reference ranges. The goals of management at this time were to divert CSF and obtain a tissue diagnosis. A decision was made to proceed with endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) and pineal tumor biopsy. This was due to the high ETV success score calculated in this patient (over 90%).
Craniometric measurements were taken to determine the simplest route to the tumor, since neuronavigation is not available in our setting. The ETV would be performed through a standard right coronal bur hole, however, a separate left frontal-precoronal bur hole was decided to be appropriate for the biopsy. This tumor had a right-sided predominance, and possible trajectories through the right foramen were not leading to the tumour. A direct and simple trajectory would however be achieved by the use of a left-sided bur hole [ and ]. While a flexible endoscope and neuronavigation may have facilitated a single bur hole ETV and biopsy, only rigid endoscopes are available in our setting. The potential risk of causing multiple haemorrhages in the patient’s dominant frontal lobe, as well as likely forniceal stretching and contusions, deterred us from the use of either a single or ipsilateral dual-bur holes.
The patient was placed under general anaesthesia and positioned supine. The head was kept neutral and slight neck flexion was done, and then secured in the Mayfield head clamp. A right Kocher’s point bur hole was placed, and the right lateral ventricle cannulated with an external ventricular drain. CSF samples were taken at this time, to assess for germ-cell tumour markers and cytology. The ventricular drain was removed, and a rigid 0-degree endoscope then introduced. Confirmation of correct position was done by identifying landmark anatomic structures (septal vein, choroid plexus, thalamostriate vein). The foramen of Monro was entered and care taken to avoid injury to the fornices. In the third ventricle, the basilar artery was identified and the ventriculostomy then performed safely away from it. Flow of CSF through the ventriculostomy was noted, and there was no vascular injury.
A second low left frontal bur hole was then made, allowing the shortest safe linear trajectory to the pineal tumour. The third ventricle was entered, and the tumor was identified as a red, vascular lesion on the posterior wall of the third ventricle . Biopsies were taken and the endoscopic bipolars used for haemostasis. A ventricular drain was left, and the left frontal bur hole was covered with titanium micro-plates. No defect was palpable or visible.
Post-operatively, the patient reported immediate cessation of headaches and resolution of his blurred vision. The drain was removed on postoperative day 2, and he was discharged on day 5. All CSF samples were negative for germ-cell tumour markers and cytology. Final histology was consistent with a pineocytoma, with conservative management and serial imaging as the management strategy. At a 4-month follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic.