A 44-year-old man with systemic manifestations came to our neurology unit because of a stroke. The analysis of his medical history revealed that, during childhood, he showed high rate of antistreptolysin O (ASO) titer, and he frequently suffered from acroparaesthesias, hypohidrosis, joint pains, cold and heat intolerance and attacks of fever.
At 18, whorled opacities in the cornea (cornea verticillata) were first observed.
At 19, the early manifestations of periumbilical and genital angiokeratomas appeared.
At 37, clinical and laboratory tests confirmed the presence of acute articular rheumatism. At the same age, he manifested episodes of vertigo, tinnitus, hearing impairment and sudden deafness which were believed to be caused by a neurinoma; however, this was not confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
At 40, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and mitral valve insufficiency, proteinuria and a reduced creatinine clearance rate were observed. He underwent renal biopsy. Light microscopy examination of the renal biopsy revealed non-specific findings: segmental increases in mesangial cellularity and mesangial matrix were seen in 3/24 of the glomeruli. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg with a regular pulse rate.
From 37 to 42, the patient had four episodes of vertebrobasilar transient ischaemic attack. At 40, he underwent a complete diagnostic work-up, which revealed multiorgan involvement: damages in the CNS with silent ischemic strokes, both cortical and subcortical, and severe peripheral neuropathy; cardiac hypertrophy, altered repolarisation and right bundle branch block; regarding eyes, cornea verticillata was confirmed; renal involvement with kidney failure (stage II/DOQI CKD). Selective damage of epithelial cells and glomerular epithelial cells induced chronic renal disease with progression to ESRD. The same year, he started haemodialysis, and at 42 he underwent kidney transplant from a cadaver donor which normalised his kidney function. Because of all the clinical manifestations, the presence of Fabry disease was suspected and genetic and enzymatic analyses were performed. Peripheral blood sample was collected and DNA was extracted using the GenElute Blood Genomic DNA Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). A pre-sequencing screening was performed on DNA sample by high resolution melting (HRM) analysis using the Light Cycler 480 system (Roche Applied Science, Germany) . Purified PCR mutated products were sequenced using LI-COR NEN Model 4300 DNA Analyzer, according to the LI-COR protocol. Sequence analysis of the GLA gene in the patient, in comparison with the wild-type sequence , revealed a single nucleotide point mutation in hemizygosis at nucleotide c.493 G > C in exon 3 (D165H in the protein) . The α-galactosidase A activity of the patient was determined by Dried Blood Filter Paper test described by Chamoles et al., with minor modifications : enzyme activity in the whole blood was 0.5 nmol/h/ml (normal range is > 3.0 nmol/h/ml). We extended the genetic analysis to the family members of the patient (mother, sister and brother) and none of them had any alteration in the GLA gene, suggesting a de novo mutation in the patient.
The 11-year-old daughter of the patient showed clinical manifestations referable to Fabry disease, too. She had severe acroparaesthesias, gastrointestinal symptoms, heat intolerance and the early signs of renal involvement (proteinuria). The results of the blood tests were in the normal range. Kidney B-mode ultrasound and color Doppler ultrasound failed to show significant discrepancies. Liver ultrasound was normal. The result of ophthalmological exams and the study of retinal funds were within the norm. Echocardiogram showed heart size, morphology, and function to be normal. Brain MRI was normal. Genetic and enzymatic studies were also performed on this subject: genetic analysis showed she had the same mutation of her father (c.493 G > C in exon 3 of the GLA gene) in heterozygosis and the α-galactosidase A activity was below the normal range (1 nmol/h/ml).
Both patients, the proband and his daughter, started ERT: the father had significant beneficial effects only on his acroparaesthesias and angiokeratomas; the daughter had marked clinical benefits on all manifestations thanks to the early diagnosis, according to literature .