A 54-year-old man diagnosed with locally advanced central squamous cell carcinoma was hospitalized in our hospital. The patient had cough and shortness of breath for 3 months. Chest CT showed central lung cancer in the upper lobe of the right lung, with tumor invading the trunk of the right pulmonary artery, the main bronchus and the upper lobe bronchus . Squamous cell carcinoma was confirmed by further bronchoscopy. Three courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy were performed before surgery. The patient refused to continue chemotherapy and asked for active surgical treatment. According to the TNM staging system, the clinical stage of this tumor is cT4N1M0.
General anesthesia was induced and maintained according to standard protocols during surgical preparation. Then right pneumonectomy was performed, and the surgical incision was located at the posterolateral side of the fourth intercostal space. The pulmonary artery, pulmonary vein and bronchus were cut off with a stapler, with intraoperative bleeding of about 100 ml. After the operation, the thoracic drainage tube was clamped, and the patient returned to the ward after waking up. Three hours after the operation was completed, the patient suddenly lost consciousness while sitting in bed chatting with his wife. The patient’s blood pressure was low (76/53 mmHg), and the indexes of heart rate, respiration and oxygen saturation were normal. After opening the thoracic drainage tube, a small amount of tension gas and 200 ml of bloody fluid was discharged. We immediately performed CT examination and excluded brain lesions. CT examination showed that there was a large amount of gas in the tissue space between the chest and neck . Blood clots accumulated in the thoracic cavity, and CT angiography showed no abnormalities in the major cerebral arteries . However, multiple free air can be seen in the blood vessels of bilateral frontal sulcus . In addition to free air, suspicious cerebral infarction was also seen in the right occipital lobe . It is presumed that air entering the cerebral circulation led to air embolism. The patient had seizures soon after the CT scan, manifesting as binocular gaze and tremor of limbs. Then the patient was quickly transferred to ICU. Respiratory assistance, mannitol dehydration and empiric antibiotic treatment were used after ICU transfer. 800 ml pleural fluid was drained from the thoracic cavity 6 h after the operation, and a second thoracotomy was performed to stop bleeding. Then blood clot was removed from the thoracic cavity. After the operation, the patient was sent back to the ICU for ventilator-assisted breathing, and the head was protected by mild hypothermia using an ice blanket to prevent excessive brain damage. At the same time, mannitol dehydration was used to reduce brain edema and anti-infection treatment was carried out. On the next day, the brain CT showed a significant decrease of air in the brain . There was no significant increase in cerebral infarction lesions compared with the first day. After 3 days of ventilator-assisted breathing, the patient’s condition gradually improved. On the third day after air embolism, the brain CT was reexamined. There were patchy low density areas in bilateral thalamic basal ganglia, temporal lobe and occipital lobe, which was cerebral infarction lesions. The patient was discharged after 25 days of treatment after cerebral infarction. He was conscious at the time of discharge, with neurological impairment symptoms of bilateral in which symptoms of left limb are more serious. The process from onset to recovery was smooth. After 3 months of follow-up, most of the neurological deficit symptoms had been recovered except for the left upper limb .