A 30-year-old man underwent right hepatectomy at previous hospital, due to trauma, in August 2012. At that time, a thoracotomy in the eighth intercostal space was performed for direct closure of the diaphragm. Pooling of right pleural effusion was treated with drainage up to postoperative day (POD) 9. The patient recovered and was discharged on POD 14. In November 2012, he presented with a right DH and strangulation of the ileus of the small intestine. He underwent laparotomy at the same previous hospital, found the defect which was separated from the previously sutured area of the diaphragm, and repaired it.
In May 2017, the patient presented to the local hospital with abdominal pain and vomiting and was diagnosed with an intestinal obstruction; an ileus tube was inserted and the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. Upon admission, the physical examination was unremarkable, and laboratory findings, including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and biochemical tests, were all within normal limits. Chest and abdominal radiographs revealed colon gas in the right intrathoracic space . On contrast imaging, the ileus tube in the transverse colon was observed to be incarcerated in the right intrathoracic space , a finding which was confirmed on computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen . The patient was diagnosed with a DH and underwent laparoscopic hernia repair.
The surgical repair was performed with the patient in the left half-lateral decubitus position. Four laparoscopic ports were placed in the abdomen as follows: a 12-mm port at the umbilicus for the scope, two 12-mm ports at the right lateral lesion as working ports, and a 5-mm port at the middle of the upper abdomen used as an assistant. Under laparoscopic view, the transverse colon and small intestine anastomosis were found to be adherent to the right hemidiaphragm , and we proceeded with careful separation . After dense adhesions between the herniated organs and the pleural lining of right lung were sectioned, 5 × 3 cm diaphragmatic defect was observed, with the transverse colon found to be incarcerated in the defect and adherent to right lung . We proceeded with widening the diaphragmatic defect, gently peeling the transverse colon from the lung, and repositioning the transverse colon into the abdominal cavity. The damaged pleural lining of the lung was repaired by a respiratory surgeon using a laparoscopic transdiaphragmatic approach . The diaphragmatic defect was confirmed to be different from the area repaired previously. It was then closed laparoscopically with non-absorbable 2–0 polyester sutures . The postoperative course was uneventful, and a contrast study of the ileus tube demonstrated good passage, with no leakage or stenosis. At 6 months after the surgery, all symptoms had disappeared.