A 71-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital by ambulance with New York Heart Association functional class IV. An artificial respirator was placed immediately after arrival with complaints of orthopnea. The patient had been treated for hypertension, hyperuricemia, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. The pulse rate of the patient was regular at 110 beats/min and blood pressure was 130/60 mmHg. Her height, weight, and body surface area were 153 cm, 71.3 kg, and 1.69 m2, respectively. Chest radiography revealed moderate cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 56.1% and severe pulmonary venous congestion. Electrocardiography disclosed sinus tachycardia. On cardiac auscultation, grade IV/VI systolic and diastolic murmurs were observed at the left sternal border and apex. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the mean pressure gradients of the mitral and aortic valves were 15 mmHg and 74 mmHg, respectively. This was associated with severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation and a good left ventricular ejection fraction of 64%. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis, however, cardiac fluoroscopy showed calcification around the posterior mitral annulus . Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated severe mitral valve stenosis including extensive calcification of the mitral posterior annulus , which extended into the myocardium of the left ventricle partially. Severe aortic valve stenosis included three severely calcified aortic cusps and fused commissures. Holter electrocardiography revealed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. After treatment for heart failure with the support of intra-aortic balloon pumping, we decided to perform surgical treatment for both mitral and aortic valve stenosis after obtaining written informed consent.
Aortotomy was performed after establishing standard cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest. Myocardial protection was provided by using an intermittent antegrade and retrograde cold blood cardioplegia and topical cooling. Subsequently, heavily calcified aortic valves were excised, and the remaining annular calcified mass was decalcified and carefully removed piece by piece using a rongeur. A 16-mm ATS AP360 valve (ATS Medical Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was placed in the supra-annular position with non-everting mattress sutures. Through longitudinal left atriotomy, a calcium bar with a thickness of more than 1 cm was placed along the posterior mitral annulus from the anterolateral commissure to the posteromedial scallop of the posterior leaflet. Calcification extended into the myocardium of the left ventricle at a portion of the posteromedial scallop of the posterior leaflet, where prolapse and torn chordae were observed . The motion of the anterior mitral leaflet was severely restricted. A calcified protrusion was observed on the ventricular side via the posteromedial commissure of the mitral anterior annulus. Overall, calcification occurred in more than half of the circumferential annuli. Finally, the anterior mitral leaflet and posteromedial scallop of the posterior mitral leaflet were excised. Prudent care was taken not to leave fragile calcium fragments that were highly likely to scatter. The calcium bar involving two-thirds of the posterior annulus was hard on palpation and remained intact because extensive debridement was considered hazardous. At the portion in which calcification was extended into the myocardium, two 2–0 polyester mattress pledgeted sutures were placed in the left atrial wall approximately 1 cm lateral to the mitral posterior annulus. In other regions, stitches were passed from the ventricular side to the atrial side using the remaining ten mattress sutures . Particularly in the calcium bar, careful valve suture placement was performed while deliberately investigating the fibrous area with the needle tip through the calcium deposits and the surrounding fibrous tissue. All sutures were interrupted to place the outlets of every stitches on the same plane. Initially, the pre-assembled composite valve, which was composed of a 25-mm St.Jude valve (St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, MN), enlarged the circumference of the sewing ring by attaching a bovine pericardial collar. It was secured to the mitral annulus in a manner allowing the prosthetic valve opening and the calcium bar met to meet at right angles to each other. The prosthetic leaflets did not interfere with the residual calcified valvular tissue . Subsequently, a 1.5 cm wide trimmed bovine pericardial collar was sutured around the annulus to the atrial wall using running 4–0 polypropylene for reinforcement . Additionally, concomitant procedures, which consisted of the De Vega method, were contracted to 29 mm for severe tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary vein isolation using bipolar radiofrequency ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was successful and the mean bypass and cross-clamp times were 272 min and 212 min, respectively. The intra-aortic balloon pumping was removed on postoperative day 5. Postoperative TEE revealed normal functioning of the mitral prosthetic valve, without perivalvular leakage . Although temporary hemodialysis was performed for acute renal failure, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 57 without another complications. She was followed-up once a month after discharge from the hospital. Anticoagulation therapy with warfarin achieved a prothrombin time- international normalized ratio of 2.0–3.0. Oral medications with bisoprolol fumarate (2.5 mg/day) and sacubitril valsartan sodium hydrate (200 mg/day) were administered. The 1-year transthoracic echocardiography after surgery showed a mean pressure gradient of the mitral prosthetic valve of 5 mmHg without perivalvular leakage.