A 49-year-old male presented with complaints of fever and fatigue. There was no relevant family history and the patient denied any drinking habit but mentioned smoking 10 cigarettes/day for 30 years.
In January 2021, the patient visited a nearby hospital due to difficulty in breathing; a large left pleural effusion was noted and thoracic drainage was performed. Signet cell carcinoma was detected in a cell block test using pleural fluid cytology, and after immunostaining (CK7 positive, CK20 negative), a diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma was made. From March 2021, the 9LA regimen was selected and CBDCA + PEM + nivolumab (3 weeks apart) + ipilimumab (6 weeks apart) was started. Nivolumab/ipilimumab was administered in May 2021 as a stable disease response was observed at the end of the second course, but fever and malaise appeared in June 2021. When he visited Kindai University Hospital in the same month, it was discovered that he had grade 3 liver damage, and he was admitted for treatment.
The following findings were recorded at admission: height, 167 cm; weight, 56.0 kg; body temperature, 38.2°C; blood pressure, 100/70 mmHg; heart rate, 130 bpm; and respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min. The patient showed clear consciousness, no palpebral conjunctiva anemia, no bulbar conjunctival yellowing, and the abdomen was flat/soft, with a palpable liver and spleen. At admission, the patient was taking esomeprazole magnesium hydrate 10 mg/day, brotizolam 0.25 mg/day, and naproxen 100 mg/day.
Positron Emission Tomography - Computed Tomography (PET-CT) was performed as a baseline examination before nivolumab/ipilimumab combination therapy . Fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation was observed in the left pleura, lung field, and hilar lymph nodes. No obvious metastatic foci were noted in the liver. Based on the above, a diagnosis of cancerous pleurisy, multiple lung metastases, and multiple lymph node metastases was made. The results of blood testing at referral admission can be seen in Table . A marked increase in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and aspartate aminotransferase levels was observed, but the alanine aminotransferase increase was mild. A significant increase in the C-reactive protein level was also observed. Hemophagocytosis was suspected due to the low hemoglobin and platelet levels and elevated triglyceride and LDH levels. Hepatitis virus markers were negative. A bone marrow aspirate examination was performed on the third day of illness. Multiple red blood cells, a small number of white blood cells, and macrophages that phagocytosed platelets were observed, consistent with HLH. Furthermore, no abnormal cells including lymphoma cells were observed in the smear .
The clinical course after admission can be seen in Figures and . Blood sampling performed on the day of hospitalization showed a decrease in platelets and an increase in LDH and triglyceride levels which led to the suspicion of hemophagocytosis, further confirmed through an additional test for serum ferritin, which revealed a remarkable value of 329 760 ng/mL. Based on these results, HLH was suspected, and a bone marrow aspiration test was performed on the third day of hospitalization to confirm the diagnosis. Bone marrow aspirate examination revealed macrophages in 20% of cases and clear signs of phagocytosis. It was determined that immediate therapeutic intervention was necessary, and pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (mPSL) was started on the same day. After 3 days of pulse treatment, a rapid recovery of platelet values, as well as decreased ferritin and LDH levels were observed. CRP and sIL2-R also rapidly decreased. Subjective symptoms such as fever and fatigue also quickly improved. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 35th day, and prednisolone was gradually reduced to 15 mg/day. The patient did not experience symptoms or recurrence of immune-related HLH (irHLH) but died of respiratory failure due to progression of lung cancer.