A 53-year-old man was brought to the emergency department because of continuous abdominal pain and bloating for 3 days. He didn’t consume any fatty meals or alcohol before the commencement of the sickness, and both his farting and stools were normal. He has a 10-year history of chronic viral hepatitis B and a 6-year history of hypertension. He was diagnosed as chronic renal failure 7 years ago and had been receiving hemodialysis on a regular frequency (three times a week) through a left forearm arteriovenous fistula since 4 years ago. Moreover, he also underwent splenectomy due to splenomegaly and received endoscopic treatment for esophageal varices 2 years ago. He denied a history of other systemic diseases, allergies, or any relevant family history. Physical examination indicated tenderness and rebound pain in the mid and right abdomen, hyperactive bowel sounds on auscultation, and a positive percussion mobile turbid examination, while other physical examinations revealed no significant abnormalities. Laboratory testing showed a significant elevation of the blood potassium level (6.99 mmol/L, reference range =3.50-5.10 mmol/L), white blood cell count (14.26×10^9/L, reference range =3.5-9.5 ×10^9/L), and procalcitonin level (41.60 ng/mL, reference range = 0.02-0.05 ng/mL). The abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed liver cirrhosis, splenic postoperative changes, edema of the stomach wall and part of the colon wall, shrinkage of the left kidney, hydronephrosis and cortical thinning of the right kidney, and significant fluid accumulation in the abdominopelvic cavity. The patient was initially admitted to the department of nephrology due to hyperkalemia. He was treated with hemodialysis, and intravenous antibiotics (cefoperazone/tazobactam 2.25g per day and ornidazole 0.25g per 12h over 4 days, moxifloxacin 0.4g per day over 4 days), antispasmodic and analgesic therapy, among others. After the aforementioned medication were administrated, the levels of white blood cell count and blood potassium recovered to normal, and the levels of procalcitonin also showed a significant decrease. However, the patient’s abdomen pain was not well-controlled. There was no improvement in fluid in the abdominal cavity or edema in the intestinal wall a second CT scan, either.
For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient was then transferred to our gastroenterology department. Repeated laboratory investigation results showed a decrease of procalcitonin (down to 10.4ng/mL, reference range = 0.02-0.05 ng/mL) and a normal white blood cell count level (7.01×10^9/L, reference range =3.5-9.5×10^9/L). Depending on the clinical symptoms, laboratory, and imaging data after admission, the preliminary diagnosis of SBP was taken into consideration. Based on the diagnosis, empirical antibiotic therapy (biapenem 0.3g per 12h) was administered. He also received percutaneous paracentesis and drainage, and ascites specimens were sent for routine laboratory biochemical examination and cytology of body fluids, as well as bacterial culture. The number of nucleated cells in the ascites exceeded 19,000×10^6/L and the Rivalta test was remarkedly positive, while bacterial culture test results were negative.
Over more than one week of the empirical medication had little effect and the patient continued to complain of evident abdomen pain. Meanwhile, repeated ascites biochemistry, cytology, and bacterial culture tests were also performed, but the results remained negative in ascites bacterial culture. In order to determine the implicated organisms and to execute targeted treatment, the ascites samples were then sent for mNGS identification. DNA extraction, library construction, sequencing, data analysis and interpretation were performed by Beijing Genomics Institution (BGI). The mNGS method applied in the present case covers 12 classes of suspected pathogenic microorganisms, including 6350 bacteria, 1798 DNA viruses, 1064 fungi, and 234 parasites. The Fortunately, Staphylococcus cohnii (S. cohnii) was quickly detected by mNGS . The number of specific reads of S. cohnii was shown in , and the coverage of the identified genome calculated with the mapping of the detected reads was 0.0145%. Other bacteria, viruses, fungus and rickettsia were not detected by mNGS. According to the results, the antibiotics were immediately switched to linezolid (0.6g per 12h) and sulbactam/cefoperazone (4.5g per day).
Over a few days of treatment, the symptoms improved as the patient’s abdominal pain was significantly relieved, and there was also a noticeable decrease in the number of nucleated cells in ascites. Two weeks later, the laboratory investigation and ascites examination were repeated, and the results showed as follows: procalcitonin was 0.51ng/mL, the number of nucleated cells in ascites was 100×10^6/L and the Rivalta test was weakly positive. On day26 of hospitalization, the sulbactam/cefoperazone was changed to levofloxacin (0.5g per day). On day34 of hospitalization, the levofloxacin was discontinued, and the linezolid was discontinued on day37. The patient eventually recovered after 39 days of treatment in hospital and was discharged home from the hospital without obvious discomfort .