A 44-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with the chief complaint of new-onset of numbness of her right hand. Except for a history of latent hypothyroidism, not requiring thyroid hormone replacement (<5 μU/mL), the patient was previously fit and well without a history of smoking or alcohol abuse. On examination, a neurologically suspect numbness of the fingers I–III of the right hand was confirmed. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable and vital signs were stable. The patient underwent immediate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, which showed significant bilateral supratentorial hyperintensity facilitating the diagnosis of stroke. In addition, bilateral peripheral pulmonary embolism was observed on pulmonary computed tomography (CT)-angiogram issued secondary to new-onset dyspnoea . Therapeutic anticoagulation with enoxaparin twice daily was initiated and an initial tentative diagnosis of a thromboembolic stroke was made. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) in the emergency department showed normal left ventricular function without clear evidence of vegetations. However, a mild- to moderate tricuspid regurgitation was found, which was no longer visible on short-term follow-up TTE.
To further evaluate an incidental, suspect pulmonary lesion on chest X-ray and CT scan (large, ill-defined nodule), the decision to perform bronchoscopy was made to obtain material for histological preparation and mutation analysis. Once work up of diagnostic material was finished, an interdisciplinary expert tumour board, made the diagnosis of a non-small-cell adenocarcinoma of the right upper pulmonary lobe [TTF 1 positive, ALK negative, PD-L1 90% positive, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) positive with exon 19 deletion] with osseous metastases and a singular, hepatic metastasis. Following the promising results of the FLAURA study (Osimertinib in Untreated EGFR-Mutated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer) treatment with osimertinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was initiated and the patient was discharged home in a stable physical condition.
Unfortunately, the patient returned to the emergency department within 2 weeks of discharge with a new numbness of her left forearm, visual impairments, and headaches. Urgent MRI was issued, which revealed bilateral supratentorial and infratentorial strokes, significantly progressive from the previously performed MRI scans. At this point, the patient was referred to our cardiological department for the conduction of a transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE). Performance of a TOE earlier in the disease course was not possible due to a pronounced pharyngeal reflex. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed an 8 × 4 mm vegetation of the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve with concomitant moderate aortic regurgitation (concentric jet with a vena contracta width of 4 mm and a pressure half time of 364 ms with a deceleration time of 1254 ms; , ). While the echocardiographic findings suggested aortic valve endocarditis, several consecutive blood cultures remained negative and the patient showed no signs of infectious disease (no fever, only minimal, clinically non-relevant C-reactive protein elevation; ). There was also no microbiological growth of bacteria from the HACEK group, which are Gram-negative bacteria and a rare cause of infective endocarditis. Regardless, empiric antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin and clavulanic acid was initiated and therapeutic anticoagulation with enoxaparin continued. Sixty milligrams of enoxaparin were given twice daily as the patient had a weight of 62 kg and normal renal function. Upon abdominal MRI scans, renal and splenic infarction were observed . Extensive testing for an autoimmune disease (no evidence of antiphospholipid syndrome or lupus erythematosus) or coagulopathy remained negative.
Aside from continued cervical and thoracic spine pain, secondary to osseous metastases, the patient was feeling well and was subsequently discharged from the hospital with close follow-up scheduled. Two weeks later, TOE revealed a complete resolution of the aortic valve vegetation and a significant decline in the severity of aortic regurgitation.
After 4 weeks, the patient was readmitted to the hospital due to a new onset of aphasia, which was confirmed as a recurrence of right-sided subinsular stroke by cerebral MRI. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) at admission showed no progression of the mild aortic regurgitation. Transthoracic echocardiogram prior to discharge, however, revealed a new 5 × 3 mm vegetation of the left coronary cusp of the aortic valve (, ). The recurring aortic valve vegetations combined with multiple thromboembolic events at different sites in the context of malignancy and the missing signs of infectious disease facilitated the diagnosis of NBTE. Taking the preference of the patient into account, she was discharged home on long-term anticoagulation with rivaroxaban 15 mg once daily combined with antithrombotic treatment with clopidogrel 75 mg once daily. However, one may note that the chosen antithrombotic treatment regimen is off-label in the setting of NBTE.
Follow-up at 10 months revealed marked clinical improvement without evidence of thromboembolic recurrences.