Our patient was a male in his 50s with a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes, end-stage renal disease (ESRD) on peritoneal dialysis (PD) and erectile dysfunction with an inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) placed 6 years prior to the admission date who presented with complaints of scrotal pain.
The pump for his IPP had eroded through his scrotum and had been intermittently draining pus for the 2 months before presentation. He also noted fevers, chills, nausea and vomiting over this same time period. He stated that he had been treated at an outside hospital 2 weeks prior to this admission but was only given a prescription for pain medication and discharged home without antibiotics. Upon arrival at the emergency department, the patient was febrile to 39.0 °C and was tachycardic with a heart rate of 101. Infection was suspected, and the patient was started on vancomycin and cefepime. Blood cultures were obtained, and a CT of his abdomen and pelvis was done that showed a soft tissue scrotal defect and surrounding inflammatory changes without evidence of abscess. Urology was consulted and planned for explant of the prosthesis. The patient was also admitted to the internal medicine service as the primary team and moved to the hospital wards floor.
Blood cultures returned positive in 4/4 bottles for Gram-positive cocci in clusters. Infectious Disease was consulted and recommended transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and repeat cultures. TTE was done and showed no valvular abnormalities, notable only for mild mitral regurgitation. In light of the prolonged duration of symptom of fever for 2 months before presentation and concern that he may have been bacteraemic for an extended time prior to admission, there was a high level of concern for infectious endocarditis. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was done and revealed a 1.1×0.7 cm mobile lesion located on the atrial side of the anterior mitral valve leaflet . Cardiology and Cardiothoracic surgery were consulted and did not recommend valve replacement surgery.
The patient’s fever and tachycardia improved the day following administration of antibiotics, and he remained afebrile for the remainder of his hospital stay. Blood cultures and intraoperative cultures from the explanted inflatable penile pump (IPP) returned positive for methicillin-sensitive (MSSA). Antibiotics were changed to cefazolin. His blood cultures cleared shortly after removal of the IPP, and the patient was discharged home on cefazolin to complete a 6-week course. The patient followed up in the outpatient clinic 2 weeks following discharge and reported improvement of his symptoms. Unfortunately, he passed away from an unrelated subdural haematoma 3 weeks later. There was no evidence of sepsis during this subsequent hospitalization.