An 11-year-old girl had gross hematuria from the morning 2 days before admission and a slight fever of 37°C since that night. On the next day, she visited her home doctor and was revealed to have thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia (platelet count, 13,000/μL; hemoglobin, 9.7 mg/dL; lactase dehydrogenase, 1,046 U/ml, with 83 schistocytes out of 1,000 erythrocytes counted), in addition to hematuria and proteinuria. The patient was transferred to our hospital with suspected TMA. Her height and weight were 142 cm [–0.6 standard deviation (SD)] and 30.8 kg (–1.0SD), respectively. Her vital signs on admission were as follows: body temperature, 37.9°C; heart rate, 105 bpm; blood pressure, 122/80 mmHg; SpO2, 98% with room air. The patient appeared pale and ill, although she was alert. Petechia was observed on her soft palate. She had a normal breath sound and no heart murmur. Her abdomen was soft and flat without tenderness. Purpura was scattered on her upper arms, lower legs, and precordium on both sides. No edema was found on her lower legs. She had no past medical history and no family history of blood diseases, autoimmune diseases, or renal diseases. Laboratory findings on admission are shown in . The data available by the end of the first hospital day revealed that her hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia were accompanied by hypocomplementemia. Direct Coombs test result was negative. Kidney function was normal despite abnormality in urinalysis. Although the patient did not complain of gastrointestinal symptoms or bloody stool, stool culture, verotoxin in her stool, and anti-O157 antibody in her serum were tested to exclude hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) caused by enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli infection; all test results were negative. Finally, we found that ADAMTS13 activity was decreased to < 1% and the anti-ADAMTS13 antibody titer returned positive.
The clinical course is shown in . After admission, PE was performed for 3 days for TMA, which successfully resulted in a rapid platelet count increase up to 71,000/μL, and PE was completed. Since she fulfilled the SLE diagnostic criteria, including positive antinuclear antibody and anti-ds-DNA antibody on the 3rd hospital day, prednisolone (1mg/kg) was initiated. On the 7th hospital day, her platelet count decreased to 10,000/μL. This led to the consideration of PE again; however, the patient was too distressed to undergo PE. Therefore, we first attempted to administer fresh-frozen plasma, which was found to be insufficient for a significantly improving platelet count. Meanwhile, we obtained the results of ADAMTS13 activity and anti-ADAMTS13 antibody, as described in . The patient was thus diagnosed with acquired TTP caused by SLE, and MPT was administered on the 10 hospital day. After two courses of MPT, the anti-ADAMTS13 antibody test result was negative, the ADAMTS13 activity increased, and the platelet count rapidly increased . Additionally, urinary findings were normal after the first course of pulse therapy. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF, 1,000 mg/day) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ, 200 mg/day) were administered for SLE. Since she was considered to be in the high-risk group of SLE organ damage, and TMA is known to have frequent complications of psychiatric symptoms , she was additionally treated with three courses of intravenous cyclophosphamide pulse therapy [IVCY, 580 mg/dose (500 mg/m2)] as induction therapy for SLE . After the three courses of IVCY, leukopenia, mainly in lymphocytes, was observed; therefore, MMF was discontinued temporarily. HCQ was discontinued because color blindness and retinopathy were suspected during a regular ophthalmologic visit. After 1 year and 4 months since the onset, belimumab (BLM) was administered instead just after BLM had become under health insurance coverage for SLE pediatric patients .
Renal biopsy was performed on the 25 hospital day. Light microscopic findings in the renal pathology showed focal and segmental mild subendothelial deposition, basement membrane duplication, and endothelial cell proliferation. The findings led to a pathological diagnosis of lupus nephritis International Society of Nephrology and the Renal Pathology Society (ISN/RPS) Classification III (A) . Notably, granular periodic acid-Schiff stain-positive thrombi were found in afferent arterioles, and glomeruli with luminal stenosis in afferent arterioles were observed in 6 of 26 glomeruli, which was considered to be consistent with TTP . Immunofluorescent staining (IF) showed full house positive at the capillary wall and, mainly, in the paramesangial region . Electron-dense deposits were observed in the paramesangial region with electron microscopy, which were comparable to IF findings .