A 38-year-old man who was previously known to have diffuse skin and nail psoriasis and difficult to manage polyarticular tophaceous gout presented with severe pain in the lower back and buttocks associated with significant stiffness. He had symptoms consistent with inflammatory back pain, associated with a marked diurnal variation, pronounced stiffness and good response to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). He had no history of uveitis, inflammatory bowel disease or other extra-articular symptoms. He was non-compliant with urate lowering therapy due to gastrointestinal intolerance.
Examination revealed an obese man with extensive psoriasis covering extensor surfaces of elbows and knees as well as scalp, ears and face. There were tophi in his hands, elbows and feet. He had symmetrical polyarthritis in his hands with a decrease in grip strength. Spinal examination showed a significant decrease in neck movements and lateral spinal flexion bilaterally with a positive modified schober’s test and tender sacroiliac area bilaterally. Chest, heart and abdomen examination are unremarkable. Blood tests done .
Lumbosacral spine and sacroiliac joints (SIJs) MRI showed bilateral chronic bilateral sacroiliitis with superimposed acute left sacroiliitis . Severe facet joint degenerative changes in the lower lumbar spine with no neural compression was reported in addition.
Our presumed diagnosis was bilateral sacroililitis secondary to psoriatic arthritis, and the patient was started on adalimumab, a tumor necrosis factor alpha blocker (TNF alpha) therapy. Adalimumab was switched to intravenous infliximab 5 mg/kg after 1 month because the patient was struggling with self-administration. Infliximab was titrated up to 7 mg/kg and given for a duration of 4 months. It helped with the patient’s psoriasis but it had no impact on the low back or buttock pain and stiffness. Due to lack of response to TNF alpha treatment and the fact that the patient had several gout flares, the initial diagnosis was questioned. A dual energy computerised tomography (DECT) of the SIJs was arranged but despite two attempts the DECT of the lumbar spine was not executed correctly. However, CT lumbar spine and SIJs showed L2/3 endplate and left SIJ erosions mostly related to gout .
Consequently, the patient was given rasburicase on three occasions which decreased the size and number of peripheral joint tophi, but unfortunately had minimal effect on his low back symptoms despite MRI evidence of resolution of T2 hyperintense synovitis and marrow oedema after receiving the treatment . His serum urate level and imaging results has responded appropriately and therapy is currently ongoing.