A 10-year-old boy was admitted to the other hospital because of coughing for 7 days 1 month ago and had undergone a chest computed tomography scan. The scan revealed a 1.3-cm mass occupying the right main bronchus and atelectasis in the upper lobe of the right lung. Bronchoscopy and biopsy were performed 12 days after the computed tomography scan. Bronchoscopy showed hyperplasic tissue in the right main bronchus. Pathology showed incisional hypersensitivity and hyperplasia of the right bronchus. Chronic inflammation of the bronchial mucosa was observed. The epithelial cells of the mucosa were proliferated and squamous, with some papillary hyperplasia. After the child was admitted to our hospital, no obvious positive signs were observed during physical examination. An enhanced computer tomographic scan was conducted, which showed a mass occupying the right main bronchus and obstructive pneumonia with atelectasis, as shown in Fig. . We also performed another bronchoscopy, which showed that the right principal bronchus was almost completely blocked by a large white mass, as shown in Fig. . On the 10th day of admission, “bronchial mass resection and extended resection” was performed in the Department of Thoracic Surgery, as shown in Fig. .
Examination of gross specimens obtained during the operation showed a piece of grey-white tissue with a volume of 1.1 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.6 cm and a smooth surface with a medium texture, as shown in Fig. . Light microscopy showed that the tumour consisted of a mixture of glands, tubules, cysts, and solid regions, dominated by glandular components and covered by columnar mucous cells, goblet cells or cubic clear cells. Tumour tissues of solid nests or pieces and sections consisted of basal-like and intermediate-type cells and, small numbers of squamous cells. Immunohistochemistry results: 1. Vimentin ++, 2. CAM5.2 ++, 3. EMA ++, 4. P63 ++, 5. CD99 ++, 6. HHF35 ++, and 7. Ki-67 5% ± (proliferation index). Pathological diagnosis: pleomorphic adenoma (as shown in Fig. and Fig. ). The child was generally in good condition after the operation and was discharged from the hospital after recovery. No recurrence or tumour metastasis was found at the 1-month follow-up.