We present a 19 year old male with two month history of ataxia secondary to an intradural intramedullary expansile dermoid cyst in the spinal cord. The patient reported to clinic with progressively worsening numbness of the lower extremities and with difficulty walking beginning three months ago. Physical exam showed 2/5 strength in right lower extremity and 3/5 motor strength in left lower extremity, spastic with exaggerated reflexes and bilateral positive Babinski signs. There was no history of incontinence, infection, spinal trauma or previous spinal surgery. The overlying skin of the thoracolumbar region was intact, showing no signs of inflammation, nevi, or local hair growth. Patient denied history of weight loss, night sweats, body aches. Family history was noncontributory. The patient underwent a lumbar puncture which demonstrated elevated protein count but was otherwise negative. MRI scan of the dorsal spine was performed with T1-and T2-weighted images, which evidenced a focal, well-defined space-occupying lesion measuring 3.5 × 3.8cm . T1-weighted image revealed a well-encapsulated hypointense lesion within the spinal canal. Prior to surgery, patient was placed under general anesthesia in prone position. Injection of methylprednisolone was given intraoperatively and continued in the postoperative period at a dose of 25 mg/kg bolus over 1 hour followed by 5 mg/kg/hr for 23 hours. The patient underwent standard posterior laminectomies and fenestration of T2, T3 and T4 performed by the in-house neurosurgeon. Intraoperative ultrasound was performed to examine the spinal cord and revealed tumor of complex shape with loculations located around T3-4. A midline myelotomy was performed and tissue was resected for the purposes of decompression and biopsy procedures. Upon opening of the arachnoid, an exophitic, yellowish, pearly tumor emanating from the right side of spinal cord at T3 was visualized and fully excised . Examination of the specimen revealed a 1.2 × 1.8cm cyst filled with a soft, yellow waxy substance with glandular secretions and areas of induration. Histopathology exam confirmed the diagnosis of dermoid cyst. Histopathology appearance demonstrated cyst wall lined with stratified squamous epithelium and lumen containing loose keratin and mature skin appendages .
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course without abnormal neurological sequelae. At the 6-month follow-up, he reported improvement in all of his preoperative deficits including right lower extremity strength and ambulation. Follow-up radiological evaluation showed no evidence of disease recurrence.