A 59-year-old German woman with a past medical history of hypothyroidism and cutaneous lupus erythematosus presented at the hospital´s emergency room 7 days after having been bitten by a wild Eurasian red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris).
The patient reported having noticed a squirrel lying motionless on the ground when she took a walk. As soon as she tried to examine the animal, it started biting her, biting digit IV of the right hand and digit II of the left hand. After the wounds had been cleaned and dressed, she was started the same day on antibiotic therapy consisting of cefuroxime 500 mg orally twice a day. Tetanus vaccination status was also checked. On day 6 after the bite, the patient presented at the hospital’s emergency room showing the following symptoms: general malaise, aching head and body, fever, chill, and a swollen right elbow. She did not report having suffered from nausea, vomiting, or sensitivity to light or noise.
The clinical examination showed a minor bite on digit IV of the right hand, located near the middle phalanx, slightly reddened, yet without clear inflammatory signs. There was no pain to pressure, no movement restriction, nor any sensory deficit. There were also visible signs of lymphadenitis at the ulnar side of the right elbow. The peripheral sensitivity as well as movement skills and blood flow were intact. At the index finger of the left hand, another minor bite without any local or proximal signs of inflammation was recorded. The physical examination did not reveal anything unusual. The vital parameters were stable, with the exception of a negligible sinus tachycardia. No signs of meningism were found.
Laboratory tests showed an increase in the C-reactive protein (CRP) up to 28.6 mg/L (reference < 5 mg/L), but no leukocytosis. The test for procalcitonin (indicating bacterial inflammation) was negative. Sampled cerebrospinal fluid and urine were also negative in standard laboratory tests. X-rays of the thorax and of digit IV of the right hand and a native computed tomography (CT) brain scan did not show any pathological outcomes. Real-time PCR assays for severe acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), respiratory syncytial virus, and influenza A and B were negative. Starting on day 7, the medical treatment also comprised combination therapy with intravenous antibiotics (ampicillin/sulbactam, 2 g/1 g) 3 times a day. However, the patient’s condition did not improve and fever rose up to 39.2 °C and persisted until day 12. Blood culture remained negative, even at 14 days after inoculation. CRP increased up to 185 mg/L on day 12. As a consequence, treatment was intensified by commencing combination antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam (4 g/0.5 g) on day 11. Followin initiation of therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam, the CRP fell to 74 mg/L (day 14) and there was a mild persisting leukocytosis (12.14 × 103).
In parallel, the wound on the patient’s right hand developed an ulcer-like lesion showing swollen reddened edges and a central incrustation . The lymphadenitis of the right elbow persisted. It was at this stage that tularemia was suspected as a possible diagnosis for the first time. Following a phone call with the reference laboratory for human tularemia at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) on day 14, the decision was made to send a wound swab sample from digit IV of the patient’s right hand (A-1825/1) to the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for microbiological examination. In addition, a serum sample (A-1825/2) was taken for antibody detection (day 14). An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) showed that antibodies against the lipopolysaccharide of F. tularensis Igpoly, immunoglobulin (Ig)G and IgM were borderline.
To isolate living bacteria and extract DNA, the wound swab was suspended in 900 µL double-distilled water, and a 450-µL of the suspension was centrifuged. The resulting pellet was used for genomic desoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction (DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). A real-time PCR based on F. tularensis-specific primers (for genes fopA and tul4) confirmed the presence of F. tularensis DNA in the wound swab sample. Subspecies Fth was identified by block PCR targeting the region of difference 1 (RD1) according to protocols described by Broekhuijsen et al. . For culture, 50 µL of the swab suspension was inoculated in 10 mL medium T and streaked onto MTKH , as well as onto chocolate agar plates and Neisseria selective medium plus (both Oxoid Germany GmbH, Wesel, Germany). The liquid medium and the agar plates were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Bacterial growth typical for F. tularensis could be observed on MTKH on day 3 of culture and on the chocolate and Neisseria agar plates on day 4. The patient’s cerebrospinal fluid did not test positive for F. tularensis.
Minimal inhibitory concentration testing according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI; ) guidelines for F. tularensis demonstrated an in vitro sensitivity to all antibiotics recommended for treatment of tularemia (for example, ciprofloxacin, gentamycin, levofloxacin) [, ]. The patient’s antibiotic treatment applied until that stage turned out to be inadequate (resistance against ampicillin/sulbactam, and cefuroxime, piperacillin/tazobactam are ineffective in the treatment for tularemia). In a sequencing study (MiSeq sequencer [Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA], see for details) and the phylogenetic analysis (Geneious prime [Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand], Mauve alignment, followed by neighbor-joining clustering, see for details), the DNA from Fth strain A-1825/1, isolated from the patient’s wound swab, was shown to belong to biovar I, clade B.6 and subclade B.49 .
When the reference laboratory for human tularemia underpinned the suspected diagnosis on day 14, the treatment was immediately adjusted, and 500 mg of ciprofloxacin was administered twice a day for 14 days. Under the adjusted treatment, the patient recovered immediately (the CRP dropped to 15 mg/L) and she could be discharged fever-free with a negligible headache on day 17.