A 53 year old man presented with a three year history of left anterior knee pain. He was unable to flex his knee more than 90°. He did not report any trauma, and serology did not reveal any metabolic or rheumatic conditions.
Clinical examination revealed a firm, nodular mass medial to the patellar tendon. The range of motion of the knee joint was limited to 90° of active flexion, with full extension. Neurovascular examination was normal. Plain radiographs showed a well delineated mass in the anterior portion of the knee. The femoral condyles and tibial plateau were normal . The mass was well circumscribed, and was likely to consist of cancellous bone with small areas of radiolucency. MRI confirmed the presence of a pedicle, but there was no continuity with the tibial plateau. The mass was lying in the Hoffa body with the cap in close contact with the medial articular joint space, elevating and displacing anteriorly the medial one third of the patellar tendon .
Under regional anaesthesia with the patient supine in a bloodless field furnished by a tight tourniquet, a 5 cm longitudinal incision was made medially to the patellar tendon. The mass lied medially and behind the patellar tendon in Hoffa body. It was dissected and excised. The medial tibial plateau and the patellar tendon were not involved in the process. The capsule and the skin were sutured with subcuticular undyed 3/0 vicryl (Ethicon, Edinburgh, UK, EH11 4HE) and steristrips (3M, Loughborough, UK, LE11 1EP). A non adherent dressing, velband and crepe bandage were applied. Weight bearing was allowed in the immediate post-operative period.
Post-operative recovery was uneventful. The patient returned to his activities of daily living, and regained full flexion two weeks after the procedure. When last reviewed 24 months after the excision, he was asymptomatic, with no clinical and radiographic signs of recurrence of the lesion .
The firm mass showed a nodular appearance with a diameter of 7 cm with sharply demarcated edges . Microscopic examination showed a cap of mature hyaline cartilaginous tissue covered by a fibrous membrane. The centre of the lesion consisted of mature bone trabeculae located beneath the cartilaginous cap containing bone marrow and amorphous calcified debris. At the interface between mature bone and well-differentiated cartilaginous cap, there were foci of active endochondral ossification. There was no evidence of malignant features, and absence of mitotic activity .