A 25-year-old male patient with a positive medical history for minor thalassemia and Gilbert syndrome presented to the hospital with a chief complaint of right posterior shoulder pain associated with weakness of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle of gradual progression over the course of 1.5 years. The patient noted pain and difficulty with overhead activities; thus, interfering with his activities of daily living. The patient explained that his right shoulder pain is exacerbated upon abduction and external rotation. He denied any traumatic event sustained to the right shoulder.
On physical examination, there was unidirectional shoulder instability, and decreased range of motion associated with clinical evidence of weakness of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles. The patient showed clinical evidence of muscle wasting or hypotrophy. Moreover, the patient had a positive O’Brien active compression test, 3+ anterior load shift, 2+ posterior load shift, and a positive relocation test. Moreover, the patient had a negative Hawkins’ test, Neer’s sign, empty can test, and inverted empty can test. Plain radiographs showed no bony abnormalities. Subsequently, an MRI was taken of the right shoulder revealing a posterior tear to the glenoid labrum and a spinoglenoid ganglion cyst (, ). Fluoroscopy with contrast was also done, also confirming the diagnosis . Preoperative electroneuromyography was suggestive of a suprascapular nerve impairment.
The patient was scheduled for right shoulder arthroscopy. Under general anesthesia, the patient’s right upper extremity was scrubbed and draped in beach chair position. The entry in the shoulder was by scope posterior portal while the insertion was under vision of anterior portal. Arthroscopic inspection confirmed MRI findings of posterior labral tear of the glenoid. The posterior-inferior labral tear is addressed. The 9 to 6 o’clock area of the glenoid rim is debrided with a burr, lasso suture is used to bring the labrum into place. Then two anchors were used to fix the tissue ensuring adequate capsule tension which led to cyst shrinkage.
At six month follow-up in the clinic as an outpatient, the patient denied any existing pain located at his right shoulder area or any associated muscle weakness interfering with his activities of daily living. Upon examination, the patient had regained full range of motion of his right glenohumeral joint without any limitations. The patient showed no residue signs of muscle hypotrophy and has regained the muscle mass which was previously hypotrophied upon his initial presentation.