A 70-year-old male with no known comorbidities presented to our hospital with an early gastric cancer in the anterior wall of the gastric antrum (a). The lesion was approximately 20 mm in size and superficially depressed (b). The background gastric mucosa had open-type atrophic gastritis and was previously infected with Helicobacter pylori. Magnifying endoscopy with narrow-banding imaging revealed a clear demarcation line and irregular microvascular and microsurface patterns (c). Based on the endoscopic findings, adenocarcinoma was suspected. Endoscopic ultrasonography using a 12-MHz miniature probe revealed that the tumor was within the deep submucosa (d). No special findings were noted in blood biochemistry tests, and serum AFP levels were not measured. Adenocarcinoma was pathologically detected on biopsy of the same site. Endoscopy revealed lesions suggestive of probable cancer invasion of the deep submucosa; however, ESD was performed to assess the risk of lymph node metastasis.
The endoscopically resected specimen was 30 mm in size and showed a superficial depressed tumor, which was found to be 20 mm in size (a). Histological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of dilated or slit-like branching tubules of variable diameters that infiltrated deeply into the submucosa (b). Adhesive glandular ducts and glandular ducts with necrotic material in the lumen were observed inside the tumor (c). The GC was moderately differentiated, which is Grade 2 according to the World Health Organization classification. Atypical glandular ducts with a partially clear cytoplasm were also observed; these resembled the fetal digestive tract (d). This enteroblastic component has been reported in approximately 30% of all cases and is more prevalent in infiltrated areas. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for Glypican-3 and AFP, with dot-like staining (a–c).
The pathological diagnosis was GAED. The tumor invasion depth was 2,100 μm into the submucosa (pT1b) with lymphatic invasion. Although an additional gastrectomy was considered, the patient denied any further treatment. The patient was followed up after resection, and no recurrence or metastasis was observed. The patient has been under recurrence-free follow-up for approximately 1 year. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report and is attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).