A 53-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with a progressively enlarged liver lesion for 2 years.
The lesion in the liver had been found during a routine re-examination after surgery two years earlier, and no significant progression was observed during subsequent annual examinations until three months earlier. The maximum diameter of the lesion had grown from 1.3 cm to 3.5 cm within a year, accompanied by mild abdominal discomfort. The patient reported to our hospital for further diagnosis.
The patient had a 30-year history of fatty liver but no history of hepatitis and liver cirrhosis and had undergone duodenal stromal tumor resection twice in our hospital in March 2012 and September 2016. He had no significant symptoms but slightly abdominal discomfort occasionally. His dietary was regular, but the sleep was not that well.
The patient had a 30-year history of alcohol consumption. His father had a gastrointestinal-related disease, but the details are unknown.
The entire abdomen was soft, and there was no pressure pain, rebound pain, and muscle tension. A vertical surgery scar of approximately 15 cm was found. All the other vital signs were stable, and no positive signs were revealed.
The results of the laboratory tests were negative, except an ALT level of 75 U/L. The tumor markers, AFP, CEA, CA19-9, had normal concentrations. The blood tests and fecal, coagulation function, and Helicobacter pylori antibody examinations showed normal results.
Three months earlier, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 2.3 cm occupying lesion in the left external liver lobe . The patient underwent an abdominal ultrasound examination using the Resona9 ultrasound system (Mindray Medical International, China) equipped with an SC6-1U (1-6 MHz) transducer. Conventional ultrasound (US) showed an uneven hypo-echo lesion with a peripheral hypoechoic halo located in the left lobe of the liver. The lesion had an approximate size of 3.5 × 2.2 × 2.4 cm3, a round shape, and slightly clear margins. Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed the dot-linear blood flow signal within the lesion . Given the history of duodenal GIST, the patient’s doctor suggested further CEUS diagnosis and obtained patient's consent. The depth, gain, and focus were thoroughly adjusted for optimal display according to the operator's habits. After a bolus injection of 1.5 mL of Sonovue (Bracco, Italy) suspension, an ultrasound contrast agent, with 5 mL physiological saline (Italy, Bracco), the timer was activated. The target lesion and surrounding liver parenchyma were continuously observed for 5 min. Based on the accepted guidelines, the arterial, portal, and late phases were defined after 10-30 s, 30-120 s, and 121-360 s of the contrast agent injection, respectively. On CEUS, the solid nodule appeared heterogeneous, and there was hyper-enhancement during the arterial phase without a significant concentric perfusion and rim-like enhancement . Quantitative analysis showed a peak intensity difference between the lesion and liver parenchyma (ΔPI) of 3.58 dB . The enhancement of the lesion was washed out rapidly and gradually; a heterogeneous enhancement and hypo-enhancement were observed during the portal and late phases. During the late phase, the contrast agent was barely perfused. These features were suggestive of malignancy. To observe the process and direction of the contrast agent more precisely and better assess the liver lesion, we carried out a second H-CEUS after the patient rested for 1 h. During the arterial phase, a solid lesion that was enhanced from the periphery to the center was observed; a heterogeneous hyper-enhancement at peak was also observed. We also found two irregular branch-like vascular columns around the lesion. Rim enhancement was more significant this time . The video showing the H-CEUS in arterial phase is displayed . Quantitative analysis showed a peak intensity difference between the lesion and liver parenchyma (ΔPI) of 6.63 dB . Similar to the CEUS findings, the contrast agent was washed out rapidly during the portal and late phases, and, finally, no enhancement was observed. The arterial phase of the lesion was suggestive of a malignancy, and metastasis was suspected based on the history.
The final pathological findings were as follows: (1) Microscopic: the short and spindle cells were patchy; and (2) Immunohistochemical results: CD117, Dog-1, and Vimentin were positive, and Ki-67 was > 5% .
Molecular testing revealed c-Kit 11 (c.1655_1699del 15 type), c-Kit 9, c-Kit 13, c-Kit 17, PDGFRα12, and PDGFRα18 wild type mutations, which were associated with poor prognosis .