A 61-year-old male was presented to our hospital with progressive joint stiffness of his right knee. He underwent tension band wiring using K-wires for a transverse patellar fracture and screw fixation for a tibial tuberosity fracture 2 years previously. One year of post-surgery, the patient experienced a gradual loss of knee range of motion (ROM) and felt progressive hardening of the patellar tendon. He did not suffer any other injuries to the right knee. On physical examination, there was no knee swelling or tenderness. A hard and bony patellar tendon extending from the inferior pole of the patella to the tibial tuberosity was palpated. The knee ROM was limited to 15°–45° . No signs of joint instability or skin abnormity were noticed, and the HSS and Lysholm scores of the knee were 48 and 53, respectively. Radiography and computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed extensive ossification of the patellar tendon fused with the inferior pole of the patella and the tibial tuberosity . Small ossification was present around the patella and within the quadriceps tendon. The height of the patella was normal. Blood tests covering lipids, glucose, electrolytes, and liver and renal function were conducted to rule out metabolic diseases, and the results were within normal ranges.
Surgical reconstruction of the patellar tendon was performed. Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned supine, and the original incision was used to expose the patellar tendon. After removing the internal fixation devices, the ossified lesions were carefully excised along with surrounding scar tissue while preserving the intact tendon sheath to retain blood supply. The semitendinosus and gracilis tendons were then harvested using a tendon stripper . Both ends of the tendon were whip stitched with #1 Vicryl sutures. A transverse tunnel was created by drilling with a 4.5-mm bit over a guiding Kirschner pin in the lower half of the patella. Another transverse tibial tunnel was drilled approximately 1 cm posterior to the tibial tuberosity in the same manner. Subsequently, the semitendinosus tendon was passed through the two tunnels using a figure-eight-shaped PDS suture. The free ends of the tendon were sutured together at 30° of knee flexion with #2 Ultrabraid sutures (Smith & Nephew Inc., Andover, MA, USA). Next, the gracilis tendon was placed in an inverted U-shaped pattern and fixed at the inferior pole of the patella and the tibial tuberosity with a 3.5-mm suture anchor (TwinfixTi; Smith & Nephew Inc., Andover, MA, USA). In addition, the overlapping part of the semitendinosus and gracilis tendons was secured using #2 Ultrabraid sutures (Smith & Nephew Inc., Andover, MA, USA) to strengthen the construct . Cerclage wiring was not used, as it requires removal and may cause fractures. A thorough cleaning was performed before layer-by-layer wound closure. The knee joint was easily flexed to 90° without tension intraoperatively. Postoperative radiography and CT demonstrated a normal patellar height and almost complete removal of the lesions . Celecoxib was administered orally at 200 mg twice a day for 2 weeks without causing gastrointestinal distress.
The patient was allowed to perform weight-bearing as tolerated with the protection of a knee brace 1 day after the surgery. An ankle pump exercise was started immediately. Passive ROM was initiated as soon as possible and gradually increased to 90° in the first 4 weeks. At 6 weeks, active ROM was initiated. At the latest follow-up (12 months), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a patellar tendon-like structure on the sagittal plane, indicating successful reconstruction with our technique . The right knee can flex up to 120° with a 5° extension lag . The HSS and Lysholm scores of the knee were 95 and 90, respectively. The patient had no pain and resumed daily activities.