A 72-year-old male presented with dyspnoea on exertion of 1-year duration with worsening in the 2 weeks prior to presentation. He had progressed from New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classification Class-II symptoms at baseline to NYHA Class III at the time of admission. He also had effort angina, Canadian Cardiovascular Society Grade III, and recurrent episodes of syncope in the past 2 weeks. His past medical history included hypertension and prior percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting of the right coronary artery (RCA) in 2006 and left anterior descending artery (LAD) in 2015. He was a reformed smoker. He was on dual antiplatelets, atorvastatin, ranolazine, trimetazidine, and long-acting nitrates at the time of admission. At admission, his blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. He had bilateral crackles in the lung bases and clinical findings of severe AS. N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level at admission was 10 600 pg/mL (normal level: less than 125 pg/mL). Echocardiogram revealed a trileaflet aortic valve with a valve area of 0.5 cm2, a mean pressure gradient across the aortic valve of 58 mmHg (severe AS), and severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 30% . After initial management with aggressive diuretics, he underwent coronary angiography that revealed patent stents in LAD and RCA. Left heart catheterization showed a peak-peak and mean aortic valve gradient of 154 mmHg and 97 mmHg, respectively . Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was elevated at 45 mmHg. Right heart catheterization was also performed. The systolic and mean pulmonary artery pressures were 50 mmHg and 36 mmHg, respectively. In view of co-morbidities and surgical risk, he was deemed a candidate for TAVI. The chest computerized tomography (CT) showed a severely calcified aortic valve with an aortic annulus perimeter of 68.4 mm (perimeter derived diameter 21.8 mm) and an annulus area of 353.2 mm2. The distance of the left and right coronary artery ostia to the aortic annulus plane was 13 mm and 10.6 mm, respectively. No peripheral artery disease was visualized on CT or femoral angiography. Baseline electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia, left ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern, and absence of any conduction blocks .