A 41-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with chest pain. It was described as substernal chest tightness, 5/10 in severity with radiation to the left arm and jaw. Past medical history was non-contributory, with no known risk factors for ischaemic heart disease. The patient was 4 months postpartum following an uncomplicated pregnancy. She admitted to using cocaine and MDMA 3 days prior to presentation. Physical examination was normal with a blood pressure of 130/80 and a heart rate of 76 b.p.m. The patient was pain free on arrival to ED.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) on presentation showed normal sinus rhythm with no ST changes. Initial Troponin T was elevated at 196 ng/L, peaking at 1116 ng/L at 12 h (normal range: 0–14 ng/L). Echocardiography showed preserved left ventricular (LV) function with normal valvular morphology and no regional wall motion abnormalities.
Coronary angiography demonstrated type 2a dissection of the mid to distal left anterior descending artery without extension to the apex . There was also type 2b dissection of the distal posterior descending artery of the right coronary artery . Intracoronary glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) did not affect these findings. The left main stem and circumflex artery were angiographically normal. Intracoronary imaging was not performed in order to avoid the risk of propagation of dissection. This was managed conservatively as the patient was clinically stable and pain free without high-risk anatomy (left main stem or proximal two-vessel coronary artery dissection).
The patient was treated with aspirin and beta-blocker therapy. Magnetic resonance angiography of the renal and carotid/vertebral arteries was normal. The patient was discharged after 7 days and was well at 6 weeks follow-up in clinic. There were no further episodes of chest pain and excellent compliance with medications. The patient has been enrolled in cardiac rehab and counselled on the importance of illicit drug use cessation. We plan to see her in clinic in 3 months.