A 50-year-old right-handed previously healthy Caucasian woman presented with a several month history of daily headaches, blurry vision, worsening daytime somnolence, and progressive memory difficulties. These symptoms had a significant impact on her activities of daily living and finally resulted in loss of employment. During this time she reported sleeping between 12 and 14 hours per day without improvement in energy level and had gained 18kg (40 pounds) in weight. She also reported a constant feeling of thirst, polydipsia (drinking 10 liters of fluid daily), polyuria, and nocturia. She had been amenorrheic for 5 years and reported no recent vaginal bleeding. She denied nausea, vomiting, heat or cold intolerance, and galactorrhea. Her past medical history was significant only for medication-controlled hypertension and she had no family history of endocrine abnormalities. Her physical examination was significant for bilateral peripheral visual field loss. The remainder of the examination, including a thorough neurological examination, was unremarkable. Laboratory studies demonstrated panhypopituitarism as follows (normal range in parentheses): thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.8uIU/mL (0.35–5.50), free thyroxine 0.52ng/dL (0.90–1.80), prolactin 42ng/mL (2.8–29.0), luteinizing hormone <1IU/L (postmenopausal range 15.9–54.0), follicle-stimulating hormone 2.1IU/L (23.0–116.3), adrenocorticotropic hormone 19pg/mL (0–49), insulin-like growth factor 38ng/mL (100–250), and cortisol at 4:00 p.m. <1.5mcg/dL (4.3–22.4).
A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the patient’s brain with contrast showed a 25 × 22 × 20mm intensely enhancing suprasellar mass involving the hypothalamus and optic chiasm. The mass appeared to be separate from the pituitary on both sagittal and coronal imaging (Figure ). Differential diagnosis included a metastatic lesion, as well as primary lesions such as central nervous system lymphoma, chordoma of the pituitary stalk, glioma, germinoma, sarcoidosis, and LCH. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast showed no evidence of neoplastic disease. Angiography revealed only mild displacement of the thalamic perforating arteries due to mass effect, and minimal tumor vascularity.
A stereotactic needle biopsy of the mass was performed. A histological examination showed mildly gliotic brain parenchyma with a weakly angiocentric lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate that ranged from modest to intense. Also present were a few aggregates of histiocytes, one resembling a well-formed non-necrotizing granuloma (Figure A). Close inspection of these histiocytes revealed notched or grooved nuclei and abundant pale granular eosinophilic cytoplasm (Figure B). No atypical lymphocytes, no multinucleated giant cells, no infectious organisms or viral inclusions, and only rare eosinophils were identified. The histological differential diagnosis included: lymphoma, lymphocytic hypophysitis, and LCH. Immunohistochemical staining showed a mixed population of T-cells (Figure C) and B-cells (Figure D) with a normal 2:1 ratio of kappa- and lambda-light chain expression (Figure E and F), consistent with a reactive non-neoplastic infiltrate. Further characterization of the histiocytes showed strong reactivity for S100, CD163, and CD1a (Figure ), supporting the diagnosis of LCH.
Prednisone and replacement hormone therapy, initiated immediately after her initial diagnosis, significantly improved the patient’s functional status; however, she remained fatigued and did not remember her initial hospital visits. Her case was presented at our multidisciplinary Tumor board. The consensus was that radiation therapy was a reasonable treatment approach for control of her tumor. She underwent CT simulation for radiation therapy planning. A 4-field 3D-conformal plan was generated with a prescription dose of 20Gy in 10 once-daily fractions. She completed radiation therapy with no acute complications.
At 3 months post-radiotherapy, she reported her energy level and cognition had significantly improved on endocrine therapy and at 5 months post-radiotherapy, an MRI demonstrated a marked decrease in the lesion size (8mm greatest dimension) with decreased edema in surrounding tissues as seen on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging. At 9 months post-radiotherapy, she presented with a 2-week history of mild confusion, forgetfulness, increased fatigue, and an increase in weight. She has had routine follow-up visits with her endocrinologist with no recent changes in her endocrine replacement regimen. MRI at this time demonstrated an interval increase in lesion size from 8mm to 14mm and increased edema in the surrounding tissues.
Her case was presented at our multidisciplinary Neuro-Oncology Tumor board. Because she initially responded well to radiation therapy, a second course of radiation was recommended. She was re-simulated and treated with an additional 30Gy in 15 once-daily fractions. She completed radiotherapy with only mild fatigue. At the completion of treatment, she reported improvement in her vision and was able to reduce her steroid dose. Three months after completion of her second course of radiotherapy, an MRI demonstrated a decrease in size of the mass to 10mm with resolution of surrounding FLAIR signal, representing a favorable response to her second course of radiotherapy.