A 58-year-old male was referred to the department of rehabilitation medicine for an electromyography (EMG) study for symptoms of bilateral foot drop that appeared 25 d after the first biliary surgery.
The patient was diagnosed with acute cholecystitis and then underwent a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Nine days after the first operation, the patient developed complications and underwent second common bile duct resection with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. During the hospitalization for the two surgeries, the patient had no unconscious time other than surgery. After the two operations, however, he rarely ate oral meals for approximately 10 d because of nausea, vomiting, and anorexia; instead, he received conservative treatment only with Hartman solution or dextrose fluid, and thus lost weight rapidly. Before the surgery, the patient was 168 cm tall and weighed 68 kg [body mass index (BMI), 24.1 kg/m2], but after the two surgeries, his body weight was reduced to 58 kg for 24 d (0.42 kg/day; BMI, 20.5 kg/m2).
After the second operation, early ambulation was recommended, but during the first postoperative week, he was unable to walk properly because of the pain of operation site and discomfort caused by the tube inserted in his body. When he tried walking in the ward 2 wk after the operation, but he noticed that both ankles, especially the left ankle, were dragged, accompanied by numbness in both feet.
There was no illness in previous medical history.
No abnormalities.
In a physical examination before the EMG study on the 105th day after the first operation, the patient showed the obvious bilateral weakness of ankle dorsiflexor (right: 2/5 and left: 0/5), big toe extensor (right: 1/5 and left: 0/5), and foot everter (right: 2/5 and left: 0/5). In addition, the sensation was decreased in the anterolateral aspect of the calf, the dorsal surface of the foot, and the first web space of foot. Tinel’s sign was positive in the area around both fibular heads.
In the motor nerve conduction study, the amplitude of the deep peroneal nerve recorded in the extensor digitorum brevis was reduced on both sides as compared with the normal lower limits, and conduction block on the area around both fibular heads was found using the “inching” technique. The amplitude of the compound motor action potential (CMAP) measured in the tibialis anterior was also significantly reduced on the left side. In the sensory nerve conduction study, no action potential was induced in the left superficial peroneal nerve . On the needle EMG, abnormal spontaneous activity was observed in both tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, and extensor digitorum brevis. In particular, no motor unit action potential was observed in the left tibialis anterior during contraction. All the other nerve conduction studies (median, ulnar, tibial, and sural nerves) showed normal findings. The EMG study was consistent with bilateral common peroneal neuropathy around the fibular heads. In addition, blood tests were conducted to detect DM, thyroid dysfunction, vitamin (B1, B6, and B12) deficiency, or folate deficiency, which may cause non-compressive peroneal neuropathy; however, all test results were normal.
There were no abnormal findings on magnetic resonance image (MRI) study of the lumbar spine that was performed to rule out the possibility of paralysis of both lower extremities due to lumbosacral lesions. Ultrasonography revealed no tumors or cysts along the course of the sciatic nerve and peroneal nerve from the hip to the lower leg.
On left knee MRI, no structure was found around the fibular head that could cause entrapment of the peroneal nerve, and volume loss and edema were observed with the signal change by the nerve denervation in the anterior and lateral muscular compartments of the left lower leg .