A 22-year-old woman with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia relapsed and the patient did not achieve remission after the second induction chemotherapy.
The disease relapsed in August 2021 and the patient did not achieve remission after the second induction chemotherapy. The bone marrow blast cells were 95%. The patient underwent leukapheresis for T cells followed by bridging chemotherapy for rapid progressive disease. Although more than 90% of the bone marrow blast cells were still present, the patient was keen to undergo chimeric antigen receptor-T cell (CAR-T) therapy. She was very thin with a body weight of 35 kg. Lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine at 30 mg/m2/d intravenously (IV) and cyclophosphamide at 300 mg/m2/d IV for 3 d administered, followed by sequential infusion of CD22+ CAR-T cells (1 × 106/kg) on day -2, CD19+ CAR-T cells (2 × 106/kg) on day -1, and CD22+ CAR-T cells (1 × 106/kg) on day 0.
On August 11, 2020, the patient sought treatment for progressive fatigue. Routine blood tests showed that a white blood cell count of 42.4 × 109/L with 89.9% lymphocytes, hemoglobin level of 54 g/L, and platelet count of 22 × 109/L. Bone marrow biopsy revealed infiltration of 90.7% lympoblasts. Immunophenotypically, the blasts were human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR+, cluster of differentiation (CD) 19+, CD22+, CD34+, CD38+, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)+, CD10- and cytoplasmic immunoglobulin M (cIgM)-. The BCR/ABL1 (P190) fusion gene was negative. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal karyotype. Next-generation sequencing revealed a pathogenic mutation in fms-like tyrosine kinase 3, kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog, paired box family of transcription factor and nonnucleoside nuclear receptor binding SET domain-protein 2. The patient was diagnosed as B cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (pro-B-ALL, adverse category). After one cycle of induction treatment with the vincristine, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, L-Asparaginase and prednisone regimen, the patient achieved complete remission. Five courses of consolidation therapy were administered, and the measurable residual disease (MRD) was kept negative by flow cytometry before each consolidation therapy. Allo-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been suggested multiple times but the patient refused.
The personal and family history was normal.
There is no positive physical examination findings before CAR-T therapy. The patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly after CAT-T therapy, the physical examination findings were described in TREATMENT part.
The basic laboratory examination findings such as bone marrow biopsy and flow cytometry were shown in History of past illness part. The Table shows several important laboratory examinations after CAR-T therapy.
The chest computed tomography showed pneumonia after CAR-T therapy. It is a very common complication. I will provide the images if they are requested.