A 70-year-old man patient weighing 55 kg was admitted to emergency department with a complaint of severe weakness, lightheadedness, and lower limb paresthesia. Before this admission, he also presented worsening of symptoms in the last two weeks. He had no family history of cardiovascular disease, sudden cardiac death, or syncope.
On admission, hemodynamic parameters were in acceptable condition. He had blood pressure of 79/99 mmHg, heart rate of 57 beats/minute, and respiratory rate of 20 breath/minute, and he was also afebrile. Oxygen saturation, at rest, with finger pulse oximeter in index finger was 95%.
Primary physical examination was also done and we found the S4 sound in the apex, in cardiac auscultation. He was in class 2 of the New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classification. Laboratory findings showed a mild hypochromic microcytic anemia [hemoglobin = 10.9 g/dl, hematocrit = 30.3%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) = 73.09 fl, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) = 21.67 pg]. He had degrees of hypothyroidism with thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) of 20 mU/l and serum thyroxine (T4) of 2.4 µg/dl.
Electrocardiography (ECG) showed right bundle branch block (RBBB) with right axis deviation and complete atrioventricular block that diagnosed as a Trifascicular block .
The patient referred to echocardiography unit and transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderate increase in thickness of left ventricular (LV) wall as a concentric pattern and LV diastolic dysfunction (grade 2). The ejection fraction of LV (LVEF) was 55%. Echocardiography revealed normal right ventricle size and function as well [tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) = 1.9 cm] . Cardiac biomarkers revealed that troponin I was negative with elevated N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) equal to 288 pg/ml.
Regard to severe weakness and paresthesia, he referred to neurology department for electrodiagnostic study. The electrodiagnostic evaluation revealed absent sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) with low amplitude compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) of upper and lower limbs. These findings were compatible with chronic sensory-motor polyneuropathy with axonal features, and evidence of ongoing axonal loss.
According to the sustained anemic situation and severe weakness, the patient underwent bone marrow aspiration. Microscopic evaluation of bone marrow aspiration revealed elevated cellularity with myeloid hyperplasia to erythroid hypoplasia ratio of 3:1, and complete maturation. Plasma cells were 22% of all nucleated cells. This finding was compatible with plasma cell myeloma.
Laboratory investigations including serum and urine electrophoresis and serum free light chain examination as immunofixation assay were also done. The results showed that kappa (κ) chains predominated over lambda (λ) chains in a ratio of 3:2. The hepatic test showed elevated alkaline phosphatase value equal to 215 U/l.
Ultimately, by considering all clinical aspects and paraclinical investigations mentioned above, final diagnosis for the patient was amyloid light-chain (AL) cardiac amyloidosis.
Immediately, the targeted therapy was established. Regarding clinical and paraclinical parameters, the patient received melphalan combined with high-dose dexamethasone. Concurrently, immunotherapeutic strategy with CPHPC and monoclonal antibodies were also prescribed. The patient closely monitored for 2 weeks and during this treatment period, he showed hematologic and organ response to the therapy. After this period, kappa to lambda ratio in urine immunofixation electrophoresis was normal, and serum level had a negative result. Heart response included no change in normal left ventricular ejection fraction (55 %), enhance the NYHA class of 2 to 1 without using any medications such as diuretic, and no wall thickness enhancement. NT-ProBNP was in normal range (100 pg/ml). The hepatic test revealed that alkaline phosphatase value had a dramatic decrease in 101 U/l (more than 50%).
After completion of treatment, the patient was discharged and advised to follow his situation and disease by referring to heart clinic every 2 weeks until 6 months, and referring electrophysiologist to consult the indications of an implantable cardiac defibrillator.