A 55-year-old male patient was sent to our hospital because of unconsciousness and limb convulsion for 1 h.
The patient's wife found him vocalizing in his sleep. He was unconscious and presented with a foaming mouth, limb rigidity and urinary incontinence. Paroxysmal convulsions of both lower limbs were observed. Thirty minutes after admission, the patient regained consciousness but remained unable to speak. His right limb was hemiplegic, and he had paroxysmal involuntary twitches of both lower limbs, with no limb ankylosis. An hour after admission, the patient was able to answer some questions and raise his right limbs. The lower limbs were no longer twitching.
The patient had a history of right pontine infarction 3 years prior. The clinical manifestation at that time was mild weakness of the left limbs, and there were no sequelae after treatment.
The patient had no personal or family history of epilepsy. Additionally, he had no risk factors for cerebral infarction, such as hypertension, diabetes, smoking, drinking, atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease.
The patient did not cooperate with the eye movement examination, and no gaze was observed. Physical examination showed vague speech, bilateral symmetry of the nasolabial grooves, grade IV muscle strength in the right limbs, normal limb muscle tension, and positive bilateral pathological signs.
Routine blood tests, liver function, kidney function, electrolytes, glucose levels and coagulation function were normal.
Head computed tomography showed no abnormality. No hypoperfused area was found via computed tomography perfusion imaging of the anterior circulation. Computed tomography angiography showed that the basilar artery was occluded and that the posterior communicating artery was patent . There was no abnormality on video electroencephalogram (EEG) examination during the interictal period. Additionally, 24-h Holter monitoring showed no abnormality.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed left pontine infarction . Digital subtraction angiography showed that the lower segment of the basilar artery was severely stenosed, the upper segment was occluded, and the bilateral posterior communicating arteries were patent .