A 39-year-old Iranian woman presented with menstrual disturbance, headache, vertigo, decreased libido, polyuria, and polydipsia for six months. In addition, she has been infertile for two years. She was a housewife with no history of occupational exposure and her family history was unremarkable. She never smoked or drank alcohol. The patient denied a history of diabetes mellitus or hypertension, but she noted a head injury 4 years ago with no change in the level of consciousness and no evidence of skull base fracture or leakage. She did not suffer from hyperandrogenism, visual complaints, and diplopia. Moreover, no signs of acromegaly or Cushing syndrome were detected.
Vital signs on admission remained normal. Physical examination revealed no visual field defects, and fundoscopy showed that both eyes were normal with sharp optic disc margins. Her visual acuity was 10/10 bilaterally. All neurological examinations, including cranial nerves, were normal.
Further investigations at another center revealed elevated levels of prolactin ; therefore, a dynamic pituitary gland magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary was performed, showing an enlarged gland with a thick infandibulum and a peripherally enhancing T1 hypo intense lesion. .
According to the results of clinical and laboratory investigations, the patient underwent trans-sphenoidal surgery (TSS) with the primary diagnosis of non-functional pituitary macro-adenoma. However, direct observation during surgery revealed drainage of malodor pus when the sella was opened. The putrid collection was drained and the enlarged and inflamed part of the pituitary gland was excised. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage and sinus tracts were evaluated after surgery.
Histopathologic examination showed an anterior pituitary gland with dense infiltration of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and some granulomas with central neutrophilic microabscess formation. No acid-fast bacilli or fungal elements were noted with Ziehl Neelsen and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stains. The final diagnosis was granulomatous hypophysitis with neutrophilic microabscess formation .
Excised tissue and pus cultures showed massive growth of Streptococcus viridans colonies. All isolates were sensitive to cefotaxim, penicillin, and vancomycin and resistant to clindamycin and erythromycin.
Direct Ziehl–Neelsen staining of pus, histopathology, and a polymerase chain reaction of cerebrospinal fluid and pituitary gland tissue excluded tuberculosis and other mycobacterial agents. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels were normal. Serologic tests for antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-associated vasculitis and syphilis were negative. Repeated blood cultures and echocardiography were normal. Ear and mastoid, and oral cavity evaluations were unremarkable.