A 43-year-old man, an outpatient, presented with a history of bilateral upper eyelid ptosis alternately for 5 years. He described symptom fluctuation as worse during the afternoons and evenings but better the next day after a good night’s sleep without any treatment. He reported no limb muscle weakness, hoarse voice, difficulty breathing, chewing weakness, dysphagia, or headaches. Fourteen months ago, he suffered from hyperhidrosis and irritability. Simultaneously, he noted bilateral eye protrusion, limitation to abduct his right eye, and intermittent horizontal diplopia. Two months later, he started experiencing limitation to adduct his left eye. These new symptoms led him to seek an assessment from an endocrinologist, and he was clinically diagnosed with Graves’ disease with hyperthyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (also known as Graves’ ophthalmopathy). Thyroid function tests showing elevated free thyroxine (T) 3, elevated free T4, depression of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and positive thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO-Ab) and TSH receptor antibodies (TR-Ab) confirmed the diagnosis. Since then, treatment with propylthiouracil (oral dose of 0.3 g/day, 0.15 g each time, twice a day) was started regularly. However, no significant change in the symptoms of ptosis and eyeball movement disorders was observed after treatment for more than 1 year.
Subsequently, a diagnosis of ocular myasthenia gravis was given based on fatigability and asymmetrical ophthalmoparesis without pupillary dysfunction by a neurological assessment. Physical examination was remarkable for ptosis of the right upper eyelid that covered the upper half of the pupil, left eyeball exophthalmos, and limitation of bilateral eyeball movement, without any pupillary dysfunction or bulbar involvement . The fatigue test of the right upper levator muscle was positive. Positivity for the neostigmine test and the repetitive nerve stimulation test confirmed the clinical diagnosis. Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody (AChR-Ab) was positive (6.273 nmol/L). Computed tomography (CT) images suggested thymic hyperplasia , and pathological examination confirmed it. Meanwhile, hypoplasia of the right thoracodorsal and deltoid muscle and malformation of ipsilateral hands were detected upon physical inspection. A CT scan demonstrated hypoplasia of the right muscles. Treatment including pyridostigmine bromide (oral dose of 180 mg per day, 60 mg each time, three times a day), thymectomy, and prednisone led to partial clinical improvement. The oral prednisone treatment plan that we adopted was an escalation schedule. The first week was 10 mg per day. When no obvious worsening reaction was observed, 20 mg per day was used for the second week. When no obvious worsening reaction occurred, 60 mg per day was started from the third week. After maintaining the condition for 3 months, when the condition improved significantly, the dose was gradually reduced by 10 mg every week until the drug was stopped. After 13 months of follow-up, the symptoms of drooping eyelids were partially improved, but the eyeball protrusion and right hand deformity remained unchanged.