A 72-year-old slightly obese man with a body mass index of 28.4 presented to our hospital for chest tightness and nausea for 2 weeks. There was no history of thoracic and abdominal trauma. A chest X-ray film revealed a double line on the right diaphragm . Chest CT demonstrated a well-circumscribed mass in the right thoracic cavity measuring 28 cm × 9 cm × 10 cm that was compressing the right lower lobe . The mass comprised mostly fatty tissue, and any other organs such as intestinal tract were not included in the mass . The results of blood chemistry studies, including tumor markers, were within normal ranges. Thus, the following differential diagnosis were considered: lipoma, liposarcoma, and diaphragmatic hernia. Surgery was performed for diagnosis and treatment via a small lateral thoracotomy via the seventh intercostal space with thoracoscopic assistance. A retroperitoneal fat pad of 28 cm in size was slid into the thoracic cavity from the right lumbocostal triangle, as the hernia orifice . The size of orifice was about 8 × 5 cm. We transected the neck of the fat pad above the orifice, because the hernia content in the thoracic cavity was larger than the orifice and difficult to reduce. Several feeding arteries contained in the stem were dissected by a vessel-sealing device. The orifice was closed by suturing the surrounding diaphragmatic muscle and the chest wall. The collapsed lung could be re-expanded by positive pressure ventilation without developing acute lung edema. The operation time was 112 min and the total blood loss 220 g. The fat pad measured 28 × 9.7 × 9.5 cm . Histological examination revealed maturated fat tissue . The chest drain was removed on the first postoperative day. Postoperative chest X-ray films demonstrated progressive re-expansion of the right lower lobes, which had been collapsed preoperatively. The patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. Not only his dyspnea on effort but also his stiff neck improved considerably. When last seen at his 4-month follow-up visit, he reported a good quality of life and there was no evidence of recurrence.