A 77-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our endocrine unit in June 2018, for evaluation of a suspected PM from melanoma.
In 2001, the patient had been diagnosed with a nonsecreting pituitary macroadenoma of 25 mm in maximum diameter with suprasellar extension. He had been treated with TNS surgery in another center, and follow-up MRI studies did not demonstrate any residual tissue, up to 5 years after intervention, and pituitary function was preserved. Unfortunately, these images from the previous patient’s history are not available since he moved from another town.
In 2016, he had undergone surgical resection of a melanoma of the right shoulder, and then he was regularly followed up by an oncologist in another hospital, reporting no relapse after surgery.
In February 2018, however, imaging studies demonstrated secondary lesions at the lung, liver, and femur level; therefore, treatment with pembrolizumab (anti-PD1—Keytruda, MSD), 2 mg/kg in cycles of four intravenous infusions each with a 3-week interval, was scheduled. Nevertheless, at the beginning of May 2018 before starting this treatment, a sudden onset of nausea and dizziness followed by loss of consciousness required an emergency brain computed tomography (CT) evaluation, which revealed the appearance a sellar mass of about 17 × 12 mm. A focused sellar MRI confirmed the presence of this lesion, isointense with the surrounding parenchyma in T1-weighted sequences and extending from the anterior pituitary towards the peduncle and the optical chiasma . For this reason, the patient underwent an emergency evaluation of adrenal and thyroid axes showing hormonal hypofunction and was prescribed with cortisone acetate (one and a half tablets per day) and levothyroxine (L-T4, 25 µg per day) by an endocrinology consultant. Then, he was discharged and referred to our endocrine unit for further investigations and adequate follow-up. At presentation, he did not report significant symptoms except diffuse weakness. He was also affected by arterial hypertension, appropriately controlled with nebivolol 5 mg per day, hypercholesterolemia treated with pravastatin 40 mg per day, osteoporosis managed by denosumab intramuscularly every 6 months and calcium carbonate 1000 mg per day, and stage II chronic kidney disease (CKD). He did not smoke and consumed only one glass of wine at meals. Physical examination demonstrated moderate overweight (weight 88 kg, height 180 cm, body mass index 27.2 kg/m2), normal heart rate at 72 beats per minute, and slightly high blood pressure (145/95 mmHg). Endocrine evaluation showed mild hyperprolactinemia (prolactin (PRL) 482 µIU/ml, normal range 86–324 µIU/ml) and panhypopituitarism, with an insufficient dose of thyroid hormone and an excess of urinary free cortisol (UFC) indicating corticosteroid overtreatment . Furthermore, a visual field test was performed, demonstrating no impairment. So, replacement therapy with cortisone acetate and levothyroxine was adjusted as required, while testosterone and somatotroph hormone were not prescribed, according to patient’s preference and in consideration of the neoplastic progression, respectively. In the meantime, the patient had started pembrolizumab infusions since the end of May 2018.
The whole-body positron-emission tomography (PET) and CT scans performed in August 2018 after one cycle of pembrolizumab infusions revealed reduced metabolic activity and morphovolumetric stability of the other known secondary lesions. The head-MRI study performed in September 2018 demonstrated a significant volume decrease (47%) of the pituitary lesion, thus confirming its secondary nature. In fact, only a paramedian left 8 × 6 × 6 mm remnant was described, without alterations in the surrounding structures . The same finding was confirmed at the following MRI controls in June 2019 and February 2020. Considering the patient’s conditions and his ongoing anticancer treatment, we did not try to withdraw any medication and test him for a possible hormone function improvement.
The patient is still followed up at our unit, while he continues his antineoplastic treatment under the oncologists’ supervision. His conditions remain good and stable under the current therapeutic regimen.