We report the case of a 27-year-old female patient with no significant medical history, who presented with mixed-type right knee pain related to a swelling on the anteromedial aspect of the knee. This swelling had been progressively developing over the past 5 years, with no signs of local inflammation or limitation of mobility. A standard knee X-ray performed showed a well-corticated, homogeneously structured metaphyseal-epiphyseal bony outgrowth on the proximal tibia, measuring 4 cm along its major axis, with no cortical breach or periosteal reaction .
The initial radiological diagnosis was a benign bone tumor (osteochondroma), and the patient did not follow up. She presented to us after 5 years with an enlarged mass that had not affected knee mobility. There was no sensory-motor deficit, and no systemic symptoms were reported. A subsequent X-ray revealed an increased size of the lesion, measuring 7 cm along its major axis involving the anterior tibial tuberosity . Additional CT and MRI scans indicated no medullary extension, and regional staging did not reveal distant metastases (, ). A surgical biopsy was performed, confirming the diagnosis of well-differentiated parosteal surface osteosarcoma.
A multidisciplinary team decision was made to perform a conservative oncological surgical resection of the knee joint, including the involved anterior tibial tuberosity and patellar tendon. Preoperative planning for resection and reconstruction using 3D printing technology to enable precise complete resection with the assistance of a customized cutting guide. Anticipating the expected bone loss and accurately calculated dimensions of a thin posterior-lateral cortical defect .
The surgical procedure involved resection of the tumor, which encompassed the anterior tibial tuberosity (TTA), half of the patellar tendon, the pes anserinus, and the superficial bundle of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL), while preserving the deep bundle of the LCL. There was no need for opening the joint capsule.
In terms of the reconstruction procedure, we used the non-vascularized peroneus for the posterior-medial pillar, embedded within the tibial shaft. The iliac crest bone graft was employed for the anterior tibial tuberosity and for the anterior-medial defect. The patellar tendon was reconstructed using the long peroneal tendon. Finally, we reinforced the posterior-internal structure through transosseous reinsertion of the hamstring muscles tendons following osteosynthesis with a locking screw plate.
Postoperatively, the patient was immobilized with a removable knee brace and instructed to avoid weight-bearing for 6 weeks (, ). Subsequently, a gentle rehabilitation program was initiated. The patient retained a competent extensor system but had slight knee stiffness with a flexion deficit of 5 degrees.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen confirmed low grade paraosteal osteosarcoma with clear resection margins . Over the past eighteen months of follow-up, no signs of recurrence were observed, and positive functional outcomes were noted in the lower limb, and the patient regained satisfactory native knee function.