A 66-year-old woman with dyslipidaemia and hypertension underwent percutaneous coronary intervention on the left circumflex coronary artery and left anterior descending artery for stable angina pectoris. She regularly received an intermediate dose of statin, a beta-blocker, an angiotensin II receptor blocker, and a P2Y12 receptor inhibitor as a life-long single antiplatelet therapy after drug-eluting stent placement. At the age of 75, she visited her primary care doctor due to a recurrence of chest discomfort on exertion. Physical examination showed neither signs of congestive heart failure nor heart murmurs. Troponin I was below the detection limit (<10 pg/mL), and electrocardiography did not show ST-T changes. On echocardiography, left ventricular function was within the normal range, and no valvular disease corresponding to her symptoms was observed.
She was referred to our cardiology outpatient clinic for further work-up. In accordance with recent clinical guidelines that recommend CCTA as the initial investigation in symptomatic patients in whom obstructive coronary artery disease cannot be excluded by clinical assessment alone,, she underwent CCTA to examine the cause of her symptoms. Coronary computed tomography angiography was performed on a 192-slice dual-source scanner using prospectively ECG-triggered high-pitch spiral acquisition, 100-KV protocol, and body weight and kilovolt-adjusted iodine injection protocol. The radiation dose was 0.9 mSv, and the contrast dose was 43 mL. On CCTA, high-grade stenosis was observed in the mid-left circumflex coronary artery. The LM had a large eccentric mixed plaque, despite minimal luminal narrowing . The LM plaque demonstrated high-risk features, including LAP with a minimum of 25 Hounsfield units and positive remodelling. To further assess the high-risk plaque of the LM, non-contrast MRI was performed on a 1.5-T scanner using the CATCH technique (details in the ). CATCH MRI acquires whole-heart dark-blood T1-weighted plaque images and bright-blood anatomical reference images simultaneously, allowing perfectly matched fusion images without any additional image registration steps (Video 1). displays the CATCH MR images. Bright-blood coronary MR angiography showed minor luminal narrowing of the mid-shaft of the LM. High-intensity signals with a plaque-to-myocardium signal intensity ratio (PMR) of 3.02 were observed on dark-blood T1-weighted imaging. The fusion image confirmed that the high-intensity signals were located within the LM wall, indicating intraplaque haemorrhage. Taking the high-risk imaging features into account, the dosage of rosuvastatin was increased from 10 mg to 20 mg daily.
The CCTA findings suggested that the high-grade stenosis of the mid-left circumflex coronary artery accounted for her symptoms. Percutaneous coronary intervention was thus indicated and considering its high probability, dual antiplatelet therapy was initiated. She was referred to the catheter laboratory for invasive coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention as clinically indicated. In line with the CCTA findings, invasive coronary angiography showed high-grade stenosis of the mid-left circumflex coronary artery and minor luminal narrowing of the LM . The mid-left circumflex coronary artery was considered indicated for revascularisation.Ad hoc percutaneous coronary intervention using a drug-eluting stent was successfully performed with NIRS-IVUS guidance. and Video 2 display the pre-procedural NIRS-IVUS imaging of the LM. At the site with the minimal lumen area (13.8 mm2), the plaque burden was 70%. Cross-sectional grayscale IVUS images showed an eccentric plaque with extensive echo attenuation and spotty calcification. Meanwhile, the NIRS chemogram categorized the LM lesion as non-lipid-rich, with a maximum lipid core burden index in 4 mm (maxLCBI4mm) of 169.
After percutaneous coronary intervention, the patient was free from chest symptoms. Considering the multiple high-risk features of the LM lesion, which might cause a fatal cardiac event, ezetimibe was added to high-intensity statin therapy to further reduce low-density lipoprotein levels. Thereafter, no cardiac events occurred during the 18 months of follow-up.