A 25-year-old female patient with no significant past medical or surgical history was admitted to the emergency room due to fever, chills, paroxysmal cough, and scattered rashes . Before the onset of illness, the patient was a general staff member of a company and had been involved in picking strawberries at a suburban farm. The results of blood tests at admission were an increased WBC count of 11.93 × 109/L, an increased proportion of neutrophils of 85%, and a raised CRP level of 24.62 mg/L. The patient failed to respond to oral cefixime treatment and her body temperature progressively increased to 40 °C . The patient’s vital signs were a blood pressure of 116/70 mmHg, heartrate of 86 bpm, SpO2 of 100%, and respiratory rate of 19 beats/min. Physical examination revealed that the patient’s bilateral neck, submandibular, and left groin regions had multiple enlarged lymph nodes, some of which were tender and others slightly hardened. The pharynx was congested and the patient’s skin was red with scattered itchy maculopapular rashes.
The results of blood tests performed after admission are shown in Table . B-ultrasonic examination showed that the lymph nodes of the bilateral submandibular glands, bilateral neck, bilateral supraclavicular, bilateral inguinal were swollen. An abdominal CT also revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the left groin. During hospitalization, the drug regime was adjusted several times (amoxicillin and potassium clavulanate, moxifloxacin, and ganciclovir), although the patient’s response to these drugs was not satisfactory. Because the cause of the illness remained unknown we performed additional tests that included IgM antibody examination for common pathogens using a broad range of autoantibodies and blood and sputum cultures. None of these tests were positive for bacteria or fungi. The nucleic acid test for COVID-19 was negative. A pathological biopsy specimen of a left inguinal lymph node was performed with histology showing structural disorder and cortical atrophy of the node and T cell proliferation in the paracortical area with infiltration of a large number of plasma cells . The patient was diagnosed histologically with reactive hyperplasia. In order to further investigate possible causes for the infection, peripheral blood samples were collected on the 3rd day of admission for next-generation sequencing analysis to detect pathogenic microorganisms. The results showed that R. ornithinolytica was present, although no drug resistance genes were detected in the analysis .
The treatment regimen was adjusted in accordance with the sequencing results. Meropenem (1 g; q8h; ivgtt) in combination with loratadine (10 mg; qn; po) were administered for 6 days, with the patient’s body temperature decreasing progressively to normal levels on the 2nd day of treatment (day 4). In addition, the rash gradually disappeared and the inflammatory reactions gradually decreased as shown by the results of the blood tests summarized in Table . On the 4th day of the final treatment it was observed that the size and tenderness of the enlarged lymph nodes had also decreased. Seven days after the final adjusted treatment, the patient gradually recovered and was discharged from the central hospital to the community clinic for an additional 7 days course of oral faropenem (200 mg; tid; po). The timeline of the entire course of diagnosis and treatment is shown in Fig. .