A 30-year-old Asian female patient presented to our emergency department with sudden loss of vision accompanied by redness and pain for 1 day, with no history of trauma or ocular disease. She had been taking prednisone acetate (10 mg/d) for 8 years for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The patient had end-stage renal disease and was on hemodialysis (HD). Comprehensive ophthalmic examinations were performed. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/32 in the right eye, and no light perception in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13.6 mm Hg in the right eye and undetectable in the left eye, as measured by non-contact tonometry. There was upper lid erythema and edema, marked proptosis with no motility in the left eye. As shown in Fig. A, slit-lamp examination revealed severe conjunctival hyperemia, corneal edema, and hypopyon. Fundus visualization was poor due to the corneal opacity, edema, and vitreous opacities. Ultrasound B-scans showed dotted, clustered low to moderate echogenicity in the posterior vitreous and edema and thickening of the bulbous wall as shown in Fig. B. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed periocular tissue swelling as shown in Fig. C.
A systemic workup for the source of infection was performed. Laboratory testing showed that white blood cells were at normal levels (4.39 × 109/L), CRP was elevated at 30.37 mg/L. Kidney and liver function were severely impaired (serum creatinine 551 µmol/L, aspartate aminotransferase 241 U/L). There was no presence of liver abscesses, sinus infections, endocarditis, meningitis, or indwelling catheters detected by X-ray, CT, or abdominal ultrasound. In addition, the patient was afebrile and the blood culture was negative. Overall, no source of infection was found.
This patient had no history of trauma or surgery, and was in an immunocompromised state. Endogenous endophthalmitis with extra-orbital involvement was diagnosed. Pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil implant was performed subsequently. Vitreous humor sample was collected for diagnosis and microbial identification. In addition, antibiotics were administered systematically (ceftazidime 2 g IV BID) and locally (levofloxacin eye drop QID). to control infection prior to microbiological culture and antibiotic susceptibility testing (AST) results. Microbiological culture which based on the Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time-of-Flight (MALDI-TOF) showed that a rare bacterium- Aeromonas veronii was isolated from the vitreous fluid. In addition, the AST showed that this type of bacteria was sensitive to second-generation cephalosporins and quinolones, including both ceftazidime and levofloxacin. However, endogenous endophthalmitis progressed rapidly, leading to severe corneal ulceration and perforation on post-operative day 1 as shown in Fig. D. Enucleation was performed on postoperative day 2 after vitrectomy because of protrusion of intraocular contents and no possibility of visual recovery. Neutrophilic infiltration and abscess formation were suggested by pathological examination of the ocular contents. Two weeks after the surgery, there was no signs of recurrent infection.