A 31-year-old female (height 165.6 cm, weight 53.1 kg) was scheduled for laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy. Her past medical history was depression, and she has been taking duloxetine, a SNRI 60 mg/day (in the morning) and mirtazapine, a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA) 30 mg/day at bedtime for 1 year. Her mental status was stable and these medications was continued until the day of the surgery.
General anesthesia was induced with propofol, remifentanil, rocuronium, and maintained with propofol and remifentanil. Blood pressure and heart rate were stable during anesthesia, and fentanyl 200 μg and flurbiprofen 50 mg along with local infiltration of 0.75% ropivacaine 6.4 ml was administered for postoperative analgesia at the end of the surgery. The duration of the surgery and anesthesia were 80 and 123 min, respectively. She emerged from general anesthesia with no abnormal symptoms. As the surgery was performed in the evening, she skipped to take mirtazapine on the day of the surgery.
One day after the surgery, the patient took the usual dose of duloxetine 60 mg in the morning. Three to 5 min later, she claimed hot flush, stiffness around her neck and shoulders, and muscle rigidity in the masseter. The blood pressure was 112/78 mmHg, and the heart rate was 77 beats/min at this time. Medical examination showed neuromuscular abnormalities (muscle rigidity, myoclonus, stiff neck, tremor, and hyperreflexia) and autonomic instability (diaphoresis, tachypnea, tachycardia, and mydriasis). Myoclonus seizure had appeared intermittently and repeated mainly on the upper extremities and neck. During the myoclonus seizure, her heart rate and systolic blood pressure had raised to 140 beats/min and over 160 mmHg, respectively. The respiratory rate also raised to 28–35/min. She was febrile (37.4 °C) and complained of anxiety due to the situation occurring to her. Given the neuromuscular abnormalities and recent surgery, malignant syndrome and neuroleptic malignant hyperthermia were assumed and initial dose of dantrolene 40 mg was given immediately, and body cooling was started as well. Blood test revealed no abnormalities including creatine kinase level, thyroid hormone, glucose, and electrolytes. Dantrolene was not effective and anesthesiologists were consulted from the gynecologists for further treatment.
A diagnosis of serotonin syndrome was made based on the findings that the onset of the symptoms occurred immediately after taking SNRI; symptoms such as clonus, agitation, hypertension, and tachycardia corresponded to the diagnostic criteria (Hunter criteria; Table ) . Duloxetine and mirtazapine were stopped. Serum levels of serotonin was 4 (normal range 57–230) ng/ml, dopamine 21 (<20) pg/ml, noradrenaline 434 (100–450) pg/ml, and adrenaline 294 (<100) pg/ml. Myoclonus seizures occurred repeatedly, tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypertension persisted, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit.
Clonazepam 1.0 mg (per oral) was given orally for anxiety and hyperexcitatory symptoms, and intravenous landiolol 0.01 mg/kg/min was started to control heart rate. Non-selective serotonin receptor antagonist, cyproheptadine (per oral, 12 mg), was also initiated to decrease intrasynaptic serotonin level through 5-HT blocking effect. Myoclonus had disappeared soon after administration of cyproheptadine and hemodynamic had stabilized. Intralipid (20%) 100 ml was also administrated for its transient ability to draw tissue and receptor bound serotonergic drugs into lipid-expanded intravascular compartment and trap them into a lipid phase. Additional cyproheptadine 4 mg was given 6 h later and 14 h later from its first administration to continue its antagonistic effect. Two days after surgery, the patient was transferred to the general ward. Serum serotonin effect site concentration was 3 ng/ml. Four days after the surgery, the patient was discharged from the hospital and advised to consult her psychiatrist for the further use of SNRI and NaSSA. (Timeline of development of symptoms and management is presented in Table ).