A 50-year-old male was admitted for a diagnostic evaluation of chest precordial pain, shortness of breath, nausea, diaphoresis, and abdominal pain. He had a past medical history of hypothyroidism treated with levothyroxine and atrial fibrillation treated with apixaban. Myocardial infarction was ruled out, and the EKG confirmed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. On the 2nd day, the patient developed acute suboccipital headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and dysmetria. Subsequently, he developed acute neurological deterioration. On examination, he was in coma, pupils were miotic, corneal, and nausea reflexes were present and symmetrical. Abnormal flexion was observed under pain stimuli. He had hyperreflexia and bilateral Babinski. Laboratory findings revealed thrombocytopenia and brain MRI showed a bilateral cerebellar ischemic stroke in PICA territory with hemorrhagic transformation, tonsillar herniation, and non-communicating obstructive hydrocephalus [-].
We initially placed an EVD considering that the patient was anticoagulated and thrombocytopenic. The EVD was connected to ICP monitoring, which measured 35 mmHg. After draining 10 cc of CSF, the patient developed bradycardia, hypertension, and bilateral mydriasis, he was transferred back to the OR, and we performed a middle suboccipital craniectomy; the cerebellum was 5 mm deep from the dura and it did not swell immediately through the dural defect . After the surgery, we sedated the patient using propofol and fentanyl; cerebellar edema and brainstem upward herniation were treated using hypertonic solutions and amines to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure. The EVD was closed most of the time and only opened when the ICP reached above 20 mmHg. After 5 days of close neurological monitoring and intracranial hypertension management, we did two clinical serial examinations without sedation and the patient persisted in coma with bilateral fixed 5 mm pupils without response, corneal reflexes persisted, but other brainstem reflexes were absent. MRI revealed cerebellar infarction with hemorrhage transformation, cerebellar edema, UTH, and the aqueduct of Sylvius persisted occluded. On the 5th day, we took out the EVD, and an ETV was performed. During the endoscopy, microhemorrhages were observed on the midbrain, the third ventricle was dorsally displaced and after the premamillary fenestration, an active pulsatile flow from the interpeduncular cistern was visualized [ and ]. State of consciousness and brainstem reflexes improved significantly the 1st day after the surgery. MRI 1 week after the ETV showed upward herniation resolution, less cerebellar edema, and no hydrocephalus. The patient needed a tracheostomy and gastrostomy, and he started with neurological rehabilitation. Three months after the surgery, the patient made a good recovery with mild cerebellar disabilities (GOS 5); however, the MRI revealed mild enlargement of the lateral ventricles and a suboccipital CSF internal leak. A Hakim programmable ventricle-peritoneal shunt was placed. One year after surgery, the patient improved progressively until he recovered his previous functional status and only persisted with mild intention tremor of his left hand.