Our patient was a 27-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history of asthma. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. She was employed in customer service, was living with her husband, and denied a history of smoking or illicit drug use. She first noticed symptoms of dry cough, body aches, and low-grade fever (day 0). Four days later, she was diagnosed with bronchitis at a local community urgent treatment care center. She was prescribed azithromycin, a bronchodilator inhaler, and a steroid. She reported improvement of symptoms initially, but within 2 days, she had notable shortness of breath with minimal exertion with progressive dry cough, pain, and perfuse sweating. She reported significant shortness of breath when attempting to eat. Subsequently, she decided to seek treatment at her local community hospital. On day 7, she was admitted for room air oxygen saturation reported between 84% and 88% and profound dyspnea. The result of her respiratory viral panel was negative. She continued to have respiratory compromise with increasing oxygen requirements. On day 8, she was intubated for acute hypoxic respiratory failure due to bilateral pneumonia and was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) at our academic medical center.
The patient remained intubated (70% fraction of inspired oxygen with positive end-expiratory pressure [PEEP] of 10 cmH2O and ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fraction of inspired oxygen, 180) and minimally sedated (propofol and hydromorphone) for ARDS upon admission to the MICU (day 8). Her chest radiograph revealed bibasilar airspace disease , and chest computed tomography demonstrated bilateral lower lobe consolidation and volume loss with atelectatic changes in mild lower lung zones with scattered ground-glass opacities in the upper lobe, mostly central, consistent with bilateral pneumonia with lung volume loss and/or atelectasis . The patient’s Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score in the first 24 hours of ICU admission was 7. She was started on vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin for empiric coverage of community-acquired pneumonia. Her brain natriuretic peptide and lactate levels were within normal limits, and aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures revealed no growth. The results of testing for urine legionella and streptococcal pneumonia antigens were also negative. The patient’s family reported no travel history or exposure risk, but, given the patient’s clinical symptoms, a test for COVID-19 was performed. A positive test result for COVID-19 was confirmed on day 9. In addition to ARDS, she met the criteria for a diagnosis of acute kidney injury (AKI; Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes stage 1) on the basis of decreased urine output and elevated creatinine level (increased from 0.77 mg/dl on first day in ICU to 1.45 mg/dl within 24 hours). Her liver enzyme levels were within normal limits (C-reactive protein, 24.3 mg/L).
The patient’s clinical status gradually improved from days 9–12 of her illness. She tolerated weaning of oxygen and PEEP . Her lung compliance was reported by her primary physician as “good” with low driving pressures (10–13 cmH2O). Her AKI improved with increasing urine output. On day 13, sedative medications were weaned fully, and the patient passed a spontaneous breathing trial. She was extubated to a high-flow nasal cannula. The patient’s respiratory status gradually improved with her being able to wean from supplemental oxygen on day 15. On day 14, physical and occupational therapy consults were performed, with the patient demonstrating modified independence with mobility and activities of daily of living. A physical therapist and an occupational therapist provided education on activity and exercise to promote strength and endurance. On day 16, the patient had a negative test result for COVID-19 by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction. A second test on day 18 confirmed the negative test result, and the patient was discharged to home from the MICU with her family later that afternoon.
On day 31, the patient returned to the ICU recovery clinic at our academic medical center. During her follow-up appointment, she complained of general fatigue and exhaustion. She stated she generally felt “wiped out.” She expressed minor difficulty with walking from the clinic garage, less than 500 feet from the clinic lobby due to fatigue. Physically, the patient participated in the short performance physical battery (SPPB), demonstrating a 0.82 m/second gait speed on 4-m habitual walk, 11.7 seconds to perform five times sit-to-stand testing, and > 10 seconds in tandem stance (total score 10/12), thus demonstrating a minor slowing in gait speed and minor difficulty with sit-to-stand performance, indicating minimal weakness in the lower extremities. The patient did have signs of mild depression (3/21 in the depression category of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [HADS]) related to her situation or memories of her illness, but her symptoms were not affecting her day-to-day life or preventing her from enjoying things she previously enjoyed. She did not have anxiety or signs of distress (HADS anxiety = 0/21, Impact of Events Scale–Revised 7/88). The patient did complain of short-term memory problems, which included no memory of her first 2 days in the ICU. She reported subsequent minor difficulty with daily short-term memory and word finding since her hospital discharge. She scored 29/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, missing 1 point removed for the cube copy test, which requires visual motor integration, depth perception, and spatial awareness. The patient also endorsed minor difficulty with sleep, including a few nights of disordered sleep with frequent waking. She reported a score of 85/100 on the EQ-5D visual analog scale.
On day 78, the patient reported returning to driving and return to work with modifications due to fatigue, including more frequent rest breaks, limited lifting of > 10 lb, and a stool to reduce time in prolonged standing.
On day 128 (approximately 4 months after discharge from the hospital), the patient returned to the ICU recovery clinic. She reported significant improvement overall, with only one episode of anxiety related to work that was alleviated with deep breathing strategies. The patient’s performance on physical, emotional, and cognitive outcome measures had improved . The patient continued to endorse reduced endurance and periods of fatigue but was generally improved. At this time point, the patient performed the 6-minute-walk test (6MWD) with total distance ambulated 390 m, equating to 64% of her percent predicted 6MWD . She also complained of insomnia, but she believed it to be unrelated to her ICU admission.