A 23-month-old boy was admitted to hospital after a 5-day history of stridor, cough, and hoarseness. On the day of admission, he was in good spirits and had clear consciousness, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, body temperature of 36.8°C, breathing rate of 34/min, and heart rate of 116/min. The suprasternal fossa, supraclavicular fossa, and intercostal space were retractions during inhalation. Inspiratory stridor and moist rales could be heard in the lungs. The cardiac examination result was found to be normal. Asked about history, the boy was a full-term child born through vaginal delivery, with normal birth history, no adverse events, and no history of tracheal intubation or ventilator treatment. His mother was normal during pregnancy, and his growth and development were also normal. However, he appeared to have stridor, weak crying, and hoarseness at birth. The family doctor diagnosed congenital laryngomalacia and ordered vitamin D and calcium supplements. The symptoms improved but never completely disappeared. After admission, chest X-ray examination revealed bronchopneumonia. After treatment with glucocorticoid and antibiotics, the boy breathed smoothly, there was no cough, hoarseness decreased, and the moist rales gradually dissipated, but inspiratory stridor always existed, especially after activities or crying. Because of considering congenital diseases or space-occupying diseases of throat, we performed neck CT examination, which indicated linear diaphragm in glottis . Laryngoscopy revealed that the anterior commissure of glottis was covered by webbed connection, which blocked nearly two thirds of glottis . Laryngeal web separation was recommended, but his mother refused. After 1 month, the boy suffered from respiratory tract infection again, which caused difficulty in breathing, and could hardly make a sound. He was rushed to the emergency department. After giving symptomatic treatment, the child’s clinical symptoms were stable, and his mother agreed to the application for surgery. We chose the treatment of carbon dioxide (CO2) laser and cryotherapy by bronchoscope. During the operation, it could be seen that the laryngeal web covered the front joint of glottis, CO2 laser was given to gradually destroy the web along the midline of the laryngeal web to both sides, and the necrotic material was removed by forceps several times, and then the edge was frozen and trimmed. No other congenital bronchial malformations were found. Adrenaline injection (1:10,000, 1 ml) and budesonide suspension (1 mg) were injected through bronchoscope to reduce larynx edema. Dexamethasone (5 mg) was given to reduce larynx edema for three consecutive days. After the operation, the symptoms of stridor and hoarseness were significantly reduced. The second cryotherapy by bronchoscope was performed on the 10th day after operation. During the operation, a small amount of yellow necrotic material were found attached to the anterior commissure of glottis, and there was no adhesion of bilateral vocal cords. The mucosal smoothness was improved after cryotherapy . On the third day after operation, the boy had no stridor, dyspnea, and hoarseness, and the timbre basically returned to normal, so he was discharged. One month, half a year, and 1 year after discharge, his pronunciation was completely normal, he had no dyspnea or stridor, and growth development was well; therefore, his guardian refused to ask for bronchoscopy again. We could not get the information by the bronchoscopy, but according to his clinical manifestation, he recovered very well.