A 22-year-old girl admitted with abdominal distention, vomiting, constipation and hyperventilation episodes lasting for 1 week. She was diagnosed as Rett syndrome at 3 years old. Seizure disorders, constipation and air swallowing were the major symptoms obtained from the medical history. Also it was learned from the family that the patient had difficulty in evacuation of stool from the rectum for a long time. The family was using rectal enema during constipation or rectal digitation for defecation. It was learned that there had been no stool discharge for 4 days. In her physical examination, abdominal distension, abdominal tenderness, rebound, septic appearance were revealed. Bloody discharge was observed in rectal examination. Increased sphincter tonus was palpated in rectal examination. Turgol-tonus was decreased. Abdominal X-ray showed dilated bowel segments with air-fluid levels. There is a coffee-bean sign on the lower left quadrant indicating sigmoid volvulus . The patient was diagnosed as acute abdomen due to sigmoid volvulus. Preoperative laboratory evaluation including coagulation function and liver function were normal. Blood Urea Nitrogen, creatinine, white blood cell count, serum sodium, blood glucose, and plasma CRP levels were increased. Blood gases showed acute metabolic acidosis. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with 500 ms QT interval. In the urgent laparotomy, sigmoid volvulus was seen. There was a 2 cm hard mass below the twisting point resembling colon tumor . In the abdominal exploration, there were several hard nodular lesions in the liver. Hartman procedure and liver biopsy were performed. In the postoperative period, the patient was followed with septic shock. Although intensive care management was given, pulmonary and cardiac functions deteriorated and the patient suddenly died on the second postoperative day. Pathology result was musinous adenocarinoma with a diameter of 3 cm. Liver mass pathology revealed adenocarcinoma metastasis. Although permission is taken from the relatives for the study, no further genetic analysis was performed because of the refusal of the relatives.