A 16-year-old nonsmoking girl was referred to our hospital because of an episode of massive hemoptysis. She had been admitted to a local hospital one week earlier because of this symptom and had developed respiratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation for two days. After extubation and cessation of bleeding, she was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
On admission to the thoracic surgery department, she was conscious and extubated, without respiratory distress, but mildly anxious. Her vital signs were stable and she was afebrile. Physical examination on the head and neck, chest, abdomen and extremities showed that these were normal. Oxygen saturation in the ambient air was 98%. There was no longer any hemoptysis.
Laboratory data including white blood cell (WBC) and platelet counts, hemoglobin and hematocrit, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and international normalized ratio (INR) were within normal limits. A chest X-ray was normal, while chest CT scans showed some patchy haziness in the right lower lobe and a very small lesion in the distal bronchus intermedius ( and ). The imaging did not show any atelectasis, honeycomb appearance, cavitation, consolidation or tumoral lesion. Common causes of massive bleeding like bronchiectasis, carcinoid tumor, tuberculosis, arteriovenous (AV) malformations and other conditions were less likely to be the reason for the bleeding in this girl.
On the next day, fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed and this showed a lesion at the beginning of the bronchus of the basal segments of the right lower lobe, without evidence of active bleeding. The lesion originated from the mucosal surface, with a small clot over it. The mucosa surrounding the lesion was absolutely normal . No biopsy was taken, because of the suspicion of Dieulafoy’s disease and the risk of bleeding. Given the lack of expertise in bronchial angiography and embolization at our center, we preferred surgical treatment. Therefore, within an elective setting and after hemorrhaging had ceased, basal segmentectomy of the right lower lobe was carried out in a planned manner, by means of right lateral thoracotomy. The superior segment of the right lower lobe remained intact . There was no intraoperative finding except for consolidation of the parenchyma of the diseased lobe, most probably due to hemorrhage. The operation was performed without any difficulty because of normal anatomical integrity.
An intraoperative frozen section study was negative for any malignant condition.
The patient had a very smooth and uneventful postoperative course, in which she only presented pain, which could be controlled with ordinary analgesics. She was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. At an outpatient visit one week later, she did not have any serious complaint. Moreover, in the third, sixth and eighteenth months of follow-up, she was still asymptomatic without recurrence of any kind of hemoptysis.
Although the diagnosis of this disease was clinical, further pathological studies showed few dilated vessels in the submucosa. This was compatible with a diagnosis of Dieulafoy’s disease .