A 16-year-old female patient with Hurler’s syndrome treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was referred for decreased vision. The diagnosis had been made by quantification of α-l-iduronidase and gene sequencing. Systemic disorders in this pediatric patient included dysostosis, arachnoid cysts and sleep apnea. Corrected visual acuity was 0.1 (20/200) in both eyes. Slit lamp examination revealed diffuse, whitish, milky, full-thickness stromal opacities . Intraocular pressure was 28 mmHg in both eyes. Corneal hysteresis was increased (Corneal Hysteresis, 18.6/20.9 mmHg; Corneal Resistance Factor, 20.7/21.5 mmHg) and corrected intraocular pressure (IOPcc) provided by the ORA device (Reichert, Inc., Depew, NY) was normal (17/11 mmHg). Fundus was unremarkable and electrophysiological examinations were within normal limits (ERG, response to the lower limit of normal with no overall deficit; PEV, no major conduction disorders in the visual pathways). No history or evidence of optic nerve involvement was found in this patient.
A DALK was performed in the left eye and, 3 years later, in the right eye. A type 1 big bubble was obtained after air injection in the posterior stroma . The posterior bed consisted of the predescemetic Dua’s layer in the 6-mm central zone and the posterior stroma in the 6–8.25 mm peripheral zone. An 8.25-mm graft was sutured after Descemet’s membrane removal using a combination of 8 interrupted sutures and 16-bit running suture. Long-term follow-up was unremarkable, i.e., clear grafts, improved vision, normal intraocular pressure, no rejection episodes. Four years after left eye transplantation, visual acuity was 0.32 (20/63, RE) and 0.63 (20/32, LE). Central corneal thickness (CCT) was normal (RE, 530 μm; LE, 520 μm). The corneal endothelial cell density was 2400 cells/mm2 in both eyes. The patient was satisfied with the results of transplantation which provided her with improved quality of life .
Preoperatively corneas were assessed with SD-OCT (RTVue-100©, Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA) and In vivo confocal microscopy (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph II/Rostock Cornea Module, Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany). Corneal buttons obtained during keratoplasty were processed for histology and stained with hematoxylin-eosin-safran, Schiff periodic acid, and Masson’s trichrome.
SD-OCT showed diffuse hyperreflectivity with normal endothelial reflectivity. CCT was 695 μm in the right eye and 662 μm in the left eye .
In Vivo Confocal Microscopy was performed by a trained senior orthoptist. It showed changes in corneal layers including diffuse hyperreflectivity of the corneal epithelium, presence of granulations within the epithelial intercellular spaces, sub-basal nerve plexus irregularity and rarefaction, hyperreflective keratocytes featuring morphological changes (i.e., round or ellipsoid shape, activated keratocytes, granular cytoplasm, presence of small dark intracellular images forming intracytoplasmic vacuoles) . Vacuoles were located close to the keratocyte nuclei. Hyperreflective deposits were observed in the anterior stroma associated with changes in Bowman’s layer, which appeared irregular and thinner . Stromal opacification resulted in poor endothelial cell visualization. No damage to the corneal endothelium was found.
Histology showed no differences between fellow corneas. The superficial epithelial cells appeared normal. Basal epithelial cells were distributed in different planes. They featured a perinuclear clear halo. Bowman’s layer was irregular with variable thickness and presence of isolated keratocytes just below Bowman’s layer. Stromal changes were mainly located in its anterior part, including irregular lamellae, presence of clear cytoplasmic mononuclear macrophage cells, and PAS-positive granulations.