A 56-year-old right-hand dominant gentleman presented to our clinic with a 6-month history of the right index fingertip pain. There was no associated history of any antecedent trauma. This person had earlier visited his general practitioner and was commenced on anti-inflammatory and antibiotic medications. There was partial resolution of his symptoms of pain and swelling. However, resurgence prompted him to approach an orthopedic clinic.
In our clinic, the vital parameters of this patient were normal. On examination of the swelling, he had a non-tender swelling measuring approximately 1 cm × 1 cm on the ulnar aspect of the distal phalanx of the right index finger. There was no overlying redness or features of cellulitis. There was a flexion attitude of approximately 45° at the distal interphalangeal joint. There was no pain on palpation of the middle phalanx. There were no palpable epitrochlear or axillary lymph nodes.
Blood investigations showed a mildly elevated value of C-reactive protein at nine. The value of white blood cells and neutrophils was within normal limits.
Radiological investigations showed a well-defined lesion in the distal phalanx with a fracture through the distal phalanx . There was no periosteal reaction evident.
Under the effect of a local anesthetic (Levobupivacaine + Lidocaine) and finger tourniquet, an incision was placed on the prominent aspect of the ulnar sided swelling over the distal phalanx. There was no pus encountered. A thorough debridement of the distal phalanx was performed (and ) and samples were sent for culture and sensitivity. The patient was commenced on oral co-amoxiclav, pending sensitivity results. The finger was splinted for 4 weeks followed by gentle mobilization under the guidance of a hand therapist.
S. lugdunensis was the microorganism identified in the culture and it was sensitive to clindamycin and flucloxacillin. An opinion was sought from the infectious disease consultant and accordingly, appropriate antibiotics were commenced. The patient had dramatic improvement in his symptoms.
This gentleman was regularly followed up and in 3 months had complete resolution of his symptoms. On his final follow-up at 1year, he had a completely functional index finger without any stiffness.