In June 2011, a 60 year old woman was admitted to our emergency room with complaints of shortness of breath, palpitation, chest pain and progressive dyspnea. She had history of dyspnoea on exertion and orthopnea too. She had no history of trauma or major illness. On her physical examination, arterial blood pressure was 135/90 mmHg, heart rate was 110 beats per minute, SpO2 94% on room air and respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute. On auscultation, the lungs were normal and no cardiac murmur, no JVP raised or gallop rhythm was noted. Cardiac enzymes, biochemical analysis, and complete blood count were normal except for eosinophilia. Chest radiography noted that cardiomegaly with bulging left heart boarder at admission . Electrocardiography (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with poor progression of R wave in lead v4, v5, and v6 and no changes in ST segment. Her myocardial-specific enzyme values were found in the normal range. Transthoracic echocardiographic investigation showed a large multicystic mass (size 77 × 57 mm) seen intrapericardially extending from left ventricle lateral wall to pericardial sac causing pressure effect on left ventricle. The abdominal ultrasonography revealed intracardiac hydatid and other cystic lesion either in the liver or other abdominal organs were not found. Contrast-enhanced CT confirmed the presence of a well-defined, thin-walled, homogeneous multiple cardiac hydatid cyst with internal trabeculae arising from pericardium with adjacent structure . Results of serologic tests for hydatidosis (indirect hemagglutination tests) were positive for E. granulosus, and marked eosinophilia was present too. After diagnosis, the patient was scheduled for surgery with the diagnosis of cardiac hydatid cyst. Patient was taken into the operation theatre and monitoring including ECG, pulse oximetry and non-invasive blood pressure were established and general anesthesia was performed with opioid-muscle relaxant technique after that established left radial artery cannulation for beat to beat blood pressure monitoring and internal juglar vein cannulation for central venous pressure monitoring. The pericardium was accessed through left lateral thoracotomy, accessing to the left mediastinal area, a solitary cystic lesion with a well-defined border was visualized in the pericardium adjacent to the left ventricle and the pericardial cyst was surgically removed . Patient’s trachea extubated and Intraoperative and postoperative hemodynamic status was maintained and within normal limits. Post-operative pain managed with inter costal block with 0.5% of bupivacain plain, inj. tramadol and diclofenac sodium I.M. Pathologic examination of the specimen was shown with hydatid cyst.