A 46-year-old male presented with a submucosal tumor of the esophagus. In 2018, the tumor was approximately 10 mm in diameter, covered by normal mucosa, and located on the left posterior wall of the esophagus 30 cm from the incisor. The tumor was discovered by accident during gastroscopic examination . The patient refused further evaluation and treatment due to the lack of clinical symptoms. In March 2021, endoscopic reexamination of the patient showed no significant changes in the tumor. There were no significant findings on physical examination. No special findings were found in terms of his medical, family, and psycho-social history. Laboratory tests of tumor markers in the patient’s serum were normal, including CEA and CA19-9. Endoscopic ultrasound revealed an oval hypoechoic mass with a homogeneous internal echo, originating from the muscularis propria, with a maximum cross section of 13 mm × 6 mm . After learning that his neighbor had esophageal cancer, the patient felt compelled to undergo endoscopic resection to reveal the true pathological nature of his tumor as he was worried about the potential for malignancy.
Gastroscopy revealed a smooth elevated lesion located on the left posterior wall of the esophagus 30 cm from the incisor teeth; the mucosa was intact. The mucosa on the surface of the tumor was removed by a snare and then the base of the tumor was ligated with a rubber band; subsequently, the tumor was excised by the snare. Following resection of the tumor, we observed perforation of the esophageal wall; this was sealed with metal clips . Food and water were forbidden for 72 h after the operation, during which antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors, and intravenous nutrition were administered. The patient had no fever, hematemesis, melena, or dyspnea.
The surgical specimen was a well-demarcated, elastic, and hard mass that was 12 mm × 5 mm in size; the section of the specimen was gray and tough. Histologically, this lesion featured an abundance of smooth muscle fiber bundles intercalated among nerve fibers; there was no evidence of malignancy. Immunohistochemical examinations were positive for S-100 protein, caldesmon, neuron-specific enolase(NSE), Neurofilament(NF) and desmin. In addition, the lesion showed aberrant nuclear localization of beta-catenin and negativity for CD117, DOG-1, HMB45, and Melan A. Collectively, these data supported a diagnosis of esophageal neuromuscular choristoma .
It has been 11 months since the resection of this esophageal submucosal tumor; the patient has no obvious clinical symptoms but has yet to be reviewed by gastroscopy.