The patient, male, 66 years old, was admitted to the hospital with a left scrotal mass that had been there for one year.
A 66-year-old male was admitted to the hospital on January 14, 2022 presenting with a year-long finding of left scrotal swelling with no apparent cause. The swelling was approximately the size of an egg, without any discomfort. Later, the scrotal swelling increased gradually and was approximately the size of a goose egg, accompanied by discomfort in the left cavity of the scrotum. The patient had no history of testicular trauma, sexually transmitted diseases, urinary tract infection, undescended testes, or groin/scrotal surgery.
The patient had no pertinent past illness history.
The patient had no pertinent personal or family history.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.2 °C; blood pressure, 140/80 mmHg; heart rate, 64 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min. The penis was of the adult type. There was a solid and tough swelling (size: Approximately 12.0 cm × 9.0 cm) in the left cavity of the scrotum. The left testicle and epididymis were not palpable, whereas the right testicle and epididymis were not nodular and painful to palpation.
The following blood tests were performed: Liver function, renal function, serum electrolytes, thyroid function, coagulopathy, markers of myocardial injury, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, glycosylated hemoglobin, lipids, rheumatoid factor, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, immune panel, and tumor markers. All laboratory values were within reference ranges.
Computed tomography (CT, Philis EPIQ5, United States) showed a cystic lesion in the left scrotum measuring approximately 6.6 cm × 5.5 cm . Colour Doppler ultrasonography (SOMATOM Definition Flash, Siemens, Germany) revealed a hypoechoic mass in the left scrotum . Further imaging examinations, including whole-abdomen CT and bone scans, did not reveal lymph node enlargement or distant tumour metastasis. The tumour markers lactate dehydrogenase, β-human chorionic gonadotropin, α-fetoprotein, and carcinoembryonic antigen were at normal levels.