A 71-year-old Japanese man had a known colonic polyp, but he did not have it rechecked for 7 years until he began to experience hematochezia. Colonoscopy revealed the tumor of the rectum, and he was referred to our hospital. He had no significant medical history. His father had suffered from lung cancer and a testicular tumor; however, there was no evidence of MEN in his family history. He did not smoke or drink alcohol, and he had no allergies.
A mass was palpable on rectal examination, forming a semicircle at the posterior wall of the rectum. Laboratory analysis revealed a total peripheral leukocyte count of 7100/mm3, with normal tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA], 2.3 ng/mL; cancer antigen 19-9 [CA 19-9], 19.6 U/mL). His height was 165.5 cm, and his weight was 57.9 kg, giving a body mass index of 21.14 kg/m2. Total colonoscopy revealed a mass in the lower rectum . The tumor described a quarter circle around the rectum and was in contact with the anal canal. Pathologic examination of a biopsy specimen yielded a diagnosis of group 1 (ulcerative lesion with generated epithelium). Computed tomography (colonography) revealed a tumor in the lower rectum, suspicious for invasion of the right levator ani muscle, swollen paraintestinal lymph nodes, and multiple liver metastases . We judged that the liver metastases were unresectable because they occurred in both lobes with adjacent to major hepatic vein. There were no metastases to the lungs or other structures. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of swollen right lateral lymph nodes .
We performed laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection of the rectum and lymph node dissection, with resection of the right pelvic plexus not only to avoid the unbearable symptoms caused by tumor growth but to make a pathological diagnosis of the rectal tumor. The operative time was 279 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 200 mL. The tumor was located in the lower wall of the rectum and measured 3.5 × 2.8 cm .
Histological examination showed the rectal tumor with subserosal invasion (pT3) involving venous and lymphatic invasion. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that diffuse staining for synaptophysin and chromogranin A, and focal staining for CD56, and MIB-1 index was over 20%. The results of CK7, CK20, and S-100 protein were negative. The patient’s Ki67 index was 25 percent. The pathologic diagnosis of the day was neuroendocrine carcinoma, stage T3N3M1(H2), according to the 2010 WHO classification of tumors of endocrine organs . The patient was discharged on the tenth postoperative day.
Two months after surgery, the patient began chemotherapy with irinotecan (60 mg/m2) plus cisplatin (60 mg/m2). In the second and third courses, each dose was reduced by 50% from the standard because of a renal dysfunction. After 3 courses, his liver metastases had increased in size, so we changed the regimen to carboplatin (400 mg/m2) plus etoposide (100 mg/m2). In the second course, each dose of carboplatin was reduced by 50% from the standard because of a febrile neutropenia. After 2 courses, the liver lesions continued to enlarge. At that point, we discontinued chemotherapy and provided supportive care. Twenty-seven months after surgery, he died of his disease.
Pathologic re-examination of the surgical specimen after he died revealed that the tumor was consistent with the 2019 WHO classification of NET G3.