A 60-year-old woman was diagnosed to have a left breast cancer stage T2 N1 M0 hormone receptor-positive in 1997. She was treated with modified radical mastectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, adriamycin and 5-fluorouracil, followed by adjuvant hormonal therapy. She completed five years of adjuvant tamoxifen in 2003 and and was started on letrozole adjuvant therapy in January 2004 .
The patient had an ocular history significant for bilateral dacryocystitis, cataracts and open angle glaucoma, left dacryocystectomy (DCR) in 1997, right DCR in 2000 and 2003, as well as a right eye phacoemulsification with implantation of a hydrophilic acrylic intraocular lens in 2003 with a postoperative uncorrected visual acuity of 20/25. The patient was maintained on antiglaucoma treatment in the form of topical beta blocker eyedrops for both eyes, combined with prostaglandin eyedrops for her left eye.
The patient was scheduled to have zoledronic acid 4 mg once every six months for osteoporosis. In August 2004, the patient was given intravenous hydration with normal saline, premedicated with paracetamol, and had an intravenous infusion of zoledronic acid 4 mg in 100 cc normal saline given over 30 minutes. The patient did well throughout the infusion; however, she felt chilly and feverish overnight. The next day, she presented to the Emergency Department complaining of severe right eye pain and decreased vision. Examination revealed uncorrected visual acuity of 20/100 in the right eye and 20/60 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in both eyes. Slit lamp examination revealed marked ciliary injection of the right eye, and a 2+ flare and inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber. An inflammatory fibrinous pupillary membrane was also present . Fundus examination was normal. A diagnosis of right anterior uveitis was made. The patient was placed on topical prednisone every 6 hours, and atropine eyedrops every 12 hours. She responded well to the treatment which was gradually tapered off over a period of 6 weeks without recurrence of uveitis. Following treatment, visual acuity in the right eye improved to 20/30, and slit lamp examination revealed slight opacification of the posterior capsule , and residual pigmented deposits on the surface of the intraocular lens . These inflammatory changes and deposits on the posterior lens surface disappeared on their own over a period of 3 months, but residual posterior capsular opacification (PCO) is still present. This PCO has no effect on the patient's visual acuity at present and doesn't require any intervention.
Unlike in metastatic bone diseases where bisphosphonate therapy is administered on a monthly basis, our plan was to give the patient zoledronic acid every six months . The patient refused to have any further bisphosphonate therapy