A 2-year-old boy with a known history of MPS was scheduled for elective hernia repair surgery under general anesthesia. The patient’s weight was 20 kg and his height was 100 cm. The physical exam revealed psychomotor retardation, bilateral corneal opacities, impaired hearing and vision, inguinal hernia, micrognathia, coarse facial features , stiff and short neck , restricted mouth opening and macroglossia, that orientated the medical team towards the possibility of difficult airway (Mallampatti score = 3). Therefore, we used a “difficult intubation set”, including a flexible fiber-optic bronchoscope. During the echocardiographic exam, the patient presented severe mitral regurgitation.
In the preoperative visit, the anesthesiologist ordered oral diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg as premedication 2 hours before surgery. The patient was monitored in the operating room with peripheral oxygen saturation (SPO2), electrocardiogram, and non-invasive blood pressure measurement. At first step, the patient was sedated by face mask inhalatory sevoflurane 3% in 100% oxygen. After, a peripheral IV cannula (20 G) was inserted and intravenous infusion of Ringer’s solution was initiated to a total amount of 8 mL/kg. The anesthesia induction was accomplished by midazolam 0.05 mg/kg, fentanyl 2 µ/kg and cisatracurium 0.15 mg/kg. The lungs were easily ventilated by face mask without any problem. The first attempt of tracheal intubation has been unsuccessfully performed by the anesthesia resident (laryngoscopy grade was 3). At the next effort, anesthesia attendant inserted the size 2 laryngeal mask airway (LMA) after cuff lubrication into the patient’s pharynx. The LMA cuff was inflated with a suitable volume of air (10 mL). Afterwards, we checked the correct position of LMA by visualization of air movement and auscultation of the lungs. We also used capnography to confirm the establishment of adequate ventilation. Anesthesia was maintained by sevoflurane 2% - 3%, fentanyl 1 µg/kg/hour and bolus doses of 0.05 mg/kg cisatracurium. Hernia was repaired and the operation was completed after about 1 hour. After completion of the operation, administration of anesthetic drugs was discontinued. Once the patient was awake and resumed spontaneous breathing, we administered atropine 0.02 mg/kg and neostigmine 0.04 mg/kg to reverse the effects of the neuromuscular blocking agent. The LMA was extracted and the patient was transferred to the ward after being fully awaken and responding positively to commands. Finally, this patient was discharged from the hospital 2 days later without any problem.