An 18-year-old Japanese woman, with a history of intestinal Behçet’s disease, complained of abdominal pain on the day she was brought to our hospital. She took prescription colchicine at a dose of 15 mg (30 tablets 0.5 mg each), which is equivalent to 0.2 mg/kg. As her condition did not improve, she was brought to the emergency department. She had a past medical history of fibromyalgia, in addition to intestinal Behçet’s disease. Prior to admission, she was taking Neurotropin® (non-protein extract isolated from the inflamed skin of rabbits inoculated with vaccinia virus), pregabalin, butylscopolamine bromide, Lactomin (lactic acid bacteria – Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium longum), and colchicine. She neither smoked tobacco nor drank alcohol. Her social and environmental history was unremarkable. She had never worked. Her mother had schizophrenia.
Her vital signs on arrival included blood pressure (BP) of 128/90 mmHg, pulse of 102 beats per minute, regular respiration rate of 18 breaths per minute, blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 98% room air, and body temperature of 37.5 °C; she was alert and conscious. She had upper abdominal tenderness with no rebound tenderness. The results of her cardiac, pulmonary, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Complete blood count, renal function tests, urine analysis, and bacteria tests were normal except for mild hepatic dysfunction and elevated d-dimer levels . Although colchicine was administered below the lethal dose, she was admitted for observation.
On the day after the hospital admission, she developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), thus, tracheal intubation using an artificial ventilator was performed. She also became dehydrated, due to diarrhea, which developed after admission. Peripheral circulatory insufficiency gradually worsened, and large amounts of infusion loads (including blood transfusions) were unable to maintain her BP. Her lactic acid level reached a maximum of 19 mmol/L. At maximum disease severity, she required noradrenaline 1 μg/kg/minute, vasopressin 2 units/hour, steroids 200 mg/day, dopamine 10 μg/kg/minute, dobutamine 4 μg/kg/minute, and adrenaline 0.15 μg/kg/minute to maintain BP. She also showed other organ failures, including worsening hepatic dysfunction after admission with maximum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 16,520 U/L as well as kidney dysfunction with associated anuria. Continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated for anuria and metabolic acidosis. At 36 hours post-admission, her lactic acid level reached its peak, and her hemodynamic reached a level at which she could tolerate water removal. At 72 hours post-admission, she was administered with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor due to the appearance of myelosuppression. In addition to the broad-spectrum antimicrobial administration, she was commenced on a course of antimycotic medication. Table shows the laboratory results of organs function over time.
Approximately 1 week after admission, her BP could be maintained without the use of vasopressor drugs; however, as she showed poor alert wakefulness, a head computed tomography was performed. The results showed multiple intracranial hemorrhages of up to 12 mm in diameter , thought to be associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). As the disease course progressed, the hematomas were absorbed and our patient was able to respond to verbal commands. Approximately 2 weeks post-admission, she presented with marked hair loss.
Subsequently, her general condition improved and, at discharge, all organ insufficiency had improved. The progress of her Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores and D-dimer levels are shown in Fig. . She worked hard at rehabilitation. By 6 months after discharge, she had no disorders and had resumed normal life as before her hospitalization. Table shows the blood tests at follow-up.