Our patient was a 50-year-old Asian woman who had undergone a total abdominal hysterectomy for uterine leiomyoma at the age of 37 years old. She did not smoke cigarettes and only drank alcohol socially.
She was referred to our hospital because of sudden anterior chest pain. Hematology, biochemistry and blood gas analysis were normal. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a ground-glass opacity (GGO) in her left S10 lung segment which was 1.3 cm in size, and a solitary small nodule of 5 mm in diameter localized in her left S4 segment .
From the beginning, we suspected lung carcinoma, but we could not get our patient's consent for performing bronchoscopic examination and surgical resection. Follow-up with CT showed that the GGO size had slightly increased and that the small nodule size had not changed. We suspected that the GGO was lung carcinoma, but it was difficult to rule out whether the small nodule was a lung metastasis. If this small nodule was not lung metastasis, the lung carcinoma could have been considered as being in the early stage. We considered that pathological examination by surgical resection was appropriate because it was also an approach for treating the lung carcinoma. We performed a left lower lobectomy and an upper lung partial resection in order to make a definitive diagnosis and to decide further therapeutic strategies. The pathological diagnosis of the GGO in her left S10 segment was primary lung adenocarcinoma(localized bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; Figure ). On the other hand, pathological examination of the small nodule in her left S4 showed spindle-shaped smooth muscle cells and low cuboidal metaplastic bronchiolar epithelia, surrounded by fascicles of smooth muscle cells without mitosis and nuclear atypia . Immunohistochemical staining for thyroid transcription factor-1(TTF-1) and surfactant apoprotein A (SP-A) showed epithelial structures composed of alveoli or bronchioli , suggesting that the low cuboidal metaplastic bronchiolar epithelium derived from the pre-existing bronchiolar epithelium. There was positive immunohistochemical staining for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and spindle-shaped cells , suggesting that the spindle-shaped cells were smooth muscle cells. Positive immunoreactivity for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) suggested that the spindle-shaped cells were uterine smooth muscle cells . Unfortunately, a histological sample of the uterine leiomyoma was not available for comparison. The small nodule was diagnosed as a BML based on the results of immunohistochemical staining and her past history of uterine leiomyoma.
No additional therapy was done and follow-up of our patient by chest CT was continued. During four years of follow-up, no recurrence of either the BML or lung cancer could be detected.