A 11 year-old girl came to our observation for a 3-day history of rash all over the body. The rash had an acute onset and was bilaterally distributed, mainly on the face and limbs. It was also associated with mild oedema of the extremities. The mother reported that the child was not complaining of fever, diarrhea or haematuria. The girl only had 2 episodes of acute diffuse abdominal pain. Moreover, this was the first occurrence of such an episode. During the preceding six weeks the girl had no signs or symptoms of infectious diseases nor she had assumed any drugs. She received the first dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech BNT16B2b2 mRNA vaccine exactly 12 days prior to presenting the reported skin manifestation. She has never been positive for COVID-19 and she has no relevant medical antecedents. Moreover, her familiar medical history was unremarkable: no autoimmune or chronic pathologies were reported in her relatives.
At the visit, the patient was alert, conscious and well hydrated. Her vital signs were normal for age. At the skin examination, she showed diffuse, blanching, figured urticarial rash all over her body . Non-pitting edema was also present on hands and feet, bilaterally. The joints were not painfull and no movement impairment was reported. Cardiovascular examination was normal, with normal sounds heard and no added sounds or murmurs. Chest examination was clear with bilateral air entry and no added sounds. Abdominal examination was also unremarkable: the abdomen was soft, without tenderness or organomegaly. Neurological examination was in the normal range. We performed a urine dipstick, that resulted normal. A dermatological evaluation described the clinical picture as a ‘non-specific urticarial rash’ and recommended antihistaminic drugs.
The following day, the abdominal pain and the urticarial rash worsened and she was conducted to the emergency department, where the previous dermatological diagnosis was confirmed, and she was discharged with antihistamines and corticosteroids.
Upon administration of the prescribed therapy, the rash disappeared and no additional abdominal pain occurred.
Three days after the disappearance of the rash, the patient, totally recovered, underwent the second administration of the Pfizer-BioNTech BNT16B2b2 mRNA vaccine.
Five days later, the girl presented again to our evaluation with abdominal pain, one episode of vomiting and a new type of rash, mainly in her lower limbs and in her buttocks. The rash was slightly pruritic and purpuric. Physical examination revealed palpable, non-blanching petechiae and purpuric papules on lower limbs and at the bottom level . Again, the objective examination and the urine dipstick were normal.
Indeed, during the following days, the rash got worse and the girl had severe attacks of abdominal pain, without diarrhea or vomiting, thus she was accompanied to the nearest hospital and admitted for further evaluations. Nasopharyngeal swab for Sars-Cov-2 and pharyngeal swab for Streptococcus group A were negative. Laboratory investigations revealed normal full blood count, normal electrolytes, normal liver and renal function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein values as well as normal coagulation profile. An anti-streptolysin-O titre was also normal, as were the anti-nuclear antibody, anti-DNA antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody and serum IgA, IgM. A slight increase in IgG (1516 mg/dL NV 690–1400 mg/dL), IgE (289 kU/L NV 0–120 kU/L) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (atypical ANCA pattern) were reported . Viral serology for Cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr Virus and Mycoplasma Pneumoniae were negative for a current infection. Urine dipsticks, daily performed, were unremarkable. Moreover 2 out of 3 samples were positive for fecal occult blood testing.
During the hospitalization the rash improved, and she was diagnosed with vasculitis subsequent to Pfizer-BioNTech BNT16B2b2 mRNA vaccination. She was discharged with corticosteroid therapy (Prednisone 25 mg/day for 5 days) and both activity restriction and rest were recommended. Moreover, the adverse reaction was reported to the AIFA's National Pharmacovigilance Network (RNF).
Two days after the rash worsened again and the purpuric eruption spread at the lower limbs and at the bottom .
Again, the objective examination and the urine dipstick were normal. Thus, we urgently addressed her to a rheumathologist, who diagnosed a Henoch-Schönlein purpura associated with the Pfizer-BioNTech BNT16B2b2 mRNA vaccine and confirmed the ongoing corticosteroid therapy for 1 month.
Moreover, a new dermatological assessment, which led to cutaneous biopsy, was recommended. Histological examination and direct immunofluorescence study of the skin biopsy confirmed the clinical diagnosis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura showing vasculitis and IgA deposition along cutaneous vessels.
In the following 15 days, upon corticosteroid administration, the rash progressively diminished . Moreover, the objective evaluation and urine dipstick, performed weekly, were normal.
At the end of the 1-month corticosteroid therapy, the rash completely resolved.
At the last rheumatological visit, one month after the discontinuation of the steroid therapy, the patient appeared in good general condition. The purpuric lesions had regressed except for the persistence of an ulcerative lesion on the anterior surface of the left leg. There were no signs of arthritis on joint physical examination. The electrocardiogram and echocardiography performed at the cardiological visit were normal. Follow-up laboratory tests including complete blood count, c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antistreptolysin titre, electrolytes, liver and kidney function, and urinalysis were normal. The autoantibody panel that cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA and c-ANCA), antinuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, anti-ENA antibodies, and anti-smooth muscle antibodies were also negative. Occult blood performed on a stool sample was negative.
This work was conducted after receiving the patient’s informed consent to publish this report and images.