The authors report the case of a 77-year-old caucasian man that presented to the emergency department with sudden onset of dyspnoea, chest retrosternal pain and epigastric pain. Complains were preceded by vigorous vomit. Patient had previous medical history of diabetes, dyslipidaemia and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Upon admission the patient was tachycardic but with normal arterial pressure and no fever. On physical examination breath sounds were diminished on the left side and there was pain in the upper abdomen. All laboratory data were within normal limits but arterial blood analysis revealed PaO2 47 torr, SatO2 78% and hyperlactacidaemia (2.7 mmol/L) on FiO2 of 32%. Chest x-ray showed a large left pleural effusion (A). A CT scan was performed and revealed pneumomediastinum, left collapsed lung and loculated pleural effusion (B). A left intercostal chest tube (32 Fr) was inserted with residue food drainage (C). Hence, Boerhaave’s syndrome was suspected and, as the patient’s general condition was progressively deteriorating, an emergent surgery was undertaken. Patient was intubated with a double-lumen tube (direct visualization laryngoscopy). The patient was positioned in right-lateral decubitus and a left thoracotomy was performed. Intraoperatively a collapsed left lung was found with large amounts of food material (A) and a 2.5 cm longitudinal tear on the left-lower oesophagus was identified. The patient rapidly became more unstable, with need of vasopressor support. So, the authors decided to aggressively debride and irrigate the chest cavity. A T-tube was positioned and sutured to the oesophageal perforation (B) in order to create a controlled fistula. Two chest tubes were inserted and the chest wall was closed. The patient was then admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (UCI) with need for ventilatory support and vasopressor therapy. Intravenous broad-spectrum piperaciline/tazobactam antibiotherapy was initiated. Forty-eighth hours later, a second look thoracotomy was undertaken with further lavage and a definitive oesophageal repair – 3/0 monofilament interrupted sutures reinforced by using a pleural patch . The remaining ICU stay was complicated by right side pneumonia, but with no prolonged ventilatory support needed. He was transferred to the general surgery ward on the 8th postoperative day. During the hospital stay the patient suffered a fall with blunt head force trauma and head CT scan showed a stroke. Antiplatelet drugs were initiated and physiotherapy was done. He was discharged home on the 38th postoperative day. On 3 months follow-up consultation, the patient is well with no impairments .