An 81-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of anticoagulated atrial fibrillation (AF), had a sudden cardiac arrest during a hospital visit, requiring 10 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) performed immediately after the arrest, allowing the restoration of atrial fibrillation rhythm. She remained intubated for three days. A coronary angiogram showed no significant coronary disease, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%. Pulmonary embolism was ruled out by a computed tomography (CT) scan on day 3, which showed no other anomalies. There was neither electrolyte disturbance nor drugs that could favor such an event. Coronary spasm or idiopathic ventricular fibrillation was finally retained as the cause for her cardiac arrest and an internal defibrillator was implanted. Due to her past AF history (CHADS score = 3), our patient received intravenous anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin (UFH) upon arrival at the intensive care unit (ICU).
On day 8, she presented with fever, hypotension and tachycardia. Broad-spectrum antibiotics and inotropic support with dobutamine and noradrenaline were started.Her platelet count dropped from 656 G/L on admission (our patient was known for an essential thrombocytosis Jak-2 positive status) to 131G/L on day 10 and 129G/L on day 11 . Her 4T’s score was 8 and positive anti-PF4-heparin antibodies were confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (day 12). UFH was stopped and therapeutic doses of fondaparinux were immediately started. A thoraco-abdominal CT- scan performed on day 14 showed multiple pulmonary embolisms, splenic infarction and bilateral adrenal ischemia with subsequent hemorrhagic transformation on a CT scan done later on day 21 for non-specific abdominal pain . Diagnosis of HIT with thrombotic complication was retained (HITT) and fondaparinux was switched to lepirudin, at the same time her platelet count was increasing . A Doppler ultrasound (US) scan showed a distal deep venous thrombosis (DVT) of the left peroneal vein (day 17). Her procalcitonin level was lower than 0.5μg/L from day 7 to day 15, with high fibrinogen, which reasonably excluded the diagnosis of sepsis with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Antiphospholipid syndrome was investigated; anticardiolipin immunoglobulin G (IgG) was slightly positive in this elderly patient, whereas anticardiolipin IgM, anti beta2-glycoprotein antibody IgM and IgG were all negative. Since the thrombotic events happened during heparin therapy and the platelet count increased after heparin cessation, the diagnosis of HITT was maintained.
Basal cortisol on day 15 was 63nmol/L (normal value greater than 500nmol/L) and increased to 136nmol/L 60 minutes after injection of 250μg ACTH (considered normal if the cortisol value exceeds 500nmol/L). The diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency due to bilateral adrenal damage in the context of HITT was made and our patient was given intravenous hydrocortisone 50mg three times a day for five days and then received a maintenance oral dose of 20mg in the morning and 10mg in the afternoon, allowing for a quick hemodynamic improvement. Inotropes and antibiotics were therefore stopped.Following ICU discharge, she was weaned off hydrocortisone progressively over the following weeks , with close blood pressure surveillance, along with plasmatic assessment of potassium and sodium levels twice weekly. After one month of hospitalization, our patient was discharged on 10mg hydrocortisone once daily after a normal ACTH stimulation test. Substitution was tapered further until a complete stop on day 45. Fifteen days after cessation of hydrocortisone (day 60, Figure ), another ACTH stimulation test without oral substitution showed complete normalization. (Basal cortisol was 224nmol/L and increased to 568nmol/L one hour post-injection of 250μg of tetracosactide.) Two years later, the ACTH test remained normal and showed a basal cortisol at 138nmol/L that increased to 1540nmol/L one hour post-injection of 250μg of tetracosatide (day 600, Figure ). The patient died of another cause three years after the essential event.