A 44-year-old Brazilian female presented with a 2-year history of worsening bilateral periorbital discoloration, pain, and swelling. Examination revealed yellow, firm papules coalescing into plaques causing cicatricial lagophthalmos, with surrounding erythema, and bilateral periorbital edema . Similar extensions were noted to the right temple, left chin, and dorsal right forearm. Magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium of the orbit revealed no enhancement or mass within the orbit. Visual acuity, pupils, and extraocular motility were normal. Biopsy of the right lower eyelid and right temple demonstrated a dermal histiocytic infiltrate surrounding areas of collagen degeneration (necrobiosis). Numerous Touton and foreign-body type multinucleated giant cells were present, consistent with NXG .
At the time of diagnosis, the patient was being regularly followed by hematology and oncology for a 7-year history of persistent leukopenia thought to be secondary to an uncharacterized autoimmune disorder, as well as history of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, cryoglobulinemia, and hypocomplementemia. Diagnosis of NXG prompted bone marrow biopsy and aspirate, and CT/PET scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to rule out development of myeloma or occult lymphoma. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed an IgG kappa monoclonal protein spike. Recent hemoglobin was 9.1 g/dL, felt to be related to the underlying plasma cell disorder. She was normocalcemic and had normal renal function. Her skeletal survey showed no osteolytic lesions. CT scan showed splenomegaly. Finally, bone marrow biopsy revealed 20–30% IgG kappa monotypic plasma cells on bilateral trephine biopsies. Diagnosis of multiple myeloma was then made and she was treated with CyBorD (cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone) with subcutaneous bortezomib.
After completing and tolerating 7 cycles of CyBorD without complication, therapy was re-evaluated. The plasma cell myeloma had responded to chemotherapy with a diminution in serum protein and marrow evidence of myeloma, however, an abnormal B cell clonality was still evident. It was decided to complete cycle 8 of CyBorD and only treat further if there was significant acceleration or evolution of her disease, as CyBorD appeared to have reached the major therapeutic benefit, and because of her low marrow cellularity and other medical comorbidities. There was also concern that continuing CyBorD may promote toxicity. After completing cycle 8 of CyBorD, bone marrow aspirate/biopsy and bone survey was obtained. Because there were no significant changes, and IgG kappa monoclonal protein remained stable at 0.4 g/dL, it was opted to withhold treatment of the asymptomatic myeloma.
During the year of aggressive CyBorD chemotherapy regimen for treatment of myeloma, she had progression of her periocular NXG. Alternative treatment of her NXG eye lesions was then considered, and IVIG was selected due to reports of its success in treating this disfiguring and painful disorder associated with myeloma. No local therapy was tried. She was started on IVIG 0.5 gm/kg/day for 4 consecutive days administered every 4 weeks with the intent to complete at least 3 cycles of IVIG, and more if it appeared helpful . After 3 cycles of IVIG, the patient noticed improvement in periorbital discoloration and pain.
After 9 cycles, there was dramatic improvement in the appearance of the soft tissue around her eyes. By cycle 16, all previously noted lesions were resolved. She continues to receive monthly injections of IVIG with favorable results at 4 years of follow-up . Since completion of the initial 8 cycles of CyBorD, her multiple myeloma has been routinely monitored and there has been no significant changes in the objective markers of myeloma off chemotherapy.