A 10-day-old, full-term Caucasian baby boy presented with viral gastroenteritis to his local hospital. During admission, pediatric surgical services were consulted for left scrotal swelling and a diagnosis of a left hydrocele was made and patient was discharged. Seventeen days later (at four weeks of age), he presented with a 24-hour history of left scrotal swelling, erythema, pyrexia, and a pus-like discharge from an ulcerated area in his left hemi-scrotum. The results of an abdominal examination were normal, and a scrotal examination revealed a left scrotal abscess with a hard swollen left testis. No hernia was identified. A provisional diagnosis of missed neonatal testicular torsion was made and the baby was prepared for immediate surgical exploration. Intravenous antibiotics (amoxicillin with clavulanic acid and flucloxacillin) and fluids were commenced in light of the local scrotal infection.
A midline raphe scrotal incision was used. A small amount of pus was evacuated, and a necrotic scrotal wall with an appearance similar to that of Fournier gangrene was excised back to the healthy tissue margin. The excised tissue was sent for histology and microbiology. The tunica vaginalis was thickened, and the testis was found to be edematous with normal blood supply. There was no evidence of testicular torsion. The wound was thoroughly washed with antiseptic solution. The dartos muscle and skin were closed primarily by means of absorbable sutures. The pyrexia was noted to settle soon after surgery. Edema, erythema, and pain settled over the following 48 hours.
Wound cultures revealed Enterococcus sp. (ampicillin-sensitive) and Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-sensitive). The antibiotic regime mentioned above was continued for a total of 14 days (five days intravenously and the remainder orally). The baby was discharged home on the fifth post-operative day with oral antibiotics. Histology confirmed the intra-operative diagnosis . The baby has remained well, and wound healing was normal at follow-up in an out-patient clinic at two weeks, two months, and six months. The results of a scrotal examination each time were normal.