A 74-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our department with a drop in visual acuity (VA) in both eyes over the past week. A VA of 6/10 (right eye) and 6/7.5 (left eye) had been documented 2 weeks earlier, attributed to cataract. The patient received palliative treatment with sunitinib 50 mg/day on the standard 4-week on 2-week off schedule for the management of osseous, hepatogenic, and lymphogenic metastatic chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. At the start of the symptoms, he had been on sunitinib for the past week. Additionally, he had a history of prostate carcinoma in 2022, for which he underwent curative radiotherapy. Additional medication consisted of paracetamol and pantoprazole only. On ophthalmological examination, VA was 6/30 in the right eye and 6/120 in the left eye. Anterior chamber was moderately deep in the left eye and shallow in the right, both with pigmented cells present. Serous retinal detachments involving the macula and inferior region were observed bilaterally, as shown in . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula revealed massive subretinal and intraretinal fluid in both eyes. Ultrasonography did not detect measurable solid choroidal abnormalities. Electroretinogram did not show electronegativity and thus was not typical for paraneoplastic syndromes like cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR). Fluorescein angiography (FAG) exhibited bilateral multiple pinpoint hyperfluorescence in the posterior pole, resembling Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome. Prednisone was initiated and gradually increased to 80 mg/day, but the visual complaints continued to worsen. The patient expressed a clear preference to prevent any further deterioration of his vision, even if it meant discontinuing the treatment for his advanced metastatic disease and potentially shortening his life expectancy. Sunitinib was discontinued, and on evaluation after 7 days, VA had improved to 6/30 in the right eye and to 6/12 in the left eye, and OCT displayed a marked reduction in serous fluid collections.
It was decided to permanently discontinue the use of sunitinib due to the evident improvement in vision. Prednisone was discontinued as well. In a bid to slow metastatic disease, the patient was switched to everolimus. The decision to use this mTOR inhibitor was made because limited effectiveness of immunotherapy has been described in this subtype of renal cell carcinoma [, ]. Five weeks later, the VA had improved to 6/10 in the right eye and 6/6.7 in the left eye, with no fluid collections visible on fundoscopy or OCT. After initiating everolimus, visual signs and symptoms did not recur. The patient passed away 4 months later due to the progression of metastatic illness. VA was maintained during the entire last stage of life.