A 38-year-old Japanese man with a mood disorder was admitted to the emergency department of Oita University Hospital (Oita, Japan) for complaints of fever and diarrhea. Ten days prior to presentation at the emergency department, he experienced appetite loss and vomiting a few days after attending a riverside barbecue and eating half-roasted foods. He was receiving oral ethyl loflazepate and paroxetine hydrochloride hydrate therapy for mood disorder and alcoholism. The patient had a fever and watery diarrhea 3 days prior to admission. His body temperature was 38.8 °C, blood pressure 111/70 mmHg, pulse 112 beats/min, and he had an SpO2 of 100% at 3 L/min with a nasal mask on admission. Although he was awake without any stimuli, he was unable to recall his name or date of birth. No murmur was detected on heart examination. No crackles were auscultated in either lung field. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (11,840/μL), hypoalbuminemia (2.6 g/dL), decreased serum iron level (22 μ/dL), decreased serum unsaturated iron-binding capacity level (162 μg/dL), decreased transferrin saturation (TSAT) level (12%), elevated C-reactive protein level (9.58 mg/dL), and an elevated procalcitonin (18.8 ng/mL). A chest X-ray showed an infiltrative shadow in the right upper lung field. Whole body computed tomography showed no remarkable finding except for consolidation with air bronchograms in the right upper lung lobe. The patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia, and treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h) and azithromycin (500 mg every 24 h) was initiated. On day 3, 2 sets of blood culture tests revealed the presence of Gram -negative rod bacteria ; therefore, the ceftriaxone was replaced with doripenem (500 mg every 8 h) and the azithromycin was discontinued. On day 4, the Gram-negative rod bacteria were identified as Y. pseudotuberculosis, using the VITEK 2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) with 99% probability. Furthermore, matrix-assisted laser-desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) was used to identify the bacteria as Y. pseudotuberculosis with highly probable species identification (score value, 2.32). On day 5, the patient’s blood pressure decreased to 80/50 mmHg (mean arterial pressure 60 mmHg). Blood gas analysis revealed an elevated lactate level (4.1 mmol/L). The hypotension persisted despite adequate volume resuscitation, and norepinephrine as a vasopressor was started. The patient was diagnosed with septic shock due to Y. pseudotuberculosis infection. On the basis of susceptibility testing of Y. pseudotuberculosis using a dry plate (Eiken, Tokyo, Japan) with a conventional microdilution method and analysis by an image analyzer (Koden IA40MIC-i, Koden, Tokyo, Japan), the strain was found to be sensitive to ampicillin, ampicillin/sulbactam, cefotiam, ceftazidime, cefmetazole, meropenem, gentamicin, and levofloxacin. A sputum culture test was negative. A stool culture test detected Escherichia coli and Streptococcus spp, but no Y. pseudotuberculosis. On day 7, his fever was reduced and the norepinephrine was discontinued. Desquamation of the fingers was observed . Two sets of blood culture tests showed negative results. On day 9, the treatment regimen was changed to cefmetazole (2 g every 8 h) and continued for a total of 14 days. On day 10, a chest X-ray showed complete improvement of the infiltrative shadow in the right upper lung field. On day 17, he was discharged from the hospital. Further characteristics of the Y. pseudotuberculosis strain was performed because of the clinical importance of virulence factors of this strain. Y. pseudotuberculosis isolate was of serotype 6 using serotyping scheme based on O-antigen. To evaluate the pathogenicity of this isolate, variants of Y. pseudotuberculosis-derived mitogen (YPM) superantigens were investigated in the strain using PCR with the following primers: ypmA [(5′-CACTTTTCTCTGGAGTAGCG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GATGTTTCAGAGCTATTGTT-3′ (reverse)] and ypmB [(5′-TTTCTGTCATTACTGACATTA-3′ (forward) and 5′-CCTCTTTCCATCCATCTCTTA-3′ (reverse)] . The PCR test using isolated bacteria showed positivity of ypm A. Combined with the results of serotype 6 and genetic detection of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis-derived mitogen A (YPMa), Y. pseudotuberculosis strain belonged to a genetic group 3 (Far East systemic pathogenicity type) . We finally diagnosed with Far East scarlet-like fever (FESLF) caused by Y. pseudotuberculosis complicated septic shock.