A 79-year-old Asian man presented with gross hematuria that started 2 weeks prior. His morning urine was bright red when he began to urinate, after which it grew progressively lighter in color. His urine later in the day was pink and sometimes yellow or colorless at night. He noted mild weight loss despite normal appetite and food intake. He also complained of mild cough and slight dyspnea upon exertion.
He had a history of open cholecystectomy for gallbladder cancer, radical prostatectomy with penile prosthesis implantation for prostate cancer, inferior vena cava filter placement for deep vein thrombosis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Medications included edoxaban, an angiotensin II receptor blocker, a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, and a proton pump inhibitor. He was an occasional drinker and had quit smoking 40 years ago. No significant family history was noted. He had opted to receive annual medical checkups including serum and urine testing with tumor markers, chest roentgenogram, abdominal ultrasound, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for over 30 consecutive years. No abnormalities were noted at the last checkup, which was conducted 11 months prior to his presentation.
Physical examination was significant only for abdominal surgical scars and decreased breath sounds on the left side. Laboratory testing revealed an increase in white blood cells (10,200 mm3) and C-reactive protein (6.76 mg/dL). Neuron-specific enolase was elevated (30.7 ng/mL), while other tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, and prostate-specific antigen were within their normal ranges. Urinalysis showed over 50 red blood cells per high-powered field, and urine cytology showed severe atypia, raising the suspicion of urothelial carcinoma. Contrast computed tomography (CT) showed a well-enhanced bladder tumor with no signs of deep invasion. Severely enlarged abdominal lymph nodes and lung, pleural, and peritoneal metastases were also observed. A small subcutaneous nodule in the left thorax was also suspected to be a metastatic lesion. While metastatic urothelial carcinoma was a possible explanation, a coexisting cancer of unknown origin was also suspected .
Cystoscopy revealed a 15-mm white mass on the right posterior wall of the bladder . Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TUR-BT) was performed with no complications. While macroscopic findings of the bladder tumor appeared consistent with those of urothelial tumors, further testing was conducted to rule out concomitant malignancies. EGD revealed a 20-mm flat, pigmented lesion with a nonpigmented nodule in the mid-esophagus, a 10-mm pigmented submucosal tumor-like growth in the distal esophagus, and polypoid lesions with central depression in the distal esophagus and stomach . Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of an abdominal lymph node and thoracentesis were also performed. Colonoscopy was unremarkable.
Esophageal biopsy showed melanin granules within tumor cells and melanoblasts in the interstitium, with immunohistochemistry positive for melan A . In situ lesions were also observed, suggesting that the esophagus was the primary site . Stomach biopsy revealed similar proliferation of tumor cells. Pathology of the bladder tumor revealed no signs of muscular invasion. Immunohistochemistry for both the bladder tumor and lymph node was positive for melan A, vimentin, S-100, HMB45, SOX10, and p53 and negative for AE1/AE3 . The MIB-1 proliferative index was 80%. A negative test for the EWSR1 chimeric gene ruled out clear cell sarcoma. No BRAF mutation was found. Comprehensive dermal and ocular examinations were negative for melanoma. The patient was diagnosed with PMME with metastases to the stomach, subcutaneous tissue, lung, bladder, pleura, and peritoneum.
Nivolumab was started at 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks, which was the standard dosage at the time. CT follow-up after six cycles revealed complete remission of all visible tumors. However, acute kidney injury was observed after seven cycles. Pathology from renal biopsy was suggestive of both mild interstitial tubulonephritis and IgA nephropathy . Partial recovery was achieved after discontinuing nivolumab and introducing steroids at 0.5 mg/kg, which were tapered over a 3 month period. While nivolumab therapy was not reintroduced, repeated CT scans taken every 3–6 months also showed no signs of recurrence. Follow-up endoscopy 1 year later revealed that all esophageal and gastric tumors had disappeared, leaving only slight melanosis with no remaining pathological evidence of malignancy . The melanosis also disappeared 6 months thereafter . The patient has remained tumor-free for over 5 years without further treatment.