A 28-year-old male came to the emergency department with a history of falls from a bike. The examination was done as per advanced trauma life support protocol , and vitals were found to be within normal limits.
On clinical examination, it was found that the patient had a superficial wound over the skin over the left olecranon and proximal ulna and radiographs confirmed a right comminuted displaced olecranon fracture . Further, the wound was thoroughly washed, the limb was immobilized and the patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. Due to the poor skin condition, a Plan for tension band wiring using a minimal incision was planned in due course.
The steps taken are as follows:
Under anesthesia, the tourniquet was applied above the elbow of the affected arm. The patient is positioned laterally, with the affected elbow placed over a side post. The surgical site was prepared through painting and draping. The elbow joint is maintained in full extension to facilitate the reduction of the olecranon fracture A 2 cm incision was made on the upper 1/4th of the posterior aspect of the ulna, and retraction was achieved using two Dura retractors. A 3.2 mm drill bit was utilized to create a drill hole (tunnel) in the proximal one-fourth of the olecranon process. A 1 cm loop was fashioned from a 0.8 mm stainless steel wire spool measuring 20 inches long The wire loop is then passed through the tunnel in the proximal ulna. 2 mm Kirschner wire, 9 inches, is inserted superior to the olecranon under the triceps tendon from lateral to medial, taking care to perform this step only in an extended elbow to protect the ulnar nerve A 2 mm Kirschner wire is inserted from the incision site on the proximal ulna to the exit site of the horizontal Kirschner wire. A Jamshidi needle or curvilinear wire passer is passed over the Kirschner wire from superior to inferior. The lateral end of the stainless-steel wire is threaded through the needle and brought out superomedially. The wire loop is passed in a similar manner from the superomedial portal to the superolateral portal A J needle is passed over the Kirschner wire from the superolateral portal to the superomedial portal. The wire loop is passed in a similar manner from the superolateral portal to the incision site using the Kirschner wire and J needle . Reduction is attempted by pushing the fragment downward and by flexion and extension at the elbow joint Both ends of the stainless-steel wire loop are tied around using pliers. Elbow flexion and extension are performed, and the reduction is verified under the c-arm Post-operative radiographs of the olecranon were taken . Mobilization begins on the 2nd post-operative day based on the patient’s pain tolerance. Sutures are removed after 2 weeks, and regular follow-ups are conducted. The wound healed over the next 2 weeks and the patient got a complete range of motion at the end of 4 weeks following physical therapy and regular follow-ups.