A 64-year-old, Caucasian, non-smoker man was admitted to the neurology division for acute cognitive impairment, personality change, spatial disorientation, and short-term memory loss associated with anorexia. He had no relevant comorbidities. The patient’s history was uneventful. At the clinical examination, we found hard, irregular, cervical and inguinal lymph nodes of 1.5 × 1.5 cm of diameter. Biological tests were all in the normal ranges but chromogranin-A and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were elevated at 175 ng/ml (NV < 102 ng/ml) and 28 ng/ml (NV < 17 ng/ml). The brain MRI revealed T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signals of the para hippocampic gyrus and the hippocamps . The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a 1-min, left, fronto-temporal focal crisis. The 18F-FDG (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose) PET scan documented many cervical and inguinal hypermetabolic lymph nodes , a hypermetabolism of the posterior surface of the right prostate lobe and the right hippocampus , and a right prefrontal, parietal, and occipital cortical hypometabolism .
The patient referred to a percutaneous ultrasound-guided core biopsy of both, cervical and inguinal, lymphadenopathies and the prostate gland. Histology revealed a massive infiltration of small, poorly differentiated, tumor cells with a scant cytoplasm and prominent mitotic figures . At the immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for CD56 and synaptophysin, and negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK-7, CK-20, chromogranin-A, p53, PAX8, GATA-3, and TTF-1 according to the diagnosis of a lymph node metastasis of a poorly differentiated, small cell neuroendocrine tumor. The proliferation index (Ki-67) was elevated at 90%. Prostate histology was consisted with a prostatitis. The lumbar ponction revealed a clear pleocytose (1 white cell/mm3; NV < 1 cells/mm3) and elevated protein levels (1,15 g/L; NV < 0,40 g/L) without any evidence of tumor cells. We documented the presence of serum anti-neuronal Hu antibodies in the absence of other neuronal autoantibodies, including anti-Yo, anti-Ri, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2, anti-SOX1, anti-GAD65, anti-Tr, anti-Zic4, anti-Titin, anti-amphiphysin, anti leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGl1), and anti contactin associated protein 2 (CASPR2). The molecular analysis of Cytomegalovirus and Human Herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) genome in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was negative. This biological pattern confirmed the diagnosis of PLE.
The patient underwent several cycles of plasmapheresis combined with high-dose corticosteroids that partially and temporarily improved neurological symptoms. We started also a systemic chemotherapy by a cisplatin/etoposide regimen. After three cycles of chemotherapy, lymph node metastases partially regressed. The brain MRI revealed a radiological improvement of the limbic lesions but patient’s neurological symptoms quickly worsened and the patient presented with many episodes of partial epileptic seizures and confusion. In this context, we administered four cycles of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIgs) in addition to the systemic chemotherapy leading to a rapid and progressive improvement of the neurological symptoms.
After six cycles of systemic chemotherapy, the whole body CT and 18F-FDG PET scan showed a regression of metastatic lymphadenopathies , an improvement of brain abnormalities but the presence of a new, anorectal, hypermetabolic tumor lesion . The colonoscopy and pelvic MRI documented a voluminous tumor of the right rectal wall of 62 × 84 × 162 mm of diameter, infiltrating the prostate, the right seminal vesicle, the internal anal sphincter, the levator ani and the puborectalis muscle. The percutaneous biopsy revealed a small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.
In order to obtain a better control of this new tumor lesion, we started a concomitant chemoradiotherapy with a carboplatin/etoposide regimen. After completion of treatment, the patient developed a diplopia, which was related to a left intraorbital metastasis. The 18F-FDG PET scan showed also lung, hepatic, lymph node, and peritoneal multiple metastases. In this contexte, we administered a palliative systemic chemotherapy by weekly topotecan but the patient’s clinical conditions quickly worsened leading to his death.