A 19-year-old male presented with diffuse abdominal pain, watery non-bloody diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting and intermittent low-grade fever. The patient had experienced these symptoms during the preceding weeks.
Prior to treatment with conventional antibiotics, multiple stool cultures on blood agar, MacConkey agar (Oxoid) and other selective media in addition to other tests for enteropathogens (bacterial and viral) gave negative results. Microscopic examinations of fresh stool specimens and of wet-mount concentrates from flotation and sedimentation techniques were performed. A multiple stool ova and parasites examination of wet mounts and permanently stained smears with trichrome, iron haematoxlyin and modified Kinyoun acid-fast stain were prepared from formalin/ethyl acetate concentrates. This case was initially suspected to be Cryptosporidium gastroenteritis because of the severity of symptoms or Cyclospora cayetanensis based on the oocyst size of 8–10 µm, which is close to the size of Sarcocystis sporocysts. The untypical presentation and duration of the symptoms, especially the diarrhoea lasting more than 3 weeks, complicated and delayed the diagnosis of the case. The parasite’s individual sporocysts were initially misidentified by the laboratory. This error would not have affected the patient treatment for this parasite if this was a mild self-limiting case. However, the definitive diagnosis of the parasite as S. hominis was made based on the microscopic demonstration of the individual sporocysts (mean size 9×14 μm) and oocysts (mean size 17×15 μm), each containing two sporocysts in the wet-mount preparations .
Based on the history of the patient, symptoms started approximately 4 h after eating undercooked beef meat in shawarma sandwiches, which is a very unusual short incubation period. The symptoms, which lasted for 6 weeks from their first appearance, were resolved after a 10-day course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole), and stool specimens tested negative for the sporocysts after treatment.