A 9-year-old female patient was presented to our emergency room complaining of intermittent fever, chills, fatigue, poor appetite, and diarrhea. On examination, she was afebrile, (however, her family reported a tympanic temperature of 37.8 °C at home), oxygen saturation was 99% on room air, her respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute with a heart rate of 90 beats/min, and her blood pressure measurement was 100/75 mmHg. The patient’s residential area is known to be a hotspot for SARS-CoV-2 infection. She had no history of similar manifestations in her family members.
The child was born with hypoplastic left heart syndrome; she underwent a heart transplant operation at the age of 7 days. She had regular follow-up appointments in our pediatric cardiology clinic. Three years back, she was admitted to our facility with severe gastroenteritis attacks that required intensive care unit admission and intravenous inotropic support. After 10 days, she was discharged with stable hemodynamic conditions and normal cardiac functions. Last year, she was complaining about frequent attacks of eczema flare-up, which was treated successfully by a 5-day course of topical hydrocortisone 1% cream. Her current medications are aspirin 81 mg daily, immunosuppressive therapy in the form of tacrolimus 7 mg once daily, and mycophenolate mofetil 0.3 g three times a week. The last recorded blood concentration of tacrolimus 1 month before admission was 6 ng/ml, and cardiac allograft function was normal with an elevated baseline creatinine level of 70 umol/L and cyclic leucopenia with measured white blood cell count of 3.2 × 109 cells/l and 5.3 × 109 cells/l 4 and 2 months prior to this admission respectively . Absolute neutrophilic count was low on admission (0.3 × 109 cells/l) and continue to rise to reach 2.5 × 109 cells/l on follow-up .
The differential diagnosis included bacterial gastroenteritis, viral gastroenteritis, and coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19).
Laboratory tests showed a leucopenia (white blood cell count of 2.86 × 109 cells/l) hemoglobin 9.2 g/dl, creatinine level 120 umol/l, renal Co2 12 mmol/l, procalcitonin level 8.4 ng/mL (normal range up to 2 ng/mL), D dimer 1.555 mg/l (normal range up to 0.555 mg/L), ferritin 229 μg/l, and ProBNP 680 pg/ml (normal range up to 450 pg/ml). Chest X-ray showed clear both lung fields and costophrenic angles. .
A throat swab nucleic acid test was positive for SARS-CoV-2. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci swab and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus swab screening were negative. Blood, urine, and stool cultures were negative for bacterial infection, and rapid antigen stool test was negative. Echocardiography study showed normal systolic and diastolic function with no pericardial effusion .
Immunosuppressive drugs were adjusted in the form of tacrolimus 5 mg as tacrolimus trough level concentration on admission was 11 ng/ml and continued on the same dose of mycophenolate mofetil and aspirin. Since the child condition was stable, a decision was made in a multi-disciplinary meeting between pediatric cardiology, cardiac surgery, pediatric infectious disease, and immunology to proceed with conservative management, and we did not start any antiviral medications for SARS-CoV-2 virus infection. Intravenous fluids therapy was used for the correction of hydration status. Body temperature was normal during the admission period , gastrointestinal symptoms were gradually improving over three days, and she resumed her normal oral intake. On the 7th day of admission, laboratory tests showed creatinine level 70 umol/l, renal Co2 19 mmol/l. The patient was discharged after two consecutive negative reverse transcriptase−polymerase chain reaction throat swabs for SARS-CoV-2 on the 12th and 18th days from admission.
The patient remained hospitalized for 15 days of isolation as per the ministry of health guidelines. She was scheduled for a follow-up appointment in the pediatric cardiology clinic.