A man in his 80s visited Takahashi Clinic with recent bilateral vision loss. There were no other associated visual symptoms. His ophthalmologic history consisted of a pterygium removed from his right eye at another clinic 10 years earlier. His family history regarding ophthalmology was unknown. His medications included amlodipine, pitavastatin calcium, and sodium ferrous citrate. He was not using eye drops.
Visual acuity tests noted a corrected distance visual acuity of 20/32 in both eyes. The IOP of the right eye measured by a non-contact tonometer was 12 mmHg and that of the left eye was 14 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination showed bilateral cataracts and pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PXF). Because the clinic was not equipped with a flare metre, it was not possible to quantify exfoliation, but slit-lamp microscopic findings were similar in the right and left eyes. Both eyes had poor mydriasis due to the PXF. In addition, the right eye showed nasal corneal opacity due to previous pterygium removal. The fundus was unremarkable. Axial lengths measured with an optical biometer were 24.43 mm for the right eye and 24.38 mm for the left eye. No preoperative visual field testing was performed.
Cataract surgery was performed on both eyes by one skilled surgeon (AK). The right eye was operated on first. After disinfection procedures were undertaken, topical anaesthesia was administered, a 2.4 mm temporal clear corneal single-plane incision was made, a sideport incision was also created, and the lens was removed by coaxial phacoemulsification. The surgery was performed using a pupil dilation ring due to poor mydriasis. A single-piece acrylic intraocular lens was inserted into the capsule bag through the unenlarged main incision. Only one cohesive ophthalmic viscosurgical device (OVD) was used during surgery. All incisions were hydrated to aid in closure after sufficient aspiration and removal of OVD from the anterior chamber, behind the iris, and behind the intraocular lens. No sutures were needed. The surgery was completed shortly after 6:00 pm and no surgical complications were observed.
After completion of the surgery, the patient was placed in a sitting position in the operating room and the nurse administered the first postoperative eye drops. The postoperative drops consisted of betamethasone sodium phosphate (steroid), moxifloxacin hydrochloride (antibiotic), and nepafenac (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug). The drops were administered at 5-minute intervals. The patient was told to self-administer the drops before bedtime and the next morning before visiting the clinic. After a short rest in the recovery room, the patient was allowed to return home.
The morning after surgery, the patient was examined at 9 am. The IOP in the right eye was 65 mmHg with corneal oedema . Although it was difficult to identify due to corneal oedema, and convection of the anterior chamber aqueous humour was also observed. The patient reported right ocular pain. Although lowering IOP with topical and/or systemic pharmacotherapy has also been used, the posterior lip of the main incision made during surgery was pushed down with a fine needle to drain the anterior chamber aqueous humour,, which is the recommended paracentesis procedure when the postoperative IOP is 28 mmHg or higher . The leaking fluid was aqueous and did not appear to be residual OVD. After the procedure, the IOP dropped to 9 mmHg. After confirming that there was no leakage of aqueous humour, from the wound by slit-lamp examination, the patient was instructed to continue eye drop treatment and to visit the doctor the next morning. When the patient was seen the next morning, the IOP was 53 mmHg and corneal oedema was again observed. The patient reported that he had begun to notice blurred vision and ocular pain after the eye drops were applied the previous afternoon. The same treatment as the previous day was performed, and the IOP was reduced to 8 mmHg. As the increase in IOP was suspected to result from a steroid response, the patient was instructed to discontinue steroid eye drops only. When he visited the clinic the next morning, his IOP was 12 mmHg and no corneal oedema was observed. As the postoperative inflammation was also reduced and appeared to be under control, the patient was instructed to return to the clinic four days later, which was the scheduled surgery date for the left eye. However, the next day, the patient came to the clinic with a main complaint of blurred vision and eye pain. The night before, the patient had mistakenly put steroid drops in his right eye, and the symptoms reappeared thereafter. The corneal oedema was mild, but the IOP was 37 mmHg. At his request, the paracentesis procedure was performed. Three days later, the patient was seen for surgery on the left eye, and the IOP of the right eye was 14 mmHg . Fundus examination revealed the appearance of an optic disc haemorrhage, which was not observed preoperatively . A visual field examination revealed a visual field defect . The same day, left eye surgery was performed as scheduled, using the same technique as for the right eye. No surgical complications occurred. No postoperative steroid eye drops were administered, and no increase in IOP was observed in either eye after the next day. At the 1-week postoperative visit, the corrected distance visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, and the IOP was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye. By that time, the postoperative inflammation had largely subsided. No visual field defects were observed in the left eye on visual field examination. The patient was then followed up for one month after surgery.