A 24-year-old Hispanic woman with no relevant medical history was evaluated for epigastric fullness and abdominal discomfort accompanied by mild exertional dyspnoea. Her vital signs were stable, although physical examination revealed significant, non-painful, pulsatile hepatomegaly with no other remarkable findings.
Electrocardiogram revealed an incomplete right bundle branch block, with ST segment changes in leads V1–V3. Chest X-ray suggested dextroversion and enlargement of the right cavities. There was also a curvilinear opacity that extended from the right pulmonary hilum, bordering the cardiac silhouette to the homolateral cardiophrenic angle, which is known as the ‘scimitar sign’ . Results of liver function tests were within the normal range.
A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated right pulmonary veins draining directly into the right suprahepatic vein, which was severely dilated. There was also atypical hepatic venous drainage, with independent suprahepatic veins into the right atrium ( and Video 1). This was associated with mild pulmonary hypertension [estimated mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) 35 mmHg] and mild right ventricle (RV) dilation (RV end-diastolic basal diameter, 45 mm) with normal systolic function (Video 2). The presence of atrial septal defect (ASD) was ruled out by transoesophageal echocardiography.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed RV dilation [end-diastolic volume (EDV), 130 mL/m2; end-systolic volume (ESV), 42 mL/m2] and identified the venous collector of the entire right lung ending in right suprahepatic vein, with shunt to middle suprahepatic vein and an increased pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs 1:9). Both veins were severely dilated with large hepatomegaly but no systemic venous collaterals were detected. In addition, the concomitant presence of an intraparenchymal venous malformation with abundant tortuous and dilated veins was observed. It also revealed right lung hypoplasia, with the absence of upper lobar bronchus and mediastinal shift towards the right hemithorax . Angiography was also performed, which confirmed the presence of a venous collector that provided drainage of the three pulmonary lobes, but no systemic collaterals were identified (Video 3).
Subsequently, right heart catheterization was performed, in which the presence of pulmonary hypertension was ruled out, with an mPAP of 21 mmHg and normal pulmonary vascular resistance (2 Wood Units), and confirming the presence of a significant Qp:Qs ratio of 2. Accordingly, surgery was indicated because the patient exhibited symptomatic anomalous pulmonary venous drainage accompanied by overloading of right cavities and remarkable hepatomegaly. She underwent surgery using an intra-atrial patch to baffle the flow from the anomalous pulmonary venous system into the left atrium through the right atrium, creating an ASD. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on Day 6 in good clinical condition.
Three months after surgery, the patient remained asymptomatic and follow-up MRI revealed normalization of the right chamber volumes (EDV, 73 mL/m2; ESV, 27 mL/m2), as well as a significant reduction in hepatomegaly and calibre of the suprahepatic veins (