The patient was asymptomatic.
The patient had no previous disease.
A 33-year-old female with a 10-year history of oral contraceptive use was diagnosed with an hepatic tumor as an incidental finding in an abdominal ultrasound (US). An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, showing a 30 mm × 29 mm focal lesion in segment VI of the liver, slightly hyperintense in T2 and isointense in T1 weighted sequences, with a central scar that showed enhancement in early arterial phase and retained contrast on delayed scans, compatible with HCA or Focal Nodular Hyperplasia (FNH) with atypical behavior .
After two years of follow-up, the patient presented an episode of upper quadrant abdominal pain, fever and vomiting. Laboratory test were normal and a new MRI showed a slight reduction in the size of the nodular formation, measuring 26 mm × 18 mm, with a change in its characteristics. Currently showing a hypointense center in T2 and hyperintense appearance in T1, compatible with an intralesional hematic component. The presumptive diagnosis in this circumstance was a HCA with hemorrhagic changes inside .
Because the patient refused to undergo surgery a conservative management was decided, agreeing a strict follow-up with serum tumor markers and color Doppler US alternating with MRI every six months. Since then, no changes in tumor chara-cteristics were observed for the following four years.
The patient later underwent hormonal treatment for infertility. The scheme used consisted in six doses of Clomiphene (50 miligrams/d) the first 6 d, recombinant FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) 150 IU and LH (luteinizing hormone) 75 IU per day for 10 d. Cetrorelix (0.25 IU) per day during 4 d (from day 6 to 10 from the initiation of the stimulus). Subsequently, HCG (10.000 IU) a single dose in day 11.
Physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory functional tests were within normal limits and tests for serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and alpha-fetoprotein were negative.
In the last MRI (six months after ovulation induction therapy) the tumor increased in size (40 mm × 39 mm) and a new focal image of 31 mm × 26 mm in contact with its upper region was detected. Both lesions presented heterogeneous enhancement, slighter than the rest of the hepatic parenchyma that persisted in late phases. It showed restriction signs in diffusion-weighted image (DWI), probably because of higher cellularity .