The 59-year-old male patient was initially diagnosed with stage IIIA follicular lymphoma in January 2018, which transformed to germinal center B-cell like DLBCL in October of the same year. Refractory to multiple cycles of Rituximab-based immunochemotherapy , the patient underwent leukapheresis for CAR T-cell therapy in April 2019. The patient experienced significant lymphoma progression during the manufacturing process of Axicabtagene ciloleucel (Axi-cel), manifesting itself in the form of malignant pleural effusions and progressive lymphadenopathy . In the six-week period between leukapheresis and lymphodepletion, the patient remained severely neutropenic after R-CHOP and developed possible invasive fungal disease (IFD) as well as E. coli septicemia secondary to a urinary tract infection. These infections were treated successfully with liposomal amphotericin B and piperacillin/tazobactam. Prior to lymphodepletion (D-5), the patient presented with an ECOG performance status of 1, intact renal and liver function, while observing residually depressed blood counts (WBC 1270/μl, ANC 700/μl, ALC 390/μl, Hemoglobin 7.2 g/dl, Platelets 20 G/l). BM histopathology showed a hypocellular marrow with no evidence of lymphoma infiltration. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations demonstrated severe B-cell aplasia and decreased absolute CD4+ (84/μl) and CD8+ (271/μl) counts. His anti-infective prophylaxis consisted of a combination of acyclovir, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (TMP/SMZ), and posaconazole. The fludarabine/cyclophosphamide lympho-preparative regimen was applied on days − 5 to − 3 according to the provider’s protocol, followed by CAR T-cell transfusion on day 0.
During lymphodepletion the patient developed an upper respiratory infection, presenting with a non-productive cough and a sputum culture positive for Bordetella bronchiseptica, which resolved clinically after antibiotic treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam. On day 7, the patient developed fever with a stable cardiopulmonary function and concomitant IL-6 rise , which was classified as CRS grade I according to ASTCT consensus grading in the absence of positive blood cultures and other foci. Due to persistent fever refractory to antipyretic treatment, four total doses of tocilizumab (8 mg/kg) were applied over 36 h. Starting on day 9, the patient deteriorated neurologically with a depressed state of consciousness prompting the diagnosis of grade IV ICANS. The patient was transferred to the neurological ICU, and high-dose corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily) were initiated. CSF-analysis displayed subtle pleocytosis, but revealed no signs of CNS infection (viral, bacterial and fungal) or meningeal involvement of the DLBCL. CT and MR imaging of the brain exhibited none of the pathological findings reported for ICANS or CNS infection . After 5 days of high-dose methylprednisolone, the patient’s neurological status slowly improved, and corticosteroids could be tapered.
While the patient’s initial clinical course was fraught with complications, CT staging performed at day 36 demonstrated a partial response to CAR T-cell therapy according to Lugano and Lyric criteria . This was particularly evident for the pleural manifestations of the underlying DLBCL, which was accompanied by an interval decrease in pleural effusions and subjective dyspnea . Multiple nodal sites including paraaortic and parailiac lymph nodes exhibited significant regression of tumor size . Moreover, the patient displayed splenic hypodensities consistent with either tumor tissue necrosis or infection-associated inflammatory changes (inset, Fig. f). These CT-morphologic findings were accompanied by a decrease of LDH levels .
The patient presented with significant myelotoxicity and sustained transfusion dependency after CAR T-cell administration . The overall duration of profound neutropenia – defined as an ANC < 100/μl – was 52 days. Because of the severity of ICANS, the clinicians chose to hold G-CSF during this time period due to concerns for risk of worsening toxicity .
While receiving broad anti-infectives (acyclovir, TMP/SMZ, posaconazole, meropenem), the patient developed breakthrough septic shock on day 24. He exhibited fever (39.5 °C), hypotension (70/30 mmHg), tachycardia (160/min), as well as lactic acidosis (lactate: 10.7 mmol/l). The patient was non-conversant, non-oriented, and was not able to localize symptoms. However, he had described epigastric tenderness and subtle changes in stool consistency and frequency on the previous day. As a result, abdominal CT imaging was obtained, which displayed severe pancolitis, as evidenced by pronounced mucosal thickening with edematous changes ranging from the ascending colon to the rectum . Labs were notable for an acute spike of serum inflammatory parameters (Il-6 > 500.000 pg/ml, CRP 5.7 mg/dl, Procalcitonin 11.2 ng/ml, Fig. d). Following ICU transfer, high-dose vasopressor support with norepinephrine was initiated together with volume resuscitation to maintain organ perfusion. Due to progressive loss of consciousness the patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated. To control the proinflammatory state, extracorporeal cytokine absorption (Cytosorb®) was performed, which resulted in a decrease of soluble inflammatory markers in the subsequent days. Arterial blood cultures were positive for vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), and the antibiotic treatment was escalated to include linezolid along with meropenem . The ICU team transitioned antifungal prophylaxis from posaconazole to an echinocandine (micafungin 50 mg IV) due to ECG changes and concerns for drug interactions on day 24. Though he remained in critical condition, in the coming weeks his clinical condition stabilized and both the catecholamine rate and volume support could be reduced. To determine the origin of sustained myelosuppression, a bone marrow biopsy was obtained, which depicted a hypocellular marrow and severe aplasia affecting all hematopoietic lineages . On days 41 and 49, surveillance blood cultures were positive for Candida glabrata, a commensal fungal organism of human mucosal tissues harboring an intrinsic azole resistance . Susceptibility testing confirmed the azole-resistance of C. glabrata isolates. The antimycotic therapy was escalated from micafungin to liposomal amphotericin B. C. glabrata likely disseminated to the bloodstream secondary to the described gastrointestinal toxicity and was previously discovered on rectal swab and fecal culture (day − 51).
Due to sustained neutropenia, BM aplasia and the availability of a suitable apheresis product, the CAR T-cell Taskforce proceeded with a stem cell boost of previously collected autologous CD34+ cells (3,1 × 106 cells) on day 46. The combination of a sudden rise in serum inflammatory markers and a strongly positive serum galactomannan (GM) assay on day 49 prompted diagnostic bronchoscopy, which revealed a diffuse infiltrate of alveolar and peri-bronchial tissue by Aspergillus fumigatus, consistent with fulminant invasive fungal pneumonia. Over the next week, the patient became increasingly hemodynamically unstable with poor peripheral oxygenation. Repeat bronchoscopy with bronchial lavage was positive for A. fumigatus and C. glabrata. After 50 days of G-CSF refractory aplasia, the autologous stem cells slowly engrafted leading to neutrophil recovery. However, this likely exacerbated the local inflammatory reaction in the lung, contributing to rapid deterioration of his respiratory status. Despite extensive supportive measures, the patient died on day 58 after CAR T-cell transfusion. Cause of death was confirmed by autopsy as invasive fungal pneumonia with multi-organ septic spread. Post-mortem examination revealed Candida spores in intestinal, colonic and rectal tissue. Of note, histopathologic BM analysis revealed signs of burgeoning hematopoietic regeneration .