A 28-year-old woman visited the emergency room with confused mental status after a few generalized tonic-clonic seizure attacks. She had been treated for spinal cord glioblastoma for 4 years. She had undergone surgical removal of a spinal cord tumour and had been on concomitant chemoradiation therapy, which was terminated 2 weeks before the visit. CSF tap was not performed due to an intracranial space occupying lesion.
Brain MRI performed 3 months before the visit showed extension of the tumour from the brainstem to the upper thoracic spinal cord and another lesion at the right temporal pole.
Figure on presentation, she was drowsy and vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 125/65 mmHg; body temperature, 36.4 °C; pulse rate, 100 per minute; respiratory rate, 19/min. The emergency medical faculty immediately gave her intravenous LEV 1000 mg; however, there was one more generalised tonic-clonic seizure without mental recovery. Video-EEG monitoring was initiated 2 h after the end of LEV loading; at that time, she started to show choreoathetoid movements in her face and bilateral limbs (see Additional file ), but no epileptiform discharges were noted on concomitant electroencephalography (EEG) as seen in Fig. . Laboratory findings including complete blood counts, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and arterial ammonia levels were normal. Review of her medical history revealed that she had been treated with solifenacin, esomeprazole, baclofen, and escitalopram for more than 3 months. She was not on concomitant drugs such as dopamine receptor blockers or antipsychotic agents. Considering the temporal relationship between the onset of involuntary movements and administration of LEV, further treatment with LEV was withheld. Chorea movement continued for about 30 min. She could communicate with her caregiver and physician until the end. After administration of 4 mg of lorazepam and 1200 mg of phenytoin, the involuntary movements ceased gradually. The next day her mental status gradually improved and no more involuntary movements were observed.