A 58-year-old lady was admitted to the coronary care unit of a tertiary cardiology centre with sudden onset of chest pain, associated with widespread ST-elevation on a 12-lead ECG . She denied any symptoms of recent viral illness and had no family history of ischaemic heart disease or cardiomyopathy. She also had no past medical history. Clinical examination was unremarkable; her heart sounds were normal, she was clinically euvolemic and her chest was clear to auscultate. Urgent invasive coronary angiography found her to have unobstructed coronary arteries. Serum high-sensitive troponin was significantly raised at 1998 ng/L (reference range <37 ng/L). Her inflammatory markers including white cell count and C-reactive protein were not elevated. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed marked global hypokinesia with overall mildly impaired left ventricular systolic function. Based on these findings an initial diagnosis of MINOCA syndrome was made and a CMR scan (1.5 Tesla) was performed for further clarification 9 days following her presentation. Cine images demonstrated non-dilated left ventricle (LV) with preserved overall systolic function (ejection fraction 67%). The apical segments had subtle hypocontractility but appeared hypertrophied (max thickness 14 mm). T2-weighted images (turbo spin-echo with dark bloods) were suggestive of active myocardial inflammation, most evidently in the apical segments, where the signal intensity (SI) ratio between myocardium and skeletal muscle was 2.8 (SI in the basal segments was 1.8). Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging demonstrated diffuse mid-wall hyper-enhancement in the apical segments , thereby fulfilling the updated Lake Louise criteria for myocardial inflammation. Given this pattern and clinical context, differential diagnosis included acute coronary syndrome with bystander apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, acute myocarditis, and Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. She was discharged from hospital on an ACE-inhibitor (Ramipril 2.5 mg once a day) and a beta-blocker (Bisoprolol 2.5 mg once a day).
She returned for an interval CMR scan in 3 months . Cine imaging on this occasion again found non-dilated LV with preserved systolic function (ejection fraction 67%); however, the thickness of the LV apical segments had returned down to normal range (max 9 mm thickness). On T2-weighted images, the SI ratio in the apical segments had reduced to 1.7. Late gadolinium enhancement imaging demonstrated resolution of the apical diffuse mid-wall hyper-enhancement seen in the previous scan. It was therefore concluded that the thick appearance of the apex in the acute scan was caused by myocardial oedema from acute myocarditis rather than apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which during the course of time had fully resolved.