An 83-year-old Japanese man with a history of CABG, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia presented to our hospital because of sudden-onset chest pain. The chest pain was vague but accompanied by shortness of breath, which prompted him to visit the emergency department. Twenty-two years prior to presentation, he had undergone CABG involving a saphenous vein graft for the left circumflex artery and a right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA) graft for the right coronary artery (RCA). Coronary angiography had been performed 10 years before presentation, but the result was unavailable. His medical conditions had been well controlled with aspirin, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and a statin. The physical examination findings were unremarkable with the exception of an irregular cardiac rhythm. Auscultation revealed no additional heart sounds and no pulmonary rales. He was haemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 164/66 mmHg and a heart rate of 60 beats/min. His qualitative rapid troponin T assay (Roche TROP T Sensitive; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) was positive, and an electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads with reciprocal changes .
Urgent coronary angiography was performed and revealed a total occlusion of the proximal RCA . The left main coronary artery exhibited moderate stenosis, and the mid-portion of the left circumflex artery was chronically occluded with distal reconstitution from collaterals; neither of these conditions seemed related to the presentation. Given the patient’s clinical situation and our lack of expertise in probing RGEA grafts, we did not check the graft patency. We assumed instead that the RGEA had been occluded, and we thus proceeded to perform a native RCA intervention. A guidewire was navigated to the distal RCA through the occlusion without any difficulty; however, even after several thrombus aspirations and repeated inflations with a 2.0-mm balloon, the antegrade flow was not attained angiographically . Intravascular ultrasound was performed to elucidate this unexplained no-reflow state without attempting to administer intracoronary agents. Intravascular ultrasound showed that the distal RCA had a well-delineated vessel architecture with dark-coloured lumen, which was suggestive of sufficient blood flow . Intravascular ultrasound also showed that the apparently patent bypass graft was anastomosed to the mid-portion of the RCA and that a massive plaque burden with a ruptured plaque was present proximal to the anastomosis . More forceful dye injection with a guide extension support demonstrated recanalization of the RCA and backward flow to the RGEA (, ). We concluded that the first assumption had been incorrect and that the plaque rupture on the proximal native RCA had caused the acute occlusion and thrombus formation extending to and overlying the patent RGEA, resulting in transmural STEMI. A 2.5-/38-mm everolimus-eluting stent (Synergy; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) covering the culprit lesion was implanted, and antegrade flow was restored with minimal distal embolization in the posterolateral branch (, ). On the final angiogram, the RGEA had a large calibre (, arrowheads), indicating that the bypass had been supplying dominant blood flow and that the native proximal RCA appeared to have been severely stenosed. The final IVUS confirmed that the stent was fully expanded and that an intended residual stenosis was present immediately proximal to the anastomosis (, ).
The patient’s clinical course after the PCI was uneventful, and he was discharged in 2 weeks. Follow-up angiography 5 months later showed no stent restenosis with competitive flow from the RGEA and dissipation of the distal embolization (, , Videos S4 and S5). Coronary computed tomography angiography 3 years later confirmed long-term patency in both the native coronary stent and the bypass graft . The patient remained angina-free after discharge, and he was well managed on an outpatient basis without rehospitalization at the time of this writing.