A 16-year-old male patient, without any relevant aspects in his medical history except a Non-Hodgkin lymphoma of his father, which is currently being treated, and a breast cancer of his mother, also in treatment. The patient was derived from the Hematology Unit for evaluation and definitive treatment of an osteolytic lesion in the left maxillary region with an evolution of nearly 2 months. Thirty days before, the patient had consulted at a dental service for a routine dental exam in which a radiolucent image appeared in the radiographic study. The patient underwent a biopsy of an asymptomatic osteolytic lesion located at apical level of the first upper left molar.
In his admission to our service, the oral and maxillofacial clinical examination did not show facial asymmetry, swelling or solution of continuity in the left maxillary alveolar ridge. The patient only had a slight and generalized gingival inflammation, and no other findings.
He brought images of a recent dental study (panoramic radiography) and a report of a biopsy performed 30 days before. The imaging study reported an osteolytic lesion in the left maxillary ridge, extending between the first and second upper left molars, with projection to the maxillary sinus [Fig. ]. The biopsy report concluded that the sample was consistent with bone monostotic Eosinophilic granuloma (Langerhans histiocytosis). The histophatological findings of the performed biopsy, compatible with Eosinophilic granuloma, are showed in the Fig. and Fig. .
To complete the case study, additionally to the routine preoperative laboratory tests (blood count, biochemical profile and coagulation tests), a cone-beam CT (CBCT) was requested, and to rule out compromise of other bones, a scintigraphy was requested. Previously performed paraffin embedded samples of biopsy were also requested.
Laboratory tests were normal. The new CBCT [Fig. ] showed inflammatory changes in relation to the left maxillary sinus with great opacification, an area of osteolysis in connection with the roots of the upper left first molar, causing soil discontinuity of the ipsilateral sinus; and extensive loss of continuity of the oral bone plate, compatible with post-surgical biopsy changes. Bone scintigraphy showed an increase in osteoblast activity in the left maxillary bone, related with the known bone injury. There were no other findings of pathological significance in the rest of the study [Fig. ].
Given these images of sinus compromise, nasal congestion and subsequent discharge reported by the patient, it was decided to complete the study with computed tomography (CT) of the sinuses before the complete surgical removal of the lesion [Fig. ], and refer the patient to the assessment and care of an otolaryngologist.
The patient came back to us 3 months after his first examination to schedule his surgical procedure, which prompted new imaging study to redefine treatment [Fig. ].
Later studies showed recovery of the left maxillary sinus transparency in spite of the persistence of mucosal thickening of the sinus floor. Newly formed bone in the periphery and between the roots was compromised by the initial injury, and a decrease of the hypodense areas found in the previous examination was also observed [Fig. ].
These findings were consistent with spontaneous remission of the osteolytic lesion after the biopsy. The patient underwent regular checks to ensure no recurrence of his original injury; the last check was 9 months after the initial biopsy. Figures and show the grade of bone repair in the originally affected area. Since the EG is a benign lesion, which developed a spontaneous remission in this case, our patient’s prognosis is excellent, as long he follows his regular checks in order to detect any early recurrence or new outbreaks for at least 5 years.