A two-year-old male with history of Trisomy 21, atrial septal defect per echocardiogram, and autism spectrum disorder presented to the emergency department with abnormal chorea-like movements, altered mental status, anisocoria. Laboratory findings showed hyperammonemia (maximum level of 256 mg/dL). The patient’s brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were unremarkable. Doppler ultrasound of the abdomen demonstrated an intrahepatic shunt between the right portal vein (PV) and inferior vena cava (IVC). Hepatopetal intrahepatic portal venous flow was present in diminutive PV branches. Further evaluation with contrast enhanced CT of the abdomen confirmed the presence of a CPSS. The interventional radiology service was consulted for further evaluation. Treatment options were discussed with the cardiology team, and an Amplatzer PFO OD was deemed appropriate for the patient’s anatomy.
Right femoral vein access was obtained, and a venogram of the IVC confirmed a large side-to-side shunt from the anterior right lateral aspect of the IVC to a branch of the right PV measuring approximately 14 mm in diameter. The shunt was circumferentially surrounded by hepatic parenchyma with no additional side-branches. Due to the patient’s acute condition and the high likelihood of placing the occlusion device regardless of measurements, hepatic pressures were not obtained. Through a 7 French sheath, an 18 mm x 18 mm Amplatzer PFO OD (St. Jude Medical, Inc., Saint Paul, MN) was deployed across the shunt with the distal portion of the plug being deployed within the right PV branch. The sheath and plug were then retracted until the circumferential hepatic parenchymal flap resisted further traction. The second portion of the plug was subsequently deployed across the shunt and the device was detached. Post-occlusion venography showed successful shunt embolization. There were no immediate complications. Given mild bleeding from the right femoral puncture site due to patient movement, short-term anticoagulation was not prescribed. On post-procedure day one, the patient’s ammonia levels decreased to 55 mg/dL. He was discharged on day two with normal ammonia levels and baseline mental status. On one-month follow-up, a doppler hepatic ultrasound was obtained demonstrating persistent occlusion of the CPSS with patent hepatopetal PV flow and a patent IVC. At one-year follow-up, the patient was unable to comply with ordered laboratory and ultrasound studies due to significant apprehension and need for sedation. Given the patient’s excellent clinical status, ammonia testing and follow-up ultrasound was deferred. The patient’s mother reports dramatic improvement in his learning skills and energy levels greater than one-year post-procedure. No additional surgical or endovascular interventions have been required.