A 14-year-old girl, presented to the local hospital on July 6, 2019, with 5 days of intermittent fever and a maximum temperature of 38.5℃. She had intermittent right chest pain, without coughing, sputum production, or chest tightness. The local doctor gave her an anti-infective treatment for “pneumonia” for 7 days because of the patchy high-density lung shadow on her chest CT scan, but it did not help her condition. Then she presented to the local TB hospital on July 15, 2019. Here she got a diagnosis of “Mycobacterium tuberculosis-negative pulmonary tuberculosis” based on the chest CT findings, positive interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) results, and positive tuberculin skin test (TST). The sputum acid-fast bacilli smear was negative. She started anti-tuberculosis medication at a dose of “0.3 g/day of isoniazid, 0.45 g/day of rifampin, 1.0 g/day of pyrazinamide, and 0.75 g/day of ethambutol.” After 2 months of treatment, her fever broke and her chest pain lessened. On October 16, 2019, she went to the hospital, and a chest CT revealed diffuse miliary nodules in both lungs. Her sputum acid-fast bacilli smear was still negative. She was currently receiving high-dose isoniazid (0.6 g/day) and prednisone acetate (30 mg/day) for miliary pulmonary tuberculosis. Prednisone acetate was subsequently tapered and discontinued. However, the youngster experienced a fever again on December 16, 2019, reaching a high of 38.8 °C without chills, a cough, or sputum. She also experienced a paroxysmal headache and blurred vision. Because of the worsening of her headache, she visited the hospital once more on December 30, 2019, and the cranial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed atypical intracranial lesions that were deemed to be TBM. In an emergency, she came to our hospital for further treatment. Prior medical history: no history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, malaria, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, psychiatric illness, surgery, trauma, blood transfusion, or allergies. Denial of a history of close contact with active tuberculosis.
When arriving at our hospital, she was febrile (38.6℃). Her vital signs were a heart rate of 112 per minute, a respiratory rate of 24 per minute, blood pressure 109/68 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air of 98%. Her physical examination showed slight neck rigidity, positive Kerning's sign, and positive Brudzinski's sign. Her chest CT showed diffuse miliary nodules in both lungs . The cranial enhancement MRI showed punctiform enhancement in the pontine brain, right cerebellar hemisphere, bilateral frontal, temporal, parietal lobes, nodular enhancement in the local meninges, and linear enhancement in the brain pool . Considering the possibility of tuberculous meningitis, we immediately obtained a specimen of her CSF. On January 02, 2020, she had her first lumbar puncture. And a culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (liquid culture, medium MGIT 960) in the CSF was taken. Her other CSF results showed a lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein level (1.33 g/L, normal value 0.08–0.43 g/L), decreased chloride level (116 mmol/L, normal value 118–132 mmol/L), normal glucose level (2.56 mmol/L, normal value 2.2–3.9 mmol/L), smear-negative for acid-fast bacilli, positive for TB-RNA, Xert MTB/RIF detected Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but rifampin resistance test was unknown. Her sputum acid-fast bacilli smear, TB-RNA, and Xpert were all negative. TBM was confirmed, but the rifampicin resistance was indeterminate. Her first rapid culture of CSF showed positive result on January 28, 2020. We then undertook the traditional-culture based phenotypic testing DST and continued treatment as sensitive TB while waiting for the DST result. The basic treatment regimen is "isoniazid 0.6 g/day, rifampin 0.45 g/day, pyrazinamide 1.0 g/day, and ethambutol 0.75 g/day". Also added "linezolid 0.6 g/day, prothioconazole 0.6 g/day, and prednisone acetate 30 mg/day", in order to enhance the efficacy and ease clinical symptoms. The child’s headache subsided, her body temperature gradually returned to normal, and her vision cleared. However, CSF protein was still higher than 1 g/L. Her chest CT scan revealed a substantial decrease in bilateral lung lesions on March 14, 2020. While her brain enhancement MRI showed punctiform enhancement in the left temporal lobe and right parietal lobe, and nodular-like significant enhancement in the left pontocerebellar horn region, with a slightly larger lesion than before. On March 20, 2020, the DST result showed resistance to “isoniazid, rifampin, streptomycin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin”. Finally, we diagnosed her with pre-extensive drug-resistant TBM (pre-XDR TBM).
After considering WHO guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of drug-resistant TB, drug sensitivity results, the patient’s medication history, and drug penetration in the CSF, we developed an individualized treatment regimen for her. The regimen included linezolid (0.6 g/day), cycloserine (0.5 g/day), clofazimine (0.1 g/day), pyrazinamide (1.0 g/day), ethambutol (0.75 g/day), and prothionamide (0.6 g/day), with vitamin B6 (100 mg/day) and symptomatic supportive therapy. Three months after the therapy regimen changed, her brain MRI showed enlarged upper ocular chiasm, suprasellar cistern, and interpeduncular cistern lesions. Since there were no obvious signs of symptoms, she continued her treatment. In the sixth month of treatment in 2020.09, she developed numbness in both lower legs and feet, which could be tolerated. We confirmed it was “mild peripheral neuropathy” caused by “linezolid”, and advised her to continue to take nutritional neurological drugs such as B vitamins. After 7 months of treatment, the child’s CSF parameters returned to normal. However, she developed joint pain in the lower limbs and a uric acid test of 719 umol/L. We thought it was an adverse reaction to pyrazinamide, excluding other factors. The patient completed the intensive phase of treatment and was recovering well, so we discontinued both ethambutol and pyrazinamide. And the child’s symptoms were significantly relieved after discontinuation of the drug. The child experienced a decrease in visual acuity after 9 months of treatment. After excluding the loss of vision caused by tuberculosis and other factors, we considered it a side effect of linezolid, we discontinued it. After discontinuing linezolid for 1 week, her vision gradually returned to normal. She continued the treatment with the remaining three drugs, with no other significant adverse reactions throughout the treatment period. Throughout the treatment period, all sputum cultures from the patient were negative. Her CSF pressure, protein level, and cell counts continued to be normal after 7 months of treatment. At the completion of 19 months of treatment, the patient’s pulmonary and brain TB lesions had all been absorbed, so we discontinued her treatment. There were no neurological sequelae other than mild peripheral neuropathy.