A 52 years old male patient presented with syncope and self-limited ventricular tachycardia in a referring hospital. Inferior wall ST- Elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) was diagnosed. He developed ventricular fibrillation requiring endotracheal intubation, cardioversion and cardiopulmonary resuscitation for 2 min.
Coronary angiography showed severely diseased left anterior descending, and right coronary arteries (Ejection Fraction < 25% (EF). A right coronary artery angioplasty was unsuccessfully attempted and the patient referred for emergency CABG. An intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted before surgery and myocardial revascularization was accomplished by bypassing the left internal mammary artery to the left anterior descending coronary artery after thrombendarterectomy and saphenous vein grafting to the right coronary artery. Both grafts had good flow to the target vessels as determined by Doppler flow measurements.
Despite prolonged reperfusion and biventricular pacing weaning from extracorporeal circulation was not possible. Intraoperative transoeosphageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated a failing right ventricle, and severely impaired left ventricular function. We decided to support the failing right ventricle by a centrally implanted veno-pulmonary ECMO (V-P ECMO), and left the sternum open due to myocardial edema. Pulmonary artery cannulation was accomplished with two purse string sutures with prolene 5/0 placed in the proximal pulmonary trunk. The PA cannula was tunneled to the left side through a 2 cm stab incision in the 4th intercostal space (midclavicular line) and secured with the purse string sutures. Venous drainage was established through a two stage venous cannula inserted in the right atrium. The cardiopulmonary bypass was transferred to Cardiohelp ECMO circuit (Maquet Cardiovascular, LLC, Wayne, NJ) and the IABP was left in place.
The sternum was kept opened by placing a plastic syringe between the two borders of the sternum. Skin and subcutaneous tissues were covered with sterile dressing which was changed daily in the intensive care unit using strictly sterile technique.
The patient was covered with broad spectrum antibiotic (Cefotriaxone 1 g /8 h), and anticoagulated with heparin keeping the partial thromboplastin time (PTT) at 50–60/s.
In the ICU, the ECMO flow was maintained form 3 to 3.5 L/min and pharmacologic myocardial support was continued to maintain mean arterial blood pressure around 50–60 mmHg and urine output at 0.5 ml/kg/h.
On the postoperative day 2, he developed intractable pulmonary edema, elevated left atrial pressure and hemodynamic instability. TEE showed a dilated left ventricle and persistent poor left and right ventricular contractility (EF =15–20%). We decided to insert Impella Recover LP 5.0 (Abimoed Denver, MA USA) to achieve complete left ventricular unloading and continue the use of V-P ECMO to support the right ventricle. Since the sternum was still open, the Impella was implanted thorough am 8 mm Dacron graft sutured to the ascending aorta The Dacron graft was then subcutaneously tunneled and exteriorized through a separate 2 cm transverse incision in the second right intercostal space just lateral to the sternum. Under TEE control, the Impella 5.0 was then advanced through this Dacron graft into the left ventricle and secured with three ligatures and IABP was removed.
On POD 3, the Impella 5.0 showed low flow alarm; with high driving pressures TEE revealed kinking of the Impella. After repositioning the right side pressure, left side volume overload and pulmonary edema rapidly decreased . The patient remained hemodynamically stable on biventricular support with V-P ECMO and Impella 5.0 till the 5th postoperative day. When closing the sternum on POD 5, the right atrial two stage cannula was replaced with a long peripheral cannula inserted from the left femoral vein .
Serial TEE follow up showed no improvement of both right and left ventricular contractility (EF 10–15%), necessitating implantation of a permanent LVAD System (Heart mate II- Thoratec Corporation, USA) on the POD 14. Intra operative TEE control showed no right ventricular improvement so we replaced the directly inserted pulmonary cannula of the V-P ECMO with another cannula inserted through a 8 mm Dacron graft sewn to the main pulmonary artery and tunneled subcutaneously and exteriorized through the old incision for future easy removal under local anesthesia by suture closing the graft. . The patient was consecutively listed for heart transplantation.
After gradual improvement of the right ventricle as demonstrated by serial TEE echocardiography, V-P ECMO could be explanted on POD 66. During this long ICU stay, the patient underwent hemodialysis for renal insufficiency and tracheostomy for prolonged mechanical ventilation with complete recovery. He was transferred to the normal ward on POD 77.
Six months later the patient underwent orthotropic heart transplantation with uneventful postoperative course; he was discharged from the hospital after 7 months of admission in a good condition, and has completed three and half years of uneventful post-transplant follow up to date.