This 68-year-old female patient presented with right-sided supranuclear facial palsy and right-sided extremity palsy. The symptoms were of sudden onset with no accompanying headaches or vomiting, or a history of recent trauma. The initial head MSCT showed no obvious signs of cerebral ischemia . The patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology for symptomatic treatment of an ischemic stroke. Percutaneous transarterial thrombolysis was not performed because the time interval from the onset of the symptoms and hospitalization exceed 4.5 h, in addition to the fact that there were no signs of cerebral ischemia on the MSCT scan.
The patient's medical history revealed chronic diseases which included arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and chronic gastritis, as well as surgical and oncological treatment for an invasive intraductal breast carcinoma.
Four days after an uneventful stay at the Department of Neurology, the patient experienced a severe headache followed by vomiting and dysphasia, as well as deterioration of consciousness, thus becoming somnolent. Urgent MSCT revealed a demarcated ischemic area in the left frontal opercular region and an SAH in the left sylvian fissure, as well as the presence of blood in the IV ventricle. MSCTA and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed an aneurysm on the left second M2 MCA branch bifurcation, 5 mm from the primary MCA bifurcation. The absence of blood flow was noticed in the “smaller” frontal opercular M3 segment, implying thrombosis. Filiform blood flow was noticed in the “larger” insular M3 segment, resembling partial vessel thrombosis. The aneurysm seemed to be fusiform, just at the second bifurcation, with full thrombosis of the frontal opercular branch. There were no radiological signs of vasospasm. By comparing the DSA and MSCT scans, it could be concluded that the fully thrombosed frontal M3 branch was the cause of the cerebral ischemia and that the second opercular M3 branch was in peril due to partial thrombosis .
The left P1 segment was hypoplastic, and the posterior cerebral arteries on both sides were dominantly supplied by the posterior communicating artery. The right vertebral artery showed to be hypoplastic. There were no signs of the presence of other saccular aneurysms or arteriovenous malformations.
As the shown aneurysm was favorable for surgical management, urgent surgery was indicated.
As DSA revealed a fusiform-shaped aneurysm at the left M2 MCA bifurcation on the superior M2 branch with signs of postaneurysm thrombosis, the plan was to prepare the STA for a possible bypass.
Left osteoplastic frontotemporal craniotomy with the preparation of the frontal STA branch was performed under general anesthesia and in the supine position, with the head rotated to the right and positioned in a Mayfield holder. After the removal of the bone, the dura was opened and suspended downward. The left sylvian fissure was widely opened and a fusiform aneurysm at the superior M2 bifurcation, including two M3 branches 5 mm from the M1 MCA segment bifurcation was intraoperatively verified. The flow in both M3 branches was checked by micro-Doppler, revealing the absence of flow and verifying a thrombosed frontal opercular M3 vessel irrigating the already ischemic part of the frontal operculum. The larger insular M3 MCA branch showed no flow on Doppler analysis, as compared to the visible filiform flow shown on the previous DSA. Bearing in mind the clearly ischemic portion of the frontal operculum irrigated by the smaller upper M3 branch, as shown by DSA and micro-Doppler, as well as the fact that the whole circumference of the vessel wall was evidently changed into a fusiform aneurysm, the permanent solution was complete M2 occlusion by placing a clip proximally to the aneurysm .
The postaneurysm part of the lower larger M3 MCA branch was opened with a small linear incision confirming the thrombus within it. After the thrombus evacuation and verified backflow, we decided to protect this vessel by creating an STA-MCA bypass .
As a preparation for the bypass procedure, the patient was given a loading dose of 300 mg of clopidogrel and 300 mg of aspirin. The STA was prepared with a fish-mouth opening and sutured with 10-0 prolene to the recipient vessel by end-to-side anastomosis .
After the bypass procedure, back-bleeding from the aneurysm occurred. This bleeding was successfully stopped by placing another clip distal to the aneurysm and in front of the bypass on the lower larger M3 MCA branch, thus creating a definite aneurysm trapping .
A second bypass or vessel occlusion by clipping was not performed on the upper smaller branch that irrigated the already ischemic part of the frontal operculum.
A micro Doppler was used to check the bypass patency, and upon patency confirmation, the wound was closed in the usual manner. A notch was created on the bone flap to protect the STA vessel.
On the second postoperative day, DSA showed a patent bypass . The ischemic region on the MSCT scan remained unchanged. The patency of the bypass was regularly checked by micro-Doppler. The patient gradually recovered from the previously diagnosed expressive dysphasia and cranial and extremity motor deficit.