A 67-year-old female presented to our hospital with complaint of 5 years and 7 mo after endometrial carcinoma hysterectomy and a dull chest pain for 1 wk.
In November 2013, a female patient experienced “uterine cavity abnormality for 2 d” and went to an outpatient center, where she underwent total hysterectomy + bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy + pelvic lymphadenectomy on November 18, 2013. The postoperative pathology indicated Grade I endometrioid adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation and superficial muscular infiltration, and all 16 Lymph nodes were negative. The patient underwent regular check-ups thereafter. On April 20, 2015, the patient was diagnosed with lung metastases by enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scans, which suggested multiple nodules in both lungs. Four days later, the patient underwent lower right lung wedge resection with pleuroscopy + lung repair. Postoperative pathology showed adenocarcinoma infiltration or metastasis (0.6 cm × 0.5 cm). Three cycles of paclitaxel + nedaplatin chemotherapy were administered before the patient presented with disease progression, after which treatment was switched to three cycles of epirubicin + cisplatin chemotherapy. After chemotherapy, additional radiotherapy was recommended by the physician but refused by the patient. In June 2019, the patient visited our hospital due to a dull chest pain.
The patient had a ten-year history of hypertension and diabetes but had no history of trauma or surgery.
The patient’s height and weight were 156 cm and 58 kg, respectively, with a body mass index of 23.8 kg/m². No enlargement of lymph node was found in the superficial lymph nodes. Breath sounds were low in both lungs. Heart auscultation revealed a regular rhythm, normal heart sounds without murmur. Two surgical scars can be seen in the chest and abdomen. The abdomen was soft without tenderness, and the liver and spleen were not palpable under the ribs. There was no percussion pain in the liver area. Shifting dullness was negative, and bowel sounds were normal.
The patient underwent a tumor marker exam to find that the levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were all within normal limits. None of the other laboratory values were considered clinically significant. Lung biopsy confirmed thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (-), Napsin A (-), estrogen receptor (ER) (+), progesterone receptor (PR) (+), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK, D5F3) (-), and receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1, D4D6) (-) metastatic endometrial carcinoma . Genomic sequencing results demonstrated polymerase-epsilon (POLE) (-) tumor pathology, mouse double minute 4 (MDM4) amplification, v-Akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1 (AKT1) missense mutation, CTNNB1 missense mutation, TP53 (-), 2.09 Muts/Mb [tumor mutation burden-low (TMB-L)], pMMR, PD-L1 (-), MSS, and heterozygous HLA-1 .
Enhanced chest CT showed multiple nodules and mass shadows in both lungs after the right lung operation, suggesting metastasis .