A 87-year-old male with permanent Afib (CHA2DS2VASc, five; HASBLED, three) was referred to our hospital for transcatheter LAAc. He had a history of recurrent lower gastrointestinal bleedings under NOAC.
His current medical therapy included apixaban 2.5 mg bid, diuretics, and optimized heart failure therapy comprising beta blocker, angiotensin 1 (AT1) blocker, and spironolactone.
Recent endoscopy showed active intestinal angiodysplasia without acute treatment option, and therefore, transcatheter LAAc was planned in this selected patient at very high stroke risk and contraindications to chronic OAC therapy.
Initial screening (timeline ‘Day 1’) with 3DTEE:
Ruled out anatomical contraindications for LAAc such as LAA thrombus
Confirmed feasible anatomy of essential structures with an intended use of an Abbott Amulet device®
Was used for pre-procedural planning including device sizing with multiplanar reconstruction of the LAA landing zone (, , and )
After written informed consent, the procedure was performed on Day 2 after hospital admission under conscious sedation via a standard left femoral venous access.
Since pre-procedural planning confirmed a non-complex anatomy for transcatheter device closure, we opted for a single-operator approach with intraprocedural TEE guidance being executed by the interventionalist using the TEE probe in a technique comparable to the handling of an intracardiac echocardiography probe.
shows the positioning of the 3D cardiac ultrasound machine in the catheterization laboratory covered with a sterile shell to allow for intraprocedural image adjustment and measurements . In this setting, the 3DTEE probe is located lateral to the right femoral venous access line; this enables intraprocedural manipulation of the probe and procedural guidance with adequate image quality . Images from 3DTEE and fluoroscopy are displayed on the cath lab screen in front of the interventionalist .
Apixaban was discontinued 24 h prior to the procedure; after venous access, 9000 units of unfractionated heparin were given, monitoring the activated clotting time aiming to achieve > 250 s at the time of transseptal puncture. For left atrial access, the VersaCross radiofrequency (RF) system (Baylis Medical), a RF-tipped pigtail wire-based TSP system was used with the RF wire serving as an exchange support wire placed in the left upper pulmonary vein once access is achieved. Infero-posterior wire tip position and tenting of the septum were confirmed on TEE before delivering RF for TSP and advancing the wire into the left atrium. Before sheath insertion, 3DTEE was used to confirm pre-procedural measurements of the landing zone and thereby device selection. Thereafter, the transseptal sheath was exchanged over the VersaCross wire for the standard double curve 12Fr delivery sheath. LAAc was completed with a 22 mm Amulet device (Abbott medical), and 3DTEE confirmed stable position of the device without residual peri-device leakage . Procedure time (skin-to-skin) was 21 min, left atrial access time 9 min, and fluoroscopy time was 4:28 min without the use of contrast dye. The patient was discharged the following day after the procedure in good medical conditions. NOAC was resumed (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily) until control TEE 3 months after the procedure confirmed good interventional results without device related thrombus formation (see , ).