A 16-year old female was brought to the pathology laboratory for fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) after presenting with a painful fast growing left breast mass for 8 months. Before coming to our laboratory, she was taken for mammography examination, which revealed a large mass of about 11x9x6 cm, well circumscribed with cystic degenerative changes. A provisional diagnosis of fibroadenoma was made. An ultrasound scan (USS) was done, w2hich revealed a large irregular predominantly solid mass with cystic areas and large egg shaped calcification . We examined the patient at the pathology laboratory before doing FNAC and we found the left breast was significantly swollen and shining . On palpation the tumor was firm, nodular, ill-defined, and mobile, and it was occupying the lower outer quadrant. The tumor was measuring 11x8x5 cm. The nipple was neither retracted nor inverted and the overlying skin was unremarkable. The contralateral breast was normal and both axillary regions had no palpable lymph nodes. After performing FNAC, the aspirate material was cystically hemorrhagic. The cytomorphological features were of moderate cellular smears indicating few solid clusters of epithelial cells without atypia in a background of cystic hemorrhagic material. A diagnosis of fibrocystic change disease of the breast was made.
Following this deviation from usual fibroadenoma as it was suggested by mammography, an open biopsy was requested. The submitted lumpectomy specimen was measuring 11×9×7 cm, encapsulated, grayish-white, and nodulated. Cut-surface showed heterogeneous tissue with numerous cystic and a few whitish and fibrous solid lesions . Microscopically, using Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) stained sections, the tumor was composed of atypical spindle cells and large pleomorphic epithelioid cells and multinucleated cells of osteoclastic type which were forming a new bone matrix (osteoid). About 40 atypical mitoses per 10 HPF were seen. Therefore, a diagnosis of primary osteosarcoma was made (–).
For immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for alpha-SMA and vimentin, sections of thickness of 4 μm were prepared from the FFPE tissue block using a microtome. The sections were de-waxed by being microwaved at 60°C for 50 minutes, and then cleared in two changes of xylene using 10 dips in each change. Hydration was done by dipping the sections in 95%, 80%, and 70% ethanol and then rinsed in running tap water. Two drops of 3% H2O2 solution were added to each section for 20 minutes to block endogenous peroxidase and, then, the slides were rinsed in distilled water. The slides were incubated in the antigen retrieval solution of 10 mmol/L citrate buffer of pH 6.0 within a pressure cooker at 95°C for 30 minutes, from which the slides were removed after 2 minutes of full pressure.
The slides were placed in distilled water waiting for addition of phosphate buffer solution (PBS, Dako, Denmark) to the sections for 3 minutes. PBS was then drained from slides before adding a ready to use primary monoclonal antibody of alpha-SMA (MA1106, BosterBio, CA, USA) and allowed to incubate for 1 hour. The slides were washed with PBS for 5 minutes, and, then, two drops of horse rabbit peroxidase were added to each section for 30 minutes. The slides were again washed with PBS for 3 minutes. PBS was drained from the sections; then, chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Dako, Denmark) was added to the sections for 3 minutes.
The sections were washed in distilled water, counterstained in Harris hematoxylin solution for 10 seconds, and differentiated by 2 dips into 1% of HCL-Ethanol solution. The sections were blued in warm water for 5 minutes, dehydrated through 70%, 80%, and 95% ethanol, and then cleared in two changes of xylene for 10 minutes. The sections were finally cover-slipped using Distyrene Plasticizer Xylene (DPX) and were ready for assessment and interpretation.
The similar protocol according to the manufacturer was used for vimentin (Monoclonal antibody, PB93559, CA, USA). Vimentin was strongly positive and SMA was focally positive . ER/PR and HER-2/neu were all negative (triple negative) and also AE1/AE3 was negative. This confirmed the histological diagnosis of primary osteosarcoma. After the wide excisional biopsy treatment of the patient, the patient was sent for a survey of metastasis by means of computer tomography (CT) scan which revealed no metastasis. Following evaluation of the patient for metastasis, the patient was supposed to start chemotherapy; however, before starting chemotherapy, the parents decided to take her for herbals. The patient has not developed either recurrence or metastasis for 10 months since diagnosis and she was reported to have no complaint regarding the previous diagnosis.