A 31 weeks pregnant 32-year-old Asian woman presented to our emergency department with the chief complaint of sudden-onset dyspnea and backache. Signs of acute respiratory distress, pallor with cold sweats, and hypotension (blood pressure 66/36 mmHg) were noted on arrival. According to her medical record, she had no history of significant systemic disease or medical events. She also denied any recent trauma.
On admission, a neurological examination revealed that she was alert, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4V5M6. Her cranial nerves were intact. She had no weakness, ataxia, or sensory disturbance. Her hematology results were near the normal ranges (hemoglobin 10.8 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 92 fl, platelet count 24 × 103/μl, white blood cell count, 23.37 × 103/μl). Laboratory results also indicated that her renal function, liver function, and levels of serum electrolytes were normal. Hypotension was transiently responsive to fluid resuscitation. A fetal monitor showed variable decelerations, indicating fetal distress. Breath sounds over her right lung field were diminished. Bedside chest ultrasound showed massive right-sided parapneumonic effusion, and thoracentesis yielded bloody fluid. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of her chest displayed a large right-sided hemothorax with contrast extravasation from an arterial phase-enhanced lesion in the lower lobe of her right lung and mediastinal shifting to the left . Owing to the tension hemothorax, we immediately performed tube thoracostomy to relieve cardiac compression, and 2000 mL of bloody effusion was drained. Afterwards, she was placed under general anesthesia, and an emergency cesarean delivery was performed; this was immediately followed by thoracoscopic exploration to establish hemostasis.
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) was performed via a single incision (5 cm in length), which was located near the mid-axillary line in the seventh intercostal space. After removal of retained thrombus inside the pleural space measuring approximately 1800 mL, a ruptured PAVM was identified in the lower lobe of her right lung . After achieving hemostasis by control of the bleeding vessel with a ring clamp, her blood pressure immediately improved. Wedge resection of the lung was performed with an endostapler (ECHELON FLEX™ ENDOPATH® Staplers). Further exploration revealed a second small PAVM in the middle lobe of her right lung, which was also removed by wedge resection. Histological examination of the resected lung tissue confirmed the diagnosis of PAVM in both the lower and middle lobes of her right lung .
Her postoperative recovery was uneventful. After taking analgesic medication (acetaminophen 500 mg four times a day), only mild wound pain was reported. Examinations of other organs did not identify any additional arteriovenous malformations. She was discharged 1 week later in a stable condition. She is currently healthy 18 months after surgery.