A 32-year-old man with a remarkable history of polysubstance abuse presented to the emergency room with a 2-week history of diplopia. Six weeks earlier, the patient had presented to the emergency department after being found unconscious secondary to a suspected drug overdose and a question of possible physical assault and head injury. Toxicology panel was positive for cocaine, cannabinoids, and opioids. The patient was observed and improved, returning to his neurological baseline level after overnight monitoring. He was unable to recall additional details of the event and was discharged the day after his presentation. Cranial imaging during this initial encounter was not obtained by the trauma team. Approximately 4 weeks after his initial presentation, the patient reported to his primary care physician because he was experiencing diplopia. Brain MRI was obtained as part of an outpatient workup 2 weeks following symptom onset, and the sagittal T1 sequence revealed an abnormal rim – hyperintense core – heterointense lesion on the sagittal T1 sequence . Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) T2 sequence more specifically revealed a 6 cm × 3.6 cm × 3 cm hyperintense , diffusion restricting, and apparent diffusion coefficient hypointense extra-axial collection without surrounding edema [ and ]. Significant mass effect on the temporal lobe and left midbrain was observed, and the patient was referred to the emergency department for further evaluation.
At the time of neurosurgical evaluation, the patient complained of double vision with downward gaze in the bilateral lower visual quadrants. He denied any alleviating or exacerbating factors and described it as constant throughout the day. The patient was otherwise healthy, with no other medical conditions. Contrast-enhanced CT of the head was obtained to assess for the progression or change in the lesion observed on MRI and demonstrated the similar contrast rim-enhancing lesion with significant surrounding mass effect [ and ]. Given the history of possible remote assault as well as aforementioned imaging findings, the lesion was suspected to be a chronic epidural hematoma. There was also consideration given that this might be an abscess due to the patient’s history of polysubstance abuse, but no clinical signs or symptoms of infection were noted.
Due to the significant size and mass effect on the left midbrain in addition to the diplopia, the patient was taken for a left temporal craniotomy for evacuation and removal of the lesion. A small temporal craniotomy was performed. On removal of the bone flap, normal dura was not clearly visualized. Instead, a rather thick, yellow fibrous-like tissue was observed . This tissue was carefully dissected, and specimens were sent for pathological analysis. Underneath this tissue, a consolidated subacute hematoma clot was found. The clot was removed and another layer of the thick, yellow tissue was encountered, which was also carefully dissected. Once this capsule of tissue was removed, normal dura was encountered. Interestingly, no inflammatory or purulent material was encountered during the procedure. No clear sources of bleeding, including arteries or veins, were identified. The cavity was copiously irrigated with antibiotic instilled irrigation. The dura was tacked up; the bone flap was placed back; and the wound was secured. Pathology results revealed an organized hematoma with marked fibrosis.
Postoperatively, the patient remained neurologically unchanged and was observed in the intensive care unit for 2 days. On postoperative day 1, a CT scan of the head showed gradual parenchymal expansion into the void that had previously been occupied by the hematoma. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. At the 6-week postoperative follow-up visit, he had near-complete resolution of his diplopia and complete resolution of his epidural hematoma on head CT [ and ].