A 16-year-old Thai female was diagnosed with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome with secondary combined dyslipidemia at the age of 3 years. She had no history of cardiovascular diseases or pancreatitis, nor family history of dyslipidemia or diabetes mellitus. A physical examination revealed no arcus juvenilis, tendon xanthoma, or xanthelasma. When the patient was 3 years old, she presented with generalized edema. Laboratory findings revealed severe proteinuria, severe hypoalbuminemia [albumin 12 g/L (1.2 g/dL)] and hypercholesterolemia [total cholesterol level of 23.4 mmol/L (904 mg/dL)]. Based on her clinical presentations and laboratory findings, nephrotic syndrome was diagnosed. A kidney biopsy demonstrated focal segmental glomerulonephritis (FSGS). After confirming the diagnosis, she was treated with prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day for 1 month, leading to improved urine protein. Prednisolone was gradually tapered off, but the patient experienced worsening generalized edema and severe proteinuria. Therefore, oral cyclophosphamide was initiated along with an increased dosage of prednisolone. Unfortunately, she experienced multiple episodes of nephrotic syndrome relapse. Many immunosuppressive agents, including mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), tacrolimus, and rituximab were challenged one by one to control her disease.
Three years ago, despite the use of various multiple immunosuppressive medicines, the patient still had active nephrotic syndrome. Her total plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels were continuously elevated. Meanwhile, her combined dyslipidemia was treated with simvastatin 10 mg/day and gemfibrozil 600 mg/day by a previous doctor. Subsequently, the statin was changed to atorvastatin to prevent muscle side effects. However, her plasma total cholesterol levels were between 13.1 and 19.5 mmol/L (504–752 mg/dL), plasma triglyceride levels between 1.2 and 15.8 mmol/L (106–1399 mg/dL), and plasma LDL-C levels between 9.4 and 16.0 mmol/L (362–620 mg/dL) over the past 13 years. As a result, 75 mg alirocumab every 2 weeks was prescribed in addition to statin and gemfibrozil, and her plasma LDL-C levels decreased from 447 to 328 mg/dL (−26.6%) after a single dose of properly stored 75 mg/day alirocumab, and it continuously decreased afterward .
Two days after receiving the second dose of alirocumab, she was hospitalized for acute diarrhea and acute kidney injury. Her parents requested medical staff to store PCSK9 mAb at the hospital after admission. Since healthcare professionals were unfamiliar with this new medicine and had never been trained on how to store it properly, alirocumab was put in a freezer from 3 pm to 8 am the next day (a total of 17 hours). The frozen drug was then moved to the refrigerator compartment (4°C), and after 7 hours, the appearance was clear and sediment free. Due to the fact that she received this medication by donation, her health insurance plan and her family were unable to pay for this expensive agent, which costs approximately US$14,000 per patient per year in the USA . Although the medical team had a comprehensive discussion with the patient and her family about the likelihood of a decrease in the efficacy of the medication and potential harm, the patient and her parents insisted on using the frozen drugs. Hence, she was closely monitored after injection.
Before being injected with the first dose of frozen alirocumab, the patient was generally well. Her blood pressure was 106/56 mmHg, and she weighed 57.2 kg, with a body mass index of 27.1 kg/m2. She had a cushingoid appearance from exogenous steroid use but was normal otherwise. After receiving the frozen drug, she did not experience any unusual symptoms and had no reaction at the injection site. The second dose of the frozen drug was administered 2 weeks later. After fourteen days, the patient had generalized discrete blanchable to nonblanchable erythematous macules in her upper and lower extremities, without any skin reaction at the injection site . After excluding other causes of the rash such as other new drugs including dietary supplements and alternative medications, insect bites, and so on, the dermatologist suspected minor cutaneous drug reaction with a Naranjo score of five, indicating a probable cutaneous drug reaction. As the patient was a minor and the results of the skin biopsy would not change the patient’s management, the patient refused it. The lesion spontaneously resolved without any treatment approximately 1 month later.
Plasma PCSK9 levels were measured using a quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The complete methodology of PCSK9 quantification has been described previously . In brief, protein G Agarose and washing buffer were used to remove other immunoglobulin Gs from the serum sample and drug complex before an experiment. The concentration of plasma free PCSK9 was measured using PCSK9 ELISA kits (Human PCSK9 Simple Step ELISA Kit, ABCAM model ab209884). Plasma free PCSK9 concentration was determined by comparing sample luminescence to the reference luminescence curve. The result of plasma free PCSK9 levels after injecting frozen alirocumab is shown in Fig. . The lipid profile, severity, and treatment of nephrotic syndrome after injection of frozen alirocumab are presented in Table . Serum total cholesterol, free PCSK9, and Lp(a) significantly decreased after the injection. Hence, the drugs still had PCSK9 inhibitory activity even after being inappropriately stored in a freezer for up to 17 hours.