A 73-year-old woman presented with a two-year history of progressive memory loss, urinary incontinence and walking difficulties. She had presented to an outside facility two years prior with acute onset of symptoms including a fall event. At the time of her initial presentation, she was diagnosed and reported as having had a stroke with negative findings in native CT, CT angiography and CT perfusion, as well as brain MR imaging (“MRI-negative stroke”) . Clinical examination of the patient at our clinic now revealed a spastic-ataxic gait with positive pyramid signs and Romberg’s test, scanning speech, disturbed fine motor skills and dysmetria of all extremities.
Neuropsychological investigation found memory deficits suggestive of cortical dementia. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, however, was normal with regard to both dementia and tissue destruction markers (Aβ42, total tau and phospho tau). Neither orthostatic nor autonomic dysfunction could not be detected. The possibility of a paraneoplastic syndrome was addressed by performing extensive screening for malignant tumors and known autoantibodies using imaging and serological evaluation.
Strikingly, brain MR imaging revealed a general atrophy of brain parenchyma with remarkable emphasis on the brain stem region . Here, a manifest gliotic neurodegeneration in the medulla oblongata with predominant loss of pyramidal tracts presented as “tadpole” appearance – a radiological sign exclusively described in association with Alexander’s disease . Even more prominently, pattern of brain stem degeneration resembled “kissing swans” in coronal sections . Importantly, no contrast enhancement could be observed in the brain stem or any other part of the brain following Gadolinium administration , indicating blood-brain barrier integrity. Furthermore, a marked atrophy of the upper cervical spinal cord was detected .
DaTscan/IBZM SPECT and FDG-PET results were neither indicative of idiopathic nor atypical Parkinson’s disease (not shown).
The combination of patient history and characteristic brain stem degeneration was strongly reminiscent of case reports of acute-onset adult Alexander’s disease (AOAD) . Alexander’s disease is a rare form of leukodystrophy, characterized by white matter degeneration, mainly caused by gain-of-function mutations of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in astrocytes .
Although most cases were reported to occur sporadically, autosomal dominant transmissions have been described . The family history of this patient was devoid of similar cases, with the important limitation that the patient had been adopted along with her siblings and has no children herself. However, personal reports as well as brain MR imaging findings of the patient’s sister, niece and grandniece gave no indication of a comparable disease in the patient’s family.
In order to genetically examine the suspected diagnosis of Alexander’s disease, we performed Sanger sequencing of all coding exons and adjacent intronic regions of the GFAP gene from the patient’s blood. Strikingly, we could not identify any mutations in the GFAP gene. Specific genetic testing for the most frequent spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) types was also negative.
We therefore performed whole-exome sequencing from patient’s blood, which provides an unbiased analysis of all protein-coding sequences in the human genome. Stringent filtering of whole-exome sequencing data for rare genetic variants (using dbSNP, 1000 genomes project, the Exome Variant Server and ExAC browser) as well as for disease-causative variants (using SIFT, Polyphen 2 and Mutation taster 2) resulted in a list of 12 potentially disease-causative heterozygous variants .
The most notable of these candidate genes was NMNAT2, which encodes for one isoform of the nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferases. Its neuroprotective role in numerous preclinical models of neurodegeneration is well established. Experimental deletion of NMNAT2 function increases the vulnerability of CNS neurons and accelerates Wallerian degeneration . Furthermore, NMNAT2 transcript levels have been shown to negatively correlate with neurodegeneration in a large study of 541 human individuals . Importantly, deletion of a single NMNAT2 allele, analogous to the heterozygous variant found in the presented patient, was sufficient to induce neurite degeneration in primary neuronal cultures .
Another candidate gene, STOX1 has been associated with phosphorylation of tau proteins in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease . KAT5, in addition, acts as a nuclear hormone receptor coactivator and has been linked to spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 .