The patient is a 13-year-old girl with no prior medical history who fell while skateboarding onto a hyper flexed left knee on the day of presentation. She experienced an immediate onset of knee pain with subsequent swelling and was unable to ambulate due to pain and weakness in her left leg. A review of systems was negative for sensory abnormalities or pain in other anatomical locations. On physical examination, the skin over the left knee was intact with no abrasions or open wounds. There was diffuse soft tissue swelling around the knee as well as a moderate knee joint effusion. She had exquisite tenderness to palpation directly over the tibial tubercle and patellar tendon, with an asymmetrically high-riding patella on palpation compared to the contralateral extremity. Although she was unable to straight leg raise against gravity, she was able to perform the maneuver with gravity eliminated, with moderate pain. Distally, she demonstrated full motor strength with ankle and great toe dorsi-and plantar flexion. Her sensation was grossly intact to light touch in all distributions distally. After examination, she underwent plain film imaging , which demonstrated a displaced tibial tubercle fracture extending to the level of the proximal tibial physis (Ogden Type IIB) with concomitant patella alta. Given the latter finding, concern was raised for patellar tendon injury, and magnetic resonance imaging was obtained which demonstrated a patellar tendon rupture at the tubercle insertion site . The patient’s left lower extremity was placed into a bulky jones dressing with a knee immobilizer and she was taken to the operating room the following day for operative intervention. The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent table with a high left thigh tourniquet. After induction of general anesthesia, administration of prophylactic antibiotics and sterile preparation and draping, a regional femoral nerve block (0.25% Marcaine with epinephrine) was performed according to the surgeon’s preference to aid with post-operative pain control. The limb was exsanguinated using an Esmark wrap and the tourniquet was inflated. A longitudinal incision was made over the anterior aspect of the knee extending from the distal pole of the patella to 4cm below the tibial tubercle. Dissection was carried through the subcutaneous tissues down to the extensor mechanism, where the fracture and hematoma were encountered. The tibial tubercle fragment was found to be significantly rotated and displaced superiorly. Moreover, the anterior cortex of the tubercle was devoid of periosteum at the patellar tendon insertional footprint (consistent with a tendon avulsion), while some ruptured terminal tendon fibers remained attached to the tubercle. The tubercle’s periosteum was found to be attached to the undersurface of ruptured patellar tendon. After assessing the extent of the injury, the fracture edges were cleared of soft tissue, and the hematoma was suctioned and irrigated to allow for manual reduction. The reduction was provisionally held with two posteriorly directed 0.045-inch Kirschner wires, and definitive fixation was achieved using two fully-threaded 3.5-mm cortical screws(lengths, 38 mm and 45 mm) using standard AO technique. A large image intensifier was used to check the positioning of the wires and screws during this portion of the operation. After satisfactory reduction and screw position were achieved, attention was turned to the repair of the patellar tendon. The knee was positioned to 30oof flexion to avoid over tightening, and two #2 Fiber Wire sutures were placed into the patellar tendon using the Krakow method. A 3.5-mm drill was then used to introduce a transverse hole through the proximal tibia 2cm distal to the tubercle. The periosteum attached to the undersurface of the tendon was reapproximated onto its footprint on the tibial tubercle and was, thus, used as an anatomic landmark to help ensure appropriate tensioning of the tendon. The sutures were then passed through the bone tunnel and tied. To augment the repair, an additional #2 Fiber Wire was passed through a transverse drill hole introduced into the patella to a second transverse drill hole through the proximal tibia (4 cm below the tubercle). The suture was tensioned and corrected the patella alta and allowed the knee to flex to 60°without difficulty or undue tension on the tendon repair. This technique was previously described by Novacheck et al. and is outlined in a diagram . Final intraoperative fluoroscopic images were then obtained . The wound was irrigated, the tourniquet was deflated, hemostasis was achieved, and a multilayered closure was performed. The remaining extensor mechanism tissue was repaired using 2-0 Ethibond in a figure-of-eight fashion, the deep soft tissue layers were approximated using 0vicryl, and the dermis and epidermis were approximated using 3-0 and 4-0 monocryl, respectively. Postoperatively, the left leg was placed into a knee immobilizer for the 1stweekduring full weight-bearing, and only taken out of the immobilizer to allow passive range of motion with up to 60° of flexion. After 1week, a hinged knee brace was used to allow full weight-bearing and active range of motion up to 60°, and physical therapy was initiated for range of motion exercises. At 4-week follow-up, radiographs of the knee demonstrated interval healing of the tubercle fracture , and range of motion was advanced to 90°of flexion in the hinged knee brace.3-month postoperatively, the brace was discontinued, and at the 5-month follow-up visit and the patient had active knee range of motion from 0° to 130° with no clinically significant extensor lag.