An 11-year-old girl with arterial hypertension presented to our pediatric nephrological outpatient clinic. The girl reported headaches twice a week for 4 months. Clinical examination of the girl showed the absence of pathological murmur in the kidney region, and blood pressure was elevated during day and night (mean 139/94 mmHg, 24 h measurement, 15 mmHg > 99th percentile). Echocardiography excluded aortic stenosis and cardiac hypertrophy, and laboratory examinations showed normal values in creatinine, metanephrine, and endocrinological results; in particular, renin (31.7 ng/L) and aldosterone (163.3 ng/L) were in the normal range. An ultrasound examination showed normal renal parenchyma with a regular corticomedullary differentiation and normal size with a total kidney volume of 158 ml (right 78 ml, left 80 ml). Doppler ultrasound revealed stenosis of a small segmental artery of the right kidney, verified by an arterial flow velocity acceleration of up to 4 m/s (, , ). A therapy with amlodipine (2.5 mg twice daily) and metoprolol (23.75 mg twice daily) was started, and catheter-based angiography with an option for renal angioplasty was initiated. Standard angiography setting angles (anterior and posterior projection and following caudal angulation 30°) could not detect the stenosis. After renewed ultrasound demonstration, an additional setting viewing (cranial angulation 30°) indicated a narrow stenosis (minimal diameter <1 mm) hiding behind the main renal artery in previous viewpoints. Percutaneous transluminal renal artery angioplasty using balloon dilatation (dilatation up to 2.5 mm) was performed without any complications (, ). Post-intervention, same-day results showed a widened diameter of 2 mm and a declined flow velocity to 120 cm/s in the former segmental artery stenosis (, ). An immediate decrease of average blood pressure values of about 20 mmHg and a reduction of renin (2.1 ng/L) and aldosterone (<37 ng/L) levels below the normal range after 12 h could be observed. Antihypertensive therapy was terminated; antithrombotic prophylaxis with heparin was administered for 24 h, and aspirin prophylaxis continued for 6 months. Right kidney volume increased to 87 ml (2 weeks after intervention) and 100 ml (11 months later). Follow-up after 4 and 11 months demonstrated age-appropriate blood pressure values (mean 112/69 mmHg, 24 h measurement) in our case (see the timeline in the ).