The subject of the case report is a 9-year-old girl who was born at full term via normal spontaneous vaginal delivery to a healthy mother following an uneventful pregnancy. The neonatal history was unremarkable. Her mother started to seek medical advice at the age of 4 years as the child exhibited speech and language delay with challenging behaviors. These challenging behaviors took the form of aggressiveness, self-injurious behaviors, stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms with hand flapping and body rocking, lack of sleep, and attention-deficit hyperactivity-like disorders.
There were not any concerns regarding her gross motor skills; she sat at 7 months and walked at 14 months and continued to be appropriate for her age in all stages. Her fine motor skills were delayed, she could only hand grasp a pen for scribbling and was not able to dress with a significant stereotypic movement of her hands. Her cognitive and language skills were significantly delayed, she could count from 1 to 10, and she said repeated non-comprehensive limited words and sentences. In the development clinic, she was diagnosed with ASD and severe intellectual disability at the age of 6 years based on DSM-5 criteria. The assessment revealed deficits in social–emotional reciprocity, in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, and in developing and maintaining relationships. The assessment also revealed that she had repetitive speech and motor movements, usually with her hands. On examination, her growth parameters were within normal percentiles, and she exhibited no gross dysmorphic features, normal neurological status, and no evidence of cardiovascular abnormalities. Her blood pressure was normal, but she was agitated and hyperactive and made no eye contact during the examination. At the age of 6 years, she was started on risperidone 0.5 mg daily and gradually increased to twice per day, which did not show significant improvement. Later at the age of 8 years, she was started additionally on methylphenidate 5 mg twice per day, which led to little improvement in sleep patterns and no change in hyperactivity or aggressive impulsive behaviors.
The parents were non-consanguineous. The mother is 50 years old, and she is not known to have any chronic medical illnesses. The father died at the age of 65 years. Although he was independent in activities of daily living, he was illiterate and was diagnosed to have ID in the form of impaired executive functions. He did not have any behavioral disorders and showed good interpersonal communication. He was diagnosed with hypertension and type 2 diabetes and developed stage 3 chronic kidney disease and coronary artery disease that required percutaneous coronary intervention. In the last 6 months of his life, he developed seizures that were controlled with levetiracetam 250 mg twice per day. All his neuroimaging was unremarkable, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and computed tomography (CT) angiography of the brain. After 3 months, he started to have mood disturbances and became isolated, with a lack of sleep, loss of appetite, and suicidal ideation but no suicide attempt. An adult mental health team diagnosed him to have a major depressive disorder with catatonic features and nihilistic delusion, followed by rapidly progressive dementia, where he was started on sertraline 25 mg daily. He died after suffering prolonged seizures followed by post-cardiac arrest the next day.
The patient has six siblings, all of whom except one have no medical concerns. She is a 30-year-old female patient who was diagnosed to have severe ID with aggressive behaviors and sleep disorders. At the age of 14 years, she was diagnosed to have bipolar disorder and psychosis, as she has visual and auditory hallucinations, she was given citalopram 2 mg and quetiapine 200 mg daily with a poor response. Her symptoms have currently improved on aripiprazole 5 mg daily and olanzapine 5 mg once before sleep time.
Laboratory investigations for the patient, including basic and neurometabolic workups, chromosomal analysis, and array comparative genomic hybridization, were unremarkable. A hearing test returned normal results. WES was performed for molecular diagnosis using standard methods.