A 70-year-old man, diagnosed with HOCM 10 years prior, presented with worsening exertional dyspnoea. He was taking several medications for HOCM, including beta-blocker (bisoprolol 5 mg/day), calcium channel blocker (diltiazem 100 mg/day), and cibenzoline (100 mg/day), under which the mean LVOT pressure gradient (PG) was well controlled to <30 mmHg. However, his symptoms gradually worsened to New York Heart Association functional Class 3.
On admission, physical examination showed no abnormalities except systolic cardiac murmur with Levine IV/VI. He was haemodynamically stable (blood pressure: 98/66 mmHg; heart rate: 52 b.p.m.). Laboratory test results showed a significantly elevated brain natriuretic peptide level (797 pg/mL) and moderate renal dysfunction (estimated glomerular filtration rate, 44 mL/min/1.73 m2). Transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal ejection fraction of 69.0%, severe LVOT obstruction that was deteriorated to a maximum (mean) LVOT PG of 115 (52) mmHg, and mild SAM-related MR. Coronary angiography clearly showed several septal perforators feeding into a hypertrophic septum . After the patient was informed in detail about the pros and cons of both surgical myectomy vs. ASA as treatment options, he refused treatment with surgical myectomy and requested ASA. The heart team agreed with the patient’s choice of ASA for reducing the LVOT obstruction.
Alcohol septal ablation was performed using a 7 Fr guiding catheter via the right radial artery. Simultaneously, intraventricular pressure was monitored with a pressure wire (Abbott Vascular, CA, USA) using a 5 Fr guiding catheter via the left radial artery. Alcohol septal ablation targeting the septal perforators that potentially contributed the most to the LVOT obstruction was performed using a total absolute ethanol injection of 2.5 mL; however, this failed to sufficiently reduce the LVOT PG (maximum and mean LVOT PG, 81.6 and 35 mmHg, respectively) . Moreover, this gradually led to interventricular septal oedema, which caused an acute deterioration of SAM-related MR from mild to massive at 6 h post-ASA (; see , and ). A continuous infusion of landiolol, diltiazem, and single-dose methylprednisolone was ineffective in reducing SAM-related MR. The patient was haemodynamically unstable (systolic blood pressure of 50 mmHg), even under noradrenaline, and experienced deteriorating oxygen saturation (SpO2 88%), even under invasive positive pressure ventilation support. Finally, venous-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and a percutaneous left ventricular assist device (Impella CP, Abiomed, MA, USA) were required for refractory pulmonary oedema caused by massive SAM-related MR. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed that SAM-related MR was caused by post-ASA morphological changes leading to a large coaptation gap (1.4 mm) of mitral leaflets with a pseudo-prolapse of the posterior mitral leaflet (PML) at a length of 10.2 mm . The mitral valve area was relatively small (3.66 cm2) with a mean transmitral PG of 2.1 mmHg. Because the patient’s surgical risk was prohibitively high due to the sub-acute post-ASA phase and the mitral valve morphology was treatable by M-TEER, our heart team decided to perform MitraClip therapy.
During M-TEER, just before the clip insertion, we removed the Impella device to avoid these interferences. Thereafter, an XT clip (Abbott Vascular) was used to grasp the centre of the mitral valve (A2/P2), including the pre-existing elongated anterior mitral leaflet (AML) with a length of 29 mm; however, the mean transmitral valve-PG remarkably increased to 8 mmHg with mild LVOT obstruction. The XT clip was then laterally relocated to cover the pseudo-prolapsed PML, resulting in optimal MR reduction with an acceptable mean transmitral valve-PG (2.8 mmHg) (; see , ). This led to an improvement in the patient’s oxygen saturation level, and he was successfully weaned from ECMO on post-MitraClip Day 2. After that, he was treated with beta-blocker alone, resulting in moderate LVOT obstruction (LVOT PG of 29 mmHg) with mild SAM-related MR. He was finally transferred to another hospital to continue his rehabilitation.