A 60-year-old woman underwent mechanical aortic and mitral valve replacement 10 months prior and then developed symptoms of cardiac insufficiencies, such as shortness of breath and chest tightness, for 10 days. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a 4.1 mm fissure at the 8 o’clock position of the mechanical aortic valve position. A 3.8 mm fissure was detected at the 2 o’clock position, and a 4.1 mm fissure was detected at the 8 o’clock position around the mechanical mitral valve. Considering the (1) age, (2) cardiac insufficiency, (3) haemodynamic significance of PVL, (4) double mechanical valve replacement status and (5) PVLs on both the inner and outer sides of the mitral valve, ultimately, the cardiac diagnosis and treatment team decided to implement a hybrid interventional closure scheme for the patient. The ventricular apex was punctured solely under TEE guidance, and a track was established to close the three PVLs. If the occlusion did not go well, the occlusion was prepared with a percutaneous transcatheter under the guidance of fluoroscopy.
The patient underwent general anaesthesia intubation in the compound operating room. A 2 cm incision was made on the left thoracotomy (the fifth intercostal space on the left side). The tissue was separated, and part of the pericardium was cut and suspended. After heparinization, a pouch was sewn at the left ventricular apex and then punctured directly with a trocar under TEE guidance alone (see ). On the fissure at the 2 o’clock positions of the mitral valve, a 7 Fr occlusion delivery system was used to establish the track, and a 10 mm equilateral ventricular septal defect (VSD) occluder was used to close the PVL. On the fissure at the 8 o’clock position of the mitral valve, a 7 Fr occlusion delivery system was used to feed an 8 mm equilateral VSD occluder. TEE showed that the occluders were in a good position and did not affect the movement of the mechanical mitral valve, and no residual shunt was seen. Closure of the APVL via the apical cordis approach was unsuccessful in multiple attempts to establish tracks. Then, we punctured the right femoral artery, inserted a 6 Fr vascular sheath, and retrogradely sent a 5 Fr pigtail catheter to the root of the aorta. Angiography showed paravalvular regurgitation from the aortic root to the left ventricle, and the APVL measured ∼3 mm (see ). A 6 Fr right heart catheter was used to establish the track through the (1) femoral artery, (2) descending aorta, (3) ascending aorta, (4) APVL and (5) left ventricle. Next, 260 cm hard guidewire was exchanged in the left ventricle, and the 5 Fr delivery sheath was guided to follow the hard guidewire to the left ventricle. The sheath-core and guidewire were withdrawn, and an 8 mm (non-membrane double-lumen) VSD occluder was sent to the left ventricle along the delivery sheath to complete the closure. All the occluder devices were provided by Amplatzer. Angiography of the aortic root after occlusion showed that the occlusion was well fixed and did not affect the opening of the mechanical aortic valve or coronary blood flow, and there was no residual shunt (see ).
The patient developed a pneumothorax after surgery and recovered after 11 days of care. Following up for 3, 6, 12 and 24 months, the patient had no related complications, and cardiac function recovered from Grade IV to Grade II (NYHA classification).