A 91-year-old male patient admitted to a nursing hospital was transferred to our hospital with dyspnea, cough, and a confused mental state.
Prior to patient transfer, a single dose of moxifloxacin was administered at the nursing hospital without blood culture tests. Oxygen was administered via a nasal cannula during the transfer.
The patient has undergone regular hemodialysis for one year. He had a medical history of atrial fibrillation, severe grade of tricuspid and mitral regurgitation, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He also had a stroke 5 years previously.
At the time of admission in our institution, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature of the patient were 85/40 mmHg, 110 /min, 20 /min, and 36.5 °C, respectively.
Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 8780 /μL (neutrophils: 78%), C-reactive protein level of 1.6 mg/dL (normal range < 0.5 mg/dL), procalcitonin level of 0.571 μg/L (normal range < 0.046 μg/L), creatinine level of 5.6 mg/dL (glomerular filtration rate by the modification of diet in renal disease study equation = 10 mL/min/1.73 m2), and brain natriuretic peptide level of 124 ng/L (normal range < 100 ng/L). Arterial blood gas analysis during oxygen supply revealed severe acidosis with a pH of 7.173, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 66 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen of 100 mmHg, and bicarbonate of 24 mEq/L.
Chest radiography revealed a large right pleural effusion and pulmonary edema . Chest computed tomography showed consolidation in the right upper and middle lobes and total atelectasis of the right lower lobe . The pleural effusion was a transudate, according to the following Light’s criteria: Pleural fluid protein-to-serum protein ratio of 0.4; pleural fluid lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) -to-serum LDH of 0.6; and pleural fluid LDH to the upper normal limit for serum of 0.6. There was no growth of microorganisms on pleural fluid culture. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderate grade of eccentric tricuspid regurgitant jet flow directed towards the CS and a mobile band-like echogenic mass (longitudinal dimension of approximately 8 cm) attached to the ostium of the CS and posterolateral wall of the right atrium, suggesting the presence of vegetation . He also had a moderate grade of pulmonary hypertension (estimated systolic pulmonary arterial pressure = 61 mmHg) and right atrial enlargement (30 cm2). Other cardiac structures, including the valves, were unaffected, and the left ventricular ejection fraction was normal. There was no radiographic evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism or deep vein thrombosis. Sequential blood culture results were negative.