A 7-year-old girl with diffuse desquamatory rash, gait instability, ptosis with photophobia, hearing loss, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and dysuria was admitted to our institution. She was the firstborn of nonconsanguineous parents with unremarkable medical and family histories. Her younger sister is healthy. Pregnancy was uneventful, and she was born via cesarean section due to oligohydramnios at 39 weeks gestational age. Birth weight was 3950 g, length 50 cm, and head 33 cm. APGAR score was 9,10 at 1st, 5th minutes, respectively.
At 3 years of age, she initially presented with a raised, nonpruritic rash around the eye and mouth that quickly spread to the upper limb and eventually developed desquamation and pruritic. There was an antecedent infection. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) was diagnosed at a local hospital and recovered after hospitalization. At 3 years and 4 months, she had a repeat episode of diffused rash followed by cerebellar ataxia gait and then inability to stand or even sit up without assistance. During this episode, she developed positive neurological signs, including mild proximal lower extremity weakness, lower limb areflexia, and failure to complete heel-knee-shin and finger-nose tests. Total spine and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as well as electroencephalogram (EEG), were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was unremarkable. Electromyography (EMG) illustrated myogenic damage. On the second episode, she was diagnosed with pediatric acute cerebellar ataxia and dermatomyositis at a local hospital and treated with initial empiric intravenous dexamethasone 7.5 mg for 3 days with no obvious response, and was transferred to our hospital. Extensive investigations to evaluate disorders were conducted, including autoimmune(total lymphocyte count, lymphocyte and immunoglobulins subsets, lupus anticoagulant, double-stranded DNA antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, complement C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor, demyelinating neuropathy autoantibody panels, sensory and motor neuropathy, autoimmune encephalitis autoantibody panel on blood and CSF, etc.), mitochondrial function and other metabolic factors (serum amino acids, lactate, pyruvate, urine organic acids, methylmalonic acid, targeted sequencing of nuclear and mitochondrial genes cause mitochondrial disturbances, etc.), infectious and inflammatory factors, toxic exposure, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and thyroid hormone. None of the above were abnormal except for lymphocyte subsets. Abdominal ultrasound, whole-body CT scan, and 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET precluded a neoplastic/paraneoplastic origin. The EMG was normal, moreover, mildly elevated muscle enzymes and normal muscle biopsy excluded myogenic origin. We considered recurrent autoimmune cerebellar ataxia and dermatomyositis and a 3 days course of 20 mg/kg of intravenous Methylprednisolone was attempted. Fortunately, she had a robust response to treatment and was discharged on oral Prednisone (tapering from 25 mg/d) plus Pidotimod.
The patient had approximately 2 years of stable situation after discharge, with remission of rash and gait difficulties. Nevertheless, after drug withdrawal for 3 months, her rash and disability to walk relapsed due to a prodromal infection. She was admitted to a local institution for reevaluation of diagnosis and therapeutic management. During the third episode, she developed a new symptom of ptosis with photosensitivity. Visual field testing was unremarkable, but visual evoked potential was abnormal. Combined with previous history, she was suspected of ichthyosis polyneuritis ataxia syndrome. There was no obvious response and deterioration due to influenza, despite symptomatic treatment. What’s more, 2 months later she developed new symptoms of bilateral hearing loss, ultimately needed hearing aids placement, and then was transferred to various hospitals for about a year only to be repeatedly misdiagnosed and treated ineffectively.
Ten days before admission, she had a precipitous deterioration in rash and ability to walk , as well as a choking cough after drinking. Seven days before admission, she developed autonomic symptoms including abdominal pain and diarrhea, nausea, and dysuria and then was transferred to our institution again. The total lymphocyte count and lymphocyte subsets decreased, bilateral auditory brainstem evoked potential threshold increased and latency prolonged, sensory and motor conduction velocity slowed and sensory nerve action potential amplitudes decreased as well as EMG suggested peripheral nerve damage. Given waxed and waned courses and progressive symptoms, we conducted whole exome sequencing (WES) to identify the etiology. WES was carried out on genomic DNA extracted from blood, a deep next generation sequencing (NGS) with an average reading depth of 30×, IDT’s xGen Exome Research Panel v2 was selected and identified a pathogenic de novo variant in ACOX1 in the proband (c.710 A > G, p.Asp237Ser) . We also performed the detection of base repeat regions in 10 causative genes of ataxia without abnormal result. Considered that ACOX1 was known to involve only in an autosomal recessive peroxisomal ACOX1 deficiency, VLCFA were tested and the concentration was normal, indicating no loss of peroxisomal proteins and no decrease in enzyme activity . Thus, the heterozygous de novo missense mutation has a new pathomechanism different from previously reported peroxisomal ACOX1 deficiency.
Supported by previous good response to immunotherapy and the abnormal total lymphocyte count and lymphocyte subsets, Methylprednisolone (a 3 days course of 20 mg/kg) was re-administered and oral Prednisone (50 mg/d) supplementation subsequently, which showed a good response except for gait difficulties. Then, oral N acetylcysteine amide (NACA) supplementation (3 g, twice daily) was initiated to attenuate levels of ROS, with a good response. At this point, she had a good recovery and was discharged after 14 days of admission. After 11 months of follow-up, her condition improved gradually, particularly in terms of rash, gastrointestinal, urinary, and gait difficulties, and she was able to have a partially autonomous life, attend school and partially maintain social relationships.