A 47-years-old female patient, nulligravida, presented to our hospital chiefly complaining of painless abdominal mass that was gradually increasing in size over a period of 6 months. She reported anorexia and weight loss associated with the mass. The patient had a history of hydatid cyst of the liver and she underwent resection of the protruding dome at age 36 years. No other comorbidities were reported. She was a non-smoker with no drug use, and had no history of allergies. She had no family history of cancer, or psychological history.
During the physical examination, vital parameters were within normal limit. The abdominal examination has exhibited a well-defined, fixed with regard to the deep plan, non-pulsatile, left sided abdominal mass.
Abdominopelvic computed tomography CT scan showed a large left and paramedian intra peritoneal mass, of undetermined origin, roughly oval, well-defined, of mixed nature with a pure septale cystic component, mucinous impure cystic component and a solid component enhanced after injection of contrast, without presence of calcifications, measuring 185 × 128*190 mm. The mass pushes back left liver without any sign of noticeable invasion . A recurrence of the hydatid cyst was suspected, also the gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Her laboratory tests, including liver biochemical tests, routine blood examination, hydatid serology, and serum tumor markers, were all within normal limits.
Surgical approach was decided with an open laparotomy. The procedure was performed by a professor of surgery with over 15 years of surgical experience at an academic hospital. On exploration, a voluminous mass, of approximately 20 cm in all its dimensions, with double solido-cystic component at the expense of the neck and the body of the pancreas, closely related to the portal vein, without infiltration. There were no peritoneal implants, hepatic metastases, or adenomegaly. The tumor was firmly united by multiple adhesions with the adjacent structures, with displacement of the surrounding organs. Splenopancreatectomy involving the mass with omentectomy were performed after isolating the tumor from the portal vein and suture of a breach by single stitches prolene 5–0 (A, B). The operation time was 270 min, and the bleeding amount was 325 ml. Three units of packed red blood cells were transfused intra-operatively. A Penrose drain was placed in the cavity.
Macroscopically, the specimen weighs 742g, ranges from 14 cm to 18.5 cm in size, poorly limited. It shows a solido-cystic, hemorrhagic, necrotic, friable, multilocular, and heterogeneous appearance. Histopathological examination of the specimen showed a pancreatic parenchyma, site of chronic pancreatitis and of intraductal mucinous tumor proliferation. The pancreatic ducts were largely ectatic lined by a unified or multi-layered muciparous cylindrical covering. The nuclei are sometimes regularly and sometimes atypical with a mitotic activity estimated at 5 mitoses per 10 pools of mucus resting a fibrous and very inflammatory chorion. This proliferation remains confined to the canal without any source of invasion (A, B). The immunohistochemistry staining was positive for anti-CK7, anti-CK20, and anti-CDX-2 antibodies. Twelve lymph nodes were analyzed that were all negative for malignancy. The diagnosis of intestinal type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm without invasive malignant component was established.
Postoperatively, the patient was doing well without any complications and she was discharged 14 days after the operation. After a follow-up of 6 months, the patient remains in good health, and there is no recurrence detected.