A 31-year-old female native of Africa was hospitalized with fever, weakness, nausea, headache, facial edema, and rash, for 4 days. She had been diagnosed as HIV positive 2 years previously. CD4 cell count was between 300 and 400 cells/mm3, viral load was near 150,000 copies/mm3, both steady for several weeks. She had no other relevant medical history, and was on no treatment for HIV. Three weeks before the onset of the symptoms, she had been started on oral minocycline to control an inflammatory form of acne vulgaris.
At admittance she was unwell and vital signs were: blood pressure 100/60, temperature 40°C, heart rate 120 beats/min., respiratory rate 22/min., and oxygen saturation 97% (room air). On physical examination, she had multiple erythematous, oedematous and coalescing plaques on the upper trunk, and on proximal segments of the limbs. Her palms and soles were erythematous. She also had injection of the sclera, and edema of the eyelids. Buccal and genital mucous membranes were unaffected. Palpation revealed enlarged tender lymph nodes at all sites, but no accompanying hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Cardiovascular and pulmonary systems were normal, with no sign of septic shock. Neurological examination was normal.
Laboratory tests revealed the following values: leucocytosis (24×109/L), eosinophilia (2.8×109/L), neutrophilia (8×109/L) without lymphocytosis (2.8×109/L), elevated C-Reactive Protein (17 mg/L) and cytolytic hepatitis (ALT 160 U/L, AST 106 U/L, lactate deshydrogenase 1400 U/L (LDH)). Multiple blood culture and bacteriological analysis of urine were sterile. Serological investigation for viral and bacterial agents, repeated over two weeks showed no sign of recent infection (Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma sp., Chlamydiae sp., Legionella sp., Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, hepatitis A, B and C viruses, measles, rubella, parvovirus B19, coxsackievirus, echovirus, VZV, HTLV1, HSV, toxoplasmosis). The antinuclear antibodies were negative. Chest radiography and echocardiography showed no abnormalities, however cerebral CT-scan showed a diffuse cerebral edema . Electroencephalogram was normal. The lumbar puncture revealed lymphocytic meningitis with 60 cells/microliter (lymphocytes: 90%, protein level: 0.80 g/L, glucose level: 0.56 g/L). No microbial agents were found in the cerebrospinal fluid (cryptococcal antigen and culture, culture for bacteriological agents, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for echovirus, coxackies virus, CMV, HSV, VZV). PCR for HIV in cerebrospinal fluid was not performed. Histopathology of a skin biopsy sample showed a lymphocytic infiltrate into the dermo-epidermis junction with edema, resulting in a blister detachment. This aspect was of a lichenoid toxiderma. Lymph node biopsy was not performed.
Minocycline was discontinued on the fourth day after the onset of the symptoms. Two days after minocycline withdrawal, treatment with steroids was introduced (methylprednisolone 60 mg daily) because of the severity of the symptoms. The patient improved quickly after steroid administration. Temperature dropped to 37°C within three days. Within one week the eruption cleared and lymphadenopathies disappeared. Biological abnormalities (eosinophilia, liver enzyme elevation) resolved within three days. A second brain CT-scan, undertaken 14 days after the onset of the symptoms, was normal. Lumbar puncture was not repeated. The steroids were steadily tailed off (5 mg per week) but a relapse occurred on week 6, when on a dose of 30 mg per day. This relapse was under the form of a transient and isolated generalized pruritus with no cutaneous nor neurological signs. Skin tests were not carried out due to the potential risk of severe reaction. The patient was weaned off steroids over a period of 8 months and was free of symptoms at discharged form care.