A 72-year old female patient presented to us with shortness of breath for the last 2 months. There was no history of fever, cough, chest pain, haemoptysis, abdominal pain, vomiting or bleeding per vaginum. There was no lymphadenopathy, clubbing, or pedal edema, but pallor was present. Air entry was decreased bilaterally in the inframammary and infrascapular regions. The cardiovascular system and gastrointestinal system were normal.
The laboratory value for hemoglobin (Hb) was 8.0 g/dL. The complete blood cell count (CBC), blood sugar, renal function test and liver function test were all found to be within normal ranges. A posterior to anterior (PA) view chest X-ray was done which showed homogenous opacity in the bilateral lower lung field along with blunting of both costophrenic angles (CPA) suggestive of bilateral pleural effusion.
A cytologic examination of pleural fluid revealed adenocarcinoma cells . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan of the thorax was done which revealed only bilateral pleural effusion with absence of any mass lesion or any mediastinal lymphadenopathy . An ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis showed only ascites; no other abnormality or mass lesion was detected. A cytologic examination of ascitic fluid also revealed adenocarcinoma cells .
A CECT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed heterogeneous thickening of omentum with nodular appearance and fatty streakiness into the adjacent soft tissues extending up to the anterior abdominal wall and adjacent bowel loops, including transverse and descending colon, suggestive of omental caking with small amount of ascites. The ovaries appeared normal and no other mass lesion was detected .
A gynecological examination did not reveal any abnormality. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy did not show any abnormal lesion. A breast examination was normal. Examinations of the oral cavity and indirect laryngoscopy were also normal. A laparoscopic examination of the abdomen showed omental thickening along with multiple nodules on the peritoneum, but the ovaries and other organs were found to be normal. A biopsy was taken from a peritoneal lesion. A histologic examination of the biopsy was suggestive of adenocarcinoma . A test for cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) showed that the level of CA 125 was elevated (3950 U/ml), but a test for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was negative. The patient was diagnosed with primary peritoneal carcinoma. The patient was treated with cisplatin chemotherapy, which resulted in a decrease in tumor size, a reduction of CA 125 level, and a reduction of ascites and pleural effusion.