A 65-year-old female presented with complaints of gross hematuria and lower abdominal pain. She denied flank pain, dysuria, urinary urgency or frequency, unexplained weight loss, or fatigue. Past medical history included cervical intraepithelial neoplasia III and endometrial hyperplasia, for which she received a fractional dilatation and curettage and complete conization. Although she had quit a decade before presentation, the patient had a 70.5 pack-year smoking history. Physical examination was unremarkable. A complete metabolic panel and blood count with differential were normal. Repeat Pap smear and vaginosis screen were negative. Cancer antigen 125 was normal at 13 U/mL. Urine analysis with microscopic examination revealed 3+ red blood cells, 2+ protein, normal white blood cells, and no bacteria. Urine cytology was suspicious for malignancy of the urothelium. Fluorescence in situ hybridization testing was negative.
We obtained a CT urogram with three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction, which demonstrated a 3.6 × 2.0 cm heterogeneous mass originating from the right pelvic kidney with associated dilation of the proximal renal collecting system . Imaging could not discern whether the mass originated from the renal parenchyma or the urothelium. Cystourethroscopy showed a normal-appearing urethra, bladder, and ureteral orifices. Retrograde pyelogram revealed a normal ureter and pelvicaliceal system on the left, but a pelvic kidney with a single, normal ureter and mildly dilated pelvicaliceal system with poor filling of the renal pelvis on the right. The hilum of the pelvic kidney was facing left. To examine vascular supply, a CT angiogram was obtained . A single renal artery originated from the proximal right common iliac artery just distal to the aortic bifurcation, whereas a single renal vein emptied into the left common iliac vein bifurcation . Biopsy of the mass was not attempted before surgery.
A robot-assisted laparoscopic nephroureterectomy was performed based on the clinical workup strongly suggesting malignancy of the urothelium. The pelvic kidney was at the level of the sacral promontory, which required robotic port placement slightly cranial to the standard pelvic surgery. Therefore, a 12-mm ENDOPATH (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) port was placed four fingerbreadths above the umbilicus. An 8-mm robotic port was placed five fingerbreadths lateral to the camera on the right side above the line of the umbilicus. A 15-mm port was placed in the right iliac fossa, whereas an 8-mm was placed in the left. An 8-mm left robotic port was placed four fingerbreadths lateral to the camera port cranial to the umbilical line .
The ectopic kidney was found hanging by the aortic bifurcation. The peritoneum was incised along the right external iliac artery and traced proximally. Dissection was carried proximally around the bifurcation and then down the left common iliac vessels. A single renal artery originating from the proximal right common iliac artery was identified. A large renal vein draining into the left common iliac vein was found and prompted further dissection for better identification. A second smaller renal vein was found emptying into the inferior vena cava. A sufficient segment of the right renal artery was freed and then stapled with a 45 mm load. The main renal vein emptying to the left common iliac vein was then stapled in a similar manner. The right-sided accessory vein was then clipped. The kidney was lifted off the iliac vessels and attention was shifted to the ureter.
The ureter was traced to the ureterovesical junction and a cuff of the urinary bladder was excised. The opening in the bladder was sutured using 2-0 V-Loc (Covidien, New Haven, CT) and a hemostatic agent was placed after removing the specimen. Estimated blood loss was 20 mL. There were no postoperative complications.
The final pathology revealed a 3.8 cm tumor of the renal pelvis that was a high-grade, invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma with focal glandular differentiation (tubules, signet right cells, and mucin). The tumor extended through the muscularis propria of the renal pelvis, invading into the renal parenchyma. The patient subsequently underwent three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. The patient remains healthy without reoccurrence 18 months after her nephroureterectomy.