A 50-year-old woman with a body mass index 23.1 kg/m2 was referred to our hospital due to a 2-year history of recurrent right upper quadrant abdominal pain with progressive aggravation. Past medical history included a cesarean section at age 40 and TAH/BSO for atypical endometrial hyperplasia and ovarian endometrioma at age 46. The patient had not taken hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) since age 46. No family history of malignancy was recorded. Physical examination revealed right upper quadrant tenderness without any palpable masses. Fever, jaundice, vomiting, or other clinical signs were not observed. Liver function and viral serological tests for hepatitis B and C were normal. Tumor markers demonstrated an elevated carbohydrate antigen (CA)-199 level (112 U/mL [normal: 0–35 U/mL]); CA-125, carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha fetoprotein levels were normal.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed an ill-defined, hypodense mass of approximately 10.7 × 7.7 cm in the right liver lobe extending to the diaphragm , with moderate enhancement in the periphery during the arterial phase . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver demonstrated this lesion had an increased signal on both T1- and T2- weighted images . No change was observed on T2-spectral presaturation attenuated inversion recovery (SPAIR) sequence , indicating hemorrhaging within the mass. The capsule of the right lobe of liver was unevenly thickened and enhanced, but no obvious enhancement was visible inside the tumor . No lymph node involvement was observed.
Laparotomy was performed, revealing a large complicated mass in segment VII. Multiple nodules on the diaphragm, ranging from 1 to 3 cm in diameter, were also observed. Some of the nodules were cystic with hemorrhagic contents and densely adhered to the surface of the liver. The abdominal cavity exploration revealed no other abnormalities. During adhesiolysis, the hepatic intraparenchymal mass ruptured, expelling large amounts of “fish flesh”-like tissue and hematoma. Some of the tissue and one diaphragmatic nodule were sent for intraoperative frozen sections, which suggested sporadic broken endometrial-like tissues. Part of the hepatic mass was resected for a second intraoperative frozen section, which unexpectedly indicated a malignancy. After fully communicating with the patient’s family, anatomical resection was performed, including right hepatectomy with infiltrating diaphragm resection. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery without complications.
Final histopathological examination of the surgical specimens confirmed the diagnosis of highly- to moderately-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma in the liver. The tumor cells had pleomorphic nuclei and a high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio, and were arranged in a glandular or sieve pattern surrounded by proliferative fibrous tissue . Immunohistochemistry found that tumor cells were strongly positive for estrogen receptor , progesterone receptor , vimentin , paired-box gene -8 , but negative for cytokerin -7 , Arginase 1 , hepatocyte , calretinin , and glypican-3 . Although the specimen was sampled extensively, the classic triad of endometrial glands, stroma, and hemosiderin-laden macrophages was not identified.
The case was discussed at a multidisciplinary team meeting involving radiologists, pathologists, oncologists, and gynecologic surgeons. Clinical and immuno-histopathological findings strongly supported the diagnosis of endometrioid adenocarcinoma originating from preexisting hepatic endometriosis. Adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended for treatment. The patient agreed with the treatment regimen and had completed three courses of chemotherapy (doxorubicin combined with cis-platinum, every 3 weeks) with sufficient tolerance (Blood tests showed Grade I myelosuppression that could be reversed by oral drugs.) at the time of writing. Long-term follow-up will be conducted to observe the prognosis.