A 77-year-old female (height 148 cm, weight 70 kg, BMI 31.96 kg/m2) with a 4-year history of hypertension, who sustained a stroke 2 years ago and regularly took antihypertensive drugs, antiplatelet drugs and lipid-lowering drugs, had repeated transient loss of consciousness. The electrocardiogram showed intermittent third-degree atrioventricular block, and she was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. After the relevant examinations, the diagnosis of high-degree atrioventricular block was confirmed, and we decided to implant a leadless pacemaker (LP, Micra, Medtronic, USA).
Under local anaesthesia, 8-F sheaths were placed percutaneously in the right femoral vein, a super stiff guidewire and pigtail catheter were passed through the sheath to the superior vena cava, and the pigtail catheter was placed in the right ventricle for right ventriculography in the right anterior oblique and left anterior oblique positions, which showed that the endocardium was intact and had no abnormalities . The delivery catheter was advanced to the right mid-ventricular septum where the device cup was gently positioned after crossing the tricuspid valve. Subsequent right anterior oblique and left anterior oblique views were taken to ensure that the device cup was positioned over the septum, and contrast agent was slowly injected to enhance the visibility of the site where the Micra would be delivered. However, we found residual contrast beyond where the Micra was deployed. The cup was pocket shaped with a large mouth and small tail, and an opening diameter of approximately 25 mm . Therefore, the head port was adjusted to allow delivery of the Micra to the low septum, and electrical testing was performed, which showed a pacing threshold of 2.0 V/0.24 ms, impedance of 500 Ω, and RV amplitude of 3.5 mV. With unsatisfactory electrical parameters, we repositioned the Micra to the mid-septum, and reimaging showed that the contrast medium was extravasated into the pericardial space .
Her blood pressure remained at 100–110/60–70 mmHg. The Micra was again deployed to the high septum of the right ventricle, ensuring good contact between the delivery system cup and the endocardium of the LAO and RAO . The pacing threshold was 0.88 V/0.24 ms, the impedance was 1080 Ω, and the R-wave amplitude was 7 mV. Approximately 20 min after Micra deployment, the patient’s blood pressure began to fall to 74/59 mmHg, and fluoroscopy showed that her cardiac shadow beat had weakened. With regard to the suspected pericardial tamponade, pericardiocentesis was performed, and approximately 100 ml of bloody pericardial effusion was drained, after which the patient’s vital signs remained stable. Postoperative echocardiography showed a small amount of pericardial effusion and a tear in the endocardium, resulting in dissection . Three days after implantation, cardiac CTA was performed, which showed a cavity-like structure protruding from the surface of the heart in the right ventricle . No increase in pericardial effusion volume was noted on continuous echocardiographic monitoring after surgery, and she was discharged 5 days after surgery.
One month after implantation, the patient’s echocardiogram still showed a moderate amount of pericardial effusion of approximately 400 ml, but puncture drainage was not performed. At the 2-month follow-up after surgery, echocardiography showed a large amount of pericardial effusion of approximately 800 ml. The patient was readmitted for pericardiocentesis and drainage. The patient was followed up with monthly echocardiograms for the next six months, and no pericardial effusion was found. Micra parameters and function were normal during the follow-up period.