A 35-year-old primigravida, with no significant medical history, presented at 33 weeks gestation because of uncertain presentation of the foetus. Her pregnancy had been asymptomatic. An initial ultrasound reported to show a single foetus in breech position and a complete placenta previa. There were no other signs that made us suspect distorted anatomy. Ultrasound measurements further showed intra-uterine growth restriction (5th percentile) with a normal amniotic fluid index. Doppler examination of the umbilical artery revealed a PI from 1.028 which is within normal range. A primary caesarean section was planned at 38 weeks of gestation.
At 37+6 weeks of gestation, the patient was admitted to the hospital with spontaneous rupture of membranes and loss of amniotic fluid. A caesarean section was performed. During the caesarean section a Pfannenstiel incision was made and the bladder and uterovesical peritoneum were deflected inferiorly. What appeared to be the lower segment was then incised but instead of entering the uterine cavity a second apparent uterine surface was encountered. Although the foetal breech could be felt within the underlying uterine surface, the anatomy was unclear. Therefore, a second transverse incision was made revealing a third uterine surface. After a third transverse incision was made, the uterine cavity was entered, presenting the breech. A live male infant, birth weight 2570 grams (5-10 percentile), was born. Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min post partum respectively. Arterial pH was 7.36. After closure of the uterine incision we carefully examined the abdominal organs. The incision appeared to be corporal and on the posterior side of the uterus , indicating that the uterus had been retroverted. The fundus was lying in the pouch of Douglas. Hence, the presentation was cephalic (by definition) but had appeared to be breech (by ultrasound).
The placenta previa was misdiagnosed due to distorted anatomy and was really situated in the fundus. No cause for the retroversion was detected. The initial incisions had been made through the anterior and posterior walls of the vault of the vagina, which was stretched by the growing incarcerated uterus. At that point the uterus was almost completely detached . The baby was born through the displaced posterior surface incision of the uterine fundus and the vaginal incisions. The uterine blood vessels were intact. After consulting a colleague, it was decided to close both vaginal incisions and restore normal anatomy. The bladder was situated in the normal anatomical position. Due to the uncommon corporal incision, a conservative healing period was chosen and the patient was advised not to become pregnant within the first year. We advised a primary caesarean section at 37 weeks of gestation if a new pregnancy occurred. Postoperative recovery was complicated by an ileus which was treated by nil per os and intravenous hydration. Mother and child left the hospital 11 days after the operation in good condition.
One year later, during her second pregnancy, ultrasound examination again revealed a uterus in retroversion at 18 weeks of gestation. We considered the possibility of turning the uterus to an upward position . However, attempts to correct uterus position later than the 15th week are more likely to fail and may cause complications such as preterm labour . Furthermore, it is recommended by some authors only to intervene if the patient presents with severe symptoms [,]. Although we strongly advised the patient to consult us in the early first trimester, we did not see her before 18 weeks of pregnancy and the decision was made not to turn the uterus in an upward position.
The pregnancy progressed asymptomatic and at 37+5 weeks of gestation a repeat transvaginal caesarean section was preformed in the same manner as described above. A girl weighing 2810 grams (10-25 percentile) was born with apgar scores 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 min post partum respectively. The postoperative course was uncomplicated and mother and child left the hospital seven days postoperative. Six weeks after delivery, ultrasound examination showed the uterus in anteverted flexion.