A 37-year-old gentleman had been incidentally found to have a diffuse multifocal cystic lesions of the pancreas at a former hospital, it had been pointed out by a screening computed tomography (CT) scan to investigate a nonspecific abdominal pain . After he was transferred to our hospital, a baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed multifocal cystic lesions confined to the uncinate process, body, and tail of pancreas associated with no high-risk stigmata neither a worrisome feature . A multifocal Branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (BD-IPMN) was considered as a main differential diagnosis. Then, a routine follow-up has been provided to put the lesions under surveillance. Two years after the diagnosis he had an Endoscopic ultrasound sonography (EUS) which showed a 2.2 cm cystic lesion in the body-tail of pancreas associated with septation and Intramural nodules with no clear communication with the main pancreatic duct (PD) . PD size is normal in body and tail. During same a sample was obtained for cytology. It yielded a positive result for cellular atypia and mucin. He had no familial history, past medical history. Physical examination was unremarkable. The laboratory data was almost normal including pancreatic tumor markers.
BD-IPMN suspicious for malignant transformation was considered as a provisional diagnosed. According to pancreatic cystic lesions guidelines . Surgical resection might be recommended because of his age, the cytology result and the presence of intramural nodules. Therefore, we decided to propose surgical resection and written informed consent was obtained. We decided that it is reasonable to perform a segmental resection to remove the IPMNs with the highest oncological risk at body-tail of pancreas and perform surveillance of the remaining lesions at the uncinate process.
Intraoperatively, we found multifocal cystic lesions at the tail-body of pancreas without invasion to the adjacent tissues. Due to the possibility of transformed IPMN, we performed a distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and a systemic lymph node dissection. The postoperative course was uneventful.
In pathological examinations, sectioning of the pancreas revealed multicystic lesions. The Cysts are filled with small white rounded firm egg-like material, the largest cyst measures 3.0 × 3.0 × 1.4 cm. The spleen was unremarkable .
Histologically, the hematoxylin and eosin sections showed lobules of pancreatic parenchyma with multiloculated variably sized thin-walled cysts, some contain dense inspissated eosinophilic laminated concretions. They are lined by a single layer of cuboidal acinar epithelium with apical eosinophilic zymogen granules with uniform basally located nuclei . By Immunohistochemistry, the acinar cells showed strong cytoplasmic and membranous reactivity for CK8/18, trypsin, and chymotrypsin which confirmed the acinar cell differentiation .
The final diagnosis was pancreatic acinar cystadenoma. Nine months have passed after resection, and no tumor recurrence and symptoms were observed.