We present a 36-year-old Black female gravida 4, para 3 (G4P3; three previous pregnancies, three term deliveries, with two live children; she lost her first son at the age of 2 years), with a 2-month history of irregular menses. She was referred to our facility with complaints of sudden severe abdominal pain associated with vomiting and generalized body weakness. There was also fatigue, headache, and spotted vaginal bleeding.
She has a regular cycle of 28 days, bleeds for 3 days, and uses two to three moderately soaked pads per day, but noticed a change in her last two previous menstrual flows. In August her flow lasted 1 day, and she used one pad, while in September it was 2 days, and she also used one pad. There was no history of dysmenorrhea, metrorrhagia, or dyspareunia. There was no prior history of ectopic pregnancy. She had never been treated for sexually transmitted diseases or pelvic inflammatory disease, and her mode of contraception is calendar. She had never been operated on and never been diagnosed with a chronic disease. She did not smoke but consumed alcohol occasionally.
Physical examination on admission revealed a conscious patient in an antalgic position. She was in shock [blood pressure (BP) 80/50 mmhg and pulse 138 beats per minute] and pale. The abdomen was distended, and there were signs of peritoneal irritation. A vaginal speculum exam revealed spotted bleeding from the cervical os, and a diagnosis of acute abdomen was made. Two large bore intravenous cannulae were placed, and blood was collected for a pregnancy test, hemoglobin, grouping, and cross-match. The patient was then resuscitated with crystalloids. The serum pregnancy test was positive, and hemoglobin was 7.7 g/dL. The working diagnosis of ruptured ectopic pregnancy was then made.
Ultrasonography was unavailable, and the possibility of referring her for one was not feasible, considering the emergency involved. The theater and anesthetic team were called immediately for an emergency laparotomy.
Intraoperatively, there was a massive hemoperitoneum. A well-formed female fetus weighing 500 g was found floating with a placenta (800 g) attached close to the left fundal tubo-uterine junction (deep to the serosa) with no sign of life, nor maceration. The site of rupture was at the upper left interstitial portion of the tube . A betadine–saline solution injected through the cervical os was seen dropping through the infundibulum of the tubes (both sides) but showed no communication with the ruptured site. The tubes were therefore of normal anatomy and patent with no signs of inflammation. The ruptured site was closed, the abdomen cleaned, and lavage done with lukewarm normal saline and closed. Blood loss was estimated at about 2.5 L.
The patient received 2 units of whole blood and an additional 2 L of crystalloids intraoperatively.
The operation was aseptic. However, she was placed on intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis, analgesics, fluids, and nil by mouth for 24 hours. She also received a third and fourth unit of whole blood on postoperative days 1 and 2, respectively. The progress in the ward was favorable, as all the symptoms subsided, and vitals stabilized on postoperative day 1. She ambulated on the second day and was relayed on oral antibiotics and analgesic. Control hemoglobin on day 3 was 8.7 g/dL, and she was placed on oral iron and folic acid at therapeutic doses.
She was then discharged on postoperative day 7 after education on menstrual health and counseling on family planning and the risk on subsequent pregnancies with a follow-up in 6 weeks.