A 46-year-old black female presented with clinical lesions consistent with DLE. She denied systemic symptoms of arthralgia, arthropathy, myalgia, fatigue, Raynaud's phenomenon and gastrointestinal complaints. Lesions were present on the head, trunk, and upper extremities, and presented as reddish-purple, atrophic plaques. Laboratory data showed a normal complete blood count (CBC) with differential analysis, and a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Antiphospholipid antibody testing was negative ; serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and liver function tests, as well as urinalysis and chest radiographs were within normal limits. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer was normal. Specific ANA screening yielded negative results for anti-Smith, anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA), and anti-histone antibodies. Tests for anti ribonuclease-sensitive antigen (RNAse), extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), small nuclear antigen) (sn), ribonucleoproteins (RNP), and U1, and U2 complexes were negative, as was testing for anti-SS-A (anti-Ro) and anti-SS-B (anti-La). Levels of Complement C3 and C4 were normal. Biopsies of the lesions were performed, with subsequent Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining, multicolor direct immunofluorescence (DIF) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies.
H & E: Routine H&E staining was performed, and examination of the tissue sections revealed mild epidermal atrophy with focal follicular plugging. A mild interface infiltrate of lymphocytes and histiocytes was noted. Within the dermis, a superficial and deep, perivascular and periadnexal infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells was observed. Neutrophils and eosinophils were rare. Increased dermal mucin was not found; disorganization of the dermis was observed on H & E .
DIF: Skin cryosections were prepared, and incubated with multiple fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated secondary antibodies. The secondary antibodies were of rabbit origin and included: a) anti-human IgG (γ chain), b) anti-human IgA (α chains), c) anti-human IgM (μ-chain), d) anti-human fibrinogen, and e) anti-human albumin (all used at 1:20 to 1:60 dilutions and obtained from Dako (Carpinteria, California, USA). We also utilized secondary antibodies of goat origin, including: a) anti-human IgE antiserum (Vector Laboratories, Bridgeport, New Jersey, USA) and b) anti-human C1q (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, Alabama, USA). Finally, monoclonal anti-human IgG4 FITC conjugated antibody was used to test for possible intercellular staining between keratinocytes (Sigma-Aldrich Saint Louis, Missouri, USA). The slides were then counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Dapi) (Pierce, Rockford, Illinois, USA) or TO-PRO®-3/DNA combined with (ANA Hoesch H1399. We also counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, California USA). Slides were then washed, coverslipped, and dried overnight at 4°C. In Figures and , we demonstrate some of the most prominent H&E and DIF patterns observed, as well as the improvement of the quality and power of DIF staining by the use of simultaneous multicolor fluorescence and counterstaining of cell nuclei. The DIF results were classified as follows: (0, negative; +, weak positive; ++ and +++, positive; and ++++, maximum positivity). We found 1) deposits of IgG, in a granular pattern at the basement membrane zone (BMZ) of the dermal/epidermal junction, as well as at the BMZ of the sebaceous glands (+++); 2) deposits of IgA surrounding the superficial dermal blood vessels (++); 3) deposits of IgM in a granular pattern at the BMZ of the skin (+++); 4) deposits of complement C3 in a granular pattern at the BMZ of the skin and of the sebaceous glands (+++) and 5) deposits of fibrinogen, in a granular pattern at the BMZ of the skin (++).
IHC: To study correlation with our vimentin DIF data, we performed IHC utilizing a Dako dual endogenous peroxidase blockage system, with the addition of an Envision dual link. We utilized Dako technical instructions for staining. We applied 3, 3 diaminobenzidine as an IHC chromogen, and counterstained with hematoxylin. highlights our results, including the compartmentalization of vimentin around several skin appendices where the DIF autoreactivty was detected. The degree of compartmentalization of vimentin by IHC parallels the deposition of immunoglobulins, complement and other immunosurfactants (such as fibrinogen) by DIF.