A 29-year-old woman presented with chest pain that had started 2 months previously. Her right chest pain radiating to the back had suddenly worsened together with the appearance of dyspnea, and she was immediately admitted to our department. On admission, her body temperature, blood pressure, and pulse rate were within the normal range, but her oxygen saturation was 93% at room temperature, and her chest pain continued to worsen. A chest X-ray displayed widening of the upper mediastinum . Chest computed tomography (CT) displayed a 9 × 8 × 5 cm heterogeneous cystic mass with an enhanced wall and fat components in the anterior mediastinum . Right pleural effusion and fluid collection near the great vessels, including the ascending aorta and the superior vena cava, were also displayed, suggesting tumor rupture into the right thoracic cavity and mediastinum. Her laboratory data demonstrated neutrophilic leukocytosis (white blood cells 10,300/μL; neutrophils: 79.7%) and an increased C-reactive protein level (19.7 mg/dL). The levels of serum α-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody were within the normal range. The patient was diagnosed as having a mediastinal teratoma that had ruptured into the mediastinum and right pleural cavity. Mediastinitis and right pleurisy were also suspected, and therefore an emergency operation was performed just after her admission.
The patient underwent median sternotomy and tumor resection with combined partial resection of the pericardium and right upper lobe. Intraoperative findings demonstrated the ruptured wall of the tumor with exposure of its white contents, which appeared similar to skin and fat, and necrotic tissue in the anterior mediastinum. The tumor was adhered to the right upper lobe, the ascending aorta, and pericardium . Pleural effusion with sebaceous fluid was observed in the right pleural cavity. Owing to the severe adhesion of the tumor caused by inflammation in the surrounding tissues, a small portion of the tumor could not be removed, and hence complete resection with a sufficient surgical margin was not achieved. After tumor resection, the mediastinum and the right thoracic cavity were irrigated with a sufficient amount of warm saline to prevent postoperative infection. The chest drainage tubes were placed in the bilateral thoracic cavity and the posterior aspect of the sternum.
Macroscopically, the tumor consisted of an 85 × 55 mm solid mass and a 90 × 50 mm cystic mass with severe adhesion to the resected portion of the lung, which included skin and lipid tissue . Microscopically, the inner cavity of the cystic tumor was lined mainly with skin, which was composed of keratinized squamous epithelium, sebaceous and sweat glands, hair follicles, and smooth muscle. The tumor also contained adipose tissue and bronchial elements. The wall of the tumor demonstrated necrotizing inflammation, with the infiltration of many neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages. As neither an immature component nor malignant transformation was observed, the tumor was concluded to be a mature teratoma .
The patient had been treated with antibiotics for 7 days from immediately after admission, and the result of the pleural effusion culture was negative. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 11.