In March 2010, a middle-aged (48-year-old) man was admitted to Dongyang Hospital Affiliated to Wenzhou Medical University complaining of soreness and swelling on his waist and back.
The patient’s symptoms of persistent pain had started one year prior. However, two weeks before admission, it had worsened to the point that he could not lie down on his back at night. Oral analgesics did not control his pain, which he reported suffering from in frequent bouts.
In May 2017, the patient was admitted to the Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University’s Medical College. Urinary system and bladder ultrasounds showed the presence of a parenchymal space-occupying tumour of the left kidney. Chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) scans suggested that the tumour had triggered implantation metastasis at multiple sites, including parapyloric nodules, lumbar areas, multiple nodules in both lungs, left pleura, left breast, and the abdominal wall. Realising the seriousness of his condition, the patient immediately visited the Cancer Hospital affiliated with Fudan University, where he was advised to undergo a left nephrectomy, followed by adjuvant therapy. However, the patient was resistant and refused the suggested treatment. Instead, he consumed traditional Chinese medicine orally at home. Unfortunately, by March 2018, the tumours had progressed and the mass on his back had grown more.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol. There was no relevant family history.
The patient’s vital signs were stable in March 2018. However, the clinical examination showed tenderness in the lower back and localised skin swelling.
Blood tests showed increased leukocytes and tumour markers. The neutrophil, hemoglobin, platelets and biochemistry was normal.
Lumbar CT scans, taken on March 5, 2018, showed that the patient’s lumbar spinous process level space had been blocked by the deterioration and absorption of lumbar 2 appendages and the invasion of the spinal canal .
Considering the medical history and follow-up treatments in this case, a puncture biopsy of the mass was recommended. Thus, on March 17, 2018, a puncture biopsy was performed on the back tumour, with guided colour Doppler ultrasound. The observed malignant tumours were consistent with ccRCC according to their morphology and histology; CK+, CK7−, CK20−, cam5.2+, CD10+, EMA+, 34beta E12−, Ki-67+ (10%) .