A 31-year-old gravida 2 with twins, para 1, was referred to the University Medical Centre Ljubljana because of spontaneous membrane rupture at 32 weeks gestation after an uncomplicated pregnancy. After admission US revealed polyhydramnion and severe NIHF in geminus A. Due to life threatening condition also for healthy geminus B an urgent caesarean section was performed. Geminus A was a boy with Apgar score 3/5 and a birth weight of 3,200 g. He was intubated immediately after birth because of severe NIHF and respiratory distress .
An initial arterial blood gas analysis revealed a respiratory acidosis with a pH of 6.91, PaCO2 19 kPa and HCO3 of 13 mmol/l. US revealed anterior mediastinal cystic mass extending into the right and left hemithorax with marked pleural effusion bilaterally. Chest X-ray confirmed a homogenous mass in the anterior right hemithorax with shifting of the mediastinum to the left . Ductus arteriosus with left to right shunt was still patent. Because of pleural effusion pleural puncture was performed, further complicated by pneumothorax. Despite ventilation with high frequent oscillations respiratory acidosis still persisted with PCO2 between 10 and 15 kPa. Due to low blood pressure (mean arterial pressure 4 kPa) and very poor urine output he needed vasoactive support with dopamin and dobutamine. US of the heart showed signs of pulmonary artery hypertension. The diagnosis based on radiological finding was congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, which needed surgical excision on day seven of life.
Right anterolateral thoracotomy was performed with removal of soft policystic encapsulated tumour without invading into the surrounding structures. Tumour was not connected to respiratory system and lungs were macroscopically normally developed. The surgical specimen measured 55 × 50 mm, weighed 54 g, and was extensively sampled.
Microscopically the tumour was predominantly, in 70%, composed by immature tissue derived from different germinal layers. Cystic areas were alternating with solid tissue. The majority of the tumour was characterized by immature neuroectodermal tissue. The elements of mature glial tissue, ganglion cells and structures of choroid plexus were also randomly interspersed. Mesodermal tissue was represented by mature muscle, bone, adipose tissue, and mature and immature cartilage components with sparsely cellular mesenchymal tissue. The mature components of the tumour were also represented by the microfoci of hepatic differentiation, and pancreatic tissue, as well as sparse elements in the form of skin appendages (,,). Serum human chorionic gonadotropin and alpha protein were within normal limits, and no further oncologic treatment was necessary.
Hydropic oedemas subsided three days after operation. Urine output and hemodynamic parameters were stable and we discontinued the vasoactive drug support one week after operation. Postoperative course was complicated by a spontaneous pneumothorax on the right side and a sepsis caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis. Fifteen days after operation, the newborn still needed support with synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation. He had multiple spontaneous episodes of oxygen desaturation. We performed diagnostic rigid bronchoscopy with which we excluded changes in the bronchial system. US of the heart showed signs of pulmonary artery hypertension, persistent ductus arteriosus and patent foramen ovale. We started treatment with nitric oxide and selective inhibitor of phosphodiesterase type 5, with no improvement. Chest X-ray revealed hyperinflation of the left lung and high position of the diaphragm on the right side .
With electromyography we confirmed phrenic nerve palsy and right diaphragm paralysis. At 50 days of age, a second surgery was performed and the right diaphragm was plicated. He was extubated successfully 1 week after plication. After extubation the cyanosis and tachipnoea were periodically observed with paradoxical movement of the chest. Scintigraphy of the lungs revealed smaller right lung without regional perfusion or ventilation defects.
At 3 months of age, he was referred to the intensive care unit with respiratory distress, intubated and mechanically ventilated. Chest X-ray revealed pneumonia and right lung atelectasis. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the lungs again revealed a high position of the right diaphragm and a consolidation of the right and left lung. Due to multiple failures of weaning from mechanical ventilation and extubation one month after admission the third operation was performed with right diaphragm plication and lung biopsy. Biopsy of the right lower lung lobe revealed acute interstitial pneumonia and alveolitis. After plication and antibiotic treatment, there was clear but slow improvement. He was extubated one month after plication and was well for one month.
At 6 months of age, he was again referred to the intensive care unit with dyspnoea, tachipnoea, cyanosis and severe respiratory acidosis with PaCO2 10 kPa. Bronchoscopy revealed narrowing of the left inferior bronchus. US of the heart showed structurally normal heart with the appropriate function of both ventricles. For further assessment of the cardiovascular function heart catheterization was performed, revealing an abnormal course of both pulmonary arteries with signs of pulmonary artery hypertension. Right middle lung lobe was practically without normal right pulmonary vascularisation. With no improvement in respiratory condition one month after treatment we decided for a tracheostomy. He was breathing with nasal continuous positive airway pressure ventilation (CPAP) on Legendair ventilator (Covidien AG™) with the addition of oxygen FiO2 0.25–0.35) after the procedure. We disconnected him from the ventilator in order to evoke spontaneous breathing several times per day.
At 11 months of age, paediatric neurologist made a neurologic assessment. He had severe generalized muscle hypotonia, a convergent strabismus and normal proprioceptive reflexes. Babinski sign was still present. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed atrophic frontal brain changes. We excluded metabolic diseases.
At 1 year of age, the boy was discharged from hospital in a stable clinical respiratory condition with tracheostomy and Legendair ventilator. At the age of 2 years, bronchoscopy revealed massive granulation in trachea just below the tracheostoma. After removal of the granulation the tracheostoma was closed and he is breathing on his own.