A 40-year-old lady presented to the emergency room (ER) with diffuse abdominal pain. She was medically and surgically free until 8 days before her presentation when she tested positive for pregnancy in a primary health care center and was reassured and sent back home. Four days after that her pain persisted with the new development of vaginal spotting, which was subsequently diagnosed with an incomplete abortion, for which a D&C was performed in a community hospital. After four days in the hospital, she was discharged on antibiotics (metronidazole and ceftriaxone) and analgesia.
The day following discharge the patient’s symptoms persisted and became much more intense with new nausea, non-bilious vomiting (10 times a day), and abdominal distention, for which she sought medical attention at our center. A physical exam revealed abdominal distention, rigidity, diffuse tenderness, and guarding. The pain was severe and stabbing in nature, mainly in the paraumbilical region.
Uterine perforation was suspected; therefore, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was done. The uterus appeared slightly bulky, without gross mural defects seen to suggest perforation, though this could not be excluded with confidence at the time. In addition, the CT showed a rim-enhancing collection just above the uterus and multiple other collections throughout the remaining abdomen and pelvis, mainly in the bilateral paracolic gutters and the right perihepatic region with air-fluid level, associated with extensive pneumoperitoneum as shown in .
These findings raised concerns for small bowel perforation in the pelvis that was presumed to have happened, in conjunction with a subtle or partially sealed uterine perforation, during the D&C procedure. Medical attention was brought to this clinical scenario, despite there being no obvious mural defects detected on the CT scan images in pelvic small bowel loops with good distention. The treating surgeon decided to conservatively treat the patient, and the patient was responding well to the management plan (nothing by mouth “NPO”, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and prophylactic proton-pump inhibitor “PPI”), and all her vital signs were unremarkable except for mild tachycardia. The interventional radiology team also inserted a pigtail catheter into the walled-off pelvic collection to drain 1.2 L of purulent fluid.
A follow-up CT scan with oral contrast was performed the next day, revealing a 0.5 cm mural defect in the anterior wall of the first part of the duodenum, with extravasation of oral contrast into the right perihepatic region as shown in Figure. 2 A and B. This was overlooked on the initial CT scan probably due to the small size of the defect, and more importantly the unintentional, clinically guided false preoccupation with the diagnosis of pelvic small bowel perforation. This was explained by the treating team as a perforated stress ulcer and was subsequently managed on the following day with surgical exploration and repair with an omental patch. No other areas of bowel perforation were detected during surgery, particularly in pelvic small bowel loops.
Paralleling the aforementioned clinical events, the patient experienced mild shortness of breath since the day of admission, which was initially interpreted by the critical care team to be secondary to abdominal distension, especially since this has improved after pigtail insertion to the pelvic collection. A rapid COVID-19 antigen test was done returning as negative. A reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test via a nasal swab was performed at the same time, but it returned positive on the 1st-day post-surgery. The respiratory team was consulted, and the patient was put on an appropriate management plan.
It was not until the 3rd-day post-surgery that the patient’s respiratory condition started to deteriorate, for which a more vigorous treatment plan was applied. The patient improved subsequently, though with residual mild tachycardia and tachypnea. However, this improvement did not last long since the patient deteriorated again on the 6th-day post-surgery when she developed cardiac arrest and died.