A 73-year-old woman who had suffered from RA for 15 years was treated with oral MTX 6 mg/week for over 10 years; the cumulative dose of MTX at the time of presentation to our hospital was approximately 3,000 mg. She had no relevant family history and psycho-social history. She complained of lower abdominal pain, abdominal distention, and nausea after eating in June 2016. She presented to the primary care physician in August 2016 with complaints of exacerbation of lower abdominal pain. Abdominal plain computed tomography (CT), esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and ileocolonoscopy including terminal ileum showed no abnormalities including ulcers. The symptom improved on fasting; however, it recurred when she resumed eating. Therefore, she was referred to our hospital for further investigation. Her general physical condition was good, and no abnormal findings were observed. Her height and body weight were 155.0 cm and 53.2 kg, respectively, and she experienced no body weight loss. Her axillary temperature was 35.9° C, and her blood pressure was 122/72 mmHg. There were no palpable swollen lymph nodes on physical examination. Her abdominal findings were unremarkable, with no hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count, 4.3 × 103/µL with normal differential count; hemoglobin, 13.0 g/dL; platelet count, 16.4 × 104/L; total protein, 6.9 g/dL; albumin, 4.2 g/dL; lactate dehydrogenase, 173 U/L; C-reactive protein, 0.1 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 60 IU/L; alanine transaminase, 23 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 207 IU/L; carcinoembryonic antigen, 2.6 ng/mL; CA19-9, 1.0 ng/mL; IgA, 365.3 mg/dL; IgG, 1382.7 mg/dL; IgM, 48.4 mg/dL; antinuclear antibody, negative; rheumatoid factor, 14 U/mL; MMP-3, 17.0 ng/mL; PR3-ANCA, < 1.0 U/mL; MPO-ANCA, < 1.0 U/mL; sIL-2R, 445 U/mL; and T-SPOT, negative. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed slight thickening of the small intestinal wall . First, we performed a patency capsule examination to investigate the feasibility of a small bowel capsule endoscope. The patency capsule was not excreted, and it was confirmed by abdominal X-ray . Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a contrast stagnation of the patency capsule in the proximal part of the ileum and mild dilatation of the proximal part . A barium small bowel enema showed circumferential stenosis at the same site . First, a transanal balloon endoscopy showed no abnormal findings, such as ulcerative lesions or stenosis, in the ileum. We injected carbon ink into the deepest part of the ileum. Subsequently, we performed an oral balloon endoscopy. We inserted the endoscope deep into the jejunum, and several shallow ulcerative lesions were noted ; however, we could not identify the inked part or stenotic lesions. A biopsy of the ulcerative lesion showed densely proliferating lymphocytes in the lamina propria and a marked reduction in gland ducts . Immunohistochemistry for CD20 showed positive results with atypical lymphocytes. Based on these findings, we diagnosed B-cell LPD. Based on a history of oral administration of MTX, MTX-LPD was suspected. We discontinued MTX and followed up with the patient for two weeks. Despite the MTX withdrawal, her symptoms did not improve, and, therefore, surgery was required. During operation, an endoscope was inserted through the inked part of the small intestine to the oral and anal sides. We observed a semi-circumscribed ulcer and mild stenosis at 3 cm of the anal side from the inked part. However, we observed no other ulcerative lesions in the jejunum and ileum. After intraoperative endoscopic observation, we performed a partial resection of the small intestine, including the same site, with no adverse event. Histopathology of the resected specimen revealed atypical lymphoid cells immunostaining negative for CD3 and positive for CD20, consistent with follicular lymphoma . The test result for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNA (EBER) was negative in the histological sample of surgical specimens. After the surgery, we found no evidence of lymphoma on fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography and bone marrow puncture. Therefore, we finally diagnosed follicular lymphoma localized in the small intestine with MTX-LPD. After the operation, her symptom improved, and we followed up without treatment. We have been following up with the patient on an outpatient basis for four years; no recurrence or complications have been reported.