44 years old gentleman presented in the cardiothoracic clinic with the unintentional weight loss of 7–8 kg for 1.5 years and chest discomfort for 6 months. On examination, he was a thin lean man with no obvious chest mass. Chest x-ray that showed a near complete opacification of right chest. A CT scan of chest was obtained which showed a 30 × 20 × 20 cm heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue mass involving the entire right hemithorax . The mass was extending into the right hilum predominantly encasing the intermediate bronchus. There was evidence of completely collapsed right lung at the periphery. It was seen completely sheathing the right pulmonary artery and its branches and was observed to be inseparable from superior vena cava, right atrium, left atrium and superior and inferior pulmonary veins. Additionally, it enveloped 50 % of inferior vena cava and esophagus too. Posteriorly it involved the prevertebral fascia and 25 % of descending aorta. A CT guided biopsy was performed that showed spindle cell lesion with features favoring solitary fibrous tumor. This initial diagnosis was followed by a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan with the intent to see the spread of the disease, which indicated a localized disease.
However, owing to its rarity and rather unclear management guidelines, this case needed a multidisciplinary approach. Subsequently, oncology, onco-surgery and radiology experts were involved. With a general consensus, the patient was planned for a complete resection of the mass.
An anterolateral thoracotomy was performed and intra-operatively, a giant highly vascular tumor was identified that occupied the entire right hemithorax compressing the right lung completely towards the periphery . The tumor replaced by half of the right upper lobe of the lung. Therefore, a complete right upper lobectomy and complete removal of mass was achieved, that resulted in complete expansion of the middle and lower lobe. Postoperatively, the patient remained stable and was discharged on the fifth post-operative day.
The mass was sent for histopathology, which showed a neoplastic lesion composed of spindle to ovoid cells intermixed with ropy collagen bundles and thick walled staghorn vessels. These neoplastic spindle shaped cells were arranged in short intersecting fascicles. Sections examined from lung parenchyma showed dilated alveolar spaces with interstitial inflammation. Immunohistochemical stains were also performed resulting in CD34 and STAT-6 to be diffusely positive.