A 57-year-old woman with a known history of asthma and rheumatoid arthritis was admitted to the hospital after presenting with a headache and dyspnea for 1 week. The neurological examination showed vague speech, mild dysarthria, and limb muscle strength level 3. Her brain magnetic resonance imaging showed multifocal acute-to-subacute ischemic lesions widely distributed over the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and thalamus and parenchymal hemorrhage . The initial laboratory findings were as follows: the white blood cell count was 20.43 × 109 (normal range, 4–10 × 109/L), with increased peripheral eosinophilia at 12.04 × 109/L (normal range, 0.05–0.50 × 109/L). Other inflammatory parameters showed an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 79 mm/h (normal range, 0–20 mm/h) and a C-reactive protein level of 95.4 mg/L (normal range, 0–8 mg/L). The patient was also positive for the anti-antineutrophilic perinuclear antibody (pANCA). Other specific markers related to autoimmune diseases, such as anti-dsDNA and anti-Sm, rheumatoid factorare were all negative. Her travel history was unremarkable. Her hospital course was further complicated by severe shortness of breath and elevated cardiac enzyme levels (cTnI: 14.10 ng/mL, CK-MB: 41.9 U/L, NT-proBNP: 28,700 ng/mL), which prompted an extensive cardiac workup. The electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversions in leads II, III, and aVF . Two-dimensional echocardiography showed that the systolic function of the heart was within the normal range, which was found to be 59% by the Simpson method. A thickened left ventricular (LV) endocardium with markedly solid echo could be seen, and a diagnosis of LV thrombus formation was suggested. Severe mitral regurgitation and moderate tricuspid regurgitation were noted. A small amount of pericardial fluid was also present (4.6 mm). We further excluded other causes of eosinophilia, such as malignancy, autoimmune diseases, and drug reactions. The parasites were negative in stool culture. In the peripheral blood smear, most of the granulocytes were normal, with no clonal proliferation or primordial cells. Further diagnostic clarification was required. The cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) confirmed the presence of a thrombus measuring approximately 1.5 × 1.7 cm in the apex of the LV, which, we believed, was the source of cerebral embolization. Gadolinium-enhanced CMR showed striated delayed enhancement between the apex and the papillary muscles restricted to the endocardium, with decreased diastolic function , which was consistent with extensive endomyocardial fibrosis. Endocardial biopsy was recommended as the diagnostic gold standard to verify the histopathologic features. However, considering the risk of this invasive operation, the patient refused.
Based on the diagnosis of Loeffler endocarditis with LV thrombus, an intravenous bolus of a corticosteroid [prednisolone 1 mg/(kg·day)] was initiated, followed by 40 mg per day orally, which was prescribed as a definitive line of therapy. The blood tests showed significantly decreased eosinophil counts and percentages after another 2 days, along with a normalized cTnT level. The patient was treated with rivaroxaban to dissolve the thrombus, but the thrombus did not shrink after 3 months. Then, warfarin was added as antithrombotic therapy until follow-up. She was doing relatively well, and no adverse events occurred during a 10-month follow-up period. The echocardiography showed apical hypertrophy, and a suspected thrombus still existed . Therefore, CMR was repeated, which revealed the complete resolution of the apical thrombus and apical hypertrophy. However, no clear regression of endomyocardial fibrosis was observed. The timeline table is shown in Table .