A 33-year-old primigravida woman, a body mass index of 31 kg/cm2, was admitted to the emergency department at36 + 6 weeks gestation with abdominal pain that had lasted for 6 h. She did not have a history of trauma. Her antenatal period had been uneventful except for one episode of hypertension (141/84 mmHg). Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 102/62 mm/Hg, a heart rate of 80 beats/min and a temperature of 36.6 °C. Blood tests showed hemoglobin of 95 g/L,Hematocrit of 28.9%, platelet count of 111 × 109/L(reference range, 110-300 × 109/L), reticulocyte count of 0.0525 × 1012/L(reference range, 0.014-0.09 × 1012/L), liver enzymes with an alanine aminotransferase of 281 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase of 392 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 525 U/L, total bilirubin levels of 19 μmol/L(reference range, 3.42-17.1umol/L), and normal alpha fetoprotein. Serological markers of hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus were negative. Ultrasound scan showed that fetal heart beats could not be found and free abdominal fluid was present. There were no images suggesting placental abruption. Ultrasound-guided intra-abdominal puncture revealed active intraperitoneal bleeding.
In less than 3 h of admission, an emergency laparotomy was performed and a dead fetus was delivered by cesarean section. No evidence of placental abruption or active intrauterine bleeding was detected. Exploration of the ovarian tubes and ovaries revealed no bleeding or neoplasm. Two liters of hemoperitoneum was removed from abdominal cavity. Active hemorrhage came from rupture of the right lobe of the liver which appeared fatty liver. Direct hemostasis was not achievable because the liver was edematous and was ruptured during the performance of sutures. Thus perihepatic packing was done by seven large gauze packs and hemostatic sponges were used to compress the bleeding lesions. Throughout the laparotomy, intraoperative bleeding was 2000 mL and the patient received 8 units of RBC and 1200 ml of plasma.
The patient was transferred to the ICU after surgery to continue resuscitation with intravenous fluids and vasoactive support. The following day in ICU, she had high fever and developed the acute kidney injury and severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. She was managed by massive blood transfusion, mechanical ventilation, renal replacement therapy and antibiotic treatment. Intra-abdominal pressure was maintained between 7.5 and 11.3 mmHg (1–1.5 KPa) by abdominal binder.
A second laparotomy was performed on the 6th postoperative day. A large hematoma and rupture of the right liver lobe were visible after removing the gauze packs , which was still bleeding . The patient was treated with argon laser to stop bleeding . Moreover, one drain was left in the abdomen. Postoperatively, ultrasound showed perihepatic and pelvic free fluid that required percutaneous drainage. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed perihepatic effusion with laceration of the right liver lobe and hypo-density of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Decreasing in volume of the perihepatic effusion was observed by subsequent CT scan . After 22 days of recovery in ICU, the patient was transferred to the surgical department where she remained for further 3 weeks with regular post-operative course. She was discharged in normal physical condition after 45 days.