A 52-year-old male presented to our department complaining of ulcerative defects on the internal surface of the hips, accompanied by pain and itching of the scrotum and shaft of the penis, progressing since the age of 47 . He had no medical history before the age of 25, when he started to suffer from plaque psoriasis. At 30 years old, he developed vesicular lesions on the penis, and he was hospitalized for herpes simplex. He was treated with acyclovir 200 mg five times a day, with short-term clinical improvement and a herpes simplex vaccine, which led to a remission of 3 years. Six years ago, he was also successfully treated for psoriasis with methotrexate 100 mg, which however triggered recurrent herpes flare ups every 2 months. He used to open up the vesicles himself, which led to erosions. Due to his very distinct and suggestive skin lesions, the patient was long thought to have pyoderma gangrenosum, which was diagnosed by surgeons and was unsuccessfully treated with prednisone (40 mg/d) and infliximab (5 mg/kg), which was concomitantly added as a steroid-sparing agent with an induction regimen at 0, 2, and 6 weeks followed by a maintenance regimen every 8 weeks.
However, the lesions in the inguinoscrotal folds area had outlines implying that the skin had been cut with a knife. We also noticed that the lesions were found particularly in sites that were readily accessible to the patient’s hands. Furthermore, other patients suggested he had a persistent desire to manually manipulate his ulcers, and during a confidential conversation, he confessed that he had poured boiling water, followed by cold water, over the penis to stop the itching, achieving immediate relief. The patient was examined by a psychiatrist, who diagnosed schizophrenia, and it is important because those suffering schizophrenic behavior can easily conceal their true intentions and motives, answering questions without raising suspicion. Moreover, the patient was a veteran from the Afghanistan war, which had negatively affected his mental health (according to the psychiatrist’s conclusion).
Based on histologic findings of the skin biopsy, which were characteristic for the simplest type of chronic inflammation , and psychiatric opinion, he was diagnosed with pyoderma secondary to dermatitis artefacta, and treated with rifampicin 300 mg twice daily and prednisone 25 mg/d. The corticosteroid dose was then tapered 2 mg once a week, until a dose of 8 mg/d was achieved, followed by a reduction in 2 mg steps every 2 weeks, until discontinuation. He also received an atypical antipsychotic (olanzapine 10 mg/d), psychotherapy, and occlusive dressings with an epithelizing ointment, which prevented him from perpetrating self-inflicting injuries . The patient achieved significant improvement with the 4-week treatment with a complete healing through granulation and scarring of ulcers on the completion of the 24-week treatment .