A male patient in his late 50s was admitted to the emergency room with fatigue and resting dyspnea. He also reported episodes of minor nasal and gingival bleedings that had occurred within the last two weeks.
The patient had been diagnosed with smoldering multiple myeloma type IgA-Kappa 5 years and 6 months ago. Within 20 months after diagnosis bone marrow infiltration had increased from 40 to 75%. Cytogenetic analysis had revealed 17p deletion. Therefore, induction therapy with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone had been started. After two cycles cyclophosphamide had been discontinued due to adverse effects. Therapy was changed to bortezomib, doxorubicin, dexamethasone and lenalidomide resulting in very good partial remission. Two years and six months after the primary diagnosis autologous stem cell transplantation was performed and maintenance therapy with lenalidomide was initiated. After two years progressive disease was diagnosed and salvage therapy with isatuximab, carfilzomib and dexamethasone was started.
Addressing other preexisting conditions, he had received a partial lumbar nephrectomy due to clear cell renal cell carcinoma (tumor classification: tumor under 4 cm T1a; without evidence for any metastases N0 and M0; highly differentiated G1) approximately 4 years prior. Furthermore, he suffered from arterial hypertension and obesity.
Vital parameters were heart rate 82/min, oxygen saturation 99%; respiratory rate 30/min, arterial blood pressure 182/89 mmHg and auricular temperature 36,9 °C.
Urine sediment analysis showed five erythrocytes per high power field (HPF), numerous granulated casts and tubular epithelia. As urinary dip test for hemoglobin was highly positive and only few erythrocytes were present in sediment analysis, we hypothesized this being due to hemoglobinuria. Furthermore, the urine sediment was suggestive of acute tubular necrosis. Urine protein analysis, however, showed nephrotic range glomerular proteinuria .
Blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis and hyperkalemia. Serum creatinine was 11,64 mg/dl in contrast to laboratory tests two weeks prior to hospitalization which showed creatinine levels of 0,96 mg/dl corresponding to normal estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).
Elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), decreased hemoglobin (decline from 13,9 to 7,0 g/dl within two weeks), undetectable haptoglobin and the presence of schistocytes in the performed blood smear were highly indicative of intravascular anemia. Thrombocytes were not measurable initially indicating massive thrombocytopenia . Indirect Coombs test showed positive results without antibody specificity probably due to recent treatment with isatuximab. After treatment of patient blood with dithiothretiol, an inhibitor of isatuximab erythrocyte binding, Coombs testing was negative indicating non-immunohemolytic hemolysis. These findings combined with severe acute kidney injury, markedly elevated blood pressure and unspecific fatigue raised strong suspicion for the presence of thrombotic microangiopathy.
PLASMIC score, which incorporates platelet count, serum creatinine, the presence of hemolysis, history of cancer or organ transplantation, mean corpuscular volume, and international normalized ratio (INR), for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura was 4 indicating low risk for TTP. ADAMTS-13 analysis was promptly initiated and available after one week. Antibodies against ADAMTS-13 were not detected and ADAMTS-13 activity was within normal range in enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) thus excluding TTP as a differential diagnosis. Complement analysis showed no abnormal values .
A gastrointestinal PCR-Panel did not reveal potential Shiga toxin producing enteropathogenetic DNA.
Exhibiting clear signs of thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, the two hallmarks of thrombotic microangiopathy, imminent evaluation of differential diagnosis is crucial as treatments differ and immediate initiation of treatment is essential to enhance outcomes and prevent irreversible organ damage or death.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is characterized by decreased ADAMTS-13 activity or autoantibodies targeting ADAMTS-13. Laboratory workup regarding its activity is usually available after several days and cannot be used for quick assessment. TTP probability has to be established rapidly as mortality in untreated cases can be up to 90%. Bendapudi et al. have published a scoring system called PLASMIC-Score containing seven readily available items derived from patient history or routine laboratory workup for rapid assessment of TTP probability . High scores are associated with high probability for TTP (Score 6–7 indicates > 72% probability of TPP) and the authors recommend plasma exchange upon reaching 6 points and the treatment with caplacizumab, a bivalent nanobody binding the A1 domain of vWF and inhibiting its interaction with thrombocytes thus preventing intravascular, vWF-mediated thrombocyte adhesion.
Distinguishing typical (Shiga toxin-mediated) and atypical HUS is also relevant as typical HUS is usually treated with supportive care while aHUS requires complement inhibition in order to prevent irreversible organ damage and decrease risk of mortality.
Typical HUS is caused by enterotoxic effects of Shiga-toxin producing enteropathogens like Shigella or Shiga toxin producing E. coli (STEC). This can be assessed either by direct analysis of serological evidence of these toxins or by detection of DNA fragments of enteropathogens that usually produce these toxins by PCR analysis.
There are no secure diagnostical parameters that are pathognomonic for aHUS. Though complement analysis (C3, C4 and CH50) can help diagnosis in certain cases, there is plenty of evidence of aHUS (confirmed by genetic analysis) without abnormalities in complement levels. Therefore, the clinically accepted approach to diagnosing aHUS when strong clinical suspicion for TMA exists, is to exclude TTP and STEC-HUS while empirically using plasma exchange and eculizumab under given conditions.
In this particular case it was important to distinguish drug-induced TMA from TMA associated with multiple myeloma which is an important differential diagnosis. This differentiation can be challenging in certain cases, and it cannot always be ruled out with complete certainty. However, in our case there a several factors indicating carfilzomib as the causative agent for TMA: the temporal association of carfilzomib treatment and TMA as well as the improvement during discontinuation of carfilzomib, the fact that the patient was not in a progressive state of multiple myeloma and light chain load was low due to ongoing treatment and the fact that so far, no recurrence of TMA was observed after discontinuation of carfilzomib.
Due to hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and resting dyspnea with clinical signs of hypervolemia the patient was immediately treated with daily hemodialysis. After exclusion of TTP and typical HUS we considered the patient to have secondary TMA after treatment with carfilzomib. Therapy with daily plasma exchange sessions (30 ml/kg bodyweight) was initiated.
Additionally, we started empirical therapy with 900 mg of eculizumab weekly for four weeks. Prophylactic antibiosis was started, and meningococcal vaccination was initiated.
Hemodialysis could be discontinued after six sessions within nine days of treatment.
Carfilzomib therapy was discontinued, and we strongly advised against further application of PIs.
Plasmapheresis and hemodialysis were discontinued after five and six sessions, respectively. Initially, eculizumab was given four times with a cumulative dose of 3600 mg followed by application of 1200 mg every two weeks for a total duration of 3 months. Hemolysis parameters improved and kidney function was steadily increasing. Proteinuria and hemoglobinuria were not detectable after four weeks of treatment. A graphic overview showing amelioration of kidney function throughout the treatment is given in Fig. . The patient is alive and well to the current moment (9 months after TMA). Kidney function was stable and hemolysis parameters inapparent after discontinuation of eculizumab treatment. The patient recently received allogenic stem cell transplantation.