A 45-year-old Chinese man had elevated blood pressure for 4 years, and the highest blood pressure was 200/130 mmHg. In 2017, he was hospitalized in our department for adrenal Computed tomography (CT) examination, in which a left adrenal nodule was observed, and ARR screening for PA was negative, with an aldosterone/renin ratio of 0.91 (according to the guideline , aldosterone (ng/dl), direct renin concentration (ng/l), and the ARR cut-off point were 3.8, 5.7 and 7.7, respectively) . Secondary hypertension was ruled out by laboratory and imaging examinations. The final diagnosis was essential hypertension. He had a history of smoking for 20 years and denied any remarkable family medical history. Many times blood potassium was lower than normal. Nifedipine controlled-release tablets, perindopril and indapamide tablets, metoprolol sustained-release tablets and spironolactone were all used to control blood pressure, but the blood pressure was still poorly controlled, and the antihypertensive drugs were adjusted many times. The patient had occasional dizziness and palpitations, but no chest tightness, no chest pain, no syncope, and no weakness. The patient came to our hospital again due to poor blood pressure control. After 2 weeks of oral administration of nifedipine controlled-release tablets combined with doxazosin, the patient was rehospitalized for further thorough examination.
Physical examination results were as follows: pulse, 64 times/min; blood pressure, 165/108 mmHg; body mass index, 25.88 kg/m2; heart murmur boundary enlarged to the left; and no other abnormalities. Auxiliary examination results were as follows: the results of routine blood, routine blood coagulation, liver function and thyroid function tests were all normal, as were D-dimer, blood glucose and glycosylated haemoglobin levels. The rhythm of cortisol was normal. The results of the two examinations (in 2017 and 2020) were all abnormal: hypokalaemia, mild renal dysfunction, and positive urine protein . In 2017, when the synchronous blood electrolytes were 3.32 mmol/l, the 24-h urine potassium was 32.94 mmol, suggesting increased potassium in urine. In other imaging examinations , left ventricular hypertrophy was indicated by cardiac colour Doppler ultrasonography, and the ventricle presented hypertrophic enlargement compared with 2017; carotid artery colour Doppler ultrasonography indicated carotid atherosclerosis, which also indicated the progression of atherosclerosis; renal artery colour Doppler ultrasonography showed no abnormality. CT of the adrenal gland showed that the adrenal glands were both thickened, and multiple round soft-tissue density shadows, such as soft tissue density shadows, could be seen in both adrenal glands. The larger one was located in the left inner branch of the adrenal gland, with a diameter of 8 mm .
In 2020, the patient again underwent a postural test . Although the ARR was negative (aldosterone/renin was 0.57), the level of aldosterone had increased significantly (> 20 ng/dl), indicating that the inappropriate secretion of aldosterone had increased. Based on this evidence, an inhibitory test with saline (infusion of 2 l of saline within 4 h) was further carried out. As shown in Table , aldosterone was more than 10 ng/dl after saline treatment, suggesting that aldosterone was not inhibited. We summarized the clinical features of this patient as follows: hypertension combined with hypokalaemia, poor blood pressure control by various antihypertensive drugs, significant progress of target organ damage of hypertension, increased basal aldosterone levels (> 20 ng/dl), aldosterone not inhibited after saline treatment (> 10 ng/dl), and a diagnosis of PA.
For the bilateral adrenal multiple adenomas, we further performed bilateral adrenal venous sampling (AVS). For hormonal examination, blood specimens were collected from 4 different sites, including the left adrenal vein, right adrenal vein, postcava and precava. The test results are shown in Table . The selectivity index of right and left adrenal venous cannulation was 2.9 and 2.22 , respectively, and judged as successful . When we compared the ratio of aldosterone-over-cortisol (A/C) obtained in both adrenal veins, the lateralization index was 1.01 (< 2) , indicating no dominant secretion . Because AVS showed no dominant secretion of either adrenal gland, it was recommended that the patient take oral medication to control hypertension. We considered that bilateral adrenal adenomas were functional, and the patient had poor blood pressure control with a variety of antihypertensive drugs in the past, serious target organ damage, and hypokalaemia that was difficult to correct. On the basis of the evidence, after obtaining the consent of the patient, the patient was transferred to the urology department for laparoscopic resection of the left large adrenal adenoma. Postoperative pathology was indicative of adrenal adenoma . Postoperative blood potassium was 4.12 mmol/l. After the operation, the blood pressure of the patient was more easily controlled than before. After 6 months, blood pressure was controlled at 130/90 mmHg with three kinds of antihypertensive drugs (nifedipine controlled-release tablets, arotinolol, spironolactone).