A 47-year-old female patient came to the outpatient clinic of FAHZU with a complaint of an asymptomatic right axillary mass for 3 months. Physical examination revealed a soft mass 4 cm in diameter in the right axilla without any other positive findings in the right breast. An axillary lymph node biopsy was conducted in a previous local hospital, and the histopathological results were suggestive of some metastatic carcinomas with an unknown primary lesion, while suspicion of lobular carcinoma of breast could not be ruled out.
In order to locate the primary lesion and other metastatic lesions, a PET-CT scan was performed in FAHZU, which reported multiple lesions with significantly increased FDG (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose) intensity presenting in the right side axilla. Meanwhile, the FDG (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose) was slightly elevated at the right elbow, considered as an inflammation or trauma . Therefore, a surgical resection of the right axillary lymph nodes and right supraclavicular lymph nodes was conducted in FAHZU. The histopathology report showed that 31/32 lymph nodes in the right axilla and 10/10 lymph nodes in the right supraclavicula were positive for metastatic carcinoma. For the time being, suspicion of metastatic epithelial sarcoma and metastatic breast cancer could not be ruled out.
With more detailed medical history review and physical examination, a mass on the right forearm was found . After a car accident 20 years ago, the mass had been growing slowly over the last decade without causing any pain or ulceration. There was also no abnormality of the right forearm X-ray in routine examination. An MRI scan was applied to the right forearm tumor and the report indicated that metastatic tumor could not be excluded. Therefore, a core needle biopsy (CNB) of the mass in the right forearm was conducted and the histopathology report suggested evidence of ES. So far, breast cancer was excluded and a surgery was performed to remove the right forearm tumor. After that, the patient received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with modified mesna, doxorubicin, ifosfamide and dacarbazine (MAID). Radiotherapy was denied to her after a multidisciplinary treatment (MDT).
Ten months after operation, the patient came back with complaints of pain and redness in the right breast . This time, there were still no positive findings in ultrasonography and PET-CT scan, while the blind CNB of the right breast showed whole breast metastasis of ES. In order to seek a useful therapeutic target, the patient was given a genetic testing. Regrettably, there was no positive result of the metastatic breast sample, sequenced by a 381-cancer-gene panel in a lab. She went through another 6 cycles of chemotherapy with Gemcitabine and Docetaxel, and took Apatinib for maintenance treatment. During the last follow-up (26 months after diagnosis), the disease was under control.
In our case, pathology was the most important basis for excluding metastatic breast cancer. The axillary lymph nodes were poorly differentiated under microscope, which was why occult or metastatic breast cancer could not be ruled out in the first place. Histopathological examination showed that the neoplasm was identifiable by tumor nodules with central necrosis surrounded by medium-sized fairly uniform, plump epithelioid cells, and short spindle cells merging in the periphery with relatively abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm . IHC showed CK (pan) (+), EMA (+), CK7 (−), CK8 (+), CK19(+), Vimentin (+), CD34 (++), CD31 (−), F8-R-Ag (−), CD68 (−), S-100 (−), MelanA (−), HMB45 (−), CK5/6 (−), P63 (−), ER (−), GATA-3 (−), E-adherin (−), P120 (+/−), TFE3 (−), MyoD1 (−), CD45 (LCA) (−).
After the right forearm mass was found, further IHC and Molecular Genetics of the lymph nodes were performed. The results suggested that all the neoplastic cells exhibited loss of INI1 protein and were negative for ERG gene rearrangement yet positive for EMA, CK8, CK19, Vimentin and CD34 . Besides, the neoplastic cells were completely negative for high molecular weight cytokeratin CK5/6, P63. Proliferation index ki-67 was approximately 30%. After the forearm operation, visual inspection of the resected specimen showed that it was located beneath the dermis without cutaneous and ulcerous presentation and could not be separated from the bone . Finally, we considered that the patient was with a conventional distal-type ES and the primary lesion was in the right forearm, excluding breast cancer.