A 36-year-old female gravida five with a history of three miscarriages and a preterm twin delivery, presented at 21 weeks of gestation for a routine anomaly scan. Her obstetric history was remarkable for a previous dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy 5 years earlier during which the patient developed severe polyhydramnios in one of the twins, resulting in a Cesarean section at 34 weeks. Bartter syndrome was suspected due to the severe isolated polyhydramnios and the normal fetal and placental structures; however, no further diagnostic steps were taken. Confirmation of the diagnosis was made 3 weeks following delivery, based on elevated urinary sodium, potassium, and chloride. Hypokalemia, high plasma renin, and metabolic alkalosis were also detected. The affected female child survived and has been on sodium supplements and ibuprofen since birth up to the ages of 6 and 36 months, respectively. Her growth was initially slow, however, by the age of five, she has maintained normal physical and mental growth.
In this reported pregnancy, a dating scan was performed at 12 weeks showing no gross fetal anomalies. The anomaly scan at 21 weeks showed a female fetus with no structural abnormalities. Amniotic fluid volume was normal with a single deepest vertical pocket (DVP) of 6 cm. Fetal biometry was consistent with the gestational age. At 30 weeks + 2 days, a follow-up ultrasound scan showed significant polyhydramnios with an AFI of 35 cm and a single DVP of 13.9 cm . Investigations to exclude other causes of polyhydramnios, including complete blood count, Parvovirus IgG, and IgM antibodies, and oral glucose tolerance test were all normal. Amniotic fluid genomic DNA analysis was declined by the patient due to financial restraints.
Accordingly, indomethacin was started at 30 weeks + 2 days at a dose of 150 mg/day and the AFI and DA diameter were sonographically monitored. One week later, the AFI decreased from 35 to 24.1 cm , while the DA diameter significantly decreased from 3.8 to 3.1 mm (corresponding to the 1st centile). The dose of indomethacin was accordingly reduced to 50 mg/day. Four days later, the AFI increased to 28 cm, while the DA diameter increased to 3.57 mm [corresponding to the 6th centile ]. Since it is not recommended to use indomethacin after 32 weeks , it was tapered down over 2 days until it was stopped at 32 weeks + 2 days. At that time, the AFI reached 30 cm, whereas the DA diameter increased to 3.98 mm (corresponding to the 19th centile).
Two weeks later, the patient started to be symptomatic with increasing abdominal pain and shortness of breath with a significant increase in AFI at 45.9 cm . At that point, the umbilical artery pulsatility index (PI), which was previously normal, increased considerably to 1.38 (Reference range 0.60–1.28 at 34 weeks, i.e., above the 99th centile) . A summary of the changes in AFI and DA diameter in response to indomethacin dose adjustments is shown in .
Accordingly, the decision to deliver the patient by a Cesarean section was made, noting that corticosteroids were prophylactically administered at 30 weeks. A healthy neonate was delivered at 34 weeks + 3 days with a birth weight of 1,615 grams and an APGAR score of 10/10 at 1 min. On the second day postpartum, the investigations showed elevated neonatal serum aldosterone at 12,500 ng/l (Reference range 30–90 ng/l), and serum renin at 255.7 ng/ml/h (Reference range 2–37 ng/ml/h). The initial urine output was 15 ml/kg/h (normal range 1–2 ml/kg/h) which decreased to 7 ml/kg/h after starting ibuprofen. Potassium chloride supplements were given up to 36 months of age until potassium levels were normalized. The infant developed necrotizing enterocolitis twice which were managed surgically. Ibuprofen was, therefore, stopped at the age of 3 months, and the parents refused to restart in fear of complication recurrence. At the time of writing this report, the child was 3.5 years old and continued to grow at a slow rate, likely due to discontinuation of the NSAID treatment or the effect of repeat small bowel resections. However, the infant's mental development and hearing function have been normal. The renal function has remained within normal limits.