A 49 years old woman suffering from Type 2A von Willebrand disease, presented in the dentistry and oral health department, University Hospital of Bordeaux (Bordeaux, France). The last results of the biological exploration regarding coagulation revealed the following parameters: F VIII = 16%; vWF RCo = 7%; vWF Rag = 12%.
She was referred by her general dentist to remove tooth #46 and to replace it by a dental implant. The lower first molar had to be removed because of inter radicular fracture and peri-apical infection . A Cone-Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) and an optical impression were recorded. Codiagnostix® software was used to match DICOM and STL data. It revealed that sufficient remaining alveolar bone support was present in the interradicular space of 46 to stabilize an implant immediately after tooth extraction . This was proposed to the patient and she gave her consent for this surgical procedure. A surgical guide was 3D printed using Codiagnostix® planification .
The patient was hospitalized the day of surgery and received one injection of von Willebrand factor (Willfactin®, 2500 UI) one hour before the surgical procedure. It was performed under local anesthesia (Primacaine® supplemented with 1/200 000 Adrenalin v/v). No flap was raised and the tooth was carefully extracted after root hemisection . Curettage and alveolar debridement were performed. Then, the surgical guide was stabilized to the adjacent teeth so the implant could be placed immediately after tooth removal. Straumann® Guided Surgery was used, following the surgical sequence determined during the planification. A torque of 35 N was obtained at implant placement (Straumann® TE 4.1x12mm RN) and the healing abutment (3 mm) was immediately placed on the implant . A xenograft bone-substitute material (Bio-Oss® Small granules 0,25-1mm) was used to fill the bone defects between the alveolar socket and the implant.
Local hemostasis was performed with absorbable sutures (VICRYLTM 4.0 ETHICON®) and fibrin glue (Tisseel, 2ml, Baxter AG) was applied on the surgical wound . No excessive bleeding was observed during or after the surgical procedure. The patient received one injection every twelve hours of von Willebrand factor (Willfactin®, 2500UI) during 48 hours, before discharge. Post-operative prescriptions included per os Tranexamic acid (EXACYL® 1g/10ml, 3 times per day during ten days), Paracetamol (1g, 3 times per day during 4 days) and Amoxicilline (1g, twice a day, during seven days). The follow-up was uneventful and the implant was restored by a crown 4 months later.
1 year after final restoration, clinical and peri-apical x-rays status were normal .