A thirty-six year-old male presented to the emergency department with a one-month history of increasing left neck mass accompanied by pain, severe shortness of breath, and eight kilograms of unintentional weight loss. He had spent several months in Ethiopia prior to presenting to our centre, where the working diagnosis for his neck mass was lymphocytic thyroiditis, based on several FNA biopsies. As a result, propylthiouracil (PTU) and propranolol were prescribed. His past medical, family and social histories were all unremarkable for malignant risk factors. Upon presentation, he was found to be euthyroid (TSH = 0.42 mU/L, Free T3 = 4.3 pmol/L, and Free T4 = 22.7 pmol/L). His thyroid indices prior to starting PTU were unavailable and thus, we can only assume that he was in a hyperthyroid state prior to administration of PTU.
CT scans revealed a mass arising from the thyroid measuring 8 × 9 × 12 cm, which stretched from the hyoid bone to the level of the innominate vein. The neck mass was situated just left of midline within level VI. Along with invasion of the esophagus, left thyroid and arytenoid cartilages, the tumor completely effaced both the left internal carotid and internal jugular vessels . The trachea was significantly displaced to the right with the narrowest luminal segment measuring 7 mm. In addition to the extensive lymph node involvement from level IA to the supraclavicular fossa, upper mediastinal lymphadenopathy with innumerable pulmonary metastases up to 2.1 cm was noted. Following the biopsy and in light of the imaging, the tumor was staged T4b, N1b, M1 .
In order to secure this precarious airway, an awake intubation in the operating room was successfully carried out. This was followed by an open biopsy of the neck mass. Endoscopy was not pursued given the significant esophageal obstruction. After careful review by the multidisciplinary Head and Neck Oncology team, it was felt that based on the significant invasion of neighbouring structures, the tumor was surgically unresectable. Moreover, a tracheostomy was considered unreasonable given the impressive superimposition of the tumor on the trachea. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy were considered less desirable options since the patient was now requiring aggressive ventilator and hemodynamic supports.
Given the few alternatives, a family meeting was held and as per the patient and his family’s wishes, a trial of extubation was attempted. It was agreed upon that it would not be beneficial to the patient to reintubate, should the airway deteriorate post extubation. Despite his extubation to heliox and the use of epinephrine nebulizers, he became increasingly stridulous and hypoxic. As per his previous wishes, the patient was provided comfort measures and he passed shortly after.