A 68-year-old man, who had been undergoing medical treatment for liver dysfunction due to chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and alcoholic liver disease, was found to have a liver tumor measuring 25 mm in segment III on abdominal ultrasonography and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. He was on antihypertensive medication and had undergone open reduction and internal fixation with metal plates for the fracture of his left upper extremity. He was a past smoker, with a daily alcohol intake of 80 g for 42 years. Laboratory analysis revealed the following results: aspartate aminotransferase, 46 U/L (normal range: 10–40 U/L); alanine aminotransferase, 51 U/L (normal range: 5–45 U/L); alkaline phosphatase, 210 U/L (normal range: 100–325 U/L); and gamma-guanosine triphosphate, 27 U/L (normal range < 30 U/L). Serum AFP and AFP-L3 were 822.8 ng/mL (normal range < 10 ng/mL) and 75.2% (normal range < 35%), respectively. Levels of protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within normal limits. Serological tests for hepatitis viruses showed that hepatitis B surface antigen was negative, but hepatitis B surface antibody, hepatitis B core antibody, and HCV antibody were positive. There was no anemia or elevation of white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level. Coagulation profile, total protein, albumin, and bilirubin levels (both total and direct) were normal. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 24-mm mass in segment III of the liver adjacent to the left hepatic vein, and an 8 mm mass in segment VIII. These lesions showed weak enhancement in the early phase and demonstrated washout of the contrast in the delayed phase . The lesion in segment III appeared abnormal on fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) with a high standardized uptake value of 10.9, however, the segment VIII lesion did not show this uptake pattern . Magnetic resonance imaging could not be performed because of the presence of the metal plates in his arm. Based on the findings of HCV infection, elevated serum AFP and AFP-L3, and radiological imaging of the liver, HCC was suspected. Thus, laparoscopic left lateral sectionectomy and partial hepatectomy for segment VIII were performed.
Macroscopically, the resected specimen showed hard white nodules, not like HCC, in approximately the same location that was indicated by the imaging studies . Histopathological analysis showed that both tumors consisted of fibrous tissue infiltrated by inflammatory cells, mainly plasma cells . In immunohistopathological analysis, tumor cells were diffusely positive for CD31, and partially positive for CD68 and alpha-smooth muscle actin, whereas human serum albumin and glypican 3 were negative , suggesting that the tumor cells contain lymphocytes and macrophage but not cells derived from hepatocyte. And, there were some tumor cells positive for AFP in immunohistochemical staining . Non-tumorous liver tissues were noted to be A2F3–4 based on New Inuyama Classification . Malignant cells, including HCC cells, were not detected. The lesions were finally diagnosed as hepatic IPT.
The patient had no postoperative complications and was discharged 7 days after surgery. AFP and AFP-L3 levels decreased to 13 ng/mL and 38.9%, respectively, 1 week after of surgery, and returned to normal levels 3 months later, to 5.5 ng/mL and < 0.5%, respectively. These tumor markers were not elevated during the 1-year follow-up.