A 71-year-old, functionally independent man, with known arterial hypertension presented due to 1-week history of headache, vomiting, disorientation, apathy, visual hallucinations and impaired consciousness. The patient underwent brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), revealing multiple acute cortical/subcortical microinfarcts accompanied by scarce cortical/subcortical microbleeds. T1 post-gadolinium sequences showed extensive right parietooccipital and left frontotemporal leptomeningeal enhancement, eventually suggesting an underlying primary central nervous system angiitis (PACNS) .
Lumbar puncture was performed, showing increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white blood cells (50/µL; normal value:≤5/µL) and total protein (238 mg/dl; normal value:15–45 mg/dl) with normal CSF-glucose/Serum-glucose ratio (0.62; normal value > 0.6) and normal oligoclonal bands (IgG-Index: 0.8; normal value:<0.6). An extensive diagnostic work-up excluded infectious, neoplastic and autoimmune etiologies and the digital subtraction angiography did not disclose any angiographic abnormalities, such as irregular notched appearance of cerebral arteries, suggestive of PACNS. Before treatment initiation, the patient underwent brain-biopsy to confirm our diagnostic suspicion, however histology disclosed amyloid deposition in arteriolar wall . The patient fulfilled diagnostic criteria for probable CAA-ri with supporting pathology . The Apolipoprotein-E (ApoE) genotype was ε3/ε3. He was treated conservatively with intravenous methylprednisolone, followed by oral tapering with prednisolone, showing gradually clinical improvement; one month after corticosteroid initiation he was fully-oriented without any psychiatric signs or focal neurological deficits and follow-up brain MRI revealed complete gadolinium enhancement resolution, indicative of radiological improvement. However impressive increase of cerebral microbleeds was documented . Typical T2/FLAIR hyperintense white matter lesions were absent in initial and follow-up MRI images.