A 32-year-old woman presented at our department with a 2-year history of right-side lower back paroxysmal pain and fever, which had worsened for 1 week. She had no history of the urinary tract infection, diabetes, hypertension or trauma. Physical examination revealed right renal percussive pain, with no positive signs on the left side.
Her laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count = 32,000/ul; C-reactive protein = 20 mg/L (0–0.5 mg/dl) and procalcitonin = 0.52 ng/ml, (0–0.05 ng/ml). Urine analysis showed 4+ WBC. Urine culture was positive for P. stuartii, which was susceptible to meropenem and cefoxitin, and resistant to levofloxacin and ceftriaxone.
Urological ultrasonography (USG) showed that the right kidney was diffusely enlarged (127 × 74 mm). Several stones were detected within the right renal pelvis and calyceal groups. The largest one was about 20 mm × 9 mm. The left kidney was normal in size and echogenicity. Computerized tomography (CT) revealed multiple, rounded, low density areas with enhancing rings arranged in a hydronephrotic pattern and hypoenhancement of the renal parenchyma, right renal multiple pelvis stones and diffuse enlargement. The fat space around the right kidney was fuzzy, the right ureter was unevenly expanded, the internal density was increased, and the peripheral fat space was rough. The size and shape of the left kidney were normal, with no obvious abnormality. Multiple lymph nodes were found in the retroperitoneum, the diameter of the largest lymph node was about 12 mm . Renal dynamic imaging revealed glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of right kidney = 17.17 ml/min, and left kidney = 83.74 ml/min.
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with right XGP and right kidney stone. The patient refused nephrectomy, and underwent holmium laser lithotripsy and right ureteral stenting. She was given meropenem treatment after the lithotripsy, with complete explanation of the treatment. Seven days later, meropenem was replaced with cefoxitin. Two weeks after the lithotripsy, the patient’s symptoms disappeared and the patient requested to be discharged. However, she suffered right-side lower back paroxysmal pain and fever again in the third month after discharge from the hospital, due to which she underwent a radical nephrectomy. Initially, we attempted laparoscopic radical nephrectomy, but it was difficult to isolate the kidney due to serious perirenal fat adhesion and infiltration of blood during the operation, which led to conversion to open surgery. After surgery, we saw that the left kidney was enlarged, with intensely dilated calyces and filled with pus . Postoperative pathology showed extensive glomerular fibrosis, significant hyperplasia of interstitial fibrous tissue with infiltration of numerous lymphocytes, plasma cells and foam cells, and focal abscess and necrotic lesions. Combined with medical history and histological morphology, it was consistent with inflammatory lesions . She was given cefoxitin treatment after the nephrectomy for 7 days. The patient recovered well after 3 months of follow-up with regular Blood routine and CT of renal.