A 79-year-old female came to the Cardiology clinic for evaluation of fatigue and dyspnoea on exertion. Her past medical history was significant for non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, endocarditis, hypertension, and hyperlipidaemia. Vital signs were within normal limits, and a physical exam revealed a Grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur at the apex with 1+ pitting oedema on the lower extremities bilaterally. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. Patient was on lisinopril 20 mg daily and metoprolol 12.5 mg twice daily, aspirin 81 mg, and atorvastatin 80 mg daily. Haemoglobin was 11.5 mg/dL but the rest of the complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel was unremarkable. The patient had bacterial endocarditis a year prior and underwent MVR with a 29 mm Edwards pericardial tissue valve with Maze procedure. During left atriotomy, large polyp-like fibrinous debris was found on the P2 segment of the posterior leaflet at the site of endocarditis. The posterior leaflet was sharply excised along with its chordal attachments. The annular region behind the P2 segment was degenerative. It was heavily calcified and was debrided with rongeurs. Behind the P3 segment, there was an abscess-like cavity extending to the wall of the ventricle. The abscess was debrided, and the annulus was extensively irrigated and debrided of any loose tissue. The anterior leaflet was detached from the annulus, and portions of it were spared to retain the chordal attachments. The valve was sized for a 29 mm Edwards pericardial tissue valve. Her post-operative course was complicated by symptomatic bradycardia, and she underwent pacemaker implantation. The patient was subsequently discharged and was to undergo cardiac rehabilitation. The previous 2D echocardiogram revealed an average left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 63% and mild calcification on the native mitral valve . A follow-up echocardiogram completed on the day after the presentation of symptoms showed a pseudoaneurysm extending from the basilar inferior-lateral wall nearly at the mitral annulus. There was a heterogeneous echo-density (thrombus) within this area, though it was laminated to the distal wall . The LVEF was 45–49%, with mild left ventricular hypertrophy and akinesia of the mid-to-apical anterolateral wall. The remaining left ventricular segments were hypokinetic. The mitral valve prosthesis demonstrated a normal leaflet motion with an average transvalvular gradient for valve type and size. A cardiac computed tomography angiography (CTA) was obtained due to the abnormal transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) findings that revealed a large pseudoaneurysm inferior to the mitral annulus plane ( and ). The pseudoaneurysm extended inferiorly and posteriorly, measuring approximately 59.1 mm × 63.6 mms. The neck of the pseudoaneurysm measured approximately 24 mm and was mildly calcified. A layered thrombus was noted in the posterolateral aspect of the aneurysmal sac . The cavity was pulsatile with systole, and the sac protruded posteriorly. Corrective surgery was offered but the patient declined. Her shortness of breath improved with an increased dose of furosemide. She remained asymptomatic on furosemide, aspirin, atorvastatin, and carvedilol at the time of her 2-year follow-up with cardiology. No surgical intervention was performed for the pseudoaneurysm.