An 84-year-old man had an incidental finding of a stomach mass on an abdominal CT scan performed in preparation for an inguinal hernia repair. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed and showed a gastric deformity suggestive of a subepithelial tumor rather than extrinsic compression. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed an intramural (subepithelial) lesion in the greater curvature of the stomach, 3 cm distal to the gastroesophageal junction measuring 44 mm × 59 mm. EUS-guided fine needle aspiration was performed and cytological examination showed spindle shaped cells that stained positive for c-kit. The cytomorphological and immunocytological findings were suggestive of a diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Shortly after the diagnosis, the patient presented to our emergency department with a one week history of epigastric pain, melena and dizziness. Upon examination, his temperature was 37.4°C, pulse 72 beats/min, respirations 18 times/min, and blood pressure 164/78 while lying down and 105/71 while standing. The patient was alert and oriented. Laboratory tests revealed the following values: hemoglobin 10.6 g/dl (normal 12–15) and hematocrit 31.5% (normal 35–49). His basic metabolic profile, coagulation profile and liver function tests were all normal. He was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and transfused with two units of packed red blood cells. Repeat EGD showed the GIST tumor with deep ulceration and visible bleeding vessels . Homeostasis was achieved with placement of two hemoclips . The patient was evaluated by the general surgery team and deemed not a good surgical candidate due to his age and severe coronary artery disease. He was started on imatinib (Gleevec; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ) 400 mg daily by mouth in accordance with oncology recommendations. Patient was discharged home with no further gastrointestinal bleeding. Upon follow up five months later, the patient was continuing to do well with no further episodes of gastrointestinal bleeding. His follow up hemoglobin was 13.4 g/dL and hematocrit 39%. Repeat upper endoscopy showed significant reduction in the size of the tumor. The previously identified ulcers were completely healed .