A 16-year-old Mongolian girl with retinal detachment was recruited with a known familiar history of ocular disease . The proband (III-5) had vitreous degeneration in both eyes. Fundus photography revealed rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in the inferior and temporal sides of her right eye, a large degeneration area in the retina, a retinal hole was located at 3 o'clock position, and proliferative cords were visible under the retina. In her left eye, a large area of retinal degeneration was observed, and small blood vessels were occluded . She developed severe myopia (−6D) at the age of 15. No obvious hearing disorder was found, and there were no abnormalities in bones and joints throughout the body. Her communication and learning capability were also normal. In the right eye, vitrectomy was performed. During the operation, it was found that the vitreous and retina were closely connected without posterior vitreous detachment. After the vitreous was removed, the retina was flattened. The hole was sealed with laser filled with silicone oil. Six months later, silicone oil was removed and the retina remains flat . There was no significant change in the size of retinal degeneration in the left eye , in which the macular morphology was improved compared with that of before operation .
In further examination, it was found that all the patient's family members had vitreous and retina degenerations except the patient's mother. Glaucoma, cataracts, hypoplasia of the upper jaw, poor hearing, and joint disorders were also found in all family members. In this family, a total of six family members over three generations had clinical diagnosis of Stickler syndrome , and their clinical features are summarized in Table .
The patient's grandfather (I-1) had developed severe myopia (−6.25D), cataracts, and vitreous retinal degeneration in the right eye; his left eyes had atrophy and loss of function, and mild deafness in both ears .
The patient's father (II-2) had congenital cleft palate , cataracts, vitreous, and retinal degeneration in both eyes. He could not speak clearly.
The patient's elderly auntie (II-4) underwent glaucoma surgery on right eye at the age of 45, and eyeballs were removed 1 year later. In the shallow anterior chamber of the left eye, the anterior lens capsule was pigmented and iris YAG laser was perforated. The vitreous body of the left eye was cloudy, and retinal degeneration was associated vitreous traction. Pigment-like lesions were observed at upper and lower temporal sides of retina . She also had hip dysplasia, lumbar dysplasia, and arthritis.
The patient's younger auntie (II-5) was diagnosed with cataracts in both eyes. Her left eye was treated with phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation at the age of 40, and she also had vitreoretinal degeneration of both eyes. The retina of both eyes exhibited a leopard pattern, and a large area of retinal choroidal atrophy was noted. She also suffered from high frequency hearing loss in her two ears , lumbar spine hyperplasia, sacroiliac arthritis, hip arthritis, Knee arthritis, and femoral head necrosis .