A 42-year-old man presented to our department with bilateral traumatic rupture of the extensor mechanism of the knee. He worked as a sports course designer, was a non-smoker, and drank alcohol only in moderation. He had no medical history, was not taking any regular medications, and had no significant family history.
The incident occurred while under the influence of alcohol he jumped over a sleeping policeman as he was running along a road. Both of his legs gave way on landing and he was subsequently unable to weight bear or actively extend either knee. On direct questioning, he recounted a 15-year history of anterior knee pain, which was worse on kneeling and typically flared after approximately 2 min of running or jogging. He had, therefore, not participated in any regular sporting activity for several years.
On examination, he had a palpable defect in his extensor mechanism proximal to the patella on the left and distal to the patella on the right. He was unable to straight leg raise bilaterally and had no power in knee extension. His plain radiographs demonstrated a knee effusion with normal patella height on the left and a knee effusion with an elevated patella on the right. A diagnosis of quadriceps tendon rupture on the left and patellar ligament rupture on the right was made.
The patient was managed operatively with bilateral extensor mechanism repairs using an intraosseous suture technique. Vertically orientated tunnels using a 2.0 millimeters (mm) drill were made through the patella, and number-5 FiberWire® sutures (Arthrex Inc., Naples, FL) were used to reattach the quadriceps tendon on the left and the patellar ligament on the right. The patellar ligament repair was augmented with a 1.6mm Dall-Miles cable (Stryker, UK) passed transversely through the patella and proximal tibia. The post-operative radiographs of the right knee are shown in . At operation, the quadriceps tendon on the left had ruptured leaving approximately a 1 cm stump on the patella with near complete disruption of the retinaculum. On the right, the patellar ligament had failed at the osseotendinous junction at the inferior pole of the patella, with complete disruption of the retinaculum. Bilaterally, the extensor apparatus appeared attenuated throughout, lacking the typical healthy sheen that may be expected in a 42-year-old individual with no prior medical history.
Hematological and biochemical parameters revealed a normal full blood count and differential and normal urea, creatinine, and electrolytes. His fasted lipid profile showed a serum cholesterol level of 4.9mmol/L with elevated cholesterol-HDL ratio of 5.5. Serum triglyceride levels were also raised at 2.33mmol/L.Operative biopsy of the extensor mechanism was sent for histological examination. This demonstrated tendinosis.
Postoperatively, he was allowed to weight bear immediately using crutches with both knees locked in extension braces and commenced a graded rehabilitation programme. Full passive range of motion, ranging from 0 to 135°, was achieved at the 1 year post-operative time point, with no extensor lag. The patient was counseled on dietary modification with a view to starting pharmacological treatment for his hyperlipidemia should his biochemical lipid parameters not improve. To date, there have been no post-operative complications.