During a hot afternoon in July, a 48-year-old man developed symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, headache, chest tightness, and shortness of breath, while working outdoors for 2 h in a southern city in China. The outside temperature at that time was 35 °C. Notably, the patient lived in the north part of China and had traveled to the southern part when he was sick. After 15 h, he went into coma and was then transferred to the emergency department of the hospital. The patient was in good health before the onset of the disease. Upon arrival, the temperature of the patient was 40.2 °C, blood pressure was 75/40 mmHg, and pulse rate was 100 beats/min. His blood oxygen saturation under balloon-assisted ventilation was 95%. Laboratory tests indicated rhabdomyolysis syndrome, acute kidney injury, hepatic disfunction, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis. The serum D-dimer level of the patient was elevated at 1022 (normal range: 0–232) μg/L. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with HS. He was immediately treated with a cooling blanket and plasma exchange and received assisted ventilation. Brain CT scans performed on the 3rd day of admission showed symmetrical low-density lesions in the bilateral basal ganglia. On the 7th day of admission, the patient’s state of consciousness improved. However, he experienced blurred vision. Eye examination results were normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 8 days after admission. Cerebral MRI revealed a slight hyperintensity in the bilateral putamen on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequence and bilateral symmetrical hypointensity in the middle of the putamen and hyperintensity around hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) sequence. The lesions showed hyperintensity in the middle of the bilateral putamen and hypointensity around them on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) sequence . Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) in sagittal projection performed on the 12th day of admission showed the absence of a straight sinus and vein of Galen, indicating CVT. In addition, the lack of flow signal was also found in the distal part of the superior sagittal sinus that also corresponds to CVT . Intravenous treatment of mannitol, subcutaneous injection of low-molecular-weight heparin calcium (5000 IU, two times/day) was initiated to reduce high intracranial pressure and to treat CVT. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination conducted on day 17 showed elevated protein levels at 1.87 (normal range: 0.15–0.45 g/L and immunoglobulin G levels at 267.0 (normal range: 0–34.0) mg/L. The CSF pressure was 210 (normal range: 80–180) mmH2O. Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) obtained on the same day indicated bilateral hemosiderin deposition or hemorrhagic foci in the basal ganglia . Follow-up MRI obtained 25 days after admission showed symmetrical abnormal signals in the bilateral posterior limb of the internal capsule, putamen, external capsule, and insular lobe. The signals were hypointense on T1WI and hyperintense on T2WI, FLAIR, and ADC and were not limited by diffusion on DWI. Strip and dot-like signals, which were isointense and slightly hypointense on T1WI and hypointense on T2WI, can be observed in the lesions. DWI revealed bilateral hyperintensity on the frontal and occipital lobes . The flow signals of the superior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, and vein of Galen were significantly better on follow-up MRV . On the 28th day of admission, after the administration of gadolinium, MRI revealed abnormal enhancement within the bilateral basal ganglia, and the size of the lesions decreased on MRI conducted 25 days after admission . The patient was discharged with blurred vision on the 38th day. (Timeline of brain imaging was shown in Table ).