A 71-year-old female presented to an outside hospital with a 1-month history of progressive lower left extremity weakness and a left foot drop with resulting difficult ambulating. Over the days prior to admission, she also developed difficulty in holding objects with her left hand. A cranial computed tomography (CT) showed an approximately 3.5 cm nodular right-sided thalamic lesion with heterogeneous enhancement, a central hypodensity, and mild midline shift .
She was transferred to our tertiary care center for further evaluation. On admission, the patient showed persistent left hemiparesis. Based on the initial CT results, the differential diagnosis of the lesion included primary brain neoplasms, metastatic brain disease, lymphoma, and less likely abscess or inflammatory or demyelinating disease. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast was obtained, again demonstrating a poorly demarcated mass in the right thalamic area with plentiful irregular blood products. The lesion showed avid heterogeneous contrast enhancement with highly prominent vasculature consisting of multiple feeders and enlarged venous channels [Figure –]. This added to the differential diagnosis entities such as an AVM in combination with a malignant glioma, a hypervascular glioma, or atypical AVM, respectively.
To further assess the vasculature, a computed tomography angiography (CTA) was obtained. Here, the mass was characterized by numerous dense calcifications, as well as by intrinsic hemorrhage posteriorly . Other significant findings included marked dilatation of clustered vessels along the medial, posterior, and superior margins of this lesion [Figure and ]. No definite aneurysms were detected but could not be ruled out with certainty. The working diagnosis at this point included a large and partially thrombosed AVM, resulting in high flow enlarged draining veins and hemorrhage versus an aggressive glioma with neovascularization . A cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed extensive hypervascularity and was interpreted as displaying AVM-typical morphology [Figure and ].
MR-perfusion was performed and showed high perfusion and markedly increased blood volume within the right thalamic lesion maintaining the concern for an AVM, whereas MR multivoxel spectroscopy indicated an increase in creatinine/choline peak ratio , substantiating the working diagnosis of an underlying glioma.
Because the prognosis and treatment algorithms for an AVM and a malignant glioma differ substantially, a definite tissue-based diagnosis was required, however, it was only hesitantly considered given the high risk of procedural bleeding. A stereotactic biopsy was finally performed under general anesthesia using a CRW frame (Radionics Inc., Burlington, MA). Preoperative T1 gadolinium MR as well as CTA-images were fused to the intraoperative frame-based CT using the StereoCalc® and NeuroSight® Arc software (Radionics Inc., Burlington MA) allowing three-dimensional planning of coordinates. Meticulous attention was paid to the delineation of a suitable target area for the biopsy at the inferior margin of the hypervascular zone but avoiding any prominent vessels [Figure and ].
Multiple serial stereotactic biopsy specimen were ascertained for histopathological analysis using a set of unique microforceps with a cubic bite size of 1 mm3 (Medical High Tech Inc., Emmendingen, Germany), as described by Warnke et al. A total of 7 specimens were obtained in 1 mm steps (−3 mm to +3 mm from the target point) without hemorrhagic complications.
Intraoperative fresh frozen analysis showed malignant glioma. Final histopathological analysis revealed a densely cellular, astrocytic glial fibrillary acidic protein positive tumor with necrosis, thrombosed vessels, and scattered mitosis among irregular hyperchromatic nuclei. The proliferative index (MIB-1) was above 10%. Thus, final histopathologic diagnosis confirmed GBM with profound hypervascularity.
After an uneventful biopsy and discharge home, subsequent treatment consisted of involved field radiation and standard chemotherapy with Temozolomide, as per Stupp et al. Given the poor prognosis of GBM at this age, no additional treatment was recommended for the vascular malformation possibly associated with this lesion since this was considered not to impact her remaining lifetime. As expected, our patient did well for several months before the tumor progressed at which point she decided not to pursue further treatment. She expired 6 months after her initial presentation.