A 17-year-old girl of Mongoloid ethnicity presented to our hospital with a history of diarrhea and edema in her eyelids and lower limbs for three weeks, which were secondary to a transient fever lasting one week. About one month prior to this admission, the patient complained of a fever (the highest temperature being 39°C) accompanied by sore throat, cough, and runny nose, but no fear of cold or shivering. These symptoms lasted for about one week and disappeared. Then the diarrhea and edema in her eyelids and lower limbs began. The frequency of stools was about two to three times a day. The stools were like yellow water with a little foam, and contained undigested foods. The patient also complained of poor appetite, occasional abdominal distention and abdominal pain. Her food intake was reduced to between one-third and half of her usual amount. She usually had gruel and did not like meat. She lost two kg in this one month. She denied hair loss, rash, skin erythema, oral ulcers, photosensitivity, joints pain, foamy urine, palpitations, night sweats, headache, chest pain, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, insomnia, irritability, and tremor. There was nothing of significance in her medical history or drug therapy.
Her physical examination demonstrated malnutrition and edema in her eyelids and lower limbs. A few lymph nodes of 0.5×0.5cm in size were found in her submandibular area, in her axillas and inguina on both sides, with clear borders and no tenderness. Her body mass index was 15kg/m2. Her heart rate was 120 beats per minute and other systematic examinations revealed no positive signs.
She was admitted to the Rheumatology department of our hospital at first. Investigations showed decreased white blood cells (2.71×109/L; neutrophils 1.64×109/L, lymphocytes 0.34×109/L), anemia (hemoglobin 100g/L), hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 20.5g/L), hypoimmunoglobulinemia (globulin 12g/L), hypolipoproteinemia (cholesterol 2.8mmol/L; triglyceride 0.28mmol/L), and hypocalcemia (1.52mmol/L). During her hospital stay, the patient had numbness and convulsions in both hands several times and these symptoms were relieved by calcium and vitamin D therapy. The results of a Coombs’ test and anticardiolipin antibodies were both negative. Results of tests related to Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and vasculitis were almost normal. The results of the investigation indicated that rheumatologic disease could be ruled out.
Further investigations showed mildly increased free triiodothyronine, anti-thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody, parathyroid hormone, phosphorus, and decreased thyroid-stimulating hormone in serum. Emission computed tomography showed a diffuse goiter, and an increased thyroid technetium uptake function. Ultrasound showed ascites of 32.6mm in depth. The patient was transferred to the Department of endocrinology.
The patient had paroxysmal paralysis in her palms many times. The attacks were always accompanied by the hyperextension of her fingers. Each attack lasted a few minutes. The symptoms could be relieved by the intravenous injection of calcium gluconate. The serium calcium levels fluctuated in the range of 1.33 to 1.52mmol/L. After the patient was given calcium and vitamin D supplementation, the symptoms stopped. Her 24-hour urinary protein excretion and lymphangiography were both normal. The Epstein–Barr virus and hepatitis virus were not detected in her serum. An electronic gastroscope revealed superficial antral gastritis. Capsule endoscopy showed that villi edema were present in the small intestinal (descending part of the duodenum and upper jejunum part of duodenum) mucosa. So at last she was transferred to the Department of gastroenterology.
A double-balloon enteroscopy revealed lymphangiectasia-like changes in the small intestinal mucosa (descending part of the duodenum and upper jejunum part of duodenum; Figure A, B). The pathologic analysis of small intestinal tissue showed chronic inflammation, edema in the submucosa, and lymphangiectasia .
Based on these findings, a therapy composed of albumin and calcium supplementation and parenteral nutrition support was given to the patient. The patient undertook recipes that strictly conformed to the low-fat and MCT diet. The daily intake of cooking oil on MCTs was 25 g and the total fat intake must not exceed 40g/day.
After 10 weeks of dietary treatment, the patient’s clinical manifestations and nutritional status were improved. The patient no longer felt any discomfort in her daily life and work. Results of the laboratory examination conducted after the 10-week diet therapy are shown in Table . A repeat double-balloon enteroscopy showed that the lymphangiectasia-like change in the small intestines had vanished. The double-balloon enteroscopy results are shown in Figure D and E, and the pathology is shown in Figure F.