The patient was a 62-year-old man who was admitted to a local hospital because of abdominal pain and abdominal distension. Colonoscopy revealed a colon mass and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed that the mass infiltrated the serosa of the transverse colon, which was adjacent to the omentum majus with mesenteric lymph node metastases. The patient then went to a cancer hospital where a CT scan of his thorax and abdomen showed no distant metastases. Radical surgery was performed to remove his colon cancer on Feb 16th, 2013. Because the primary tumor was removed in a different hospital, we were unable to acquire a specimen of the resected primary tumor, however, we were able to obtain the pathological examination report. According to the report, the primary tumor was a poorly differentiated NEC of the right colon (grade 3) with a mass size of 9 × 5 × 3.5 cm. The tumor infiltrated the full thickness of the intestinal wall and extended into the extraserosal fibrous and adipose tissue, and 5/19 excised lymph nodes were positive for metastases. There were vessel cancer emboli, neural invasion, four cancer nodules around the tumor, four cancer nodules on the mesenterium and five cancer nodules on the omentum majus. The immunohistochemical report showed that tumor cells were stained positive for cytokeratin AE1/3, cytokeratin CAM5.2, chromogranin A (CgA), synaptophysin (Syn), CD56 antigen, CDX-2 and Ki-67 (approximately 30-50%).
The patient came to our hospital for adjuvant chemotherapy on March 28th, 2013. Multiple nodules in the scalp were found using physical examination (>3) and no cutaneous nodules were palpated at other sites. The patient recalled that he had some reddish papules on his scalp before surgery, but he did not mention them to the surgeon. These papules became gradually larger and formed multiple nodules. Laboratory tests done on admission showed that carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 51.27 U/mL (normal, <37 U/mL), carbohydrate antigen 125 was 95.09 U/mL (normal, <35 U/mL) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) was 123.9 μg/L (normal, <17 μg/L). Magnetic resonance of the head showed multiple space-occupying lesions with a rich blood supply in the soft tissue of his scalp . Our patient received one cycle of systemic chemotherapy with a regimen of etoposide 100 mg/m2 IV on days 1-3 and cisplatin 25 mg/m2 IV on days 1-3.
He underwent a lumpectomy and transfer of a skin flap after chemotherapy. The largest nodule was about 2.5 cm in diameter, and it was removed during surgery. Pathological examination of the scalp nodule showed that the size of tumor was 2 × 2 × 1 cm. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed that the scalp metastasis was composed of small to medium-sized cells with minimal cytoplasm, irregularly shaped nuclei with granular chromatin and prominent nucleoli in some cells. Tumor cells were arranged in diffuse and nesting patterns and mitoses were numerous (24 mitoses per 10 high power fields) . Immunohistochemical analyses showed that tumor cells stained positive for CD56 (weak), Syn (diffuse), CDX-2 (strong), pan-cytokeratin, cytokeratin 8, cytokeratin CAM5.2 and Ki-67, with the Ki-67 index reaching up to 60% . On the other hand, tumor cells stained negative for CK20, transcription termination factor 1 (TTF-1), melanoma antibody (HMB45) and CgA . On the basis of the pathological examination and medical history, the metastatic tumor of the scalp was considered to be a poorly differentiated carcinoma that originated from the colon with necrosis and neuroendocrine differentiation (NEC grade 3).
But other scalp nodules became larger and new nodules appeared after surgery. The patient received one additional cycle of the same chemotherapy regimen after April 23rd, 2013. Tumor progression was considered to have occurred once scalp nodules further increased in size and NSE levels further rose after chemotherapy. A CT scan of the patient’s abdomen was performed on May 14th, 2013. The scan showed that he had liver, pancreatic and lymph node metastases. Once visceral metastases were found, the patient received subcutaneous injection of octreotide acetate 0.1 mg per 8 hours for three days as of May 26th, 2013, and intramuscular injection of 20 mg octreotide acetate microspheres every 28 days three days later. Finally the patient received palliative and supportive treatment, and died of disease progression one month later.