A 45-year-old female was admitted to the emergency department (ED) following a rear-end collision accident. At the scene the patient was awake but somewhat somnolent. Her circulatory function was compensated with a blood pressure (BP) of 150/80 mmHg and she complained of back pain. Following initial assessment the patient was transferred via helicopter to our level 1 trauma centre for further evaluation and treatment. Upon arrival in our trauma bay the clinical picture was unchanged. Detailed clinical assessment including laboratory tests, ultrasound, radiology and computed tomography (CT) was negative and the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for observation. Within one day her cognitive function had returned to normal and the patient was transferred to one of our normal wards. On day 2 following the trauma the patient complained of blurred vision. Ophthalmology assessment revealed a visual field loss affecting the right lower quadrant on confrontation field testing. Clinical eye examination further revealed a visual acuity for the right eye of 0.5 decimal (LogMAR 0.30, Snellen ratio 20/40) and for the left eye of 0.8 decimal (LogMAR 0.1, Snellen ratio 20/25). Pupil testing indicated an afferent defect of the right eye. There was no history of eye disease prior to the accident. Imaging studies, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit, showed an isolated unilateral distension of the right optic nerve with edematous soaking of the adjacent retro-orbital fat . There was no fracture of the skull or of the optic canal and no intracranial pathology was noted. High-dose corticosteroids were administered for three consecutive days and then reduced, i.e. prednisone 250 mg IV for three days, reduced to 100 mg IV and stopped. The patient's symptoms responded quickly to this approach. Repeated eye examination after one week showed normal testing results for pupillary function and confrontation fields, and visual acuities returned to 1.0 decimal on both eyes (LogMAR 0.00, Snellen ratio 20/20).