In November 2019, an 81-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery of the Jagiellonian University in Cracow due to tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) on the left side cT3N1M0. Clinical examination and computed tomography (CT) revealed a synchronous left breast tumor . Biopsy from the breast tumor revealed mucinous carcinoma, and diagnostic imaging excluded dissemination. After tumor board consultation, we decided to start the treatment with surgical excision of tongue SCC and bilateral neck dissection. Selective bilateral neck dissection (level I–IV ipsilateral and I–III contralateral) was performed by a horizontal neck fold incision. During neck dissection, the facial vessels on the left side were preserved for an island FAMM (iFAMM) flap. However, the facial vessels on the right side were ligated. Tongue cancer was excised with margins control by frozen section examination. Tongue reconstruction with an iFAMM flap was performed according to the technique described by Joseph et al. . The healing process was uneventful. Histopathological examination revealed squamous cell carcinoma G1 resected with inadequate distal margin (2mm) and metastasis in one lymph node (IIa cervical level) on the left side (pT3N1). The patient was qualified for postoperative radiotherapy and radical mastectomy with axillary node dissection. However, the patient did not give her consent for the proposed treatment.
In February 2020, the patient started hormone therapy with tamoxifen due to breast cancer and had oncological controls in our outpatient department every month. In December 2020, after 4 months from the last visit, the patient was admitted to the outpatient clinic with suspicion of tongue cancer on the opposite, right side. Biopsy from the ulceration confirmed SCC G2. Clinical examination and CT revealed only local advancement of the disease cT2N0M0. Breast cancer disease was stable. We proposed surgical treatment, but the patient again did not give her consent. For that reason, the patient was qualified for definitive radiotherapy. However, the total dose was reduced due to general health conditions. The patient received 30 Gy in 10 fractions on the second primary and cervical region, and the treatment was finished in February 2021. In May 2021, 2 months after the last visit, the patient was admitted to our outpatient department with dysphagia and odynophagia. Clinical examination and biopsy confirmed local recurrence of the tongue cancer on the right side. CT showed local recurrence with dimensions 21 × 42 × 29 mm and without suspicious neck lymph nodes (rT3N0M0) . Definitive radiotherapy was impossible at this stage of the disease. The patients agreed to salvage surgery, hemiglossectomy with reconstruction and without neck dissection. Due to the fact that the right facial vessels were ligated in November 2019 and considering the extent of the defect, iFAMM was not possible. Also, the general condition of the patient was a contraindication to extensive, long procedures such as free flap reconstruction. Another contraindication for free flap reconstruction was a higher risk of early postoperative thrombosis of microvascular anastomoses due to continuous tamoxifen intake. Based on CT evaluation, we decided to use a dpFAMM flap for reconstruction, which was performed as described earlier . Histopathological examination revealed SCC G2 resected with adequate margins >5mm (pT3). The healing process was uneventful . Unfortunately, in August 2021, we observed enlarged cervical lymph nodes on the left side. Neck dissection in levels II and V was performed. Histopathological examination confirmed three metastatic lymph nodes. The patient was disqualified from adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient died 2 months following neck dissection due to pneumonia.