A 48-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital due to back pain with unknown causes for over 20 days, which could not be alleviated by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). MRI scan showed abnormal signals at the third and fourth thoracic vertebral bodies and the T3/4 intervertebral disc, as well as infectious lesions and formation of paravertebral abscess . Blood routine examination of the patient showed no abnormality, of which the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 98 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 75 mg/L, T-STOP.TB test showed high positivity. According to international standard revised by American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA), the patient’s neurological function was grade D. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed upper thoracic spinal tuberculosis accompanied with spinal cord injury. The patient was then treated with enhanced tetrad anti-tuberculosis strategy (including isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and streptomycin) for 2 weeks, after which the ESR reduced to 42 mm/h and CRP reduced to 17 mg/L. Then the one-stage operation through the posterolateral approach was conducted. In brief, the focus debridement through intertransverse articulation at the left rib, spinal decompression, and ilium grafting were conducted. The two ends of the lesion were fixed by two groups of pedicle screws to restore the stability of upper thoracic spine and correct the kyphosis. Few tissues of the lesions were obtained during the operation for pathological examinations, which showed caseous necrosis and tuberculosis infection.
After surgery, the patient was in persistent low-grade fever, and the white blood cell count, ESR, and CRP were slightly increased. Such changes were initially considered to be the transient manifestations after operations of infectious diseases. However, sputum-like secretions were found during the dressing on the postoperative Day 7, and the secretions containing small bubbles were found when pressing the wound. Based on our experience of treating esophageal injuries after anterior cervical surgery, the tracheal or esophageal damages were highly suspected, due to the fact that the bubbles could not be found in regular wound infections (except for the infection of aerobacter aerogenes).
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was immediately conducted, which showed that the airway of the patient was intact. Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract showed a bulge at 22 cm to the incisor, with a black hemispheric lustrous foreign matter at the center, which was surrounded by esophageal mucosa . Endoscopy confirmed that the patient was with postoperative esophageal perforation caused by screw. CT scan showed that the right screw perforated the anterior cortex of the vertebral body and the esophagus at the T4 level . However, fortunately, no mediastinal infection was observed in the CT scan.
After preoperative preparation, emergent posterior wound incision and rinsing was conducted. The T4 screw was removed, Vacuum Sealing Drainage (VSD) was performed, and jejunum catheterization was used for enteral nutrition. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after the operation. The vital signs of the patient were stable on the day after operation. After consulting with the physicians or surgeons from the departments of Gastroenterology, ICU, Thoracic Surgery, and Spinal Surgery, the patient was transferred back to our department 2 days later, while symptomatic and supportive treatment, including enteral nutrition, anti-infection, infusion of human serum albumin, VSD, and continuously enhanced anti-tuberculosis were conducted. Endoscopy at 1 month later showed that the perforation of esophagus was completely healed, while the lumen dimeter of the esophagus was about 50% lower than that of normal esophagus. However, fortunately, the patient had no symptoms of dysphagia or pain when swallowing, and thus no esophageal dilation was performed. The patient’s wound was with infection when the esophageal perforation was discovered. Bacterial culture showed that the infection was caused by Escherichia coli. After continuous treatment with sensitive antibiotics for 2.5 months and 5 times of VSD vacuum aspiration, the infected wound recovered gradually.
After treated with the enhanced tetrad anti-tuberculosis strategy for 3 months, the patient was further treated with isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide for 15 months for anti-tuberculosis. In addition, imaging and blood examinations were also conducted for the patient every 3 months. The re-examination at 18 months after operation showed tuberculosis clinical manifestations of the patient disappeared, 3 continuous ESR and CRP examinations showed normal results, CT scan showed the union of bone graft, and the upper thoracic spinal abscess disappeared, while no sequestrum was found . These findings demonstrated that the upper thoracic spinal tuberculosis met the criteria of clinical healing.