A 32-year-old woman complaining of aggravated wheezing, bruising, and numbness of multiple fingers presented to our rheumatology and immunology department. She reported epigastric and right upper abdominal pain of 6 months duration. She had suffered from bronchial asthma for 5 years, treated with inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Physical findings included purpura . Laboratory tests revealed increased leukocytosis (15.59 × 103/μL) with eosinophilia (7.96 × 103/μL, 51.1%) and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (30 mm/h), C-reactive protein (0.54 mg/dL), immunoglobulin (Ig) E (808 kU/L), IgG4 (2028 mg/L), and rheumatoid factor (176 IU/mL). Negative studies included anti-nuclear antibodies; and cytoplasmic-, perinuclear-, proteinase-3-, and myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Computed tomography of the chest disclosed a subpleural patchy shadow in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe . She was diagnosed with EGPA according to the 1990 classification criteria of the American College of Rheumatology , and began therapy with daily doses of prednisone acetate 30 mg and cyclophosphamide 50 mg given orally. All symptoms resolved quickly, and eosinophilia and ESR returned to normal. Four weeks later, when prednisone acetate was reduced to 27.5 mg, she developed a mild dry nocturnal cough, and experienced a relapse of respiratory, digestive, and neurological symptoms after another 2 weeks, when the daily dose of prednisone acetate was reduced to 25 mg. Consequently, she received supplemental betamethasone 7 mg by intramuscular injection that resulted in a remission of only 1 week’s duration.
Considering that SGB is an effective treatment for asthma and multiple ischemic conditions, an experimental ultrasound-guided unilateral SGB was planned. The patient was positioned supine with the neck turned to the right. The skin was disinfected with iodophor, and a high frequency (4–12 MHz) linear-array ultrasound transducer (TUR200, Tuoren Medical Device Co., Ltd. Henan, China) covered with a sterile sleeve was placed transversely at the left anterior cervical region to identify relevant anatomic structures that included the C6 transverse process, carotid artery, internal jugular vein, longus colli muscle, prevertebral fascia, vertebral artery, and inferior thyroid artery. A 25-gauge needle was inserted in-plane and the needle tip was placed between the fascia investing the longus colli muscle and the prevertebral fascia, and 2 mL 1% lidocaine was injected .
Immediately after the block, Horner’s syndrome occurred, and she reported simultaneous resolution of all symptoms, such as wheezing, epigastric and abdominal pain, and numbness of the fingers. SGB was repeated every 2 days, alternating between left and right aspects of the neck, for completion of a 7-procedure treatment course. Prednisone acetate was successfully tapered to 22.5 mg daily without symptomatic relapse. Furthermore, no inhaled corticosteroids were required, and improved mood and sleep were reported. Unfortunately, recurrent symptoms were triggered by a negative emotional event, and inhaled corticosteroid therapy was reinstituted to control asthma. A second course of SGBs conferred satisfactory symptomatic relief. The prednisone acetate dose was gradually reduced to 10 mg/day, with cyclophosphamide added at a daily maintenance dose of 50 mg over a 3-month period with no observed recurrence.