A 66-year-old woman underwent total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, omentectomy, resection of dissemination, and low anterior resection with formation of a sigmoid end colostomy for endometrial cancer with infiltration of the rectum. The transperitoneal route was used to create the colostomy in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen at a site decided by a doctor and wound ostomy nurse. She had received six cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin as adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery and had been under follow-up. A stoma prolapse had occurred 4 months after the initial operation, but there were no other symptoms, and it had resolved spontaneously.
Fourteen months after the initial surgery, she presented to the hospital’s emergency department complaining of a prolapsed colostomy and several episodes of vomiting. Examination of the abdomen revealed a prolapsed stoma that was 20 cm in length (a), swollen with edematous change, and somewhat firm. Although the stoma prolapse appeared viable, some of the mucosa was darkish red, indicating congestion. There was no evidence of abdominal pain or dilatation. A diagnosis of prolapsed sigmoid end colostomy with an ischemic area was made. Initially, manual reduction was attempted by gradually applying pressure to the protruding portion of the prolapsed stoma toward the luminal side with the patient in the supine position. This was unsuccessful. We then applied a 50% glucose solution to the mucosa of the stoma prolapse to reduce the edema but without noticeable effect. When we reattempted manual reduction, the prolapsed stoma developed a rupture about 5 cm in length (b). Therefore, an emergency laparotomy was performed.
After making a midline incision, we found that the small intestine was incarcerated in the aperture made by the formation of the colostomy . Enlargement of the aperture and releasing the incarcerated small intestine within the stoma prolapse into the intra-abdominal cavity revealed reversible ischemic change in about 40 cm of the ileum, which did not need resection. When the incarcerated ileum was released, the prolapsed stoma was easily reduced. We resected the prolapsed stoma, including the damaged length of the colon, and refashioned a sigmoid end colostomy in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed light and dark brown areas of ischemia and an area where the colonic stoma had perforated into the sigmoid mesentery, measuring 9 cm long and 3.5 cm wide .
The patient was discharged 10 days after surgery with no postoperative complications. There were no stoma-related complications in the 6 months after the surgery.