A 65-year-old man, with early-stage gastric cancer, was referred to our hospital. He was 170 cm tall and weighed 67 kg (body mass index of 23.1 kg/m2). He was asymptomatic and had an unremarkable medical history. Endoscopic biopsy of the depressed gastric tumor (type 0-IIc + III) revealed a well-to-moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. However, submucosal involvement was observed on endoscopic ultrasonography. No nodal or distant metastases were noted on contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT). Serum levels of CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen were within normal limits. The patient was diagnosed with early-stage gastric cancer, clinical stage I (T1bN0M0) , and was scheduled to undergo RDG with regional lymph node dissection.
The da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Tokyo, Japan) was used. After exposing the left gastropancreatic fold , the left gastric vein was identified, clipped, and divided using a vessel-sealing device . Behind the left gastric vein, the LGA-1 was identified, doubly clipped, and divided following artery denervation. Because the LGA-1 appeared to be slightly more slender than usual , careful dissection was carried out toward the root of the celiac artery, where the duplicate LGA (LGA-2) was identified . The two LGAs were similar in size, and ran towards the lesser curvature of the stomach. The LGA-2 was exposed carefully along the outermost layer for lymphadenectomy, denervated, doubly clipped, and divided . LGA-1 and LGA-2 both branched individually and had different nerve plexuses The RDG was completed without any complications. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8.
Postoperatively, we reevaluated the preoperative contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan and identified two LGAs. Both arteries fed the lesser curvature of the stomach, LGA-1 towards the oral side and LGA-2 towards the anal side. A three-dimensional (3D)-CT angiogram with multiplanar reconstruction using the Synapse Vincent 4.0 (Fuji Film, Japan) revealed that the LGA-1, 2.7 mm in diameter, branched from the root of the splenic artery and the LGA-2, 3.0 mm diameter, branched from the main trunk of the celiac artery .