A perineal mass, present for 2 years, that had gradually increased in size over time, causing discomfort.
A 52-year-old Asian man visited the outpatient department for discomfort associated with a perineal mass that he had first noticed 2 years prior. Initially, the patient experienced pain but did not seek medical assistance because the recurrent condition had a negligible impact on his daily routine. However, the swelling gradually increased, leading to throbbing pain and minor scrotal abrasion.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, which were managed with oral medication. He also had a surgical history of ureteroscopic lithotripsy 4 years prior and conventional hemorrhoidectomy 10 years prior. The patient’s medical history revealed no evidence of underlying abdominal malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, abdominal trauma, or other gastrointestinal disorders.
No family history of abdominal neoplasms or inflammatory bowel disease was noted, and the patient exhibited regular social functioning and self-care abilities.
Vital signs, including blood pressure and body temperature, were within the normal ranges. Physical examination revealed a soft, well-defined, non-tender mass at the left buttock tracking towards the patient’s perineum, without a visible opening. The preliminary diagnosis indicated a soft tissue tumor.
Laboratory data, including white blood cell count, hemoglobin, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and electrolytes such as sodium and potassium, were within the normal range.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a swelling of the abscess cavity connected to a rectal cutaneous fistula. A track-like lesion (approximately 6 cm × 0.7 cm) was observed between the internal and external anal sphincters . The superior aspect of the lesion was positioned within the intersphincteric plane, and the lower part extended into the perineum . There was no evidence of invasion of the levator ani muscle or muscular plane of the gluteus, and the small intestine and mesentery appeared normal.