A 24 year old gravida 2 para 2 female presented to our tertiary referral center (Grant Government Medical College and Sir JJ Group of Hospitals Mumbai, India) for the first time, in the year 2021 with complaints of continuous incontinence for 18 months. She underwent abdominal hysterectomy for benign leiomyoma nearly 18 months ago in a peripheral part of western India. Prior to this, the patient had 2 normal vaginal deliveries 2 and 4 years ago. The patient developed continuous incontinence immediately after removal of foley catheter on the 2nd postoperative day. The patient was discharged on the 8th postoperative day without any wound infection on surgical site.
The patient was referred for the management of VVF which was diagnosed elsewhere. Her physical examination and laboratory investigations were normal. An ultrasonography revealed left mild hydroureteronephrosis with an empty bladder. The contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed contrast extravasation from the left side of the posterior wall of urinary bladder into the vaginal vault of tract (1x2x5 cm) and a right ovarian cyst which was stuck to the sutured vaginal vault .
The examination under anaesthesia with cystoscopy and vaginal/speculum findings revealed a papillary frond like mass protruding intravesically from VVF site which was free from the edges of fistulous opening all around. Left ureteric orifice couldn’t be visualized .
Considering the CT scan and cystoscopic findings, the patient was electively planned for modified O’Conners VVF repair with left ureteric reimplantation. On exploratory laparotomy, the right ovarian cyst was densely adhered near the left vaginal vault apex which was located near the VVF site with right fimbrial herniation into the bladder through the VVF tract . This fimbrial herniation was mimicking bladder mass on preoperative cystoscopy. The ovary was enlarged in size with cystic consistency. The tube and peritoneum were normal. The ovary was dissected free from the bladder wall. The ovary seemed to contain only a small volume of normal tissue, so a right salpingo-oophorectomy was done. Left ureteric reimplantation was done over DJ stent. VVF tract was excised with double layer closure done on the bladder and vaginal side using 3/0 vicryl and omentum was interposed between the two. The right ureteric orifice was localized and found to be normal.
Histopathological examination showed serous cystadenoma of the right ovary and normal right fimbria. An indwelling catheter was left in situ for 2 weeks. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient voided with a good stream and she was clinically asymptomatic at the end of 6 months.