A 49-year-old male visited our outpatient department (OPD) with chief complaints of fatigue, light-headedness, nocturnal chest pain, and palpitations. He was diabetic, dyslipidemic, and hypertensive for 5 years. Medical history did not reveal any syncope, effort angina, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, or pedal swelling. His daily medications included Metformin (1000 mg twice) and Glimepiride (2 mg once), Aspirin (75 mg once), Atorvastatin (20 mg once), and Telmisartan (40 mg once). The blood glucose was well-controlled, as indicated by a blood HbA1c level of 6.8%. He smoked 30 cigarettes daily and consumed alcohol occasionally. Physical examination revealed stable vitals. He was obese with a body mass index (BMI) of 30. In addition, bibasal fine rales with occasional ronchi were detected, and resting pulse oximetry oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96%.
Recent investigations revealed normal urine albumin–creatinine ratio, blood creatinine, normal lipid profile, and euthyroid status. His coronary angiography (performed 6 months ago) showed minor plaque burden (30%–40% disease) in the mid-left anterior descending artery. The patient underwent a 24-h Holter ECG monitoring due to light-headedness and palpitations; frequent short and long sinus pauses were detected with the highest record of 7.8 s . Thus, he was advised urgent pacemaker implantation. Surprisingly, the Holter monitoring report revealed that all sinus pauses occurred only during the sleep at night . Further questioning confirmed recurrent nocturnal awakening and daytime sleepiness. His partner confirmed loud snoring at night. Considering his clinical presentation, he
was provisionally diagnosed with OSA and advised polysomnography for confirmation, which revealed AHI = 68 and oxygen desaturation index = 65 . Thus, he was diagnosed with severe OSA with significant desaturation. He underwent a CPAP trial and was advised weight reduction and cessation of smoking. Further, the CPAP trial AHI was drastically decreased to 5.6 , the quality of sleep improved dramatically, and daytime sleepiness subsided. Subsequently, Holter ECG monitoring repeated during CPAP did not show any more significant sinus pauses as reflected by the longest sinus pause of 1.3 s .
Therefore, he was advised to use CPAP for at least 4 h/night. Consequently, the plan of implantation of the pacing device was canceled, and he was followed up after 4 weeks.