Physical examination of a 63-year-old man led to suspicion of gastric cancer. He had a history of hypertension and bronchial asthma. On referral to our hospital, esophageal cancer was also diagnosed in addition to the gastric cancer. Endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed for the early-stage gastric cancer. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical treatment was planned for the esophageal cancer. Chemotherapy was initiated with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin (5-fluorouracil at 800 mg/m2, days 1–5; cisplatin at 80 mg/m2, day 1 of a 5 day cycle). One week after completing the first cycle of chemotherapy, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to determine the efficacy of treatment. This incidentally revealed ascending aortic thrombus that had not been present 1 month before starting chemotherapy. No thrombus in other vessels or embolism to other organs was observed. Blood tests showed no clotting abnormalities: fibrinogen, 340 mg/dL; prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, 0.95; activated partial thromboplastin time, 23.7 s; D-dimer, 0.6 μg/mL; antithrombin III, 128%; and protein C, 62%. Before chemotherapy, only prothrombin time/international normalized ratio and activated partial thromboplastin time were checked, and both were normal (0.92, and 25.6 s, respectively). The patient was immediately referred to our department. As CT showed a floating, 2 cm thrombus , we decided to perform emergency surgery because of the high risk of embolism. The cross-section of the ascending aortic diameter measured 33 × 33 mm, with no calcified lesions. The surgery began within 2 h of the referral to our department.
Median sternotomy was performed and the ascending aorta was exposed. Epiaortic echography confirmed the location of one large thrombus and two smaller thrombi in the ascending aorta . Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by cannulation of the right femoral artery and right atrium, allowing the ascending aorta to be clamped cephalad to the thrombus. Echography showed sufficient space for cannulation proximal to the thrombus, so we decided to cannulate the aortic root for antegrade cardioplegic infusion. To prevent the thrombus from floating away as a result of the change in blood flow, the aorta was immediately clamped as soon as cardiopulmonary bypass was started. After aortic cross-clamping and aortotomy, three thrombi were identified as per echography. The aortic intima showed only mild atherosclerotic changes .
One of these thrombi was excised by Metzenbaum scissors and the others were easily removed by forceps. Histological analysis of thrombi revealed all were blood clots, with no neoplastic lesions.
The patient was started on low-molecular-weight heparin, warfarin, and aspirin on postoperative day 1. Once the effects of the warfarin were sufficient, heparin was terminated. Postoperative contrast-enhanced CT confirmed no recurrence of thrombus, and he was discharged on postoperative day 16. One month after thrombectomy, the patient underwent surgery for the esophageal cancer. No recurrence of cancer or thrombus was evident as of 6 months after this second surgery, so warfarin was terminated. As of 1 year after the cancer surgery, the patient remains on aspirin only and no recurrences of either cancer or thrombus have been identified.