A 28-year-old Saudi right-handed woman, who is not known to have any medical or surgical history, presented to the clinic with a history of right-sided headaches associated with blurred vision for the past 2 weeks. The headache was severe, sudden, tension-like, associated with nausea and infrequent vomiting, and partially relieved by acetaminophen tablets. She had no history of trauma, loss of consciousness, or seizure. She had a history of irregular menses since puberty for which she was not investigated before. She had no symptoms of thyroid dysfunction or other hormonal disorders. She had no family history of brain tumors or endocrine diseases, and she was not taking any regular medications. Other systemic reviews were unremarkable. On examination, she was vitally stable, conscious, alert, and oriented. She had bitemporal hemianopia on visual field testing. Other cranial nerves, motor, sensory, and cerebellar functions were all intact. Her hormonal profile and laboratory tests were unremarkable. She underwent a brain MRI which demonstrated a clear intrasellar and suprasellar mass measuring 2.5 cm in its largest axis that was compressing the optic chiasm and displacing the anterior communicating artery . The mass appeared predominantly cystic with an internal area of mixed signal intensity and enhancement at the anterior lateral side of the cyst. The preoperative diagnosis based on the radiological features was consistent with cystic craniopharyngioma. As the patient was symptomatic, surgical management was offered to her. Two weeks after the presentation, she underwent an elective endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal surgery to excise the lesion. The ear, nose, and throat team exposed the sellar region endonasally, after which the neurosurgery team proceeded to resect the mass. Intraoperatively, as a small portion of the lesion was attached to the pituitary gland without a clear plan for separation, only subtotal excision was achieved to prevent hormonal imbalances in the patient. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient made a full recovery and was discharged on the 6th postoperative day. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination which showed foamy macrophages, chronic inflammatory cells, multinucleated giant cells, necrotic debris, hemosiderin deposits, and cholesterol clefts . The histopathological findings confirmed the diagnosis of a xanthogranuloma of the sellar region. A 1-month follow-up brain MRI revealed a residual tumor with calcific and cystic components . The patient was evaluated by the radiation oncology team for potential adjuvant therapy, but it was deemed unnecessary due to the low grade of the tumor; so no adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was given to the patient. A 6-month postoperative follow-up brain MRI showed marked improvement in the size and appearance of the residual lesion with no evidence of recurrence . Moreover, an 18-month follow-up brain MRI revealed no signs of tumor recurrence and a stable lesion appearance . The patient experienced no recurrence of the clinical symptoms during the follow-up period and was discharged from the clinic as she was moving to live abroad.