A 73-year-old male visited a previous doctor with a chief complaint of progressive leg edema and dyspnea on exertion 1 year prior. The patient had a history of spasmodic angina pectoris, midbrain infarction, and chronic renal failure. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple hepatic cysts compressing the right lung, right side of the heart, and IVC. He underwent percutaneous aspiration for the largest cyst in segment eight of the liver; however, the leg edema did not improve, and the cyst flared up within a month. He was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment.
Blood tests at the time of our visit revealed no significant findings other than mildly decreased renal function . CT showed multiple liver cysts, with the largest cyst in segment eight measuring 13 cm in diameter and compressing the right side of the heart and the right thoracic cavity . The IVC was bilaterally compressed by multiple liver cysts in the caudal lobe , implying blood flow obstruction. The cysts were also present in the hilar region of the liver, compressing the portal bifurcation and causing stenosis of the right branch of the portal vein . Angiography showed that the IVC was markedly stenotic, with an 11-mmHg pressure gradient on the central and peripheral sides of the IVC stenosis . Furthermore, superior mesenteric artery angiography showed that the portal vein enhanced the antegrade flow; however, left gastric vein–left renal vein shunt developed . No intestinal edema was found on imaging studies. Considering these imaging findings, pre- or post-hepatic mild portal hypertension (PH) may have occurred with the IVC compression.
Based on the above test results, we concluded that the IVC stenosis due to the liver cysts was the cause of the leg edema and dyspnea on exertion and hence decided to treat the liver cysts with fenestration. To confirm the hemodynamic status of the IVC, intraoperative angiography with CT during hepatic arteriography, CT during arterial portography, and angiography were performed in the hybrid operating room to allow IVC and PV angiography before and after liver cyst fenestration. Moreover, portal vein pressure (PVP) and central vein pressure (CVP) were continuously monitored intraoperatively as indices of hemodynamics in relation to the release of IVC stenosis. Furthermore, if the above methods did not improve the IVC stenosis, we were prepared for the dissection of the hepatic caudate lobe from the IVC and the placement of a metallic stent in the vessel.
The surgery was performed in a supine position under general anesthesia. To monitor PV pressure, a 15-Fr intravascular catheter (ANTHRON® P-U CATHETER; TORAY Medical, Japan) was inserted and fixed peripherally in the jejunum vein. CVP was defined as the pressure measured at the peripheral side of the IVC stenosis and measured by inserting a sensor through the right femoral vein. After mobilization of the left lobe of the liver, we fenestrated the largest lesion in segment eight of the liver. The CVP did not change before and after the fenestration of this lesion. After mobilization of the right lobe, the lesions on both sides of the IVC were identified under ultrasonographic guidance, and the cysts were fenestrated on the left and right sides of the IVC. Before and after fenestration, the CVP decreased from 5 to 1 mmHg, and the PVP decreased from 22 to 17 mmHg. The intraoperative changes in CVP and PVP are summarized in Table . Angiography findings and improvement of CVP confirmed that IVC stenosis was released after fenestration . Intraoperative CT findings also confirmed that the cysts that were causing the stenosis had been fenestrated . The cyst fundus was cauterized using a bipolar device, and a leak test was performed from the gallbladder duct to confirm that there was no bile leakage, finally completing the surgery. The operation time was 334 min, and the amount of bleeding during the surgery was 767 mL. The patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. His weight markedly decreased from 63.0 kg just before the surgery to 58.8 kg at the time of discharge. Six months after the surgery, the CT scan showed no obvious recurrence of the cysts . No leg edema recurrence or weight gain was observed.