A 30-year old woman was admitted to our hospital to undergo renal biopsy. According to her medical records, microscopic hematuria was detected on every urine analysis since her birth. At 16-years-old, the potential causes were closely examined. However, no diagnosis was made. Renal biopsy was not performed at that time because the patient’s manifestation was only microscopic hematuria without increased urinary protein or other signs of renal dysfunction. A few years later, she chose to stop her regular visits to the doctor. When she was 27-years old, she became pregnant. Upon her initial visit at the department of obstetrics and gynecology, she tested positive for hematuria. In the 30th week of pregnancy, her urine tested positive for the presence of protein but the results returned to normal after puerperium. Further, the patient experienced hypertension soon after delivery, but her blood pressure was normotensive during all other periods. Through entire pregnancy and post-partum, evidence of hematuria remained upon testing her urine samples.
The patient did not experience any subjective or objective symptoms associated with kidney disorders such as, fever, deafness, hemoptysis, or rash. In addition, she was not taking any medication. Her urinary findings did not change over 2-years. The urinary protein level was 60 and 40 mg/day in 2016 and 2018, respectively. Hematuria was assessed using a urinary occult blood test resulting in 3+ and 2+ in 2016 and 2018, respectively. In addition, the urinary dysmorphic red blood cell (RBC) sediment was 50–99/high power field (HPF) and 30–49/HPF in 2016 and 2018, respectively. In contrast, serum creatinine levels increased from 0.57 mg/dl to 0.86 mg/dl during the same 2-years, without special events.
The patient had a history of far-sightedness, astigmatism, and strabismus from birth as well as polycystic ovarian syndrome diagnosed at the age of 27-years. Her family history included a paternal grandmother with a subarachnoid hemorrhage and a father with hypertension. There was no family history of renal dysfunction or urinary abnormalities.
Physical examination results on admission were as follows: height 152 cm, weight 42.0 kg, body mass index (BMI) 18.2 kg/m2, body temperature 36.8 °C, blood pressure 99/76 mmHg, and pulse of 73 beats/min. Hearing loss, skin manifestations, and joint symptoms were not detected. In addition, the patient’s respiratory sounds were normal and abdominal tenderness was not detected. Laboratory data showed renal insufficiency [serum creatinine, 0.86 mg/dl; estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 64 ml/min/1.73 m2] and hematuria (urinary occult blood, 3+; urinary dysmorphic RBC sediment, 11.3/HPF) . eGFR was calculated by serum creatinine concentrations using the Japanese eGFR equation . The patient’s urinary protein level was 60 mg/day, which is classified as normal to mildly increased proteinuria according to the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes 2012 Clinical Practice Guidelines . Immunological testing showed no abnormal findings .
The kidney size was within normal limits (right: 109 × 58 mm; left, 108 × 62 mm) and compression of the left renal vein between the aorta and proximal superior mesenteric artery, which would suggest Nutcracker syndrome, was not detected on abdominal computed tomography (CT). However, the density of the renal cortex was remarkably low . In addition, numerous small high-intensity spots were distributed within the subcapsular cortex on magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted image .
The differential diagnosis of hematuria from early childhood include IgA nephropathy, Alport syndrome, and TBMN. Therefore, we performed renal biopsy the day after admission. Renal histological examination revealed global sclerosis in 5 of 22 glomeruli, cystic dilatation of the Bowman’s capsule in 3 of 22 glomeruli (14.1%), and atrophy of the glomerular tufts . Immunofluorescence studies indicated no deposition of immunoglobulins or complement proteins. Type IV collagen staining showed normal expression levels of the α5 chain in the GBM and Bowman’s capsule . The renal biopsy samples obtained for electron microscopy examination did not contain cystic glomeruli and therefore, the detailed appearance of cystic glomeruli could not be evaluated. Electron microscopy revealed thinning of the GBM. The width of the GBM was measured at 30 random points to calculate the average value. The average thickness of the GBM was 191 nm, which exceeded criteria set forth by Haas et al. for the lower limit of normal thickness (215 nm for females) . Other morphological abnormalities, including electron-dense deposits and foot process effacement, were not identified on electron microscopy. Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with TBMN accompanied by GCKD.
Although this patient had no recorded family history of GCKD, we examined whether there were any associations with known genetic mutations using next-generation sequencing. There were no pathogenic mutations of UMOD, MUC1, or SEC61A1, encoding uromodulin, mucin1, or Sec61 translocon alpha 1 subunit, which are causative proteins of autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease, including GCKD. No pathogenic mutations of COL4A3 and COL4A4, encoding type IV collagen α3 and α4 of the GBM, were detected. Based on these results, we diagnosed the patient with TBMN coexistent with sporadic GCKD. The patient was discharged and followed closely without intervention.