A 74-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with symmetric hyperkeratotic skin changes for a 7-month duration. Clinical manifestation showed hyperkeratotic plaques, first affecting the oral mucosa, face, and fingers then extending to palms, soles, and trunk. Meanwhile, the patient also complained of heartburn and felt bloated after meals during the last 2 months. The patient had no other obvious medical history. He denied any history of similar diseases in his family. The patient was a common farmer around the countryside and often planted in farmland under the sun. He lived in the southeast of China. He was married and reported no drug abuse history. He drank alcohol occasionally and was a former smoker.
On physical examination, hyperkeratotic plaques were observed in the oral mucosa, face, fingers, palms, soles, and trunk . No lesions were detected in the wrinkles of the neck, armpits, groin, and other parts of the body. The other physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 100.30 μg/L (normal range 0 to 5), and carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) was 250.98 u/mL (normal range 0 to 40). Other laboratory findings were within normal range, and no other clinically significant findings were noted.
A biopsy of skin lesion revealed hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and hyperpigmentation of the basal layer, and some dermal papillae were projected upward in the form of finger-like projections . Furthermore, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed. A histopathological examination of the gastric mucosa showed dilated branching tubules of varying diameter and presence of acinar structure. In addition, the malignant glands invaded fibrous stroma, and individual neoplastic cells were columnar or cuboidal, with the varying degree of nuclear atypia from middle to high grade . An endoscopic ultrasound was performed to determine the depth of invasion and lymph node metastasis, which led to the diagnosis of gastric cardia tubular adenocarcinoma and TNM classification (T4N2M0). The patient was detected with lymph node metastasis in the abdominal cavity by a computed tomography scan.
The diagnosis of MAN associated with gastric adenocarcinoma (T4N2M0) was given. Palliative surgery was recommended to relieve symptoms and improve life quality of the patient. Then the patient was transferred to the department of gastrointestinal surgery for tumor resection and lymphadenectomy. A subsequent slight improvement was seen in the skin condition. Unfortunately, the patient died of cancer cachexia 3 months later.