A 47-year-old lady without significant past medical or surgical history presented to the outpatient clinic with intermittent episodes of left hypochondrial pain radiating towards the left shoulder for 2 months. She did not have associated fever, jaundice, or altered bowel habits. Some loss of appetite was noted without loss of weight. She could not recall any abdominal trauma in the recent past. Physical examination was unremarkable except for a nontender hepatosplenomegaly.
Hematological and biochemical tests were normal. Abdominal radiographs were unremarkable. Abdominal USG revealed a complex cystic lesion in the spleen measuring 4 × 8 × 6 cm with poorly defined double wall and multiple internal septations suggesting a likely hydatidosis along with enlarged fatty liver.
She was given a course of antihelminthics, vaccinated against capsulated organisms predicting possibility of a subsequent splenectomy, and asked to return a month later.
At follow-up, her symptoms persisted and repeated abdominal USG showed expanding splenic cyst measuring 9 × 8 × 8 cm. CECT scan of the abdomen showed a nonenhancing cystic lesion arising from lower pole and hilum of spleen measuring 10 × 9 × 9 cm with multiple internal septations and abutting the tail of pancreas as shown in .
A list of differentials was considered that included a splenic hydatid cyst, pancreatic tail pseudocyst, and a mesenteric cyst. In view of clinical and radiological worsening, she was taken for an elective exploration through a left subcostal incision.
At laparotomy, a huge splenic cyst was found occupying entire lower pole and significant portion of hilum and measuring 9 × 9 × 8 cm. The aspiration of this revealed a brownish translucent fluid as shown in , the routine bacterial culture of which was later reported to be sterile.
The cyst was causing pressure atrophy of the residual splenic parenchyma and also had multiple dense perisplenic and pericystic adhesions. Total splenectomy was done. During intraoperative manipulation, the cyst wall got inadvertently ruptured. The image of splenectomy specimen is shown in .
She had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged on the 7th postoperative day. At 2-week and one-year follow-up, she remained symptom-free.
Histopathologically, gross examination confirmed the operative findings and showed a unilocular already cut-open cyst measuring 9 × 5 cm with wall thickness measuring 2–5 mm.
Microscopic section showed a cyst wall that was composed of hyalinized fibrous tissue without epithelial lining. Also noted were plenty of extravasated red blood cells and hemosiderin laden macrophages over the cyst wall. There was no evidence of cellular atypia. The microscopic image of the SP is shown in .
The features confirmed a SP.