A 35-year-old man from Bihar, presented to our emergency department in unconscious state, with high-grade fever and vomiting since last 5 days. His relatives gave the history of headache for last 6 months. For his persistent headache, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain had been done at an outside hospital 10 days earlier, which showed a left parasellar-middle cranial fossa mass extending via the foramen ovale into the left infratemporal fossa and its dural based and looks most likely like an invasive meningioma . Patient had no recent history of travel or contact with other COVID-19 patients. On examination, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was E1V1M2, chest auscultation showed normal vesicular breath sounds, heart rate (HR) 127/minute, blood pressure (BP) 138/87 mm Hg, temperature 104°F, respiratory rate 36/minute, and SPO2 was 95% on room air. A plain computed tomography (CT) scan of the head under our institutional COVID-19 protocol was immediately performed, which showed the mass as well as hypodensities in both thalami and left caudate nucleus . According to Modified Early Warning Score, this patient was classified as suspected COVID-19 severe case with a score of 12/21 points and was admitted in a dedicated COVID-19 intensive care unit (ICU). Chest radiographs on the day of admission and next day in the isolation were within the normal limits . In view of airway protection and poor GCS, trachea was intubated with endotracheal tube of size 8 mm by wearing complete personal protective equipment (PPE) zone III protection gear and patient was put on synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) mode of mechanical ventilation. As per Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations, nasopharyngeal swab was collected under recommended biosafety precaution. It was placed in viral transport medium (VTM) and sent to laboratory maintaining cold chain. CDC/WHO recommended real-time PCR was performed and ORF1b gene of SARS-CoV-2 was detected in this patient. On the day of admission, cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed increased protein and no bacterial growth, and tests for herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, and varicella zoster virus were also negative. The various laboratory parameters like Hb% of 14.4 g/dL, total leucocyte count (TLC) of 14.81 × 109/mm3, neutrophils 85%, lymphocytes 10%, and other parameters were within normal limit. His arterial blood gas (ABG) was pH: 7.51, PaO2: 131, PaCO2: 22, HCO3: 18, lactate: 1.3. Patient was managed with hydroxychloroquine 400 mg twice daily, azithromycin 500 mg once daily, and injection amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 1.2 g intravenous thrice daily, intravenous methyl prednisolone 1 g once daily, along with other standard ICU therapy. On second day, patient started showing features of raised intracranial pressure like increased BP, bradycardia, and papilledema. Patient was managed with propofol infusion and mannitol. An MRI brain was planned; however, patient had cardiopulmonary arrest and expired next day after about 36 hours of admission.