A 27-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of chronic bilateral blurred vision and discomfort. She suffered from similar complaints 13 years ago. At that time, dry eye syndrome with bilateral corneal erosions was diagnosed. Her condition improved partially after topical treatment but was never completely cured. She had a past medical history of APS-1 including Addison disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, hypoparathyroidism, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. She does not have diabetes mellitus. She has a short body height (147 cm) and low body weight (37 kg). Hair loss was also noted . She wore soft contact lens for approximately 5 years and stopped wearing them for the last 3 years.
On ocular examination, her corrected distance visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was normal. Slit-lamp examination revealed 2 patches of corneal erosions in the right eye . Diffuse superficial punctate erosions with filaments on the lower corneal surface were found in the left eye . Bilateral meibomian gland dysfunction was also noted. Schirmer testing under anesthesia revealed dry eye.
IVCM using Confoscan 3.4.1 (Nidek Technologies, Padova, Italy) was then performed and revealed significant abnormality of the sub-basal nerve plexus and stromal nerve bundles in both eyes. The squamous epithelial cells in the most superficial layer of the cornea were found to be elongated with a tendency to slough off easily, which highlights the poor differentiation of the corneal epithelial layer . The sub-basal nerve plexus was torturous and beading; it lost its parallel pattern in the right eye and became short and segmented in the left eye . In both eyes, the stromal nerve bundles became very thin and torturous , which is quite different from the thick stromal nerve bundles in normal corneas. There was no significant change in the corneal endothelial layer. As a result, ocular surface disease caused by dry eye with severe NK was diagnosed.
In the following 4 months, the corneal surface problems persisted despite regular use of artificial tears, topical corticosteroids, cyclosporin, autologous serum eye drops, and nighttime ointment. Corneal erosions, superficial punctate erosions, and filamentary keratitis were found in both eyes . Treatment including therapeutic soft contact lenses, and punctual occlusion was later performed; both treatments had a limited effect. In the following 2 years, the corneal epithelial erosions relapsed intermittently.