A 29-year-old female underwent breast augmentation with autologous fat grafting at one clinic in Shanghai, China. And swelling of the right breast was observed being more severer on the 2nd day postoperation. Initially the swelling was considered as post-surgery swelling, therefore no special attention was taken. Unexpectedly critically severe swelling on the right side showed with high fever, which running up to 39.5 °C.
Then she was then transferred to another clinic and treated with intravenous Ceftriaxone, 3.0 g, q8h for 2 weeks. Unfortunately, the redness, swelling and pain in her right breast persisted without any improvement tendency.
Subsequently incision and drainage of the right breast was carried out under local anesthesia, meanwhile antibiotics were changed to empirical use of intravenous Levofloxacin, 1.0 g, bid. Still no improvement tendency showed.
Then she was transferred to a Grade A hospital in Shanghai being diagnosed as “soft tissue infection” and antibiotics was adjusted to “intravenous penicillin” (more detailed information is unknown). Nevertheless no sign of significant improvement turned up. Finally she was then hospitalized in our department, on the 58th day after surgery.
Upon admission, physical examination was performed and listed below: low fever being 37.3 °C, pulse being 107 bpm, respiratory rate being 20 bpm and blood pressure being 102/75 mmHg. And redness and swelling were observed ranging from the right breast to right chest. Moreover shoulder accompanied with mottled bruise was obvious. Besides, previous incisions in the infra-mammary fold and the upper pole of her right breast were notable with tendency to form fistula for visible pus outflowing. In addition, several abscesses beneath were obvious with the diameter being 10 cm maximally, and the foci temperature being elevated significantly. Surprisingly, several kermesinus scleroid blotches with higher skin temperature and distinct boundary from surrounding normal skin was found scattered around the pretibial area in both lower extremities .
After admission, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was conducted immediately. It was shown that pectorals major muscle, shoulder and upper arm in right side were sweeped by infection. Besides, multiple nodular-like foci were detected across the right breast .
Moreover, apparent swollen soft tissues around the right shoulder joint capsule were perceived, which was the infected grafted fat. In addition, soft tissue swelling and infection could be detected via MRI of the knee (right). While the results of blood routine (BRT) are shown in Table .
Additionally, Piperacillin & Tazobactam and Levofloxacin was delivered intravenously after admission to cover both Gram-positive (G +) and Gram-negative (G −) bacteria as empirical antibiotic application, which would consequently be adjusted following microbiological studies afterwards. A total of 8 pus swab samples were collected for bacterial smear test, acid-fast stain, regular and anaerobic bacterial culture while blood samples for Beta-d-glucan fungal and TB-spot testing. However, no clues were obtained. Unaccountably the maximum temperature of the patient monitored daily fluctuated between 37.8 °C and 39.2 °C.
Sequentially, surgery for incision, exploration and debridement of the lesion was carried out repeatedly, additonally vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) was used to ensure thorough drainage. Meanwhile subcutaneous necrotic tissue and pus were collected to be sent to Genoxor Medical & Science Technology Inc. (Shanghai, China) for next-generation sequencing (NGS) as last straw, which was conducted under the protocol of NGS by the testing agency as previous similarly [, ].
Undisappointedly, the NGS results showed that Lawsonella clevelandensis infection was present in both pus and necrotic tissues, with the abundance being 96.60% and 100% respectively, while the sequence numbers were 141 and 6, respectively .
Correspondingly, the antibiotics were adjusted to intravenous Cefoxitin (2.0 g, tid) and Ornidazole (500 mg, bid) following an adequate wound drainage and a thorough literature review [–]. Delightedly, her fever, white blood cells (WBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) examination were significantly improved after therapy adjustment . The residual wound on the right chest wall was limited and tended to close gradually. However, obvious deformity and asymmetry in her right breast were observed during 2 weeks postoperative follow up .