A 52-year-old man was admitted to a tertiary hospital (Incheon, Republic of Korea) due to a febrile rash in November. He had diabetes mellitus and hypertension without any complications. At the time of his visit, his blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg, body temperature was 39.9 °C, and heart rate was 107 beats/minute. He did not exhibit any respiratory or gastro-intestinal symptoms or arthralgia. He presented with eschar in the left popliteal fossa. He had a maculopapular rash on his trunk, and palpable purpura was remarkable in the lower extremities . His leukocyte count was 11,840 cells/μL, hemoglobin was 14.5 g/dL, and platelets were 274,000 cells/μL. The aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase ratio was slightly elevated to 55/85 IU/L and total bilirubin level (0.8 mg/dL) was normal. The patient had elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (22 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein (9.57 mg/dL) values. The urine dipstick test showed proteinuria(++) without pyuria or bacteriuria, and autoantibodies were negative. Although IgM (indirect fluorescent antibody, 1:64), IgG titer (1: 256), and western blot were positive for Lyme disease (Borrelia serology, tested by Korea Center for Diseases Control and prevention ), the patient did not present erythema migrans or arthralgia, which are typical findings of Lyme disease. Six weeks later, Borrelia IgM was negative and IgG titer decreased to 1:64, in the Lyme disease test. O. tsutsugamushi IgM and IgG titers (indirect fluorescent antibody, Supplementary 1) were 1:1024 and 1:2048, respectively. Further, O. tsutsugamushi IgA titer was also high (1:1024). The 56 kDa antigen gene of O. tsutsugamushi was positive by polymerase chain reaction on the first day at the hospital (Supplementary 1). Histological examination of the skin biopsy of the rash showed findings of leukocytoclastic vasculitis and deposition of IgA on dermal blood vessel walls . Rash, histologic findings, and proteinuria satisfied the criteria for diagnosis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura. He had not started any new medications for a month and had no symptoms of any infections other than scrub typhus. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with Henoch-Schönlein purpura associated with scrub typhus. Despite no immune suppressive treatment, the patient showed a dramatic response to doxycycline (100 mg twice/day) alone. His fever resolved within 24 h, and the rash (both maculopapular rash on his trunk and palpable purpura on his lower extremities) began to improve within 48 h. He was discharged after 4 days. Five weeks later, his rash and proteinuria improved, and he is currently living without any sequelae.