We describe the case of a 33-year-old Magar male with complaints of muscular discomfort, dizziness, nausea, and tingling sensation around the face and lips. He also felt difficulty breathing and chest tightness and difficulty swallowing, after ingesting two handfuls of dried white rhododendron flower (approximately 40–50 g). As stated by the patient and his party, he had orally ingested the white rhododendron flower. This is a trend practiced in his village for removing pieces of bone or other materials stuck in the food pipe. The patient presented approximately 4 hours after consumption with the symptoms mentioned above.
On examination, he was conscious, alert, and well oriented. His heart rate was 40–48 beats/minute and regular with blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 94% in room air and blood pressure (BP) of 70/40 mmHg. Clinical examination revealed no murmur or gallop, and chest was clear with no added sounds. He also denied consumption of alcohol or any other drugs. Similarly, there was no history of diabetes, hypertension, thyroid, or any illness or cardiac conditions. Also, there was no sign of head trauma or focal neurological symptoms.
He was immediately observed in the emergency department, received medical attention, and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further observation.
His initial complete blood cell count (CBC), renal function tests, electrolytes, and thyroid function test (TFT) were unremarkable. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia with a heart rate (HR) of 47 beats/minute .
Cardiac markers were negative. Chest X-ray and ultrasound (USG) of the abdomen revealed no significant abnormality on admission. An echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricle (LV) and right ventricle (RV) function. His family had brought the remnant of the flowers he had ingested .
According to the clinical course, acute intoxication by some species of rhododendron was suspected.
He has continued on normal intravenous saline at 50 mL/hour, and at the same time 2 mg atropine was given when he was in ICU. After 24 hours of hospital stay, he showed gradual improvement in his clinical condition with BP 110/70 mmHg and heart rate of 76 beats/minute. An electrocardiogram carried out 24 hours after admission showed normal sinus rhythm with heart rate of 86 beats/minute . After 48 hours of admission, he was discharged in good health without any clinical symptoms.