A 45-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with a 1-week persistent feeling of malaise associated with anorexia, nausea, vomiting and a reduction in urine output the day before being admitted to the hospital. These symptoms started 24 hours after the administration of the second dose of the BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccine. The patient has denied taking any new medication in the past few months. She denied having fever, as well as any cardiorespiratory symptoms.
Her chronic medication consisted of levothyroxine after a total thyroidectomy due to a multinodular goiter. There was no history of hypertension, or kidney disease (previous laboratory results showed a serum creatinine of 0.85 mg/dL 4 months before).
She was a non-smoker and not a regular alcohol drinker. There was no history of taking any homeopathic drugs/herbal teas.
Upon physical examination, the patient was apyretic and her blood pressure was 126/78mmHg, with a peripheral oxygen saturation of 98% at room air. The patient appeared to be euvolemic, without orthostatic hypotension. She referred to her breathing as foul, like a “festering wound” and had a papular rash on her lower limbs, distributed mostly on her knees, thighs, and palms without pruritus.
Initial blood tests revealed normocytic normochromic anemia, with normal platelets. There was a severe increase in serum creatinine level (18.4 mg/dL, normal range: 0.5–0.9 mg/dL) with hyperkalemia and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (58 mm/1h). Her chest X-ray was normal, and her kidney ultrasound described enlarged kidneys (both with 14–15 cm) with no apparent structural abnormalities. Her arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis (pH 7.157 and HCO3 7.6 mmol/L) with normal lactate and an anion gap of 16.
Considering these results, the patient was transferred to a central hospital to start hemodialysis. A central venous catheter was placed, and treatment underwent without complications. A full immune evaluation was performed upon admission to the Nephrology ward , including anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), protein electrophoresis, as well as C3 and C4 serum levels, and every value was normal. Urinalysis showed both red blood cells and white blood cells in the urine as well as proteinuria. Proteinuria on a 24-hour urine collection was 531 mg/24h.
The patient maintained a low urinary output for the first three days, so a kidney biopsy was performed (10 days after the symptoms began).
The glomerulus appeared slightly congestive but with an unremarkable basement membrane and no mesangial or endocapillary hypercellularity. The tubulointerstitial compartment showed findings of mild AIN, edema, and acute tubular necrosis (ATN). The interstitial infiltrate was mainly mononuclear, but focal areas of eosinophilic cells were also observed. Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (IFTA) were estimated to involve 20% of the renal cortex (, and ). Immunofluorescence was negative for IgM, IgG, IgA, C3 and both Kappa and Lambda light chains. Electron microscopy showed non-significant focal podocyte foot process effacement with otherwise unremarkable findings .
Methylprednisolone was started on three daily 500 mg pulses, followed by 50 mg of prednisolone (1mg/kg). Her urinary output increased progressively 5 days after treatment. Central venous catheter was removed at that point. The cutaneous rash regressed on the second day after corticotherapy.
Blood tests upon discharge (15 days after admission) showed a decreasing serum creatinine of 4.4 mg/dL, with a normal ion pattern and a hemoglobin of 10.7g/dL. Protein-to-creatinine ratio in the spot urine sample was 193 mg/g.
The patient returned for follow-up 4 days later and was clinically well. Laboratory tests showed no anemia and a serum creatinine of 1.9 mg/dL. Two weeks later, her kidney function had already normalized (1.02 mg/dL) with a proteinuria of 33mg/g. Kidney ultrasound was repeated, revealing normal-sized kidneys without any structural abnormalities.
She remains on a trimonthly nephrology follow-up with progressive corticosteroid wean.
The patient was evaluated at the Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department 2 months after discharge. A drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction (HSR) was considered, and epicutaneous tests, Basophil Activation Test (BAT) and Lymphocyte Transformation Test (LTT) were performed. Epicutaneous tests included the BNT162b2 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine solution with 10% and 30% dilution with saline, polyethylene glycol (PEG) 1500 solution (100 mg/mL) polysorbate 20 and 80 at 5% petrolatum concentration. Readings were carried out at 48 h, 72h, and 96 h, with negative results for all tested allergens. The BAT and LTT were conducted with the vaccine solution and PEG 1500 (100 mg/mL). The methodology and concentrations (4 fivefold dilutions) were performed according to the existing literature. Results were considered positive if the stimulation index was higher than 2 for two different concentrations. The BAT result was negative, while the LTT was positive for vaccine solution and PEG 1500.