A 51-year-old female with long-standing Hashimoto’s disease, chronic urticaria, mast cell activation disorder, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus type 2 (well controlled, with glycosylated hemoglobin A1C ranging from 5.1% to 6.0%), treated with metformin 1000 mg orally, twice daily, and liraglutide (Victoza®) 1.8 mg daily, presented to the clinic complaining of recurrent hives, skin dryness, fatigue, weight gain, intermittent constipation and diarrhea, cold intolerance, brain fog, difficulty with word finding, swelling in her lower extremities, and daytime somnolence. The patient was also suffering from multiple chemical sensitivities, including 76 food allergies, medication sensitivities, and reactions to food dyes and additives. She was very careful with her food and medication choices due to multiple symptoms. Written informed consent for publication of this case report was obtained from the patient. No institutional approval was required to publish this case report.
Physical examination demonstrated an otherwise healthy woman with a temperature of 36.6°C, pulse 92 beats per minute, blood pressure 136/88 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 respirations per minute, O2 saturation 98%, height 1.57 m, weight 92 kg, body mass index 37.3 kg/m2. She was in no acute distress, with no palpable thyroid nodules on physical examination and no visible urticaria. She had hypoactive bowel sounds on physical examination and minimal tenderness to palpation in the left lower quadrant. She had a family history of papillary thyroid cancer in a sister. Multiple bilateral nodules had previously been biopsied and found to be benign. She had previously tried and failed generic L-T4 and transitioned to L-T4 sodium tablets (Synthroid®) at 125 µg daily. Because of the variability in her gastrointestinal (GI) function, she had discontinued metformin for several weeks without resolution of the GI symptoms.
presents her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free T3, and free T4 values at presentation. She was aiming for TSH optimization and resolution of symptoms. For six months, she was put on increasing doses of L-T4 ranging from 112 µg to 137 µg daily. Because of multiple drug sensitivities and intolerances to additives, she was transitioned to a compounded T4/T3 prescription without additives (sustained-release L-T4/T3 at doses ranging from 125 to 200 µg L-T4 and 7.5–20 µg T3). However, her dose was escalated three times over the course of three months with only mild improvement in thyroid function. At 24 weeks, she experienced worsening GI symptoms, including projectile vomiting with undigested food and pill capsules, weight loss, and 10–20 bowel movements daily. Metformin and liraglutide were discontinued.
Upper endoscopy revealed gastritis and a hiatal hernia. Gastric emptying examination demonstrated 20% gastric retention at 4 hours; she was diagnosed with gastroparesis. She was placed on high-dose probiotics and dicyclomine hydrochloride (Bentyl®) and initiated on a gastroparesis diet.
A timeline of treatments administered is shown in .
Because of continued bloating and abdominal pain, she was treated with one cycle of rifaximin (Xifaxan®) after she was also diagnosed with SIBO, confirmed by a GI examination including clinical history, physical examination, and the gold standard SIBO breath test. At 24 weeks, due to further worsening symptoms and thyroid levels, she was switched to L-T4 oral solution at 150 µg .
The medication was well tolerated, led to a resolution of the thyroid symptoms, and was successfully down-titrated to 112 µg daily dose based on her body weight. She did not experience any side effects or reaction to the medication despite her multiple chemical sensitivities. TSH control was successfully sustained as shown at the latest monitoring six weeks following down-titration of L-T4 oral solution .