On 16/01/08, a 36 year old female presented to a Private Hospital in Botswana. She is a hospital nurse from the Tswana tribe in Botswana. She is married and has 2 children.
She complained of progressive body swelling that was worse on the face and generalized itchy body rash, malaise and nausea. She revealed ingestion of about 20 grams of mopane worm, 2 hours before the onset of symptoms. She had lived in Botswana all her life and had eaten mopane worm most of its season since childhood. She has had neither personal nor family history of similar symptoms or atopic syndrome. Except for occasional headache often attributed to tension headache, she had no significant medical history.
She had taken 4 mg of pediatric chlopheniramine syrup before going to the hospital.
According to the records from the accident and emergency of the hospital, her initial assessment revealed that she was anxious, but physically stable.
She had generalized maculopapular rash, normal systemic [cardio respiratory] function, mild hypotension.
Her vital signs were; Blood Pressure 90/50 mmHg; Pulse Rate 110/minutes; Respiratory Rate 14/minutes.
A diagnosis of food allergy was made.
She was treated with intramuscular injection of adrenalin followed by intravenous Hydrocortisone and promethazine through a venous line. The venous line was maintained until she received I liter of normal saline drip over 8 hours, while being observed.
She was discharged on oral chlopheniramine.
Two days later, she presented to our clinic with increasing rash, facial swelling, nausea, dizziness and yellowness of the eyes. There was no vomiting and patient reported a daily fluid intake of up to two and half liters and a good urine output.
She confirmed eating an unusually large quantity of mopane warm with the rest of the family members. She had been eating and tolerating the warm in most of the season since child hood.
On clinical examination, she had generalized macular exanthem, periorbital swelling, mild conjunctiva ingestion, pale extremities [palms] and dry lips.
Her vital signs were normal; Blood Pressure was 110/65 mmHg; Pulse Rate was 78/minutes; Respiratory Rate was 12/minutes. Examinations of the systems in the body were normal.
Her urine was tea colored but dipstick test was normal. Liver function test was also normal; White Blood Cell was marginally high at 11000 with predominant neutrophyls. Eosinophil ratio to other cells was normal.
Reaffirming the diagnosis of food allergy, we started her on high dose prednisolone and promethazine but discontinued chlopheniramine.
We advised her to drink lots of fluid, at least 3 liters daily, avoid the worm, and return if she didn't feel better. When called on 19/01/08, she said she felt much better.
On 21/01/08 she returned for assessment. She was well, so we stopped her promethazine and started tailing off her prednisolone. She was discharged and told to commence her routine activities on the 23/01/08.