A 45-year-old man presented with minor stroke appearing as symptoms of dizziness and defects of the visual field, and 0.5-T MR imaging showed an infarct in the right occipital lobe. Administration of an antiplatelet drug was initiated. Six months later, the patient experienced transient ischemic attacks manifesting as dizziness and disturbance of consciousness. MR imaging using a 1.5-T imager showed spotty new ischemic lesions in the right cerebellum, pons, and left thalamus. MR angiography with the same imager revealed occlusion of bilateral VAs.
Cerebral angiography with arterial catheterization showed occlusion at the V3 segments of bilateral VAs. On common carotid angiography, bilateral posterior communicating arteries, bilateral marginal tentorial arteries, and the upper part of the basilar artery were faintly visible . However, whether the former two arteries perfused the latter was unclear.
Three-dimensional time-of-flight MR angiography with a 7.0-T imager (Signa 950; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) demonstrated that each marginal tentorial artery originating from each internal carotid artery ran along the tentorial edge and anastomosed with each PCA . The right SCA was located below each marginal tentorial artery .
Quantitative brain perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed decreased cerebrovascular reactivity to acetazolamide in the cerebellum and bilateral occipital lobes; in the latter, blood flow was also reduced .
The patient suffered frequent orthostatic dizziness and we planned STA–SCA or PCA bypass surgery using a subtemporal approach through a right temporal craniotomy. During surgery, the SCA was not visible when the tentorial edge was elevated, as expected from preoperative 7.0-T MR angiography . The tentorium was not cut because it included the marginal tentorial artery as collateral circulation , and the STA was anastomosed with the P2 segment of the PCA.
Orthostatic dizziness completely resolved after surgery and postoperative angiography demonstrated that the entire posterior circulation was perfused via an anastomosed STA .