A 41-year-old male patient presented at the outpatient clinic of the Department for Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine on 30 May 2016, one day after returning from Martinique where he had spent a two weeks holiday with his wife and his three children. The symptom onset was 6 days prior to presentation, still in Martinique and started with malaise and fever. A diffuse macular rash of the entire body developed on the following day, accompanied by fatigue, subjective hyperthermia, sweating, severe retro-orbital pain without signs of conjunctivitis, general myalgia, painfully enlarged occipital lymph nodes and pain in the elbow joints.
The travel history revealed previous trips to Vietnam in 2006, India in 2012, Turkey in 2014, and Guadeloupe in 2015, without any medical history suggestive of a previous flavivirus infection. The further previous history revealed in addition to routine immunizations vaccinations against tick borne encephalitis virus and yellow fever virus. Notably, the patient had been vasectomized for family planning purposes in 2015. Physical examination revealed a patient in only slightly reduced general condition and good nutritional status with an already pale but still clearly visible macular rash. An enlarged lymph node was palpable and tender in the right occipital area. The auricular temperature was 37.4 °C. The remaining findings of the physical examination were not remarkable. On digital palpation of the prostate no abnormal finding could be noted. Ultrasound investigation of the abdomen revealed no pathological findings. The neurological examination yielded no remarkable results.
As a suspect case of ZIKV infection according to the case definition of WHO the patient was included, after signing an informed consent form, in an ongoing study of ZIKV infections (“Diagnostics of Zika virus Infection in Different Body Fluids”) conducted jointly between the Department for Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine and the Department of Virology and Rickettsiology of the Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology (BwIM). The study has been granted ethical clearance by the Ethics Committee of the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich (opinion number 223–16).
The patient recovered without receiving any specific treatment. All symptoms resolved completely by 10 June, besides a markedly depressed mood that lasted until the end of June.
Clinical samples were collected 6, 9 and 14 days after disease onset and from then on a weekly basis until 91 days after symptom onset. After day 91 the visit intervals were prolonged due to periods of absence of the patient. He was seen again on day 101, 112 and 119. Specimens were transported to BwIM, and stored at −80 °C prior to laboratory investigation.
In order to verify azoospermia in the vasectomized patient, examination of ejaculate by microscopy was conducted.
Nucleic acid preparation: Viral RNA was extracted using the QIAamp viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to extraction, ejaculate, EDTA whole blood and saliva specimens were diluted 1:2 in nuclease free water to avoid PCR inhibition. PCR: All specimens were investigated for the direct detection of ZIKV using the commercially available real-time reverse transcriptase assay RealStar Zika RT PCR Kit (Altona, Hamburg, Germany). Coinfection with chikungunya virus (CHIKV) or dengue virus in the patient was excluded by testing the serum sample six days after symptom onset by means of the commercially available real-time reverse transcriptase assays RealStar Dengue RT PCR Kit and RealStar Chikungunya RT PCR Kit (both purchased from Altona, Hamburg, Germany), respectively, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Serological testing was conducted in all serum samples using commercially available immunofluorescence tests for the detection of IgG and IgM antibodies against ZIKV, DENV, CHIKV, Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), West Nile virus (WNV) and yellow fever virus (YFV) (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). Twofold dilutions of sera were subjected to endpoint titration with starting dilutions of 1:10, in order to determine IgM and IgG titers.
Cultural isolation in 80% confluent monolayers of African Green Monkey kidney fibroblasts (Vero B4) and Aedes albopictus cells (C6/36) was attempted for urine, ejaculate, EDTA whole blood and saliva specimens. Samples were diluted 1:10 in minimal essential medium (MEM) (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA). Inocula of 500 μl each were added to 25 cm2 tissue culture flasks, incubated at 37 °C (Vero) or 28 °C (C6/36) for 1 h, then removed and replaced by 5 ml MEM containing 3% fetal bovine serum, 1% non-essential amino acids (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA) and 3% Antibiotics/Antimycotics Solution (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA). Cultures were incubated at 37 °C or 28 °C for 7 days and then passaged using the procedure described above.
All cultures were observed daily for cytopathic effects. Also, viral growth was confirmed by Cycle Threshold (CT) value decrease in real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR assay between day 0 and day 7 of infection.
In order to subtype the strain of ZIKV in this patient sequences of two genomic regions (non-structural proteins 2b and 3 (NS2b/NS3) and 5′ untranslated region (5UTR)) were investigated.
PCR products were obtained by conventional reverse transcriptase-PCR. Briefly, fragments of 772 base pairs and 345 nucleotides size were amplified from the extracted nucleic acid using the primers Z4360 F 5′- CTCTgTACACTCCATCTgTggTC-3′ and Z5108 R 5′- gACAgTTAgCTgCTTCTTCTTCAg −3′(NS2b/NS3) and the primers 5UTR F 5′- TgTTgATCTgTgTgAATCAgACTg −3′and 5UTR R1c 5′-CTCTTCTAgATCTCCgTgCTTCAC −3′ (5UTR), respectively. All protocols were carried out using a superscript III high fidelity kit (Life Technologies) and an identical thermoprofile. Briefly, 5 μl RNA, 0.4 μM forward and reverse primers, 1 μl enzyme mix, 1 x buffer and 2.4 mM MgSO4 were mixed and PCR-grade water was added to a final volume of 50 μl/reaction. The thermoprofile consisted of 20 min reverse transcription at 50 °C and an initial denaturation for 2 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles each featuring 15 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 58 °C and 30 s at 68 °C and a final extension step for 7 min at 68 °C. The obtained PCR fragments were analysed by Sanger sequencing conducted by an external contractor (GATC, Konstanz, Germany). Phylogenetic tree analysis was performed using the Maximum Likelihood Method based on the Tamura-Nei model and 1000 bootstrap replicates with Mega 5.0 . Identical clusters and highly similar confidence values were obtained by Maximum Parsimony method and Neighbour-Joining method.
Routine laboratory tests including blood count and clinical chemistry parameters as well as serological differential diagnostics for common infectious diseases were performed at the laboratory of the Department for Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine and an external sub-contractor.