A 47-year-old female complained a month-history of fever, intense neck pain, and progressive motor weakness at upper and lower limbs, with gait disturbance, not responsive to pharmacological conservative treatment. A computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine showed a median and left paramedian discal herniation at C4–C5 level. A cervical spine magnetic resonance (MRI) showed a severe spondylodiscitis at C4, C5, and C6 levels with mass effect on the spinal cord, where signs of myelopathy were evident, and on the nerve roots.
The neurological examination at admission revealed severe spastic tetraparesis with preservation of proximal shoulder and hip movements, loss of movements of the distal segments of both arms and legs, and impossibility of standing and walking.
Blood cultures, Wright test, and tuber test were negative, while the Widal test was positive for antigen H of Salmonella paratyphi, expression of previous infection. Intravenous corticosteroid therapy was administered.
A cervical spine contrast-enhanced MRI contrast showed a marked abnormality at the C4–C5–C6 levels, with fragmentation and destruction of the endplates resulting in focal kyphosis. Dense material on the epidural space, mainly on the ventral side, suggestive of epidural abscess caused severe mass effect on the spinal cord, which appeared markedly compress and posteriorly displaced. Intense and diffuse contrast enhancement of the paravertebral soft tissues from C2 to T1 was also found [ and ]. A CT scan-guided biopsy of the collection resulted positive for Methicillin-Sensitive Staphylococcus Aureus. Thus, an adequate antimicrobial therapy with trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole, 160/800 mg twice a day, was administered. After the initial improvement of the clinical symptoms, the patient was discharged with the indications to continue the antibiotic therapy for 8 weeks, adopting cervical spine immobilization, and performing seriate cervical spine contrast-enhanced MRI.
In the following months, the neurological conditions moderately improved, laboratories and neuroradiological examinations showed the progressive resolution of the infectious disease but resulting in multilevel degenerative changes with severe myelopathy . Furthermore, a dynamic XR of the cervical spine (maximal flexion and extension) showed C5-C6 retrolisthesis with instability.
Nine months after the discharge, once the spinal inflammation was resolved, the patient was readmitted to our department, and through anterior approach to the cervical spine, after initial debridement of the subcutaneous tissues, with the pharyngoesophageal complex which appeared tenaciously adherent to the prevertebral fascia and bone and which required careful microsurgical dissection, she underwent C3– C6 anterior cervical stabilization with titanium low profile plate and screws. A postoperative radiogram confirmed the correct position of the implant . The immediate postoperative course was uneventful. At 5th day after surgery, the patient developed surgical site swelling and drainage of a brownish liquid material from the caudal part of the surgical wound. A barium-swallow study was able to detect PEP, lesser than 1 cm on maximum diameter, through a contrast medium leakage at the pharyngoesophageal junction, close to the cervical plate . A MRI of the cervical spine confirmed the presence of the pharyngoesophageal-cutaneous fistula . Therefore, feeding was set by parenteral nutrition and systemic broad spectrum antibiotic therapy was administered. In the following days, we appreciated the progressive resolution of the secretion from the surgical wound. Serial barium-swallow studies documented a progressive improvement until the resolution of the fistula ; thus, parenteral nutrition was suspended, and the nasogastric tube was positioned.
The patient was discharged on POD13 with absence of leak on clinical and radiological evaluation, and with nutrition per os.