A 64-year-old woman with past medical history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia was referred to invasive coronary angiography due to effort angina and a positive treadmill exercise testing (Duke treadmill score: +2). The physical examination, resting electrocardiogram, and transthoracic echocardiogram were unremarkable. The coronary computed tomography angiography revealed a severe stenosis in distal RCA [Coronary Artery Disease-Reporting and Data System (CAD-RADS) classification: 4A]. The invasive coronary angiography revealed a severe (90%) calcified stenosis in the distal RCA and non-obstructive disease in the proximal and mid segments.
During pre-dilatation using a non-compliant balloon, the patient experienced severe chest pain and ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads. Cineangiography revealed a large spiral type D dissection, according to National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) classification system, with compromise of flow to the distal vessel. The patient became agitated, and the position of the guidewire was lost (; , ).
The initial strategy consisted of attempts to wire the true lumen with a 0.014-inch Runthrough™ NS guidewire (Terumo Corporation, Japan) with the support of a FineCross™ microcatheter (Terumo Corporation), while minimizing contrast injections that may lead to dissection extension. Despite marked difficulty, we managed to cross the lesion and progress the wire until distal posterior descending artery (PDA).
Since it was not possible to ascertain whether the guidewire was in the true or false lumen based on angiography alone, intracoronary imaging was used. Intravascular ultrasound imaging (Eagle Eye, Volcano Corporation, Rancho Cordova, CA, USA) was firstly used, nonetheless, it was not possible to clearly identify the guidewire position along the entire vessel due to low spatial resolution. Albeit requiring an antegrade injection of contrast medium, OCT imaging with angiographic co-registration and using the Ultreon™ Software (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) was performed. Special care was made to minimize further contrast injections and avoid repetition of the OCT pullbacks. The OCT run demonstrated the wire entering the false lumen (FL) in distal RCA, and co-registration enabled to identify and localize the dissection entry point (; , ).
The Runthrough™ NS wire was left in place, and the IVUS catheter was positioned with the transducer immediately after the entry point to the FL, visualizing simultaneously the true lumen (TL) and FL. A second guidewire was then advanced in parallel using the FineCross™ microcatheter (the tip of which was placed before the fenestration), aiming to rewire the compressed TL. Therefore, the position of the second guidewire (TL or FL) could be assessed immediately after the fenestration in real-time using IVUS imaging. Multiple attempts were unsuccessful despite employing different wires, including a Runthrough™ NS, a Hi-Torque Balance Middleweight (BMW) Universal II (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), a Sion® blue (Asahi Intec, Japan) and a Hi-Torque Pilot™ 50 (Abbott Vascular). Still assisted by real-time IVUS images, we ultimately achieved to enter the TL using a Fielder XT® wire (Asahi Intec) , which was further advanced along the artery architecture. Notwithstanding, we could not perceive the wire position in distal vessel with IVUS. The IVUS catheter and the wire in the FL were then removed.
With the wire tip in distal PDA, a second co-registered OCT run was acquired. It demonstrated the position of the wire in the TL until the level of the crux, where it reentered the FL (see , ). Subsequently, we decided to stent the RCA before the crux (true lumen) with two overlapping stents, covering the proximal margin of the dissection.
Afterwards, a new Runthrough™ NS guidewire was inserted in the PDA with the support of the FineCross™ microcatheter, with both wires being apparently positioned in different lumens, considering their distance in fluoroscopy. A third OCT run confirmed the TL position of the second guidewire and the FL position of the first guidewire in the PDA (; , ).
The guidewire in the FL was removed, and using a GuideLiner® catheter (Vascular Solutions Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), two additional stents were deployed in the PDA, which yielded a satisfactory angiographic result (; , ). The dissection in the posterolateral branch was treated conservatively.
The patient had an uncomplicated post-procedural recovery. Peak high-sensitivity troponin I was 27 184 pg/mL (upper reference limit: 16 pg/mL). The patient was discharged 5 days later, with the echocardiogram showing mild hypokinesis of the inferior and inferoseptal walls and left ventricular ejection fraction of 59%.