A 45-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department due to a severe headache. Twenty-one years prior, she was diagnosed with left clavicle ES and underwent surgical tumor excision. Preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy, consisting of vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, ifosfamide and etoposide were respectively administered. The patient also had a history of left breast cancer, treated with pectoral muscle-sparing mastectomy. Preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy, consisting of docetaxel, pertuzumab, trastuzumab, fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide, were respectively administered 2 years prior. On admission, the patient presented with a headache, but no neurological findings were noted. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed a tumor extending superiorly and inferiorly from the cerebellar tent, along the left occipital bone with a contrast enhancement effect . Osteolytic changes were observed in the left occipital bone . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed the tumor, exhibiting an isodense signal intensity on T1-weighted and T2-weighted imaging . No signal was noted in the left transverse sinus on magnetic resonance venography. This suggested occlusion due to tumor invasion . The tumor extended to the left mastoid air cells. On 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET), the tumor exhibited a low uptake . No high uptake regions were observed throughout the entire body .
Following admission, a small craniotomy and biopsy were performed to confirm the pathological diagnosis. Pathological examination showed small round cells with scanty cytoplasm on hematoxylin–eosin staining . CD99 immunohistochemistry showed strong membranous staining among the tumor cells . Periodic acid-Schiff detected small positive granules in the cytoplasm . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with bone metastasis of ES. A craniotomy and subtotal tumor excision were performed the following day. After the subtotal removal of metastatic tumor, her headache improved.
During the craniotomy, a yellowish-white neoplastic lesion was observed in the epidural space across the transverse sinus . A portion of the tumor infiltrated the dura and extended to the surface of the brain. The tumor was removed as completely as possible, and the left transverse sinus was resected. However, the tumors in the left mastoid air cells and left sigmoid sinus could not be excised. Postoperatively, intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) at 61.2 Gy was administered in 34 fractions. Head MRI after IMRT showed a small residual tumor . After 2 months of radiotherapy, the patient was discharged without headache, and there was no noted deterioration of her status. Genetic examination (OncoGuide NCC OncoPanel System) indicated BRCA1–E1148fs* and EWSR1–FLI1 fusion, and chemotherapy with pembrolizumab (platinum) and olaparib (poly adenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase inhibitor) was considered. However, chemotherapy was not performed because of the low grade of evidence for both drugs. At present, approximately 9 months after surgery, MRI shows no local recurrence.