At the time of diagnosis, the patient, a Caucasian male, was 45-years-old. His past medical history included hypertension, hyperuricemia, previous asymptomatic myocardial infarction and anti-HCV positivity. In 1988 post-glomerulonephritis renal failure occurred and he was treated with dialysis for 13 months. Subsequently, in 1989 the patient underwent kidney transplantation from deceased donor and since then immunosuppressive therapy was introduced. The oncological history started in February 2013, when a routinary abdominal ultra sound (US) exam, performed in another institution, evidenced a bladder wall thickening. Subsequent cystoscopy was performed showing suspect eteroplastic lesion. TURB revealed poorly differentiated transitional cell bladder carcinoma. In May 2013 TURB was repeated showing poorly differentiated carcinoma with neuroendocrine features. In June 2013, the patient had partial cystectomy plus lymphoadenectomy. The histology confirmed high grade UC with lymphatic invasion (stage pT2N0); immunohistochemistry resulted strongly positive for Ki-67 (100 %), negative for cromogranin-A, neuron-specific enolase, somatostatin receptor 2 antibody and synaptophysin. During follow-up, the patient underwent regular cystoscopies and in January 2014 the biopsy of a suspected mucosal area showed residual poorly differentiated carcinoma with focal CD56 stain. Therefore, in March 2014, radical cystectomy was completed with final histological report of poorly differentiated carcinoma with neuroendocrine features (pT1N0). During follow-up, a 18-F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) performed in July 2014 showed the appearance of pathological uptake localized to confluent right iliac and retroaortic lymph nodes.
The patient came in our institution for the first time in August 2014 to discuss the initiation of first line chemotherapy. At that time, he was in therapy with cyclosporine 125 mg/die as immunosuppressive treatment. Therefore we considered to start chemotherapy with dose reduction as precaution. He started gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 (day 1,8) on 27th August 2014 and carboplatin AUC 3 (day 1) was added from the second cycle. During the treatment, the patient developed subsequent adverse events (AEs according to NCI-CTCAE version 4): anemia grade (G) 2, thrombocytopenia G1, neutropenia G3, ALT increased G2 and nausea G1. These AEs entailed dose delay and further dose reduction. A FDG-PET/CT was planned after 3 cycles and showed partial response. He completed 6 cycles of treatment but subsequent PET/CT, performed on February 2015, demonstrated progressive disease due to numeric increase of captating bilateral common iliac and paraortic adenopathies . On 27th February 2015 the patient started second line treatment with VFL 280 mg/m2. After the first cycle the patient presented oral mucositis G1, loss of appetite and nausea G1 and prolonged G4 neutropenia that required precautionary hospital admission and administration of G-CSF and antibiotic prophylaxis. Considering the severe haematological toxicity, the second cycle was prescribed with further dose reduction (220 mg/m2) and G-CSF prophylaxis. Despite this, after the second cycle, neutropenia G4 and thrombocytopenia G4 occurred. In April 2015, FDG-PET/CT after two cycles documented complete metabolic response with disappearance of adenopathic pathological uptake . Chemotherapy proceeded with further dose reduction to 200 mg/m2 plus G-CSF prophylaxis and treatment was well tolerated with the exception of G2 temporary transaminases increase. In July 2015, before the 6th cycle, patient presented gastroenteritis and diarrhea (seven stools/die for three consecutive days) with consequent acute renal failure (creatinine 5.5 mg/dL, clearance 23 ml/min). He was admitted to hospital and adequate hydration and supportive care was administered. After resolution of renal failure, which was considered not related to VFL, patient received the 6th and last cycle. After treatment completion, FDG-PET/CT was repeated showing pathological captation of inter aortic-caval and right common iliac nodes. A multidisciplinary team decided for stereotactic radiotherapy on pathological nodes that the patient received in November 2015. A new FDG-PET/CT was planned for the end of January 2016, 2 months after the completion of radiotherapy, and revealed a partial metabolic response to radiotherapy. Then the patient was followed with close clinical and radiological controls.