We report the case of a 45-year-old Caucasian man presenting with an indolent mass in his neck of 4 months’ duration, who was otherwise in good clinical condition. He did not take any prescribed medications and did not report any history of allergy, tobacco smoking, fever, sweating, headache, or hypertension. Familial anamnesis was negative. At a physical examination his thyroid appeared normal, while a subcutaneous 2 cm swelling of his neck was present at the superior margin of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle. The mass was indolent and of parenchymatous consistency at palpation, mobile with respect to the surrounding planes. Palpation also revealed a right submandibular 1.5 cm lymph node enlargement. Routine laboratory parameters were normal.
He was subjected to ultrasonography (US) of his neck, which showed a 2.2 × 2.2 × 1.7 cm homogeneously hypoechoic oval lesion at the carotid bifurcation, with clear-cut margins, markedly vascularized at color-Doppler US. His thyroid had normal morphology and volume, while bilateral lymph node enlargement was observed at lateral cervical level II, devoid of characteristics suspicious for metastases .
An endocrine work-up was requested, including urinary 24-hour catecholamines and metanephrines, plasma calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, and chromogranin A; all were found to be in the normal range.
He underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his neck that showed a 2.3 × 2.5 cm neck mass, isointense to the muscular tissue on T1-weighted images (T1-wi) and hyperintense on T2-weighted images (T2-wi). After contrast administration the lesion showed marked vascularization and intralesional serpiginous areas. Several bilateral cervical lymph nodes were observed with axial maximum diameter of 1.2 × 0.8 cm and 1 × 0.9 cm at the I and II levels .
On the basis of US and MRI, a PGL was suspected. A 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N(I),N(II),N(III),N(IIII)-tetraacetic acid(D)-Phe(1)-thy(3)-octreotide (68Ga-DOTATOC) positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) evaluation was performed, showing an intense focal uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 92.4. Weak lymph node uptake was found in the following regions: lateral cervical, hilar-mediastinal, peribronchial, axillary, and inguinal stations, with a SUVmax of 3.9 in the pulmonary left hilum .
According to current guidelines , our patient was submitted to genetic testing, including investigation for germline RET and succinate dehydrogenase complex (SDHx) mutations. Germline RET mutation testing was performed by direct sequencing as described before and did not disclose any significant mutation. Germline SDHx mutation testing was performed on leukocyte DNA by a next-generation sequencing (NGS) method based on capture technology (probe; IDT), evaluating the presence of point mutations, small deletions, or insertion mutations in the coding region of the SDHB, SDHA, SDHD, SDHAF2, SDHC genes and flanking intronic regions by amplification and direct sequencing. The results of the genetic test of our patient showed the presence of a germline mutation in exon 7 of the SDHB gene. The sequence variant c.689>A; p.Arg230His in heterozygosis was confirmed in a second genomic DNA sample. This variant causes the replacement of the amino acid arginine with a histidine at SDHB protein codon 230. The arginine residue is highly conserved in the course of evolution. Moreover, this variant is present in the population database with a very low frequency, having been identified in one allele out of 251.416 studied. This variant is reported by multiple sources as causative, being classified as pathogenetic, and associated with PGL. The family history of our patient was negative for PPGL or other endocrine neoplasms.
Our patient underwent surgery and histology was consistent with a carotid body PGL. Due to the presence of a germline SDHB gene mutation, a second malignancy was suspected; therefore, accurate histology examination was also pursued for the neck lymph nodes resected during surgery. In fact, a follicular lymphoma was documented as grade 1 according to the histological classification of the World Health Organization (WHO). The hematological assessment of our patient followed European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) guidelines; therefore, a contrast-enhanced CT scan of his neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis with an 18FDG (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose)-PET examination established a stage IIIA in accordance with the Ann Arbor classification system . A clinical follow-up with blood test (including a complete blood count, creatinine, uric acid, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, total protein, serum protein electrophoresis, and beta-2 microglobulin) and US examination at 3 months was performed, the results were normal. Chemotherapy was not deemed necessary.