Chest pain, nausea and vomiting × 3 d.
A 25-year-old male patient with no prior medical history presented to the emergency department with chest pain, nausea and vomiting × 3 d. He described sharp, intermittent chest pain that is sub sternal, radiating to the back and left arm for last 3 d. His pain is worse upon leaning forward and worse with deep inspiration. He also had multiple episodes of nausea and vomiting with an episode of coffee-ground emesis. Patient reported long-term abuse of hydrocarbon containing inhalant (PC keyboard dust off) for the last 1 year. He used to huff 2 cans of dust off at the same time to achieve a hallucinogenic effect along with marijuana use. One week prior to admission, he reported increased use (10 cans/d).
History of intracranial aneurysm rupture in father.
The patient’s heart rate was 112 bpm, respiratory rate was 15 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 114/73 mmHg and oxygen saturation on room air was 99%. His body mass index (BMI) was 37 kg/m2. Cardiac examination revealed a regular rate and rhythm, and no jugular venous distention with mild chest wall tenderness. Erythematous, non-scaling lesions were noted on the chest wall, arm and lips. Abdominal examination revealed right upper quadrant and bilateral flank tenderness.
Initial laboratory evaluation showed leukocytosis (WBC-19.6 bil/L), acute kidney injury (Cr-3.4 mg/dL, BUN-54 mg/dL), elevated transaminases (AST-161 U/L, ALT-77 U/L), troponin-1.63 (ng/mL) peaked at 2.06 (ng/mL), CK-3000 ng/mL, CKMB-45 ng/mL. Urine drug screen was positive for cannabinoids. Initial electrocardiography (EKG) showed sinus tachycardia with diffuse inferolateral ST elevation, concerning for acute myopericarditis .
Echocardiogram showed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) of 40% to 45% with severe aortic root dilation (5.0 cm) and trivial pericardial effusion. Given patient’s elevated troponins, cardiac catheterization was performed. Coronary angiogram showed no evidence of coronary artery disease . Working diagnosis of myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA) was established and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed to evaluate the etiology further.
CMR showed borderline LV function with edema in the mid and apical LV suggestive of myocardial inflammation . No delayed enhancement was seen in the myocardium or in the pericardium . There was no evidence of pericardial effusion.