The patient with Alstrom syndrome is a 20-year-old son of non-consanguineous parents, and he has a healthy, unafected brother. The patient was born by vaginal delivery after a 40-week uncomplicated pregnancy; his birth weight was 2.9 kg. During his first year of life increased weight gain, progressive and worsening pathological ocular signs were noted: nystagmus, convergent strabismus, photophobia (at 12 months), reduced visual acuity. During evolution his diagnosis was „tapeto-retinal degeneration”. The first sign, nystagmus, was noted at the age of 4 months, then he developed progressive retinal distrophy and blindness at 10 years old. Infantile obesity (17 kgs at the age of 11 months) was also noted and progressed while aging. Sensorineural hearing impairment was noted at 15 years old and type 2 diabetes mellitus was diagnosed at 16 years old. From that point forward, he has been on insulin therapy, in different protocols, with 3 of 4 shots/day. In order to obtain a good glycemic control the needed dose of insulin was more than 200 IU/day. At this point, diabetes mellitus was considered the result of the resistance to the action of insulin. He never developed ketosis or diabetic keto-acidosis (DKA). While a child, he was evaluated with thyroid and metabolic dysfunctions and thyroid disorders so, lysosomal storage diseases and aminoacidopathies were excluded. While growing, several laboratory tests showed hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia and increased liver transaminases. In the following years there was a progressive worsening of the metabolic functions.
We investigated the systems and organs known to be affected in this disease. The ophthalmologic evaluation showed diffuse retinal dystrophy with dispersed pigment accumulations and bilateral pigmented macular scarring. The audiometric examination showed bilateral symmetric hypoacusia. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly and steatosis. Systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle was noted on echocardiography (long parasternal axis showed diffuse hypokinesia with mitral valve failure). Using Tissue Doppler Application, longitudinal velocity shortening and pulmonary hypertension of 65-70 mmHg were also found. The patient had fasting hyperglycemia (16.5mmol/L), HbA1c (19.9%), basal insulin (51mU/L) and glycosuria (65.3mmol/L). The tests for anti-islet cell antibodies (ICA) and antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxilase (GAD-Abs) were negative.
Because Growth Hormone deficiency and Alstrom Syndrome share some clinical and metabolic features, we studied the GH-IGF1 (Insulin Growth Factor 1) axis, using MRI techniques and dynamic tests (insulin tolerance test). The MRI study of the diencephalic and pituitary region was suggestive for the diagnosis of empty sella. We found normal TSH (Thyroid Stimulating Hormone), fT3 (free triiodothyronine), fT4 (free thyroxine), and negative results for anti-thyroid auto-antibodies. Growth hormone stimulatory tests were taken and insulin provocative test revealed a severe GH deficiency in this patient, defined by a peak response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia less than 3ng/dL and IGF1 concentrations less than –2SDS.The values were: GH1 – 0.18ng/mL, GH2 – 0.49ng/mL (after the stimulation with insulin 0,4IU/kg/dose), IGF-1 – 49ng/mL (N :116-356ng/ml).
In conclusion, multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD) wasn’t found and we only noticed severe GH deficiency. The presence of empty sella seems to be a rare morphologic finding in Alstrom syndrome though it was described in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome . Decreased serum levels of GH, which act on cardiac myocytes primarily through IGF-1, are associated with impaired myocardial growth and function, which can be improved with restoration of GH/IGF-1 homeostasis. This effect of GH on cardiac tissue may explain why the patient had multiple episodes of cardiac decompansation due to severe cardiomyopathy. In animal models and among human adults with heart failure attributed to dilated cardiomyopathy, treatment with GH results in acquisition of left ventricular (LV) mass and improved LV function, through a combination of mechanisms. Future studies are needed to assess if the substitution therapy with Recombinant Growth hormone is cost–effective and risk-free in patients with Alstrom Syndrome and severe insulin resistance.
By studying his family’s medical records we identified two relatives with suggestive clinical findings for Bardet-Biedl syndrome. The two children (Alstrom patient’s relatives), brother (5 years old) and sister (15 years old) were clinically diagnosed with Bardet-Biedl syndrome based on the presence of rod-cone dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly (hexadactyly fifth finger in one hand and foot), central obesity, cognitive impairment, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, mental retardation. Parents denied consanguinity in the family and were questioned about the onset of visual problems, renal disease, diabetes mellitus, and deafness. Nystagmus was present at the age of 3 and 4, respectively. We used direct ophthalmoscopy and electroretinograms for these two patients and ocular fundus has shown a waxy pale optic disc, atrophy of the choroids, narrow or obliterated vessels, and atypical pigmentation in the periphery suggesting the presence of retinitis pigmentosa. Electroretinogram recordings showed no rod responses to dim blue light. The general systemic examination comprised measurements of height and weight. The presence of ataxia and paraplegia was estimated by inspection of the gait and by finger to nose test. Both had normal perceptive hearing. Obesity, according to age and gender, defined by a body mass index (BMI) >28kg/m2, was found in the girl patient. She was also diagnosed with paresis of her lower extremities caused by spinal stenosis, while her affected brother had no history of paresis. She also presented a positive oral glucose tolerance test, but after a program of diet and exercise, the glucose measurements became normal. On ultrasound scan of the kidneys she had renal structural abnormalities suggesting polycystic kidney disease. Cardiac assessment by echocardiogram was normal in both patients. The boy is currently on peritoneal dialysis for end stage renal disease; meanwhile his sister is under supervision with screening for renal deterioration, her renal function is, so far, in normal limits.
Analyzing the clinical traits of these patients we found that retinopathy, nephropathy and central obesity were present in both the Alstrom patient and his relatives with Biedl-Bardet, suggesting a main anomaly in ciliary’s function controlling photoreception, renal and metabolic processes. The patients were included in a study of linkage mapping (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine). The DNA samples from the Biedl Bardet patients are currently under investigation. Interestingly, so far, the Alstrom patient doesn’t have any of the known ALMS1 mutations and he did not have any of the known BBS mutations either. He had one heterozygous SNP in BBS5 (BBS5_N184S het) that is not disease-causing. Despite the fact that this case has been analyzed for years without the identification of a known mutation, efforts are still made using the Asper Biotech Gene Chip, in order to identify a possible new unknown mutation that may explain the phenotypic variability observed in the case of his Biedl-Bardet relatives. Taking into account the clinical presentation, we still believe that the diagnosis of Alstrom is the right one for the patient despite the present absence of any identified mutations in his genome and the unexpected presence of the Bardet-Biedl cases in his family. Twelve genes are known to be associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Approximately 20% to 30% of persons with BBS do not have identifiable mutations in any of the twelve known BBS genes; therefore, it is possible that more BBS genes are yet to be identified. BBS1, BBS2, ARL6/BBS3, BBS4, MKKS/BBS6, BBS7, TTC8/BBS8, B1/BBS9, BBS10, BBS11/TRIM32 and BBS12 are of moderate size and together comprise approximately 137 exons, therefore, mutation screening for any given individual is a large undertaking. Mutations range from missense and nonsense to insertions, deletions, and splice site disruptors for most of these genes. Sequence analysis of entire exons 10 and 16 and partial exon 8 detects mutations in 25%-40% of individuals with Alstrom syndrome [Collin et al. 2002; Hearn et al. 2002; Titomanilio et al 2004; JD Marshall, GB Collin, personal communication]. In a small study of a UK population, Minton et al (2006) sequenced the entire coding region of ALMS1 and failed to identify a second mutated allele in two of 12 individuals; in two other persons (2/12) no disease-causing mutations were found [Minton et al. 2006].