In December 2017, a 19-year-old female was referred to our hospital with a recent diagnosis of histiocytic sarcoma. The patient had presented as pharyngeal pain and left neck mass with fever for 2 months. She had received tracheotomy because of airway obstruction resulting from the large mass arising from the left parapharyngeal space at local clinic. PET/CT scan showed a large solid mass located in the left parapharyngeal space with compression of pharyngeal cavity and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left neck . The histopathological review confirmed diagnosis of HS. Histologically, HS is composed of large polygonal cells with epithelioid-to-pleomorphic morphology, abundant eosinophilic to vacuolated or foamy cytoplasm, ovoid to irregularly shaped nuclei, and variably prominent nucleoli . For immunohistochemical markers, most HS express CD68 and CD163 and partially express S100 . Chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and etoposide (CHOEP)) was initially started on December 8, 2017 with the aim of stabilization of the fulminate disease course; however, the lesions did not shrink and pain and dysphagia were heavier caused by the compression of the pharynx . In order to relieve the compression, irradiation to the lesions of pharyngeal and neck was started on day 11 of chemotherapy. After irradiation of 20 Gy/10 F, the size of lesions became a little bit smaller (pharyngeal mass: from 6.0 cm × 4.4 cm to 5.6 cm × 4.0 cm; neck mass: from 3.5 cm × 2.8 cm to 2.9 cm × 2.6 cm).
Meantime, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor tissue was performed using a panel of 93 genes (Gene+ OncoLym). This analysis revealed the presence of oncogenic mutation c.2888-1G>T in the MET gene, exon 14 (allele frequency, 5.58%), as well as an activated mutation c.361T>A (C121S) in the MAP2K1 gene, exon 3 (allele frequency, 17.23%). MEK inhibitor trametinib has been reported to be effective in HS patients with MAP2K1 mutation ; however, trametinib was not available in China at that time. It has been reported that patients with MET exon 14 skipping mutation-positive nonsmall cell lung cancer are sensitive to MET inhibitor crizotinib ; therefore, this histiocytic sarcoma patient began to take crizotinib (250 mg, twice daily) after irradiation of 20 Gy/10 F. Partial response (PR) was observed after radiotherapy of a total dose of 60 Gy/30 F and 1-month treatment of crizotinib, with sum of the product of the longest perpendicular dimensions (SPD) decreased by 57% . The lesions kept shrinking after radiotherapy, and crizotinib was still taken daily for 1 month more. However, 2-month treatment of crizotinib cost her family RMB 100,000 Yuan. The patient could no longer afford such an expensive drug.
In order to search for new targetable therapeutic drugs, NGS was done again with a panel of 1,021 genes (Gene+ Onco-C1021T). The most frequently mutated genes were mutation c.410G>A (G137D) in the DUSP2 gene, exon 2 (allele frequency, 18.9%), mutation c.290G>A (C97Y) in the HIST1H3B gene, exon 1 (allele frequency, 15.9%), and mutation c.3646A>T (S1216C) in the GRIN2A gene, exon 13 (allele frequency, 15.7%). Both DUSP2 and GRIN2A are in the RET signaling pathway. Imatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that inhibits RET, PDGFR, and KIT. It has been reported to be effective in some HS cases . The patient was subsequently treated with imatinib (400 mg daily) and thalidomide (100 mg daily) since March 2018. The cost of imatinib and thalidomide was RMB 2,600 Yuan/month. Two months after the treatment, excellent PR was observed compared with tumor size in March 2018. Four months later the re-evaluation by CT scans showed a nearly complete remission (CR) . The patient took maintenance of imatinib and thalidomide for 2 years and stopped the treatment in March 2020. To date (September 2021), 45 months after HS diagnosis, she is still alive without tumor recurrence.
To explore the possible underlying mechanism of imatinib plus thalidomide in this HS patient, experiments in vitro were performed in a canine HS cell line DH82. Results of cell counting kit-8 (CCK8) assays showed that the proliferation activity of DH82 was significantly inhibited by imatinib but not thalidomide . Combined thalidomide and imatinib treatment did not improve the inhibitory effects of imatinib to DH82 . We speculated that no synergistic effect existed between imatinib and thalidomide, but each of them might have its own specific antitumor activity.
As mentioned above, mutations of DUSP2 and GRIN2A are involved in the RET signaling pathway. RET signaling leads to the activation of the RAS/MAPK and the PI3K/AKT pathways and has key roles in cell growth, differentiation, and survival . Further KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of NGS results from patient’s tissue also revealed that PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways were activated in this HS patient . Immunohistochemistry staining on the patient’s tissue was performed to detect phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) and phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK) of MAPK pathway and phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) of PI3K/AKT pathway. Results showed that p-AKT and p-ERK were strongly positive, while p-JNK was almost negative , indicating the patient actually harbored the activation of MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Treatment of DH82 with imatinib demonstrated that p-ERK and p-AKT were substantially inhibited with imatinib while p-JNK was slightly elevated in a dose-dependent manner, which confirmed the inhibitory effects of imatinib on DH82 by targeting activation of MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways .