A 36-year-old woman affected by Goltz syndrome was admitted to our observation to evaluate unclear alteration of the lung basis suggesting bullous dystrophy and occasionally reported during a CT scan, performed to study an abdominal pain subsequently spontaneously solved. Goltz syndrome was diagnosed and reported when the patient was 6 years old. The clinical history was essentially characterized by a number of not complicated bone fractures in absence of multi-organ abnormalities. She presented with some facial dysmorphic signs and showed linear cutaneous aplasia on her face. With respect to the respiratory system the patient referred a silent history. She was an occasional smoker. She managed a dry cleaner’s, without direct exposure to toxic cleansers and vapors. She did not refer any thoracic/respiratory problem either in the childhood or in the more recent years so that no previous chest radiograms were available. At the onset, we performed a chest HRCT scan which documented emphysematous destruction with aspects that partially recalled PE featuring an unusual distribution pattern. In detail, the CT scan allowed to report in many sections a single chaplet layer of bubbles with thin walls formed by interlobular septa typical for PE . As opposite, it differed from typical PE because lesions were not entirely peripheral and interested mainly the lobules localized at the center of the lung . Moreover, chest alterations were consistent neither with CLE, since they mainly affected lower lobes instead of the expected upper ones , nor with PLE because of the presence of cyst-like lesions. The latter cannot properly be defined as cysts due to the absence of thick walls and the presence of septa and vessels in their middle. The global spirometry showed normal lung function together with a slightly reduced diffusing capacity (DLCO) . In order to exclude a genetic origin of the emphysema related to alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency we performed isoelectric focusing and a MM genotype (associated to the production of a normal level of enzyme) was demonstrated. Notably, seric levels of A1AT were higher than normal and RCP was slightly increased too as coherent with an inflammatory condition. Bronchoscopy allowed us to exclude a tracheal diverticulum as suspected at the CT scan. The patient continued the follow up, under clinical and instrumental surveillance.