A 55-year-old male patient presented with an asymptomatic mass of the upper lip that he had noticed 8 years previously. His past medical history included depression. The patient’s systemic findings were a good constitution and nourished condition. Intraoral examination revealed a painless, apparently circumscribed, movable, elastic hard, and little-finger-sized tumor mass in the upper lip . No sensory or motor paralysis was observed in the maxillofacial region. No abnormal findings were observed in the bilateral cervical lymph nodes. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed that the tumor mass had clear boundaries and low-signal intensity . On T2-weighted images, the mass showed slight high-signal intensity with internal heterogeneity . These findings suggested the presence of a benign tumor in the upper lip. Needle biopsy was thus carried out, and the pathological diagnosis was PA . The tumor was removed under general anesthesia. Grossly, the cut surface of the excised tumor was glistening, heterogeneous, and tan . Histopathological examination revealed typical histologic features of PA; the tumor was well demarcated and completely encapsulated . However, a well-differentiated SCC component was found in the central region of the tumor. The tumor was finally diagnosed as CXPA. There was no focal capsular invasion of malignant cells or infiltration into the adjacent normal tissue. We thus chose a wait-and-see approach without postoperative treatment. There was no evidence of recurrence or metastasis for 6 years after the operation.
The specimen obtained by needle biopsy showed a proliferation of polygonal epithelial and myoepithelial cells in myxomatous, fibrous, and hyaline backgrounds. Typical bilayered ductal structures comprising these cells were observed. These histological features are usually noted in PA . Meanwhile, the sample removed during the operation revealed that the well-differentiated SCC component was located in the central region of the tumor . However, no extracapsular invasion of malignant cells into the adjacent normal tissue was found. The border between the PA and SCC was unclear and intermingled . In the PA region, the round and ovoid epithelial cells showed a compact cellular arrangement in the form of a large sheet with myxoid and fibrous stromata . In the SCC region, cancer cells with several mitotic figures showed invasive growth and individual cell keratinization .