A 28-year-old woman presented with a one-year history of cervical pain radiating to the right arm. She had no history of other illnesses, surgeries, related traumas, or a family history of spinal diseases. No skin pigmentary abnormalities were observed. Neurological examination revealed mild weakness in the right arm and dysesthesia in the C5-C6 right dermatome. Electromyography (EMG) testing was performed and did not disclose any abnormality. Spinal cord Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) demonstrated two right intracanal extradural and intra/extra-foraminal lesions at the cervical level: the first lesion measured 20x10mm and was located at the C6-C7 level with paravertebral extension and “dumbbell” shape; the other smaller one was located at C5-C6 level .
The case was discussed by a multidisciplinary team which set the indication for surgical removal of the lesions. The patient gave written informed consent for the procedure. On the day of surgery, the patient was positioned supine, and a laminectomy was performed at the C5-C7 levels. Through a microscopic technique and an extended transcanalar approach, a GTR of intracanal, intra-foraminal, and paravertebral components of the two lesions was performed. Fat tissue was placed to reinforce the dural closure. The postoperative course was uneventful and characterized by strength recovery. On the other hand, dysesthesia slightly improved, but never recovered completely. The patient underwent a postoperative cervical MRI, which confirmed radical excision of both lesions . Surgical specimen underwent histopathological examination, which showed spindle-shaped epithelioid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm carrying abundant melanin and scattered psammoma bodies. Neoplastic cells featured nuclear polymorphisms and evident nucleoli as well . Immunochemistry showed cellular positivity for “ HMB-45, S100, Synaptophysin, Melan-A and Collagen-IV “, thereby confirming a diagnosis of MNNST. MIB-1 proliferative index was 4-5%. To rule out CC, molecular screening on PRKAR1A gene was performed using Sanger sequencing, and no germline pathogenic variant in PRKAR1A was identified. Concerning the young age of the patient, research on the pathogenic variant in phacomatosis susceptibility genes (NF1, NF2, SPRED1, SMARCB1, LZTR1) and other 24 genes relevant in the pathogenesis of nervous system tumors (TP53, EGFR, PDGFRA, PTEN, PIK3CA, PIK3R, RB1, NOTCH1, CDK4, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, IDH1, IDH2, FUBP1 CIC, TACC3, TERTp, ATRX, DAXX, FGFR3, ACVR1, H3F3A, KIAA1549 BRAF), was performed using a customized gene panel on lymphocyte DNA and tumor tissue. No pathogenic variants of those genes were detected in both tissues. 30 days after the surgical procedure, a whole-body Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) was performed, showing no residual focal pathology nor metastasis, and an echocardiogram revealed no cardiac myxoma. One year after surgery, the patient was in clinical and radiological remission without any signs of recurrence of the disease as confirmed by a recent one-year FDG-PET/CT.