The case is a 6 years old female that was referred to the Pediatric Dept. due to multiple congenital anomalies. She was the first daughter of non-relative parents who was born via normal vaginal delivery.
On physical examination, the case had multiple congenital anomalies such as: frontal bossing, horizontal palpebral fissure, small deepest eyes, aplastic nasal bridge, broad philtrum, low set ears, large prominent ears, short neck, microcephaly, pectus excavatum, mental retardation, and dislocation of the hip. In physical examination, there was no lymph adenopathy or thyromegally. The spleen was palpable but there was no hepatomegaly. The lung and heart sounds were normal.
The case had a history of epilepsy at age of 9 months which had been controlled by phenobarbital and nitrazepam tablets. In addition, there was a history of urinary infection with normal findings in sonography.
In peripheral blood smear, platlates were decreased but other hematological levels were normal. The cases laboratory data is presented in table 1.
In bone morrow aspiration she had normal cellularity and the megakaryocytic level was increased and myeloid level was seen until neutrophils production. There was no malignant cell in the blood sample. According to the results of bone morrow aspiration and her clinical condition, 3 times platelets transfusion was done for her.
For genetic evolution karyotype was performed. To do this, fifty metaphase spreads were studied on the basis of GTG technique at 450 band resolution. In 11 spread monosomy of chromosome 21 was detected, while in the remaining 39 spreads, 46 chromosomes with marker chromosomes were observed. The marker chromosome is most probably a chromosome 21 with deletion at band distal to q21 (21q21). Therefore the karyotype result indicated a mosaic monosomy and partial monosomy of chromosome 21 (45, XX, - 21 [11] / 46, XX, del (21)(q21) [39]). The cytogenetic test was performed for the parents and it was normal. In view of her parent's karyotype this chromosomal aberration in the case is of de novo origin, and the mosaic pattern is of post–zygotic origin. It was explained to the parents that the risk of recurrence in future pregnancies is around 1%.