A 71-year-old male with a medical history of osteoarthritis, right total hip arthroplasty, hypercholesterolemia, disorder of thyroid gland, steatosis of liver, lung nodules, calcification of coronary artery, and benign prostatic hyperplasia was admitted to Larkin Community Hospital in South Miami after a routine cruciate retaining TKA due to osteoarthritis . Before surgery, the patient was awake, alert, and oriented (AAO) times 3 (AAO × 3). He showed a full understanding of the procedure and treatment options. He admitted to alcohol abuse but quit 1 year ago. He was cleared by his primary care and cardiology physicians. He had the following medical problems: Hypercholesterolemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia, disorder of the thyroid gland, steatosis of the liver, nodule of the lung, and calcification of the coronary artery. Muscle strength was 5/5, pulses were 2+ in both lower extremities and body mass index was 30.1 kg/m2. The patient was discharged the following day after an unremarkable hospital course. Post-operative X-rays are shown below ( , ).
The patient returned to the emergency department (ED) 7 weeks later with right knee pain. On examination, he was found to be awake, AAO × 1 to person only. During this time, the patient had a respiratory rate of 11 bpm, blood pressure of 131/89, and oxygen saturation of 97%. There was no prior history of altered mentation or memory deficits. There was obvious deformity of the right knee with tenting of the skin and signs of prosthetic joint infection (draining sinus with elevated CRP and ESR) as well as a skin ulcer on the foot .
According to a history obtained by his proxy, the patient was doing well until 2 weeks prior (approximately 5 weeks postoperatively) when he was found by his physical therapist lying on the floor of his home in his own urine with an apparent right knee dislocation. He was taken to an outside facility that preformed a closed reduction. He was discharged to a rehabilitation facility after this encounter. The patient was then transferred to the Larkin Community Hospital ED from the rehabilitation facility due to another apparent knee dislocation. The dislocation was reduced but continued to dislocate on extension. Once the knee reduced in extension a well-padded knee immobilizer was put on to prevent complications and recurrent dislocation. He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). He was started on appropriate antibiotics and scheduled for revision surgery after medical optimization. Radiographs obtained during time of admission are shown in and . The patient also had a previous THA which appeared in appropriate alignment . Further imaging of the right lower extremity was unremarkable.
The patient was later taken to the operating room to undergo a Stage 1 right TKA revision with placement of a static cement antibiotic spacer (,). The femoral component was removed in the usual fashion. The tibial component was completely loosened. Attached to the tibial component were parts of bone, which may indicate trauma as the etiology of the patient’s dislocation. Furthermore, a significant amount of scar tissue had formed on the anterior aspect of the patella and the patellar tendon. Dissection and histopathology also demonstrated evidence of infection. Knee cultures grew Enterobacter Cloacae which was sensitive to levofloxacin. The patient was then taken to the operating room to remove his current prosthesis and add an antibiotic cement spacer (, ). He was eventually discharged AAO × 1 to a × DCF with 6 weeks of medication.
Six days after discharge, the patient returned with an inflamed knee (AAO × 0) and some evidence of hematoma formation but no infection. Almost no fluid was aspirated and there was no pus. The patient remained AAO X1 in the ICU with multiple medical problems including pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, anemia, encephalopathy, and atrial fibrillation. Blood cultures demonstrated no growth during that time.
During the post-surgical course, he was confused, disorganized in thought, restless, delusional, aggressive, and tangential in his responses with a blunted affect. According to a psychiatric consult, the patient had delayed responses and processing. He had thought blocking and was unable to recall events. It was evident that the patient had an extensive history of alcohol use. According to his son, the patient was a recovering alcoholic who may have relapsed past year when he found several empty beer cans in the patient’s car before this admission. The son also stated the patient had a history of bipolar II disorder. He had never been admitted to any psychiatric facility and had not been on medication for his bipolar disorder in several years.
Overtime the patient became aggressive and disoriented. There was increased pain in the right knee, tenting of skin, soiled dressing, and an inflamed incision. New radiographs showed a dislodged antibiotic spacer perforating through the distal aspect of the tibia ( and ). Due to the subsequent dislocation, an intercalary fusion was indicated ( and ). Surgical and histopathologic examination at this time continued to show evidence of infection. Blood cultures during this time were negative. He was admitted to the ICU and suffered from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal polyp hemorrhage. Other medical problems included acute blood loss anemia, hypokalemia, pulmonary embolism, atrial fibrillation, lung nodule, and shock of undetermined significance. The patient had normal B12 levels, negative rapid plasma reagent test, and normal ammonia levels. He was given many medications and treatments throughout his hospital course including apixaban, loop diuretics, epinephrine, and packing, lorazepam for seizure prophylaxis, aspirin and atorvastatin, and Vitamin K. The patient’s mental status improved to AAO × 3 overtime through treatment of underlying medical conditions. MRI was recommended but never performed. A new 6-week course of antibiotics was started. He was eventually cleared medically for discharge. There are no new follow-ups following this hospital admission.