A 74-year-old male patient with a history of myocardial infarction and paroxysmal
atrial fibrillation was admitted owing to frequent discharge of his ICD for 4 days.
Four days before admission, the patient experienced diarrhea approximately six to
ten times a day after intake of crabs, without vomiting and syncope. He felt
frequent discharge of his ICD and had chest distress and palpitations, with
approximately 17 discharges in 4 days. He underwent ICD implantation 8 years
previously for an episode of ventricular tachycardia and regularly took dabigatran,
atorvastatin, metoprolol, amiodarone, perindopril, spironolactone, and furosemide
outside the hospital. He had no history of digitalis use. On admission, his blood
pressure was 143/78 mmHg with a temperature of 37.8°C, respiratory rate of 20
breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 97%. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed
a ventricular rate of 203 beats/minute . The serum potassium level was
3.1 mmol/L and brain natriuretic peptide level was 699 pg/mL. No abnormalities were
observed in myocardial enzymes, troponin, complete blood count, liver and kidney
function, and the blood coagulation index. Echocardiography showed the following:
left atrial diameter of 44 mm, left ventricular diameter of 58 mm, ejection fraction
of 38%; and the amplitude of inferior wall motion was reduced. Esmolol was
administered to control the ventricular rate at the pump point of 0.05 mg/kg/minute,
along with oral potassium chloride 3 g plus an intravenous supplement of 39 mEq/L
potassium chloride (200 mL/hour) and antidiarrhea therapies. After this drug
administration, his ECG was improved, and it showed sinus rhythm with frequent
premature ventricular beats. Three hours later, the patient experienced chest
distress and palpitations again. A repeated ECG showed a ventricular rate of 153
beats/minute (.
The serum potassium level was 3.3 mmol/L.
The initial ECG showed atrial fibrillation with aberrant conduction and occasional premature
ventricular contraction, whereas the second ECG showed BVT. A clinical diagnosis
of ventricular tachycardia, electrical storm, and hypokalemia was made. Guided by
the serum potassium level of 3.1 mmol/L (normal >3.5 and <5.5 mmol/L), oral
and intravenous potassium were administered with rapid resolution of tachycardia. A
follow-up ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm that alternated with atrial pacing . The ECG metrics and
serum potassium levels at the time of each ECG are shown in . After serum potassium levels were
maintained to >4 mmol/L, the premature ventricular beat was gradually reduced and
ventricular tachycardia never occurred, which strongly supported the diagnosis. The
patient has had no ventricular tachycardia attack again after discharge for 3
months.