A 68-year-old woman with a 2-year history of highly symptomatic drug-refractory paroxysmal AF (EHRA 3), previously treated with a previous PVI procedure, was referred to our division for a PVI redo procedure. The patient (height 160 cm, weight 69 kg) presented a history of two-vessel coronary artery disease treated with percutaneous revascularization, a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 4, and HAS-BLED score of 2. She had a history of hypertension, hypothyroidism, and a congenital ostium secundum atrial septal defect with a left-right spontaneous shunt. The patient presented also moderate kyphoscoliosis of the vertebral column, most prominent at the lumbar level. She was treated with rivaroxaban 20 mg/day, aspirin, sotalol, thyroxin, furosemide/spironolactone medication, and pantoprazole. The pre-procedural blood values, including routine coagulation indices were all normal.
The anticoagulation therapy was interrupted 36 h before the procedure and a transoesophageal echocardiogram performed on the same day of the procedure excluded left atrial appendage thrombi. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia and vascular access was obtained through the right femoral vein. High-density mapping was performed during sinus rhythm and showed pulmonary vein reconnection of all pulmonary veins. A radiofrequency ablation catheter (Thermocool Smarttouch, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was performed; it showed a reconnection of three pulmonary veins. A mapping procedure obtained 20 min after the last ablation point showed a persistent deconnection of all pulmonary veins. Atrial programmed stimulation as well as repeated high-rate pacing bursts did not induce AF. During the entire procedure, the patient had a sinus rhythm, remained stable with vital signs within range of normality; ACT was stable around 300 s with a final procedural value of 259 s. No reversion of anticoagulation was performed and no intraprocedural and peri-procedural complications occurred. The patient was then carefully transferred to the ward bed with the aid of a sliding mat; a mandatory 4 h bed rest and immobilization was prescribed.
At the time of femoral vein haemostasis (4 h after PVI completion), the ACT was 110 s; rivaroxaban (20 mg) was then administered. In the following hours, the patient developed right gluteal and bilateral lumbar pain, right lower limb paraesthesia, and motor deficits below the knee [patellar and achillean hyporeflexia; iliopsoas, quadriceps, ankle dorsiflexors, plantar flexors, and long toe extensors motor deficits (MMT 2)]. A psoas sign was also present. The neurological symptoms fluctuated presenting an on–off pattern intermittently affecting either the right or left lower limb; there was the suspicion for either a transient central or peripheral involvement. A complete thoracic, chest, and cerebral angio-computed tomography scan was performed and acute retroperitoneal or cerebral bleeding were excluded.
Furthermore, a cervical, dorsal, and lumbar native magnetic resonance imaging was then performed. This examination showed a subdural spinal haematic collection with an associated epidural component from L3 to S2 (8 × 11 mm in the axial plane, see ; 65 × 11 mm in the sagittal plane, see ). The subdural spinal haematoma exerted compression over the dural sheath, abolishing the liquoral representation around the cauda equina lateral right nerve roots within L3–L4 and L4–L5 and within L5–S1 mainly in the posterior bilateral location.
After consultation with neurologists and neurosurgeons, a ‘wait-and-see’ treatment approach by withholding anticoagulation therapy and patient immobilization was taken. Indeed, the operative risk of subsequent lower limb paralysis associated to the surgical approach was estimated too high and exceeding possible benefit. In the following 9 days, a neurological rehabilitation and sub-therapeutic anticoagulation regimen was initiated. There was progressive recovery of sensorial and motor deficits. After 5 months though, the patient still presented residual lower limb motor deficits necessitating the support of a walking stick.