In April 2021, a 40-year-old man came to the Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine ENT department complaining of facial numbness and pain for one month, weakness of his facial muscles for 15 days, and recurrent right epistaxis for 1 year. Initially, he experienced numbness and pain on the right side of his face, followed by abnormal flushing on the right midface approximately 10 days later. He developed sagging at the corners of the right side of his mouth and a deepening of the right nasolabial groove . Of note, he had a smoking history of over 20 years and a medical history of right nasal inflammatory polyps with chronic sinusitis for more than 1 year. Meanwhile, he denied a history of occupational exposure and other associated nasal diseases. In 2020, he presented with right epistaxis and nasal obstruction for over 1 year. Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the tumour occupied part of the right maxillary sinus and nasal cavity . He underwent his first functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) in January 2020. However, this surgery was aborted due to excessive bleeding (more than 2000 millilitres), leading to only partial mass removal. Some tissue in the right paranasal sinus could not be removed and sent for pathological examination. Histopathology results of the removed masses confirmed the diagnosis of nasal inflammation polyps with massive necrosis due to the patient’s refusal to undergo further immunohistochemical examination of this portion of tissue, which led to difficulties in determining the nature of the tumour. He was preliminary diagnosed with right nasal inflammatory polyps and chronic sinusitis and discharged. Then, appropriate intranasal treatment was administered, including a 0.9% sodium chloride injection to rinse the nasal cavity, oral antihistamines, mucosal excretion enhancers, and a full course of antibiotics. After receiving the above-mentioned intranasal treatments for a while, the patient felt that his nasal obstruction symptoms had been alleviated. At that time, he discontinued them on his own and never received similar treatment again. However, he had developed symptoms of right epistaxis again in April 2020.
Clinical examination revealed tenderness in the right ethmoid sinus and maxilla, as well as dense secretions in the right middle nasal meatus. Additionally, hypoesthesia was observed in the maxillary nerve distribution area, as well as in the distribution areas of the zygomatic and buccal branches of the right facial nerve, accompanied by the loss of the ability to whistle. These findings indicated FP (H-B III).
CT and Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an increased extent of the space-occupying lesions in the right nasal cavity and maxillary sinus compared to the images from 2020 . From the presented data, it was evident that the mass in the right maxillary sinus had occupied entirely the sinus, ruptured it, and obstructed the right common nasal meatus and middle nasal meatus. Moreover, the anterior wall of the right maxillary sinus had also been damaged. Although the intranasal biopsy results pointed towards necrotising polyps, the recurrence of the lesion indicated the possibility of malignant changes. However, the doctor decided to perform a second FESS. During this procedure, a significant amount of red and grey tissue was extracted from the right maxillary sinus, and extensive bone destruction was observed. The tumour was excised and sent for pathological testing.
The postoperative pathological result revealed the presence of more adipose spindle cell hyperplasia under the mucosa of the right maxillary sinus mass, and the findings of mitotic figures on the images suggested a malignant lesion. Eventually, the patient was diagnosed with PSA according to the result of immunohistochemistry, which suggested Ki67 (approximately 30% +, P16 (+), CD31 (+), and ERG (+) . According to the eighth edition of American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) cancer staging manual , the patient was classified as stage T4aN2aM0. Despite our careful explanation of the potential consequences and prognosis, the patient and his family rejected the subsequent treatment: local extended resection combined with radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
At the 3-year follow-up, the patient described alleviating his facial numbness and hypoesthesia following surgery. Additionally, after being diagnosed with PSA, he chose to quit smoking. However, in August 2021, MRI scans of the sinus and neck revealed that the tumour may have infiltrated the skin along the bone defect of the anterior wall of the right maxillary sinus . Concurrently, lymphatic metastasis had occurred in the right neck, with the largest lymph nodes located in the IB area of the right neck (2.8 cm × 2.0 cm) . In December 2021, MRI indicated a reduction in the size of the space-occupying area in the right maxillary sinus, while the IB area of the right neck (2.3 cm × 3.9 cm) was larger than before, with multiple lymph nodes present in the bilateral neck IV region . Based on these data, the stage of this patient was updated as T4aN2bMx.
In November 2022, the patient developed a purplish-red induration on his cheek , but the severity of FP was not increased. Unfortunately, the patient declined to undergo nasal endoscopy, biopsy, CT, and MRI examinations, which made it challenging to determine the progression of the lesion in the right maxillary sinus and nasal cavity and whether this nodule was consistent with PSA. Despite experiencing recurrent epistaxis and impaired facial function, he has survived for more than 3 years without receiving any radiotherapy or chemotherapy since being diagnosed with PSA.