A 53-year-old woman was diagnosed with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of lung with involvement of the liver and mediastinal lymph nodes. She has a history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease due to prior cisplatin use and uterine fibroids but no history of thyroid disease or any other autoimmune disorders. She was receiving second-line therapy using nivolumab, to which she achieved excellent response and complete resolution of liver disease and significant response in the lung and mediastinal lesions. Programmed death-ligands 1 (PD-L1) were expressed on 81–90% of malignant cells. She was doing well until she presented to the emergency department with slurred speech, progressive diffuse facial, periorbital swelling and tongue swelling over the last few weeks. She also complained of generalized weakness, fatigue, forgetfulness, constipation, dyspnea, slow voice, cold intolerance and dry skin. Physical examination revealed slightly overweight woman with cushinoid appearance, depressed mentation, poor memory and delayed relaxation phase of deep tendon reflexes. Facial examination revealed diffuse facial, periorbital and neck swelling. She has no thyromegaly or lymphadenopathy. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory findings showed hemoglobin of 87 gm/L, mean corpuscular volume of 94 fL, white blood cell count of 4.6 × 109/L, platelets of 238 × 109/L, creatinine of 209.5 μmol/L, sodium of 136 mmol/L, potassium of 4.4 mmol/L and calcium of 2.5 mmol/L. Thyroid function tests revealed thyroid-stimulating hormone of 237 micro Unit/mL and free T4 ˂1 pmol/L. Cortisol level was 303 nmol/L. Creatine kinase was elevated at 23.80 μkat/L suggestive of myopathy due to severe hypothyroidism. Computed tomography of the brain revealed no evidence of intracranial metastasis.
These clinical and laboratory findings were consistent with myxedema crisis. Therefore, she was hospitalized and immediately initiated on 100 μg of intravenous (IV) levothyroxine for 3 days. This was followed by 137 μg of oral levothyroxine daily. In addition, she was started on IV hydrocortisone which was subsequently discontinued once adrenal insufficiency was ruled out. She expressed dramatic recovery of her symptoms and laboratory studies. Nivolumab was suspected to be the culprit of myxedema in this patient and was held until symptoms improved. She was subsequently restarted on nivolumab without recurrent symptoms. On continued follow up, she was given another 10 cycles of nivolumab over 5 months period without any signs or symptoms of myxedema.