A 3-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital due to isolated proteinuria for 3 months. The patient did not receive routine urine test until he got pharyngitis. Notably, the quantity of proteinuria once reached the nephrotic range (0.93 g/24 h, 53 mg/kg), which then decreased to between 0.59 g/24 h and 0.62 g/24 h after the recovery of infection. During the entire course of disease, there was no edema. The patient was treated with Chinese herbal medicines at the local hospital although no definite diagnosis was made. However, proteinuria was not improved after nearly 3 months of treatment.
Both of his parents were healthy and provided normal results in routine urine test. In addition, they denied any positive family history of nephropathy. No obvious abnormality was detected in the prenatal examinations, and his vital signs and systematic physical examinations were normal. The total quantity of proteinuria was within the non-nephrotic range (590 mg/24 h, 33 mg/kg), which was dominated by albuminuria (522.90 mg/24 h). Besides, there was no abnormality in the low molecular weight proteinuria (LMWP) or the urine calcium-to-creatinine ratio, with no hematuria. Laboratory investigations revealed mild hypoalbuminemia (35.7 g/L), no hypercholesterolemia (4.52 mmol/L) and normal glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, 189.54 ml/min). Moreover, the patient did not have any significant illnesses, including hepatitis B, tuberculosis, IgA vasculitis or systemic lupus erythematosus. Besides, both ASO and EBV-IgM were negative. Renal ultrasound revealed normal echogenicity (left kidney, 72 mm × 32 mm, right kidney, 68 mm × 27 mm).
Clinically, the patient presented with isolated proteinuria, which was identified as glomerular proteinuria, while both the low molecular weight proteinuria and urine calcium-to-creatinine ratio were normal. Therefore, renal tubular diseases, such as Dent disease, were ruled out. Furthermore, there was no evident evidence of nephrotic syndrome since the patient had neither nephrotic proteinuria nor hypercholesterolemia, regardless of the mild hypoalbuminemia. Moreover, there was no evidence of secondary nephritis, including purpura nephritis, lupus nephritis or hepatitis B-related nephropathy. Based on the above findings, the patient was treated with angiotensin converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) before renal biopsy, hoping to improve proteinuria.
Renal histopathology under light microscope (LM) showed that, one glomerulus turned sclerosis, while the other thirty one glomeruli exhibited minor glomerular abnormalities . Immunofluorescence was negative. Besides, electron microscope (EM) observation revealed mitochondrial proliferation and hypertrophy, as well as crowded arrangement in the lumen plane of renal tubules .
As confirmed by Whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis, there were compound heterozygous variants in the COQ8B gene inherited from both of his parents. Of them, the variant (c.[271C > T]), which had not been reported among Asians, was inherited from his father (According to GnomAD, this variant was presented in heterozygous state and detected in three individuals in Europeans. (.). Meanwhile, the missense variant (c.[737G > A]), which had been reported previously, was inherited from his mother . The pathogenicity of both variants was analyzed, as displayed in Table . The online Polyphen2 and SIFT software were used for the interpretation of the missense sequence variants. In silico (computational) prediction, these variants were predicted to be PROBABLY DAMAGING using the Polyphen2 tool . However, the prediction result was deleterious using SIFT tool . MAF of 0.00 for the c.[271C > T] variant was shown in population data, including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes Project, ExAC (East Asia), ExAC (South Asia), while in GnomAD, this variant was presented in heterozygous state and detected in three individuals in Europeans. MAF for the c.[737G > A] variant varied between different databases, as displayed in Table . According to ACMG, the pathogenicity of the sequence variant c.[271C > T] was of uncertain significance (PP3). The proband’s father with the same heterozygous variant had normal phenotype. Similarly, the pathogenicity of the sequence variant c.[737G > A] was also of uncertain significance (PP3), and his mother also showed normal phenotype. Notably, the sequence variant c.[271C > T] was located at exon 4, which coded the helical domain, whereas the sequence variant c.[737G > A] was located at exon 9 and coded the kinase domain. The amino acids encoded by the two above-mentioned sequence variants were of evolutionary conservation . The variants in the proband were compound heterozygotes, which were consistent with the pathogenesis of autosomal recessive (AR) compound heterozygous genetic diseases. Moreover, the segregation of phenotypes and genotypes of the proband was consistent with that of his family members. Neither other nephrotic syndrome-related genes nor any copy number variations were detected. Mitochondrial detection also came to negative results. Combined with the typical renal histopathological findings, the diagnosis of ADCK4-GN was made, which was derived from the compound heterozygous sequence variants of the COQ8B(ADCK4) gene.
Given the potential neurological involvement, further neurological system examinations were performed, including physical examinations and imaging examinations. The proband presented with neither hypotonia nor psychomotor delay. No abnormality was detected in brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or electroencephalogram (EEG), and there was neither visual loss nor sensorineural hearing loss.
ACEI treatment was thus terminated, and the child was given treatment with CoQ10 (15 mg/kg·d) since then. Proteinuria and eGFR were persistently monitored, which showed that proteinuria gradually decreased during the 3-month-follow-up period (0.33 g/24 h, 18.9 mg/kg in the third month). In the fifth month, proteinuria decreased to 0.28 g/24 h, and eGFR was within the normal range.