A 52-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a 1-year history of progressive breathlessness and productive cough with white sputum. The patient had no occupational exposure and had a ten-year smoking history. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple cysts and nodules . Pulmonary langerhans cell histocytosis (PLCH) was considered basing on the imaging manifestation and smoking history without evidence of histopathology due to limited medical care, and treated with giving up smoking. After 6 months, repeated chest CT scan revealed rapid progress, exhibiting disseminated thin-walled cystic lesions in bilateral lungs . Finally, the patient was transferred to our hospital with progressive breathlessness and aggravated cough.
Physical examination on admission included body temperature 36.3 °C, the blood pressure 115/74 mmHg, respiratory frequence 19 times per minute, heart rate 80 times per minute and auscultation of her lung revealed decreased breath sounds. The oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 93% in ambient air.
Significant laboratory values were as follows: normal autoimmune markers, normal anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody level, no evidence of infection in sputum culture, an increased serum white cell count of 11.6 × 109/L (4–10 × 109/L). A severely mixed ventilatory defect was detected by pulmonary function test, showing a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.37 L (47.6% of predicted value), a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 1.00 L (42.6% of predicted value) and severe reduction of diffusion capacity (DLCO) of 1.94 L (27.4% of predicted value). Echocardiogram showed mild-to-moderate pulmonary hypertension (48 mmHg).
Repeated HRCT revealed obvious deterioration with diffuse pulmonary cystic lesions, pericardial effusion and bilateral pleural effusion . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cytology indicated 5% neutrophils, 5% lymphocytes, 55% histocytes, 10% ciliated cells and 5% cancer cells. TBCB showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and vascular tumor emboli . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the lung primary site [cytokeratin (CK) 7 and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) positive]. Abnormal carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) level of 50.93 ng/mL (0–10 ng/mL) and an increased neuron-specific enolase (NSE) level of 4.26 ng/mL (0–3.3 ng/mL) were observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain suggested possible metastatic tumor in the left frontal lobe. Bone scintigraphic imaging showed multiple bone metastases. Therefore, her clinical stage was T4N0M1c stage IV, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation test was positive with exon 18 (G719X, G719). She underwent afatinib therapy. The next follow-up after 1 month demonstrated significant improvement, and the patient was alive .