The focus of this report is a 65-year-old man with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, treated with obinutuzumab from October 2020 to April 2021, with partial response achievement, subsequently undergoing maintenance treatment with obinutuzumab (the monoclonal antibody was given every 2 months), with the last dose given on 15 December 2021. Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia was diagnosed in November 2007. In previous treatment, he received 2 lines of immunochemotherapy (in 2007 and in 2008).
He was admitted to our hospital, on 24 February 2022, due to conjunctivitis and severe thrombocytopenia. Two days before admission, he had a fever of 38.5 °C. He had received two doses of COVID-19 vaccine, one in March and one in June 2021. He had a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection on 7th of January with a mild course. The patient was ambulatory and treated with molnupiravir. After antiviral treatment, he received a negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR result. Moreover, he had a history of arterial hypertension and prostate hypertrophy with no significant family history. On admission, a SARS-CoV-2 PCR test via nasopharyngeal swab was negative. On physical examination, numerous petechiae were present on the skin and mucous membranes. Additionally, features of conjunctivitis were observed. The patient had fever of 38 °C. Laboratory findings on admission revealed severe thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, elevated inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers (CRP, fibrinogen, D-dimer), and high levels of lactate dehydrogenase .
On day 3, the patient developed dyspnea, with bilateral rales and crackles over the lungs. On the chest X-ray, numerous signs of bilateral heterogenous shading with unclear etiology were observed .
The patient required oxygen therapy, and initially, due to a lack of diagnosis, he received empirically broad-spectrum antibiotics (meropenem, linezolide). On laboratory testing, a further increase in inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers (CRP, ferritin, interleukin-6, D-Dimer, fibrinogen) was observed. Blood cultures as well as a respiratory PCR multitest were negative. Due to the dynamic increase in D-dimers and the elevation of cardiac biomarkers (BNP, NT-proBNP) along with dyspnea, an angio-CT was performed. It excluded pulmonary embolism, but it revealed widening of the pulmonary trunk and pulmonary arteries, as well as alveolar compaction in both lungs and bilateral pleural effusion. Pulmonary edema was diagnosed (, and ).
The patient was treated with diuretics and showed clinical improvement. However, on day 5, he developed neurological complications such as confusion and dizziness. Despite platelets transfusions, the levels of platelets remained extremely low. All presented symptoms (cardiac failure presented as pulmonary edema, severe thrombocytopenia refractory to transfusions, conjunctivitis, high inflammatory and coagulation markers, and neurological symptoms), in a patient who 5 weeks prior had undergone COVID-19 treatment, strongly indicated MIS-A. The treatment with high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin (40 g per day) and high doses of methylprednisolone (250 mg per day) were initiated and were continued during the next 5 days. On day 10, inflammatory markers and natriuretic peptides decreased. Laboratory results showed a significant increase in platelet count . During the next 5 days, steroids were reduced, the control chest X-ray showed no evidence of pulmonary edema.
Three months later, patient returned to his daily activities. Levels of inflammatory markers, natriuretic peptides, and levels of platelets returned to normal values. No signs of neurological impairment were observed. Despite the normalization of lymphocyte counts and their subsets 3 months after MIS-A, the CD4/CD8 ratio assessed by peripheral blood immunophenotyping remained in a disturbed proportion .