A 22-year-old patient, Para 1, Gravida 2, presented to our Emergency Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, at 35 weeks of gestation for acute onset of abdominal pain and uterine contraction. It was learned that the patient's history had no follow-up hypertriglyceridemia. On physical exam, her heart rate was at 100 pulses per minute, and her blood pressure was at 110/70 mm-Hg, respiratory rate 18 /min. Her abdomen was defensive. Her cervical os was dilated to 1-2 cm and minimal bleeding. The patient had mild epigastric tenderness. Decelerations were seen in pregnant cardiotocography follow-ups with abnormal abdominal pain and uterine contractions continued and simultaneous wide bleeding area (like abruptio placenta) was seen on the posterior part of placenta in ultrasound. Immediate cesarean section was performed under general anesthesia because of contraction of the tetanic type in the manual contraception. She gave birth to a healthy infant of 2980 g. Amylase, lipase, triglyceride, HDL, and LDL were studied in the patient's blood after emulsion of chylous fluid from abdomen during the cesarean section. Liver enzymes were high: ast: 241, sub. 147. It was observed that blood sample revealed a milky turbid serum. Laboratory finding included a triglyceride at 3297 mg/dl and amylase 827 U/L, lipase 1576 U/L. Abdominal ultrasound showed thickened pancreas without necrosis; acute pancreatitis compatible with diffuse edema was observed on pancreas. Biliary tract was naturally observed. Other causes of cholestasis of pregnancy, such as cholangitis, acute hepatitis, and hemophagocytic syndrome, were ruled out. Oral intake of the patient was stopped; intravenous fluid replacement therapy, antibiotherapy, proton pump inhibitor, insulin, and heparin therapy were started. She was discharged on the 10th day of treatment. Even though the patient did not have previous history of diabetes or gestational diabetes, the baby was born 4 to 3 weeks earlier. It was thought that this condition might be related to maternal hyperlipidemia for newborn's doctors.