A 71-year-old male patient with history of cataract surgery (previous refraction: −12.5 sphere, −1.00 to 0º cylinder), with diffractive lens implant and high myopia (axial length of 30.19 mm) in the right eye, developed a MH 15 days after the cataract surgery, associated with metamorphopsia and decreased visual acuity (VA, count fingers). One month later, PPV with ILM peeling was performed achieving the closure of the MH. Three months later, the visual symptoms returned (metamorphopsia), the VA had not improved (count fingers), and a MH recurrence was observed (700 µm), associated with subretinal fluid, intraretinal hemorrhages, and pigment dispersion .
A new surgery was carried out in order to achieve the MH closure. The PRGF-membrane was prepared according to Endoret® technology (BTI Biotechnology Institute, S.L., Miñano, Álava, Spain) The surgical procedure consisted in enlarging the peeling of the ILM, close to the optic nerve and the vascular arcade and tap the edges of the MH (to increase the probability of closing the MH, technique proposed by the retina surgeon: AFVS). Then, the PRGF membrane was introduced through the trocar and placed inside the MH (the thickness of the membrane was 100 µm), without pressure and without forcing the adhesion (PRGF fibrin membrane have adhesion properties when it comes into contact with the cell surface) trying to avoid the potential damage to the retinal pigment epithelium; subsequently three drops of liquid PRGF were placed in the MH, and a fluid-gas (C3F8) exchange was performed at the end of the surgery .
To obtain the PRGF-membrane, 81 mL of the patient’s blood was extracted in 9 mL tubes with 3.8% sodium citrate as an anticoagulant. The blood was centrifuged at 580 g at room temperature for 8 mins (Endoret system®). The fraction 2 (F2) was defined as 2 mL of plasma just above the buffy coat and fraction 1 (F1) was defined as the remaining plasma above F2. To make each PRGF membrane, 5 mL of F2 was activated with 10% calcium chloride and then incubated in 35 mm diameter wells at 37°C for 30 mins. Once the fibrin clots were formed, they were placed in a shaping vessel and pressed for 30 s, yielding 100 µm thick PRGF-membrane. The F1 (liquid) was placed after the PRGF membrane was introduced into the MH. This preparation does not contain cells.
After two months of follow-up, the MH was completely closed. Anatomic recovery of the foveal depression (assessed by SD-OCT) was observed and the mild intraretinal hemorrhages and subretinal fluid disappear, improving the VA to 0.1. An alteration was observed in the outer layers of the retina in the foveal area, but no adverse reactions were associated with the PRGF. We did not have any new recurrences of the MH in a follow-up period of six months, and VA remained stable during this period .