A 75-year-old Chinese male, who was diagnosed with gastric adenocarcinoma and who underwent a radical total gastrectomy, was admitted to the clinical oncology center on 27 June 2016 due to the presence of an indolent lump on his gingiva. The patient complained a gingival swelling that continued for approximately 1 month with progressive enlargement. A physical examination revealed a gray and painless neoplasm on the left upper gingiva with local hemorrhage on palpation. The diameter of mass was 2 cm. His dentist had originally diagnosed epulis and suggested surgical excision. However, the patient refused. He was treated with antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, but the result was negative. Examination of the patient’s medical history revealed that the patient underwent a radical gastrectomy through laparoscope in 29 months earlier. The histological examination of the postsurgical specimen confirmed that the muscular layer of gastric wall had been infiltrated by poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells, and lymph nodes metastasis (2/18) was also shown. The clusters of hyperchromatic and pleomorphic cancer cells among the tumor tissue were observed under optical microscope . Furthermore, immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that tumor was positive for CK7 and CK20 , and negative for Her-2, CK-19, and TTF1. There was no cancerous cell in the greater omentum, in the proximal resection margin or in the distal resection margin according to the histopathology examination, and no distant metastasis was found by a computerized tomography (CT) scan. The stage of gastric cancer was pT3N1M0 (stage IIIA). The patient received 4 cycles of chemotherapy (oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 in day 1 and tegafur 800 mg/m2 in days 1–4, this regimen was performed once every 4 weeks as 1 cycle) after the operation. After 2 months of chemotherapy, the contrast-enhanced CT scan showed no recurrence of the tumor. No regular check-up and followed-up were performed.
At admission, serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated (13.12 ng/ml). On 30 June 2016, a PET-CT revealed left adrenal gland and upper gingiva (left molar area) involvement, which were considered as the malignant lesions . The gingival mass was subsequently getting a surgical biopsy. Samples were fixed in 10% neutral formaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections were cut at a thickness of 10 μm. The results showed that tumor cells were arranged in pseudoglandular patterns and were uniform in size with prominent nuclei microscopically . The IHC investigations of gingival tumor postoperative specimens demonstrated immunoreactivity of CK7 (scattered+) , CK20 (partly+) , MUC2 (+) , Villin (+) , NapsinA (−), Her-2 (−), and TTF1 (−). These features suggested a metastatic adenocarcinoma of gingiva that was consistent with an origin in the patient’s gastric carcinoma. Then the patient received 3D–CRT (5000 cGy/25F/5w) with synchronization and sequential chemotherapy (raltitrexed 4 mg day1 q3w as 1 cycle). The gingival neoplasm disappeared, and serum level of CEA decreased to 3.31 ng/ml after radiotherapy and 4 cycles of chemotherapy. The disease was stable until 26 March 2017. And the follow-up is being performed.