A 16-year-old Chinese girl was admitted to Chinese PLA General Hospital with left upper abdominal pain, which she had experienced for 1 month. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory investigations revealed moderate elevations of total bile (43.9 μmol/L; normal 0 to 10 μmol/L) and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (89.5 U/L; normal 0 to 40 U/L), and mildly decreased serum albumin (33.2 g/L; normal 40 to 55 g/L). Serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase levels were normal. Serologic markers for hepatitis B and C virus were negative. A chest x-ray showed normal pulmonary vascularity. The patient did not have any neurological manifestations of hepatic encephalopathy, and her blood ammonia level was 56 μmol/L (normal 18 to72 μmol/L).
Precontrast abdominal CT revealed a large hypodense nodule in segment II and a small hypodense nodule in segment IV of the liver. Following intravenous administration of iodinated contrast, an additional lesion was seen in segment VI. Moderate enhancement was seen on arterial- and venous-phase images . Precontrast MRI confirmed the presence of the three nodules in the liver. The largest one (segment II) measured 7.8 cm, and was markedly hyperintense on T1-weighted images and inhomogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted images . The other two lesions (segments IV and VI) measured 3.2 cm and 1.9 cm, respectively, and were heterogeneously hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. After intravenous injection of gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA, Magnevist; Schering AG, Berlin, Germany), all three lesions showed strong enhancement on arterial phase images. On portal-venous phase images, these lesions were moderately hyperintense compared with normal liver parenchyma due to washout of contrast agent, while on delayed-phase images, areas of delayed enhancement were seen in all three lesions . Based on these CT and MRI findings, we diagnosed this case as multiple FNH.
During the radiologic workup of the patient, including both CT and MRI, no intrahepatic portal vein was seen. After joining of the middle and left hepatic veins, the portal trunk drained directly into the inferior vena cava (IVC) just below the level of the right atrium . These vascular abnormalities were not identified prior to the hepatic surgery.
Five days later, the patient underwent resection of the three hepatic tumors. During intraoperative examination, intrahepatic portal branches were not apparent. The largest lesion (segment II) protruded out of the liver and was encapsulated within an intact capsule with rich subcapsular vessels . All three lesions were completely removed. The gross pathologic investigation from one lesion (segment IV) revealed multiple nodules in the capsule . Microscopically, all three lesions comprised nodules of hepatocytes separated by fibrous septa containing numerous dystrophic arteries, proliferated bile ducts, and lymphocytic infiltration. The diagnosis of multiple FNH was confirmed; however, the histologic features of the two smaller FNH lesions (segments IV and VI) and the larger FNH lesion (segment II) differed. Aside from the lack of veins, the two smaller FNH lesions were characteristic of classic FNH: (a) abnormal nodular architecture, (b) radiating fibrous septa originating from a central scar, (c) malformed arteries, and (d) bile duct proliferation . The larger FNH lesion (segment II) showed less central scar and fibrous septa and, more importantly, contained substantial sinusoidal dilatation, consistent with telangiectatic FNH .
Following surgery, liver ultrasonography (US) confirmed the CAPV and the presence of a portosystemic shunt, which fed directly into the IVC. Additionally, a ventricular septal defect (VSD) was observed using US.
Prior to discharge, the patient underwent an additional MRI with gadobenate dimeglumine (Gd-BOPTA, MultiHance; Bracco Imaging SpA, Milan, Italy), and additional hepatic nodules were found on delayed hepatobiliary-phase images obtained at one hour after contrast administration . These lesions were not seen on the CT examination or the MRI examination performed with gadopentetate dimeglumine.