A 50-year-old Caucasian woman with previous history of IM diagnosed at 14 years of age, which had been followed-up with the general practitioner and had not been subjected to surgical intervention, was referred to the emergency department with an intestinal obstruction. She had a 3-day history of generalized abdominal pain, distension, vomiting and constipation. There was no previous history of trauma. Physical examination revealed a dehydrated patient with tachycardia, hypotension but no fever. Her abdomen was distended with mild hypogastric pain, but there was no guarding or rebound.
Laboratory testing showed leukocytosis with a white cell count of 15.8 × 109/L (88% neutrophils), renal impairment with serum creatinine of 760.24 μmol/L (8.6 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen of 84.61 mmol/L (237 mg/dL), and serum sodium was 130 mmol/L and potassium was 6.4 mmol/L. Chest X-ray showed an opacification in the right base. Abdominal CT with oral contrast revealed dilated and fluid-filled loops of the small bowel with an unidentified mechanical obstruction associated with a right subphrenic fluid collection. The exam showed also an atypical right pleural effusion compatible with an empyema .
An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed. There was fusion of the right and transverse mesocolon and the root was limited to the Treitz angle. The duodenum was in a right laterocolic location and the free cecum was located in the left hypochondrium, as well as the ascending and transverse colon . The right lobe of the liver was practically without its triangular ligament and was at a median location. We also found a right-sided BH with transdiaphragmatic, gangrenous and perforated ileum . The following procedures were carried out: reduction of the hernia content, resection of the ileal segment with entero-enteric anastomosis, closure of the right Bochdalek foramen, and the Ladd procedure.
During the first postoperative week, the patient stayed in the intensive care unit and made good clinical progress. She remained hemodynamically stable and with concomitant respiratory stability. A follow-up abdominal CT showed a right subphrenic air-fluid collection, which was percutaneously drained under ultrasound guidance. In the second postoperative week, there was an increase in the inflammatory parameters and the patient was diagnosed with a supradiaphragmatic collection that was drained under CT guidance.
The patient was discharged on the third postoperative week. No complications were identified in the subsequent follow-up checks.