A 78-year-old previously fit and independent lady presented to our center 3½ hours after witnessed onset of left-sided weakness and difficulty in speaking following a fall. Relevant medical history included atrial fibrillation for which she was taking apixaban and mild cognitive impairment; premorbid modified Rankin scale was 1. On admission, the patient was seen by the specialist stroke service and diagnosed with a right total anterior circulation stroke (TACS); NIHSS score was 21. Noncontrast CT head and intracranial CT angiography demonstrated an extensive right MCA territory infarction with occlusion of the right terminal internal carotid artery (ICA) and right proximal M1 segment middle cerebral artery (MCA) . ASPECT score was 6. Due to the presenting history of fall, concurrent apixaban usage, and concern about potential neck of femur fracture, thrombolysis was contraindicated and the patient was taken to the angiography suite for mechanical thrombectomy using a stent retriever device and aspiration (Synchro System®, Stryker, Fremont, CA). Successful recanalization was achieved at 5.5 h from symptom onset. Thrombolysis in cerebral infarction score pre- and postintervention was 0 and 3, respectively, and total procedure time was <1 h. At the end of the procedure, an Angio-SealTM device (Abbott, Illinois, USA) was placed in the femoral artery.
Following the thrombectomy procedure, the patient initially made a good postoperative recovery, recovering to Medical Research Council Grade 3 in arm and leg, and the patient was repatriated back to her local hospital. In the 3rd week after repatriation, however, the patient developed progressive confusion. Repeat CT head at 4 weeks postthrombectomy was initially reported as demonstrating possible hemorrhagic transformation with surrounding edema and midline shift.
Due to ongoing confusion and the development of pyrexia, further imaging with both contrast-enhanced CT and MRI was undertaken at 7 weeks posttreatment. MR imaging demonstrated an extensive right frontal cerebral abscess with mass effect and midline shift . Diagnostic work-up for the infective source of this abscess was undertaken, but the only evidence suggestive of an external infective source was raised leukocytes and mixed bacterial growth in a midstream urine sample. There was no evidence of infective endocarditis on either transthoracic echocardiogram or serial blood cultures. Based on the MRI appearances, the patient was transferred under the care of the neurosurgical team at our center and subsequently underwent ultrasound-guided burr hole drainage of the brain abscess, with 95 mls of frank pus aspirated. Microbial pus samples grew Proteus mirabilis, sensitive to ceftriaxone and the patient was started on a 6-week course of antibiotics. Following surgery, the patient was transferred back to her local hospital for ongoing neurorehabilitation, and to date, the infection has been eradicated.