A 22-year-old male with extremely severe OCD underwent DBS and pulse generator implantation in September 2009. The patient and his family reported severe obsessive-compulsive symptomatology since childhood: at 11 he began to manifest magical thoughts and compulsions involving “just-right” symptoms, symmetry and perfectionism, slowness in writing, the need to hoard and to touch objects, and repeating and arranging rituals. The disease course had been progressively debilitating, with highly compulsive time wasting behavior that led to the abandonment of education and successive hospital admissions from the age of 13. After trying a wide variety of treatments the patient was enrolled on the DBS program. For reasons of space, some features of the case (as well as treatment resistance profile) are summarized in the Table .
Surgical procedure was performed according to Bellvitge Hospital DBS protocol for resistant OCD (L.D. B-29406-2012). The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of Bellvitge University Hospital (CEIC Ciutat Sanitària i Universitària de Bellvitge). Two quadripolar DBS electrodes (Model 3389 DBS lead; Medtronic, MN, USA) were bilaterally implanted in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) region with the aid of a Leksell stereotactic frame (Elekta, Sweden). NAcc was one of the targets reported to be effective in the treatment of OCD with DBS [, ] and 3389 electrode was the one available in our setting at that moment. The target was referenced to the anterior commissure (AC) as described in previous studies . The stereotactic brain surgery software BrainLab iPlan Stereotaxy 1.1 (Brain Lab, Germany) was used for target selection and trajectory planning. A postoperative stereotactic cranial CT scan was co-registered with the preoperative MRI to verify the final position of the electrodes within the first 24 hours. The position of each contact was referenced to the AC and coordinates were transferred to an anatomic atlas to identify anatomic structure influenced during stimulation. The final position of the active contacts with respect to AC is shown in the Table .
Even though parameter testing and adjustment were the same as in other DBS implanted patients, no significant clinical improvements were achieved with the first surgery (Y-BOCS reduction from 38 to 35, less than 10 % of basal YBOCS). The patient’s quality of life remained very poor, and he needed further hospital admissions after DBS surgery. After a full explanation and with the consent of the patient and his family, the DBS electrodes were removed in March 2011. In April 2011 the patient underwent surgery for the second time. A baseline-assessment between the two implantations was done and clinical and psychometric measurements were performed (i.e.: Y-BOCS ratings dropped to the first intervention’s previous levels).
For the second surgical procedure we decided to use the ventral capsule/ventral striatum (VC/VS) target as it was reported to have the strongest evidence for therapeutic benefits at that moment . The final theoretical target was calculated to be at the posterior border of the AC at the intercommissural level and 5 mm lateral to midline. The final trajectory was planned to cover the whole length of the anterior limb of the internal capsule (ALIC). For this purpose a Model 3391 DBS lead was used (the aim was to increase the setting options of the electric field, mainly in size, seeking the highest potential for clinical benefit in this especially resistant patient). The deepest active contacts on both sides (contact 0 on the left and contact 5 on the right) were located in the postero-ventral part of the ALIC (see Fig. ). The stimulation protocol was conducted exactly the same way after both surgeries. So, any parameters combination tested in the 2nd surgery (including low-frequency paradigms) were also tested after the first implant, with null results.
After 16 weeks, compulsive behavior began to improve: YBOCS score fell from 35 to 26, a 32 % improvement compared with baseline (symptom severity in obsessions and compulsions decreased in parallel). A Dimensional Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (DY-BOCS) was also scored after second surgery, showing that clinical improvement occurred mostly in the Aggressive-Checking dimension (Basal Severity Score: 15 vs Postsurgery Severity Score: 9, 40 % reduction) and secondly in the Symmetry-Ordering dimension (Basal Severity Score: 15 vs Postsurgery Severity Score: 10, 33 % reduction). The patient reports improved quality of life and a stabilization of daily life routines (in Table ). Since hospital discharge (in June 2011) the patient remains stabilized with fluctuating moderate symptomatology (YBOCS 22 in April 2012, a 42 % improvement), but he has not needed further hospital admission.