An 11-year-old male child weighing 30 kg was brought to our emergency medicine department with a history of entanglement in the blades of the rotavator 8 h ago. There was no history of loss of consciousness or vomiting after the accident. Pediatric advanced life support protocol was utilized and a primary survey was conducted. There was no derangement in the airway, breathing, or circulation. He was conscious, oriented, and following commands with a Glasgow coma score of 15/15. He has hemodynamically stable on general examination. On the secondary survey, facial avulsion injuries, bilateral tibial fractures, and degloving injuries to both lower limbs were noted. Injuries are detailed further in the text. The child had complete avulsion injury of the nasal bones and nasal septum from the glabella in the anterior 1/3 continuing with an inferiorly based flap to upper lips and both the cheeks, the cartilaginous septum was separated from the white perpendicular plate of the ethmoid, the left medial canthus ligament was torn shifting it downward, degloving injury of the face . A contaminated lacerated wound (CLW) over the right lower quadrant measuring 8 × 2 cm was noted. CLWs over the right inguinal region and right lower leg measuring 15 × 4 cm and 5 × 4 cm respectively were noted . Multiple extensive degloving injuries were noted over the left groin, thigh, leg, and foot ( and ). There was a closed right mid-shaft tibia injury and grade IIIB compound Gustilo-Anderson on the left tibia with a butterfly fragment. Distal neurovascular status was intact in both lower limbs. Examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, ophthalmologic, neurological, and abdominal systems was normal. Assessment of the airway was not possible because of the avulsion injury of the face. His central incisors were missing after the injury. He had 22G intravenous accesses on his right hand with normal saline infusion. Intravenous antibiotics (Metronidazole 500 mg, Amikacin 500 mg, and Cefuroxime 750 mg) and intramuscular tetanus toxoid 0.5 mL injection were given within 30 min after arrival at our institution.
Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin of 9.9 g%, a white blood cell count of 15,000/cumm, and a platelet count of 280,000/cumm. Serum creatinine, electrolytes, blood sugar level, and chest radiographs were within normal limits. CT scans of the brain, thorax, abdomen, and spine were within normal limits. Radiographs of the lower extremities revealed an AO 42-A3 fracture on the right side and AO 42-B3 on the left side . Since the child was hemodynamically stable, a decision of surgical intervention for all injuries.
A multidisciplinary team of experts involving an anesthetist, plastic surgeon, ENT surgeon, and pediatric orthopedic surgeon was involved in the surgical intervention of this child. Informed consent was taken. After arrival in the operation room, 3-lead continuous electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, temperature, and non-invasive blood pressure monitor were attached. Another 20 G intravenous line was secured on the left hand and DNS (dextrose 5% and 0.9% normal saline) infusion started. Due to the facial avulsion injury, difficult intubation was anticipated and a decision of tracheostomy under local anesthesia was taken. The airway was secured with a number 6.0 cuffed tracheostomy tube which was attached to a closed circuit and air entry was confirmed on both sides of the chest. Anesthesia was given with intravenous fentanyl 60 mcg, propofol 60 mg, and vecuronium 3 mg. The patient was ventilated with intermittent positive pressure ventilation and maintained on oxygen, nitrous oxide, and sevoflurane. Vecuronium bromide was used for muscle relaxation. An end-tidal carbon dioxide probe was attached. A warming mattress and fluid warmer were used to maintain the patient’s body temperature. Simultaneous surgical intervention for the face and limbs was planned by two different teams. The facial wound was debrided and sutured. The nasal septum was sutured with the help of bilateral internal nasal splints. It helped in healing without adhesions in the nasal cavity. After the repair of the nose, a nasogastric tube was inserted. Splints were removed after 4 weeks. Nasal endoscopy showed a very well-healed septum. Thorough debridement of compound left tibia fracture and foot wound was performed with 6 L of normal saline, diluted betadine, and hydrogen peroxide. Fixation was performed with two interfragmentary screws and neutralizing ankle-spanning external fixator . Simultaneous debridement of degloving injuries over both thighs was performed with 6 liters of normal saline, diluted betadine, and hydrogen peroxide. Subsequently, wound closure was done . The right tibia shaft fracture was treated with closed elastic intramedullary nailing . A below-knee slab was given for the right leg. Intraoperative blood loss was 100 mL and urine output was 250 mL. The surgery lasted for 6 h and was uneventful. A total of 800 mL crystalloids and 250 mL packed red blood corpuscles were given. For post-operative analgesia, inj. paracetamol 15 mg/kg and inj. diclofenac 1 mg/kg were given IV. After ensuring stable hemodynamics and adequate breathing attempts, reversal was given with 8 mcg/kg glycopyrrolate and 50 mcg/kg neostigmine. The patient was awake, following commands, and maintaining SpO2 98% on T piece. He was shifted to the pediatric ICU for observation. Subsequently, the patient underwent debridement of wounds and vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) dressing 3 times with split skin grafting for the left leg under general anesthesia (, , ) and was discharged without any complication after 30 days. The child was followed up regularly at monthly intervals and was advised in-bed exercises and wheelchair mobilization for the initial 3 months. All wounds healed well within 3 months ( and ). The external fixator was removed at 3 months and a below-knee cast was applied for 1 month. Radiographs at 4 months showed complete healing of the right tibia shaft fracture and partially united left comminuted tibia shaft fracture ( and ). At this time, he was advised walker-assisted full-weight bearing walking. All fractures healed well at 6 months and the child was able to do all activities without any functional limitations ( and ).