The patient was a 66-year-old female with past medical history of endometrial carcinoma status post total abdominal hysterectomy (seven years prior), small bowel adenocarcinoma status post resection (12 years prior), and inoperable partial small bowel obstruction. She was being treated for chronic abdominal pain on home ketamine via patient-controlled analgesia pump. Her history was complicated by a recent diagnosis of ketamine-induced cystitis. She presented to the emergency department (ED) from an outside physician for abnormal hemoglobin of 6.1 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 12.0–16.0 g/dL).
On evaluation, the patient reported one to two weeks of hematuria without melena, hematochezia, or hematemesis. She reported continued dysuria, frequency, and suprapubic abdominal pain. She also endorsed worsening fatigue and malaise. She denied dyspnea, chest pain, cough, fevers, lightheadedness, or syncopal episodes. Presentation vital signs showed an oxygen saturation of 85% on room air, blood pressure of 113/67 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate of 91 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. She was started on six liters of nasal cannula oxygen without improvement of oxygen saturation.
Of note, the patient had been admitted three weeks prior with dysuria and suprapubic pain. During hospitalization, she was given ceftriaxone for a presumed urinary tract infection without clinical improvement and with negative urine culture. She was ultimately diagnosed with ketamine-induced cystitis, and her pain regimen was modified with the addition of gabapentin, diazepam, venlafaxine, and phenazopyridine. Although asymptomatic, she was incidentally found to be coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-positive during that admission. At the current visit, the patient reported improvement in dysuria since starting the new pain regimen. She reported that she took her phenazopyridine more frequently than directed, six to eight tablets per day.
On exam the patient was alert and oriented with no signs of trauma, but conjunctival pallor was present. Heart, lungs, and abdominal exam were all normal. Repeat labs in the ED were notable for hemoglobin of 7.4 g/dL, hematocrit of 22.5 (reference range: 36–46%). Venous blood gas revealed a pH of 7.34 (7.35–7.45), partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 50.1 mm Hg (33–45 mm Hg), and partial pressure of oxygen of 38.9 mm Hg (75–105 mm Hg). D-dimer was 690 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) (reference range: less than 250 ng/dL), and urinalysis showed moderate hemoglobin, moderate leukocyte esterase, nitrite positive, red blood cell count of 7 per high power field (HPF) (0–3/HPF), and white blood cell count of 32/HPF (0–5/HPF). On imaging a chest radiograph (CXR) showed no abnormalities, and computed tomography angiogram chest was without evidence of pulmonary embolism or other thoracic abnormalities.
The patient’s initial presentation was concerning for COVID-19 given her marked hypoxia and recent positive test on prior hospitalization, although the lack of response to supplemental oxygen and unremarkable CXR made this unlikely. Given the history of increased phenazopyridine use, a methemoglobin level was obtained, showing an elevated level of 11.6% (reference range: 0.0–1.5%). After consultation with the Poison Control Center the patient was started on methylene blue in the ED with near immediate improvement of oxygen saturation to 92–93% on 2–4 liters nasal cannula. She was then admitted to the inpatient telemetry unit and was hospitalized for three days. She was transitioned from oxygen support, and palliative care was consulted for her pain regimen. Phenazopyridine was discontinued, and she was transitioned to her outpatient regimen of gabapentin, diazepam, and venlafaxine.