A 13-year-old Caucasian boy presented with reduced vision. There was no family history of consanguinity or nystagmus in family members. His past medical history was unremarkable and he has had slowly progressive myopia in both eyes. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.5 (logMAR) in each eye. He had high myopia with a current refraction—7.5SD/+1.5SC at 60 degrees in both eyes. Clinical examination revealed horizontal jerk nystagmus with no significant head posture. Anterior segment examination was normal with no signs of iris transillumination. Fundus examination showed hypopigmented (blonde) fundi with visible choroidal vasculature and peripapillary atrophy with a mildly hypoplastic optic nerve in both eyes which was confirmed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient’s brain and orbits.
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) showed bilateral foveal hypoplasia, grade 1, displaying presence of the inner plexiform and inner nuclear layers at the fovea with a widened outer nuclear layer . In addition, the retinal nerve fiber layer showed some thinning, but Goldmann perimetry showed no constriction of either visual field. Fundus autofluorescence showed a reduced foveal reflex but was otherwise normal.
Full-field electroretinography (ERG) examination was done using skin electrodes as the patient did not tolerate corneal ones. Photopic flash and flicker responses (Light Adapted 3.0) were severely attenuated in both eyes. Isolated rod responses (Dark Adapted (DA) 0.01) were also severely attenuated bilaterally. Combined rod cone (DA 3.0) and responses to high flash (DA 10.0) demonstrated normal a-waves (for pad recording); however, b-wave was markedly attenuated giving rise to an electronegative waveform in both eyes, characteristically known as Schubert-Bornschein type ERG. The multichannel pattern onset visual evoked potentials (VEP) demonstrated symmetrical responses and normal responses across right and left occipital recording when each eye was tested independently.
The proband underwent a targeted gene panel for congenital stationary night blindness containing 16 genes (CABP4, CACNA1F, CACNA2D4, GNAT1, GPR179, GRK1, GRM6, LRIT3, NYX, PDE6B, RBP4, RDH5, RHO, SAG, SLC24A1, TRPM1) through the Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Genetic Laboratory at Oxford, UK. Mutation screening was carried out by next generation sequencing with library preparation using the Agilent focused clinical exome +1 kit followed by sequencing on the Illumina platforms. Data were analyzed using an in-house pipeline and virtual gene panels, with all mutations confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The proband was found to have a novel hemizygous splice-site mutation c.4294-11C>G in intron 36 of the CACNA1F gene (hg19; chrX:g.49067563G>C, NM_005183.2:c.4294-11C>G) . This variant has been predicted to affect the efficiency of the splice acceptor site and lead to aberrant splicing. Parental segregation found that the mother was a carrier of the variant; however, she was clinically asymptomatic with no phenotypic features of CACNA1F-related disease. depicts the family pedigree of the proband.