A 55-year-old female with lower back pain and bilateral lower leg numbness for months had an osteolytic bone lesion over the third lumbar vertebra (L3). In February 2017, an L3 vertebra biopsy showed metastatic adenocarcinoma, compatible with lung origin (TTF-1 positive, L858R mutation positive). Complete imaging of the right lower lobe (RLL) showed a spiculated mass about 3.4 × 2.2 cm with pleural traction. A trans-bronchoscopic lung biopsy revealed non-small cell carcinoma of lung origin (positive for TTF-1 and negative for p40). Tentative diagnosis was RLL adenocarcinoma, cT2aN0M1b, with bone metastasis at L3. Routine use of serum tumor markers for monitoring of the tumor burden revealed a higher carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level that was still within the normal range (4.9 < 5.0 ng/ml), and an abnormal level of CA-125 (37.1; normal range 35.0 U/ml). The EGFR-TKI afatinib was prescribed beginning April 2017. However, side effects (severe diarrhea, poor appetite, and body weight loss) required dosage reduction to 40 mg every other day. A November 2018 CT scan showed regression in the RLL lung mass, and the density of lumbar bone lesion became unapparent in the whole-body bone scan compared with scans from 2017 . A whole-body PET-CT showed RLL lung nodule with faint uptake and mildly increased uptake in the L3 vertebra. A series of declining serum CEA levels down to 1.1 ng/ml were noted after starting afatinib treatment with no signs of elevation prior to surgical intervention. Serum CA-125 level down to 16.8 U/ml (< 35) was also noted after starting afatinib treatment 3 months later, and there was no further follow-up due to stable of disease. For alternative treatment evaluation, the patient went to the surgical outpatient department and asked for possible surgical intervention of the primary tumor. After providing signed informed consent, the patient received uniportal video-assisted thoracoscopic RLL lobectomy and radical mediastinal lymph node dissection on December 25, 2018. The final pathology report was a fibrotic scar with no residual tumor cells, compatible with post-treatment status, ypT0N0 . Curative intent radiotherapy with 30 Gy/12 fraction was also applied to the L3 vertebra after the operation. The patient is still alive for more than 32 months after initially diagnosed with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma.