A 43-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to abdominal pain, and she was suspected of having a pancreatic tumor after imaging examinations. She was subjected to radical surgery and was pathologically diagnosed with PDAC. In immunohistochemistry investigations, EMA, CK19, CK8/18, CA19-9, and MIB-1 (20%) were all positive, while CA125 and DPC-4 were found to be negative. However, shortly after the surgery, new metastatic lesions in the liver and peripancreatic lymph nodes appeared, and she began receiving T-GA (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 and nab-paclitaxel 125 mg/m2 on day 1 and day 8 and toripalimab 240 mg on day 1, administered every 3 weeks) as the first-line therapy in May 2019, despite the fact that genetic analysis of the tumor tissues indicated a low tumor mutation burden, microsatellite stability, and negative PD-L1 expression. After completion of 4 cycles of the treatment, the levels of asymptomatic myocardial markers were increased, but the thyroid function was found to be substantially decreased . After daily oral administration of 75 µg levothyroxine, the thyroid function index improved significantly.
Notably, two weeks after administration of the fifth dose of T-GA, the patient experienced speech impairment, stuttering, with frequent halts, airflow blocks and repetition during this period. As a professional woman, she immediately detected the symptoms associated with imperceptible stuttering during the treatment because she had been articulate for the previous several decades. In addition, the non-fluent speech was persistent which aggravated gradually and was accompanied by slow thinking, self-consciously “stupid, dull”, without fever, headache, vomiting, fatigue, stiff neck or other psychiatric symptoms. A panel of serological antibodies (ANNA1, PCA-1, ANNA2, anti-CV2, anti-amphiphysin, anti-Ma1, anti-Ma2, anti-SOX1, DNER, anti-Zic4, anti-GAD65, anti-titin, anti-recoverin, and anti-PKCγ) that have been implicated in the neurological paraneoplastic syndromes was found to be negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of the cerebral white matter demyelinating polyneuropathy but no evidence of encephalitis or cancer metastasis was found . A nerve conduction study, cerebrospinal fluid test and electroencephalogram were not conducted due to the refusal by the patient. Moreover, the levels of elevated myocardial markers peaked at grade 3 cardiotoxicity according to CTCAE 4.0. We considered that stuttering could be possibly attributable to encephalopathy, and toripalimab as the possible underlying cause. Hence, it was immediately discontinued and only chemotherapy was maintained. Indeed, encephalopathy and cardiotoxicity rapidly improved after the discontinuation of toripalimab treatment and administering intravenous corticosteroids. As the patient’s stuttering completely recovered, comprehension as well as thought reaction speed was also found to be improved. The various laboratory indicators also showed marked improvement and hence the doses of steroids were gradually tapered and stopped. Toripalimab was permanently discontinued in the light of the observed neurological and cardiac toxicity, as a rare emerging toxicity that may lead to a fatal outcome.
During the follow-up treatment, the patient was treated with the second-line regimen of fluorouracil, irinotecan, leucovorin, oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) due to the increase in the liver metastases. However, later once the multiple metastases appeared in the gastric antrum and abdominal cavity, the patient was treated with nimotuzumab in combination with oxaliplatin and nab-paclitaxel based on the results of mini patient-derived xenograft drug sensitivity test, which has the lowest relative proliferative power of tumor cells, but died after 3.3 months of progression-free survival (PFS). Overall, from the start of first-line treatment to death, the overall survival (OS) of the patient was 21 months . The patient did not experience any recurrence of the neurological, cardiac, or thyroid toxicity throughout the subsequent follow-up period.