We report the case of a 33-year-old Caucasian man who was involved in a quad bike accident in a remote area. After losing control of his vehicle he fell down a 7-meter scarp. Because of cardiopulmonary arrest, his father started mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and cardiac massage on scene. At the time of arrival of a paramedic-staffed ambulance, gasping accompanied with a massive cervical swelling on the left side was detected. Since endotracheal intubation was unsuccessfully attempted due to the severe cervical swelling as well as oral bleeding, the airway was secured with a combitube. He was transported to a level-1 trauma center by a rescue helicopter. For airway protection, an emergency tracheotomy using a 7.5 Fr tube was performed on scene since the larynx could not be palpated for a coniotomy . Chest tubes were inserted because breath sounds were diminished bilaterally.
At the time of presentation at our trauma center, he was hemodynamically unstable in spite of volume resuscitation and administration of vasopressors. Computed tomography (CT) revealed severe injuries limited to the craniocervical region. Extensive bleeding in the mesencephalic as well as pontine region and a stable fracture of the arch of the seventh cervical vertebra and fractures of the transverse processes of C5-C7 with involvement of the lateral wall of the transverse foramen was detected. An abort of the left vertebral artery signal at the first thoracic vertebrae with massive hemorrhage was also present . Additionally, he had a fracture of the left thyroid cartilage and intracerebral hemorrhage. Further evaluation of the CT scan showed retrograde filling of the left vertebral artery at C5 distal of the described abort. He was hemodynamically stabilized after transfusion of six packed red blood cell units and 12 units of fresh frozen plasma. After 24 hours, an additional cranial CT scan was performed and revealed unchanged intracranial bleeding combined with moderate intracranial swelling without any signs of incarceration of the brain stem. Evaluation of the vascular status confirmed the initial finding of retrograde filling of the left vertebral artery up to the abort at the suspected rupture site. Based on these findings he was treated with 10,000IU heparin per day. After a prolonged weaning period, he was transferred to a rehabilitation center specializing in neurological disorders. At the time of discharge, he was aware and moved all extremities on command.