A 76 year old woman presented with a 12 month history of hypoglycaemia symptoms. The patient underwent a series of tests including measurement of overnight fasting plasma glucose, measurement of plasma levels of glucose; insulin; and c-peptide during a hypoglycaemic episode, measurement of urinary sulphonylurea, and radiological imaging with a CT scan. Abdominal CT scan demonstrated a 13 mm insulinoma localized in the tail of her pancreas. She was commenced on diazoxide and later underwent surgery for enucleation of insulinoma when a small (< 1 cm) incidental tumour was discovered on her stomach wall. The small incidental tumour was an exophytic gastric wall lesion that had not been detected pre-operatively and revealed no suspicious features suggestive of invasion or spread on intra-operative inspection. For this reason the lesion was excised with diathermy off the surface of the gastric wall, the defect being closed with Polydioxanone suture, and no frozen sections were taken to assess invasion/spread. Macroscopically the lesion was completely excised. The nature of the lesion was unknown at this time. Recovery was uncomplicated and she was discharged home a week later.
The pancreatic lesion was composed of homogeneous soft tissue that had the typical red brown colour of such lesions although paler than usually seen, measured 13 mm in diameter, and its histology showed a well differentiated neuroendocrine tumour with nesting and trabecular pattern. The tumour cells were regular, their nuclei were round with vesicular chromatin and no mitosis was identified. Numerous psammoma bodies were seen in tumour nests and there was abundant hyalinised stromal reaction with no remarkable inflammation or necrosis. Immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity with chromogranin A, synaptophysin, progesterone, oestrogen-β and insulin markers. Very occasional cells were stained by somatostatin antibodies whilst pancreatic polypeptide, gastrin, amyloid and CD117 (C-kit) immunostaining were negative. There was a low proliferation index with less than 1% of tumour cells being stained by Ki67 antibody. Also, no vascular invasion was noted. The tumour was encapsulated and looked completely excised. The insulinoma was classified as T1NxMx.
The gastric lesion was a 6 mm firm whitish nodule in the upper wall of her stomach and its histology revealed an epithelioid cell tumour. Mitotic rate was very low and no necrosis was noted. Immunohistochemistry showed uniform positivity with C-kit and CD34 markers. Desmin, smooth muscle actin, S100, cytokeratin and neuroendocrine markers were all negative. Ki67 immunostaining revealed very low proliferation index. We attempted performing mutation analysis on the GIST tumour but the DNA obtained was not of sufficiently good quality for the assay. We were unable to comment on the nature of the tumour margin because the GIST lesion was excised without any adjacent gastric wall tissue. The overall appearance was that of an epithelioid kit positive incidental GIST tumour and the lesion was incompletely excised.
The patient was re-admitted 6 months later with weight loss, anorexia and vague symptoms. She had a CT scan which showed a 3.9 × 3.9 cm fluid attenuation mass superior to the tail of her pancreas displacing the stomach anteriorly. Endoscopic ultrasound confirmed a solid/cystic irregular mass involving the stomach wall, and in close relation to the pancreatic tail.
She subsequently underwent oesophagogastroduodenoscopy-guided endoscopic ultrasound confirming an ill-defined mass extending into the stomach wall. Cytology revealed groups of spindly and epithelioid cells highly suggestive of recurrent/metastatic GIST but not indicative of a neuroendocrine tumour . She was managed symptomatically, discharged and had another abdominal CT scan 7 months later that showed that the lesion had not significantly grown in size, but did appear to have formed 2 well defined cystic components measuring 29 × 28 mm, and 21 × 24 mm. Owing to the small size of the primary GIST and the frail state of the patient, she was not treated with Imatinib (Glivec) or offered further surgery but has subsequently been regularly reviewed by CT scan surveillance of the lesion and has fortunately had no evidence of tumour size increase or metastases.