A 6-month-old boy presented with complaints of pendulous urethral dilation and urine dribbling during voiding since birth . According to the parents' information, the patient was born (term and normally) to a consanguineous couple in a nearby district hospital maternity ward in the western neighboring province of the capital. All the siblings of the patient were healthy with no medical problems. Anti-natal history was unremarkable. After delivery, the attending physician noticed a disfigured penile appearance in newborn and informed the child's parents about the problem. Initially, they noticed that the penis is like a balloon, more prominent during micturition (during urinary bladder filling and tendency to micturition). The parents added that after birth, as the patient was feeling extreme pressure during voiding, they had to squeeze the patient's ballooned penile to facilitate emptying urine from the reservoir. The parents took their child to different physicians working as general practitioners (GPs) and specialists, preferably pediatricians, in the local clinic, provincial hospital, and tertiary hospital for advice and received conservative treatments. Recently, they observed marked dilatation of their child's penile urethra with inflammation of the preputial orifice, so they came to our hospital and consulted our pediatric surgery team. Upon admission, the child was examined clinically, and all routine and biochemical blood and urine tests were done. All parameters were within the normal limit, and abdominopelvic ultrasonography (USG) was also normal, but urinary tract infection (UTI) was reported. Our team treated the UTI appropriately and prepared the patient for definite treatment. We began the surgical procedure by interfering through the small preputial opening by working our way down to the penile base. During degloving, on the penile ventral aspect, we found a dilated penile urethra and a poorly developed corpus spongiosum, but an intact corpora covernosa (relatively hypoplastic), confirming the scaphoid type of megalourethra. We further mobilized the balloon urethra and excised it in the midline (A). The redundant urethra was excised and reduction urethroplasty was performed in three stages with an 8fr silicon foley catheter as a urethral stent and 6-0 Vicryl suture. In the first stage, a subcuticular running suture was done starting from distal to proximal; in the second stage, a suture was inverted over the first plan (as reinforcement layer) (B); and in the third stage, a subdartos flap was harvested from the left side of the penile shaft and fixed over the entire urethroplasty suture line (C). Following 48 hours of post-operation, we discharged the patient and followed him up for 21 days. On the 21st day, we removed the foley catheter and followed him for 25 consecutive days onward. On the 45th post-operative day, we rechecked the patient and observed normal voiding with satisfactory cosmetic penile appearance (A&B). On the 6th post-operative month, the patient was re-checked with excellent result.