We report the case of a non-smoker, non-diabetic, and non-hypertensive 58-year-old man who had previously been monitored in our facility for LVNC with preserved ejection fraction.
The patient had been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy 7 years before this admission, after a routine echocardiogram for palpitation exploration and subsequent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan, to a diastolic non-compacted/compacted myocardium ratio > 2.3 . The initial functional stress test was negative. He declared no cardiac family history. Until this new admission, he had remained entirely asymptomatic, and he was being treated with nebivolol 2.5 mg once a day and followed up annually with echocardiography and Holter electrocardiogram (ECG).
He was newly referred to our cardiac emergency department for acute non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and atrial fibrillation de novo with a fast ventricular response. The initial clinical presentation included chest pain radiating to the left arm and palpitations. Clinical examination showed clear lung fields and heart sounds with an irregular pulse at 150 b.p.m. Blood pressure was measured at 106/89 mmHg, and he was afebrile. Initial workup confirmed atrial fibrillation with a fast ventricular response and elevated troponin of 2628 ng/L, which then rose to 4758 ng/L after 6 h (normal < 40 ng/L). The echocardiogram performed in the emergency room showed initially normal left ventricular ejection fraction at around 55 with evidence of lateral hypokinesia. Spontaneous conversion to sinus rhythm was attested few hours after the admission .
In this context of NSTEMI with an intermediate GRACE risk score of 134, the patient was prescribed subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (dosage: 0.5 mg/kg) combined with a loading dose of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin 250 mg intravenously) and a P2Y12 receptor inhibitor (ticagrelor 180 mg orally) before being referred for coronary angiography within 24 h.
A coronary angiogram revealed abnormal retrograde filling of the left circumflex coronary artery via a collateral network vessel from the left anterior descending artery . A consecutive gated cardiac computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed ACXAPA and the patency of the left circumflex artery with a steal phenomenon as it was not structurally occluded . A stress myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed localized latero-basal ischaemia (up to 2–3 segments/17) corresponding to the circumflex artery territory.
Knowing the evidence of ischaemia and the increased risk of sudden death, we referred the patient to surgery. After a multidisciplinary consultation, the preferred option was to reimplant the circumflex artery into the aorta (sinus) to prevent any residual coronary steal from the circumflex artery into the pulmonary artery, favoured by a pressure gradient, and surgical atrial fibrillation ablation was also performed.
He was successfully operated on 3 months later with an uncomplicated post-operative course.
He was readmitted to the hospital 16 days after surgery for a recurrence of atrial fibrillation. Amiodarone was added to nebivolol as daily therapy. Due to his CHAD2 VA2SC 1 and HAS BLED 0 scores, he was maintained on long-term oral anticoagulant treatment. He remained asymptomatic at the last follow-up.