A 47-year-old woman, multigravida, was referred to evaluate her abnormal uterine bleeding that started two years ago. Previous ultrasound showed multiple intramural subserosal uterine myomas (15–20 mm diameter) and a simple cyst (20 mm diameter) in the right ovary without septation and solid component.
The patient’s symptoms had worsened over seven months, and she also suffered from a sense of abdominal fullness. The abdominal physical examination was unremarkable except small palpable mobile mass located in the lower abdomen. Recent abdominal and transvaginal ultrasounds illustrated bilateral adnexal masses (51 × 31 mm diameter simple cyst in the right ovary and 38 × 29 mm diameter hyperechoic mass in the left ovary). Furthermore, there was a new finding; a hypoechoic mass located deep in the soft tissue of the lower abdominal wall (63 mm in diameter). Moreover, computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis confirmed an abdominal mass within the left ovary and a mass in the abdominal wall. Considering all findings, in November 2015, the patient underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and surgical removal of the abdominal wall mass. Both ovaries were removed intact, and peritoneal washing was performed. The pathological evaluation described a 28 mm focus of PTC within struma ovarii without angiolymphatic invasion surrounded by normal thyroid tissue, confined to the ovary. Moreover, evaluation of abdominal wall mass revealed a metastatic PTC in fibro adipose tissue. In addition, there was no evidence of thyroid-type tumor cells in peritoneal washing fluid, and all surgical margins were free of tumor cells. Post-surgical Magnetic Resonance Imaging results are available in Fig. .
The patient did not complain about thyroid dysfunction symptoms and denied radiation exposure and previous cervical thyroid carcinoma in herself or her family. The examination of the cervical thyroid gland and lymph nodes was unremarkable, except for a nodule within the left lobe. Then, thyroid ultrasound showed a 21 mm nodule within the left lobe without cervical lymph nodes suspecting malignancy, and subsequent ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy illustrated PTC. Furthermore, laboratory evaluations revealed that the complete blood count, biochemical parameters, and thyroid function tests were normal. In light of these findings, the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy, and the pathological evaluation demonstrated bilateral and multifocal PTC with no evidence of angiolymphatic invasion, extrathyroidal extension, or cervical lymph node metastasis. [Stage 1 (T1N0M0)-ATA low risk] The left lobe evaluation showed a malignant nodule (15 mm diameter) with a mixed papillary and follicular variant of PTC. Moreover, four foci of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (5 mm diameter) were found in the right lobe.
We examined the pathogenic variants of BRAF and N-RAS genes and RET/PTC1 rearrangement. Samples were collected from affected tissues, including malignant struma ovarii, cervical thyroid gland, and abdominal wall metastasis.
Three to four tissue curls cut (10 μm) from Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) blocks were obtained from Tehran Khatam-al-Anbya Hospital. Total DNA and RNA were extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen U.S. Cat. No. 15596-026) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Codon 600 mutation in BRAF oncogene and codon 13 mutation in N-RAS were investigated by direct sequencing. Exon 15 of the BRAF gene and Exon number 2 from N-RAS were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using previously reported primers . After quality control by running 2% agarose gel electrophoresis, direct DNA sequencing was carried out using the same primers by Applied Biosystems 3130/3130xl Genetic Analyzers. Total RNA (1 μg) was reverse transcribed with a cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol to determine the RET/PTC1 rearrangement . The amplification condition was optimized by quantitative reverse transcriptase real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) using the Rotor-Gene 6000 (Corbett Research, Sydney, Australia). The results are explained in Table .
One month afterward, the patient received oral administration of 100 mCi 131I for treatment, and one week later, she underwent a whole-body scintigraphy. The scan showed radiotracer uptake in the remnant of the thyroid tissue in the thyroid bed. Furthermore, the absence of abnormal tracer activity throughout the body illustrated no evidence of regional or distant metastasis, and the patient did not receive post-surgical radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
The patient’s whole medical history is summarized step by step in Fig. .
After six years of follow-up, the patient had no recurrence or distant metastasis complaint. Moreover, neck ultrasound and CT scan of abdomen and pelvis have revealed nothing related to recurrence or metastasis, alongside undetectable thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin antibody levels.