A 57-year-old Caucasian female (proband), teacher, with oculocutaneous albinism was admitted for dry cough and rapid worsening of dyspnea. A thorough analysis of the medical history revealed that the patient had eye problems since childhood and that from the age of 45, her vision was significantly worse. Furthermore, it was found that she had several episodes of prolonged bleeding: after appendectomy, after minor injuries (including hemartros) and after childbirth. At the age of 50, she was examined by a hematologist. Platelet aggregation was performed, showing slightly prolonged PFA-100 time in the presence of collagen/ADP. No definite conclusion has been made regarding this finding. The first mild lung problems occurred at the age of 53. She was followed with diagnosis of bronchial asthma by a regional pneumologist. There was no family history of these symptoms. She was a non-smoker.
Physical examination revealed clubbing fingers and bilateral end-inspiratory fine crackles in the lower and middle lung areas. The posteroanterior chest X-ray showed bilateral diffuse reticular opacities.
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest identified thickening of the peribronchovascular interstitium, bronchiectasis, reticulations, honeycombing, ground glass opacities and lung parenchyma consolidations. A comparison of HRCT images performed at 3-month intervals showed fulminant progression of pulmonary involvement .
Pulmonary function testing revealed severe restrictive ventilation impairment and a severe decline of diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLco 20%). Arterial blood gas analysis showed hypoxemia (p02 7 kPa). Moderate pulmonary hypertension was found. Blood count, serum biochemistry, and immunologic parameters were normal.
Based on these findings, HPS was suspected. The negative family history of symptoms suggested an autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance. Therefore, whole exome sequencing (a form of massive parallel sequencing) of the proband-parent trio was carried out. Samples of peripheral blood were collected and processed for genomic DNA isolation using MagCore® Genomic DNA Whole Blood Kit (RBC Bioscience). Whole exome libraries were processed using KAPA Hyper Prep Kit, SeqCap EZ MedExome Enrichment Kit and HyperCap Bead Kit (Roche, USA) according to the SeqCap EZ HyperCap Workflow v2.1 following the recommended protocols. Paired-end 2 × 75 bp sequencing was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 500 Sequencer (Illumina Inc., USA). The raw sequencing reads were aligned to the GRCh37 (hg19) human reference genome using the BWA-mem algorithm, version 0.7.15, PCR duplicates were identified with the MarkDuplicates tool from Picard. Germline single nucleotide variants (SNV) and indels were detected by the GATK HaplotypeCaller, version 3.7. Annotation of obtained variants/indels was performed with Annovar. Furthermore, the processed variants/indels were matched to the virtual panel of genes including HPS1, AP3B1, HPS3, HPS4, HPS5, HPS6, DTNBP1, BLOC1S3, and PLDN. The virtual panel was created based on the literature review [–]. Exome sequencing identified a compound heterozygous genotype in the HPS1 gene (NM_000195.3) in the proband: 1) pathogenic frameshift variant c.1189delC; p.(Gln397Serfs*2), resulting in a premature stop codon, associated with HPS; and 2) previously undescribed nonsense variant, c.1507C > T; p.(Gln503*), resulting in a premature stop codon, implying a loss of 197 amino acids or more likely, nonsense-mediated decay of the mRNA degradation .
The coverage range of the novel variant c.1507C > T in the proband was 26 reads and variant allele frequency range 38.5%.
Subsequently, the diagnosis has been verified using PCR and Sanger sequencing of the amplicons in the proband, and also the presence of heterozygous carrier status of parents . Primers were designed for exons 13 and 15, respectively (13F-primer: CTTAGGGTTGGCACGTCTTC, 13R-primer: TGGGTCTCACCTGAATCTCC; 15F-primer: TTCTGCTGTAATGCCCTCCT, 15R-primer: GAAGTCCTTCCAGTCCGTCA). PCR was performed with the annealing temperature 60 °C using Q5 High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs Inc., England) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR products were purified using the Qiaquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN, Germany). Capillary sequencing was performed using BigDye-terminator chemistry on 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, USA).
We could not analyze the structural effect of the variant p.(Gln503*) “in silico” because the crystal structure was not available. However, given the type of “nonsense” variant, we can assume that the novel variant including the nucleotide change C > T at the position 1507 leads to a shortened protein which most likely results in misfolding of the protein and impaired function.
Treatment with corticosteroids, started before HPS diagnosis was confirmed, had no effect on pulmonary functions. Therefore, lung transplantation began to be prepared. Unfortunately, 2 months after HPS diagnostics, the patient died due to ongoing fulminant lung fibrotization.