A 58-year-old male patient with hyperlipidemia, and maintained on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) due to coronary artery disease status and implantation of two stents, presented with a 4-h history of bilateral lower limb numbness. He was also a heavy smoker and had a history of stroke. He was initially sent to the local medical department where a computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed pulmonary embolism with a massive thrombus straddling both the pulmonary arteries and aortoiliac artery occlusion with poor collateral recanalization to the lower limb arteries . He was immediately transferred to our center with symptoms of mild orthopnea and resting pain. In addition, cyanosis of the affected limbs was noted, and muscle strength in both the limbs regressed to grade 1. Since enoxaparin was given before transfer and echocardiography did not reveal right ventricle failure, he underwent an emergency thrombectomy for the aortoiliac artery occlusion. After the first operation to salvage the limbs, he was admitted to the intensive care unit for further treatment. On postoperative day 5, the general condition of both the legs improved, with the muscle strength improving to grade 4. He was then transferred to the general ward, and DAPT and enoxaparin were continued to be administered. Owing to the persistence of orthopnea and complaint of chest tightness with intermittent tachycardia, a CTA was performed again to further evaluate the pulmonary embolism on postoperative day 8 . The CTA results revealed that the thrombus was still lodged in the bilateral main pulmonary arteries. Fearing the possibility of a myocardial infarction, cardiac catheterization was performed, which did not reveal any intrastent restenosis or specific lesions in the coronary arteries. Owing to the failure of medical treatment, a staged pulmonary embolectomy with cardiac arrest using heart–lung-machine support was performed on postoperative day 13. During the surgery, intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography did not reveal a PFO or an existing right-to-left shunt. Postoperatively, he was closely monitored in the intensive care unit for 3 days and then transferred to the general ward for 10 days. A follow-up CTA was performed on postoperative day 18 , which revealed resolution of the thrombus in the pulmonary arteries. He was discharged on postoperative day 30 under DAPT and rivaroxaban prescription, without any in-hospital complications.