A 58-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with 6 months of recently worsening effort angina. She had no history of previous stroke, but had been treated for diabetes mellitus and hypertension for 7 years and was currently controlled, with glycosylated hemoglobin and blood pressure in normal range. Electrocardiography showed abnormal Q waves in II, III, and aVF, and downsloping ST-segment depression in V4 to V6. Echocardiography showed severe left ventricular anteroseptal hypokinesis and decreased ejection fraction of 38% without mitral regurgitation. Coronary angiography revealed total occlusion of proximal right coronary artery #2, tandem stenosis (75 and 90%) of the left anterior descending coronary artery, and 75% stenosis of the left circumflex coronary artery. Unfortunately, this 3-vessel coronary disease was considered inappropriate for percutaneous coronary intervention due to multiple long stenotic lesions, the patient was referred for CABG.
However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) angiography demonstrated severe carotid and intracranial vessel stenosis . Selective carotid/cerebral angiography also showed severe stenosis and delayed filling of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) and moderate stenosis of the left ICA, with occlusion of the bilateral middle cerebral arteries (MCAs). The bilateral distal MCAs were slightly enhanced with delayed filling via collaterals from the external carotid arteries and vertebral artery . SPECT N-isopropyl-p-[123I]iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) with acetazolamide showed depleted cerebral perfusion volume and vascular responses, particularly in the left MCA area. However, bilateral MCA reserve cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was maintained at > 34 ml/100 g/min . Fortunately, the ascending aorta and arch were intact, without calcification or atherosclerotic debris on CT.
Despite severe CIAD, we considered that the patient could tolerate open heart surgery with appropriate perioperative circulatory management, without need for preoperative cerebral perfusion intervention. She underwent off-pump CABG (OPCAB: left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descending artery #8, right internal thoracic artery to left circumflex artery #14, and saphenous vein graft to right coronary artery #4). Before sternotomy, prophylactic intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) support was used to minimize possible perioperative stroke. For proximal saphenous grafting to the ascending aorta, we used the Enclose II anastomosis assist device (Novare Surgical Systems, Inc., CA, USA). As a result, hemodynamic status and brain regional oxygen saturation were stable throughout the operation, even during displacement of the heart for posterior and inferior anastomosis . The postoperative course was uneventful; weaning from both the respirator and IABP was performed on postoperative day 1, with discharge on postoperative day 17 without any complications. The patient has remained stable for more than 3 years.