A 17-year-old female presented to our trauma bay after a motor vehicle collision. She was intubated in the field for a Glasgow Coma Score of 3and hemodynamic instability. Non-orthopedic injuries included a subdural hematoma, liver and kidney lacerations, facial fractures, and pulmonary contusions. Her orthopedic injuries were a vertical shear pelvic ring injury, an open left Lisfranc injury, and a type IIIB open right tibia fracture with segmental bone loss. The right tibia fracture was grossly contaminated and had a 90cm × 7cm circumferential soft tissue defect . After appropriate resuscitation, antibiotics, and splinting, she was taken emergently to the operating room for debridement and irrigation of her open fractures.
She returned to the operating room on post-injury day 2 and underwent management of her pelvic ring injury. In addition, an antibiotic intramedullary nail was placed into the right tibia, along with an antibiotic cement spacer into the 4 cm bone void . The oral and maxillofacial microvascular surgery service performed a latissimus dorsi free flap on post-injury day 5. Her free flap was complicated by a pseudomonas aeruginosa infection that was successfully eradicated with intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam. The patient underwent removal of the antibiotic nail and spacer with placement of a tibial nail at the 6-week mark (Synthes North America, West Chester, PA). Autograft was harvested from the ipsilateral femur using a Reamer-Irrigator-Aspirator (RIA; Synthes, West Chester, PA) and placed into the segmental defect along with allograft chips.
Postoperatively, the patient had difficulty with a knee flexion contracture and equinus contracture. She was advanced to 50% weight-bearing at 3 months postoperatively and then weight-bearing as tolerated at 6 months postoperatively. At 10 months, she was able to graduate high school. At 2 years, her knee flexion contracture resolved and she was able to run short distances . Her equinus contracture persisted but was not severe enough to warrant any intervention. At 24 months, her foot and ankle outcome score was 87 and Shoe Comfort Scale score was 60 (normative values 45 and 45, respectively). Her SF-12 Health Survey physical score was 50.03, which is 0.03 higher than the United States average. Her SF-12 Health Survey mental score was 60.21, which is 10.21 points higher than the United States average. Verbal consent for this case report was received from the patient at the time of her final follow-up.