A 57-year-old Asian woman was admitted due to a finding of pulmonary mass in the right lower lobe upon physical examination. The patient, an ex-smoker (10 cigarettes a day × 20 years), had no specific medical history otherwise. The chest computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed a 2.8-cm dorsal segment of the right lower lobe mass. A positron emission tomography scan (PET-CT) showed central hypermetabolic activity only in the right lower lobe, raising suspicions of a neoplastic process . Bronchoscopy revealed a dorsal segment of the right lower lobe mass , and a biopsy was performed.
The hematoxylin and eosin (HE)–stained sections of the biopsy yielded a neoplasm composed of atypical small-to-medium sized epithelioid cells with light eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm and round-to-oval nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli lacking significant pleomorphism and mitotic activity. The tumor cells were arranged in irregular nests, cords, and tubular and trabecular patterns with a loose myxoid stroma . Focally, the tumor cells appeared to connect to the basal layer of the bronchial epithelium and lacked keratinization and in situ carcinoma of the overlying epithelium . Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor cells to be positive for CK7 ; most tumor cells were found to be positive for p40 , ck5/6, p63 and negative for PAX8, CD10, RCC, CAIX, TTF1, S100, CDX2, SATB2, CK20, calponin, HMB-45, Melan A, SOX10, WT-1, Carteinin, D2–40, and SMA. An initial diagnosis of low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma with clear cell feathers was rendered. Because mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the lung is rare and involves specific molecular changes , molecular testing was performed. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was negative for MAML2 gene rearrangement . These results prompted a histologic re-review of the case, a literature search, and consultation with an outside expert. The specialist, Dr. Zhou, found a resemblance between HCCC and myoepithelial tumors. Specifically, he found hyalinizing acellular stroma around the tumor cells in focal areas. Subsequently, additional FISH showed EWSR1 gene rearrangement, and EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusion confirmed the presence of the EWSR1 gene rearrangement and EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusion . A final diagnosis of HCCC of the lung was ultimately rendered.
A right lower lobectomy with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenectomy was performed. Grossly, a firm, solitary, well-circumscribed, 2.8-cm tan mass, 1.0 cm from the bronchial margin, was identified . H&E-stained sections of the mass showed classical HCCC morphology: tumor cells with light eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm and inconspicuous nucleoli lacking significant pleomorphism and mitotic activity. The tumor cells grew in cords, trabeculae, and nests in a hyalinizing acellular stroma . They had infiltrated the periphery alveolar tissue and showed aggregates of chronic inflammation in the periphery of the tumor. No angiolymphatic invasion, perineural invasion, pleural involvement, or necrosis were observed. Immunohistochemistry and FISH results were the same as those of the biopsy. The metastatic foci were found in 1 out of 12 lymph nodes . All surgical margins were negative. At the time of this report, the patient was free of any local recurrence. She was free of metastasis at her 3-month follow-up, despite receiving no additional therapy after surgery.
In addition to the present case, 12 primary pulmonary HCCC cases that were previously reported in the English-language literature are summarized in Table [–]. Of these 12 patients, 7 (60%) were women with an average age of 47.8 (range: 32–66 years), and 5 patients were smokers. These 12 patients, 5 cases presented with symptoms including cough, persistent back pain, and shortness of breath, and seven were asymptomatic. All primary tumors were located in the bronchial tubes or trachea. The average diameter of the tumor was 26.5 mm (range: 13–36 mm). Morphologically, every case showed nests or anastomosing cords of mixed clear and eosinophilic cells in a hyalinized or loose myxoid stroma. The tumor cells lacked significant pleomorphism and mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for CK7, P63, P40, and CK5/6, and negative for TTF-1, PAX-8, S-100, SMA, Napsin A, HMB45, Syn, and CgA.
Molecular testing was done in each case, and showed that 10 cases were positive for EWSR1 gene rearrangement, seven cases were positive for EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusion, and four cases were negative for MAML2 gene rearrangement. Eleven cases were treated by surgical resection and one case by laser therapy. Lymph node metastasis was found in surgically removed specimens in only two cases. The average follow-up time was 56 months (with a range of 3 to 192 months), excluding case reported by Gubbiotti et al. (that had recurrences over a 48-month period, and after which the patient became deceased 24 months after recurrence). Eleven cases of HCCC, when treated with complete surgical excision, exhibits an excellent prognosis with no evidence of mortality.