A 53-year-old man was referred to our ORL clinic due to a presence of a mass at the nasal root having been growing asymptomatically for 1 year. The patient's past medical history was unremarkable. The root of the nose was enlarged by a non-tender, firm, ovoid mass, the overlaying skin was intact. Nasal endoscopy revealed a smooth bulge in the superior turbinate apparent on both sides. An endoscopic biopsy was performed, and was accompanied by profuse bleeding. The tentative histopathological diagnosis was a juvenile angiofibroma. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a large (25 × 20 × 35 mm) bilateral frontoethmoidal, strongly enhancing (90 HU) mass with concomitant destruction of nasal bones, the frontal processes of the maxilla, inferior wall of the frontal sinuses and medial orbital wall. MRI scans demonstrated that the tumour did not appear to invade the anterior skull base [Figure , ]. A selective bilateral carotid angiography revealed a moderate hypervascularization (tortuous arteries) of the tumour during early and late arterial phases. The hypervascular area was supplied from internal and external carotid arteries through the ophthalmic and maxillary arteries. In the parenchymatous phase, a moderate tumour blush was visible. Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed a slight osteopenia of the first and second lumbar vertebrae and neck of the thigh bone. The serum and urinary levels of both calcium and anorganic phosphate were within normal limits. Neither the clinical picture nor all the above-mentioned findings were consistent with osteomalacia.
The tumour was removed under general anesthesia. After an H-shaped skin incision was made, we encountered a grayish-white mass invested in a thin capsule. The tumour was easily extirpated from the intact posterior wall of the frontal sinuses, anterior ethmoids, and nasal cavity, and the posterosuperior part of the nasal septum was also removed. The peroperative bleeding was moderate, and it ceased immediately after the tumour resection. The definitive histopathological diagnosis was a PMTMCT variant [Figure ]. It consisted of benign (in appearance) undifferentiated mesenchymal spindle- to stellate-shaped cells. The cells were negative for CD 34, CD 99, S-100, AE1 and AE3. The examination for smooth-muscle actin was focally positive, a strong immunoreactivity for vimentin was noted. Osteoclast-like giant cells were not found. In some parts of the tumour a chondroid and osteoid differentiation was noticed, as was a moderate microvasculature comprised of capillary-sized vessels invested in endothelial cells. Some vessels showed a staghorn branching pattern. No mitoses, atypia, foci of necrosis or bleeding were observed in the tumour during the histology assessment.
The course, thereafter, was uneventful, and two years after the operation the patient is doing well; there is no evidence of the disease in either endoscopic or CT examinations, and the serum and urine levels of calcium and phosphate remain well within normal limits.