A 65-year-old female patient was referred to our department due to pain and decreased vision in her left eye. Her medical history included rheumatoid arthritis, for which she received monthly intravenous tocilizumab injections (8 mg/kg). There was no family history. She was followed by her previous doctor for secondary glaucoma and recurrent rheumatic keratitis. She had a prior history of bilateral cataract surgery.
The patient was aware of the pain in her left eye 10 days before admission. At this time, 0.1% betamethasone 4 times daily and 0.1% tacrolimus 2 times daily were continued for the treatment of rheumatic keratitis. Five days before the patient came to our department, slit-lamp examination at the previous clinic showed a white stromal infiltrate on the peripheral cornea at the 12 o’ clock position. Since exacerbation of rheumatic keratitis was suspected, oral prednisolone (10 mg) was started, dexamethasone was administered via subconjunctival injection, and 0.1% betamethasone administration was increased to 6 times daily.
Three days before admission to our department, when the patient first experienced decreased vision, the stromal infiltrate in her left eye worsened and a hypopyon emerged. At this point, microbial keratitis was suspected, and hourly topical 0.5% moxifloxacin, hourly 0.3% tobramycin, and systemic ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h) were prescribed, whereas oral prednisolone was withdrawn and 0.1% betamethasone administration was reduced to 3 times daily.
On initial examination in our department, her visual acuity in the left eye allowed her to count fingers at a distance of 0.3 ft. Slit-lamp examination showed a white focus on the upper peripheral cornea, hypopyon, anterior chamber fibrin formation, marked ciliary hyperemia, and whole epithelial defects in the left eye . Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT; CASIA2, Tomey) also revealed hypopyon, anterior chamber fibrin formation, and keratic precipitates . As echography showed no evident vitreous opacity, we speculated that infection had not advanced to the posterior chamber at this point . The full-field electroretinogram (ERG) waveform had no amplitude reduction or latency delay, which suggested that retinal function was not impaired by the infection . She was emergently hospitalized for infectious keratitis, and anti-bacterial treatment was continued.
The corneal scraping smear was positive for filamentous fungi and Fusarium species were detected by aqueous humor polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Antifungal susceptibility tests were performed and the MIC values were as follows: > 16 μg/ml for Micafungin, > 64 μg/ml for Flucytosine, > 64 μg/ml for Fluconazole, > 16 μg/ml for Miconazole, > 8 μg/ml for Itraconazole, 4 μg/ml for Voriconazole, and 2 μg/ml for amphotericin B. Thereafter, her treatment was shifted to anti-fungal therapy 2 days after hospitalization. The patient received topical 1% voriconazole hourly, 1% natamycin ointment 6 times daily, and intravenous liposomal amphotericin B injection (125 mg/day), whereas 0.1% betamethasone was replaced with 0.1% fluorometholone, and 0.1% tacrolimus was withdrawn. Adherence to topical medical therapy was checked by nursing staff by filling in the list of eyedrops.
Two days after the onset of anti-fungal therapy, anterior inflammation improved, as characterized by a smaller corneal infiltrate and improved ciliary hyperemia; in addition, anterior segment OCT demonstrated a smaller hypopyon and anterior chamber fibrin deposits . However, after the patient’s monthly intravenous tocilizumab injection was administered 7 days after hospitalization (anterior chamber irrigation was performed on the same day), signs of recurrent inflammation were observed. Ciliary hyperemia markedly worsened, and vitreous opacity emerged on echography the day after tocilizumab injection .
As the initial response to anti-fungal therapy was good, and the vitreous opacity appeared to be a transient effect of tocilizumab application, therapy was continued without modification. However, 17 days after hospitalization, the degree of corneal infiltration, hypopyon, and vitreous opacity worsened, which suggested progression to endophthalmitis . In addition, both the a-wave and b-wave amplitude of the full-field ERG diminished, which suggested malfunction of the retina caused by advancement of the infection to the posterior segment . Given that the infection worsened in spite of conservative therapy, we determined that surgical treatment was required. After obtaining informed consent from the patient, penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) combined with vitrectomy was performed 19 days after hospitalization.
We used an intraocular infusion solution containing 10 mg/500 ml voriconazole. The host cornea was punched out with a 7-mm trephine. When the intraocular lens (IOL) was removed together with the lens capsule, a white focus ranging from the pupillary area to the back of the temporal iris became evident . After mounting the temporary corneal prosthesis (DORC, Fig. b), we performed a 25-gauge 4-port vitrectomy using the Constellation Vitrectomy System. The white focus in the pupillary area was removed during the anterior vitrectomy. Fundus examination revealed dense white vitreous opacity which was removed during the core vitrectomy and shaving . However, the focus in the vitreous had not adhered to the retina. A small white focus and dot hemorrhages were sparsely distributed on the peripheral retina . After removing the vitreous opacity completely, we removed the temporary corneal prosthesis and sutured in a frozen donor graft (7.75 mm in diameter). Pathological examination of the removed cornea by PAS and Grocott staining revealed filamentous fungi in the stroma.
The hypopyon and corneal infiltration were completely absent 3 weeks after the operation . The vitreous opacity was nearly absent by echography, and the waveform of the full-field ERG normalized at the same time . Although mild vitreous opacity emerged 4 days after the monthly intravenous tocilizumab injection (3 weeks after the operation), it showed spontaneous remission . As signs of inflammation improved, the amphotericin B infusion was discontinued and topical voriconazole and natamycin were both reduced to 4 times daily 1 month after the operation. The patient was discharged 2 months after the operation.
When she came to our department 4 months after the operation, the visual acuity of her left eye was 20/100. We observed neither relapse of infection nor vitreous opacity on echography . Optical PKP and IOL suture were performed 1 year after the initial therapeutic PKP combined with vitrectomy. The patient continues to visit our office (July 2020), and is doing well. The visual acuity of her left eye at her most recent visit was 30/100.