A 16-year-old pregnant adolescent attended a routine prenatal consultation at the Maternity School of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, UFRJ). According to her medical records, she had a history of syphilis and bacterial vaginosis that had been adequately treated at the same health clinic. In the clinical examination performed during the first trimester of pregnancy, she presented cervical lesions diagnosed as HPV-induced lesions in the cytopathological evaluation. The patient received guidance regarding her HPV infection and for periodic monitoring of the cervical lesions. Moreover, aspects of STD prevention, including oral sex, and family planning issues were addressed.
At the time of the clinical appointment, she was 31 weeks pregnant with her first child. She had been using an oral contraceptive method, which failed due to incorrect use, and resulted in an unwanted pregnancy. When interviewed, she reported that her active sex life started when she was 13 years old and that she had had 10 sexual partners since her first sexual intercourse, but that at that moment, she had only one sexual partner. During the interview, she also reported having vaginal intercourse and oral sex at weekly frequency. The last vaginal and oral intercourse had been on the previous day and four days earlier, respectively. She stated that she had never used alcohol, marijuana or cocaine.
In the genital examination, white stained areas were identified in the uterine cervix, after applying acetic acid. Local smears for cytopathological analysis were collected from these areas. The slides were sent to the laboratory at the same clinic. An oral examination was performed, including a complete periodontal examination. The patient did not present any oral lesions and her teeth were healthy. The gingival bleeding index, dental plaque index and the mean probing depth of the gingival sulcus were recorded. The patient presented bleeding in 9% of the gingival sites and dental biofilm in 65% of the tooth sites. The mean probing depth was 2.24 mm, with no attachment loss.
The slides sent to the laboratory were processed using the Papanicolaou (Pap) test. The cytological data were evaluated by means of the Bethesda criteria and the cells were found to present koilocytosis, nuclear enlargement, nuclear hyperchromasia, irregular nuclear outlines and perinuclear halos .
Swab samples for HPV identification were collected from the cervix and the mouth (dorsum of the tongue and the area of the soft and hard palate). Samples of dental biofilm were also collected using a sterile periodontal curette, from the teeth with deeper sulci. The samples collected were subjected to DNA purification (QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, Qiagen) and the microarray reaction for DNA HPV genotyping (Papillocheck, Greiner-Bio-One).
The cervical smear showed the presence of DNA from HPV56, which is a high-risk subtype. No HPV DNA was detected in the tongue/palate smear. DNA from HPV 6 was detected in one of the four samples of dental biofilm. HPV was present in the periodontal sulcus of the lower left canine. The depth of the gingival sulcus at this site was 4 mm, and it did not present bleeding on probing.
Preventive measures were reaffirmed and a clinical monitoring approach was implemented in relation to the cervix HPV-induced lesions, which consisted of cervical screening every 12 months. The lesions presented a self-healing course within the first year of observation.