A 45-year-old male patient suffered a high-energy trauma when he was driving the vehicle and was hit from side from a trolley coming from opposite side on his right side. The patient was taken to the emergency block at a local hospital where the patient was stabilized and referred to our hospital for further management. At our hospital after making sure patient is stabilized, skin traction was given and X-rays were done. Following radiographic analysis, the patient was found to be suffering from posterior hip dislocation with ipsilateral femur neck fracture with posterior wall acetabulum fracture . In our case, closed reduction had no effect as posterior segment of the acetabulum along with the associated femur neck fracture, hampered the reduction of the hip joint. Plan for emergent hip reduction and primary surgical fixation of fractures was made. With the patient in floppy lateral position, Kocher-Langenbeck approach was used for exposure and primary fixation of fractures . Extended trochanteric osteotomy had to be done for better intraoperative visualization as the femoral head was present deep within the tissues and thus could not be visualized and to have a supratectal visualization of the acetabulum as fracture was seen to be extending there . On opening of the fracture site, posterior wall acetabulum fracture was found to be excessively comminuted non-amenable for fixation and femoral head was found to be avascularized, with no bleeding on drilling of the femoral head. Subsequently, plan was changed intraoperatively and uncemented total hip replacement with acetabular defect reconstruction with bone graft from femoral head was done. Postoperatively, the patient received 1.5 g of cefuroxime twice daily for 3 days with Ecosprin and indomethacin started from post-operative day (POD)-1 for prophylaxis of thromboembolism and heterotopic ossification, respectively, for 6 weeks. Rehabilitation was started from next day with high sitting, static quads, and knee bending. From POD-2, the patient was mobilized, with full weight-bearing walking started. At 1-year follow-up, no aseptic loosening was found on anteroposterior view of pelvis with total Harris Hip Score of 91 .