A 54-year-old male known to have type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia and chronic kidney disease stage III. He presented complaining of on and off episodes of headache mainly at the frontal area for three months duration, which was accompanied with gradually progressing drooping of his left eyelid initially and then involving the right eyelid as well. It was not associated with visual impairment, seizures, fever, weakness or change in sensation and there is no history of trauma. His symptoms were not proceeded by an upper respiratory tract infection or a febrile illness. He also reported an occasional dry cough and he noticed some weight loss; however, it was not measured. The cough was not associated with chest pain, shortness of breath or hoarseness of voice. Upon examination, the patient was found to have bilateral ptosis, ophthalmoplegia and midway pupillary dilation, otherwise the rest of neurological examination was within normal. Brain CT scan and MRI with contrast was performed which showed a sellar and suprasellar enhancing lesion replacing the pituitary gland with extension along the pituitary stalk and invasion of the cavernous sinuses measuring 4.3 × 2.3 × 1.8 cm which was suggestive of an invasive pituitary macroadenoma or a pituitary metastasis. . He also underwent chest x-ray which has showed left lower zone opacification and whole-body FDG PET scan that has revealed a left parahilar mass in the left lower lung lobe most likely lung cancer associated with metastatic lymphadenopathy and likely metastatic left adrenal nodule and pituitary mass. .
With these clinical information, the patient underwent endoscopic trans-sphenoidal sellar mass surgery. Frozen section showed the mass to be a metastatic carcinoma and tumor debulking was done. The final histopathological report was metastatic non-small cell carcinoma/Adenocarcinoma with primary lung origin. It was positive for pancytokeratin, TTF-1, Napsin A, and CK7. After the diagnosis, patient was sent for definitive management.