A 52-year-old white male with CF presented with persistent exertional dyspnea and cough with scant sputum production. Physical examination demonstrated oxygen saturation of 91%, with normal temperature and vital signs. His weight had fallen from 79.2 to 77.1 kg over 3 months. Cardiovascular exam was entirely normal. Lungs demonstrated coarse breath sounds bilaterally with scattered rales throughout the lung fields. The abdomen was normal, extremities demonstrated significant clubbing and there was no peripheral edema. Forced expiratory volume at 1 second (FEV1) had decreased from 50% to 36%. The chest radiograph resembled baseline findings with no obvious infiltrate or pneumothroax. He received a month-long course of azithromycin, aztreonam and inhaled tobramycin for suspected pulmonary exacerbation of acute super-infection in the setting of underlying chronic CF lung disease.
One month later, follow-up revealed no improvement in dyspnea and no change in the scant sputum production, despite full adherence to the antibiotic regimen and airway clearance techniques. Exertional discomfort located along the sternum and left anterior chest associated with dyspnea without radiation or pressure sensation was further described but was not associated with palpitations, diaphoresis or nausea. This discomfort improved with rest and was not associated with meals. He did report the need to sleep upright in a recliner, but denied paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
CF was diagnosed in this patient by sweat chloride at age 35 after an episode of hemoptysis, with subsequent genetic analysis identifying a ΔF508, 2789+5G>A mutation. He also has gastroesophageal reflux, Barrett's esophagus, azoospermia, and pancreatic insufficiency. He had sinus surgery at age 47. Medications include albuterol, ipratropium, fluticasone, dornase alpha, salmeterol, omeprazole, pancreatin and multivitamin. The patient's father had a myocardial infarction at age 37, his mother had coronary artery bypass surgery at 52 years of age, and a brother underwent coronary bypass at age 61. The patient has never smoked and alcohol intake was minimal.
Diagnostic testing demonstrated normal white blood cell, hemoglobin and platelet count. Electrolytes, albumin, protein and glucose were normal with a 5.1% HbA1c. Total cholesterol was 139 mg/dl, LDL 80 mg/dl, HDL 30 mg/dl and triglycerides at 76 mg/dl. Chronic findings with cystic changes were evident on chest radiograph, but with no obvious consolidation. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with a left anterior fascicular block and normal ST findings.
Stress thallium testing was subsequently arranged within a week of the follow up visit, with results positive for moderate anteroseptal area of reversible perfusion with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%. Subsequent heart catheterization revealed 99% occlusion of the left anterior descending artery with extension into the two diagonal branches, 100% obstruction of the left anterior descending artery at the trifurcation and 70% lesion affecting the first posterior lateral branch of the circumflex artery. The patient was evaluated for possible coronary artery bypass graft; however, because of his current pulmonary status, angioplasty was elected with successful stenting of the left anterior descending artery. On follow up one year out from stent placement, the patient remained asymptomatic with exercise tolerance and pulmonary function returning to baseline.