When she was 40 years old, a Caucasian woman underwent bunion surgery for pain whilst ambulating. The wounds healed without complication but she went on to develop mechanical allodynia, intermittent swelling and a bluish discoloration of the foot, consistent with a diagnosis of type 1 complex regional pain syndrome. She received many different treatments for continued pain over the subsequent years. Drug therapies using pregabalin, strong opiates and epidural analgesia were not fully successful and she was offered a below knee cast as a temporizing measure. There was no pre-existing psychiatric diagnosis but the patient developed a psychological dependence upon this cast. She was reluctant to have it removed, believing that her pain remained inadequately treated. She failed to attend several appointments at the pain clinic. When she did return, the anesthetists asked for orthopaedic assistance to remove her cast. By this point she was 45 years old and had spent the previous 28 months in the same below knee cast. She was no longer taking regular analgesia but was unable to tolerate anyone touching her leg and therefore received a general anesthetic to facilitate the cast removal.
The cast was found to be intact, despite having been worn for such a long period. This can be explained by the fact that she had been using crutches and the plaster was reinforced with a heel stirrup. The resin surface was filthy . The toes were swollen and erythematous with thick scales in the web spaces; the toenails showed evidence of onychocryptosis and onychogryphosis and had not been cut. The deep cotton bandages were intact but appeared soiled on removal of the cast. The exposed leg was covered in thick yellow skin scales which were easily exfoliated by hand . There were no significant areas of skin loss with integument intact over bony protuberances. Dense heel callosities were removed with a sharp blade. Closer inspection of the skin surface revealed small pitted ulcers 1-2 mm in diameter replacing the normal skin pores. Healthy pink granulation tissue was seen at the base of these ulcers which appeared clean and were not infected . They did not bleed on palpation and required no dressing. Some superficial telangiectasia were also noted on the anterior aspect of the ankle joint which were not present elsewhere on her limbs. There was no change in skin pigmentation. The leg circumferences were reduced by 5.5 cm at the calf and 1.5 cm at the ankle when compared to the normal leg. Passive dorsiflexion was symmetrically zero degrees. Passive plantar flexion was 30° in the cast leg and 40° in the normal leg. Her passive knee movements were normal. Doppler ultrasound showed good flow at the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses. Swabs, skin and toenails sent at time of the removal of the cast showed no growth of any organisms or fungal species.
She was later reviewed in the pain clinic. Her skin was healthy but her allodynia remained symptomatic. At this stage she was reluctant to pursue any further treatment.