A 64-year-old Caucasian female with a past medical history of asthma, congestive heart failure, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department with worsening dyspnea and cough for 3 weeks, which showed no improvement with antibiotics. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a right lung nodule measuring 1.2 cm in the largest dimension, bilateral pleural effusions, and multiple pleural-based nodules. The largest pleural nodule in the right chest measured 5.8 cm and in the left chest measured 4.8 cm . The findings of multiple nodularities involving both lungs and pleura were suspicious for metastatic disease.
Cytological examination of the pleural fluid showed reactive mesothelial cells and inflammatory cells with no evidence of malignancy. Subsequent biopsy of the right pleural nodule showed sheets of tumor cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and few scattered clear cells . Mucocytes were absent. The tumor cells were positive for p63 and negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) by immunohistochemistry . A review of the patient’s past medical history was significant for a high-grade salivary gland neoplasm, which was resected and radiated 6 years prior at an outside facility. At this point, the differential diagnosis included squamous cell carcinoma of the lung with pleural involvement or metastasis from the previously resected salivary gland neoplasm.
A review of the prior parotidectomy specimen and comparison of both lesions showed similar morphologic characteristics . The tumor cells from the previous resection were positive for cytokeratin 7(CK7), CAM5.2, p63, and CK5/6. Mucicarmine special stain highlighted a few mucocytes . The tumor cells were negative for vimentin, CDX2, estrogen receptor (ER), CK20, chromogranin, TTF-1, smooth muscle actin (SMA), synaptophysin, S100, and calponin. This tumor was diagnosed as high-grade salivary gland neoplasm at the referring institution without further subcategorization. Based on morphology and immunoprofile, the differential diagnosis included high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma and hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma.
Molecular studies performed on both specimens detected a CRTC1 (19p13) and MAML2 (11q21) fusion. The overall findings were thus consistent with metastatic mucoepidermoid carcinoma to the pleura.
After diagnosing metastatic MEC to the pleura, the patient became severely short of breath and developed bilateral pleural effusions that persisted despite evacuation. She developed respiratory distress, could not be weaned off the ventilator, and passed away 2 months after the diagnosis.