A 64-year-old man with a diagnosis of atrial septal defect (ASD) presented ECG features of incomplete or complete right bundle branch block (CRBBB) during a regular medical check-up. He was asymptomatic, and he had no other significant past medical history. He was referred to our hospital to assess the possibility of catheter device occlusion for ASD, and surgical correction was indicated due to multiple defects and the size of the defects. A chest radiograph showed enlargement of the pulmonary vasculature, indicating pulmonary high flow. An ECG showed CRBBB, and the corrected QT interval (Bazett formula) was 478 ms . Echocardiography showed preserved left ventricular function, and enlarged right atrium and right ventricle with trivial tricuspid regurgitation and multiple secundum ASDs. The patient was not taking any medications known to prolong the QT interval, and his laboratory data indicated no significant electrolyte disorders. We were informed that he had a child receiving drug treatment for arrhythmia; however, we did not think that this was clinically relevant before the surgery as further information was not provided.
During the operation, anesthetic drugs were used as follows: sevoflurane, remifentanil, dexmedetomidine, propofol, fentanil and rocuronium were administered. Cefazolin was given for the prevention of surgical site infection. After the median sternotomy, an aortic cannula was placed in the ascending aorta, and venous cannulas were inserted into the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava to establish the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Once the aorta was cross-clamped, cold blood cardioplegic solution was infused through the cannula in the ascending aorta. The body temperature was cooled down to 33.8∘ Celsius. Under conditions of cardiac arrest, the right atrium was cut horizontally and opened. Then, three large ASDs were identified at the secundum with thin rims around the holes. The ASDs were closed directly with continuous 4–0 Prolene. After the de-airing, the aorta was de-clamped. The cross-clamp time was 38 min. The patient developed VF. The direct current (DC) cardioversion was successful to convert to sinus rhythm with one attempt of 10 J. The CPB was weaned uneventfully, and its running time was 76 min. The chest was closed using standard techniques, and the patient was sent to the intensive care unit (ICU) with tracheal intubation. In the ICU, dopamine at 4 mcg/kg/min and noradrenaline at 0.05 mcg/kg/min were administered for cardiac support. Propofol and dexmedetomidine were given at the adequate level for sedation. Bipolar temporary pacing wire was placed on the right atrium, and the setting of pacemaker was AAI pacing mode with HR 88 bpm, the sensitivity threshold of 3 mV and the output of 10 mA. The serum level of potassium was 3.8 mEq/l (normal serum potassium value: 3.8–4.8 mmol/l), and that of magnesium was not measured 2 h after the surgery as we do not routinely measure it after low risk operations and the patient was stable. Three hours after the operation, he suddenly presented R on T followed by TdP and Vfs . Chest compressions were initiated, and DC cardioversion was attempted. Sinus rhythm was achieved following cardioversion; however, the patient presented repetitive VF (14 times) .
Intravenous amiodarone and lidocaine were not effective in managing the arrhythmic storm. After the administration of magnesium and nifecalant, the patient finally recovered to sinus rhythm. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular wall motion, which indicated no heart ischemia. After the event, he underwent 24 h of hypothermic treatment to prevent brain damage, and, fortunately, there remained no evidence of brain damage on computed tomography. Landiolol had been administered intravenously to maintain sinus rhythm until the patient was able to take bisoprolol tablets orally. Given that his VFs were refractory and the patient had no coronary artery disease and relevant valve disease, we supposed that he might have been a carrier of familial arrhythmic disorders causing repetitive VFs. Therefore, we reviewed his family history and found that his daughter and grandson had congenital LQTS diagnosed at other hospitals, and his grandson was being treated with a beta blocker for this disease.
After obtaining informed consent from the patient, genetic screening for LQTS related genes was conducted to confirm the diagnosis. In the genetic analysis, a CACNA1c missense mutation, c. 4739a > c, p.K1580 T, was identified. CACNA1C is a causative gene for LQTS type 8 [–]. The mutation was novel and not reported in the cohort databases; ExAC (/), gnomAD (/) and HGVD . We could not perform genetic analysis for the family members who were diagnosed with LQTS.
He was discharged 2 weeks after the operation with the prescription of bisoprolol.