An 89-year-old male affected by a corneoscleral wound burn in his right eye, which developed during phacoemulsification at another centre, was referred to our facility, the University Eye Clinic of Trieste (Italy). The preoperative documentation showed a diagnosis of Fuchs endothelial dystrophy and mature cataract. The detailed preoperative data for the right eye were as follows. The best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) was 20/125 with a manifest refraction of −6.5 D + (−0.75) D × 118° and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was 19 mm Hg. The axial length was 24.38 mm, and the anterior chamber (AC) depth was 1.89 mm. The mean corneal curvature was 45.24 D, and the central corneal thickness was 553 μm. The corneal endothelial cell count was 1,800 cells/mm2. The preoperative examination showed confluent corneal guttae, central haze, a beaten-metal appearance of Descemet membrane, phaco-/iridodonesis, and a significant nuclear cataract (C3N3).
At the presentation to our attention, the day after surgery, the right BCDVA was finger count at 40 cm and the IOP was 9 mm Hg. The right eye presented two sclerocorneal stitches at 9 o’clock, a 1 × 2-mm area of corneal melting at the corneal tunnel with diffuse corneal oedema and with Descemet folds, iris partially incarcerated in the corneal tunnel, an irregular pupil, the AC was formed but presented flare (2+) and cells (2+) . Topical antibiotics, topical steroids, topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and hyperosmolar eye drops were prescribed.
After 1 month, a circular full-thickness corneal patch graft of 4 mm was applied to the corneal burn. For trephination of the recipient cornea and punching of the donor cornea, two distinct sterile dermatologic punch biopsy blades (Blife Srl, Italy) were employed with a diameter of 3 mm (available ranges 1–4 mm, 1 mm steps). The patch was sutured with 16 interrupted stitches using 10-0 nylon (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA).
On the first postoperative day, the right BCDVA was finger count at 30 cm and the IOP was 7 mm Hg. The corneal patch was in place and sealed, the AC was normally formed without inflammatory reaction, and the IOL was regularly in the capsular bag . The Seidel test was negative.
After 2 months, the right BCDVA was finger count at 1 m and IOP was 5 mm Hg. The corneal patch was in place and sealed with Descemet folds in a radial pattern, the AC was present, the pupil was irregular and stretched at 12 o’clock, the IOL was in place in the capsular bag. Central corneal thickness was 827 μm. Fundus oculi was not visible. Bulbar ultrasound and macular optical coherence tomography exams were performed and showed an intact retinal profile and architecture. Fourteen dioptres of irregular astigmatism were detected by Scheimpflug tomography (Sirius, CSO, Florence, Italy).
Fifteen months after the corneal patch graft surgery, a penetrating keratoplasty (PK) was done due to patients complaining of low-quality vision. The donor button, held by suction, was cut with an 8.25 mm punch trephine (Moria Guarded Punch, Moria Surgical, Antony, France) from the endothelial side. The recipient bed was trephined using an 8 mm adjustable suction trephine (Moria Surgical, Antony, France) to cut a partial depth, circular incision in the cornea, centred at the geometric centre of the cornea. The excision of the recipient corneal button was completed with a diamond blade and then 4 interrupted stitches and a single 16-bite continuous suture using 10-0 nylon (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA) were placed. On the day after surgery, right visual acuity at distance was 20/200 without correction and IOP was 22 mm Hg. The donor cornea was in place, efficiently sutured with continuous suture, but showing some central anterior corneal oedema with Descemet folds.
One month after PK, the right visual acuity at distance was 20/200 without spectacle correction and BCDVA was 20/50 with −2.50 D + (−5 D) × 35°. IOP was 20 mm Hg. The corneal graft was in place and efficiently sealed with continuous sutures. A central anterior corneal oedema with Descemet folds was still visible and the Seidel test was negative. The pupil was irregular and stretched at 12 o’clock. One year after PK, the continuous suture was removed and after 7 days residual astigmatism at corneal tomography was 5 D × 98°. BCDVA was 20/32 with −2.50 sph + (−5 D) × 35°.