A 49-year-old female with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and chronic atrophic gastritis presented with the main complaint of acute-onset chest pain for 3 weeks. She denied any trauma to the chest, falls, or other injuries prior to the onset of symptoms. She was initially examined elsewhere, where positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed multiple fractures in the ribs (right 5th-9th, left 6th-9th), the right transverse process of L3, and left side of the sacrum, as well as bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, right pneumothorax, and enlargement of the left parapharyngeal and subclavian lymph nodes.
Upon admission, a general physical examination revealed no significant findings except for tenderness at L3. Blood investigations were unremarkable except for elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 253U/L, mildly elevated highly sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) of 4.69 mg/L, and a positive T-SPOT.TB test. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed that the bilateral pleural effusion and right pneumothorax have resolved. CT 3D reconstruction of the rib cage and vertebrae showed fractures and formation of calluses in bilateral ribs (right 5th-10th, left 5th-10th) and fracture of the right transverse process of L3 . CT of the lumbar spine and pelvis confirmed fractures in the right transverse process of L3 and the left side of the sacrum .
Differential diagnoses including osteoporosis, autoimmune disorders, infection, hematological tumors, and primary or metastatic bone tumors were considered. The patient’s bone density scan, autoimmune antibodies, bone marrow biopsy, and sacral bone biopsy all came back normal. Imaging tests found no evidence of solid tumors. Furthermore, imaging results did not indicate active tuberculosis (TB) infection.
The patient then recalled having a violent productive cough accompanied by dyspnea 1 week prior to the onset of chest pain, hence the possibility of stress fractures due to violent coughing was considered. The patient had a previous diagnosis of GERD, which is a common cause of chronic cough due to acid reflux. Hence, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) was administered, but her symptoms failed to improve.
When further inquired, the patient revealed that her daughter had violent coughing accompanied by fever prior to her illness, while several other relatives recently developed similar symptoms. Hence, the patient’s blood sample was sent to Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for testing, revealing Bordetella pertussis toxin (PT) IgG titer of 110.68 IU/mL. Blood samples from the patient’s family members were also collected and sent to the CDC (April 2022) . A PT-IgG cut-off value of 30 IU/mL has been suggested to indicate recent Pertussis contact, while a titer greater than 100 IU/mL is indicative of active or recent infection with high sensitivity and specificity [, ].
The patient never received the pertussis vaccine as an adult, and she could not recall whether she received the vaccine in childhood. Based on the serological evidence, the patient was diagnosed with pertussis. Since the patient had already entered the convalescent stage of the disease, symptomatic treatments were administered, her symptoms were alleviated, and the patient was discharged. Prescribed medications included montelukast sodium (10 mg q.d.), codeine phosphate (30 mg q.d.), and oxycodone and acetaminophen (5 mg: 325 mg b.i.d.), which were continued for 10 days after discharge. The patient was followed up 8 weeks later, she reported complete resolution of coughing and chest pain and was satisfied with the treatments she received.