A 56-year-old man presented at our hospital with dysphagia. He was diagnosed with unresectable advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma with mediastinal lymph node metastasis and esophagobronchial fistula. The tumor formed a very strong stenosis, which did not allow a narrow-bore endoscope to pass through. He underwent esophagogastric bypass surgery comprising anastomosis between the cervical esophagus and subtotal gastric tube, pulling up through the retrosternal route with external drainage of the remnant esophagus using a silicone tube from the abdominal wall. Subsequently, he was able to have meals and underwent chemotherapy and therapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors following chemoradiotherapy. Nine months after surgery, he was admitted to our hospital with severe dyspnea and hoarseness and could not be kept in supine position. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed marked dilation of the residual esophagus on the oral side of the tumor and heavy tracheal exclusion . Thoracoscopic surgery was planned to secure the airway during the emergency surgery. Intubation can be performed safely by guiding bronchoscopy in the semi-supine position. We prepared extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for use when needed. He was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and thoracoscopic surgery was performed with five ports and one-lung ventilation. There were adhesions between the mediastinal pleura and the right lung in the upper mediastinum, which were dissected safely. Upper esophageal dilation was observed on the cranial side of the azygos arch, and a tumor was found at the level of the tracheal bifurcation. We dissected the mediastinal pleura of the upper thoracic esophagus and exposed its wall. Subsequently, a puncture using a fine needle was performed, and 120 ml of white fluid was aspirated. A 12-Fr silicone drain was inserted from the right chest wall below the right subclavian artery along the chest wall and was placed in the esophagus. The drain was fixed to the esophageal wall, and the mediastinal pleura was closed . The drainage tube was fixed to the esophageal wall using a non-absorbable suture; subsequently, we fixed mediastinal pleura and esophageal wall covering the drainage tube similar to that in Witzel’s method. This surgery lasted 90 min.
The stenosis of the trachea and hoarseness disappeared, and the patient was able to maintain a supine position without dyspnea after surgery. A day after the surgery, a drain contrast study was performed, which showed the dilatation disappeared . The patient was discharged 9 days after surgery without complications. He resumed treatment with an immune checkpoint inhibitor 23 days after the surgery. A CT scan showed that the mucocele had disappeared 2 months after surgery . Three months later, a bronchial stent was inserted for invasion of the left bronchus due to tumor progression. Radiotherapy for brain metastasis was performed 13 months later. The patient continued chemotherapy for esophageal cancer. However, the patient died of tumor progression and lung metastasis 35 months after bypass surgery and 25 months after thoracoscopic surgery.