A 68-year-old man with a history of smoking and without comorbid conditions was admitted to the emergency department on February 28, 2021, with a 15-day history of progressive and worsening dyspnea. He also reported chills and a productive cough. His medical history included herpes zoster and an inguinal hernia. He had no history of thoracic traumatic injury or any other surgeries.
The patient’s body temperature at the time of admission was 39.0 °C, with a heart rate of 141 beats/min and blood pressure of 174/107 mmHg. The patient’s oxygen saturation was 77% while breathing ambient air. The physical examination was remarkable for decreased lung sounds and wheezy breathing sounds with rales over the entire right lung. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 20.000/mm3, a hemoglobin level of 11.8 g/dL, a platelet count of 455 × 103/μL, a C-reactive protein level of 34.6 mg/dL, and a procalcitonin level of 59.42 ng/mL. The HIV antigen/antibody combination test revealed a positive result and the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for HIV was 1.11 × 105 copies/mL. The CD4 + T-lymphocyte cell count was 308 cells/µL (15%).
Chest radiography showed a totally whited-out right lung and chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a large amount of right pleural effusion, diffuse pleural enhancement, and multifocal low dense lesions in the right lobe . Percutaneous catheter drainage of pleural fluid and pleural fluid analysis were done on the third day after admission to relieve dyspnea and make a differential diagnosis. Pleural fluid analysis revealed an exudate of white blood cells (3860/μL) and an adenosine deaminase (ADA) level of 179 IU/L. The white blood cell differential count was not available due to multiple lysed cells. Cytologic examination of the pleural effusion and sputum revealed several acute inflammatory cells and necrotic cellular debris without microorganisms. No malignant cells were found in the pleural fluid. Based on the high level of pleural ADA and the newly diagnosed HIV infection, a presumptive diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) pleurisy was made. Anti-tuberculosis treatment was initiated, although the acid-fast bacilli (AFB) stain and culture results, as well as tuberculosis real-time PCR analysis of the pleural fluid, were negative. The TB-specific antigen interferon (INF)-gamma was negative. A pleural biopsy was performed on day 6 after admission, which revealed two tiny fragments of pleura showing abundant acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltrates with ovoid basophilic radiating filaments under light microscopy, consistent with actinomycosis . Anti-tuberculosis medications were stopped. Intravenous ampicillin (200 mg/kg/day) was administered and anti-retroviral therapy (tenofovir alafenamide fumarate/emtricitabine/bictegravir) was initiated. After 4 weeks of parenteral ampicillin, the patient was switched to oral amoxicillin for 11 months. Chest radiography performed during a follow-up 15 months later revealed a small amount of loculation in the right hemithorax. The patient came to the hospital on September 28, 2021, and did not complain of any special symptoms. There were no abnormal findings in most of the examination results including the chest X-ray.