A 50-year-old man was admitted for elective aortic valve replacement. The patient had severe aortic regurgitation; however, apart from hypertension, he had no other systemic diseases. The patient’s electrocardiogram showed a right bundle branch block with sinus bradycardia. Echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 45% to 55%, severe aortic valve regurgitation, and a dilated left ventricle. He had a normal preoperative coronary angiogram.
Immediately after routine induction of anesthesia, the patient developed intraoperative cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started by performing emergency cardiopulmonary bypass, and the aortic valve was replaced with a mechanical valve. Postoperatively, the patient’s hemodynamic parameters were unstable and he was transferred to the ICU on inotropic support, atrioventricular sequential pacing, and an intra-aortic balloon pump. During the ICU stay, the patient developed acute kidney injury with hepatic dysfunction and deranged coagulation requiring massive transfusion of blood and blood products in the first 48Â hours postoperatively. Regular hemodialysis was initiated from the first postoperative day. By the fourth postoperative day, his renal, hepatic, and coagulation profiles had improved toward the reference ranges. An anticoagulation regimen of heparin and oral warfarin was started. Because of his depressed level of consciousness and inability to be weaned off mechanical ventilation, the patient underwent percutaneous tracheostomy on the seventh postoperative day. He gradually recovered in the ICU. On the 16th postoperative day, however, he developed fresh rectal bleeding. Urgent colonoscopy revealed multiple ischemic ulcers in the colon and a large hematoma in the right colon . The anticoagulants were stopped and consultation was requested with a gastrointestinal surgeon. The surgeon felt that in light of the patient’s poor general condition, extensive disease, and likely dismal outcome of pancolectomy, surgical intervention was not warranted. The patient remained stable over the next few days and was weaned from the ventilator. Upon reinstitution of anticoagulants on the 24th postoperative day, he developed massive LGIB of approximately 6Â L in the form of melena. He also exhibited hemodynamic compromise necessitating reintroduction of vasopressors and mechanical ventilation. He was transfused aggressively with 12 units of packed red blood cells, 14 units of fresh frozen plasma, 12 units of platelet concentrate, and fibrinogen. The bleeding continued unabated despite correcting the coagulopathy. A consensus was thus reached among the intensivist, hematologist, primary cardiac surgeon, and gastrointestinal surgeon to administer rFVIIa. The patient was given 60 mcg/kg of rFVIIa as a first administration after failure of standard treatment, which resulted in prompt cessation of bleeding. He remained stable for the next 48Â hours. On the 26th postoperative day, he developed another bout of melena (approximately 2Â L). After the coagulation parameters had been corrected, a similar dose of rFVIIa was administered. This stopped the bleeding, and the patient gradually recovered. His anticoagulation treatment regimen was resumed after 1Â week, and he had no further episodes of bleeding. His prosthetic valve function was monitored with regular transthoracic echocardiography throughout these periods of coagulopathy. However, his ICU course was further prolonged by supervening sepsis. He was treated with colistin for Acinetobacter baumannii identified in the urine and with meropenem for Enterobacter cloacae in the sputum; he gradually improved upon prompt administration of these antimicrobials. The patient was finally transferred out of the ICU on the 45th postoperative day after full functional recovery and was discharged from the hospital after another week of convalescence in the surgical step-down unit. Since discharge, he has been followed regularly in the warfarin clinic for adjustment of his anticoagulant dose. Repeat colonoscopy after 3Â months revealed healing ulcers with no evidence of further bleeding episodes. The patient’s laboratory values before and after administration of rFVIIa are noted in TableÂ .
Approved by the Institutional Research Ethics Committee of Hamad Medical Corporation State of Qatar (protocol #13347/13).