A 28-year-old Black Brazilian woman, gravida 1, para 0, was referred to our maternity hospital for close monitoring at 39 weeks 4 days of gestational age (calculated by first trimester obstetric ultrasonography), after her latest prenatal visit has revealed a low platelet count (PC) of 65.000 plt/μL. She had received the diagnosis of Bernard-Soulier syndrome ten years ago, suspected by the finding of thrombocytopenia with giant platelets on a routine complete blood count (CBC), and confirmed by the finding of failed ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation, even after the addition of normal plasma. Prior to the diagnosis, she complained of had suffering, during her childhood, from several episodes of epistaxis while sneezing, as well as having experienced gingival bleeding after minimal trauma while toothbrushing. None of the episodes required medical intervention. However, she affirmed having received platelet transfusion as prophylaxis against hemorrhage before undergoing teeth extraction. She denied menorrhagia or developing significant hematomata after accidental bruises.
The patient was referred to our maternity hospital, the only tertiary care center of the region, for assessment of the best mode of delivery in face of her condition. She was admitted to our wards and a CBC was performed, confirming a low PC of only 43.000 plt/μL, a hemoglobin (Hb) of 13.6 g/dL, and a hematocrit (Hct) of 39%. Activated clotting time was 6 minutes, clot retraction was normal, prothrombin time was 13.2 seconds, International Normalized Ratio (INR) was 1.3, and activated partial thromboplastin time was 31.9 seconds. An obstetric ultrasound revealed a placental grading (Grannum classification) of II, a normal amniotic fluid index of 13.1 cm, and no signs of growth restriction or fetal distress. Physical examination was unremarkable. The patient denied the occurrence of any bleeding episode demanding intervention during the antenatal period, reporting only minor gingival bleeding after tooth brushing. Her baseline PC varied from 75.000 plt/μL to 120.000 plt/μL.
Platelet transfusion was regarded as a necessary prophylactic measure prior to delivery. Ten units of random donor platelets were administered on the course of three days, after which the patient was submitted to an elective cesarean section delivery under general anesthesia, at gestational age of 40 weeks. A healthy male baby with a normal birthweight of 3.615 kg was delivered. His 1-minute and 5-minute Apgar scores were both 8.
After the delivery, the mother’s state continued being assessed daily, with special attention taken to lochia and surgical wound healing. At one week postpartum, a CBC revealed a PC of 41.000 plt/μL, Hb of 13.3 g/dL, and Hct of 39%. Since there were no signs of neither evident nor occult hemorrhage, and the surgical wound was healing accordingly, the patient was discharged.