A 44-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of productive cough and fever for 5 consecutive days. He also reported suffering from chronic worsening dyspnoea, orthopnoea, and abdominal discomfort for ∼18 months. He underwent mitral valve replacement due to rheumatic valve disease (severe regurgitation and mild stenosis) with a mechanical prosthesis 7 years before. His medical history additionally consisted of moderate asthma and atrial fibrillation. After initial surgery, the patient remained asymptomatic for 6 years. He had serial echocardiograms showing mild ventricular dysfunction without significant valve prosthesis dysfunction or thrombosis that could explain the worsening symptoms. Cardiovascular physical examination revealed elevated jugular venous pulse, irregular cardiac rhythm with S3, a lower left parasternal heave and a pathologic pulsation in the left second intercostal space. Hepatomegaly and diffuse bilateral pulmonary rales and wheezes were also discovered. Due to pulmonary consolidations on superior and inferior right lobes on chest X-Ray and elevated inflammatory markers, the initial diagnosis was acute decompensated heart failure triggered by community-acquired pneumonia, and treatment was initiated with intravenous loop diuretics and antibiotics. Other relevant laboratory tests showed leucocytosis, mild anaemia (HgB 112 g/L), mild hypoxaemia, and a supratherapheutic international normalized ratio (5.94).
Further evaluations by chest computed tomography (CT) and echocardiogram were performed because of persistent respiratory symptoms, elevated inflammatory markers and worsening cardiovascular symptoms.
Echocardiogram showed left ventricular dilation and mild dysfunction with ejection fraction (EF) of 43%, right ventricular dilation and dysfunction, mild pericardial effusion, normally functioning mechanical mitral prosthesis and an intriguing anechoic structure adjacent to the left ventricle posterior lateral wall, near the mitral prosthesis with possible left ventricle communication . Thorax CT confirmed pneumonia with concomitant pulmonary congestion. Furthermore, it revealed two massive multilobulated formations, located in superior and inferior aspects of mediastinum, with partially calcified walls (, ). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) was performed for better assessment of these structures, showing one trilobed formation, located at left ventricle inferior wall, causing diaphragm compression, and one bilobed formation, located at left ventricle anterior wall and extending to the lateral wall. . Both structures communicated with the left ventricle through perivalvular, contrast-filled necks. The absence of ventricular muscle layer and passive filling during ventricular systole characterized these structures as PSAs (, Video S1). On coronary CT angiography, we also identified a circumflex branch occluded which was confirmed by coronary angiography (, ).
Owing to the massive size of PSAs and the presentation with new-onset severe heart failure, an operative approach was chosen. During the procedure, after initiation of CPB, mechanical mitral prosthesis was explanted permitting posterior ventricular wall exploration. It was impossible to find the PSA neck. The option was to perform an incision of the PSA external wall, and a tear was found on the posterior AVG, below the insertion site of mitral prosthesis, communicating the PSA with the left ventricle. This communication was closed with bovine pericardium patch using single pledgeted sutures and a new mechanical prosthetic valve number 25 was implanted with interrupted stiches. After weaning from CPB and protamine reversal, patient presented diffuse bleeding on the site of dissection from PSA wall, left ventricle, and diaphragm. Surgeons did not find bleeding on suture lines, nor any bleeding with possible surgical approach. Therefore, they packed the chest with compresses as a life saving measure before closing the sternum. After 48 h, patient’s chest was reopened in order to remove the towels. Further, post-operative course was uneventful.
Prior to discharge, patient was re-evaluated with CMRI. The absence of contrast filling of the inferior wall PSA confirmed its successful closure. However, a contrast-filled peri-mitral valve neck on left ventricular basal anterior segment was noted, communicating it with the PSA located at the anterior wall, and a structure suggestive of small thrombus , (, Video S2). Due to multiple previous interventions, a conservative approach was chosen and patient was discharged without any further complications.
The patient is being followed-up since hospital discharge. On echocardiographic assessment, 5 months after surgery, despite an improvement in left ventricular function with EF of 51% and normal right ventricular function, we identified a moderate paravalvular leak from the mitral prosthesis on anterior topography, which might be related to mitral annulus instability from both procedures. His last outpatient appointment happened 1 year and 2 months after surgery: he remains asymptomatic without signs of heart failure and is being managed conservatively.