An 11-year-old boy presented with occasional chest pain for 2 weeks. A palpable mass was initially found on his left chest. He denied having a cough, chest stuffiness, polypnea, or weight loss. Dental caries was observed. On physical examination, an 8 cm × 7 cm palpable mass was found on the left upper chest wall; there was tenderness of the mass but no swelling; and skin temperature was normal. Retraction to a slight extent and decreased breath sound were observed over the left lung field.
Laboratory tests showed neutrophilic leukocytosis of 13.27 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 105 g/L, platelets of 524 × 109/L, C-reactive protein level of 44.59 mg/L, 70.9% lymphocytes, and 0.2% eosinophils, and a Mantoux skin test was negative. The patient underwent a detailed series of radiological examinations to visualize the entire landscape of the lesion. 3D-VR imaging and MinIP showed the mass and its internal structures .
Post-contrast CT and MRI revealed an irregular soft-tissue mass in the left upper zone. Several small arteries could be seen emerging from the left pulmonary artery in the lesion. There were some bony invasions of the left 2nd and 3rd ribs and an associated left pleural effusion . Because of its radiological characteristics, a type of malignant small round cell tumor known as an Askin tumor was initially considered. Subsequently, bronchoscopy demonstrated endobronchial inflammation with a little yellow and white secretion before antibiotic treatment. However, pathological biopsy via the chest wall suggested purulent inflammation with scattered bacterial clusters, which morphologically suggested Actinomyces species . Further to this discovery, Actinomyces odontolyticus bacteremia, Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, and Fusobacterium nucleatum were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid next-generation sequencing. High-throughput DNA sequencing eventually proved infection of Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans (bacteria), Haemophilus influenza (bacteria), and Alterniospora (fungus).
The patient was treated with an intravenous infusion of cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium for 9 days while the etiology was unknown. After confirmation of actinomycosis, treatment was switched to penicillin combined with piperacillin/tazobactam and included a one-month regime of gargling using compound chlorhexidine gargle. After discharge, the patient changed to oral amoxicillin for 9 weeks. At 2-month outpatient follow-up, the patient had completely recovered, with no symptoms remaining, and chest radiograph showed that most of the lesion was absorbed .