A 33-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the Emergency Department of our hospital with acute abdomen and sepsis following a surveillance colonoscopy five days earlier at another hospital unit. He had previously been fit and well, although he had had two corrective surgeries for congenital talipes equinovarus in childhood and early adolescence. His family history was notable for CRC on the maternal side of his family. His mother and grandmother had died from colonic malignancy (his mother at age 42 years), and his cousin had been diagnosed with CRC at age 21 years. Furthermore, his maternal aunt had been diagnosed with endometrial cancer in her 40s and had recently been found to carry a mutation in the gene hMSH2, which is associated with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). As a result, he had now had five screening colonoscopies since the age of 21 years, although no abnormalities had been detected thus far.
His physical examination was notable for pyrexia and tachycardia with signs of localized left iliac fossa peritonitis. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed inflammation of the sigmoid-descending colon junction and the adjacent loop of the proximal jejunum, which were associated with a small pocket of free air and free pelvic fluid . Incidentally, an isolated right common iliac artery (RCIA) aneurysm measuring 2.7 cm in diameter was also noted . As the clinical and radiological findings suggested a controlled localized perforation of the sigmoid colon, he was initially managed non-operatively with immediate bowel rest, intravenous fluid resuscitation and broad spectrum antibiotics. However, over the next 24 hours, he developed signs of more extensive peritonitis, so we proceeded to perform an emergency laparotomy.
Surgical exploration revealed generalized purulent peritoneal fluid and a small perforation of the proximal sigmoid colon. Colonic resection was performed with the formation of an end colostomy (Hartmann's procedure). The histology of the colonic segment was consistent with acute perforation with no identifiable cause and so was presumed to be due to his recent colonoscopy. The patient recovered well post-operatively and was discharged with outpatient follow-up by the Colorectal and Vascular Surgical units at our hospital.
Six months post-operatively, with no intervening complications, the patient had a reversal of the Hartmann's procedure. This was technically challenging because of dense fibrous adhesions and an apparently fragile small bowel, resulting in two small bowel resections and repairs of multiple enterotomies. Because of the complexity of the case, the colorectal anastomosis was covered by a defunctioning loop ileostomy. Histological analysis of the colonic and small-bowel specimens obtained during this surgery revealed patchy thinning and fibrosis of the muscularis externa, with complete absence of the layer in some bowel segments . There was no evidence of vasculitis or of a hollow visceral myopathic disorder. No amyloid was found, nor were there any features to suggest myositis. It was suggested that the focal defects in the muscle might be in keeping with a collagen vascular disease.
The patient was subsequently noted to have a high-arched palate, tethered earlobes, long fingers (although not hypermobile), and transparency (but not hyperelasticity) of the skin over the anterior chest with easily visible vessels. These clinical features, together with the history of congenital clubfoot, the operative and histological findings of bowel wall thinning, and the incidental finding of the RCIA aneurysm, were suggestive of an underlying collagen vascular disease, specifically Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV (EDS-IV), despite there being no family history of this disease. The patient was therefore referred for genetic testing.
A skin biopsy was performed to assess levels of type III collagen secreted by dermal fibroblasts (typically reduced in patients with EDS-IV ), although the results were inconclusive. Genetic testing was undertaken, and genomic sequencing revealed a heterozygous missense non-conservative mutation c.3256G > T in exon 45 of the collagen type III, α1 (COL3A1) gene, consistent with a diagnosis of EDS-IV. This mutation is predicted to replace the glycine at position 1086 of the triple-helix domain with a cysteine, and although it has not been previously reported in the literature, similar mutations within the triple helix are known to be associated with EDS-IV .