An adult woman aged 26 years visited the clinic to request orthodontic retreatment for her relapsed crowding in her mandibular dentition.
Ten years prior to the present visit to the clinic, she received orthodontic treatment resulting in the extraction of two upper premolars and one lower central incisor.
The clinical examination revealed that the patient had a straight profile and a strong chin . A 2.0 mm space in the maxillary dentition and 4.0 mm of crowding in the mandibular dentition were found. The upper incisors were retroclined, and the anterior overjet was minimal. The anterior overbite was within the normal range. Compared with the facial midline, the maxillary dental midline deviated by 0.5 mm to the right. The mandibular dental midline was basically the center of the remaining lower central incisor since the other lower central incisor was missing. No chin deviation was found. She had Class II molar and canine relationships bilaterally.
Cephalometric analysis indicated skeletal Class I malocclusion (SNA, 82.4°; SNB, 79.5°; ANB, 2.9°) with a normal mandibular plane angle (SN-MP, 34.8°). The maxillary incisors were retroclined (U1-SN, 82.8°; U1-NA, 15.8°).
The patient had experienced TMJ pain many times after her first orthodontic treatment, and we found joint clicking at the start of mouth opening in TMJ clinical examination. CBCT examination was performed to check the TMJs. CBCT examination was performed when the maxillary and mandibular teeth were in maximum intercuspation (MI). JSI was used to assess the condylar position by calculating the ratio of the anterior and posterior joint spaces. Vargas-Pereira described that the physiologic range of JSI values for the condylar position was -32.5 to 21.1. A greater value indicated an anterior position, while a smaller value indicated a posterior position. CBCT images of the TMJs were oriented sagittally and taken perpendicular to the maximum transverse of the long axis of the condylar region, as previously reported. Left and right JSI values of -38.5 and -52.6 , respectively, were obtained in this case. The results indicated that the position of bilateral condyles had posterior displacement and that the right condyle displacement was more severe than that of the left condyle. The right upper central incisor had dark gray discoloration, but the panorama examination showed no obvious findings. CBCT examination revealed a large periapical radiolucency associated with the upper right central incisor . We collected the medical history and the patient gave no history of trauma, caries, and clinical symptoms of upper right central incisor. We speculated that the periapical periodontitis of the upper right central incisor might be associated with anterior occlusal interference.