Shallow breathing was observed for 21 min after premature delivery.
A female infant, aged 21 min and weighing 830 g at 28+6 wk of gestational age, was admitted to our hospital on May 9, 2020, because of premature birth and shallow breathing. She received endotracheal intubation in the delivery room after resuscitation, and a pulmonary surfactant was instilled through the endotracheal tube. When her condition was stable, she was transferred to the NICU with T-piece ventilation. After admission, the doctor assessed that the patient's breathing condition was improved, and therefore, the endotracheal tube was removed, and she was treated with nasal continuous positive airway pressure, vitamin K1 to prevent bleeding, cefoperazone sodium/sulbactam sodium combined with ampicillin for anti-infection, caffeine citrate to stimulate breathing, minimal enteral feeding, intravenous fluid infusion, and warming.
After obtaining signed informed consent from the patient’s parents, a doctor and nurses qualified for umbilical arterial and venous catheterization inserted a 3.5 Fr UAC/umbilical venous catheter (UVC) (3.5 Fr, single lumen polyurethane umbilical catheter, Utah Medical Products, Inc., West Midvale, UT, United States) on the day of admission . The UAC was used for continuous invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring, and the UVC was used for intravenous medication and parenteral nutrition administration. UAC patency was maintained by flushing with 0.5 IU/mL heparin solution q6h, in addition to continuous infusion of 0.5 IU/mL heparin solution.
On May 18, i.e., day 9 of catheterization, according to the doctor’s plan, the UAC and UVC were removed, and a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC; 1.9 Fr, single lumen Vascu-PICC, medCOMP, Inc., Harleysville, PA, United States) was inserted (cannulation via an upper limb).
On May 20, i.e., 2 d after removal of the UAC/UVC, the patient’s manifestations included poor responsiveness, a heart rate range of 175-185/min, and a total of 24 g of currant jelly stool. Therefore, we considered a diagnosis of NEC. Abdominal X-ray showed inflation of the small intestine but no obvious dilatation of the intestinal lumen or effusion . Color Doppler ultrasound showed partial thrombosis of the abdominal aorta (2 cm × 0.3 cm) and abdominal effusion. On May 21, abdominal X-ray showed that the range of intestinal inflation increased over previous measurements . Additional diagnosis included abdominal aortic thrombosis and NEC (stage IIA; the diagnostic criteria for NEC in this patient were based on the modified Bell's staging criteria, combined with her clinical manifestations). The patient was treated with nil per os, gastrointestinal decompression, anti-infective therapy, blood transfusion, and low-molecular-weight heparin sodium q12h for anticoagulant therapy. On the 67th day after admission, the patient fully recovered and was discharged.
On May 19, i.e., 1 d after removal of the UAC/UVC, the patient’s manifestations included significant abdominal distension, a visible bowel pattern, and weakened bowel sounds, and her feeding was paused once.
The female infant was delivered by cesarean section at 28+6 wk of gestational age to a gravida 3 para 1 mother. The pregnancy was complicated by severe preeclampsia, diamniotic-dichorionic twins (one survived and one died), abnormal liver function, fatty liver, bilateral hydronephrosis with dilatation of the upper ureter, and thrombocytopenia. The infant’s Apgar scores at 1, 5, and 10 min were 6, 9, and 9, respectively.
Upon physical examination, prematurity, poor responsiveness, a temperature of 36.1 °C, a pulse of 158/min, a respiratory rate of 65/min, irregular spontaneous breathing, and retraction were noted, while no abnormalities in the heart and abdomen were observed, and bowel sounds were normal.
On May 20, i.e., 2 d after removal of the UAC/UVC, the patient’s abdomen was slightly distended and bloated but soft to palpation, bowel sounds were normal, no redness or ecchymosis on the abdominal wall was identified, and no abnormal mass was palpable.
On May 20, i.e., 2 d after removal of the UAC/UVC, peripheral blood examination showed a hemoglobin level of 94 g/L (normal range for reference: 170-210 g/L), hematocrit of 25.8% (normal range for reference: 58%-59%), C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 15.6 mg/L (normal range for reference: 0-8 mg/L), procalcitonin level of 0.74 ng/mL (normal range for reference: 0-0.5 ng/mL), coagulation function prothrombin time of 14.6 s (normal range for reference: 7.6-13.6 s), and activated partial thromboplastin time of 55.9 s (normal range for reference: 15.2-35.2 s).
On May 20, i.e., 2 d after removal of the UAC/UVC, chest X-ray showed that the tip position of the PICC was in the 7th-8th thoracic vertebrae. Abdominal X-ray revealed inflation of the small intestine, but no obvious dilatation of the intestinal lumen or effusion was observed . Color Doppler ultrasound showed partial thrombosis of the abdominal aorta (2 cm × 0.3 cm) and abdominal effusion, but no thrombus was noted in the portal vein, splenic vein, or superior mesenteric vein. On May 21, abdominal X-ray showed that the range of intestinal inflation increased over previous measurements .