A 54-year-old male presented to our outpatient clinic with a solitary and painful lump of the right upper arm. The lump has been getting bigger for the past 1 year and the pain has increased due to daily activities. The patient had no other symptoms. On physical examination, the tumor was felt on the right upper arm underneath the biceps muscle, approximately 8 cm × 8 cm in size, palpable as a solid mass, no warmth, and tender to palpation. Range of motion of the shoulder joint was limited due to pain. Upper extremity pulses and neurological examination were normal.
CT scan of the lung showed a well demarcated, homogeneous isodense lesion with irregular borders and spiculae shadows that covers the anterior segment of the left superior lobe and superior lingula, approximately 3,4 cm × 3,2 cm × 2,3 cm in size and bronchiectasis on the supra-hilar area of the right superior and inferior lobe on both of the lungs .
MRI of the right shoulder showed a 5,6 cm × 7,8 cm × 8,8 cm dense, lobulated, and indefinitely demarcated mass with involvement of the supraspinatus, biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, teres major, teres minor, latissimus dorsi, subscapularis, triceps brachii, and deltoid muscle. The soft tissue tumor eroded the scapula, the head and the diaphysis of the humerus. With lymphadenopathy of the left axilla, obliterating the suprascapular artery, vein, and nerve, with involvement of the axillary artery, vein, and nerve around the left humerus where the destruction resembles a malignant tumor. MRI revealed there was no involvement of the bone structure .
A core biopsy was performed on the left arm. The result was a fibrous tissue which infiltrated with a massive tumor mass. Tumor masses form a structure proliferative gland, pleomorphic oval, tightly arranged and form a solid tumor nest. Tumor cell nucleus was large round oval, partially pleomorphic, rough chromatin, partially dense chromatin cells, and mitosis was found. The lumen of the gland is partially filled with necrotic tissue. Histopathological examination leads to metastatic adenosquamous cell carcinoma on the soft tissue of the left arm .