A 46-year-old woman presented with a gastric submucosal uplift by screening endoscopy. She was admitted to our hospital for a further diagnose without any symptoms.
One week ago, the patient presented to the hospital for a screening endoscopy and gastroscopy revealed a submucosal bulge in the upper anterior wall of the gastric body. The possibility of a stromal tumor was considered, and rectal polyps were found by colonoscopy; therefore, the patient was admitted for further endoscopic treatment. The patient was lack of bowel habits change and other alarm symptoms.
The patient had no history of H. pylori infection or chronic infection.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumor.
There were no obvious abnormalities during physical examination.
Carbon-14 breath test results were negative, and antibodies against H. pylori types I and II were negative, indicating that the patient had no history of H. pylori infection. Routine blood examination showed normal white blood cells, lymphocytes, hemoglobin and platelets, normal liver and renal functions and electrolytes, and a negative fecal occult blood test.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed an isolated submucosal protrusion in the upper anterior wall of the gastric body, about 4 mm × 5 mm in size, and the surface was slightly faded. The blood vessels were slightly dilated, elongated, and thickened . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) revealed elongated and dilated marginal crypt epithelium and widened intervening space, similar to the pyloric gland structure, elongated and thickened blood vessels, and slightly thickened radial vessels around the area . The possibility of gastric fundus gland cancer could not be ruled out using endoscopy. To further characterize this suspicious lesion, endoscopic ultrasonography was performed, which showed thickening of the musculature of the mucosa and homogeneous hypoechoic changes in the lesion of the gastric body , and leiomyoma was suspected. At this point, the nature of the lesion examined by endoscopy and endoscopic ultrasonography remained controversial. Therefore, diagnostic endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed after communicating with the patient, but no intact tumor was found during the dissection. Therefore, the lesion was removed via endoscopic mucosal resection and sent for pathological examination. Results of hematoxylin and eosin staining showed massive lymphocytic infiltration . Immunohistochemistry was positive for CD20 and MUM1. CD21 showed expansion and destruction of follicular dendritic cells. Immunohistochemistry was negative for CD3, CD10, Bcl-6, CK, cyclin-D and P53. The Ki-67 proliferation index was < 10%. Gene detection revealed clonal rearrangement of the IgH gene in B cells , and Giemsa staining confirmed the absence of H. pylori infection. Therefore, H. pylori-negative gastric MALT lymphoma was diagnosed. Rectal polypoid lesions were observed by colonoscopy , and electrosurgical treatment was performed. Lymphocyte sheet infiltration was observed on hematoxylin and eosin staining . Immunohistochemistry was positive for CD20 . CD21 showed expansion and destruction of follicular dendritic cells. It was negative for Bcl-2 , Bcl-6 and MUM1. Therefore, rectal MALT lymphoma was considered. Systemic positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed no abnormal uptake in the stomach and other areas of the body.