A 73-year-old man with diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia, and a previous history of coronary artery bypass surgery presented for evaluation of dizziness and episodes of syncope. Bilateral cervical bruits, a difference in blood pressure 45–50 mmHg between both arms, as well as barely discernable radial, ulnar and branchial arterial pulses on the right upper limb prompted color duplex which revealed bilateral internal carotid artery stenosis of 75% at each side, retrograde flow in his right vertebral artery (subclavian-vertebral steal) and retrograde flow in his right carotid artery during the midsystolic phase of the cardiac cycle (subclavian-carotid steal), while an antegrade blood flow was seen during the rest of the cardiac cycle . Further investigation with selective catheterization of the origin of the right subclavian artery and digital subtraction angiography demonstrated occlusion of the innominate artery while catheterization of the left subclavian artery confirmed the subclavian-vertebral steal phenomenon on the right side . Due to bilateral external and common-external (on the left) iliac artery occlusions (the patient was a 200 meters claudicant), we had to perform upper extremity catheterization and full aortic arch aortography. Initially we performed a left brachial catheterization but we did not pass the aortic arch due to a dissecting plaque at the origin of the left subclavian artery (< 50%). We only performed selective catheterization of the left subclavian artery . Catheterization through the impalpable right brachial artery was the option for catheterization of the right subclavian artery, the wire passed the innominate lesion (possibly through) the subendothelial route. Clinical neurologic evaluation and brain computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal focal ischemic brain lesions, while no myocardial ischemic symptoms and an ejection fraction of 40% was seen after regular post-coronary artery bypass grafting (using saphenous veins) (CABG) follow-up. We had to provide the most safe and effective clinical solution to this 73-year-old man with very extensive and severe arterial disease and a previous CABG. Permanent dizziness and many episodes of syncope with acceptable cardiac function was the indication for doing something invasively. The priorities for the patient were: a) reestablishment of antegrade arterial flow through the right carotid and right vertebral arteries; b) treatment of the bilateral internal carotid artery stenosis; c) treatment of the left subclavian dissecting lesion; and d) treatment of bilateral iliac artery occlusions.
The operation was conducted under general anesthesia and included a staged bilateral approach with a left cervical incision along the anterior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle employed to expose the left common carotid artery and to perform the endarterectomy with a Dacron patch angioplasty and the proximal end to side polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) graft-arterial anastomosis with the use of a shunt, while a limited right cervical incision was used to expose the origin of the right common carotid artery and to perform the peripheral end to side graft-arterial anastomosis passing anteriorly to the trachea under the staple muscles. We preferred left carotid to right carotid bypass instead of left subclavian to right carotid bypass, to avoid double length of graft and dysfunction in neck movements, besides in our case left subclavian had an ostial < 50% stenosis. Concerning the internal carotid stenosis, we treated the left one since it was more ulcered and our policy is to treat the left lesion first and later the right one, after close follow-up. When performing treatment of the right internal carotid stenosis we tried an effective solution to its coiling. Endovascular treatment of the innominate occlusion was an option with specific disadvantages: a) the lesion could possibly be passed with a wire but then the angioplasty would be performed rather in a subendothelial route or, in an extremely eccentric way in a vessel which is known to be fragile and the patient having had a previous sternotomy, rendering the emergent operation in case of rupture, a catastrophe; b) the possibility of having an alternative second endovascular approach (second wire) through femoral or left subclavian arteries was deemed neither efficient nor safe; c) the feasibility of innominate endovascular angioplasty is known to have a high risk of distal embolization. In this case the operator had to put one or two filters for protection of embolization (carotid and subclavian); d) the insertion of a filter in the right common carotid, at least, was technically very difficult or unfeasible before innominate angioplasty, as the only route was the right subclavian and the angioplasty had to be done in a retrograde way in the innominate artery; and e) the medium and long term results of subclavian angioplasty are inferior to operative ones, especially for innominate occlusions or sub-occlusions and we are unaware of a series with medium or long term results.
We have an excellent series of 0% death-stroke rate of carotid endarterectomies (70 cases) and we have not yet adopted the questionable carotid angioplasty combined with stenting (CAS). The patient remains symptom free after one year of follow-up, while the right internal carotid artery stenosis remains stable.