A 53-year-old woman was admitted because of shortness of breath and impaired physical capacity (New York Heart Association class II-III). On preoperative echocardiogram, severe congenital bicuspid aortic valve stenosis was confirmed with a peak transvalvular pressure gradient of 103 mmHg and septum thickness of 1.32 cm . Calcified stenotic valve did not work well on echocardiogram. The aortic valve was replaced with a 19-mm St Jude Medical Regent prosthesis (St Jude Medical, Inc, St Paul, MN). The cuff of the valve prosthesis was raised above the tissue annulus, whereas the struts remained intra-annular. One of the pivot guards was placed in contact with interventricular septum. Normal leaflet mobility and pressure gradient without systolic anterior motion (SAM) were confirmed on TOE. Hemodynamics became unstable on the second day and with a large dose of vasoactive drugs the systolic pressure was held just >100 mmHg. No acute hemorrhage was observed according to drainage. A fast transvalvular flow velocity of 2.3 m/s was revealed by the transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE). The situation became worse on the third day as the systolic pressure sometimes jumped to 220 mmHg or dropped to 75 mmHg. The dose of vasoactive drugs was adjusted frequently according to the changeable blood pressure. The continuous cardiac output monitor showed intermittent rises and drops of cardiac output. A faster transvalular velocity of 4.5 m/s and peak pressure gradient of 79 mmHg were revealed on TTE. An emergent surgery was performed. The intraoperative TOE showed that the basal septum bulged into the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT) with a thickness of 1.6 cm increasing by about 20% from baseline and the leaflets of the prosthesis did not work well accompanied with severe aortic regurgitation and a fast outflow tract flow velocity . In surgery, we observed that the basal septum bulged into the LVOT and interfered the mobility of both leaflets. After myectomy and replacement with a new 19-mm St Jude Medical Regent prosthesis, valve worked well on intraoperative TOE . However, the blood pressure was not stable to wean cardiopulmonary bypass. Although the patient was supported with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, the pressure and O2 saturation dropped still. The patient was declared death finally.