A 32-year-old male physician of Indian descent with a history of hypertension, latent tuberculosis treated with 4 months of rifampin completed 1 month prior to presentation, and resolved symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosed 3 months prior and not requiring hospitalization presented to the Emergency Department. His chief complaints at this time were 2 weeks of fever, chills, and neck swelling which began after a haircut. He had completed a course of doxycycline followed by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for presumed folliculitis without improvement. On presentation to the hospital the patient complained of right neck swelling, worsened fatigue, myalgias and fevers. A CT with contrast of the neck was obtained and the patient was discharged with a plan for outpatient biopsy . However, he returned to the Emergency Department 3 days later due to persistent symptoms and ongoing fever. At that time was noted to be febrile to 101.6 degrees Farenheit, tachycardic to 124 bpm, leukopenic with WBC 2.8 K/UL, absolute neutrophil count of 0.8 K/UL, and LDH elevated at 289 unit/L. Rapid SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid amplification test was negative. He was admitted for further workup and treatment.
On admission a core needle biopsy of the right cervical lymphadenopathy was performed which revealed necrotic tissue and was inadequate for diagnosis. He was started on cefepime for febrile neutropenia and cyclic fevers. Extensive workup showed no evidence of HIV, Syphilis, Parvovirus, Mononucleosis, CMV, Adenovirus, Toxoplasmosis, Bartonella, and no growth on bacterial, fungal, or acid-fast bacilli blood cultures. Autoimmune panel including anti-ds-DNA antibody and anti-Smith antibody were negative. Due to inadequate sample on needle biopsy, concern for worsening B symptoms, and need to rule out lymphoma; an excision lymph node biopsy was planned. A SARS-CoV-2 PCR test was repeated at this time per operating room protocol and was found to be positive.
Following SARS-CoV-2 testing an excisional cervical lymph node biopsy was completed using appropriate PPE for a SARS-CoV-2 positive patient. The lymph node was submitted for histologic analysis which showed partially preserved architecture with follicular hyperplasia. The paracortex was expanded with focal, well-circumscribed areas of necrosis . Necrotic foci show abundant karyorrhectic nuclear debris and a large accumulation of histiocytes at the edge of necrosis . Among the histiocytes, there were scattered small lymphocytes, activated T cells, and some plasma cells. Neutrophils and eosinophils were absent. At the edge of necrotic areas, there were clusters of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, as well as immunoblasts. No granulomas were identified.
The histiocytes were positive for myeloperoxidase, CD68 , and CD4. The lymphocytes were mostly CD3-positive T cells demonstrating a predominance of CD8 compared with CD4, with very few CD20-positive B cells. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells were highlighted with CD123 . CMV and SARS-CoV-2 stains for the lymph node were negative and further microbiologic assessment of the lymph node including culture of the tissue for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, acid fast bacilli, and fungus was negative.
This result was deemed to be consistent with Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease. The antibiotics were discontinued, and given the persistent fever and hospitalization the patient was discharged on oral prednisone (0.5 mg/kg) with plan for inflammation control. The patient had a favorable response to steroid treatment and since discontinuation has remained asymptomatic with resolution of all symptoms.