A case of cervical adenocarcinoma with an abnormal increase of CA199 in a 50-year-old Chinese woman is reported. There is no family history of the disease. The clinical features of the patient at baseline are summarized in . The follow-up time is 20 months.
Our patient presented with abnormal vaginal discharge. Gynecological examination showed no obvious abnormal lesion in the cervix. Cervical cytology revealed atypical adenosine cells and the HPV test was negative. Laboratory examination found an abnormal elevation of Ca199 at a high value of 2,729 IU/ mL. Ultrasonography showed an echogenicity of thickened myometrium, suggesting adenomyosis (see ). Imaging examinations including MRI and abdominal CT showed no obvious cervical lesions. Considering that CA199 was unusually high, PET-CT was done before surgery, which could rule out distant metastasis or other diseases. However, the results only suggested adenomyosis. Lastly, cervical biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma in situ.
Considering the unsatisfactory visualization at the time of colposcopy, the patient underwent a diagnostic conical resection, which was also suggestive of cervical adenocarcinoma in situ. In addition, gastroenterostomy indicated normal results. Hysterectomy was not the only treatment option because local resection also offered a possible option. We talked to the patient about the pathologic findings and an unexplained high elevated ca199 value, and the patient chose hysterectomy. Intra-operative rapid freezing suggested uterine adenocarcinoma and cervical focal adenocarcinoma. An extensive hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node resection were eventually performed. Post-operative pathology confirmed mucinous cervical adenocarcinoma (considering gastric type, , ), infiltrating cervical interstitial >2/3, involving the deep myometrium and accompanied by vascular carcinoma infiltration and lymph node metastasis. Ascites cytology was negative. The patient’s final stage was stage IIIC1. In addition, patients received post-operative adjuvant chemoradiotherapy. The chemotherapy regimen was paclitaxel, combined with platinum. Immunohistochemical results showed positive protein molecules such as Ki-67, CK7, CEA, and CA199, suggesting the diagnosis of GAS. The Ca199 value showed that it gradually decreased to normal after operation, suggesting a correlation between elevated CA199 and cervical adenocarcinoma .