An 80-year-old male patient was referred to the abdominal surgery department due to incarcerated ventral hernia and ileus. In the past he was operated due to perforated gastric ulcer. He also had arterial hypertension, chronic pulmonary obstructive disease and pulmonary hypertension, a history of smoking, he suffered an ishemic stroke in the past. He was urgently operated on the same day. Segmental resection of small bowel with end-to-end anastomosis was performed and the hernia defect was closed with direct sutures, without prosthetic mesh because the bowel was resected. There were no surgical or other complications after surgery and he was discharged from hospital after 8 days. 5 days later he was admitted to the hospital again due to early recurrence of ventral hernia. The content in hernia sac could however be reduced back to his abdomen. Laboratory findings showed leucocytosis and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP - 148 mg/l). Intestinal winding with a thickened wall up to 5 mm was found at the location of the ventral hernia by ultrasound examination. The patient underwent a second surgery 22 days after the first surgery due to obstructive ileus, which was seen on the abdominal computed tomography (CT) a day earlier. Due to additional diseases and disorders (ischemic stroke and insertion of stent in his left internal carotid artery in 2011, arterial hypertension, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis and hypertension, which were not properly treated, because the patient did not follow the prescribed treatment) the anaesthesiologist decided for the spinal anaesthesia, because the general anaesthesia would be to risky. The surgery was performed by an abdominal surgeon with 5 years experiences as a specialist and he performed more than 30 Rives-Stoppa ventral hernia repairs. The skin incision was made along the previous skin incision. In the subcutaneous tissue the small intestine was tightly adhered on to the skin. We managed to release it but unfortunately, a segment of the small intestine was damaged during adhesyolisis. Segmental resection of the damaged small bowel with end-to-end anastomosis was performed . The small intestine was reduced back in to the abdominal cavity. Ventral hernia was repaired according to Rives-Stoppa technique with prosthetic mesh . Other than postoperative tachycardia there were no reported issues. A couple of hours after the procedure apnoeic episodes appeared followed by unconsciousness. A computed tomographic angiography (CTA) of the brain vascular system was made and it showed a stenotic left vertebral artery (90% stenosis). Because of respiratory insufficiency and haemodynamic instability, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Due to a worsening clinical condition, a CTA of the abdomen was preformed and an occlusion of superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was discovered. Interventional radiologist preformed an embolectomy and thrombus aspiration from the SMA with an insertion of a stent. The patient's condition continued to worsen so the abdominal surgeon decided for a “second look” abdominal exploration. At surgical revision we found a small intestinal and sigmoid colon gangrene. Because of the patients age, several other comorbidities and gangrene of the entire small bowel, the multidisciplinary team (abdominal surgeon, anaesthesiologist, intensivist) decided for conservative treatment. The patient died the day after surgery.