A 32-year-old female patient had experienced abnormal serum liver enzyme levels for 15 years.
Fifteen years previously, the patient was diagnosed with abnormal serum liver enzyme levels during the course of a high school physical examination. As she did not exhibit any symptoms of overall liver dysfunction, no action was taken at that time. Four years later, liver function index abnormalities were observed during an occupational health examination. The patient was admitted to a local hospital with no apparent cause of her abnormal serum enzyme levels. The patient was treated with some liver-protective drugs, but her liver function indices did not improve. The patient was not experiencing any adverse effects at that time and did not actively have her liver function indices monitored in subsequent years. One month prior to her admission to our hospital, the patient visited a maternal and child health hospital due to infertility, but routine examination on admission revealed significantly abnormal liver function indices. For further diagnosis and treatment, she was admitted to the Department of Hepatology at our hospital.
Thirteen years previously, the patient had undergone splenectomy due to a ruptured spleen caused by a car accident and recovered well.
During her ten years of marriage, the patient experienced continued infertility and did not take any infertility medications or oral contraceptives. One year previously, salpingography at a maternal and child health hospital showed partial obstruction of the fallopian tube, and the natural conception rate was low. The fertility tests of the patient’s spouse were normal. Therefore, in vitro fertilization (IVF)-assisted reproduction was recommended. However, due to financial reasons, the patient did not receive IVF.
The patient indicated that she did not have a history of alcohol intake or the use of any hepatotoxic drugs. Her father had undergone surgery years previously to treat intrahepatic bile duct stones and recovered well from the surgery. Her mother, who died from a brain hemorrhage three years earlier, did not have liver disease in her medical history. Her brother’s liver function was normal.
The patient’s vital signs were all stable, and physical examination revealed no noteworthy positive signs.
Analysis of her laboratory data (November 3, 2020) revealed the following results: total bilirubin, 28.1 μmol/L; direct bilirubin, 16.1 μmol/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 151 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 119 U/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 226 U/L; GGT, 1025 U/L; total bile acid (TBA), 17.2 μmol/L; and albumin, 41.8 g/L . Several markers for hepatitis viruses (hepatitis A, B, C, and E) were determined to be negative. The analyses for antibodies to cytomegalovirus antibodies and Epstein-Barr virus DNA were also negative. All autoimmune antibodies, including antimitochondrial and antinuclear lupus-related antibodies and Sjogren's syndrome-related antibodies were negative. We also assessed serum copper levels as well as ferritin and ceruloplasmin, and the levels were within normal ranges. Routine blood analysis, coagulation function, thyroid function, and several additional laboratory test results were found to be unremarkable.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an increased hepatic interstitium and multiple patchy abnormal signal shadows in hepatic segments VII and VIII. The presence of nodule regeneration was considered after enhanced examination using gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid, which is a hepatocellular-specific contrast agent. No obstructions associated with the extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts were observed following detailed examination using magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography . Cardiac ultrasound and chest radiography showed no abnormalities.
We examined the sclera of the patient’s eyes for Kayser-Fleischer rings, but no rings were present. The transient elastography assessment for liver fibrosis was 14.6 kPa.
With the consent of the patient, we performed an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy. Pathological examination revealed cholestatic liver fibrosis (modified Scheuer score S2). An analysis of histological samples revealed a significant decrease in multidrug-resistant protein 3 (MDR3) protein staining compared to the levels of staining observed in samples from healthy subjects .
Genomic DNA was purified from peripheral blood samples. Based on Illumina NovaSeq® 6000 instruments and the xGen® sequencing Exome Research Panel, high-throughput sequencing was used to detect genomic mutations. The genetic testing results revealed two novel heterozygous mutations in the ABCB4 gene: a 2950C>T; p.A984V mutation (exon 24) and a 667A>G; p.I223V mutation (exon 7) .