A 30-year-old lady, G4P3A0, previously healthy, non-smoker, and non-alcohol user, presented at 29+3 weeks to the hospital for preterm premature rupture of membrane. The patient had early and regular prenatal care; she used to see her health care provider every 4 weeks and denied any history of complicated pregnancy or delivery. Her outpatient medications included prenatal vitamins and iron supplements. Upon presentation, the patient’s temperature was 37°C, heart rate was 89 beats per minute, blood pressure was 105/60 mmHg, respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air oxygen. She was clinically and hemodynamically stable with regular heart sounds, clear lungs, soft abdomen, and no lower limb edema. Laboratory tests showed hemoglobin 9.7, hematocrit 30, and a white blood cell count of 10 000 with 90% neutrophils.
The patient was started on dexamethasone 6 mg intramuscular injection every 12 h in order to accelerate the maturation of the fetal lungs and rocephine 2 g intravenously once daily. On day 3, the patient had a C-section, which was complicated with uterine atony and massive bleeding; she thus received 4 l of lactate ringer solution, 4 units of packed red blood cells, 2 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 1 pool of platelets with tranexamic acid and calcium gluconate.
Hemostasis could not be achieved except after emergent intrauterine balloon tamponade and uterine artery embolization.
The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for observation. Upon arrival in the ICU, the patient’s vitals were stable, with a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, pulse of 98, and SpO2 of 97% on room oxygen. The patient was somnolent but conscious and cooperative, oriented to time, place, and persons; pallor was noted with slight jugular venous distension, but otherwise clear lungs on auscultation. The uterine drain showed a small amount (50 cc) of serosanguinous fluid. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin 10, hematocrit 31, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.66, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 39, D-dimer 185 052, and creatinine and electrolytes within the normal range.
On the next day of ICU stay, the patient complained of new-onset right lower quadrant abdominal pain for which she had an abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan. The CT scan showed an enlarged uterus without hematoma, pelvic intraperitoneal drainage, and dilated and tortuous right ovarian vein with surrounding amount of fluid suggestive of OVT . A complementary CT angiography with venous time was then performed and the diagnosis was confirmed . The patient was started on heparin 5000 units intravenous bolus followed by 20 000 units of continuous heparin intravenous drip with PTT monitoring every 6 h and complete blood count monitoring every 12 h to check hemoglobin and to avoid the risk of rebleeding. Two days later, acenocoumarol was initiated, and bridging with heparin for three more days with therapeutic INR was achieved. The patient was discharged on acenocoumarol and advised for follow-up in 2 weeks.