A 23-year-old female presented to the spine clinic of a tertiary teaching hospital with complaints of low back pain (VAS -– 8/10) for 3 years. The patient had a Deformity in the lower back and difficulty in walking for 3 months duration. Low back pain was insidious in onset, progressive in intensity, more during night time and relieved on taking medication. Deformity in low back was noticed by parents which gradually progressed to the presenting state. There was weakness in bilateral lower limbs with difficulty in walking and sensory disturbances in the form of tingling and numbness over the areas of both lower limbs for three 3 months as described in the clinical examination below. There were no complaints suggestive of of bowel and bladder involvement. On examination, there was visible knuckle deformity in the mid lumbar region which was tender on direct palpation . The neurological evaluation of the patient is as shown in the below.
Knee, ankle, and plantar reflexes were absent bilaterally and graded sensory loss was seen over L3, L4, L5, and S1 dermatomes bilaterally. The patient had had X-rays taken at the interval of three 3 months, before presentation to our OPD which showed the evolution of the involvement of vertebra from a lytic lesion to complete collapse and dislocation . NCCT scan showed destruction of L3 body with only remnants of endplates seen with a point contact between L2-L4 and dislocation of L3-L4 facet joint . MRI revealed that a homogeneous mass was at the level of L3L4 L3L4 and on either side of the pedicles of L4 with obliteration of bilateral neural foramina. The lesion and mass were hypointense on T1- weighted images and iso to hyperintense on T2 weighted and in contrast images. There was also considerable compression on the thecal sac at the level of L3 . USG- guided biopsy was done from the lesion and was suggestive of plasma cell dyscrasia. Routine blood investigations showed no abnormality. Complete multiple myeloma workup was done in the form of serum myeloma profile, urine for Bence Jones proteins, and serum immunoelectrophoresis. The workup was normal and did n’t not suggest multiple myeloma. Owing Due to the profound neurological deficit and existing instability, the patient was offered decompression, correction of deformity, and instrumented spinal stabilization followed by radiotherapy. The patient underwent decompression, resection of tumour, anterior column reconstruction with cage, and instrumented posterior and posterolateral fusion (360° fusion) from L1- L5 (, ). Extensive physiotherapy and passive range of movements of lower limbs were started immediately in the post-operative period. An ankle-foot orthosis was given to prevent equinus deformity at the ankle. The patient was subjected to 23 cycles of intensity-modulated radiotherapy and is symptom- free with good fusion at the latest follow- up (14 months) (, ). Sensory disturbances recovered completely. shows neurological examination finding at latest follow-up.