A 45-year-old man with type 2 diabetes was hospitalized with complaints of mild pain in the left lumbar region, irregular low-grade fever and occasional dysuria for 3 months. He occasionally passed whitish soft masses along with urine for last two months and his loin pain aggravated prior to passage of such soft masses per urethra. Three months prior to hospitalization, he underwent ureteroscopy and ICPL for removal of stone in left kidney. A stent was then placed in left ureter following ICPL. However, the stent was removed after 2 weeks as he developed fever and lower abdominal pain, which did not respond to antibiotic treatment. On physical examination, his vital signs were normal. There was no lymphadenopathy, organomegaly or renal angle tenderness. Repeated routine urine analysis revealed persistent pus cells (40–50 cells/hpf) and occasional erythrocytes. Urine cultures were negative for bacteria and fungi on three consecutive samples. No acid-fast bacilli were detected by Z-N stain in three consecutive morning urine samples. Ultrasound scan and intravenous urogram (IVU) revealed a cystic lesion (4 × 3.9 cm) at lower pole cortical region of the left kidney. Chest X-ray and tuberculin test were negative. Blood culture was negative and count was within normal limits (Hb14.6 g/dl, total leukocyte count 10.8 × 109/L, neutrophils 57%, lymphocytes 33%, monocytes 04% and eosinophils 10%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 25 mm 1st hour, total platelet count 288 × 109/L). His serum creatinine, urea, electrolytes and liver function tests were all within normal range. Initially, his fasting blood glucose level was 10 mmol/L and he was on oral hypoglycaemic agent. His diabetes was controlled with insulin and fasting blood sugar was maintained between 5.5–6.5 mmol/L throughout the treatment period. A course of antibiotic (ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily for 7 days) was given without resolution of the symptoms.
Subsequently, microscopic examination of the soft whitish masses , which was expelled along with urine revealed a mesh of fungal hyphae and upon culture yielded growth of Aspergillus fumigatus. The case was diagnosed as a localized aspergillosis of the urinary tract.
Monotherapy with amphotericin B was planned and accordingly the treatment was initiated with intravenous amphotericin B 1.25 mg/kg/day. However, amphotericin B had to be stopped after 2 weeks of treatment due to rise in creatinine level, vomiting and weakness. Oral itraconazole (200 mg twice daily) was started. After one month, he became symptom free and he ceased to pass whitish soft masses (fungal ball) per urethra.
Itraconazole 200 mg twice daily was continued for a total of two months and thereafter, the dose was reduced to 100 mg twice daily and continued for another four months. He was followed regularly for 18 months. Repeat IVU and ultrasound scan revealed resolution of cystic lesion. He was symptom free 17 months after initiation of itraconazole, and 12 months after stoppage of itraconazole. His renal function, liver function, routine urine analysis and culture were all normal. No surgical intervention was required.