A 24-year-old young man was admitted to our hospital with chief complaints of high-grade fever more than 1 week. Antibiotic treatment in local hospital was ineffective. He denied a history of hypertension or a family history of cardiac disease. Six months prior to admission, the patient developed acute aortic dissection DeBakey type-1 for which he underwent complex surgery including removing autologous aortic walls of the ascending aorta and arch, David procedure, elephant trunk stenting and dacron graft repair of the total arch.
On admission, his blood pressure was 104/84 mmHg, pulse rate 96 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 19 per minute. He was febrile with temperature of 37.8 °C. There was a swelling in the superior sternum fossa, the skin temperature was higher than that of the surrounding normal skin, and the yellow turbid pus flowed out from the surface breach. Hematological findings included C-reactive protein of 59.8 mg/L (reference range<7 mg/L), hemoglobin of 102 g/L (reference range from 120 to160g/L), white blood cell count of 23.35 G/L (reference range from 4 to 10 G/L). Blood bacterial culture was negative. Transthoracic echocardiography showed an echolucent area consistent with fluid or blood around the ascending aorta conduit graft concerning for perigraft leak or abscess, but the valves were not involved. Liquid dark area was found in the subcutaneous tissue above the sternum with a few flocculent echo . Due to the concerning findings, a total aortic arch CTA scan with contrast was ordered and showed that the lesion surrounded the ascending aortic artery, aortic arch and its branches, extending into the level of the C7 vertebral body and going down to the origin of the aortic body .
This case was diagnosed with perigraft abscess and treated surgically. We chose a median sternotomy and saw the abscess cavity when opening the skin of the suprasternal . After thoracotomy, the old thrombus was cleared, and then washed repeatedly with active iodine and warm saline. No obvious bleeding was found. On surgical exploration, purulent material was drained from the wall of the aorta around the graft and microbiological cultures were obtained. The graft were normal in shape with a little old thrombus tissue . Intraoperatively, it was found that there was a clear demarcation between the graft and the abscess collection, and therefore, a decision was made not to explant the graft. After thoracotomy, the thrombus was cleared, then washed repeatedly with active iodine. Bacterial culture of pus and tissues collected during the surgery was negative. All surveillance culture samples collected perioperatively were also negative. Patient was still continued on intravenous antibiotics (Vancomycin mainly) for 2 weeks from the day after surgery. It based on the empirical use of antimicrobial agents in the treatment of infections. He started to defervesce postoperatively and remained afebrile upon discharge. As of 3 months postoperatively, there has been no recurrence of the infection.