A male child, 3 years and 6 months old, was admitted to our hospital for fever and multiple skin rashes throughout the body. The child presented with toothache and fever of 38°C 10 days ago. The fever persisted even after the toothache improved. The patient was treated with antibiotics for 3 days at the outpatient department, but the fever did not improve, and the fever peaks at 40.3°C with 4–5 h intervals between fever peaks. The child was found to be hyperopic at about 6 months of age and is currently farsighted with 6.75 diopters. The father had a previous “transsphenoidal pituitary adenomectomy” for “non-functional pituitary macroadenoma, hypopituitarism.” The mother has “Mediterranean anemia.”
Physical examination at admission: lymphadenopathy was medium hard and movable in the neck, submandibular, and subchin bilaterally. Oral mucosa was smooth, pharynx was congested, tonsils were swollen (III°), and dental cavities were present. The spleen was palpable 1 cm below the ribs, medium in quality, and without percussion pain. The rest of the cardiopulmonary, abdominal, joint, and neurological examination showed no significant abnormality. The initial findings of the tests carried out after the child's admission to hospital are shown in and .
The child was admitted to the hospital and given piperacillin sodium and tazobactam sodium for anti-infection due to the patient's infection indicators were well above normal. Seven days after the fever subsided, recurrent high fever with lethargy, oral and pendulous ulcers, generalized red maculopapular rash, and generalized superficial lymph node enlargement, liver, and spleen enlargement were seen again. The repeated blood test showed that C-reactive protein (CRP) was 108.66 mg/L, white blood cell count (WBC) was 9.56 × 109/L, neutrophil numerals (NEUT#) was 8.54 × 109/L, procalcitonin (PCT) was 127.00 ng/ml, lumbar puncture intracranial pressure was 155 mmH2O, and cerebrospinal fluid tests were negative. The fever subsided after treatment with acyclovir, meropenem, fluconazole, and gamma globulin 2 g/kg, but later there was still recurrent low-grade fever and peeling of skin at the junction of perianal, finger and toe nails, recurrent oral ulcers, and repeatedly increased CRP. The child's symptoms and medical history suggested that there might be an acute immune response to connective tissue disease or viral infection; then, we perfected whole exome sequencing. In the meantime, due to the high likelihood of connective tissue disease, he was given prednisone treatment (1 mg/kg qd) and his recurrent fever improved, but he still had recurrent oral ulcers. Then, the prednisone dose was gradually reduced. Based on the results for the full exome, methotrexate (5 mg qw) and thalidomide (12.5 mg qd) were added, after which the child did not have any more oral ulcers. Then, the child is discharged from the hospital. After 1 month of treatment at home, he returned to the hospital for follow-up: CRP was 0.94 mg/L, WBC was 6.14 × 109/L, NEUT# was 3.85 × 109/L, hemoglobin was 102 g/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 40 mm/h; abdominal ultrasound showed multiple lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity and mesentery, smaller than before. Ten months later, we saw this child in our clinic and found that the patient did not develop recurrent fever and oral ulcers, and the blood test showed that CRP and PCT were reduced to normal, ESR fluctuated between 20 and 60 mm/h, and P-ANCA was still weakly positive.
Whole exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous mutation in the affected TNFAIP3 gene, chr6: 138197151, NM_006290.3 c.653del p.Leu218TrpfsTer10, derived from the father, consistent with HA20. This child's grandparents tested negative for the gene, suggesting that the mutation came from the father. The shift variant is a 1-base pair deletion, resulting in an out-of-frame transcription product and an early termination codon that may cause protein truncation or activation of nonsense-mediated mRNA degradation, resulting in loss of function of the protein product of the TNFAIP3 gene. The downstream truncation variant of this variant is known to be pathogenic. The results are shown in the .