A 75-year-old Caucasian female patient was admitted to her local hospital with a short history of nausea, vomiting, confusion, drowsiness, and loss of consciousness resulting in a fall. Her past medical history included hypothyroidism and frequent palpitations. Two years previously she had a transient ischaemic attack of unknown aetiology.
On examination, she was drowsy and disorientated. Her serum sodium level was 103 mmol/L (normal 135–145 mmol/L). Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm. Further investigations for hyponatraemia revealed urine sodium of 92.5 mEq/L (normal <20 mEq/L), urine osmolality of 295 mOsm/kg (normal 50–1200 mOsm/kg), serum cortisol of 1390 nmol/L (normal <620 nmol/L), serum osmolality of 221 mOsm/kg (normal 280–290 mOsm/kg), suggesting Syndrome of Inappropriate Anti-Diuretic Hormone (SIADH) secretion. A computer tomography (CT) of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed to exclude any malignancy causing the SIADH syndrome. The CT showed a large LA mass (5.7 × 3.0 × 4.0 cm) likely myxoma and a benign ovarian cyst. An echocardiography confirmed the LA mass measuring 5.9 × 4.2 cm (area 28.8 cm2), a severely dilated LA (volume: 111.5 mL/m2; normal <34 mL/m2) and moderately dilated right atrium with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction . The presumed myxoma was found attached to the left inter-atrial septum (IAS) and not interfering with the mitral valve but almost filling the entire volume of the LA. Carotid ultrasound was unremarkable. Computed tomography angiogram showed unobstructed coronary arteries. She was referred for urgent excision of the AM. Due to the associated poor outcomes in hyponatraemic patients having general anaesthesia, she was initially optimized with medical management by fluid restriction and sodium supplementation. Her sodium levels gradually improved to 132 mmol/L a week later to allow surgery.
The myxoma was approached via a right atriotomy and incision of left IAS after establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass. It was found to be attached to the lower IAS and was excised with its inter-atrial attachment. The IAS defect was repaired using a bovine pericardial patch. The procedure and intensive therapy unit stay were uncomplicated. Postoperatively, she remained hyponatraemic with a serum sodium of 126 normalizing to 132 on Day 10. When she was discharged on Day 11, the echocardiography revealed mildly dilated LA size (volume: 50 mL/m2; ), normal-sized right atrium (area: 17.9 cm2) with a preserved ejection fraction. There was no atrial septal defect noted.
Histopathology confirmed a completely excised benign cardiac myxoma measuring a maximum diameter of 70 mm. The patient remains well and symptom-free 6-week post-discharge.