A 42-year-old male presented with slight right neck pain, slurred speech and slight difficulty in chewing. He was previously healthy. The patient noted right side neck pain and a slight headache upon waking one morning, and 2 days later, after a nap at his desk, he experienced slurred speech and slight difficulty in chewing. The patient then visited the clinic, but head CT and MRI indicated no obvious abnormalities. He was then referred to our department.
On admission, a physical examination showed that the patient weighed 85-kg, exhibiting mild obesity and had a slight speech disturbance. His cardiopulmonary and otorhinolaryngologic systems were normal. Neurological examination only revealed a right deviation of a protruded tongue with local palsy .
Routine blood test results were normal. However, a suspected diagnosis of right ICA dissection was suggested based on the clinical history and demonstration of obvious segmental narrowing with CTA and DSA . The diagnosis was finally confirmed by a high-resolution MRI (HRMRI) scan of the responsible segment of the ICA, which showed considerable segmental narrowing with an enlarged artery lumen, combined with a “double cavity”, intima tear, and haematoma within the vascular wall . We also found a tortuous right basilar artery cross the midline to the left. T1-fat-suppression scan showed that the hypoglossal nerve was closely adjacent to the dilated internal carotid artery . Interestingly, the perineural structure within the right hypoglossal canal seemed larger than that on the left side , and a compressed, deformed internal jugular vein was observed .
Target-genes-capture and high-throughput-sequencing showed that the patient had a heterozygous mutation of the polycystic kidney disease type 1 (PKD-1) gene, which was located in the exon region of this gene: c.782G > T (guanine > thymidine), resulting in an amino acid change p.G261 V (glycine > valine) . The sample indicated two other heterozygous mutations in von Willebrand disease (VWF) related genes. Multiple small liver cysts were found on an abdominal CT scan, however, the patient did not present polycystic kidney disease (Additional file : Figure S1).
The patient received antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel, and his clinical condition gradually improve. After 3 months of follow-up, the tongue paresis had fully recovered . A CTA examination was performed 6 months later which showed significant recovery of the internal carotid lumen, with only mild residual stenosis (Additional file : Figure S2).