A 56-year-old gentleman presented with severe back pain throughout day and night and was unable to walk. He sustained burst fracture at L3 vertebra following a trivial fall in a road traffic accident. He was operated for the same elsewhere with pedicle screw fixation one level above and below the fracture. The posterior elements of L3 were also found to be removed during the primary operation 70 days back. On examination, the patient had severe local tenderness at the operated site. X-ray showed fracture fixation. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 70 mm/1st h. C-reactive protein was 100. Due to his rest pain and night pain, a pathological fracture was suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine (,) and X-ray of the skull showed punched out lesions. MRI showed the collection in the paraspinal area, prevertebral area, and adjacent disc spaces of L3 vertebra. Serum electrophoresis did not show M band. A surgical drainage of the abscess and implant removal was planned . At incision itself, a lot of thick pus was drained. The area was debrided and entire puswas removed, implants removed, and the wound was closed over a drain. Intraoperatively, the posterior elements of L3 were found to be removed at the primary surgery when there was a burst fracture of L3 making it further unstable the culture grew MRSA. IV antibiotics were given according to sensitivity. 6 weeks later, the patient was taken back to theater and instrumented two level above and below L3 vertebra(, , ). Bone marrow biopsy was also taken simultaneously. Clinical parameters and bone marrow study were correlated for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Biopsy from L3 showed plasmacytosis. Once the wound was healed, the patient was sent to the medical oncology department for further management. The patient was continued on IV antibiotics for 6 weeks. The patient was walking without pain following the surgery . Thereafter, the patient was given chemotherapy from the oncology department. The patient was followed up further. By the end of 8 months, he had back pain again. On evaluation, the patient has had infection again at the operated site with implant loosening[, , , , ]. The patient under went surgery again for removal of the implant and debridement . There was difficulty in wound healing following the surgery[, , , , ]. However, in 3 weeks’ time, the wound healed, but the pain persisted. He developed electrolyte imbalance (hyponatremia) and diabetes. He was not responding to the medication and chemotherapy was not possible because of the infection. The patient became unhappy and went to another hospital and expired 5 days later.