A 74-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for examination and surgical treatment of a liver tumor. His medical history revealed that he had undergone a sacroabdominal rectal amputation for malignant GIST of the rectum at age 65 years. The resected specimen showed a tumor with intraluminal growth measuring 2 cm × 2.5 cm, with a center spot ulcer. The UICC TMN classification of GIST was T2N0M0. Upon histological examination, morphologic analysis suggested a spindle-cell GIST, and the diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemical (IHC) investigation. MIB-1 was strongly positive, but the surgical margin was negative. The final diagnosis was high-grade rectal GIST (mitotic index > 5/50 high power field). After surgery, the patient did not want to receive adjuvant chemotherapy and he underwent regular follow-up in our hospital according to National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. The patient did not receive any other adjuvant therapy. The patient had never been outside of Japan.
Nine years after surgery, follow-up CT revealed a 14-mm low-density area in segment 8 of the liver. The periphery of this area was nonhomogeneously enhanced by contrast medium and appeared isodense in the late phase compared to surrounding normal liver tissue (Figure ). Retrospectively, the tumor was just about identifiable on a CT scan acquired six months previously, and had grown bigger in the interim. Laboratory data were all within normal ranges, except for a slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 0.6 mg/dL. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e-antigen, and hepatitis C virus antibody were negative. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9), and α-fetoprotein (AFP) were all within normal ranges. On dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (EOB-MRI), the tumor appeared to be isointense in the arterial phase and was completely washed out in the delayed and hepatocyte phases (Figure ). There was no finding on both gastroscopy and colonoscopy. Based on these results, the tumor was suspected to be a metastatic tumor of the rectal GIST. FDG-PET was performed to confirm that the tumor was malignant, and showed strong uptake in the liver (Figure ). No other abnormal uptake was observed. Surgical oncologists, medical oncologists, and radiologists discussed this case for multidisciplinary management. Considering the patient’s history combined with the radiological findings, a diagnosis of metastatic malignant GIST from the previous rectal lesion was made, and partial hepatectomy was performed. The tumor was well-circumscribed, solid, and yellowish-white in color (Figure ). No evidence of necrosis or hemorrhage was present. Microscopic examination of the paraffin section of the liver ‘tumor’ showed that it was composed of fascicles of spindle cells, such as fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, accompanied by many lymphocytes, plasma cell, neutrophils, and macrophages (Figure ). No mitotic cells were observed in these spindle cells. IHC studies of the spindle cells showed positive staining for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and vimentin, and negative staining for desmin, CD34, and cytokeratin AE1/3. Thus, the spindle cells were diagnosed as myofibroblasts. IHC studies of white blood cells revealed that the majority of lymphocytes expressed CD3 and some cells expressed CD20. Moreover, IHC revealed some IgG4-positive plasma cells. Since no evidence of malignancy was apparent, this case was diagnosed as IPT of the liver. The patient recovered well after surgery and was discharged without complications. He was followed-up regularly in our outpatient clinic, with half-yearly CT scans and blood tests. The patient remains asymptomatic and free of disease four years after his last surgery.