A man in his 40s visited his local physician (A) with a chief complaint of pain during urination and cloudy urine in December. Figure shows a summary of the course of treatment. The local doctor (A) suspected urethritis due to a sexually transmitted infection and prescribed a single dose of AZM and 5 days of LVFX. The PCR test results were positive for chlamydia and negative for gonorrhea. Antibiotic treatments improved the pain during urination, but the cloudy urine persisted.
In January, the patient visited a hospital (B) in Hawaii due to persistent cloudy urine. The details of the tests and treatment are unknown. It seems he was treated with several oral and intravenous antibiotics such as MOFX and STFX. In February, the test was negative for causative bacteria. However, he felt distrustful and dissatisfied because he continued to feel discomfort during urination similar to prostatitis and test results showed he had ESBL-producing E. coli. He stopped visiting the hospital (B) at his own discretion.
The patient came back to Japan and went to see another local doctor (C) in March. Once again, various culture and bacteriological tests were submitted, and Mycoplasma genitalium was positive. Based on the susceptibility results, oral treatment with DOXY for 10 days was administered. However, the pain during urination and cloudy urine flared up even with the treatment, so he stopped seeing his local doctor (C) on his own judgment and went to see another hospital (D) in March. The test results were positive for chlamydia and negative for mycoplasma, but he had been taking STFX internally at his own discretion even before the test results came back.
In addition, he visited our university hospital (E) at the end of March for a flare-up of symptoms. The PCR test for gonorrhea and chlamydia was negative, and urine culture was also negative. This test was done with the patient taking antibiotics internally at his own discretion. Then, without any further contact, his visits to our hospital ceased.