A 25-year-old woman presented with persistent abdominal pain and bloody stools. The patient had experienced recurrent periumbilical pain for 20 d, accompanied by bloody stools, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. During colonoscopy at another hospital, lesions were found in the ileocecal area, suggesting cecal cancer.
The patient had no pertinent current medical history.
The patient had no family history of intestinal disease.
The patient had no pertinent personal or family history.
On examination, the patient was visibly distressed by abdominal pain. The most striking finding on physical examination was marked tenderness of the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. No visible or palpable mass was noted, and there were no signs of peritoneal irritation such as rebound tenderness or guarding.
Laboratory tests showed a red blood cell concentration of 2.72 × 1012/L and a hemoglobin concentration of 78 g/L; there were no other significant abnormalities.
A colonoscopy was performed at the referral hospital ten days prior to admission at our institution; that colonoscopy revealed a lesion in the ileocecal region. A biopsy was performed which revealed high-grade adenomatous dysplasia with focal malignant transformation, and the initial diagnosis was cecal cancer. After the patient was admitted to our institution, we performed an abdominal computed tomography (CT) with contrast, which showed significant thickening of the ileocecal wall. However, the appendix was not clearly visible, and the diagnosis of intussusception was ultimately missed. Retrospective analysis of the CT images revealed target signs, suggesting intussusception . A subsequent colonoscopy performed at our institution revealed a "finger-shaped" tumor in the cecal lumen . The patient underwent a biopsy of the tumor and the adjacent mucosa of the cecal wall. The pathology report of the tumor was initially misinterpreted as a hyperplastic polyp. Postoperatively, an examination led to the identification of an intussusception ischemic appendix . Simultaneously, a biopsy of the mucosa adjacent to the cecum wall confirmed the presence of a mucinous adenocarcinoma.