A 47-year-old male patient experiencing homelessness was admitted to our hospital with respiratory distress and septic shock. The patient was an intravenous drug user and a heavy smoker (30 pack-years). Except for chronic hepatitis C, there was no history of liver or gastrointestinal disease. No relevant alcohol consumption was noted. Vital signs on admission showed hypotension (mean arterial pressure <65 mm Hg), tachycardia (heart rate = 130/m), and oxygen saturation of 80%. Laboratory tests on admission revealed leukocytosis (18,000/µL), elevated CRP (250 mg/dL; reference <5) and procalcitonin (2.2 ng/mL; reference <0.5), and very high liver enzymes (ALT 50 times the normal value, AST 100 times the normal value). The bilirubin, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and albumin levels were normal. The HCV-antibody test was positive, with a viral load of over 7 million IE/mL. The HIV test was negative. Computed tomography revealed bilateral pneumonia and abdominal ultrasonography revealed normal findings. Mechanical ventilation was initiated to treat the respiratory failure, and high-dose catecholamine was necessary for hemodynamic instability. The disease course was complicated by kidney infarction and paralytic ileus of the colon, which resolved after endoscopic decompression. After 1 week, the liver enzymes returned to normal range. After 10 days in the ICU, the patient was transferred to a tertiary hospital for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy due to further respiratory deterioration. After 30 days of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy, the patient was transferred back to our hospital. On the second admission, the liver tests were normal, except for slightly increased GGT. During the stay in the normal ward, we noted a gradual progression of the cholestatic parameters (GGT increased 30 times, ALP increased 10 times, and bilirubin was normal). Abdominal ultrasonography showed extrahepatic cholestasis with a common bile duct diameter of 12 mm and hyperechoic longitudinal material within the bile duct . We removed multiple biliary casts from the bile ducts via ERCP . The cholangiography showed rarefication with multiple segmental stenoses of the intrahepatic bile ducts (, ). Therefore, the diagnosis of SSC-CIP was made. After the ERCP, the cholestasis parameters improved but did not return to normal ranges (GGT increased 10 times and ALP increased 5 times). During the second ERCP, no biliary casts were observed. To date, no signs of liver cirrhosis and no signs of recurrent cholangitis have been detected in our patient. We plan to follow up in 3 months.