In January 2001 a 36 year old woman, nulliparous, menarche at 13 years with a regular cycle came to our Institution because of abdominal pain and increase of abdominal volume. Serum tumour marker tests revealed abnormally high levels of CA-125 (182 IU/ml), but normal levels of CA-19-9 (20,68 IU/ml), CA 15-3 (16 IU/ml) and CEA (1.1 ng/ml). Ultrasound scan (US) and Computer tomography (CT) of the pelvis was done at our surgical department and revealed a moderate amount of ascites and a conglomeration of the bowel [Fig ].
Explorative laparotomy revealed one litre of ascites, diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis and a solid tumour originating from the ovary that formed a mass with extensive adhesions to the uterus, sigmoid colon, and rectum in the pouch of Douglas. There were also numerous metastatic tumours with a diameter of about 3 cm in the greater omentum and the retroperitoneum. Based on these findings, we decided to only perform biopsy of the tumour. Pathologic examination revealed poorly differentiated serous adenocarcinoma arising from the ovary, FIGO stage IIIC
After surgery, six courses of chemotherapy with paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) and carboplatin (CBDCA: AUC 5) were given every 3 weeks.
At the end of chemotherapy a re-evaluation of the situation by CT scan and serum marker CA 125 (102 IU/ml) showed no response to therapy. For this reason we started with a second line of chemotherapy with topotecan (1,5 mg/m2) for 5 days every 3 weeks. Unfortunately, fifteen days from the first cycle of chemotherapy the patient underwent surgery again due to an intestinal occlusion.
The second laparotomy showed that the pelvis and the abdomen were completely obstructed by a tumour mass that incorporated the bowel with widespread peritoneal carcinomatosis of diaphragmatic peritonetoneum and on liver surface. This situation with an increase of serum marker Ca 125 (300 IU/ml) showed a clear progression of the disease. Given the extension we decided to perform only a colostomy.
Even if the patient only had one cycle of second line chemotherapy, it was not possible to verify response to further treatment with topotecan, because of the general deterioration with marked weight loss and anaemia grade 2 (classification by the NCI-CTC).
After thorough discussion with the patient, informed consent was obtained and further salvage chemotherapy was started in August 2001. The regimen of a palliative chemotherapy was oral cyclophosphamide (50 mg) every day plus support therapy with epoetin alpha (10000 IU) every day plus vitamins.
Even if evaluation with CT scan and serum marker Ca 125 (90 IU/ml), 3 months after colostomy, showed stabilization of the disease, surprisingly, the patient improved with disappearance of anaemia and weight increase.
For 65 months after the diagnosis of ovarian cancer FIGO stage IIIC platinum resistant the patient continued the chemotherapy with oral cyclophosphamide (50 mg) every day plus vitamins without side effects. She had a stabilization of disease [Fig ] with a normal blood exams, normal liver and kidney function tests, stabilization of serum marker Ca 125 (50 IU/ml) and a good performance status (ECOG = 0). In fact she was well and lived a normal working and social life during chemotherapy.
In July 2006 the patient came to our institution because of bladder haemorrhage. We performed a cystoscopy that showed external compression of the bladder with an internal formation of the bladder bottom which bled easily. The biopsy showed a carcinoma of ovarian origin that revealed a progression of disease.
Unfortunately, the patient died from a severe bladder haemorrhage before trying an other palliative chemotherapy line.