Patient: 16-year-old male. The patient signed an informed consent statement. This study was conducted in compliance with the international Declaration of Helsinki. The institutional review board of our university hospital approved the study protocol.
Chief complaint: abdominal pain
Past medical history: no specific findings
Occupation: high school student
Family history: no specific findings
The patient’s father received cinnabar and a mixture of talisman ashes (approximately 6 g) following the recommendation of the owner of a fortune-telling shop in the city of Daegu, and had the patient take a total of five doses of the mixture from April 7 to 11, 2013, one dose per day with water. Later, on April 14, the patient experienced discomfort in the upper abdominal quadrant and several episodes of vomiting and diarrhea. After receiving symptom management for enteritis at a local clinic, the patient’s symptoms improved in three more days. However, on April 21, beginning at early dawn, the patient experienced increasing pain in the whole abdomen—mainly in the left lower quadrant—which was squeezing and piercing in nature, along with several bouts of vomiting and diarrhea. He then visited a regional hospital and underwent blood testing. His test results included the following: AST 250 U/L; ALT 1130 U/L; γ-GTP 244 U/L; and total bilirubin 3.0 mg/dL (direct bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL). The result of an abdominal sonogram was normal. Abdominal CT results showed hepatosplenomegaly, suspected lymphadenopathy in the right lower quadrant, and suspected presence of body fluid in the pelvic cavity. Based on the results, the patient was diagnosed with acute hepatitis. Later, the patient was transferred to C University Hospital as requested by his parents and was hospitalized and treated for another week. During hospitalization, tests for diagnosing his abdominal pain and hepatitis were conducted. Among the imaging tests, a chest X-ray, abdominal X-ray, and abdominal CT scan showed normal results. An abdominal sonogram showed liver function impairment and slight splenomegaly. A liver-spleen scan confirmed diffuse parenchymal liver disease. The results of a sigmoidoscopic examination were normal. The lab test results were as follows: no specific findings from a Widal test; HAV IgG Ab/IgM Ab (-/-); HBs Ag/Ab (-/+); Anti-HCV (-); VDRL non-reactive; HIV Ab (-); CMV IgM (-); HSV IgM (-); EBV EA-IgM (-); and EBV (EBNA) IgM (-). Moreover, there were no specific findings from the tests for typhoid fever, viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, or Wilson’s disease, as shown by anti-mitochondrial Ab (-), anti-smooth muscle Ab (-), liver/kidney microsomal Ab (-), Rheumatoid factor < 5.0, ANCA (-), FANA (-), autoimmune target test (AIT) (-), ceruloplasmin 19 mg/dL, copper 75.1 μg/dL, u-copper 22.5 μg/day, IgG 840 mg/dL, IgA 267.4 uIU/ml, IgM 65.8 uIU/ml, IgE 169 uIU/ml, and IgD 3.6 mg/dL. The patient’s condition was observed while analgesia and hepatotonics were administered. During the hospitalization, the hemoglobin fell to 11.5 g/dL, and the serum iron was 160.6 μg/dL, TIBC 256 μg/dL, transferrin 182 mg/dL, and ferritin 508.7 ng/mL.
On April 30, he was discharged from the hospital, as his abdominal pain had been relieved and his liver function test results had improved . During follow-up at the outpatient clinic of C University Hospital, the same pattern of abdominal pain as occurred initially recurred in the left side of the abdomen on May 5, and he was hospitalized again. An abdominal CT scan was performed as a follow-up measure, and it showed normal findings. The next day, in order to identify the cause of the continued abdominal pain, the patient was transferred to the Department of Pediatrics of Y University Hospital, per the patient and his parents’ request. During the evaluation, the patient was referred to the Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, and after an in-depth interview, it was determined that the patient had taken talisman ashes and cinnabar, a talisman material , and the patient was confirmed to have lead poisoning associated with the administration of that material.
At the time of the Y University Hospital intake, the patient’s blood pressure was 120/82 mmHg, heart rate 69 bpm, respiration rate 19/min, body temperature 36.6°C, and he was alert, with no signs of acute illness, conjunctival pallor, or icteric sclera. No abnormality was noted in the heart and lung sounds at auscultation. The abdomen was soft, and there was no distention or palpable mass. Tenderness was present in the left lower quadrant. There was no edema or petechiae in any of the four extremities. There were no specific findings in the neurologic exams.
At the time of hospitalization in Y University Hospital, the results of tests conducted in the Department of Pediatrics showed the following: Hb 12.5 g/dL, Hct 37.3%, MCV 87.4 fL, MCH 29.3 pg, WBC 5900/μL, platelets 257 k/μL, and reticulocytes 5.6%. A peripheral blood smear examination showed normocytic-normochromic anemia and basophilic stippling of the red cells , heptoglobin of 61 mg/dL, a negative Coombs test, additional blood lead concentration of 58.1 μg/dL, zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP) 43.6 μg/dL, and 24-h urine δ-aminolevulinic acid (δ-ALA) 15.1 mg/L. The analysis of the metal ingredients of the cinnabar received from the fortune-telling shop showed 99,636.5 ppm of lead, 166,567.2 ppm of mercury, and 54408.7 ppm of cadmium. No other metal ingredients were found. Later, the patient’s blood cadmium, blood mercury, and urinary mercury concentration were checked, and found to be 0.853 μg/L, 1.942 μg/L, and 3.737 μg/L, respectively. In the meantime, some of the test results showed ongoing improvement compared to the previous test results, including total bilirubin 3.4 mg/dL, AST 32 IU/L, ALT 41 IU/L, and γ-GTP 115 IU/L.
The patient visited our hospital three weeks after the onset of symptoms and was diagnosed with lead poisoning. As the patient had moderate abdominal discomfort and intermittent piercing pain in the left lower quadrant without other specific symptoms at the time of the diagnosis, he was only administered analgesics for abdominal pain. Three days after hospitalization, his symptoms improved, and the patient’s condition was observed without additional pharmacotherapy. He was discharged on the seventh day after intake. Based on monitoring by follow-up tests at the outpatient clinic, his abdominal pain did not recur, nor were there any other notable symptoms. The peripheral blood smear examination conducted on June 13 showed no basophilic stippling of red cells, and the hemoglobin and reticulocyte count improved continuously . At the 3 months of follow-up observation, the blood lead concentration was found to have decreased, while the blood ZPP had increased at the 2-month follow-up but had decreased again at the 3-month follow-up . The patient is undergoing follow-up on a monthly basis.