A 75-year-old Korean woman presented to the emergency room with cough, myalgia, and severe
neuropathic pain in the trunk, all of which began 1 month prior; dry cough and whole-body
myalgia developed first and were followed by bilateral lancinating pain in the trunk with
allodynia, 2 weeks later. Her pain visual analog scale (VAS) score was 9 to 10. Initial
chest computed tomography demonstrated multifocal consolidations with reversed halo sign
involving both lungs .
Her vital signs were initially stable with no fever. With the suspicion of organizing
pneumonia, percutaneous fine needle aspiration (PCNA) was attempted but failed because the
patient could not tolerate the procedure due to severe neuropathic truncal pain. On the
second day of admission, neurology consultation was requested for the severe neuropathic
pain, and neurological examination revealed that the patient was alert with no cranial nerve
deficit. Motor examination revealed normal strength in the both upper and lower extremities.
Position and vibration sensations were normal. Pain and touch were hyperesthetic, and
allodynia of touching the skin in the trunk between T4 and 10 was observed. Reflexes in the
upper extremity were normal; however, hyperreflexia was noted in the lower extremities.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spinal cord was performed to determine the cause of
her severe neuropathic pain. T2 weighted imaging showed multiple short-segment
hyperintensities in the spinal cord spreading from T3 to T8. Cord swelling was not observed
. Brain MRI did not
show any change in white matter. Although she denied any visual disturbance, her
visual-evoked potential study showed a bilateral prolonged P100 wave. The patient showed
unobtainable lumbar (N1) and cortical (P37) waves on somatosensory evoked potentials. Motor
evoked potential study was normal. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed, and
the results were as follows: white blood cell count, 20 (normal range: 0-5); total protein,
50.7 (normal range: 15-45) mg/dl; and glucose, 78 (normal range: 50-80) mg/dl. The serum
AQP4-IgG was positive on cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay. Tumor markers such as
CEA (Carcino-embryonic antigen), CA19-9 (Carbohydrate Antigen), ANA (antinuclear antibody),
ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies), C3, and C4 and anti-dsDNA IgG antibodies were
negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and rheumatoid factor were elevated to 68
(0-20) mm/hour and 18.7 (0-14) IU/ml, respectively. Serological tests (for viruses and
bacteria) to evaluate the infectious cause of pneumonia were all negative. The CSF study of
viruses and bacteria to assess the infectious myelitis was also negative.
She was commenced on intravenous steroid pulse therapy (1 g) for 5 days. To rule out
cancer, PCNA was performed in the right lower lobe and no tumor cells were present although
interstitial fibrosis with mild inflammatory cell infiltration was observed. Oral steroid (60 mg) was
tapered and 2 g of mycophenolate mofetil was added. After 2 weeks of treatment, the
neuropathic pain resolved considerably (she had a VAS score of 2-3) along with the multiple
lung consolidations .