We present a 73-year-old male with a past medical history significant for melanoma, prostate cancer, hypothyroidism, and hypertension. He presented with clinical symptoms of myasthenia gravis and myositis shortly after beginning treatment with Pembrolizumab.
The patient was diagnosed with melanoma of the back approximately a year before presentation (Stage IIB) and underwent wide local excision. Additional workup including a sentinel lymph node biopsy and PET-CT scan was negative for any evidence of metastatic disease when adjuvant Pembrolizumab was started. He received his first two doses about two months prior to presentation. Both these doses were 200 mg in 0.9NaCL IV 118 mL infusion.
Approximately two weeks after this second dose, he presented to the emergency department with progressive neck and back pain, dysphagia, hoarseness, generalized weakness, and urinary incontinence. Upon admission, he was noted to have creatinine kinase elevated to 2639 U/L (Normal 55–170 U/L), ALT elevated to 222 (Normal 0–61 U/L), and AST elevated to 200 (Normal 5–34 U/L). MRI of the brain and cervical spine did not show signs of metastasis but revealed a disc bulge at C3/C4 (shown in Fig. ) causing canal stenosis. Neurological exam at this time was significant only for tenderness to palpation over the cervical neck. Both AChR and MuSK antibodies were negative, as was a paraneoplastic autoantibody panel. However, the possibility of MG secondary to Pembrolizumab could not be ruled out, and the decision was made to initiate empirical steroids. The patient was discharged home twelve days after admission with home health care and a steroid course.
One month following discharge, he was readmitted for failure to thrive in the setting of progressively worsening dysphagia, difficulty breathing, and generalized weakness. His exam was notable for neck extension weakness, right-sided ptosis, and inability to phonate. Within two days of admission, he developed hypoxic respiratory distress requiring intubation. On admission to the ICU, the patient was afebrile, tachycardic to 119 bpm, and hypotensive to 90/62 mmHg. His cardiac exam revealed no murmurs, rubs, or gallops in any of the cardiac windows. His labs were significant for CK 480 U/L (Normal 25-90U/L), ALT 168 U/L (Normal 0–61 U/L), AST 74 U/L (Normal 5–34 U/L), Tbili of 1.7 mg/dL (Normal 0.1-1.0 mg/dL), and WBC of 13,400 mm^3 (Normal 4,500 − 11,000 mm^3). Given that his clinical picture was consistent with myasthenic crisis, a 5-day course of high-dose steroids and plasma exchange was initiated. Following plasma exchange, his negative inspiratory force index remained low, but there was a significant improvement in his overall strength. Extubation was attempted two times given improving vital capacities, however the patient developed respiratory failure and required re-intubation. Pyridostigmine was started following the last session of plasma exchange for symptomatic treatment.
A repeat paraneoplastic panel, myositis panel, and LRP4 antibody workup were unrevealing during his second hospitalization. An NCS/EMG was done which demonstrated diffuse neuropathy with evidence of non-specific proximal myopathy . A muscle biopsy of the left rectus femoris muscle showed myositis with necrotic fibers and inflammatory infiltrates, consistent with inflammatory myopathy and/or medication induced myositis .