A 51-year-old morbidly obese African-American woman with a 6-month history of progressive voice change, dysphagia, and dyspnea on exertion presented to the clinic. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, gastrointestinal reflux disease, and generalized anxiety disorder. Her social history included a status of a former smoker (1 pack/day for 24 years, quit smoking in 2009) and being married without any biological children. She reports no history of drinking or illicit drug use and has been employed at Tyson Foods as a Manager. No known history of exposure to environmental chemicals. The family history was significant for hypertensive status of both parents. At the time of office visit, her medication included escitalopram, 10 mg tablet orally daily; hydrocholorothiazide 25 mg tablet orally daily, omeprazole 40 mg capsule every morning before breakfast orally and ranitidine 300 mg orally daily. She has been reported to be on these medications for last 5 years. Blood pressure, pulse and temperature were 114/80, 92 and 36.3 °C (97.4 °F), respectively. The overall physical examination was unremarkable except for scattered, intermittent wheezing and prominent vasculature on the chest indicative of Superior Vena Cava (SVC) syndrome. The remaining details of the physical examination are provided in Additional file : Table S1. The CBC showed WBC: 12,700/µl; RBC: 5.24 million/µl; Hb:13.3 g/dl; Hct: 41; MCV: 78, MCHC: 25 and platelets: 381,000/µl. The CMP showed glucose: 108 mg/dl; urea nitrogen: 15 mg/dl; creatinine: 0.69 mg/dl; sodium: 138 mmol/l; potassium: 4.2 mmol/l; chloride: 103 mmol/l; carbon dioxide: 26 mol/l and anion gap: 9. The urine analysis was unremarkable. On CT examination, a large, lobulated, heterogenous mass centered in the subcarinal region (10.5 × 6.3 × 6.0 cm) infiltrating the subcarinal and right infrahilar soft tissues as well as the azygoesophageal recess was evident . The mass was causing bronchus distortion and right lower lobe collapse. Abnormal air-fluid level in the esophageal lumen causing stasis of contents was evident due to obstruction from the mass. In addition, multifocal mediastinal lymphadenopathy was seen in the right paratracheal, pretracheal and precarinal lymph nodes. This mass demonstrated fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity in the range of 6.5 to 8.5 . The immunoglobulin quantification showed increased serum IgM (663 mg/dl) with normal levels for IgG and IgA. There was also an increase in kappa light chain concentration to 28.7 mg/L with an increased kappa: lambda ratio of 4.35 by serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) analysis . The patient underwent subcarinal lymph node biopsy via endobronchoscopy procedure. On the day of brief hospitalization for this procedure patient continued her routine medications without any changes. The flow cytometry analysis was normal . Microscopic examination of the biopsy specimen revealed a lymph node replaced by sheets of lesional cells with oval to round eccentric nuclei and gray-pink cytoplasm with readily evident Dutcher bodies . The immunohistochemical stains performed on the biopsy specimen showed that the lesional cells demonstrated diffuse positive staining for CD138, CD79a, CD56, and MUM1 while negative staining for CD20, Pax5, CD5, CD3 with a high Ki67 proliferation index of 60% . The immunohistochemical stains for OCT2, CD10, CD30, BCL-2, EBER, BCL 1, CD25, CD45, and CD117 were negative in lesional cells (not shown). These lesional cells demonstrated a kappa-restricted IgM immunophenotype . These findings prompted the diagnosis of a clonal lymphoid lineage with plasmacytic differentiation with a differential diagnosis for B-cell lymphoma (i.e. lymphoplasmacytic differentiation vs marginal zone lymphoma) with an extreme level of plasmacytic differentiation and primary de novo IgM plasma cell neoplasm. Cytogenetic studies, karyotyping, FISH studies for PCN, and NGS for lymphoma panel were then performed to further characterized the mass and establish the final diagnosis. The FISH studies revealed an abnormal tetraploid clone with gain of 1q21 and borderline loss of chromosome 17 (TP53), while negative for t(4;14), t(11;14), and t(14;16). NGS analysis detected no disease-associated variants or variants of uncertain significance including MYD88 and CXCR4. The final diagnosis was rendered as IgM solitary extramedullary plasmacytoma. The subsequent bone marrow biopsy was normal without any involvement of bone marrow by plasma cell neoplasm. Radiation therapy to the mediastinum (50 Gy) with reassessment after 3 months of treatment demonstrated a reduction in mass. Post-radiation SPEP showed a decrease in IgM levels to 82 mg/dl and free light chain kappa to 10.7 mg/dl with a normal kappa: lambda ratio of 1.51. Three years after the radiation, patient is in complete remission with no interval recurrence with 3 years of follow-up.