This patient is a 22-year-old woman with 2 and a half year history of CD who has been treated with sulfasalazine and azathioprine since diagnosis. The diagnosis of CD had been established by colonoscopy which showed regional inflammation and ulceration in the sigmoid colon and the proximal part of the ascending colon. Histology revealed granulomatous colitis, inflamed mucosa of the large intestine with inflammatory epithelial damage, and focal mild crypt distortion. Barium meal and small bowel follow-through were normal.
Since her diagnosis of CD, she has had episodes of relapse with symptoms including fever, weight loss, diarrhoea and arthralgia in the form of inflammatory monoarthritis of the ankle.
Recently the patient presented with symptoms which were different from those seen in her previous relapses. She had malaise, weight loss (7 kg in 6 months), hematochezia and arthralgia, although this time both knees were affected symmetrically with an inflammatory pattern. On physical examination, the patient was afebrile with normal blood pressure. Both radial pulses were normal and symmetrical with a bruit heard over the abdominal aorta, but no carotid or clavicular bruits were detected.
Laboratory tests showed a considerable rise in ESR (100 mm/h) with white blood cell count, 7800/μL; hemoglobin, 10.0 grams/dl; platelets 500000/μL.
Colonoscopy revealed edematous mucosa and ulceration in the ascending colon without any other lesions in the rectosigmoid or other parts of the colon. Barium meal and small bowel follow-through were performed and showed no lesion in the oesophagus, stomach, or small intestine including the terminal ileum and cecum.
Abdominal CT scan showed thickening of the abdominal aorta (4 mm) and narrowing of renal arteries which was suggestive of TA .
To confirm the diagnosis of TA, a CT angiography was also done, which showed marked circumferential mural thickening in branches of the thoracic aortic arch (left common carotid artery and subclavian arteries), right innominate artery, aortic arch and descending aorta which was consistent with Takayasu's arteritis (type v, diffuse involvement) .
With the diagnosis of Takayasu's arteritis, in association with Crohn's disease, oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) was started plus continuation of her previous medication, i.e. sulfasalazine (3 g/day) and azathioprine (100 mg/day). She became symptomless after 4 weeks of treatment, at which time the prednisolone dose was tapered and discontinued over 8 weeks. Her treatment was continued with sulfasalazine and azathioprine with dosage of 3 g and 100 mg per day respectively. Five months after discontinuing prednisolone she has remained symptomless with a normal ESR.