A 54-year-old Japanese man who had been diagnosed as ulcerative colitis 28 years ago and had been treated with conventional medications, including corticosteroids, presented to our hospital. Eighteen years ago, his colitis had become refractory to conventional medication, and J-shaped ileal pouch-anal anastomosis with a double-staple technique was performed. In the postoperative period, diarrhea and blood in the stool were observed, and a diagnosis of pouchitis was made. The patient was treated with metronidazole. Thereafter, he had repeated recurrence episodes of pouchitis. Endoscopic surveillance was regularly performed to rule out dysplasia or cancer. Upon presentation to our hospital, 18 years after the operation, he was admitted with complaints of faintness and fresh blood in the stool of 2 days’ duration.
The patient’s vital signs were stable after an intravenous saline drip, with blood pressure of 90/56 mmHg, heart rate of 86 beats/minute, and body temperature of 36.3 °C. His laboratory data revealed a decreased hemoglobin level of 11.2 g/dl, a normal white blood cell count of 5.8 × 103/μl, a normal C-reactive protein level at 0.04 mg/dl, and a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 6 mm/h. A digital rectal examination revealed a large amount of blood in the pouch. Lower endoscopy was performed to confirm the origin of the hemorrhage, which revealed the hemorrhage to be from an area of neovascularization close to the site of the patient’s ileal pouch-anal anastomosis but no evidence of pouchitis, although a biopsy was not taken, to avoid promoting the bleeding. Cap-assisted APC was carried out with a clear cap over the tip of the colonoscope for hemostasis. Two sessions of brief pulse APC at a power setting of 50 W and an argon flow rate of 1.4 L/minute were performed . The APC probe was moved close to the lesion site, and cauterization was performed carefully to avoid contact with the stapled ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. APC cauterization was performed several times to enable stoppage of bleeding, and complete hemostasis was achieved without causing pain or complications. Three months later, the patient was admitted to our hospital with a small amount of fresh blood in the stool again. Although lower endoscopy revealed no active hemorrhage, electrocoagulation was carried out in the most suspicious area, where there was an area of neovascularization close to the site of previous cauterization. After that, the patient returned for a follow-up visit, and he reported being without bleeding for 8 months.