A 68-year old male with a previous inferior myocardial infarction (MI) with right ventricle (RV) involvement was thrice-admitted due to abdominal distension and peripheral oedema. He denied fever, dyspnoea or known hepatic or renal disease. Vital signs were stable and physical examination identified marked ascites and peripheral oedema. Blood tests revealed an NT-proBNP of 1525 pg/mL (reference: < 125 pg/mL), creatinine 1.25 mg/dL (reference: < 0.8–1.3 mg/dL), alanine aminotransferase 30U/L (reference 5-30U/L) and C-reactive protein of 4 mg/dL (reference: < 5 mg/dL) with no proteinuria. Paracentesis unveiled a serum-ascites albumin gradient of 1.3 g/dL with no malignant cells, thus suggestive of portal hypertension.
An initial diagnosis of RHF due to previous MI with RV involvement was assumed and intravenous diuretics were started. Yet, a re-evaluation echocardiogram performed during the final hospitalization revealed pericardial thickening, respiration-related ventricular septal shift and a peak septal E' > 8.0 cm/s; however, no obvious variation in mitral inflow E velocity was identified. Echocardiogram also showed dilated inferior vena cava and borderline RV dysfunction (tricuspid annular systolic plane excursion of 16 mm, peak tricuspid annular systolic velocity by tissue-Doppler imaging of 10 cm/s). Cardiac computed tomography (CT) unveiled mild pericardial thickening while also identifying an anomalous pulmonary venous return (right-upper pulmonary vein draining in the superior vena cava) (see Fig. A, B, E). Subsequent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) confirmed pericardium thickening with diffuse late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) (see Fig. C, D and Additional file : video 1) and ventricular septum “d-shape”. Estimated Qp/Qs was 1.4. To clarify such findings, a right heart catheterization (RHC) was ordered. RHC revealed a Qp/Qs of 1.7, intracardiac pressure equalization, discordant RV/left ventricle systolic pressure relationship with inspiration and an RV systolic pressure < 50 mmHg with a pressure-waveform showing a “dip and plateau” pattern. A possible diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis with an incidental finding of anomalous pulmonary venous return was considered.
After Heart-Team discussion, patient underwent pericardiectomy and surgical correction of anomalous pulmonary venous return. Post-operative RHC now showed no constrictive physiology. Resected pericardium unveiled diffuse fibrous thickening, as well as a patchy and dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with numerous plasmocytes. Moreover, focal fibrosis with a storiform pattern was observed. As such, IgG4 immunochemistry study was performed, which confirmed an extensive IgG4-positive plasma-cell infiltration .
A diagnosis of IgG4-related constrictive pericarditis with concomitant anomalous pulmonary venous return was therefore established. The patient was started on corticosteroids and discharged with marked symptom improvement.