A 24-year-old white male smoker, previously healthy, presented to the emergency room (ER) of the Makassed General Hospital with abdominal pain of several days duration. The patient was 173 cm in height and weighed 85 kg. He described his pain as dull and continuous, worsening from time to time, mainly involving the epigastric area, radiating bilaterally to the back and associated with nausea and vomiting. Curiously, his pain was not provoked by food intake.
The patient had no history of alcohol intake. He exercised regularly and reported taking testosterone injections three times weekly for the past 2 months. He also reported the intake of diuretics and amino acid supplements. The patient reported no intake of other vitamin and mineral supplements.
Physical examination was normal except for diffuse abdominal tenderness elicited even with light palpation. Primary laboratory analysis showed leukocytosis with left shift, hypercalcemia, mildly elevated liver enzymes, elevated creatinine level, and a significant increase in the levels of amylase, lipase and creatine protein kinase (CPK) . Negative ketones in the blood and normal urine analysis were read. An elevated serum calcium level of 13.8 mg/dl was measured, whereas the measured albumin level was near normal (3.3 g/dl). Taken together, these two values show a corrected calcium level of nearly 14.3 mg/dl. Further analysis showed a low parathyroid hormone (PTH) level indicating a suppressed parathyroid function as well as an increased level of 1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D.
The patient was admitted for management with a primary diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, acute renal failure and hypercalcemia.
After admission, the patient's vital signs were normal, with no fever or disturbances in pulse and respiratory rates. Electrocardiogram (ECG) assessment showed regular sinus rhythm, with no abnormalities. Chest X-ray revealed minimal bilateral basal pleural effusion. Abdominal ultrasound showed slightly enlarged liver, distended gall-bladder, dilated common bile duct (0.9 cm) with no evidence of calculi, as well as minimally enlarged spleen. The pancreas was surrounded by a minimal amount of fluid.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a swollen pancreas without any focal lesions or calcification. Management included aggressive fluid therapy, furosemide, proton pump inhibitors and symptomatic treatment. Due to pain severity, several injections of pethidine were required every day. Daily lab studies were taken for 10 days, after which the patient was discharged. The fluctuations of various laboratory measurements are shown in Figure .