A 64-year-old Hispanic woman with a psychiatric history of bipolar I disorder (diagnosed in early adulthood) presented in the outpatient setting for the continuation of psychiatric care after moving to the area. Her prior uncontrolled symptoms included pressured speech, rapid ideas of importance, and insomnia. She also reported new short-term memory problems. Her psychiatric management included amitriptyline (25 mg daily), valproic acid extended release (1500 mg nightly), and quetiapine (50 mg twice daily).
On continued follow-up, she complained of forgetfulness and dropping items which led to feelings of sadness and frustration. A neurologic exam revealed no focal deficits at that time. She was prescribed donepezil (titrated to 10 mg daily) for treatment of possible dementia. Over the following year, her symptoms continued, and the patient relapsed into a major depressive episode. Neurology was consulted for continued concerns of dementia, with laboratory studies returning within normal limits (TSH, T4, T3 total, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein, vitamin B12, RPR). Electroencephalogram (EEG) demonstrated mild generalized slowing, with no focal slowing or seizure activity. Computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were unremarkable. Neurology recommended discontinuing donepezil and amitriptyline out of concern for medication adverse reactions and concerns of pseudodementia.
The patient was monitored over the following year for alleviation of symptoms but did not have significant change despite her medication changes. She continued to complain of difficulty with concentration, memory, and restlessness but did have some improved mood. Due to the persistence of forgetfulness, ADHD was considered in the differential diagnosis. Her evaluation for ADHD at this time was consistent with many DSM-5 criteria for inattention including difficulty sustaining attention, frequent careless mistakes, not following through on instructions, frequently losing necessary items, difficulty maintaining sequential tasks, being easily distracted, and did not listen when spoken to directly as if her mind was elsewhere.
The patient was prescribed methylphenidate 5 mg twice a day and reported near-immediate improved focus, increased energy, and improvement in her memory. 6 months into treatment the patient developed insomnia which resolved by decreasing her dose of methylphenidate to 5 mg daily. However, 4 months after the decrease in dose, symptoms of inattention returned, and she was restored to methylphenidate 5 mg twice daily and tolerated the medication without insomnia. The patient was followed for 3 years thereafter before moving out of the county, during this time she had no reported adverse reactions to methylphenidate and continued alleviation of symptoms.