A 70-year-old male was admitted to the hospital on November 7, 2019 with transient ischaemic attacks presenting paroxysmal weakness of the limbs in the previous 2 years. He had a past medical history of diabetes and right inguinal surgery in 2018. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 147/74 mmHg, and a systolic whistle-like noise was heard in his left carotid artery. A neurological examination showed a slightly shallow nasolabial sulcus, and a test for paraplegia showed that the right upper limb was suspected to be positive. His bilateral deep tendon reflexes were (+ ~ ++). Bilateral palmar jaw reflexes were positive, and the right Gordon sign was (±). One-stop CT of the brain was conducted on November 11th: computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the cervical vessels indicated severe stenosis of the left internal carotid artery , and CT perfusion imaging (CTP) showed decreased perfusion in the left hemisphere.
After admission, the patient was the patient was treated with nutritive nerve, aspirin antiplate and stable plaque. A week later, the patient underwent CAS. During the operation, severe stenosis was found in the initial segment of the left internal carotid artery . After implantation of a self-expanding stent (Wallstent 9 * 40 mm), the left internal carotid artery stent and distal blood flow were smooth . The operation was successful, and the patient was safely returned to the ward. Two hours after surgery, the patient developed weakness in the right hand and poor speech. On physical examination, his heart rate was 73, and his blood pressure was 110/62 mmHg. Right upper limb muscle strength was grade 1 to 2. He immediately underwent another one-stop CT examination, which showed swelling of the left frontal parietal lobe and a linear high-density area in the cortex . A stent shadow could be seen in the left internal carotid artery, and the lumen was unobstructed. CTP showed no high perfusion image and was basically the same as the previous scan. To determine the cause of the left hemisphere lesions, the Philips IQon spectral CT (Philips Healthcare, Cleveland, OH, USA) was performed at the same time. The iodine density image indicated a scattered high-density area in the left hemisphere, which was also somewhat apparent in the right hemisphere, while the scattered high-density area disappeared and became a blank shadow on the image once the iodine had been removed . He was diagnosed with contrast encephalopathy. He was immediately treated with dexamethasone, mannitol and albumin to induce dehydration and reduce cranial pressure. Six hours after surgery, he presented as restless, he wanted to sit up and get out of bed, and he had a tendency to attack others. He was immediately given 10 mg of diazepam. At night, he developed fever, with a maximum temperature of 39 degrees Celsius. He was treated with ice compress, aminobarbital, anti-infectives, and midazolam for sedation. After 1 week of supportive treatment, the patient improved. The muscle strength of the right upper limb was 5 -, the speech was fluent, and there was no restlessness or other discomfort. Reexamination of head CT showed that the swelling of the left hemisphere was less than before, and the linear high-density area in the cortex had disappeared . One month after discharge, the follow-up by telephone revealed that the patient had completely recovered without recurrence.