A 23-year-old man presented to the ophthalmology clinic with a two-month history of blurred vision in the left eye. The patient had a history of unilateral familial retinoblastoma in the left eye, which had been treated with cryotherapy and systemic chemotherapy 20 years before. Medical and drug histories were otherwise unremarkable. The patient had a positive family history of retinoblastoma, as his father and two siblings were diagnosed with bilateral familial retinoblastoma.
Ophthalmic examination showed a corrected distance visual acuity of 10/10 in the right eye and 5/10 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was normal, and relative afferent pupillary defect was negative. Anterior segment examination showed normal findings. Fundus examination of the left eye revealed a white elevated regressed retinoblastoma mass with intralesional cavitation and focal subfoveal neurosensory detachment . The right eye was completely normal. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed echo-free subfoveal fluid accumulation and a small pigment epithelial detachment. Additionally, enhanced depth imaging OCT of both eyes showed thick choroid and dilated choroidal vessels . Fluorescein angiography (FAG) of the left eye revealed an expansile leaking dot near the fovea in the mid-to-late phase. Indocyanine green angiography showed hyperpermeability of dilated choroidal vasculature . Based on clinical examination and paraclinical findings, a diagnosis of CSC coincidental with regressed unilateral familial retinoblastoma was made. As there was no sign of retinoblastoma recurrence or secondary malignancy and the clinical findings did not reflect late-onset retinopathy related to prior treatment, a close follow-up was planned. During the follow-up period, oral propranolol was prescribed. At the two-month re-examination, the best corrected visual acuity of the affected eye improved to 7/10, the retinoblastoma mass was unchanged, and the new macular OCT revealed absorption of the subretinal fluid .