A 78-year-old man with a diagnosis of right inguinal hernia classified as II-3 according to the Japan Hernia Society classification underwent transabdominal preperitoneal hernia repair (TAPP) at our hospital. He had a history of chronic subdural hematoma evacuation at age 77 years, appendectomy during childhood, and hypertension. He had been continuously using telmisartan for hypertension; he used no other medications. During the preoperative evaluation, although premature ventricular contraction was observed on the electrical cardiogram, no evidence of asynergy or low function of the left ventricle was detected on the echocardiogram. The pulmonary function test results were within normal limits; therefore, we assessed that his cardiopulmonary function was maintained. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia using propofol, sevoflurane, rocuronium bromide, remifentanyl, fentanyl, and sugammadex sodium. We also used cefazolin sodium hydrate as a prophylactic antibiotic and acetaminophen for postoperative pain. His postoperative progress was good except for moderate subcutaneous emphysema. He was discharged on the first postoperative day. However, he returned to the emergency department with difficulty defecating and abdominal distension on the third postoperative day.
The patient presented with marked distension and mild tenderness of the entire abdomen without peritoneal signs; no tumor was palpable during rectal examination. His vital signs were as follows: temperature, 36.0 °C; heart rate, 80 beats per minute; and blood pressure, 160/93 mmHg. Blood test results showed a mildly elevated total white blood cell count (8600 cells/μL; neutrophils, 94.5%) and slightly increased level of C-reactive protein (0.90 mg/dL). Liver injury, renal dysfunction, and electrolyte imbalance were not detected. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed significant enlargement from the cecum to the rectum . The mesenteric arteries and veins were patent. The enlarged colon and rectum were well-enhanced with radiopaque dye and considered non-ischemic. There was no evidence of small intestinal dilatation, mechanical obstruction, or bowel perforation. Postoperative constipation was the first diagnosis and he was admitted for hospitalization. He received some conservative management as follows. We performed digital disimpaction, glycerin enema for colorectal decompression, and intravenous administration of panthenol to promote bowel movement; however, his nausea and vomiting did not improve. Further, we inserted a nasogastric tube for intestinal decompression and performed an X-ray examination to evaluate the tube location and bowel dilatation. Residual radiopaque dye of the CT remained in the significantly dilated bladder 20 h after admission . He had also experienced dysuria after the previous discharge. We inserted a urethral catheter based on the belief that dysuria and constipation affected each other. He gradually started to release small volumes of stool, and these treatments seemed relatively successful.
He later exhibited nocturnal delirium and suddenly experienced cardiopulmonary arrest 30 h after admission; he could not be resuscitated. At the time of tracheal intubation, there was no vomitus causing asphyxiation; however, there was massive foamy sputum intratracheally. Laboratory test results showed a decreased total white blood cell count (4400 cells/μL; neutrophils, 62.2%) and significantly increased level of C-reactive protein (19.27 mg/dL). The serum blood urea nitrogen (58.9 mg/dL) and creatinine (2.48 mg/dL) were also increased, indicating acute renal dysfunction. His serum troponin level was negative but D-dimer (10.9 μg/mL) was increased. CT imaging during autopsy did not show any significant change, such as bowel perforation in abdomen, from the time of admission. Cardiomegaly was not significant; however, a large quantity of intratracheal fluid and upper and dorsal infiltration of the lungs were detected. Based on the clinical course and these examination results, apart from postoperative constipation, ACPO was considered the fundamental disease and developed fulminant obstructive colitis leading to critical sepsis rapidly.