A 69-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension and chronic renal failure visited another hospital for jaundice and was suspected of having obstructive jaundice caused by a distal bile duct tumor. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography and subsequent biliary drainage were performed; however, both bile juice and brushing cytology were negative, thus, precluding a definitive diagnosis. He was, therefore, referred to our hospital for detailed examination and treatment. Laboratory tests revealed anemia, renal dysfunction, and increased concentrations of biliary enzymes and tumor markers: Hb 9.0 g/dL (reference range at our institution 13.7–16.8 g/dL), blood urea nitrogen 36.9 mg/dL (8.0–20.0 mg/dL), creatinine 2.06 mg/dL (0.65–1.07 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase 158 U/L (38–113 U/L), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 556 U/L (13–64 U/L), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 85.9 U/mL (0.0–37.0 U/mL). Enhanced computed tomography showed an enhancing tumor in the ampullary region protruding into the second portion of the duodenum and an enlarged lymph node around the peripancreatic lesion . Duodenoscopy revealed an ulcerative lesion in the swollen ampulla of Vater . Subsequent endoscopic retrograde cholangiography revealed a mass in the distal bile duct arising from the ampulla of Vater , and biliary drainage was performed. Bile juice and brushing cytology yielded a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Tumor biopsies were also performed to achieve a definitive diagnosis. Pathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma in five of the six specimens obtained . The remaining specimen showed proliferation of epitheloid cells that were found by immunohistochemical analysis to be positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, consistent with a neuroendocrine neoplasm . Based on these findings, an Amp-MiNEN was suspected and the patient referred for curative resection.
At laparotomy, no liver metastases, peritoneal dissemination, or carcinoma cells in peritoneal washings were detected. Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy with modified child’s reconstruction and regional lymphadenectomy were performed. Pathological examination revealed that the tumor had both adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine components . Each component had its own area and was distributed adjacent to each other. The adenocarcinoma component was basically located in the superficial layer and the neuroendocrine component in the deeper layer. However, in the center of the tumor, the neuroendocrine component was exposed in the superficial layer, which was thought to be resulting from ulceration. There were also areas, where the adenocarcinoma component invaded deeper layer and appeared to be a transition area . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the neuroendocrine tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . The Mib-1 labeling index was 45.9%, and the neuroendocrine component was poorly differentiated with necrosis. Thus, the neuroendocrine component was diagnosed as neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC). Tumor cells invading the muscularis propria of the duodenum (T1b[Du]), and lymph node metastases with NEC components were detected (N2, 7/30). The adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine components each comprised more than 30% of the tumor. The final diagnosis was, therefore, Amp-MiNEN, pT1b(Du)N2M0 fStage IIIB, according to the guidelines of the Japanese Society for Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery 7th edition.
The patient was discharged without complications. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered because of the patient’s renal dysfunction. Liver and lymph node metastases were detected 2 months after surgery, and he subsequently underwent platinum-based chemotherapy at 50% dosage. This initially achieved remarkable tumor shrinkage; however, he died 6 months after surgery.