A full-term 32-d-old male infant was admitted to the general ward for a one-day history of intermittent fever (peak temperature 38.5ºC).
The patient had intermittent fever, deterioration of abdominal distension, and lethargy for one day.
The patient was born at 40+4 wk’ gestational age via spontaneous vaginal delivery with a birth weight of 3240 g. He had a perinatal history of bladder distension as seen on fetal ultrasonography, as well as abdominal distension that improved and worsened repeatedly after birth. Additionally, the patient presented with watery diarrhea, poor appetite and a markedly decreased amount of urine output for one day, but not with bilious vomiting or hematochezia. He was admitted to the general ward for conservative treatment, but symptoms worsened abruptly. Thus, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where he exhibited lethargy, grunting, and signs of shock.
The patient did not have any clinically relevant family history.
On admission, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: blood pressure (BP) of 80/58 mmHg, heart rate (HR) of 158 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate (RR) of 43 breaths/min, oxygen saturation of 99% in room air, and body temperature (BT) of 38.4ºC. A physical examination showed an intensely distended abdomen with no palpable mass. In the ICU, signs of shock were observed: BP, 71/44 mmHg; HR, 170 bpm; RR, 52 breaths/min; oxygen saturation of 99% in room air; and BT, 38.4℃.
Initial laboratory tests showed mild leukopenia with mild neutropenia (white blood cell count 3.23 × 103/µL, neutrophils 1260/µL, band neutrophil 6%), elevated acute inflammatory markers [C-reactive protein, 4.99 mg/dL (reference: < 0.5 mg/dL), procalcitonin, 14.4 ng/mL (reference: < 0.5 ng/mL)], mild hyponatremia [sodium, 133 mmol/L (reference range: 135.0-145.0 mmol/L)], and pre-renal azotemia [blood urea nitrogen, 20.8 mg/dL (reference range: 8.0-20.0 mg/dL), creatinine, 0.4 mg/dL (reference range: 0.5-1.2 mg/dL)]. No microorganisms were detected in blood culture, urine culture, cerebrospinal fluid culture and multiplex polymerase chain reaction performed on a nasopharyngeal specimen.
Plain abdominal radiographs showed diffuse gaseous distention of bowel loops . Due to the large amount of intra-intestinal gas accumulation, tracking the entire bowel in abdominal ultrasonography was restricted. In the visible area of sonography, there was no evidence of a focus of lesion that might cause mechanical obstruction. The patient also underwent an upper gastrointestinal series, which revealed that his junction between the duodenum and jejunum was normally placed on the left side of the vertebral body, suggesting that there was no bowel malrotation.
Symptoms of abdominal distension and oliguria progressively worsened. The patient was diagnosed with small bowel obstruction due to unspecified lesion and had to undergo surgery. During laparotomy, we observed a 4 cm × 3 cm solid structure in the cecum . The small bowel was severely dilatated with no necrotic changes. The cyst and the contiguous portion of the ileum were resected . Then, bowel continuity was restored by end-to-end anastomosis. When the cyst was opened, there was a cystic mass located at the cecum, measuring 2.5 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm which was found to be unilocular and contained a clear, light-yellowish, mucinous fluid, including gelatinous material. Histopathological examination of the cystic lesion revealed two distinct muscle layers on low magnification. The outer layer was continuous with the intestine. Immunohistochemical staining for desmin highlighted two separated muscle layers, and the cyst-lining epithelium consisting of low columnar epithelial cells or flattened cuboidal cells .