A 52-year-old woman presented at an external hospital with a chief complaint of abdominal pressure and pain in the right upper abdominal quadrant. A CT scan revealed a 700 cm3 liver lesion in segment IV. Hepatocellular carcinoma, metastasis or cholangiocellular carcinoma were excluded by biopsy but no definite diagnosis could be established. Subsequently, she was referred to our cancer center for further evaluation and management.
In July 2015 the histopathological workup of a repeated biopsy showed a pleomorphic epitheloid tumor with small to medium sized cells. On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells expressed vimentin and melan-A, but were negative for cytokeratin. Proliferative activity was very high measured by MIB-1/KI-67 . A diagnosis of PEComa of the liver was clearly established. The lesion was classified as a malignant PEComa according to the Folpe classification because of its size (> 5 cm) and more than 1 risk factor (high proliferative activity, nuclear pleomorphism, multinuclear giant cells).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen showed progression of the tumor to 1280 cm3 within 26 days after initial CT . FDG-PET/CT showed no evidence of distant metastasis. Due to tumor size and invasion of the inferior vena cava, the tumor was deemed unresectable and the multidisciplinary tumor board recommended neoadjuvant radiotherapy. To achieve high, ablative doses a stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) technique was chosen consisting of 8 fractions of 7.5Gy prescribed to the 80% isodose to a total dose of 60Gy (biologically effective dose 105Gy; BED = total dose*(1+ dose per fraction/α/β) for α/β = 10 Gy) given every other day. The patient was immobilized in a vacuum bag using abdominal compression. Radiotherapy planning was based on a 4D planning CT and MRI resulting in a target volume (PTV) of 1944 cm3. A treatment margin of 4 mm was used around the GTV to create the PTV. Dose constraints for organs at risk were used as published elsewhere . The whole liver had a volume of 3709 cm3 and 3330 cm3received a dose below 15 Gy. Treatment toxicity was limited to a slight elevation of transaminases (grade 1 and 3).
To evaluate efficacy of treatment, FDG-PET/CT was repeated (week 8, 17) showing no change in tumor size, but a reduction of SUVmax at 8 weeks and substantial reduction in tumor volume (49%) at 17 weeks post SBRT. At the multidisciplinary tumor board, the patient was deemed operable because of the significant downsizing effect. A complete resection was performed 21 weeks after radiotherapy consisting of an extended hemihepatectomy [segments 1, 4-8), tangential resection of the retrohepatic cava, and biliodigestive anastomosis via end to side technique (Roux-Y). There were no intraoperative complications. The postoperative course was complicated by sepsis, wound healing problems and weight loss. Histological and immunochemistry findings were consistent with the diagnosis of PEComa showing more than 80% necrosis corresponding to a pathological response after SBRT. Surgical margins were negative.
At last follow-up 21 months after therapy, MRI showed neither local nor distant tumor recurrence. The patient was in stable condition (ECOG 1) with no symptoms of late radiation toxicity.