A 61-year-old Japanese man was transported to our critical care and emergency center by ambulance with fever, exacerbation of pain in his lower back and both legs, and a painful mass over his left SCJ.
Approximately 3 months previously, he had consulted an orthopedic surgeon because of low back and leg pain. He had been diagnosed with disc herniation at L4-L5, and had been hospitalized for bed-rest and treatment. While hospitalized, he had received several intravenous injections of sodium salicylate, but no peripheral intravenous catheter had been inserted. About 2 months after discharge, he had been referred to our outpatient anesthesiology department because of ongoing leg pain. Two weeks before presentation, he had received his first epidural block using 6 ml of 0.8% mepivacaine hydrochloride at the L4-L5 level, injected via the paramedian approach. Two days before presentation, a second epidural block using 5 ml of 0.8% mepivacaine hydrochloride had been administered at the same level. The skin had been disinfected with 5% chlorhexidine solution prior to needle insertion on both occasions. His medical history included hypertension and diabetes, for which he was taking antihypertensive and hypoglycemic agents, respectively. He had no history of trauma, shoulder injection, subclavian vein catheterization, or intravenous drug abuse. He did not have any focal dental infection or signs of tooth decay. He was unable to walk, due to increased leg pain. The day prior to admission, he experienced a fever of 39 °C.
On examination, he was in moderate respiratory distress and mildly diaphoretic, with a blood pressure of 97/51 mmHg, pulse rate of 95 beats/min, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, temperature of 39.5 °C, and oxygen saturation of 80% on room air. His oxygen saturation improved to 92% with oxygen administration (2 l/min by nasal cannula). Examination of the oral cavity and pharynx was normal, and there was no cervical lymphadenopathy. Chest examination was unremarkable except for swelling and severe tenderness over the left SCJ. Lumbar spine examination showed stiffness, with tenderness over the vertebrae. Movement of the lower back and pressure over the lumbar spine caused pain. The straight leg raising test and femoral nerve stretch test were inconclusive bilaterally because of lower back muscle spasm. His lower limb muscle power, knee and ankle reflexes, and sensation were normal. Bladder and bowel function were normal.
Laboratory testing showed the following results: plasma white blood cell count (WBC) 18,490/mm3, platelet count 541,000/mm3, hemoglobin 9.0 g/dl, C-reactive protein 22.9 mg/dl, fasting blood glucose 335 mg/dl, glycosylated hemoglobin 8.1%, blood urea nitrogen 23.7 mg/dl, creatinine 0.73 mg/dl, glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 59 IU/l, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase 62 IU/l, cholinesterase 134 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase 600 IU/l, lactate dehydrogenase 381 IU/l, and creatine kinase 566 IU/l. US examination of the left SCJ suggested pyogenic arthritis with involvement of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The chest X-ray was normal, and there were no abnormalities on ECG or cardiac US. CT showed erosion and abscess formation of the SCJ with extension of the abscess into the mediastinum and sternocleidomastoid muscle . Abdominal CT showed swelling of the left paraspinal muscle at L1-L3 . MRI showed spondylitis of the L3-L4 vertebrae with a focal epidural collection and L3-L4 discitis .
Aspiration of the SCJ revealed a turbid fluid (approximately 3 ml) with clusters of gram-positive cocci on microscopy. The SCJ was incised and drained, and the abscess cavity was enlarged to include the abscess of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. Sulbactam/ampicillin administration was started immediately. Aspirated pus, urine, and two sets of blood cultures all indicated S. aureus infection. According to the results of antibiotic susceptibility testing, the patient’s antibiotic therapy was changed to cefotiam. After one week of antibiotic therapy, blood and wound cultures were negative for pathogens. Follow-up MRI clearly showed abscess formation in the left paraspinal muscle at L1-L3, but culture of fluid aspirated from the abscess showed no growth.
The patient’s general condition improved significantly and his fever subsided after 4 days. The wound at the SCJ was irrigated daily. Twelve days after the onset of treatment, his plasma WBC was 7,050/mm3 with 78% neutrophils. Two weeks after admission, there was a still a non-tender swelling over the left SCJ, but the purulent secretion had completely resolved. Neurological examination of the lower limbs was unchanged. Eight weeks after admission, he was transferred to the spinal surgery unit to undergo evaluation for operative treatment of his spondylitis and epidural abscess.