A 32-year-old woman had ovarian dysfunction and had been undergoing Kaufmann’s treatment for 17 years. Kaufmann’s treatment is the sequential administration of estrogen and progesterone cyclically for a fixed period. In her Kaufmann’s treatment’s 28 day cycle, she had been taking 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens for the first 10 days, both 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone 5 mg for the next 11 days, and nothing for the rest of the 7 days. Three years ago, she developed seizures with the right upper extremity flexion, left upper extremity extension, and conjugate deviation to the right, which led to systemic convulsion. She was then treated with fosphenytoin, levetiracetam, and midazolam, and the convulsion was relieved. However, photophobia and myoclonus seizures sometimes occur, so she had taken levetiracetam 1000 mg/day as an outpatient. Her symptoms had repeated about once per 3 months, but her blood pressure had been within an optimal range.
Since 3 months ago in this year, she had been feeling strong photophobia and nausea. She then developed tonic-clonic seizures for 3 min and was transported to our emergency department. Her blood pressure was 124/77 mmHg, and laboratory test results were all within normal limits. She did not present any neurological deficits at admission, but the head computed tomography (CT) revealed a low-density area (LDA) in the left occipital lobe. The diffusion-weighted image (DWI) and T2-weighted image (T2WI) showed high-intensity area (HIA), and arterial spin labeling (ASL) image described cerebral blood flow (CBF) increase in the same region. These findings suggested brain edema . We diagnosed unilateral PRES and started nicardipine to decrease her systolic blood pressure to around 110 mmHg and increased levetiracetam from 1000 mg/day to 3000 mg/day. Edaravone 60 mg/day was also administered for a week. However, she gradually developed motor aphasia and apraxia, and the HIA in the T2WI in the parieto-occipital region enlarged, and CBF was further upregulated in the ASL image on day 12 . Therefore, we started glycerol 400 mL/day continuously. We administered magnesium sulfate 4 g/day for 3 days. However, her aphasia and apraxia further worsened, so we started perampanel 2 mg/day and steroid pulse treatment (hydrocortisone 500 mg/ day for 2 days, 300 mg/day for 3 days, 200 mg/day for 2 days, 100 mg/day for 2 days, and 50 mg/day for 2 days) on day 26. She developed total aphasia, and her apraxia worsened so that she could not perform daily living activities.
On day 29, the HIA in the T2WI in the left parieto-occipital region enlarged to the temporal lobe, and CBF was further upregulated in the ASL image. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging was performed, but the lesion was not enhanced; thus, malignant glioma seemed negative . We diagnosed status epilepticus due to PRES and started general anesthesia treatment with intubation. Her weight was 75 kg, so we started continuous administration of 1% propofol 40 mL/h, but we could not obtain her sedation. We also started midazolam 10 mg/h and fentanyl 0.5 mg/day as continuous administration and got her sedated.
On day 32, she suddenly developed multiple organ dysfunctions with a serum creatinine kinase level of 25,770,000 IU/L. We diagnosed PRIS, and she was transported to another advanced medical care center. After intensive care with vasopressors, continuous hemodiafiltration, and prone position respiratory therapy with sedation by midazolam and dexmedetomidine, her systemic status and consciousness gradually improved. She was extubated on day 68, and continuous hemodiafiltration ended on day 76. Her consciousness finally improved as that before the onset, but intention tremor was present as a subsequent complication. During the intensive care, electroencephalography did not reveal any epileptiform patterns, and laboratory cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood tests associated with autoimmune and inflammatory diseases were all negative; anti-viral antibodies, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody, anti-Nmethyl-D-aspartate receptor antibody, and anti-aquaporin 4 antibody were negative in both CSF and blood serum. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibody, Ro/La antibody, serine proteinase 3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were all negative. Serum C3, C4, and CH50 levels were 72 mg/dL, 44.3 mg/dL, and 39.9 U/mL, respectively. Serum pyruvate and lactate levels were increased to 1.15 mg/dL and 25.7 mg/dL each.
She was transported back to our hospital on day 89 and has continued mainly physical therapy for gait disorder due to disuse syndrome rather than higher cognitive training. Her aphasia and apraxia had already disappeared, and she has walked without any assistance. On day 90, HIA in the T2WI in the parieto-occipital region a bit became small, and CBF was severely downregulated in the ASL image. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy did not reveal the peak of lactate .