A 26-year-old male presented with repeated episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures with loss of consciousness for the past 2 months and was resistant to dual full-dose antiepileptic drugs. The patient had a 7-year history of severe progressive headaches with an affected mentality which resulted in school dropout. The neurological examination was intact, with no cutaneous telangiectasia or angiomas, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 13 (E3, V5, M5).
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right parietal paramedian AVM, bounded posteriorly with the parieto-occipital sulcus, and accompanied by signs of an old hemorrhagic cavity beneath it which extends to the atrium of the right lateral ventricle [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography revealed a slow-flow AVM with dilated venous varix emptying into the superior sagittal sinus (SSS); however, the exact drainage point cannot be appreciated. The arterial source was mainly from the middle cerebral artery’s (M4) parietal cortical branches as it entered the deep part of the AVM. This AVM has a Spetzler-Martin grade of 2 (size 3.6 cm; 2 points, superficial venous drainage; 0 points, and non-eloquent area; 0 points). According to the supplementary S-M grading system, the AVM receives an additional two points (age at resection 26 years; 2 points, previous rupture; 0 points, and compact; 0 points), giving a combined grade of 4.
The filling of the AVM occurred at the end of the arterial phase, exactly with the beginning of the venous phase , which is not quite typical for an AVM with such a size and location and confirmed to be a slow-filling AVM. Microsurgical excision was performed to extirpate the AVM through a right paramedian parietal craniotomy. Intraoperative monitoring was applied in the form of somatosensory-evoked potentials, motor-evoked potential, and free-running electroencephalogram. During the initial exposure and arachnoid dissection, a whitish spherical mass (around 2 cm) was identified, dissected, and found to be attached to the top of the nidus; a large cavity was located lateral and deep to the nidus. The cavity was lined with thick white gliotic membranes and hemosiderin accumulation. After the elimination of all the feeding arteries, the nidus was dissected. The last step intraoperatively was the identification of a large draining vein that ends medially in the falx cerebri rather than drained directly to the SSS, which is then clipped and cauterized, followed by hemosiderin dissection and evacuation.
In the postoperative course, the patient had intact consciousness (GCS 15) and no weakness, with two attacks of seizures, which occurred in the first few hours after the surgery, for which he received antiepileptics. At 11 months, follow-up revealed a clear brain MRI and neurologically intact patient and seizure free as Engel scale was Class I.