A 38-year-old male patient visited the outpatient department of Felege Hiwot Specialized Referral Hospital, Bahir Dar City, Northwest Ethiopia. He presented with multiple skin lesions on his face, hands and mutilation of nose as shown in . His upper lip was injured and swollen. He reported that cutaneous ulcers started eight years before on both his cheeks and subsided by itself leaving di-pigmented scars. He originally lived in Senbo village of Achilo Kebele, Yayu district, Illubabor zone, Oromia region of Western Ethiopia. He has no history of alcohol abuse, chronic diseases, HIV or immunomodulatory drug use. He said that eight years before it started as a small papule on his right check and progressed to an open ulcer. Gradually, ulcers progressed to the left cheek and the forehead. Active lesions lasted for about six months and healed spontaneously leaving permanent scars.
During healing, the ulcers started to dry/crust at the center and proceed to the periphery. The present manifestation started at two sites (the edge of the nasal openings and right hand). As shown in , later on, the ulcer disseminated to cover both hands and mutilate the nose through both nostrils. However, there was no blockage of the nasal openings. Physical examination revealed multiple nodular lesions on his hands, face and nose as well as swelling of the upper lip. Ulcers were crusted at the center and have raised contours at the periphery. The lesions were infected. Multiple healed scars were observed on his face mainly on both cheeks implying previous infection. No systemic signs and symptoms like fever, swelling of liver and/or spleen and lymphedema were seen.
Leishmaniasis was suspected and he was sent to Amhara Public Health Institute, Bahir Dar City for parasitological investigation. Skin lesions were collected aseptically from nose, face and hands, and processed for parasitological examination. A smear was prepared directly from the lesions and examined microscopically after staining with Giemsa. Skin sample was also cultured in Novy–MacNeal–Nicolle culture media; however, because the ulcers were infected, the culture was contaminated and reliable results were not obtained. As shown in , microscopic examination of the stained smear revealed presence of many macrophages filled with amastigote stages of Leishmania graded as +6. Based on nonreactive rK39 rapid diagnostic test result and absence of related signs and symptoms VL was ruled out. Therefore, based on the clinical manifestations and smear result, the patient was diagnosed with MCL. He was referred to Addisalem hospital, the nearest hospital where leishmania treatment service is available, to start the therapy.
He was admitted and treated with sodium stibogluconate (SSG) (20 mg/kg/day IM for 30 days) and a broad spectrum antibiotic. He was clinically cured and discharged. Two years later, he presented with a quite different cutaneous manifestation from the previous one. As shown in , he presented with multiple, nonpitting, closed papules on his face, nose hands and legs. He reported that the present manifestation started to appear in the last three months and was preceded by intense itching.
Skin smear was examined using microscopically and culture techniques. Intramacrophage amastigotes were detected from the smear with a parasite load grade of +6 and the culture was also positive for promastigotes. Hence, he was diagnosed with DCL. He was initially treated with cloxacillin (500 mg qid for five days), SSG (20 mg/kg/day IM for 30 days) and paromomycin (15 mg/kg/day IM for 30 days). Wound care was also given twice a day for four days. He showed no improvement after four weeks of treatment and was put on prolonged treatment with SSG (20 mg/kg/day IM for 60 days). Still there was no improvement and re-examination of skin sample revealed presence of amastigotes. Since he was not responsive to the available anti-leishmanial drugs, he was requested to start amphotericin B treatment. However, he was not willing to do so; instead he strongly asked to be discharged. In respect of the patient’s decision, he was discharged uncured.