A 61-year-old Caucasian male patient came to our department complaining of two large venous aneurysms on his left cephalic and basilic veins. The patient suffered from end-stage renal disease and underwent right kidney transplantation and brachiocephalic arteriovenous fistula (AVF) creation, 10 and 13 years before admission, respectively. The patient was poorly collaborative due to his cognitive retardation, likely linkable to an improperly treated meningitis during childhood. He was also affected by hypertension and colonic diverticulosis. Five years before admission, deep vein thrombosis of the upper and lower limbs was reported. Interestingly, the patient followed an immunosuppressive therapy with everolimus, prednisone, and mycophenolate mofetil. He also took atenolol, ramipril, and amlodipin to control blood pressure, and clopidogrel with subcutaneous enoxaparin in relation to his medical history of hypercoagulation. Physical examination showed a 6 × 4 cm2 swelling of the proximal left forearm, with no alterations of the covering skin. Thrill was present at palpation. Auscultation revealed VI/VI Levine systolic–diastolic bruit. Before intervention, informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal representative and, only subsequently, was he premedicated with intravenous cephazoline 1 g, administered one hour before skin incision. Surgery was performed under local anesthesia by means of mepivacaine 2%. A 10-cm incision was necessary to expose the fistula and the two outflow vein dilations. Cephalic vein aneurysm measured 5 cm in length and 3 cm in transverse diameter, whereas the basilic vein aneurysmatic dilation was 3 cm long and 2 cm wide . After AVF closure and cephalic vein aneurysmectomy, the breach of the artery wall was closed with a 5-0 polypropylene suture. Basilic vein aneurysm was then excised, and the two vascular stumps were approached with a 5-0 polypropylene suture . The patient was discharged after two days without complications. Twenty days later, the patient came back to our attention with substantial blood loss from the surgical site . The left forearm was edematous, and the perilesional skin showed signs of inflammation. The wound was not healed, and substance loss measured about 10 cm in transverse diameter. Blood loss was stopped by means of a tourniquet; intravenous administration of ceftriaxone 2 g was carried out, and the patient was immediately conducted to the operating room. Intraoperative examination revealed purulent fluid collection at the surgical site and a huge perivascular clot. Artery appeared inflamed and avascular. Debridement of the site caused substantial blood loss from proximal radial artery, close to the brachial artery bifurcation. After a failed attempt at vascular wall suture, considering the persistent infection of the surgical site (and the subsequent impossibility to use a vascular graft) and testing the patency of the ulnar artery, the radial artery was tied and completely closed. The area was cleared and, due to retracted skin margins, second-intention healing was chosen to restore normal local conditions . The surgical site was treated with povidone iodine and covered with sterile gauzes. Daily medications were carried out for the next 2 weeks. After surgery, the patient showed low hemoglobin blood levels, requiring blood transfusion. To favor healing, 14 days later, 10 mL homologous (due to constantly low blood hemoglobin levels) platelet concentrate gel was applied. After application, wound was covered with a nonadherent dressing. Before the procedure, wound swab was performed. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonies were detected, but no specific antibiotic therapy was established.
To prepare platelet concentrate gel, a unit of apheresis platelets from a type 0 periodic donor was used. The unit was aliquoted into 10 minibags of 20 mL each, and stored at a controlled temperature of –40 °C. Whenever a medication was performed, one minibag was thawed, divided into 10 dry tubes, and centrifuged at high speed (3500 rpm) for 5 minutes to obtain a platelet pellet stratified at the bottom of each tube. Once the supernatant plasma (rich in anticoagulant) was removed, the pellet was suspended in 10 cc of type AB virus-inactivated plasma (universal plasma donor). To allow gelling of the platelet concentrate, the Plateltex Act® kit was used. The full preparation of PRP gel took around 30 min.
Medications were performed once a week (as successfully attempted in other work ), for 7 weeks. Before applying the PRG, the wound was prepared by surgical debridement as required to remove any dead tissue and hyperkeratotic skin, then cleaned each time with saline solution. After application, the wound was covered with nonadherent antiseptic dressing. A few layers of sterile gauze and noncompressible bandages were positioned on the region of interest. Clinical evaluation of the outcome of treatment included assessment of the size of the ulcer and degree of wound healing. Percentage of reduction was calculated using the following equation: (wound dimensions before treatment − wound dimensions after treatment)/wound dimensions before treatment × 100.
After only seven applications of homologous platelet concentrate gel, wound completely recovered and no invasive surgical procedures were necessary. One week after the first application, the first granulation spots appeared . At the second week, the wound measured 5 cm in transverse diameter and was 3 cm wide . One week later, wound debridement showed that the granulation tissue covered the whole loss of substance and wound edges appeared narrower (4.5 × 1.5 cm2). Five weeks after the first PRG application, the wound measured 3.5 × 0.7 cm2 . After 2 months, the wound was completely recovered . There were no complications recorded in the study (Additional Files and ).