A 73-year-old man was found to have early-stage sigmoid colon cancer by colonoscopy during a medical examination. Colonoscopy revealed a 7-mm-sized sessile and protuberant lesion in sigmoid colon; after observation with indigocarmine spray, we diagnosed early-stage sigmoid colon cancer , and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) was performed. The pathological diagnosis was well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pT1 [submucosal (SM) invasion of 400 µm], with no lymphovascular invasion, low budding grade, and negative horizontal and vertical margins . Both RAS and BRAF gene mutations were negative. Therefore, the patient was observed without postoperative treatment. CT scan 6 months after EMR showed no local recurrence, lymph node metastasis, or distant metastasis. One year later, a computed tomography scan showed multiple liver metastases of 35 × 45 mm in S4 and 30 × 35 mm in S8. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated at 5.5 µg/ml (normal range < 5.0 µg/ml). We clinically diagnosed hepatic metastases from sigmoid colon cancer, and after five courses of preoperative chemotherapy with folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) and panitumumab, the liver metastases were reduced to 12 × 18 mm in S4 and 18 × 23 mm in S8. We evaluated this as a partial response, and the patient underwent extended right hepatectomy. The pathological finding was well to moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, and immunohistochemistry showed that tumor cells were weakly positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and positive for CK20 and Caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2), consistent with liver metastases from sigmoid colon cancer. The margins were evaluated to be negative. The tumors in S4 and S8 of the liver showed degeneration and necrosis in 1/3 and 2/3 of the tumors, respectively. Postoperatively, the patient received five courses of as FOLFOX adjuvant chemotherapy. Although the patient had been recurrence-free, a CT scan revealed a nodular lesion in the sigmoid mesentery 5 years after hepatectomy . The serum CEA level was normal. Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy showed only a post-EMR scar on the sigmoid colon mucosa , but positron emission tomography showed abnormal accumulation in the same lesion . Therefore, we diagnosed lymph metastasis and recurrence of sigmoid colon cancer and performed laparoscopic sigmoid colon resection with lymph node dissection. Microscopically, the tumor was tubular adenocarcinoma which was compatible with recurrence of sigmoid colon cancer 7 years ago. Although the pathological examination revealed nodular-like distribution in mesentery with venous, lymphatic, and neural invasion, it did not contain lymph node metastasis . The pathologic specimen of the sigmoid colon had fibrosis in the submucosa, which was consistent with post-EMR scarring. No neoplastic lesions, which are considered to be a local recurrence on the mucosal surface, were found. After sigmoid colon resection, adjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and capecitabine was conducted, and the patient has been recurrence-free for 13 months at present.