A 51-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of intermittent fever, thoracalgia, swollen lymph nodes, and subcutaneous nodules and was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University in February 2014. His medical, family, and psychosocial history including relevant genetic information had no special. On examination, he exhibited a maximum body temperature of 38.2 °C and multiple swollen lymph nodes, painful nodules were found in the right subclavicular region and left chest wall. Routine blood examination revealed an elevated leukocyte count of 25.43 × 109 cells/L, a neutrophil count of 19.21 × 109 cells/L, a lymphocyte count of 3.27 × 109 cells/L, a platelet number of 642.60 × 109/L, and a decreased hemoglobin level of 8.72 g/dL. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 65 mm/h, and C-reactive protein levels were 136.67 mg/L. The patient’s serum albumin level was 32.8 g/L. The level and rate of clearance of creatinine were 109 μmol/L and 45 mL/min, respectively. The serum IgG level was slightly elevated at 21.420 g/L, whereas IgA and IgM levels were normal. HIV autoantibodies were not detected. Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis were negative for monoclonal immunoglobulins. Tumor biomarkers were within their normal range. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a patchy dense shadow, suggesting left pleural effusion. Positron emission tomography/CT showed increased metabolic activity in the right lower lung, ninth rib on the left, and right ilium and multiple lymph nodes (right subclavicular region, mediastinum, and hilum) . Pathological examination of the lung, lymph nodes, subcutaneous nodule, and bone marrow (right ilium) showed no malignancy. Analysis of the lymph nodes and nodule revealed chronic purulent inflammation. Thus, he was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia (not excluding malignancy). He was administered anti-bacterial (ceftazidime for 5 days), anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis (combination of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 weeks), and anti-non-Mycobacterium tuberculosis (clarithromycin + rifampin + ethambutol, for 10 days) therapy. However, his condition worsened, and he presented with multiple subcutaneous nodules with yellow secretion from the ulceration in the inguinal region and left thigh .
Pathological examination of subcutaneous nodules indicated that microorganisms were located outside the cells of the tissue with a round, oval or sausage-like shape, after periodic acid-Schiff staining, the microorganisms arranged in a mulberry-like shape, and a characteristic diaphragm with a sausage-like fungus could be seen under the microscope at a 400-fold magnification by periodic acid-Schiff stain . Then, we cultured the secretion from the subcutaneous nodules and observed the growth of a dimorphic pathogen on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 25 °C and 37 °C. At 25 °C, the microorganisms was a mold, growing as yellow-green colony and producing soluble red pigments that diffused into the agar, making the reverse side appear either pink or red . The microorganisms grew as a white yeast-like colony with radial stripes in the middle at 37 °C .The patient was re-diagnosed with disseminated TSM involving the lungs, lymph nodes, skin, bone, and subcutaneous tissue. He accepted fluconazole (400 mg/day, for 5 days) treatment at the beginning, but his symptoms were not relieved. His overall condition, except for the bone pain, improved after the antifungal amphotericin B treatment (starting at 10 mg/day, gradually increasing to 25 mg/day, for 2 weeks until the patient was discharged). Chest CT showed bone damage and cavities in the bone marrow of multiple ribs, clavicle, acromion and clavicle . Emission CT (ECT) showed a significant increase in the radioactive concentration of technetium-99 m-labeled bisphosphonates in the bilateral clavicles, sternum, multiple ribs, multiple vertebrae, inferior angle of the right scapula, pelvis, and long bones of the limbs, resulting in a dense morphology . Owing to the presence of osteolysis, we re-examined the bone marrow of the right ilium. Bone marrow smears suggested reactive hyperplasia and reduction in erythrocyte ratio. Bone marrow biopsy showed the presence of neoplastic cells with eccentric and prominent nucleoli in the bone marrow cavity . The cells exhibited abnormal morphology, having a small and round or spindle shape . Immunohistochemistry showed the expression of CD38 , CD138 , and kappa and lambda light chains which were consistent with the diagnosis of plasma cell myeloma. We conclusively diagnosed the patient with NSMM and disseminated TSM (in the lungs, lymph nodes, skin, and subcutaneous tissue). The patient was negative for TM infection and did not complain of bone pain after a year of chemotherapy (bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone). ECT re-examination in 2017 showed a reduction in the radioactive content in primary bones .