A 27-year-old man presented with a two-week history of mild epigastric and right-sided abdominal discomfort associated with progressive jaundice. He had no history of alcohol abuse or other predisposing factors for chronic pancreatitis. On examination, he was deeply jaundiced but his other clinical examinations were unremarkable. There were no stigmata of chronic liver disease.
Laboratory examination showed aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 133 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 282 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 766 IU/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 423 IU/L, bilirubin 89 μmol/L, Tumor marker values: CA19-9= 433 U/ml (N < 33), CEA = 2,38 mg/ml (N < 2,5) and absence of antinuclear antibody (ANA).
Ultrasonography and subsequent Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a diffusely enlarged pancreas with a so-called “sausage-like” appearance as well as enhancement of the pancreas in the portal phase. No pancreatic calcification and intraductal stones were observed. Mild intra-hepatic bilary dilatation and dilated common bile duct (CBD) of 13mm were noted . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) indicated important intrahepatic biliary dilatation and a saccular dilatation of the common bile duct . The pancreatic duct appeared to be normal.
A provisional diagnosis of pancreatic malignancy was made. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a swollen pancreas with a palpable mass in the pancreatic head. The mass was resectable and a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple operation) was performed. Postoperative period was uneventful. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen showed chronic pancreatitis with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration raising the diagnosis of AIP. The patient was therefore started on a trial of steroid therapy with a tapering dose of oral prednisone 40 mg/day with good effect. After 3 weeks of treatment, his biochemical indices returned to normal and the symptom of jaundice disappeared as well. The patient managed to completely wean off prednisone after a period of ten months.