A 20-year-old Caucasian male patient with complex cyanotic heart defects, namely, ccTGA, PA, and VSD, underwent left-sided Blalock–Taussig–Thomas shunt palliation at the second day of life, followed by a correction at the age of 5 years. The surgery included ventricular septal defect (VSD) patch closure and subpulmonary outflow tract reconstruction with a 17-mm homograft (Rastelli-type procedure). He was readmitted at 20 years old, with no symptoms in anamnesis and with good exercise tolerance. A loud systolic murmur with a thrill and soft diastolic murmur were found upon physical examination. Echocardiography revealed good function of the systemic ventricle—morphologic right ventricle (mRV) and homograft obstruction with a maximum and mean gradient of 78 mmHg and 45 mmHg, respectively, as well as its' moderate regurgitation. The peak-to-peak gradient of 82 mmHg through the narrowed-to-10-mm homograft was measured in the diagnostic catheterization and the patient qualified for PPVI.
Nonselective coronarography was performed to exclude the possibility of coronary artery (CA) compression assessed by aortography with a 20-mm Mullins-X balloon placed in the potential valve landing zone . The test revealed that the right coronary artery (RCA) originated from posterolateral sinus and the left anterior descending artery (LAD), with the circumflex artery (Cx), originated from medial sinus separately. Despite the short distance between the Cx origin and the homograft valve annulus, coronary artery compression was not an issue.
The 35-mm AndraStent XXL (AndraMed GmbH, Reutlingen, Germany) was implanted into the homograft on a 20-mm balloon-in-balloon (BIB). Then, an 18-mm Melody valve (Medtronic Inc., MN) on an 20-mm BIB was expanded . Because of the residual peak-to-peak gradient of 30 mmHg, the 22 mm Mullins-X balloon was used for postdilatation, and the final gradient dropped to 15 mmHg (see Additional file : Video S1, S2; Additional file : Video S3, S4; Additional file : Video S5). In the 8-year follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic with a mean residual gradient through the Melody valve of 22 mmHg on checkup echocardiography. Ejection fraction of the systemic ventricle was assessed to be 39% by magnetic resonance imaging . Single and insignificant fractures of the Melody valve stent (Cheatham-Platinum stent) are observed on fluoroscopy . No late complications, such as infective endocarditis, have been observed.