An 81-year-old male was admitted to a regional hospital with malaise for several months. He had a long history of cardiovascular disease, with multiple myocardial infarctions, coronary arterial bypass grafting, a stent in the left carotid artery, and a prosthetic biologic aortic valve for two years (a bovine, Sorin Soprano valve). The patient was on warfarin treatment due to an atrial fibrillation. Ten months prior to the admittance, the patient experienced an episode of bleeding from a rectal diverticulum. On the day prior to admittance the patient suffered an acute headache and expressive dysphasia. Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a left-sided 13 mm acute fronto-temporal subdural haematoma (SDH) (Figure ). The patient denied any form of trauma to the head. Neurosurgeons recommended conservative treatment. PK-INR was 2.1, warfarin was discontinued and vitamin K was administered. Since C-reactive protein was around 50 mg/L and there was a low grade fever (maximum 38.2°C), blood cultures were collected. All four blood culture bottles drawn yielded growth of a Gram-positive coccus identified as L. lactis (91% with Vitek II GP). Sequencing of 500 base pairs of the gene encoding 16S rRNA as described in
, however, revealed 99–100% identity to several sequences from L. garvieae and only 85–89% identity to L. lactis. A transthoracic echocardiography could not visualize vegetations or other abnormalities.
The patient was transferred to the clinic for infectious diseases at Skåne University hospital in Lund after six days and on physical examination he was not dysphatic and had a body temperature of 36.3°C. A systolic murmur with punctum maximum at the left fourth intercostal space was heard. No splinter haemorrhages, Osler nodes, or Janeway lesions were observed. CRP was 118 mg/L and the white blood cell count was 9.1×109/L. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed small vegetations on the native mitral valve and on the prosthetic aortic valve. MRI revealed a 1.5 cm large ischemic area in the cerebellum (Figure ), which could not be seen in the CT performed nine days earlier.
Treatment with penicillin (3 grams, fid) and tobramycin (60 mg, tid) was initiated. MIC was 0.5 mg/L for penicillin and 2 mg/L for tobramycin. After three weeks of treatment, the patient developed vertigo and hearing impairment, probably resulting from the tobramycin treatment, which was discontinued. The patient slowly became afebrile and CRP gradually decreased. A follow up TEE after three weeks of treatment, showed regression of the assumed vegetation on the aortic valve whereas the mitral vegetation was unchanged. At the request of the patient, no further TEE was performed. After four weeks treatment, a CT-scan showed no signs of additional embolizations and regression of the acute lesion, thus antibiotic treatment was terminated.
The recovery was slow but uneventful. There has been no relapse during 36 months of follow-up.