A 49-year-old female with a past medical history of fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis presented with acute worsening of chronic neck pain. She had exhausted conservative treatment options. The pain, described as burning in nature, radiated from her paraspinal muscles up the back of her head, down her shoulders and arms bilaterally, and occasionally into her fingertips. She noted decreased strength and dexterity. Her symptoms were affecting her sleep and daily routines.
Neurologic and musculoskeletal examination noted a positive Spurling's sign on the left, paravertebral spasm, and restriction in cervical range of motion. She had intact strength in the upper and lower extremities and sensation to light touch and pinprick diffusely. Hoffman's sign was negative, and no ankle clonus was present.
Computed tomography (CT) detected cervical spondylosis with partially calcified disc herniations from C4 to C7 resulting in central canal stenosis and left C5–C6 foraminal stenosis. Minimal calcification of the posterior longitudinal ligament was evident.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed diffuse degeneration of C4–C7 with disc herniations throughout and an osteophyte complex at C6–C7. Moderate central canal narrowing was evident throughout the mentioned levels as well as severe left foraminal narrowing of C5–C6 (, ).
The patient underwent an ACDF of levels C4–C7 through a small incision in the skin crease on the right side. The platysma was incised and the sternocleidomastoid muscle was identified. The medial avascular plane was bluntly dissected. Cloward retractors were used to retract the esophagus and trachea medially and the carotid artery-jugular complex was retracted laterally; revealing the prevertebral fascia and the longus coli muscles. A Thompson-Farley retractor was used to optimize visualization and care was taken to avoid injury to adjacent anatomical structures. The vagus nerve was never encountered. After level verification, discectomy was performed at C4–5, C5–6, and C6–7. The discectomy and the rest of the procedure were performed with the microscope. The posterior longitudinal ligament was identified and cut transversely using Kerrison rongeurs. Interbody cages were then placed followed by anterior plating and screws. A drain was placed, and the wound was closed in standard fashion. Neuromonitoring was utilized during the case, with both somatosensory and motor-evoked potentials. No significant deviations from the baseline were encountered during the course of the operation. From incision to closure, the case lasted approximately 175 minutes.
The patient's hospital course after the procedure was uncomplicated. Her original neurological symptoms improved. Her main complaints were expected postoperative pain, muscle spasm, and swallowing discomfort, which all improved significantly a few days after. However, she experienced periodic episodes of sustained sinus tachycardia ranging from heart rates in the 100 to 110 seconds while resting and with spikes up to 150 seconds with exertion prompting a cardiology consult. Fluids were given to correct any hypovolemia, EKG and troponins were unremarkable aside from sinus tachycardia, TSH was within normal limits, and computed tomography and angiography (CTA) ruled out pulmonary embolism. There was no evidence of fever or leukocytosis suggesting an infection. She did not have any evidence of sympathetic injury, nor did she have any other signs of vagus nerve injury. She was eventually discharged home on postop day 4. A review of the patient's pre-operative MRI did not reveal any abnormalities of the carotid sheath or vagus nerve.
The patient continued to follow up with cardiology and neurosurgery. Follow-up imaging did not demonstrate any hardware failure . In the months following the operation, she continued to experience heart rates in the range of 100 to 130 along with some episodes of lightheadedness. She was started on metoprolol XL 25 mg twice a day, which helped lower her resting heart rates into the 60s to 80s, however, sinus tachycardia would still occur with light exertion and other events such as eating. The patient underwent a vagus nerve ultrasound demonstrated a thickened and hypoechoic vagus nerve one inch inferior to the skin incision. The nerve is contiguous with no hyperemia. The findings suggest neuropathy perhaps due to local scar tissue formation.