A 62-year-old Caucasian female presented with a six-month history of left lumbar pain. She had no history of fever, hematuria, dysuria, frequency, urgency, polyuria, nocturia, incontinence or difficulty in voiding. The patient was a smoker, and she had mild chronic arterial hypertension and Takayasu arteritis. Both of these diseases were under control with medications. She had previously undergone three vascular interventions because of complications from the Takayasu arteritis. In 1984, she underwent superior mesenteric artery endarterectomy. In 1986, she underwent aortobicarotid graft surgery with implantation of a Dacron prosthesis and in 1991, she underwent aortobiiliac graft surgery, also with a Dacron prosthesis.
Physical examination revealed only mild pain in the left flank. The patient was negative for Giordano’s sign. Urine culture and urine cytological tests were negative. Biochemical parameters were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a cyst in the left kidney. Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) just confirmed the diagnosis. The patient was submitted to US-guided aspiration puncture, follow by ethanol sclerosis.
The pain kept bothering the patient and CT was performed again. This showed moderate left ureterohydronephrosis and a stop point in the mid-portion of the left ureter. Intravenous urography confirmed the moderate left ureterohydronephrosis and showed a filling defect in the ureter close to where the iliac vessels crossed . This was compatible with ureter stenosis, and the aortoiliac prosthesis may have been the reason for this inflammatory process. The patient underwent laparotomy, which showed that there was a relationship between the ureteral stenosis and the vascular prosthesis. Segmental ureterectomy and end-to-end ureteroplasty with the ureter crossing over the prosthesis were performed. Some fat tissue was interposed between the ureter and prosthesis and a double-J catheter was implanted.
There were no complications. The early and late postoperative periods were uneventful. The results from a new intravenous urogram were normal, i.e. contrast was eliminated through the ureter without filling defects. At a 24-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic.