An 11 year old male child presented with a history of high grade fever with chills, right flank pain and progressive pyuria for two months. He had a prior history of surgery for vesical calculus and anterior urethral calculus for which he underwent open cystolithotomy and urethrolithotomy four years back. The chemical nature of the stone was calcium oxalate dihydrate. Medical work-up did not reveal any cause for the calculus.
On examination, the child was emaciated, febrile with pallor. There was diffuse tenderness in the right lumbar region with renal angle tenderness. X-ray showed radio-opaque shadow in the right lumbar region measuring 2 × 2 cm. Abdominal computerised tomography (CT) revealed a dilated pelvicalyceal system with necrotic debris at the lower pole of right kidney and a thrombus in the renal vein extending into the infrahepatic vena cava. Pyonephrosis, parenchymal calcification along with marked retroperitoneal and porta hepatis lymphadenopathy were also seen on the CT. Blood urea and serum creatinine were within normal limits. Gram negative bacilli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa were isolated from thick pus aspirated from the right renal pelvis. The urine culture was sterile.
Open nephrostomy was done which drained only pus and no urinary drainage. Following a renal biopsy diagnosed as chronic pyelonephritis (end-stage changes), the patient underwent subcapsular right nephrectomy. Kidney exposure was accomplished through the flank extraperitoneally using a 12th rib cutting incision. There were dense adhesions of the kidney and Gerota's fascia with the surrounding structures. It was decided to do a subcapsular nephrectomy. When the kidney was reached, the capsule was incised and is freed from the underlying cortex. The capsule was stripped from the surface of the kidney, and an incision was made all around the capsule where it was attached to the hilum. The vessels were protected by placing a finger in front of the pedicle while cutting the capsule. The adhesions present around the pedicle were meticulously separated out. To avoid damage to the duodenum or major vessels, pieces of adherent capsule were left behind. The renal vein appeared enlarged with multiple venous collaterals. The renal vein control was obtained proximally and it was longitudinally incised and the thrombus was delivered out in its entirety. After ligation and cutting of the pedicle, the ureter was identified and cut, and the distal end was ligated.