Our patient was a 64-year-old female of Southeast Asian descent with no significant past medical history. She underwent right TKA for primary knee osteoarthritis in 2013 , utilizing the Stryker Triathlon Total Knee System (Stryker, Mahwah, New Jersey). Her post-operative recovery and rehabilitation were uneventful. Unfortunately, she developed a PJI 1 year later, confirmed by positive knee joint aspiration for beta-hemolytic Group G streptococci. She was treated with the DAIR procedure and 6 weeks of intravenous penicillin G, which led to the biochemical and clinical resolution of PJI. However, she was re-admitted the following year for a recurrence of right knee PJI. Repeat knee joint aspirations showed positive cultures again for pan-sensitive Group G streptococcus. A decision was made to perform a two-stage revision knee arthroplasty.
During the first-stage revision surgery, the arthroplasty implants were removed, followed by a thorough knee joint washout and debridement. Vancomycin-impregnated cement spacers were created via molds (COPAL® Exchange G Preformed Spacers, Heraeus Medical GmbH, Wehrheim, Germany) with Palacos R+G cement (Heraeus Medical GmbH, Wehrheim, Germany) and inserted . The patient was treated with 6 weeks of intravenous penicillin G and allowed full weight-bearing ambulation 6 weeks after surgery. She was a follow-up outpatient and demonstrated a good recovery with resolution of infective symptoms and normalization of inflammatory markers. Serial radiological evaluations showed a stable cement spacer with no significant bone loss or fractures. However, she refused second-stage revision surgery despite repeated counseling and expressed that she was satisfied with her knee range of motion and functional status with the cement spacer. She was last reviewed in December 2016 and demonstrated a knee range of motion of 30–100° with an intact extensor mechanism, was ambulant with a walking frame, and was fully independent in activities of daily living. She declined further follow-up appointments.
Seven years after first-stage revision surgery, she fell while walking to the toilet and presented with severe right knee pain. Clinical examination of the right knee showed tenderness over the distal femur, healed previous surgical scars, and no effusion, erythema, warmth, or sinus tracts. Radiological evaluation showed a displaced transverse distal femoral fracture with a concomitant fracture of the femoral component of the cement spacer . Knee joint aspirate cultures pre-operatively were negative for infection. The patient underwent surgery for the removal of the cement spacer and revision arthroplasty with megaprosthesis under general anesthesia. Exposure was done via the previous midline incision and medial parapatellar approach. Intraoperative samples of surrounding soft tissue and bone were taken for culture and returned negative for infection. The cement spacer components were removed, and the knee joint was washed thoroughly. Additional caution is taken during the removal of cement spacer components to prevent fracturing of the bone intra-operatively. The interval between cement spacer and bone is first developed with an oscillating saw using a thin saw blade. Once the correct interval has been entered, flexible osteotomes are stacked under the cement space to lift the component off the bone cleanly. The distal femoral fragment was excised and measured to assess the resection level. The femoral fracture was exposed, and the femur was resected based on pre-operative and intraoperative measurements. The final implants used were the Depuy Limb Preservation System Size XXS Femoral Component with a 12 × 125 mm cemented stem and the Depuy Mobile Bearing Tibial Revision Tibia Size 1.5 with a 13 × 60 mm cemented stem and size XXS 14 mm tibial hinge insert (DePuy Synthes, Warsaw, IN) . In the post-operative period, the patient was allowed to bear full weight as tolerated. Rehabilitation started on the first post-operative day, where the patient was able to achieve ambulation with the aid of a walking frame and gait training with 4-inch kerb step-ups. The patient was given a course of prophylactic antibiotics in view of the high risk of repeat PJI, as discussed with the inpatient infectious disease specialists. The patient was followed up in clinic for 6 weeks and 3 months postoperatively; however, defaulted on subsequent clinic visits. During the two follow-up visits, the patient recovered well and reported no pain or swelling. She was ambulating independently in the community with the aid of a walking frame. Clinical evaluation at the last follow-up visit showed healed wounds, a range of motion of 0–110°, good patella tracking, and stability with varus and valgus stress.