A 59-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to acute chest pain for more than 2 hours. At approximately 23:55 on February 28, 2020, she felt severe central chest pain with associated diaphoresis and radiation to the back. She seemed to have no traditional cardiovascular risk factors, whereas she had a prior history of anxiety and panic attacks.
Her physical examination was unremarkable, and her ECG showed ST-segment elevation of 0.05–0.15 mV in leads V2–6 . Her point-of-care ultrasound showed that the motion amplitude of the left ventricular apical wall was decreased, the basal segment of the ventricular septum was thickened, and the left ventricular systolic function was slightly decreased with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 46%. Cardiac troponins were elevated [serum troponin I: 6.168 ng/ml (normal range < 0.03 ng/ml)].
A diagnosis of STEMI was made in the ambulance, followed by oral administration of aspirin (300 mg), ticagrelor (180 mg), atorvastatin (40 mg), and metoprolol (5 mg), and nitroglycerine (10 μg/min) was given intravenously immediately in this emergency. Heparin anticoagulation therapy was added (the load was 50 U/kg, and then 12 U/min was pumped intravenously to maintain APTT from 50 s to 70 s). The patient was transferred to the coronary care unit after the exclusion of COVID-19 by lung CT imaging and IgM testing and, later, by COVID-19 nucleic acid testing. Because of her severe chest pain after admission, morphine was administered for sedation, and acid-suppressive medication was given to inhibit acid and protect the stomach. After excluding the complications according to the requirements of the current consensus statement, alteplase thrombolysis was administered at 03:30 (rT-PA 50 mg dissolved in 50 ml NS; 8 ml was statically pushed and pumped at a speed of 28 ml/h) and ended at 04:30. Thrombolysis was considered unsuccessful because the degree of chest pain was not alleviated and the ST segment of ECG did not decrease .
Next, our intervention team remedied CAG under third-grade protection, which showed total occlusion in the distal segments of the LAD, with TIMI 0 flow, whereas the left circumflex and right coronary arteries appeared normal, with TIMI 3 flow . During the operation, the guidewire reached the distal end of the LAD lesion smoothly, the balloon dilated slightly, and the reflow of TIMI blood could be seen by repeated CAG . The operator considered that there were no plaques in other blood vessels and that the patient had no conventional risk factors for ACS, such as hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipemia, smoking, etc. IVUS was performed to explore the aetiology and guide the treatment, which showed SCAD with an intramural haematoma at the distal segment of the LAD branch. The compression of the haematoma resulted in lumen occlusion . Therefore, SCAD was diagnosed. No stent implantation was performed, and the patient commenced dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and ticagrelor) followed by long-term antianginal pharmacologic therapy (nitrates, calcium-channel blockers, and beta-blockers). She remained clinically stable and was subsequently discharged from the hospital on March 09, 2020.
On August 26, 2021, the patient was readmitted to the hospital after one and a half years. She complained of occasional chest tightness and discomfort, and there were no positive signs on cardiopulmonary physical examination. The ECG revealed the return of the ST segment to the baseline level, the R wave in the precordial area was poorly increased, and the T wave was inverted or bidirectional . The repeated CAG showed that the dissection in the distal segments of the LAD had healed well, with TIMI 3 flow . The repeated IVUS confirmed that the dissection and intramural haematoma had been mostly resorbed and repaired. There was no obvious atherosclerotic plaque, and the distal end of the blood vessel was slender .