A 34 year old previously well lady from urban Sri Lanka presented to the Institute of Neurology at the National Hospital of Sri Lanka with a one month history of numbness of the right side of her face and difficulty chewing from the right side of her mouth. She described the onset of the symptoms as sudden as it was present on awakening from an uninterrupted sleep the previous night. The symptoms had persisted over a month without much progression. She had received treatment from a general practitioner but her symptoms had not improved. She did not have any diplopia or blurred vision, painful eye movements, hearing impairment, dysphagia or dysarthria. She did not complain of limb weakness or unsteadiness with tendency to fall. She did not complain of shooting pain on the right side of the face triggered by touch and has had no previous facial rashes. She denied sexual promiscuity. She had lived in Sri Lanka all her life and has not had any foreign travel.
Neurological examination revealed an alert lady who was oriented to time, place and person. There was no facial asymmetry or drooling of saliva and no obvious facial rashes. On asking the patient to open her mouth there was slight jaw deviation to the right side . Palpation of the Temporalis and Masseters did not reveal any wasting. Sensory examination revealed impaired pain sensation on the right side of the face involving the Ophthalmic, Maxillary and Mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve conforming to the characteristic onion skin distribution. The corneal reflex on the right side was also absent. All other cranial nerve examination was normal including the adjacent nerves. Opthalmoscopic examination did no reveal optic atrophy or papillitis. There was no limb involvement with normal Corticospinal, Spinothalamic and Posterior column pathway examination including preserved reflexes and there were no demonstrable Cerebellar signs.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and spinal cord was subsequently performed and it revealed multiple, hyperintense (Both T2WI and T2 FLAIR), periventricular lesions in the deep white matter conforming to the characteristic Dawson’s Finger appearance which is highly suggestive of multiple sclerosis . There were also similar lesions in the right cerebellar peduncle. The spinal cord was free of lesions. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed normal protein levels with no cells. The presence of oligoclonal bands could not be analyzed as this facility is unavailable at our institution and was unaffordable to the patient to be done in the private sector. Visual and Brainstem evoked potential studies were carried out and revealed normal results. All other basic biochemistry results were normal including normal inflammatory markers.
She was treated with intravenous Methylprednisalone 1 g daily for 3 days followed by oral Prednisalone 50 mg daily (1 mg/kg/day) with plans to gradually taper off the treatment later. She was advised on the possibility of further neurological deficits in the future and asked to adhere to the follow up programme.