A 33-year-old-female with no underlying diseases was referred to the emergency department due to cardiac arrest. She had been recovering at a postpartum care center since giving birth to her third child a week ago. On the day she visited the hospital, she complained of sudden squeezing chest pain, headache, and collapsed with a seizure. The chest pain was the first attack; however, the recurring severe headache had started three days before the initial visit. Ventricular fibrillation, as shown in Fig. , was documented in real time monitoring performed by rescue workers. Basic life support was immediately conducted with two electrical shocks, resulting in successful resuscitation. On the arrival to the hospital, she showed an alert mentality and did not experience any further seizure events or other neurological symptoms. Additionally, the initial brain compute tomography (CT) without enhancement revealed no abnormal findings. Blood pressure was 113/83 mmHg, heart rate was 114 beats/min, respiratory rate was 26 breaths/min, and blood temperature was 36.6 °C on the initial visit. The highly sensitive troponin I level was slightly increased to 137.2 pg/ml, and creatinine kinase myocardial band was 2.1 ng/ml, which jump up to a maximum of 1588.7 pg/ml and 9.9 pg/ml, respectively. The initial pro-brain natriuretic peptide level was 306.2 pg/mL. The electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with T-wave inversion at V1–V4. Prominent cardiomegaly and severe haziness were observed in both lungs . Therefore, we conducted a chest computed tomography, which revealed a diffuse consolidation ground-glass opacity pattern consistent with the findings of aspiration pneumonia combined with pulmonary edema. Due to high risk of recurrent cardiac arrest and increase requirement for oxygen supply, she was admitted to the intensive care unit. A neurologic consultation was conducted, and brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was performed due to intermittent thunderclap headache, which strongly suggested the features of RCVS. Brain MRA showed stenosis in the basilar artery, the right M2 segment, and bilateral A1 segments . Additionally, sulcal hyperintensity was observed on post-contrast fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), indicating blood–brain barrier breakdown which resulted from vasoconstriction and contrast exposure . Formal echocardiography demonstrated a regional wall motion abnormality of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), grade I diastolic dysfunction, as well as mild left ventricular systolic dysfunction characterized by an ejection fraction of 48%. The patient did not have any ongoing cardiac symptoms, but only experienced recurrent headaches. Her follow-up laboratory test showed the stabilization of cardiac markers. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed via the right femoral artery six days after admission, when the pneumonia had remarkably improved, due to severe radial artery spasm. Intracoronary nitroglycerin 200mcg was applied twice, following the anteroposterior caudal view which showed a significant diffuse long lesion in the LAD. Post-injection angiography revealed persistent diffuse luminal narrowing from the mid to distal LAD, which was attributed to a long segmental huge dissection with Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 3 flow. This condition was assessed as SCAD. Since the patient was stable, we decided to continue administrating medical treatment. The calcium channel blockers (CCBs) including nimodipine with low-dose diltiazem, low-dose nebivolol, candesartan, aspirin, and a combination of ezetimibe and atorvastatin were given. A follow-up brain MRA checked 3 months later, showed complete resolution of vasoconstriction in the relevant cerebral vessels. Additionally, a coronary CT angiography performed 6 months later which confirmed the full recovery of the coronary vessel . So far, the patient is free from the related symptoms.