A 76-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with progressive signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure in the past month. The patient had been repeatedly admitted for decompensated congestive heart failure in the past 2 years, and discharged after standard treatment of care. She had a history of permanent atrial fibrillation, a single-chamber ventricular pacemaker (PM) implant for complete atrioventricular block 10 years earlier, and pacing induced moderate left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction. The patient received oxygen, loop diuretics in continuous perfusion (100 mg of furosemide/day), spironolactone (50 mg/day), acenocumarol in doses monitored by using the INR, perindopril (5 mg/day), and digitalis (0.25 mg/day). After 3 days of favourable evolution, she was switched on oral furosemide (60 mg/day).
Clinical examination revealed regular cardiac rhythm (70 b.p.m.), normal blood pressure (100/60 mmHg), polypnoea, and mild hypoxaemia in ambient air (Sa O2 95%), holosystolic murmur at the lower sternal border, and prominent signs of right heart failure (jugular congestion, hepatomegaly, and peripheral oedema).
The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation and a heart rate of 70 b.p.m., and QRS corresponding to pacing morphology. Complete blood cell count and chemistry panel were normal, except for mild hyponatraemia and a high NT-pro-BNP (3520 ng/mL, normal values of max 100 ng/dL). Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions. Abdominal computed tomography was remarkable for hepatic congestion, dilated inferior vena cava, and small peritoneal effusion. On PM interrogation we found that the right ventricle (RV) had been paced 90% of the time, with normal impedance and thresholds.
Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography revealed moderately dilated LV (87 mL/m2), severely dilated left atrium (101 mL/m2), and severe LV global systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction of 30%). Two-dimensional echocardiography also showed inter-ventricular and intraventricular dyssynchrony and moderate functional MR. Moreover, 2DE showed severe dilation of the right atrium (81 mL/m2) and of the RV (RV end-diastolic area of 32 cm2), severely dilated tricuspid annulus (31 mm/m2), and non-coapting tricuspid valve (TV) leaflets. In conclusion, 2DE suggested severe functional tricuspid regurgitation (TR) caused by the important dilation of the tricuspid annulus, with flow reversal into the hepatic veins, and vena contracta of 12 mm and EROA of 51 mm derived from 2DE PISA method .
A multi-beat full-volume of the TV was acquired using an echo machine equipped with a 3DE probe (GE Healthcare, Horten, Norway) and post-processed in order to measure the coaptation defect and to further analyse the mechanisms of the TR. Three-dimensional echocardiography analysis using flexi-slice tool and multiple cut-planes at the level of the TV revealed that the PM lead was not placed between the commissures of the valve, but at the middle of the septal leaflet, causing impingement of the leaflet, coaptation deficit, and severe secondary TR .
Therefore, 10 years after the PM implant, the patient was diagnosed with severe TR due to a coaptation deficit secondary to impingement by the PM lead. Unfortunately, given the late diagnosis of this post-implant complication, the lead could not be repositioned and the patient was referred for cardiac surgery. Interventional extraction of the lead was considered very risky in this case, considering the long duration after the initial implant, which most probably led to the adherence of the lead to the tricuspid leaflet and to the venous walls. Additionally, the patient was a candidate for an upgrade to a biventricular device considering the severe LV dysfunction and congestive heart failure, which could be accomplished by placing of an epicardial lead during cardiac surgery.
Patient’s delayed the procedure for personal reasons. Therefore, patient was discharged after ten days of receiving oxygen, iv then oral diuretics, antialdosteronic, ACE-inhibitors and anticoagulant. She died 2 months after the last hospitalization, with severe and irreversible heart failure.