A 9-year-old boy with CP was born at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 2772 g. Developmental delay and spastic diplegia were observed and the patient started walking at 4 years of age. He was followed up by a pediatric neurologist, but no medication was prescribed for his lower leg spasticity because it was considered necessary for walking. He and his parents visited our clinic when he was 9-years-old, with complaints of frequent falls due to a toe-in gait that causes instability during ambulation. The patient could walk short distances without assistance at home but required a wheelchair to travel long distances.
In supine position, the patient’s leg alignment was neutral. On ambulation, internal rotation of the hips and right and left foot progression angles of 90° and 100°, respectively, were observed. Physical examination findings are summarized in . At admission, the patient’s height and weight were 130 cm and 24 kg, respectively.
A standing anteroposterior full-length leg radiograph showed bilateral patellar medialization and high neck-shaft angle of the femur, indicating excessive femoral internal rotation and high femoral anteversion . Computed tomography (CT) of the patient’s lower extremities revealed right and left femoral anteversion angles of 55° and 58°, respectively . A single-event multilevel surgery, including bilateral femoral derotational osteotomy, distal hamstring lengthening, and soft tissue and bony procedures of the feet were proposed by a surgeon to correct the rotational deformation of the lower limbs, thereby improving gait. However, the patient and his parents requested minimal hospital stay. Therefore, the surgeon decided to treat the left knee contracture and to correct only the left femoral deformity as it is more pronounced than the right.
Left femoral osteotomy at the subtrochanteric level and correction of toe-in gait by decreasing the femoral anteversion by 40° were planned. First, we performed fractional lengthening of the left distal hamstrings to improve the flexion contracture of the left knee. Subsequently, osteotomy of the proximal femur was performed by a standard lateral approach. The Pediatric Hip Plate 3.5 (Depuy-Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) LCP with a screw angle of 120° was used. The bone was sufficiently solid, and the plate fixation was stable. All three proximal and four distal holes were fixed with locking screws with a 3.5 mm diameter . Unilateral hip-spica casting above the ankle without weight-bearing was performed for post-operative therapy. Post-operative pain was managed with intravenous acetaminophen, opioids, and oral ibuprofen. Opioids were discontinued on post-operative day 2. After recovery from general anesthesia, the patient showed an increased left foot spasticity. The on-demand use of oral tizanidine and suppository diazepam was indicated to be necessary by a pediatric neurologist.
At 2 weeks postoperatively, radiographic examination was performed after removing the hip-spica casting; breakage of one proximal locking screw and varus deformity were found on radiography and CT images (, ). The surgeon considered the displacement acceptable, and the hip-spica casting was applied under general anesthesia. An additional daily oral dose of 10 mg baclofen was introduced.
At 3 weeks postoperatively, breakage of all proximal screws and progression of the varus displacement were observed on radiographic examination . A reoperation was performed, and intraoperative findings were as follows: the breakage of the proximal screws occurred just under the locking thread, no screw loosening or metal debris was observed, and one of the three locking threads was detached from the plate (, ). Refixation was performed using a locking plate with a screw angle of 110°. We performed a 12 mm femoral shortening to reduce the stress at the osteotomy site simultaneously with a bilateral hip adductor tenotomy and a botulinum toxin injection into the bilateral hip adductor and left rectus femoris muscles . A bilateral one-and-a-half hip-spica casting including the left foot was applied for 6 weeks. Post-operative pain management included epidural anesthesia for 1 week, and a conventional daily dose of 10 mg baclofen and 3 mg tizanidine. The clinical course after reoperation was good. Partial weight-bearing was allowed at 9 weeks postoperatively, and full weight-bearing was allowed at 12 weeks postoperatively. At 6 months after reoperation, the osteotomy was completely healed without any signs of implant breakage or displacement as confirmed by radiography , and the patient showed increase stability on ambulation with a remarkable reduction in falls at 1 year postoperatively compared to his pre-operative condition.