A 12-year-old girl was admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital on October 3, 2021, presenting with the chief complaints of cough with hemoptysis and dyspnea persisting for 4 d.
Four days previously, the individual presented with symptoms of a cough accompanied by hemoptysis and dyspnea subsequent to exposure to cold temperatures.
The patient has a medical history of recurrent respiratory tract infections dating back to early childhood. The patient had a history of patent foramen ovale and was admitted to our cardiothoracic surgery department 1 year previously. Cardiac ultrasound revealed a 2-mm echogenic interruption in the atrial septum, confirming the presence of a patent foramen ovale. Due to the small size of the defect and low platelet count (89 × 109/L), surgical intervention was not pursued.
The patient was G3P3, born at term with a birth weight of 3.5 kg. The Apgar score at birth was unknown, and there was no reported history of postnatal asphyxia. The patient’s parents were healthy and not blood relatives. The patient had a 25-year-old brother and a 14-year-old sister; neither of whom had any history of similar medical conditions.
Physical examination at admission showed body temperature 36.4°C, pulse rate 98 bpm, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, and blood pressure 98/65 mmHg. The patient exhibited clear mental status, stable breathing, absence of cyanosis in the lips, no signs of aspiration, coarse breathing sounds in both lungs with audible wet rales, and the absence of clubbing of the fingers. The abdomen was found to be soft with no evidence of pressure or rebound pain. On palpation, the liver was located 3 cm below the rib cage, while the spleen was found to be 8 cm below the rib cage.
Laboratory test results were as follows: white blood cell count 3.28 × 109/L, platelet count 84 × 109/L; fecal occult blood, negative; blood biochemistry: alanine aminotransferase 28.0 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 38.0 U/L, creatine kinase-MB 15.0 U/L; positive for Mycoplasma antibodies; sputum culture: Pseudomonas aeruginosa; bone marrow smear: normal proportions and morphology of the erythroid, myeloid, megakaryocytic, and lymphoid populations; tumor tests: a-fetoprotein 1.66 ng/mL, carcinoembryonic antigen 1.63 ng/mL, nonspecific enolase 10.87 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 90.95 ng/mL; fiberoptic bronchoscopy alveolar lavage: numerous erythrocytes and inflammatory cells, 74% neutrophils, 6% lymphocytes, and 20% macrophages.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a flocculent shadow with multiple cystic translucent shadows in both lungs, and bronchiectasis with infection was considered. Ultrasound of the portal venous system showed that the internal diameter of the main trunk of the portal vein was 8 mm, with a maximum blood flow velocity of 19.3 cm/s, and a slightly tortuous course. The internal diameter of the splenic vein was 11 mm, with a tortuous course, slowed blood flow velocity, and tortuous vascular echoes around the fundus of the stomach, suggesting that the portal vein had a slightly tortuous course, and the splenic vein was thickened with a tortuous course. The whole abdomen was enhanced on CT imaging . The liver was irregular in shape, with a large caudate lobe and no abnormal density shadows in the parenchyma. The gallbladder was not significantly abnormal in shape or size, and no abnormal density shadows were seen. The spleen was enlarged, the left kidney was compressed, and multiple tortuous dilated vascular shadows were seen at the splenic hilum, which flowed back into the left renal and portal veins. The findings were suggestive of Abernethy malformation type II.
The diagnosis of CF was based on a combination of recurrent respiratory infections, hemoptysis, splenomegaly and bronchiectasis. Prior to conducting full epigenetic testing, the parents were engaged in preoperative communication and provided written informed consent. The testing was carried out at our hospital by the Beijing Full Spectrum Medical Testing Laboratory. Whole-exome sequencing of the patient identified two compound heterozygous mutations, c.233_c.234insT (p.Trp79fsTer32) and c.2909G>A (p.Gly970Asp), in the CFTR gene, associated with CF (OMIM:219700). The c.233_c.234insT and c.2909G>A mutations were inherited from the mother and the father of the patient, respectively, as confirmed by Sanger sequencing . In exons 3 and 18 of the CFTR gene, a frameshift mutation (c.233_c.234insT) and a missense mutation (c.2909G>A) were identified, respectively. The mutation c.233_c.234insT caused a frameshift and premature stop codon 32 amino acids downstream (p.Trp79fsTer32), theoretically leading to the production of a truncated protein. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines (2019), both mutation classes are pathogenic. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the father carried a c.2909G>A/p.Gly970Asp missense mutation, while the mother was a carrier of a c.233_c.234insT heterozygous mutation. These findings are consistent with an autosomal compound heterozygous mutation inheritance pattern, known as autosomal stealth inheritance. The compound heterozygous mutation observed in the aforementioned case is the first reported instance in China, following a thorough review of the relevant literature and databases.