A 70-year-old Japanese man underwent cervical laminoplasty 10 months ago at another hospital for cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Postoperatively, his hand numbness had been improving; however, his cervical alignment became kyphotic . Ten months after surgery, he experienced sudden onset of severe neck pain and numbness and muscle weakness in both upper limbs, following which he visited his previous doctor, who detected facet dislocation with progressive kyphotic deformity post-laminoplasty. The patient was referred to our department for further evaluation and treatment. He had a history of diabetes mellitus and alcoholic liver cirrhosis with no evidence of neuromuscular disease.
On admission, he was unable to stand or sit because of severe neck pain and complained of severe numbness and weakness in both upper limbs. The patient showed distal dominant upper limb muscle weakness (manual muscle testing level of 3–4/5). Decreased sensation was observed in both palms, and bladder-rectal function was slightly diminished. The patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes were enhanced in both sides, and the patient exhibited a spastic gait. The Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score for cervical myelopathy was 7.5 points out of 17 (full marks).
Before the initial surgery, his cervical alignment was lordotic but not kyphotic. Kyphosis occurred early in the post-operative period and gradually progressed. On admission, we observed severe kyphosis with a forward slip of C4 on C5 with C4/5 facet dislocation . The sagittal alignment parameters of the cervical spine were as follows: C2-7 angle, -52; T1 slope, 25°; and center of gravity of the head (CGH)–C7 sagittal vertical axis (SVA), 134 mm. Computed tomography images revealed a C4/5 facet dislocation on the right side. Restenosis of the enlarged spinal canal at the C4/5 level was observed on magnetic resonance imaging .
The patient was diagnosed with cervical kyphotic change with restenosis of the spinal canal at the C4/5 level by spondylolisthesis and facet dislocation, and anterior-posterior surgery was selected. First, we attempted and successfully performed the close reduction of facet dislocation under anesthesia. Second, we performed anterior cervical discectomy fusion with an intervertebral cage (CeSPACE®XP Interbody System, B. Braun Aesculap, Germany) filled with artificial bone (Affinos, Kuraray, Japan) at the C4/5 level to improve cervical alignment. Subsequently, we performed posterior cervical fusion with C3-6 lateral mass screws (SYMPHONY OCT System, DePuy Synthes, USA). After surgery, his cervical spine was corrected for lordosis. Post-operative cervical sagittal parameters were as follows: C2-7 angle, 2.5°; C4/5 angle, 3°; T1 slope, 30°; and CGH-SVA, 80 mm .
The patient was kept intubated on the day of surgery and extubated 3 days after surgery to treat the swelling of the pharynx caused by the combined anterior-posterior surgery. His hand numbness and skilled movements improved immediately after surgery, and he was able to walk using a walker 1 week after surgery. Three weeks after surgery, the patient was transferred to the previous doctor for rehabilitation. The JOA score for cervical myelopathy improved to 10.5 points out of 17 (recovery rate of the JOA score, 31.6%) a year after surgery. Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging showed the attenuation of spinal cord compression, and interbody fusion at C4/5 was satisfactory on computed tomography images obtained 6 months after surgery . Post-operative radiography revealed that his cervical spine was S shaped and slightly tilted forward without screw loosening. Cervical sagittal parameters at 12 months after surgery were as follows: C2-7 angle, −5°; T1 slope, 23°; and CGH-SVA, 81 mm . The progression of kyphosis was carefully observed.