This 15-year-old boy was admitted to our emergency unit with complaints of abdominal and back pain, dyspnea and cough for 2-3 months prior to presentation. He was a known case of major β-thalassemia who had been hospitalized twice for the same complaints during the last two months. The diagnosis was made by the age of 8 months [hemoglobin (Hgb) A 87.5%, Hgb A2 2.2%, Hgb F 10.3%] and from then on, he underwent intermittent whole blood transfusions every 25 days (390 milliliter at last time). Subcutaneous deferoxamine injection started at age 5, using portable pump. He has had good compliance for blood transfusion and chelation therapy.
His past medical history included splenectomy at age 6. Physical examination revealed a lethargic and febrile boy with a typical thalassemic feature, mild jaundice and respiratory distress at rest. His pulse rate was 42/min with blood pressure 108/72 mmHg and 93% arterial O2 saturation (with pulse-oximetery). He had periorbital and lower limb edema, pale conjunctivae and icteric sclera. Examination of cardiovascular system revealed muffled cardiac sounds with no detectable murmur. His right jugular vein pulsation point was raised and prominent. Lung auscultation was clean but there was decreased breathing sound in both lungs that was more severe in the bases of the lungs. Examination of the abdomen revealed a huge tender hepatomegaly, distension and dullness in percussion. A 15 cm midline scar was also seen in abdomen. Laboratory findings: hemoglobin 11,4 mg/dl, mean cell volume 98.32 fL, white cells 11.6×10/L, platelets 161×10/L, potassium 5 mg/dl, urea 13 mg/dl, creatinine 0.6 mg/dl, blood glucose 74 mg/dl, serum iron 219 µg/dl, ferritin 7600 ng/ml, total iron binding capacity (TIBC) 250mg/dl, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 84 IU/L, serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 54 IU/L, C-reactive protein (qualitative) negative and calcium 8.6 mg/dl. Blood culture was negative for bacterial aerobic and anaerobic growth.
Chest x-ray showed increased cardio-thoracic ratio and some areas of consolidation in both lungs . Also bilateral pleural effusion was detected by chest ultrasonography. A trans-thoracic echocardiogram revealed mild mitral regurgitation and moderate tricuspid regurgitation and a diffused dilation of all cardiac chambers. Right and left ventricle had severe systolic dysfunction. Also massive pericardial effusion was detected. Unfortunately, cardiac MRI was not performed.
The electrocardiogram showed complete heart block with junctional escape rhythm . Interestingly, his previous electrocardiogram taken 2 months earlier had some premature ventricular contractions (PVC) and second degree Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach) heart block taken 2 months earlier had some PVC and second degree Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach) heart block .
The patient was briefly managed with Furosemide, Captopril, Digoxin, Aldacton and Ceftriaxon. He had a fixed bradycardia (heart rate less than 45) that did not change after Dopamin infusion (15 drops per minute of 50% solution). After improvement of dyspnea and tachypnea and control of blood pressure in normal range, patient was referred for permanent pacemaker implantation. A dual-chamber permanent pacemaker (ST. JUDE MEDICAL) was implanted and his symptoms improved, but suddenly, he died 24 days later due to ventricular tachycardia.