We report a 6 month-old female infant, first daughter of a healthy, young couple. The pregnancy was followed up for microcephaly detected by prenatal ultrasound. The patient was born by caesarean section for pathological cardiotocography following premature rupture of membranes at 35 weeks; the birth weight was 2.06 kg (25th centile), and the head circumference was 30 cm (9th centile).
At birth, in addition to microcephaly, she was noted to have petechial rash, hepatosplenomegaly and respiratory distress requiring CPAP for the first 48 h of life. The platelet count was 44 × 103/μL and ALT was 6 IU/L. CMV was detected by PCR in blood and urine on day 3 of life with a CMV DNA level in blood of 3.6 × 105 copies/mL. Ophthalmology assessment on day 4 of life showed normal retinae bilaterally, and audiology screening on day 5 showed left sensorineural hearing loss (60 dB). The MRI showed periventricular and multiple thalamostriate areas of calcification.
In view of the symptomatic manifestations of cCMV infection, the patient was started on valganciclovir (16 mg/kg twice daily, commercially available solution) on day 5 of life.
Of note she was on home oxygen during the first months and developed apnoeic episodes from day 27 of life and on one occasion required intubation and mechanical ventilation for less than 24 h following a respiratory arrest. There was absence of gag reflex, as a probable manifestation of congenital CMV, and the child was fed via nasogastric tube.
Her viral loads were measured periodically in blood as well as her trough and peak ganciclovir levels . Initially there was a reduction in CMV viral load. Her valganciclovir dose was increased according to her weight gain and drug levels and there were no concerns regarding compliance.
Clinically, she was making steady progress, specifically in her weight gain and neurodevelopment, although there were some inter-current episodes of respiratory deterioration coincidental with flaring up of the petechial rash with normal platelet counts.
After 4 months of treatment, an increase in viral load was noted reaching a peak of 3.6 × 106 copies/mL, as seen in the Fig. . Her valganciclovir had been maximised up to 140% the standard treatment dose because of low drug levels and no signs of toxicity.
Blood was therefore sampled for viral nucleotide sequencing analysis (Manchester Medical Microbiology Partnership), which confirmed the presence of the A594V mutation in the CMV UL97 gene conferring resistance to ganciclovir. No mutations were detected in the UL54 gene, inferring sensitivity to foscarnet and cidofovir. The retrospective analysis of a sample when the patient was 2 months of age identified no known CMV resistance mutations.
Her full blood count, liver function tests and electrolytes remained within normal limits.
Valganciclovir was therefore stopped at 5 months of age. In view of her steady improvement, no benefit was felt in starting any of the other alternative drugs, such as foscarnet or cidofovir, which are associated with significant toxicity, have limited CNS penetration and require intravenous administration. There were no signs of primary immunodeficiency, including a normal lymphocyte subset panel, and her CMV level taken when stopping treatment had decreased to 3.5 × 103 copies/mL. In addition, her IgM and IgG, both negative at 4 months, were found to be positive, with high avidity IgG. One month after the end of treatment her viral load continued to decrease, with a level below 2 × 103 at 6 months of age, and was undetectable at 9 months of age. At 2.5 years of life CMV was not unexpectedly still detected in urine, but levels were too low for reliable mutation analysis. In spite of her marked developmental delay she was still making some steady progress. She can pull herself to stand, and sit unaided, but has no saving reflex when she falls, and she can grasp and transfer toys. Vision is normal, she does not require hearing aids, and she is vocalising, but uses no single words. She developed severe epilepsy at about 2 years of life..