In June 2020, a 62-year-old male patient presented to the Department of Dermatology of our hospital because a red papule was discovered on the right face two months prior, with occasional itching that gradually increased. He had a 7-year history of diabetes, underwent foot surgery due to traffic accident in April 2020, and had a 4-year history of cerebral infarction. Physical examination after admission: a “crater”-like ulcer was found on the skin of the right face, with a size of about 3.5 × 3.5 cm, protruding from the body surface, the surface was uneven and hard, and the formation of keratin plugs was seen in the middle of the ulcer, accompanied by ulceration, exudation, crusting, and a clear boundary, accompanied by pain and itching, without any swollen lymph nodes around . Auxiliary examination on admission: An MRI superficial soft tissue plain scan revealed that local soft tissue shadows on the right side of the face had thickened, and localized lumps had grown outward. Heterogeneous, with a somewhat high signal on T2WI and a slightly high signal on T1WI, the lesion grew medially and lacked a distinct border between adjacent muscles. There was no abnormal signal in the surrounding bone, but the soft tissue of the right eyelid had thickened. DWI and brain parenchyma was isointense. Diagnosis prompt: right facial mass . Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed bronchitis and emphysema in both lungs. Right middle lobe and bilateral lower lobe inflammation, inflammatory cord, thoracic aorta, and coronary arteriosclerosis were observed. Color Doppler ultrasound of the neck showed lymph node-like echoes around the bilateral submandibular region. The border between the cortex and pulp was still visible. Ultrasound diagnosis: the lymph nodes surrounding the submandibular area on the left side were visible, and the lymph nodes around the submandibular area on the right side were slightly larger. Laboratory tests, including routine blood tests and liver and kidney function tests, revealed no obvious abnormalities. Tumor marker levels were within normal limits. The pathological findings indicated that the changes were consistent with keratoacanthoma . Diagnosis: Keratoacanthoma, a skin infection.
After admission, the patient obtained swabs from the lesions in the dermatology department for bacterial and fungal culture and drug sensitivity test, and the results showed that there was golden grape ball infection. Tobramycin was given to the patient and applied externally to the lesion. At the same time, the patients were given recombinant human epidermal growth factor and sprayed on the lesion for external use to promote skin repair. In addition, the patient has bronchitis and pulmonary infection. After consultation in the respiratory department, the patients were given 1.0g cefotaxime twice a day for intravenous infusion. Because the patient has a history of cerebral infarction, troxerutin and cerebroprotein hydrolysate injection 10ml, once a day, intravenous infusion. The endocrinology department was also invited to regulate the blood glucose level of the patient. After symptomatic treatment, the lesion did not subside. Considering that it is difficult to predict the maximum size of the lesion in this patient before regression or how it will eventually heal. There is a risk of disease expansion and canceration, so early intervention is required. Because the large lesions are located near the corner of the eye, the surgical treatment is difficult, and there are cosmetic problems after surgery. The patient has a history of diabetes, and the surgical wound is difficult to heal. In addition, the patient has other basic diseases such as cerebral infarction and emphysema. At the same time, the patients and their families also refused to undergo surgical treatment. After multi-disciplinary consultation, we chose radiotherapy for the patient. After 7 days of treatment in dermatology department, he was transferred to our radiotherapy department for radiotherapy. Radiotherapy for facial tumors was administered after ensuring that there were no contraindications. According to the patient’s condition, 6 MV X-ray was used for intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) at the beginning of treatment. When the number of radiotherapy reaches 11 fractions, the disease subsides obviously. Since then, we have used superficial electron beam and added a bolus with thickness of 5mm on the surface of the lesion for radiotherapy. The target dose: 42Gy/21 fractions (6MV X-ray, 22Gy; 2Gy/fraction; a total of 11 fractions, 6MeV electron beam, 20Gy; 2Gy/fraction; a total of 10 fractions). The radiotherapy proceeded smoothly. There was first-degree radiation skin damage in the irradiation field during the application of electron beam irradiation. We gave the patient recombinant human epidermal growth factor for external use to promote the repair of damaged skin. There were no obvious abnormalities in laboratory tests, such as routine blood tests, during radiotherapy. The whole radiotherapy process lasted for 1 month. The patient’s facial tumor was dry and subsided by the end of radiotherapy . The facial tumor subsided significantly two years after radiotherapy, and the damaged skin on the face recovered and flattened . summarizes the important events of this patient according to the timeline.