We report the case of a 37-year-old Greek man who was seen in our outpatient clinic and who had anterior left knee pain that lasted more than five months. A clinical examination showed a 5 cm visible and palpable mass at the level of the medial patellar rim of his left knee .
Our patient had no limitation of knee range of motion apart from a minor lack of flexion and no knee effusion, and he had tenderness over the swelling upon local palpation. The results of Lachman-Noulis, Apley, and McMurray tests were negative, and X-rays showed no bony abnormalities. Initially, our predominant diagnosis was medial meniscal cyst.
An MRI examination was performed with T1-weighted, proton density (PD) and T2-weighted sequences with fat saturation in sagittal, axial, and coronal planes. The MRI examination revealed a large well-defined multilobular 5 cm cystic formation in the Hoffa's fat pad with the presence of intralesional septa. The lesion showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted and PD images . MRI also showed regular morphology and signal intensity of menisci, ACL, PCL, and the rest of the capsuloligamentous components, and there were a few small chondral lesions on the patellar articular surface. No intra-articular fluid was shown.
We decided to take our patient into surgery, but our main concern was the kind of surgical modality that was indicated for this case. Our dilemma was the choice between arthroscopic or open excision of the ganglion. After thoroughly researching the literature, we decided on an open procedure.
When the surgical excision was performed, spinal anesthesia and a tourniquet were used, and the mass was approached via an incision over the cystic mass medially to the patellar tendon . A multilobular mass of 5 cm was found inside the infrapatellar fat pad with a firm attachment to the capsule . A very careful dissection of the whole mass along with a portion of the capsule was performed, and a substantial synovial defect was left . The defect was repaired, and the wound was closed in layers. Macroscopically, there was a multilobular cystic mass with a rubbery wall and a clear jelly-like content . The septa inside the cyst, detected on MRI, were not verified when the cyst was incised. A histological examination of the resected mass confirmed the diagnosis of ganglionic cyst. On hematoxylin-and-eosin staining, a fibrous-walled cyst associated with enclosed myxoid areas and fatty cells adjacent to the fibrous capsule was seen .
The postoperative period was uneventful, and our patient was able to return, with no complaints, to his job and previous activities within three weeks. When he was re-evaluated six months after the operation, his knee range of motion was normal and there was no palpable swelling. He had no complaints and no pain from the knee joint on gait or during sports.
A new MRI of his left knee showed no evidence of a residual cystic lesion in the remaining fat pad. Of course, there was a mild increase in signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences because of previous surgery. As expected, the right knee MRI showed no joint pathology at all .