A 38-year-old male with a past medical history of mild, intermittent asthma presented with suicidal ideation and alcohol intoxication. Reports from the local police department transporting the patient to the emergency department (ED) indicated he was uncooperative in the field and required two CEW exposures for officers to safely transport him. The patient did admit to telling police to “end his life” by shooting him but also admitted to alcohol consumption earlier in the evening and a domestic dispute causing him to be emotional. He did regret those statements and denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation at time of initial evaluation. The patient denied any symptoms of chest pain and noted no family history of sudden cardiac death.
Initial evaluation included a negative physical examination. An ECG performed as part of the triage process, given the reported CEW exposure, revealed Brugada type II pattern ST-segment and T wave changes in precordial leads . This initial ECG was performed approximately one hour post CEW exposure. Laboratory studies included a negative complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and troponin. Laboratory studies were significant for an ethanol level of 143 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference: less than 10 mg/dL).
The patient was observed in the ED under suicide precautions until he was no longer intoxicated. A repeat ECG after the three-hour observation period showed improvement and resolving Brugada-like changes noted previously . He continued to be physically asymptomatic and denied suicidal or homicidal ideation and was able to demonstrate clear and coherent thought. Psychiatry was consulted, and after evaluation determined that the patient was no longer intoxicated and was competent to make his own medical decisions. The psychiatry consult also determined that he was not a significant danger to himself or anyone else and recommended further evaluation with psychiatry on an outpatient basis. At that time, he was discharged to home in stable condition with psychiatry and family practice follow-up.