In April 2021, a 62-year-old male patient was diagnosed with gastric cancer and subsequently underwent multiple chemotherapy treatments at Peking Union Medical College Hospital. On January 10, 2022, he underwent a total gastrectomy at the same hospital. In early March 2022, the patient began experiencing blepharoptosis, followed by progressive dysphagia, neck weakness, and fatigue, exacerbated after physical exertion. Symptoms were milder in the morning and worsened in the evening, prompting the patient to seek medical attention at Peking Union Medical College Hospital, where he underwent relevant examinations. At admission, a paraneoplastic screen was performed and found negative for paraneoplastic syndrome. The head and neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computerized tomography angiography (CTA) revealed no abnormalities in intracranial lesions or vascular malformations. Thymus computerized tomography (CT) also showed no abnormalities. Electromyographic examination indicated stimulation of the bilateral facial nerve and accessory nerve by repetitive frequency stimulation, and the neostigmine test yielded a positive result, leading to a diagnosis of MG. The patient was prescribed oral pyridostigmine bromide at a dose of 60 mg three times a day, which initially relieved subjective symptoms. However, after two weeks, the patient experienced worsening symptoms, including difficulty straightening the neck and swallowing, faint and low voice, and overall weakness. Following daily activities, the patient’s symptoms deteriorated, necessitating the use of a wheelchair when venturing outside. Despite the addition of 240 mg of pyridostigmine bromide daily, the symptoms were not alleviated.
On April 1st, 2022, the patient was admitted to our department for inpatient care and denied a history of hypertension, other immune system disorders, and exposure to potentially harmful medications. The patient also reported regular outdoor activities to receive sunlight. Due to the potential risk of gastrointestinal bleeding post-total gastrectomy, glucocorticoid treatment was deemed unsuitable, and gamma globulin therapy was declined due to financial constraints.
To investigate a potential causal relationship between vitamin D, total gastrectomy and MG in the patient [–], we conducted tests to analyze the spectrum of acetylcholine receptor antibodies and the serum vitamin D level. The patient’s AchR antibody value (measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, ELISA) was 1.865 nmol/L, significantly exceeding the normal range of < 0.625 nmol/L. The Titin antibody value (ELISA) was 0.504 nmol/L, also significantly higher than the normal range of < 0.472 nmol/L. Additionally, compared to the typical range of > 30 ng/ml, the serum vitamin D (25-OH) level was 6.64 ng/ml, signifying a significant deficiency.
After observing a significant decline in the patient’s vitamin D levels, we commenced high-dose vitamin D supplementation. With the patient weighing 47 kg, we started with a daily dosage of 2400 IU of vitamin D in the first week, subsequently elevating the dosage to 4000 IU daily after seven days. After a month, the supplementation was reduced to 2400 IU daily for maintenance. Simultaneously, the patient continued the regimen of pyridostigmine bromide at a dosage of 60 mg thrice daily.
The severity of symptoms before and after treatment was assessed using the Absolute and Relative Score of MG (ARS-MG) scoring scale . The relationship between the changes in the severity of symptoms and vitamin (25-OH) D concentration is illustrated in Fig. . As the treatment went on, the vitamin (25-OH) D concentration got back to normal range, and the symptoms showed great improvements (the ARS-MG score decreased from 18 [before treatment] to 2 [after treatment] ). After one week of treatment, the patient experienced improved swallowing symptoms and was able to consume a small amount of liquid food. By the end of the second week, there was a notable enhancement in swallowing and neck function. After one month of medication, the patient could walk with a straightened neck and consume a regular diet, albeit with ongoing challenges in chewing hard food. By the third month, the patient could independently walk 300–500 m without rest and had improved chewing ability. The strength of the neck-lifting muscle had also recovered, enabling the patient to perform daily activities without difficulty. The dosage of vitamin D remained unchanged, and symptom progression was continuously monitored. A re-evaluation of vitamin D concentration (25-OH) three months later revealed a level of 39.3 ng/mL (normal range: >30 ng/ml).
The MG-activities of daily living profile (MG-ADL) was also used to assess the patient before and after the treatment. Before treatment, the MG-ADL score was 18, and decreased to 15 after one-week treatment. The MG-ADL scores were 8, 3, and 1 respectively at the 2nd week, 4th week, and 12th week after the treatment. The MG-ADL score changes indicated the great improvement of the patient.