A 63-year-old right handed man was admitted because of memory impairment. His past medical history included hypertension and angina of ten years duration, for which he had been placed on regular antihypertensive medication. The patient denied a history of diabetes mellitus, episodes of stroke, or neuropsychological symptoms. He had been educated for 12 years and had learned Hanja at school. His wife said he had no problems reading or writing Hanja before admission. During neurological examinations, he was fully conscious and had a Korean Mini-Mental State Examination score of 22/30. Deficits were observed mainly in the domains of attention, calculation, and immediate memory recall. Interestingly, we found that he was unable to read or write Hanja, but could read Hangul. Hangul writing was partially impaired. In his wife's statement, he did not have any problems reading Hanja and Hangul before this stroke event. Conventional brain MRI revealed an infarct involving the left frontal and parietal lobe including the angular gyrus. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scans showed decrease uptake in these infarcted regions . There were no additional hypometabolic regions. fMRI and simple language tests were performed two weeks, six weeks, and six months after stroke onset to identify activated brain regions associated with Hanja and Hangul reading in each scan. An implicit reading task was performed during each fMRI scan. Three sets of test were prepared for the fMRI experiment. Each set included ten two-syllable Hanja and Hangul words and each test included 20 words: 10 Hanja and 10 Hangul words, and a total of 30 Hanja and Hangul words were tested in one visit (Supplementary Table 1 in the onlineonly Data Supplement). After the fMRI, an independent reading and writing task was performed to obtain response times and hit-rates. Written consent was obtained from the study subject, and the study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board (GIRBD 0024-2012) of Gil Medical Center. Detailed fMRI scan protocol and analysis method are described in the Supplementary data (Supplementary data in the online-only Data Supplement).
Hit-rates for Hangul reading were perfect (30/30) at every session for language tasks. The mean response time for Hangul reading improved from 2.8 seconds per letter [standard deviation (SD) 2.1 sec] to 1.03 seconds per letter (SD 0.2 sec) over the 6-month experimental period. In contrast, Hanja reading, Hanja writing and Hangul writing was markedly impaired initially. However, the number of correct hits increased from 8 to 28, and the mean response time for Hanja reading shortened from 3.3 to 1.5 seconds after six months. Hangul agraphia also improved to almost normal; however, Hanja agraphia persisted. The overall results are provided in .
fMRI scans during Hanja reading showed activation of the occipital regions bilaterally including the lingual gyrus, extending to the parietal cortex bilaterally from the prefrontal area, and both insula at the initial time point and six months after the onset of symptoms (, and ). Although the fusiform gyrus was partially activated bilaterally (, Supplementary Table 2 in the online-only Data Supplement), the patient could not read Hanja. At six months after symptom onset, his ability to read Hanja greatly improved; however fMRI revealed no significant changes in the fusiform gyrus region . Instead, both middle frontal gyri showed significantly greater activation after six months (, ).