A female patient in her 40s presented without a chief complaint. She had undergone a partial left mastectomy for left breast cancer 2 years previously and currently was on adjuvant hormone therapy. Postoperatively, the patient was undergoing follow-up examinations at our breast oncology department. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a neoplastic lesion (lipoma) with invagination in the small intestine.
At admission, the patient was 161.8 cm tall, weighed 60.6 kg and had a body mass index of 23.15. The abdomen was flat and soft, with no tenderness or palpable mass. Admission laboratory blood tests revealed no noteworthy findings. Plain abdominal CT showed a fatty mass in the small intestine . Pseudo-kidney and target signs were observed. The tumor was 35 mm in diameter. The patient was followed, but there was no improvement in the tendency for tumor enlargement and pseudo-kidney signs. Based on these findings, surgery was recommended due to tumor enlargement and the possibility of intussusception from the tumor in the small intestine.
Laparoscopic-assisted partial resection of the small intestine was performed with the patient under general anesthesia. A pedunculated neoplastic lesion was found approximately 30 cm from the terminal end of the ileum on the oral side and intussusception was observed over approximately 20 cm on the anal side. Although edema was noted together with the duplicated intestine, there was good color tone and there were no ischemic changes. The intussusception was released via the Hutchinson technique, and partial ileal resection was performed.
The resected specimens revealed a pedunculated, club-shaped mass protruding from the mucosa into the lumen connected to the wall of the small intestine. The transverse and long axis tumor diameters were 36 and 78 mm, respectively and an excavation was observed on the serous surface .
Histopathologically, the mucosal epithelium showed inflammatory cell infiltration in the superficial layer of the area of tumor onset and the submucosa showed proliferation of atypical mature adipocytes . Gastric mucosa-like crypt epithelium and proper glandular tissue were found in the small intestine epithelium. Additionally, GCP-like glandular ducts were seen over the submucosa, and dilatation of the deep gastric pits and hyperplasia of the crypt epithelium were noted .
Immunohistochemical findings revealed that the mucosal epithelium of the small intestine was positive for CDX2, negative for MUC5AC, and negative for MUC6. The gastric crypt-like epithelium was negative for CDX2 and MUC2, and positive for MUC6. The goblet epithelium of the small intestine was positive for MUC2. The superficial gastric crypt-like epithelium and parts of the deep GCP were positive for MUC5AC. Gastrin was negative.
The patient progressed well postoperatively, and food intake began on day 4 postoperatively. The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 9.