A 4-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented to our emergency department with one day of worsening abdominal pain. The pain was diffuse but greatest in his periumbilical area. His mother also noticed new-onset abdominal distention. He demonstrated decreased appetite but had no emesis. His last bowel movement was the previous evening and was normal. Upon presentation, the patient was febrile to 38.7 °C. On exam, the patient’s abdomen was soft but distended with tenderness to palpation around the umbilicus and in the left hemiabdomen. Labs were significant for leukocytosis (WBC 20.1) but otherwise unremarkable. The patient was tested for influenza A/B and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)—all of which were negative.
A transabdominal ultrasound was performed which demonstrated a normal appendix. Moderate volume complex ascites with particulate matter was also noted on this study. Given the unexplained presence of debris-containing intraperitoneal fluid, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was obtained. This study showed a large cystic lesion in the left hemiabdomen, measuring 7.3 × 11.7 × 14.9 cm, which extended from the greater curvature of the stomach to the dome of the bladder . The cyst was noted to exert mass effect on the small bowel and colon, but there was no evidence of obstruction.
The patient was admitted to the pediatric surgery service. The following day, the patient was taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy. Upon entering the peritoneal cavity a large thin-walled cyst was apparent, occupying the majority of the lower hemiabdomen. The cyst contained serous fluid and appeared to be multilocular. There were multiple solid components floating within the cystic fluid, all several centimeters in length. The cyst was carefully elevated out of the abdomen and traced to its origin in the lesser sac. The thin walls of the cyst necessitated careful handling to avoid rupture. The inferior and lateral borders of the cyst were continuous with the omentum, and the cyst was separated from the omentum using electrocautery and a LigaSure device (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota). The superior-most attachment of the cyst was then explored . It appeared that the cyst was arising from the confluence of the transverse mesocolon and the inferior aspect of the tail of the pancreas. It was not clear if the cyst was in communication with the pancreatic ductal system, so the LigaSure device was jettisoned and meticulous sharp dissection was employed to free the cyst from the inferior aspect of the pancreatic tail. There was no bleeding or leakage of fluid from the pancreas, indicating that the ductal system was not involved. The cyst was then removed intact from the patient’s abdomen and placed on the back table . Off the surgical field, fluid from the cyst was aspirated and sent for amylase, lipase, and triglycerides . Results of these studies were not consistent with pancreatic or chylous fluid. Gross pathological analysis of the specimen found a 351-g cystic mass with dimensions of 15.0 × 11.0 × 4.0 centimeters. Congested vasculature and dilated lymphatic structures raised the question of whether this was originally of lymphangiomatous origin or whether these changes were due to torsion of the mass causing lymphatic and vascular congestion. There were solid components of necrotic fat suspended within the cystic fluid. Ultimately, this mass was felt to represent an omental cyst of indeterminate histologic origin. Immunohistochemical analysis was not performed.
Postoperatively, the patient returned to the surgical floor. His subsequent course was unremarkable and he was discharged on postoperative day number two. The patient was seen in clinic four weeks after discharge and was doing well. His mother felt that his appetite had improved compared to his preoperative state, perhaps indicating that the cyst was causing some degree of subclinical early satiety prior to presentation.