A 68-year-old asthmatic male patient presented to our center with 12 days history of melena. He denied any previous episode of melena or hematochezia or bleeding from another site. The patient did not have any other associated symptom, and had no other co-morbidities, or medication use. Upon referral, he was uncomfortable and looked pale. He was vitally unstable, with a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and a pulse rate of 120 beats/min. The examination revealed the presence of clotted blood on the anal verge, and some tarry stool on digital rectal examination. The hemoglobin level was 7.7 g/dl, the hematocrit was 22.8, and the blood urea nitrogen was 8 mg/dl. The prothrombin time and the partial thromboplastin time were normal.
Resuscitation was performed with transfusion of 2 units of packed red blood cells and intravenous fluids. He was admitted to the ICU for intensive monitoring. After admission and stabilization, upper and lower endoscopies were performed without demonstrating the bleeding site. They only revealed clotted and red blood throughout the colon.
Technetium-labeled red blood cell bleeding scan was done to localize the site of bleeding. This scan showed no evidence of early focal increased uptake in the abdomen to indicate active gastrointestinal bleeding during early images, but in the delayed images, it revealed that there was a focal uptake in the right and transverse colon. After that, capsule endoscopy was also performed without findings. As the angiography became available, the patient underwent selective angiography without findings noted at that time. These tests were inconclusive because they were performed while the episodes of bleeding ceased.
After 8 days of conservative management and negative investigations to define the cause of the bleeding, a sudden drop in hemoglobin level from 10.8 mg/dl to 6.9 mg/dl occurred over 12 h, which mandated operative management. Exploratory laparotomy was performed. Extensive jejunal saccular pouches were found 10 cm distal to duodenojejunal junction extending 1.6 m distally Fig. . The bleeding was difficult to control and the decision to clamp the major branched was performed. Division of the small bowel proximal and distal to the diseased part using gastrointestinal stapler was performed with side to side primary anastomosis Fig. . The specimen was a part of small bowel, 117 cm in length, with congested wall and multiple pouches at the mesenteric site. Opening of the specimen showed normally looking mucosa with active bleeding that stopped after awhile. No polyps or masses were detected. We reviewed the angiography achieve after that and a suspicious shadow reflecting the diverticular outpouching was detected.
Microscopic examination of the specimen revealed many diverticula; some of which being true diverticula, while the others are devoid of muscularis propria (false diverticulae). Within the diverticula and in the intervening portions of the bowel wall, there were numerous dilated thick- and thin-walled small blood vessels in the submucosa. Additionally, submucosal intermediate-sized vascular clusters and feeder vessels in the muscularis propria and serosa were present. The overall features were those of small intestinal diverticulosis and arteriovenous malformations. The latter involves the diverticula and intervening portions of the bowel wall Fig. .
Postoperatively, the patient was doing well, discharged home on day 5 postoperatively, with an uneventful postoperative course. He was followed up 2 years after that without complications.