A 32-year-old male presented to the ED after experiencing three days of nausea and vomiting. Additionally, he reported anorexia with constipation for three days, and obstipation for one day. He had no relevant past medical history, was taking no medications, and had no allergies. Review of the electronic health record revealed the patient had been evaluated two weeks prior following a motor vehicle collision (MVC). He had been the restrained driver in a two-car collision with associated airbag deployment and heavy front-end damage. He was seen approximately 30 minutes after the MVC at a community hospital without a trauma center designation. At the time, he was hemodynamically stable and did not have any abdominal pain or bruising. He was evaluated by an attending physician and, after a primary and secondary trauma survey, was discharged without any indication for imaging or further evaluation.
For the current ED visit, his presenting vital signs were as follows: temperature 97.8 degrees Fahrenheit; heart rate 89 beats per minute; blood pressure 126/73 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg); respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute; and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. Physical examination revealed a soft but diffusely tender abdomen with voluntary guarding in all quadrants. There was no rebound, rigidity, or palpable mass. Further, no external signs of trauma were appreciated. The remainder of his examination was unremarkable, including bowel sounds, which were present and normoactive. On history-taking he denied new trauma aside from the known MVC, and had been taking acetaminophen since the accident for pain control.
Notable laboratory values were as follows: hemoglobin 13.2 grams (g) per deciliter (dL) (reference [ref] range: 13.5–16.5 g/dL), hematocrit 40.4 % (40.0–49.0% ref range), anion gap 9 milliequivalents (mEq) per liter (L) (ref range: 5–17 mEq/L), aspartate aminotransferase 21 international units (IU) per L (ref range: 8–40 IU/L), and alanine aminotransferase 14 IU/L (ref range: 15–45 IU/L). While awaiting computed tomography (CT), a point-of-care abdominal ultrasound examination was completed. There was no free fluid visualized in the hepatorenal, splenorenal, or pelvic windows. Further, there was no mass visualized within the abdominal cavity. Subsequently, a CT of the abdomen with intravenous (IV) contrast revealed a large intramural fluid collection occluding the lumen of the ascending colon, with resulting bowel obstruction. .
We inserted a nasogastric tube – with return of non-bilious stomach contents – for gastric decompression and administered IV fluids. He was admitted to the surgical service for observation and was taken to the operating room two days later for bowel resection. He was discharged on postoperative day six. His course was complicated by a minor surgical site infection, which was managed with point-of-care drainage. No antibiotics were required. At his five-week follow-up appointment, he reported normal bowel movements and eating habits, and was cleared to resume full activity.