A 54-year-old man was referred to our institution, he complained pain on his left thigh for 2 years. The pain was felt in the midthigh region. There were no other symptoms from the anamnesis. Patient previously had pathological fracture 3 years ago on the left femoral shaft. It occurs after the patient was slipped on the bathroom and fell. The patient had undergone curettage, open reduction and internal fixation at district general hospital. Histopathological examination after first surgery suggested fibrous dysplasia. On physical examination, the lump was palpable on his postero-medial thigh. The lumps were firm and non-tender on palpation, fixated, and the size was around 14 × 8 × 11 cm .
The patient underwent diagnostical procedures, including a blood test, plain radiograph, and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Laboratory findings were within normal ranges. A shows the pre-fracture condition 3 years ago, while B shows the fracture line in the diaphyseal of the left femur. C shows femoral radiograph that revealed lytic geographic lesion at femoral diaphysis, cortical disruption, interrupted periosteal reaction, soft tissue mass, and internal fixation attached to the femoral bone. Femoral MRI indicated a tumor on femoral diaphysis that measured 20 × 10 × 14 cm and displayed low to intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images. T2-weighted images displayed a heterogenous lesion, containing areas of low to hyperintense area. Some area showed metal artifacts due to metallic implants . The histopathological result from core biopsy suggested chondrosarcoma.
The patient underwent total femur resection with wide surgical margin. He was placed on supine position. The surgical incision started 4 cm proximal to the greater trochanter, it is brought curved distally to the medial thigh until anteromedial aspect of tibial tuberosity. Superficial femoral artery and vein were identified. Rectus femoris and some parts of vastus lateral muscle were preserved. The tumor was removed with wide surgical margin . Reconstruction after total femur resection was done using total femur megaprothesis (D). The remaining hip capsule was sutured tightly with mersilene tape. Psoas muscle was tenodesed to the anterior hip capsule. External rotator muscles were sutured to the posterior hip capsule. Remaining abductor tendon is attached to the lateral aspect of the prothesis. Sartorius was sutured to the rectus femoris muscle.
The surgery took 7 h. The amount of bleeding during total femur resection was 1300 cc. There was no complication during or after surgery. We mobilized the patient with non-weight bearing and after one month of surgery we change it to partial weight bearing as tolerated. The length of stay in the hospital was 7 days.
The histopathology examination from the resected tumor showed cartilage matrix and hypercellular chondrocyte. The chondrocytes were varied in shape, atypical, larger in size, and hyperchromatic nuclei. There were large number of binucleation with mitosis, and same myxoid changes. The conclusion from the histopathology examination was chondrosarcoma grade II .
At the 12 months follow up, the patient was in good condition. Patient had Trendelenburg gait and weak extensor knee muscles. Patient needed one crutch for walking. MSTS score evaluated functional outcomes, where the patient scored 16 or 53%. The patient did not complain of any pain. The patient also showed no sign of recurrence 12 months after the surgical procedure.
At follow up, the patient was in good condition and could work normally.