An 80-year-old woman with a history of HAE, angina pectoris, and cerebral infarction was referred to the emergency department due to severe pain in her lower left abdomen. She reported a one-day history of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. She showed no other signs of edema of her skin or airway. Her previous attacks included abdominal pain and were occasionally accompanied by skin symptoms. Although she had experienced multiple HAE gastrointestinal attacks throughout her lifetime, they were all self-limited without administration of C1-INH concentrate. Her vital signs were a blood pressure of 163/65 mmHg, a heart rate of 68 beats per minute, and a temperature of 37.1 °C. On examination, the abdomen was soft and nondistended with tenderness and rebound in the left lower quadrant. She claimed that the pain was similar to her previous episodes of gastrointestinal attacks; however, her history of angina pectoris and cerebral infarction suggested increased vascular risks, making it necessary to exclude other diagnoses, such as mesenteric ischemia, mesenteric embolism, and ischemic enteritis.
Laboratory investigations showed an elevated white blood cell count of 17.4 × 105/μL and a lactate concentration of 2.80 mmol/L. Other test results were unremarkable, including C-reactive protein, liver function, and electrolytes. Subsequent laboratory tests revealed a serum C4 level of 6 mg/dL (reference range: 20–50 mg/dL) and C1-INH activity as low as 15% (reference range: 70–130%). Computed tomography (CT) showed edema of the stomach, which was most pronounced at the gastric angle , and mechanical obstruction of the proximal small bowel with mild ascites . The latter indicated surgical intervention; however, the underlying cause was not evident. She had no abdominal distention, previous abdominal surgeries, obstipation or free air, suggesting that the HAE attack possibly caused the obstruction.
Following guidelines suggesting C1-INH concentrate as the first-line choice for episodes of acute gastrointestinal HAE, the patient was administered an infusion of 1000 international units of C1-INH concentrate . Typically, most patients show relief of abdominal and skin symptoms 15–20 min after treatment . However, abdominal pain alleviation was mild even an hour after administration of the medication, while follow-up CT showed little change in the bowel obstruction, thus eliciting diagnostic laparoscopy. Intraoperative findings showed bloody ascites and a hernial orifice formed by the transverse colon and sigmoid colon omental appendices with the small bowel incarcerated . Ligation of the hernial band showed instantaneous blood flow improvement in the bowel, eliminating the need for any bowel resection.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) postoperatively due to possible laryngeal edema after extubation. However, she was successfully extubated; no further doses of C1-INH concentrate were necessary, and she was moved to the general ward. She was discharged with no apparent complications on hospital day 7. Subsequent laboratory tests showed elevation of C1-INH activity (45%) and serum C4 levels (16 mg/dL) compared with those observed on admission (15% and 6 mg/dL, respectively).