A 51-year-old woman, 55 kg, 155 cm, presented with a left breast tumor. The local skin has no redness, swelling, ulceration, or “orange peel-like” change, without pain, nipple bleeding, and nipple depression. The examination revealed a mass of about 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm, which was hard in texture, with poorly defined borders, a less smooth surface, and no tenderness. An enlarged lymph node of about 1.5 cm × 0.5 cm was found in the left axilla. The immunohistochemical pathology report suggested invasive unspecified carcinoma. E-cadherin (membrane +), ER (weak +, 5%), PR (weak +, 10%), CK5/6 (-), Her-2 (3 +), P120 (membrane +), Ki (+, 40%).
Medical history: No previous history of the disease. No family history of genetic predisposition. No preoperative history of blood transfusion. No psychosocial history.
Six cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (docetaxel 120 mg, epirubicin 120 mg, and cyclophosphamide 950 mg) were performed in the TEC regimen. During chemotherapy, neutropenia occurred after IV chemotherapy, and it improved after treatment with recombinant human granulocyte-stimulating factor. The results of physical examination showed that the two breasts were symmetrical after chemotherapy, there was no obvious mass in both breasts, and there was no enlargement in axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes. Dynamic re-examination of breast color Doppler ultrasound indicated that the mass was reduced. No platelet drop was observed during chemotherapy. Three months later, a modified radical left breast cancer was performed and intraoperative Lobaplatin 60 mg was administered to irrigate the wound. Five days after the modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer, the incision was well healed and the drainage tube was not removed from the operated area. The efficacy was evaluated as PR.
Trastuzumab targeted therapy was given for the first time 3 days after surgery. Pre-treatment routine blood tests showed normal. A total of 8 mg/kg trastuzumab was administered intravenously. Six hours after infusion, there was gingival bleeding, and subcutaneous ecchymosis in the operation area, and the red liquid was drawn out from the drainage tube. Routine blood tests showed a WBC count of 9.82 × 10^9/L, a PLT count of 2 × 10^9/L, and an NE count of 8.79 × 10^9/L . Four coagulation tests showed normal. Meanwhile, a bone marrow puncture was performed to exclude the primary decrease in platelet. Fresh frozen plasma and platelets of the same type were transfused, and human immunoglobulin injection and recombinant human thrombopoietin were added. The patient gradually returned to normal.
One month later, the patient returned to the hospital for targeted therapy. Before treatment, routine blood tests were normal, platelet count was normal, and the four coagulation tests were normal. No other medication was given. A total of 6 mg/kg trastuzumab was administered intravenously. Gum bleeding with scattered petechiae and petechiae under the skin reappeared at 6 h. The routine blood test showed that the WBC count was 11.10 × 10^9/L, HGB count was 122 g/L, PLT count was 3 × 10^9/L, and NE count was 10.26 × 10^9/L . The four coagulation tests showed normal. He improved after symptomatic treatment with human immunoglobulin, blood transfusion, dexamethasone, and recombinant human platelet thrombopoietin.
Since sharp increases in leukocytes and neutrophils in patients, it is hypothesized that the complement reaction is the main cause of the dramatic decrease in platelets. Therefore, the extracted platelets were subjected to a complement hemolysis assay . It was shown that a large number of platelets from the patient were destroyed after the addition of trastuzumab and complement. In contrast, platelets in other HER2 breast cancer patients maintained normal morphology.
The patient was rechecked every 3 months after discharge, and the blood routine, liver and kidney function, and tumor markers were normal. No further decline in platelets was detected. The patient’s compliance was good During the follow-up with no adverse or unexpected conditions.