A 66-year-old man presented with a 1 mo history of neck and shoulder pain and intermittent fevers.
His fevers had no clear pattern in timing or duration. His neck and shoulder pain was not sharp, with no neck and shoulder stiffness or limited movement, and was relieved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, intermittent fevers of 37.7-38.9 °C persisted. Therefore, he was given empirical antimicrobial therapy with moxifloxacin for 5 d in his native hospital. However, 2 d after leaving the hospital, the fever (up to 38.8 °C) returned, and his neck and shoulder pain got worse.
His past medical history included diabetes and cervical spondylosis.
Physical examination showed no palpable lymph nodes, organomegaly, or cutaneous lesions.
Blood laboratory results were as follows: Leukocytosis (14.39 × 109/L, 84.4% neutrophils), elevated C-reactive protein (126.3 mg/L), elevated transaminases (alanine aminotransferase: 71 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase: 51 U/L), elevated alkaline phosphatase (208 U/L), elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (313 U/L), and hypoproteinemia (32.5 g/L). The anti-Epstein-Barr virus capsid antigen immunoglobulin G test was positive, and the tuberculosis antibody tests and tubercle-specific immune responses were negative. Urinalysis indicated 1 + protein, moderate blood (61 red blood cells), and trace leukocyte esterase (10 white blood cells/ hibernation-promoting factor). Blood and urine cultures were negative. Electrocardiogram, serum protein electrophoresis, and tumor markers, as well as abdomen and heart ultrasonography were normal. The trephine bone marrow biopsy showed hypocellularity, and the aspirate revealed granulocyte hyperplasia but no cellular atypia. Flow cytometry was negative for any atypical lymphocytes.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed local bronchiectasis in the upper left and right middle lobes, furthermore, an obviously osteolytic lesion in T10 vertebral body was also noted . Because of neck and shoulder pain, a thoracic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. It indicated T2 and T10 vertebrae bone destruction, suggesting evident malignancy . Based on these findings, the patient underwent a positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examination for further evaluation. On PET-CT, increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity involved the left sphenoid wing, the C4-5, T2, T10, L5, S1, and S5 vertebrae, the right humeral head, both sides of the humerus, and the right proximal femur. These lesions were identified as hypermetabolic lesions with a maximum standard uptake value of 18.64. Different degrees of bone destruction could be observed in corresponding sites, indicating lymphoma or multiple myeloma involvement . No lymph node or extranodal site (such as the lung, liver, spleen, etc.) lesion was identified. CT-guided biopsy of the T10 vertebral body was performed and the pathological diagnosis was ALCL. Microscopic examination showed that the lesions of the vertebral body were infiltrated by pleomorphic tumor cells that have scanty cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei. The neoplastic cells exhibited small- to medium-sized, irregular nuclei and abundant clear cytoplasm. Hallmark cells (horseshoe-shaped or doughnut cells) were present and Reed-Sternberg cell-like cell were also noted . Immunohistochemistry showed that the large atypical cells were positive for ALK , CD3 , and CD30 , but negative for CD2, CD5, CD7, CD4, CD8, CD10, CD19, CD79a, B-cell lymphoma-2, multiple myeloma-1, epithelial membrane antigen, and pan-cytokeratin. The proliferative index (Ki-67) was approximately 60% . Moreover, we indagated the specific fusion partner using a two color, two fusion translocation probe, designed to detect the translocation between the ALK gene located at 2p23 and the NPM gene located at 5q35, and real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis demonstrated that the NPM/ALK fusion product was positive in the bone marrow.