A 33-year-old man presented with a left-sided, painless scrotal mass suspicious for testicular cancer. Scrotal ultrasound showed a 3 cm mass of heterogeneous echogenicity in the left testicle with irregular, poorly defined borders. Serum tumour markers were elevated with an alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) of 28135 μg/l, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-HCG) of 19700 U/l and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 4421 U/l. Staging thoraco-abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed bulky retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, left hydronephrosis, metastases to both liver and lung, as well as mediastinal and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy.
The patient underwent left inguinal orchiectomy and routine biopsy of the contra-lateral testis in a secondary referral centre. A double-J stent was inserted into the left ureter.
Histo-pathological examination of the left testis revealed a mixed GCT consisting of two-thirds classical seminoma and one-third non-seminomatous tumour with embryonal carcinoma and yolk sac tumour components. In the adjacent parenchyma intra-tubular germ cell neoplasia was found. The right testis biopsy showed normal testicular tissue without intra-tubular germ cell neoplasia. The tumour stage was determined to be pT1 cN3 cM1b S3 (TNM; ) and clinical stage IIIC poor prognosis group (Lugano classification; ).
Subsequently, the patient was discharged to a community oncologist and treated with four cycles of cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin chemotherapy. Five months after completing chemotherapy all serum tumour markers normalised. Regular follow-up thoraco-abdominal CTs showed residual retroperitoneal and supra-clavicular lymphadenopathy, along with sub-centimetre pulmonary and liver masses. As these post-chemotherapy lesions were small and did not show interval growth, surgical resection was not performed. Four and a half years after orchiectomy the patient was referred to our academic tertiary referral centre with a newly enlarging retroperitoneal mass. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) had been performed at the community and this demonstrated a partially FDG-avid retroperitoneal mass infiltrating the left renal vessels, left ureter and abdominal aorta . Tumour markers remained normal. The hepatic, pulmonary, mediastinal and supra-clavicular lesions were unchanged. Both kidneys appeared normal on abdominal CT and FDG-PET.
Left retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy with en-bloc resection of the left kidney and the infrarenal aorta was performed. An aorto-bi-iliacal graft was inserted.
Histology of the en-bloc resected specimen revealed a retroperitoneal GCT metastasis with a maximum diameter of 12 cm. The metastasis consisted of mature cystic teratoma containing peripheral nerves, cartilage and respiratory, squamous and pigmented epithelium .
Within the teratoma, a 2.5 cm lesion with the typical appearance of a papillary renal cell carcinoma was found. Areas of papillary and tubular histoarchitecture were seen . The cell nuclei appeared to be pleomorphic containing fine-granular chromatin. The cytoplasm of these cells was eosinophilic .
Immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR, Figure c), CD 10 (not shown), focal expression of renal cell carcinoma antigen (RCC; Figure d) and cytokeratin 7 (CK 7; not shown). Vimentin and AFP were negative (not shown). Histologically, no renal cell cancer was found in the removed left kidney.
No additional chemotherapy was administered after surgery. Currently, 2 years after retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy, the patient remains progression-free with stable disease showing no further tumour growth, metabolic PET-activity or tumour marker elevation.