A 20-year-old man with no medical history was referred to the Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) emergency room at Shenzhen People’s Hospital on June 17, 2008. He had an extended laceration of his left ear by a shattered beer bottle during a violent fight 3 h ago.
On examination, the external auditory canal of his left ear was amputated transversely, the tragus was lost, the cartilage was exposed, and the auricle was avulsed with only 5-mm skin attachment anteriorly at the crus of helix . Other physical examinations were normal.
After informed consent was obtained, the patient was admitted and taken to the operation room within 3 h for the first-stage surgery under general anesthesia.
First, the amputated ear segment was cleaned with saline, oxydol, and a diluted povidone-iodine solution. The irregular lacerated skin and cartilage were trimmed, and the anterior skin of the amputated segment and the external acoustic pore were sutured appositionally with multiple, interrupted No. 5–0 nylon sutures. Second, the skin on the posterior aspect of the amputated segment was separated from the cartilage with perichondrium preserved . Next, the wound was extended at the posterior sulcus of the auricle longitudinally by 1 cm upward and downward, and the postauricular mastoid skin was elevated about 1 cm to fit the size of the cartilage . Direct suturing was done between the margin and the free edge of the ear, and the wound was closed completely. Then, using an inversion maneuver, the cartilage and the inner side of the posterior skin of the auricle were pushed into the postauricular underlying muscle bed to provide nourishment and blood supply for the cartilage as extensively as possible . A suction drain was placed, and the ear was packed with iodoform gauze and pressure bandage to strengthen the effect of inversion .
Antibiotics consisting of intravenous cefuroxime 1.5 g every 12 h (GlaxoSmithKline Manufacturing S.p.A. Italy, with 1st dose given at the start of surgery), and intravenous metronidazole 0.5 g bid (Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine Co. Ltd., China) were both given for 1 week. Intravenous dextran 40 (Xian Wanlong Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., China) infusions were given for 7 days. The patient was also given tetanus vaccine.
The nylon sutures were removed on postoperative day 7, and no external auditory canal stenosis or tissue necrosis was observed.
The patient underwent a second-stage procedure 27 days after the initial surgery. On examination, the left auricle healed well without inflammation or skin ischemia; however, the auricular lobule had partial necrosis .
The auricle was released from the postauricular area, and the normal auricle structure was restored . Then, a skin defect (4 × 2 cm2) of the posterior aspect of the ear was noted, and a full-thickness skin grafting of the abdominal wall was applied to reconstruct it. A suction drain was placed, and the ear was covered with pressure bandage . The patient was given dextran 40 (Xian Wanlong Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.) and vasodilators for 7 days.
The patient had a good recovery with minimal volume loss of the earlobe 15 days after the second-stage surgery . The location and contour were normal. The color and temperature of the left ear were similar to those of the right one. The patient was followed up for nearly a decade, and continued to have good cosmetic and functional outcomes, with the size about 90% of the size of his right ear. The sensation and algesia were a little less sensitive .