The patient was a 13-year-old Japanese girl who presented with left side lumbar pain that had persisted for 7 months. She also complained of pain and torpor of the left lower limb for 2 weeks prior to admission for the initial surgery. A neurological examination revealed that the muscle strength of the left side iliopsoas, quadriceps femoris, and tibial anterior muscles was 4/5, 4/5, and 5/5, respectively.
An X-ray examination revealed no remarkable space occupying lesions. Computed tomography (CT) showed an osteolytic lesion on the left side of the L4 pedicle . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumorous lesion extending from the L4 pedicle to the epidural space . CT-guided biopsy was performed. Histologically, the tumor showed typical features of osteoblastoma, which was composed of woven bone trabeculae rimmed with a single layer of osteoblasts. There was no marked nuclear pleomorphism or mitotic activity.
We performed left side facetectomy and gross total resection of the tumor , and pathological diagnosis was OB without malignant features. The tumor was composed of irregular woven bone trabeculae. These woven bone trabeculae were lined with a single layer of osteoblasts with no conspicuous permeation to the surrounding bone. Osteoclast-type, multinucleated giant cells without atypia were present. Almost all of the tumor cells were p53-negative .
Although her symptoms showed transient improvement, she complained of left side lumbar pain again at 4 months after surgery. CT and MRI showed local recurrence of the tumor . Based on the radiological findings, we performed a second surgery. However, it was difficult to perform gross total resection of the tumor because of adhesion between the tumor and surrounding tissues. Histologically, the tumor showed the same features as the previous one: OB without malignant change.
At 3 months after the second surgery, the lumbar pain and pain of the left lower limb recurred. CT and MRI showed a recurrent tumor extending from the epidural space to the paravertebral area . We performed palliative resection of the tumor due to the worsening of lumbar pain and grade 4/5 muscle weakness. The pathological diagnosis was OB with no malignant change. Hematoma and mild fibrosis were also observed, suggesting ABC-like changes. There were no obvious features of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. CIRT (64 Gy [RBE] in 16 fractions) was performed over 4 weeks as an additional treatment for the residual lesion after the third surgery, because the tumor was locally aggressive. At 10 years after CIRT following multiple surgeries, MRI and X-ray showed neither tumor recurrence nor postoperative spinal deformity and the patient was ambulatory with slight muscle weakness of the left lower limb .