A 23-year-old Caucasian woman, 22 weeks into her first pregnancy, presented to an outside hospital following the sudden onset of severe headache associated with nausea and vomiting. She denied weakness or numbness, but reported occasional double vision. Her past medical history was significant for an irregular heartbeat, gastroesophageal reflux disease and hypertension. Our patient's only physical exam finding was a right lower visual field deficit but otherwise she was intact. Non-contrasted computed tomography of her head revealed an acute left parieto-occipital hemorrhage with mild mass effect. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 5 × 2.6 cm hematoma in the left parieto-occipital region abutting the ventricle with flow voids, characteristic of an AVM . Mild mass effect was noted with no midline shift or effacement of basilar cisterns. Digital subtraction cerebral angiography demonstrated that the nidus was being supplied by the posterior branches of her left middle cerebral, left anterior and posterior cerebral arteries. The majority of the venous drainage was via her superior sagittal sinus. No intra-nidal or flow-related aneurysms were noted. Our patient was counseled with regards to her options and opted for endovascular embolization followed by surgical resection of the AVM.
Our patient was brought to the endovascular suite three weeks after her initial hemorrhage. The procedure was coordinated with obstetricians as well as anesthesiologists to ensure the safety of both the mother and fetus. During the procedure, various measures were taken to minimize exposure of the fetus to ionizing radiation. Our patient's abdomen was fully covered with lead drapes. In addition, instead of performing a full angiogram prior to the embolization, we used a prior MRI scan to determine the primary pedicle with the greatest promise of having nidal feeders and then selectively targeted that vessel during the embolization procedure. The guide catheter was positioned in her distal left internal carotid artery. A microcatheter was navigated over a guidewire to select the inferior division of the middle cerebral artery feeding the AVM. Visipaque™ 320 (iodixanol) contrast agent was used at half strength. After ensuring the selected branch was feeding the nidus, Onyx-18 (Onyx Liquid Embolic System®) was used in the standard fashion [-] to embolize the AVM. Control runs after embolization revealed the successful reduction of the nidus by approximately 50%, preserving venous outflow . After the procedure, our patient was transferred to the neurosurgical intensive care unit for close observation. She had an uncomplicated postoperative course.
Three weeks later, our patient was brought to the neurosurgical operating suite and anesthetized by obstetric anesthesia. The obstetrics team was also in the room and was monitoring the fetus during the entire procedure. After insertion of a right femoral sheath in the standard fashion, our patient was put in the prone position for the craniotomy. Stealth guidance was used to plan our craniotomy prior to incision. The craniotomy was centered over the left parieto-occipital AVM and using the standard microsurgical technique we proceeded to safely and effectively resect the AVM. Once we were satisfied with our resection we performed an intraoperative cerebral angiogram. Once again, all possible measures were taken to reduce radiation and contrast exposure to mother and fetus. The angiogram revealed complete resection of the AVM. The wound was closed in the standard fashion and our patient was transferred to the neurosurgical intensive care unit.
Our patient recovered well without complications and was discharged home on postoperative day two. At the time of this submission, our patient had delivered her baby at 39 weeks via a normal vaginal delivery at an outside hospital without the need for high-risk obstetric personnel. Both mother and baby are healthy and with no complications related to the procedures.