We report an 80-year-old female (body mass index 20.8 kg/m2) who presented to our clinic for further evaluation of her dyspnoea [New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification III]. Her cardiovascular risk factors included arterial hypertension, and her relevant medical history contained atrial fibrillation, rheumatoid arthritis, and a bilateral pulmonary embolism in 2014 after varicectomy. The patient was on diuretics, a beta-blocker, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and oral anticoagulation.
The physical examination revealed the following abnormalities: mild oedema of the lower legs bilaterally and reduced breathing sounds bilaterally. Auscultation of the heart showed a holosystolic murmur (II/VI) at the apex and left lower sternal border. The echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricular function and moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. The right ventricle was enlarged, with preserved function (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion: 21 mm). In the continuous wave Doppler measurement, pulmonary artery systolic blood pressure was significantly elevated at 86 mmHg. Coronary heart disease and pulmonary venous congestion had been ruled out by coronary angiography and chest X-ray, respectively. However, there were small pleural effusions on both sides.
Due to the patient’s complaints and the pathological findings, we decided to examine the right heart with a balloon-tipped pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) for further clarification. The RHC was performed in the catheter lab via the right femoral vein. We used a standard balloon-tipped PAC (5French, CORODYNTM, B. BRAUN), which was placed in the left pulmonary artery under radiological control. Immediately after the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure measurements, haemoptysis occurred, which rapidly increased in intensity and led to respiratory failure. This event was accompanied by rapid haemodynamic deterioration, necessitating cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for 4 min. The patient was orally intubated and ventilated immediately.
Concurrently, angiographic imaging of the left pulmonary artery was performed via a 6 Fr multipurpose guiding catheter (MB1, Medtronic). As a result, rupture of a lateral branch of the left pulmonary artery could be identified as the cause of the haemorrhagic shock . Due to the patient’s comorbidities and age, we initially decided against surgical treatment, in consultation with the heart surgeon. We inserted a coronary intervention wire (Runthrough®, TERUMO®) into the periphery of the perforated vessel and performed balloon occlusion [Maverick MonorailTM, Boston Scientific; 4.5 mm × 20 mm; pressure: 6 atmosphere (atm)], proximal to the perforation. The new angiographic image now showed a complete balloon occlusion of the perforated vessel . Balloon occlusion was continued for a total of 40 min.
Meanwhile, the patient's haemodynamic situation stabilized. The activated clotting time (ACT) was 123 s. The repeat angiographic image continued to show contrast agent leakage from the perforation site after 40 min. Due to persistent bleeding from the perforated pulmonary artery, we decided to embolize the perforated vessel with microcoils (Hilal Embolization MicrocoilsTM, COOK®, Medical). For safety reasons, to control bleeding and ensure a stable haemodynamic situation throughout the planned bail-out procedure, we decided to implant the coils through a second interventional catheter. To this end, another 6 Fr MB 1 guiding catheter was placed in the left pulmonary artery via the left femoral vein. We then used this catheter to insert a second wire (Runthrough®, TERUMO®) into the target vessel past the blocked balloon. For this purpose, the inflation pressure was briefly reduced to 2–4 atm. We then advanced a microcatheter (Finecross® MG, TERUMO®) via the second interventional wire. The perforation cavity was selectively visualized via the inserted microcatheter , after which embolization was performed with four coils into the cavity. The angiographic image showed complete embolization of the perforation cavity . Consequently, the patient's haemodynamic situation stabilized at this point.
Following the procedure, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit while haemodynamically stable. Sonography revealed a haematothorax on the left side, which was relieved by drainage. Laboratory findings showed a decrease in haemoglobin concentration from 12 g/dL to 9 g/dL. The patient was extubated on the following day. During her stay, she developed pneumonia, which was treated with antibiotics (ampicillin/sulbactam). Ten days after the index procedure, a computed tomography scan of the thorax was performed, which showed a favourable result after coiling . In addition, there was no evidence of chronic thrombo-embolic pulmonary hypertension.
Due to the patient’s pre-existing atrial fibrillation, with significant atrioventricular block in the clinical follow-up, a permanent pacemaker was implanted before discharge. On Day 26 post-index event, the patient was discharged without further sequelae. The echocardiography at discharge showed a systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 50 mmHg, perhaps due to the increase in diuretic doses compared with the day of hospital admission.
At follow-up, 1 month later, the patient reported no further episodes of haemoptysis or any discomfort related to the pulmonary artery rupture. Echocardiographic findings were without significant changes.