An eighty-one year old Caucasian male presented in June 2006 to the Emergency Department of the Brooklyn Hospital Center with a one-month history of blood- tinged stools. He was admitted to the medical service for further management. The surgical team was consulted for evaluation of pain associated with a palpable mass in the right iliac fossa. The pain was described as dull, non-radiating and constant in nature. It was rated a 3 on a 10-point intensity scale and there were no reported exacerbating or ameliorating factors. The patient's history was significant for intermittent constipation and repair of an incarcerated umbilical hernia three weeks prior.
On examination, vital signs were normal. The abdomen was non-distended with a 3-cm, midline, infraumbilical scar. Tenderness was noted on deep palpation of the right lower quadrant and a large mass was felt measuring approximately 5-cm × 5-cm. The lower margin could not be felt. The mass was also palpable on digital rectal exam. Femoral pulses were normal. Laboratory values were unremarkable. Fecal occult blood test was negative. Colonoscopy showed the cecum high in the right upper quadrant with no evidence of a cecal mass. Contrast computed tomography (CT) of both abdomen and pelvis revealed a 5-cm × 5-cm × 7.5-cm, enhancing, rounded, heterogeneous, well-defined mass in the right lower quadrant, ventral to the psoas muscle and displacing the terminal ileum anteriorly.
Chest X-ray was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis confirmed CT findings and showed that the mass abutted and compressed the external iliac vessels. Pseudoaneurysm was ruled out. Gallium and positron emission tomography (PET) scans revealed localized abnormal activity in the right lower quadrant. Octreoscan showed a solitary, abnormal lesion in the lower right quadrant consistent with previous findings. No other lesions, primary or metastatic, were demonstrated in any of these studies. Meticulous physical examination of the skin and lymph nodes also revealed no suspicious lesions. There was no evidence of appendicitis and biopsy was recommended. Exhaustive pathological and immunohistochemical analysis of the transabdominal CT-guided biopsy specimen revealed that tumor cells were positive for both synaptophysin and CK 20, but negative for TTF-1, CK7, WT-1, HBME-1, CD45, CD20, CD3, PAP, PSA, S100 and HMB-45. With such a staining profile, a definitive diagnosis of neuroendocrine (Merkel cell) carcinoma was made and we chose to forego further analysis.
The patient then underwent exploratory laparotomy and the mass was successfully excised along with an associated mesenteric lymph node. Final pathologic analysis of the mass was consistent with biopsy findings and the mesenteric lymph node was negative for tumor. Extubation was delayed due to difficult intubation and the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for observation. He was extubated the following day and transferred to the surgical floor where he had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day eight. The patient's care was then transferred to an oncologist at another institution where he is currently being monitored and evaluated for treatment with various chemotherapeutic regimens.