A 50-year-old woman complained of pain in her right wrist for 2 years. The pain was dull aching and aggravated on lifting objects with her right hand. She had a history of falls on her outstretched right hand 4 years earlier. She had no pain in other joints. She had no other pre-existing medical conditions and was right-hand dominant. On examination, tenderness was present over the dorsal aspect of the radial half of the wrist. Range of movements of the wrist was limited with palmar flexion of 50°, dorsiflexion of 40°, ulnar deviation of 30°, and radial deviation of only 10°. Watson’s scaphoid shift test was positive. Her grip strength was found to be 8 kg less than the contralateral side.
Her blood parameters including rheumatoid profile were found to be within normal limits. Radiographs of the wrist revealed scapholunate diastasis, arthritis of radio-scaphoid joint , and dorsal intercalated segment instability (DISI) . On further analysis of the radiographs, radial styloid beaking, and migration of capitate proximally into the space created by the scapholunate dissociation were also noted . Radiolunate joint space appeared normal. The scapholunate diastasis (Terry Thomas Sign) was measured and found to be 6.25 mm , which is normally supposed to be <3 mm. The lunate wound was found to be dorsally tilted about 30° from neutral , indicating the DISI deformity. The scapholunate angle was measured to be 100° , while it is normally expected to be between 30° and 60°. She was therefore diagnosed with SLAC. As per the Watson and Ballet classification of SLAC, it was classified as grade II, the radio-scaphoid joint was involved, but the capitolunate joint appeared normal . She underwent conservative management with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for 2 months but only had partial relief of symptoms. She was then given a local corticosteroid injection and the wrist was splinted for 1 month. She had satisfactory pain relief allowing her to return to her normal activities. The range of movements of the wrist improved to palmar flexion of 70°, dorsiflexion of 60°, ulnar deviation of 40°, and radial deviation of 15°. Correspondingly her grip strength also improved and was found to be only 5 kg less than the contralateral side when measured 1 month following the corticosteroid injection. This was sufficient for her to be able to carry on her routine daily activities and vocation without pain, and hence, no surgical intervention was performed during the 3 years of follow-up.