A healthy 10-year-old male patient (weight 53.3 kg and height 158.4 cm) was referred to the Radiological Department of our Institution.
He had not familiarity and risk factors for cardio-vascular diseases, congenital heart disease, arrhythmias and SCD. Karate practitioner (3 times/wk) without problems. Asymptomatic for chest pain, dyspnea, palpitation and syncope episodes.
The patient had a free previous medical history. In particular, born at term (38 wk), childbirth without any complications and birth weight was 2.4 kg. Regular growth.
Physical examination revealed no sign of cardiopathy and without any
cardiac added noises at chest auscultation. The patient’s temperature was 36 °C, heart rate was 72 bpm, respiratory rate was 13 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%.
Blood analysis revealed normal haematocrit and platelet count. The blood biochemistries, as well as urine analysis were normal. Creatinine value was 0.9 mg/dL and creatinine clearance was 106 mL/min (estimated with Cockcroft-Gault formula).
Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, correct atrial-ventricular conduction (QRS 0.09 ms) and non-specific alterations of ventricular recovery (QTc 0.39 ms). Echocardiographic findings included normal volumes of left ventricle and atrium. Normal function of atrioventricular, aortic e pulmonary valves. No septal defects. Normal diameter of ascending aorta. No pericardial effusion. RCA origin high and ectatic. Left coronary artery origin and course not detect. For these reasons, patient was undergoing to C-MRI.
C-MRI (Achieva, Philips Medical Systems, The Netherlands) using a 1.5-T scanner was performed. Was used a 32-channel MR cardiac array coil with patient in prone position. C-MRI protocol consisted of balanced steady-state free precession (BSSFP) cine-imaging, T2-weighted and T1-weighted inversion recovery images, and sequences for late enhancement evaluation. Contrast agent dose was 0.2 mL/kg (gadobutrol, 1.0 mmol/mL) with flow injection rate of 2.0 mL/s. BSSFP sequences were acquired in the three cardiac axis, T2-weighted and T1-weighted in transversal cardiac axis, and sequences after contrast agent in short cardiac axis covering the entire left ventricle. The exam showed concordance in atrial-ventricular and ventricular-artery communication, regular return of superior vena cava and pulmonary veins. Left ventricle normal for volume, thickening of posterior wall with multiple mitral accessory ropes. Regular contractile functionality (ejection fraction of 71%). Accentuated endocardial trabeculation. Regular volume of left atrium. Regular right cardiac sections. Probable anomalies of origin and course of LCx and LAD arteries. For this reason, the patient was scanned with third generation Dual Source C-CT 192 × 2-sections (SOMATOM Force, Siemens, Germany). Patient remained in sinus rhythm before examination without receiving βblocker. Patient received a non-ionic low-osmolality contrast agent Visipaque 320 mgI/mL (iodixanol; GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chalfont, United Kingdom), with a volume of 30 mL and flow injection rate of 5 mL/sec followed by saline injection at same volume and velocity. The scanning area began from the upper limit of the sternum to 1 cm below the diaphragm with superior to inferior direction. The parameters used for the exam were: 70 kV of tube voltage; automatic tube current modulation technique (CAREdose); rotation time, 0.28 sec; detector array, 192 × 0.6 mm; slice thickness, 0.75 mm and convolution kernel of B26. Was applied prospective ECG-triggered axial coronary protocol in a step-and-shoot scan mode and the exposure time was adjusted between 40%-70% of the cardiac cycle. After the examination, radiation CT dose index, dose length product and effective dose were recorded. Then the raw data was post-processed and was included the capture of the optimal images, multi-plane and maximum intensity projection reconstructions and volume rendering representations. C-CT confirmed anomalous origin of LCx artery from RPA associated with anomalous origin of LAD artery from RCA with proximal-medium course in front of RVOT and presences of coronary interconnections. Moreover, the examination showed the origin of a small diagonal branch from the left coronary sinus for the vascularization of the left ventricle wall .