A 60-year-old man was admitted with cough. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed an 11-cm mass in the right upper lobe that was suspected of invading the right side of the superior vena cava (SVC) almost from the proximal end of the right internal jugular vein to the right atrium inflow . The patient did not present with signs or symptoms of SVC obstruction. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) showed leiomyosarcoma of the lung . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed the high accumulation of FDG in the pulmonary tumor with a maximal standardized uptake value of 16.83; the absence of any other accumulation allowed us to exclude metastasis from another site. We diagnosed the patient with primary pulmonary leiomyosarcoma.
We considered complete resection of the tumor to be very difficult because of the tumor invasion, particularly that to the right atrium inflow of the superior vena cava, so we performed chemotherapy (doxorubicin monotherapy) for five cycles. We discussed the regimen for neoadjuvant treatment in a conference with orthopedic surgeons and medical oncologists. The recommended regimen for advanced soft tissue sarcoma is doxorubicin monotherapy or the combination of doxorubicin and ifosfamide. However, given that the combination therapy results in bone marrow toxicity more frequently than monotherapy, we selected doxorubicin monotherapy for neoadjuvant treatment. After chemotherapy, the tumor size shrank to 5.6 cm, and the distance of suspected invasion to the superior vena cava was reduced, rendering the tumor resectable with a sufficient surgical margin between the inflow of the atrium and the tumor .
We performed right upper lobectomy with combined resection of the superior vena cava and reconstructed the blood flow by an artificial vascular graft between the left brachiocephalic vein and right atrial appendage. We were able to remove the dense adhesion around the right brachiocephalic vein and right atrium inflow of the superior vena cava. However, we had to resect the superior vena cava around the azygous vein combinedly. The pathological findings revealed tumor invasion to the superior vena cava at that point. The tumor was completely resected by surgery . Pathological findings showed leiomyosarcoma and positivity for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and h-caldesmon . The tumor was found to have arisen in the lung and invaded the superior vena cava. The vessel lumen of the superior vena cava was intact, and the tumor had invaded the superior vena cava from the outside. The pathological response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy was Ef.1a. The patient was still alive without recurrence at 17 months postoperatively.