We report a case of a 56-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man from the Kandy region who presented to the Peradeniya Teaching Hospital with a history of high-grade fever of 3 weeks’ duration associated with drenching night sweats. During this period, he had marked loss of appetite, and he had lost 6 kg of weight over the course of 3 weeks. He denied long-standing cough, alteration of bowel habits, or headache. His past medical history was unremarkable. He was a teacher by profession, a nonsmoker, and a social drinker. He denied any past history or contact history of tuberculosis.
On examination, he had mild pallor and was not icteric. He was febrile with a temperature of 39.8 °C. He had no lymphadenopathy. His cardiovascular and respiratory system examinations were unremarkable; his blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg. His abdominal examination revealed a soft, nontender abdomen with mild hepatosplenomegaly, soft in consistency. He did not have features of meningism. The results of his neurological examination, including higher functions, were unremarkable. His optic fundus was unremarkable.
A complete blood count revealed anemia with hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dl (reference range 14.0–17.5), leukopenia 840/μl (reference range 4000–10,000) with neutropenia of 640/μl, and a low platelet count of 112 × 103/μl (reference range 150–450). Pancytopenia and reactive lymphocytes with profound neutropenia and moderate thrombocytopenia were evident in the patient’s blood workup. His C-reactive protein level was 206 mg/L with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 135 mm in the first hour. His blood culture and urine cultures were sterile. His chest radiograph was unremarkable. His renal function was normal. He had a low serum albumin level (26 g/dl) with a normal prothrombin time. His liver enzymes were elevated (alanine aminotransferase 318 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 444 U/L), and his serum bilirubin level was normal. His lactate dehydrogenase concentration was 1620 U/L. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal protein and sugar levels with five lymphocytes, and the patient’s CSF culture was sterile. The patient’s melioidosis serology was negative. The result of his Mantoux test was negative. An ultrasound scan showed mild hepatosplenomegaly with no intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy or solid organ lesions. His 2D echocardiogram was unremarkable. The results of contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the patient’s chest, abdomen, and pelvis were negative. His hepatitis profile, malaria film, and human immunodeficiency virus serology were negative.
The patient was started on intravenous meropenem 1 g every 8 hours empirically after blood and urine were taken for cultures. Intravenous teicoplanin was subsequently added to the treatment regimen. He continued to spike high fevers, and his condition deteriorated.
A histological examination of a bone marrow biopsy was performed . The pathology results showed a diffuse infiltrate of large atypical cells with slightly nuclear pleomorphism and focal necrosis with caseating granulomas. Results of acid-fast staining and polymerase chain reaction assays for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were both positive. The patient’s bone marrow adenosine deaminase level was 85 U/L. His lipid profile did not show high triglyceride levels, and his serum ferritin level was only mildly elevated (900 ng/ml).
The patient was started on standard antituberculosis treatment, including isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol with intravenous steroids. Soon after starting the antituberculosis treatment, the patient complained of headache, and we found a tender area over the second lumbar vertebra. Magnetic resonance imaging of brain and pan-spinal imaging were arranged immediately, and they did not show evidence of tuberculoma or infective discitis. We could not find a primary lesion that led to disseminated tuberculosis, because results of a chest x-ray and contrast-enhanced CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were also negative. The patient made a rapid clinical improvement, and he was fever-free after 3 days of treatment. His blood counts improved over the course of 1 week, and his liver enzyme levels normalized. A diagnosis of disseminated tuberculosis was made, and he was referred to a local chest clinic for continuation of antituberculosis drug treatment. He was seen in follow-up 3 months later in the medical clinic. He was continuing to receive antituberculosis drugs. He was well and free of fever and constitutional symptoms, with a weight gain of 5 kg over this period. His complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level of 12 g/dl, white blood cell count of 7000/μl, and a platelet count of 380 × 103/μl. His antituberculosis treatment continued for 9 months. At the end of 9 months of antituberculosis treatment, he was back to his premorbid status with a hemoglobin level of 13.3 g/dl, and he was carrying out his normal activities.