A 27-year-old Indigenous man, with a history of smoking and no other cardiac risk factors, developed epigastric pain associated with nausea, vomiting and diaphoresis, following significant alcohol consumption the night prior. In the subsequent hours he also developed chest pain. On presentation he was tachycardic to 110 beats per minute, febrile to 38.4 °C, and had epigastric tenderness.
His laboratory workup showed an elevated lipase of 1310 U/L, leukocytosis of 17.2 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 26 mg/L, and marginally deranged liver function tests with bilirubin of 26 µmol/L, alkaline phosphatase of 118 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase of 101 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 109 U/L, and aspartate aminotransferase of 141 U/L. Kidney function was maintained with a creatinine of 76 µmol/L, and his lipid profile showed only raised triglycerides at 2.5 mmol/L. His serial troponins rose from 0.77 ng/mL to 1019.63 ng/mL, and electrocardiography (ECG) revealed ST elevation in the anterior leads . A provisional diagnosis of anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction was made. The patient was thrombolysed, commenced on dual antiplatelet therapy and low-molecular weight heparin, and transferred to the Coronary Care Unit of the closest tertiary centre.
Repeat ECG showed partial resolution of ST-elevation and the presence of Q waves. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated severely reduced left ventricular systolic function, with an estimated ejection fraction of 20%. Subsequent coronary angiography with ventriculography showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease, and basal hyperkinesis with apical akinesis of the left ventricle . The final diagnosis of TCM was made. Dual antiplatelet therapy was ceased, and the patient was commenced on an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) and beta-blocker.
Meanwhile, hepatobiliary ultrasound was unrevealing for cholelithiasis or choledocholithiasis, and computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrated an oedematous pancreas with diffuse peripancreatic fat stranding. There were no signs of necrosis, collections or vascular complications . Therefore, the patient was concurrently diagnosed with uncomplicated acute alcoholic pancreatitis. This was managed conservatively with intravenous fluids and gradual diet upgrade. The patient's abdominal pain resolved after three days.
The patient was discharged on day five. On initial follow-up at four weeks he had moderate clinical recovery, and still became dyspnoeic on heavy lifting or several minutes of walking. He had ceased further alcohol use. Follow-up with repeat echocardiography was planned at three months, but the patient did not attend.