An 81-year-old Japanese man complained of hematemesis and visited a doctor. He was referred to our hospital with the diagnosis of gastric cancer. Since he had not been seen by a doctor before, there are no special notes in his medical history, including the presence or absence of H. pylori infection. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed an ulcer with irregular edges at the middle posterior part of the stomach body. Gastric poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was diagnosed based on the pathological examination of the biopsy specimen. After making a radiological diagnosis of lymph node and lung metastasis, based on computed tomography findings, the patient was treated with 4 courses of tegafur gimeracil oteracil (S-1) therapy (80 mg/day for 4 weeks with a 2-week rest). After chemotherapy, total gastrectomy and lymph node dissection were performed for the treatment of gastric cancer after confirming that the size of the lymph nodes metastases had decreased and that the lung metastasis had disappeared.
Grossly, a type 3 tumor of 83 × 50 mm in size was located in the middle posterior part of the stomach body . At the cut section, the tumor consisted of a white and solid part on the anal side of the tumor and flat and an elevated part on the oral side .
Histologically, the white and solid part of the tumor consisted of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with dense lymphocytic infiltration, GC with lymphoid stroma . In contrast, the flat and elevated part was composed of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma without prominent lymphocytic infiltration . These two histopathological components were clearly separated from each other . The tumor cells invaded up to the serosa in the gastric carcinoma with lymphoid stroma component. Lymphatic and venous invasion as well as lymph node metastasis were detected, all of which showed gastric carcinoma with lymphoid stroma histology. On EBER-ISH, the GC with lymphoid stroma component was positive, while the other component was negative . On EBER-ISH, tumor cells in the metastatic lymph nodes were positive.
Since both the EBV-positive and -negative components immunohistochemically showed the overexpression of p53 , exons 5–9 of TP53 were sequenced using DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections from these two components. The EBV-negative component showed a C→T transition at nucleotide position 477 (c. 477C>T) in exon 5, which gave rise to a synonymous mutation. In contrast, the EBV-positive component showed no mutations at this nucleotide position . In this study, non-synonymous mutations were not detected in exons 5–9 of TP53 in either component. These observations are in line with previous results from The Cancer Genome Atlas project, which showed that TP53 was less frequently mutated in EBV-positive GC . However, it is possible that there may be mutations outside the region that was examined in this study or that mutations could not be detected in DNA extracted from EBV-positive GC because of the large number of lymphocytes and the small percentage of cancer cells.
Targeted next generation sequencing (Oncomine™ Target Test, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA), which did not contain a TP53 test, was performed using DNA and RNA extracted from the EBV-positive component and the EBV-negative component, which revealed MYC amplification in the former and ERBB2 (HER2) amplification in the latter.
Immunohistochemically, the EBV-positive component of the tumor was diffusely positive for C-MYC and negative for HER2, while the EBV-negative part was positive for HER2 and negative for C-MYC . Chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) showed high C-MYC amplification in the EBV-positive component and no amplification in the EBV-negative part. On dual-color in situ hybridization (DISH) for HER2, the HER2/chromosome 17 (Chr17) signal count ratio was 3.9 in the EBV-negative component, which was scored as “amplified” . In contrast, the HER2/Chr17 signal count ratio was 1.4 and the average number of HER2 signals per cell was 2.8 in the EBV-positive part, which was scored as “not amplified”.