A 70-year-old type II diabetic male with the history of gut gangrene presented at surgical department of a public sector tertiary care hospital in Lahore, Pakistan. He went through surgical procedure of partial small intestinal resection, sparing 1 ft proximal jejunum and 2–3 ft distal ileum. Drainage jejunostomy was performed. After the surgery, the patient was kept on inadequate peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) (2 l/day) for 4 days. Excessive losses through the fistula during this period and unnoticed hydration inadequacy led to the development of hypovolemia. Based upon biochemical analysis, elevated BUN (115 mg/dl), and creatinine levels (7.2 mg/dl), the patient was diagnosed with acute renal failure. The random blood glucose levels were found to be within controlled range (148 mg/dl). He was referred to nephrology department of the same health care facility where hypovolemia was reversed through the administration of intravenous rehydration fluids (saline 5% dextrose solution with KCl 2.5 cc/ml). After 15 days, acute renal failure was settled; BUN and creatinine reached within normal range (16 mg/dl and 1.1 mg/dl, respectively). However, the patient on discharge was given an inappropriate ileostomy feed plan including ORS (800 ml/day), milk (600 ml/day), polymeric supplemental formula (1800 ml/day), and low dose aspirin therapy through feeding ileostomy. Moreover, he was given broth and blended bread slices by his caregivers through ileostomy. Poorly planned ileostomy feed led to several complications, resulting in increased hospital stay, and serious implications on his physical, psychological, and social wellbeing.
After 23 days, the patient returned to the hospital with relapse of acute renal failure (BUN = 32 mg/dl, creatinine = 1.6 mg/dl). The patient showed signs of severe dehydration along with pedal edema upon physical examination. A history of 16% weight loss within the last month (BMI = 19.5 kg/m2), mild anemia (Hb = 11.7 g/100 ml), and hypoalbuminemia (2.8 g/dl) indicates poor nutrient uptake and declining nutritional status. Because of the declining health of the patient, early anastomosis was carried out to restore intestinal continuity. At this point, a trained dietitian intervened and planned a post-surgical progressive diet along with careful monitoring of hydration status. Total parenteral nutrition [TPN] was recommended initially with a gradual transition to oral feed. The target caloric requirement of the patient was calculated to be 2400 kcal with fluid intake of 6000–7000 ml.
For the first 2 days post-surgery, electrolyte and fluid balance were maintained through intravenous solutions. From the 3rd day onwards, an individualized TPN plan along with the administration of rehydration fluids through feeding ileostomy was started with the target of improving the nutritional status, allowing for postoperative stress and maintaining the hydration and electrolyte status .
The caloric requirement of the patient for initial total parenteral feed was calculated to be 1700 kcal (BEE + 20% sedentary factor + 15% for uncomplicated surgery + 15% for severe weight loss). Initial TPN plan provided 1500 kcal from elemental formula (amino acids), sorbitol, and 25% dextrose solution. An intravenous fat emulsion (20% Liposyn) was infused on alternate days providing 20 g fat/day for preventing the fatty acid deficiency. In addition, a 10 ml ampoule of multivitamin (Multibionta) was administered daily in order to fulfill the requirements of vitamins A, E, C, and B complex .
TPN was slowly tapered off by slow addition of ileostomy feed and then to final transition towards oral feed .
A high protein, high carbohydrate (low lactose, low fiber), and low-fat diet was planned . On the 5th day after anastomosis, the patient received first oral intake of clear fluid diet along with TPN. The total calories were kept within the range of 1100–1500 kcal. Upon introduction of oral feed, severe dysphagia and withdrawal of food were observed which, upon probing, was revealed to be due to the overlooked oral hygiene and prolonged NPO period with subsequent pharyngitis and mouth ulcers. Antiseptic mouthwash was started promptly. The patient’s caregivers were counseled regarding effective feeding and caring practices. The patient also contracted urinary tract infection for which antibiotics were prescribed. Mobility was encouraged by suggesting supported sitting and walking along with frequent side changing while lying in order to recover from bed sores. After maintaining the tolerance of clear fluid diet for 2 days, the patient was shifted to full fluid diet along with TPN. Oral fluid intake (drinking water) was also started. On the next day, the patient was suspected to develop TPN-induced hepatic dysfunction based on clinical signs of jaundice which was confirmed by the abnormal pattern of hepatic enzymes (ALP = 465 U/L, ALT = 40 U/l, AST = 52 U/l) and hypoalbuminemia. TPN was discontinued.
Soft, bland diet consisting of easily digestible food items from all food groups and nutritional supplement along with PPN (10% dextrose), intravenous albumin infusion, and oral multivitamin syrups was then introduced. Soft diet was continued for 2 weeks with gradual increase in calories. The patient was discharged with a recommendation of a detailed soft, bland diet plan able to meet 1750 Kcal .
The patient’s caretakers were guided for food substitutes for adding variety in diet and increasing the palatability and acceptance. The caregivers were guided for foods to avoid and were given balanced diet recipes for incorporating all the food groups in the diet .
Throughout the nutritional management, the blood glucose levels of the patient were carefully monitored (below 180 mg/dl) and insulin units were precisely adjusted for the grams of carbohydrates fed. Two weeks after discharge, the patient was called for a follow-up. He showed compliance with dietary recommendations and medical prescription, and his health showed a gradual improvement. The patient was suggested to decrease the amount of nutritional supplement while increasing the exchanges for other foods. Dietary recommendation of adding 2 teaspoons of fat (canola oil) and chicken/vegetable curry was given. Local flat bread (chapatti) made of extracted wheat flour was allowed. On the next follow-up visit, the patient showed slight weight loss and reduced compliance to diet. The dosage of dietary supplement was again increased, and caregivers were given strict instructions for dietary compliance until the patient regained weight and gradually started having family meals with slight modifications.