A 69-year-old Tunisian male patient consulted the emergency department at the month of June, for severe left leg pain limiting physical mobility due to a 5*6 cm large ecchymosis located at the left inner thigh, having spontaneously appeared 5 days prior consultation and without notion of trauma.
The patient had no known personal medical history, a family history of gastric cancer (father) and no psycho-social relevant history. He had received the second dose of CoronaVac-SinoVac vaccine 30 days prior to consultation. The patient reported a small ecchymosis appearing and disappearing spontaneously 3 weeks after the vaccination.
Further physical examination at the the emergency department (ED) revealed the presence of two other ecchymoses: one at the inner face of the right forearm, starting at the wrist reaching the elbow, measuring 15 * 5 cm and the other at the left flank of the abdomen reaching the left iliac crest, measuring 40 * 12 cm .
Both of these were secondarily reported by the patient as having spontaneously started 5 days ago, with no context of trauma. Soft tissue ultrasound performed in regard of the initial ecchymosis at the left inner thigh because of a 5 cm-asymmetry between the two thigh sizes revealed a hyper echoic infiltration of soft tissue located at the left inner tight.
The complete blood count showed marcrocytic normochromic anemia with hemoglobin at 8.4 g/dl; mean corpuscular volume at 103 fl; mean corpuscular hemoglobin at 32 pg/cell, hyper-reticulocytosis at 130 000/mm3 and a normal platelet count at 475 109/l.
The determination of Prothrombin Time (PT), of aPTT and of coagulation factors were performed by coagulometric technique on ACL TOP. In our patient’s case, coagulation tests showed an isolated prolonged a PTT (100 s) which was not corrected on the mixing study.
In front of the presumptive diagnosis of acquired hemophilia A (AHA), treatment by systemic corticotherapy of 80 mg/die of prednisolone for 3 days was immediately initiated and switched by oral corticotherapy at the dose of 1 mg/kg. The patient received also tranexamic acid 3 g/die and red blood transfusion to correct the anemia. Bypass therapy was not considered if front of the absence of life-threatening bleeding.
In front of the patient’s age, the absence of history of bleeding or heparin-based treatment and the spontaneous occurrence of hematomas and ecchymoses associated with the isolated prolonged a PTT, specific determination of coagulation factors was conducted (available 13 days later), revealing an isolated decrease of factor VIII (FVIII) activity (F VIIIc equal to 1%).
FVIII deficiency was confirmed on two separate samples. The presence of an FVIII inhibitor was confirmed and titrated by the modified-Bethesada assay (BA) = 121 Bethesada units/ml, affirming the diagnosis of AHA.
The diagnosis of AHA was confirmed. After 17 days of corticosteroid treatment, the patient continued to show minimal improvement although the progressive shortness of aTTP and a course of rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for four consecutive weeks was initiated.
To exclude possible secondary organic causes of hemophilia A, CT-total body was performed with no signs of malignancy. Screening for autoimmune (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-extractable nuclear antigen, anti-double-stranded DNA), lupus anticoagulant studies, and chronic infectious diseases also resulted negative. There was also no history of illicit drug intake or recent medication.
The patient was later discharged after the first dose of rituximab and followed-up weekly at the out-patient clinic. After the second dose of rituximab, we noticed a prolongation of a TTP without worsening of the hemorrhagic syndrome not leading us to the interruption of treatment given its delayed effect. Follow-up showed a significant clinical (healing of the ecchymoses and no reoccurrence of further signs of bleeding) and normalization of a PTT 18 days of treatment with corticosteroids associated with rituximab. The detailed therapeutic schedule along with the biological improvement trends over 63 days are displayed in Fig. . There were no treatment-related adverse effects.