A 61-year-old woman was referred to the Allergy Clinic at Western University for evaluation of an IgE-mediated reaction to insulin. She had two episodes over a 5-month period that required a visit to the Emergency Department (ED), requiring treatment with epinephrine to achieve resolution of her symptoms. The first event she experienced entailed a burning sensation in her hands and feet with nausea immediately after injecting NovoRapid® insulin subcutaneously. The second event caused a similar reaction but there was also throat swelling and difficult breathing immediately after taking metformin, Levemir® and NovoRapid®. There was no rash, vomiting, diarrhea or loss of consciousness. In the ED, she was found to be hypotensive. There were no cofactors such as exercise or other medications including NSAIDs taken at the time of these reactions. On both occasions, the insulin used were from a fresh vial stored in her refrigerator. She did not have any previous reactions to insulin and had been on the same medication for over 30 years without missing any doses. She had a medical history comprising of longstanding T2DM with a recent hemoglobin A1c level of 8.9%, Lyme disease in 2018 and herpes zoster in 2019. There was no personal history of previous allergies to drugs or insect stings, atopy or autoimmune disease. Her medications included zopiclone 5 mg once daily, detemir insulin 20 units every morning and Novorapid® insulin 10 units twice daily. Both forms of insulin were held after the reactions mentioned above.
In clinic, she underwent skin-prick testing (SPT) to metformin, Lantus®, Humalog®, NovoRapid®, Apidra®, Insulin Regular, NPH, Detemir, and the additive protamine. NPH was diluted 30-fold to 333 μg/mL for testing, to approximate concentration in undiluted NPH insulin (350 μg/mL). Metacresol testing was not performed as its use was restricted by the hospital pharmacy but she had positive wheal and flare responses to non–metacresol–containing insulin preparations. Insulin preparations containing zinc and without zinc were included in testing. A positive skin-prick test was defined as a wheal size of greater than 3 mm than the negative control that developed within 15 min. All skin-prick test results were interpreted by an Allergist and Clinical Immunologist and validated with an appropriate histamine (10 mg/mL) positive control and saline negative control.
Positive SPT to the long-acting basal insulin Detemir was noted but negative to metformin, the other insulin formulations such as Lantus®, NPH, Humalog®, Novorapid®, Apidra®, Insulin Regular, and the additive protamine . Subsequently, intradermal testing at 1:10 and 1:100 dilutions with the various insulin preparations along with protamine at 3 mcg/mL and 0.3 mcg/m indicated sensitization to all insulin preparations at both concentrations . Protamine at both concentrations was negative. A positive intradermal skin test was defined as a wheal size of greater than 3 mm than the negative control that developed at least 15 min after the allergen was pricked to the skin of the participant’s forearm. Again, the results of the intradermal skin testing were validated with an appropriate histamine (10 mg/mL) positive control and saline negative control. Baseline and intermittent clinical exams, vital sign assessment, and blood glucose measurements were performed during the SPT and intradermal skin testing with no changes to the clinical exam. Blood glucose levels remained stable ranging from 9 to 12 mmol/L. All tests were applied to a healthy volunteer for a negative control. Serum IgE insulin was elevated at 2.85 kU/L. Serum tryptase and serum C4 levels were normal at 3.9 ng/mL and 0.34 g/L respectively. Latex IgE level was also normal at < 0.1 kU/L. Oral challenge to metformin was negative.
She was diagnosed with an IgE-mediated anaphylactic reaction to insulin and advised to avoid insulin, unless she underwent desensitization therapy in a monitored setting followed by continuous use of an insulin pump. Two epinephrine autoinjectors were provided and recommended to be on hand at all times after a discussion and shared decision making with the patient.