The patient, an 8-year-old Japanese boy with the weight of 27 kg, was run over by a motor vehicle traveling at approximately 40 km/h when he was playing in the street. Emergency services were called, and a doctor car was dispatched. Examination performed when the doctor car reached the accident site revealed that the patient’s blood pressure (BP) was maintained at 112/73 mmHg, but his heart rate (HR) was increased (149 beats per minute). Focused assessment of sonography for trauma (FAST) revealed fluid collection in the bladder and ischio-rectal fossa, and fluid resuscitation was initiated after securing an intravenous line. The patient was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital approximately 40 min after the accident. On admission, he was able to speak, but was restless and complained of severe upper abdominal pain. His BP was 112/73 mmHg, HR was 140 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 44 breaths per minute, and percutaneous oxygen saturation was 100% on 10 L/min of oxygen via mask. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13.
FAST revealed fluid collection in the bladder, ischio-rectal fossa, and Morrison's fossa, which was suggestive of intra-abdominal hemorrhage. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed 17 min after admission with rapid intubation in the emergency room showed thyroid injury, bilateral hemopneumothorax and pulmonary contusion, and grade IV right hepatic lobe parenchymal injury . Although there was no obvious free air, some intestinal dilatation was observed, suggestive of intestinal injury . No significant extravasation from the hepatic artery was observed. At this time, the patient’s serum hemoglobin level was 9.6 g/dL and his prothrombin time-international normalized ratio was 1.25 . Red blood cells (RBCs) and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were transfused. His hemodynamic condition stabilized with fluid resuscitation and blood transfusion. He had acidosis (pH 7.338) and a bicarbonate level of 19.9 mmol/L, base excess of − 4.9 mmol/L, and lactate level of 24 mmol/L. Although his hemodynamic condition was stable, the patient’s altered level of consciousness, the presence of signs of peritoneal irritation, and suspicion of intestinal injury led us to perform exploratory laparotomy. After thoracic cavity drains were placed bilaterally for treating the hemopneumothorax, the patient was transferred to the operating room 57 min after admission. On opening the abdomen, there was spillage of a large amount of hemorrhagic ascites fluid. A laceration was noted in the right lobe of the liver, and no intestinal injury was observed. As part of a DC strategy, we packed the right lobe of the liver from the ventral and dorsal sides using gauze. We covered the abdomen with an ABTHERA Open Abdomen Negative Pressure Therapy System . The operative time was 23 min, total blood loss was 1185 mL, and total amount of blood transfused intraoperatively and preoperatively was 1120 mL of RBCs (eight units) and 240 mL of FFP (two units). The hemorrhage was gradually controlled with direct gauze packing. The anemia and coagulopathy improved; his serum hemoglobin level was 11.5 g/dL, prothrombin time was 14.3 s, and fibrinogen level was 304 mg/dL at 4 h after surgery.
Forty hours after DC surgery, we reperformed laparotomy, gently removed the gauze used for perihepatic packing, and directly closed the abdomen after confirming that there was no active bleeding from the liver and intestinal injury sites. The operative time was 20 min, and the total blood loss was 0 mL. The left and right thoracic drains were removed on the fifth and sixth days after injury, respectively. The patient was successfully extubated on day 7 of admission. His total length of intensive care unit (ICU) stay was 5 days.
We continued to evaluate the hepatic injury using abdominal ultrasonography and CT. The patient experienced abdominal distension caused by ascites fluid and right lateral abdomen pain 18 days after injury. An abdominal drain was inserted at the site of lateral abdomen pain. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed fluid collection in the right infradiaphragmatic region. He had high total and direct bilirubin levels and was diagnosed with a biliary fistula, with more than 400 mL of fluid drainage per day. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed injury to the posterior branch of the bile duct 25 days after the injury. The biliary fistula showed poor improvement with percutaneous drainage. Endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) was performed using endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) after bile duct dilatation 59 days after the injury . The volume of bile drained through the percutaneous drainage tube was approximately 400 mL/day for the first 2 weeks, and about 100 mL/day thereafter. After ENBD implantation, the volume gradually decreased. At the time of discharge from the hospital, almost no drainage was observed. The patient had no neurological sequelae and was discharged from the hospital 102 days after the injury. The drain was removed during an outpatient visit after cessation of the bile leak.