A 79-year-old male was referred for evaluation of multiple ischemic pretibial ulcers (W1I3fI1) of the right lower extremity (Rutherford stage 5 classification). The patient had a history of smoking, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, renal insufficiency, and endovascular recanalization of the right common iliac (CIA) and left external iliac artery (EIA) combined with bilateral thromboendarterectomy (TEA) of the common femoral artery (CFA). The photoelectric plethysmography toe-arm index was 0.34 and duplex ultrasound showed patency of previously placed stents in the CIA and EIA, however a flow-limiting stenosis in the right CFA and occlusion of the SFA were observed. Computed tomography–angiography (CTA) imaging confirmed significant stenosis of the right CFA and occlusion of the SFA from its origin to the Hunter’s canal.
The treatment team decided to treat the abovementioned vascular lesions in a hybrid surgical procedure: an endarterectomy of the CFA and SFA origin combined with an endovascular recanalization of the occluded SFA using FORS technology. The patient provided informed consent for the procedure. The CFA was approached via a standard surgical approach and the atherosclerotic plaque was removed via open endarterectomy with venous patch closure. Subsequently, the venous patch was punctured and a 6F sheath was placed over a standard guidewire. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed and confirmed the SFA occlusion . Furthermore, the FORS-enabled 0.035 inch angled hydrophilic floppy guidewire and 5.5F FORS-Berenstein catheter were registered out of body for use. During recanalization of the occluded SFA, the three-dimensional (3D) visualization of the FORS-guidewire clearly showed that the guidewire was following the path of least resistance as the guidewire, with the tip pointing forward, slowly twisted subintimally around the occluded SFA like a corkscrew . At the popliteal segment P1, re-entry to the true lumen was obtained. The entire tract was predilated with a 5 mm × 200 mm plain percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) balloon (Abbott Laboratories, Lake bluff, Illinois, United States) and then treated with two 6 mm × 150 mm drug-coated balloons (DCB) (Cardionovum GmbH, Bonn, Germany). A post dilatation DSA was created to assess the recanalized SFA and to assess any residual flow-limiting dissections or stenosis, which showed a remaining dissection in the P1 segment (a). First, this dissection was treated with a 5 mm × 60 mm PTA balloon. However, post PTA DSA still showed a significant dissection in the P1 segment, which was treated with a 5 mm × 60 mm Supera stent (Abbott Laboratories, Lake bluff, Illinois, United States) and extended to the proximal SFA with two 6 mm × 150 mm self-expandable (SE) Everflex stents (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) because of remaining dissection (b). Finally, control DSA was performed in two different planes, which showed no residual stenosis or dissection, but a persistent corkscrew configuration (c). Skin-to-skin procedure time was 367 min, of which 194 min was endovascular recanalization time. In addition, during the procedure the air kerma (AK) was 57.14 mGy, the dose area product (DAP) was 14.93 Gy/cm2, and the fluoroscopy time (FT) was 1046 s.
After the procedure acetylsalicylic acid 80 mg daily was added to clopidogrel 75 mg once daily and continued for three months after which only clopidogrel was continued. After the procedure, wounds healed within 6 weeks and duplex ultrasound after 6 months confirmed patency of the treated segment without restenosis.