A 26-year-old male patient had a road traffic accident and fell off a bridge, while he was driving his motorcycle with his hips in abduction, flexion, and external rotation and was brought to the emergency room nearly 20 h after injury with complaints of severe pain, inability to bear weight, and restriction of movements at bilateral hip joints.
In the emergency room, ATLS protocol was followed. The patient was clinically and hemodynamically stable and there were no other systemic injuries on the primary survey. On detailed physical examination, both hips were in abduction, flexion, and external rotation . The range of motion at both the hip joints was extremely painful and restricted. There was no neurovascular deficit and no associated injuries. Radiographic evaluation of the patient was done outside before he arrived in our hospital and a roentgenogram of the pelvis with both hips revealed a bilateral anterior hip dislocation into the obturator foramen with no associated fracture .
The patient was planned for immediate closed reduction and was shifted to the emergency operation theater. Under general anesthesia, dislocation of the right hip joint was reduced first in supine position using Allis’ maneuver. After stabilizing the pelvis, traction along with counter-traction was continuously applied in line with the femur, and an internal rotation and adduction force were applied to reduce the hip joint. After achieving reduction on the right side, left hip dislocation was reduced using a similar maneuver .
The reduction of both the hip joints was confirmed by C-arm images. Post-reduction, both hip joints were stable and neurovascular status was intact. Post-reduction, X-ray film for both the hip joints and computed tomography for the hip joints was done which revealed a concentric reduction of both the hip joints with no associated fracture or osteochondral fragments (, ).
Below knee skin traction was applied bilaterally for 3 weeks. The patient was encouraged to perform static quadriceps strengthening exercises and was made to sit non-weight bearing from 4 weeks and was encouraged to do active knee range of motion exercises, quadriceps strengthening, and isometric gluteal muscle strengthening exercises.
He was started on partial weight-bearing walking with a walker from 6 weeks and was gradually increased to full weight-bearing walking by 8 weeks. He returned to normal activity at 3 months. The patient was pain-free with full range of movement and no radiological signs of AVN or post-traumatic arthritis on follow-up at 21 months post-procedure (, ).