An 80-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital for further exploration of the increase in biliary enzymes, immunoglobulins, bile duct wall thickening, and bile duct dilation.
He had a history of cerebral infarction and antihypertensive treatment, but no history or symptoms of inflammatory bowel disease and family history were remarkable.
He showed no remarkable signs and symptoms, and physical examination upon admission revealed no jaundice or lymphadenopathy and no abnormal findings on his abdomen.
Laboratory results on the day of admission revealed an increase in the serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase (75 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (77 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (1060 IU/L), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (1160 IU/L), and immunoglobulin G (1850 mg/dL) and its subtype 4 (255 mg/dL). No increase in bilirubin and tumor markers was seen . CT scans revealed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation, bile duct wall thickening with a mild enhance effect were noted . No changes in the pancreatic ducts or parenchymal structure were seen . Abdominal US revealed the wall thickening of the common bile duct with narrowing of its diameter . EUS also revealed the thickened bile duct wall and narrowing of its diameter with no significant irregularity of the epithelial surface . The changes of the bile duct were confirmed with a MRCP showing the stenotic lesions in relatively in the proximal side including the lower common bile duct . ERCP revealed multiple stenoses with long stricter in the lower bile duct and only a partial dilatation of the bile duct . There were no abnormal findings at the pancreatic duct . Following the ERCP, a biopsy of the lower bile duct was performed, showing the long stenotic lesion and the endoscopic nasobiliary drainage tube was placed for drainage.
Histological analyses revealed the infiltration of inflammatory cells and severe storiform fibrosis in the bile duct tissue . These inflammatory cells included the IgG and IgG4 positively-stained plasma cells (more than 10 cells per high power field) and the IgG4/IgG-positive cell ratio was approximately 30% . To differentially diagnose PSC, liver biopsy was performed. The tissue showed mild infiltration of inflammatory cells partly stained with IgG and IgG4 , but no onion-skin fibrosis was seen.