A 13-year-old male with a history of prematurity, meningococcal meningitis with post-meningitic neuropathic pain, tics, and staring spells concerning for seizures presented after being struck by a car while riding his bicycle. Polytrauma imaging workup revealed an incidentally discovered odontoid process cystic lesion with internal fluid-fluid levels on MRI consistent with ABC . Post-contrast MRI did not reveal any enhancing mass(es) in association with the cystic odontoid process lesion to raise concern for this lesion representing a secondary ABC arising in the context of a preexisting neoplastic process such as giant cell tumor, chondroblastoma, osteoblastoma, or osteosarcoma.
The patient was allowed to make full recovery from his traumatic injuries prior to embarking on the management of the ABC. The indication for surgical intervention was primarily the location of the lesion. Any progression of the lesion could potentially affect cervical stability given the role of the odontoid process in neck range of motion biomechanics. Invasive intervention was decided upon to limit the chance that this ABC will expand and erode through the outer cortex of the odontoid process. The alternative option proposed would be conservative management with serial imaging or non-invasive therapies such as radiation.
A preoperative angiogram was performed 10 weeks after first discharge from the hospital for two reasons. The first reason was to evaluate the vasculature of the ABC and potentially embolize the main arterial feeders. The second reason was to confirm resolution of the previously noted traumatic right transverse/sigmoid sinus thrombosis. The diagnostic query failed to show any identifiable target for ABC embolization. However, there was confirmation of good flow with no residual clot in the right transverse/sigmoid sinus.
The surgery was performed 2 days after the diagnostic angiogram. There was the use of intraoperative neuronavigation (Stealth S8 AxiEM system) and intraoperative fluoroscopy. The patient was supine on a standard operating room table and his head was aligned in a neutral position on a horseshoe head holder. The operative exposure was performed by our otolaryngology colleagues. A Crowe-Davis mouth gag was placed. Two red rubber catheters were placed through the mouth and nose to elevate the palate. The posterior oropharynx was exposed, C1 arch was palpable and confirmed with navigation. A midline vertical incision was made in the posterior oropharynx. Dissection was then taken through the mucosa, muscles, and vertically through the anterior longitudinal ligament to expose the arch of C1 and then carried slightly inferiorly to expose the base of the ventral odontoid and cephalad aspect of the ventral C2 body.
With the anterior aspect of C2 exposed, a Jamshidi bone biopsy needle was used to enter the cortical bone at the anterior aspect of C2, near the base of the odontoid process under direct fluoroscopic guidance. A core sample of tissue from within the odontoid lesion was removed for permanent pathology. When the Jamshidi needle was withdrawn from C2, egress of dark (chronic) blood products was noted from the hole left in C2 by the needle pass.
Next, a doxycycline-albumin foam was created using the protocol first described by Shiels and Mayerson, albeit with the addition of Isovue 370 for better fluoroscopic visualization of foam infusion. Specifically, doxycycline (2 mL of 50 mg/mL concentration), albumin (2 mL of 25% human serum albumin), and Isovue370 (1 mL) were sterilely mixed with 5 mL of air by flushing the mixture back and forth between two Luer lock syringes with an interposed stop cock numerous times. At the conclusion of the mixing process, 10 cc of the doxycycline/albumin/Isovue370 foam was maintained in a single sterile 10 cc syringe. This syringe containing the doxycycline/albumin/Isovue370 foam was connected to the Jamshidi needle using a Luer lock adapter. The Jamshidi needle was then inserted through the C2 bone defect made previously under direct fluoroscopic guidance. Once in position, the doxycycline/albumin/Isovue370 foam was infused into the cystic cavities of the odontoid lesion under direct fluoroscopic guidance. Complete filling of the lesion was appreciated. At this point, the needle was withdrawn, and the resulting hole left was plugged with a small piece of Gelfoam to prevent egress of the doxycycline/ albumin/Isovue370 foam.
The otolaryngology team commenced with a multilayer closure after adequate hemostasis was obtained. The patient tolerated the procedure well. There were no postoperative complications, and he was discharged the next day. 2-month postoperatively, a CT scan demonstrated a decrease in the size of the lesion with substantial new bone formation . A repeat CT at 6 months showed no residual cystic lucency, formation of dense new bone, and only minimal irregularity of the cortex at the prior needle biopsy site .