A 38 year-old woman presented with progressive abdominal distension. Contrasted abdomino-pelvic CT revealed that the distended abdominal cavity of the patient was filled with low-density fluid, and showed a degree of scalloping sign on the liver surface . A 7-cm sized multi-locular cystic mass containing fat tissue, which was thought to be originating from the right ovary, was identified in the pelvis. However, the patient’s appendix and left ovary appeared normal. Pelvic magnetic resonance image showed cystic component with high signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images, and fat-saturated T1-weighted images showed a drop in the signal intensity of the right ovarian mass . These imaging studies suggested a teratoma of the right ovary resulting in pseudomyxoma peritonei. Colonoscopy and gastroscopy were normal. The laboratory test of tumour markers showed that CEA, CA19-9, and CA125 were elevated to 15.5 ng/ml (Upper normal limit [UNL] < 5 ng/ml), 59.8 U/ml (UNL < 37 U/ml), and 39.7 U/ml (UNL < 35 U/ml), respectively.
Importantly, the proband’s family history completely fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria . The mother suffered from appendiceal cancer, ascending colon cancer, and endometrial cancer, a maternal brother died of rectal cancer at the age of 51, and an older sister of the patient died of sigmoid colon cancer at the age of 31, suggesting the possible diagnosis of LS. After genetic counselling, a written informed consent was obtained from the patient, and a genetic test was performed using DNA from the patient’s peripheral blood. As a result, a germ line mutation consisting of a single nucleotide duplication of C (c.1546dupC, p.Q516PfsX3) in codon516 was identified in the MLH1 gene . This mutation was judged as a deleterious mutation because the duplication resulted in a frameshift mutation inducing a truncation of the MLH1 protein.
An open laparotomy was performed, where abundant mucinous ascites mixed with hair was found in the peritoneal cavity . In addition, surgical exploration identified a ruptured left ovarian cystic mass of 16 cm in size and a non-ruptured right ovarian cystic mass of 7.5 cm, but the appendix was normal. The patient underwent complete cytoreductive surgery (CRS) including total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, total peritonectomy, appendicectomy, greater and lesser omentectomy, splenectomy, cholecystectomy, and resection of the liver capsule. Following the CRS, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) was added with mitomycin C at 10 mg/m2 for 1 h. The post-operative course was uneventful.
Both ovarian tumours were filled with copious gelatinous fluids containing multiple hairs and yellowish sebaceous materials . Histological examination revealed that the right ovarian tumour was a mature cystic teratoma accompanied by an endometriotic cyst. It was reported that 3 to 8% of primary ovarian mucinous tumours are accompanied by teratoma [–]. The teratoma-associated mucinous tumours were also described to show various histological appearances such as cystadenomatous, borderline tumour-like to adenocarcinoma, tumours with entity of goblet cell carcinoid, and low grade adenomatous mucinous tumours. Consistently, the left tumour was a mixture of mucinous cystic tumour and teratomatous lesion. Most of the tumour cells showed mild cellular atypia but complex structural changes classifying the tumour into an intermediate malignancy . Additionally, a part of the tumour demonstrated stromal invasion, which corresponds to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The teratomatous tumours predominantly consist of ectodermal components such as skin and its adnexa, cartilage, tracheobronchial epithelium, and included mucin-producing epithelium depicting lower intestinal tract . Immunohistochemical study revealed that the left ovarian tumour with intermediate malignancy was negative for CK7 , and diffusely positive for CK20 and CDX2 suggesting that it has a lower intestinal phenotype . However, the region of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma was positive for CK7 and CDX2, and negative for CK20, indicating aberrant cytokeratin staining pattern due to malignant transformation. Histological examination of the peritoneum, omentum and implants found mucinous material and a small amount of tumour cells (pseudomyxoma). It is of note the histology of the appendix was normal. These data suggested that the pseudomyxoma peritonei may result from mucin-producing epithelial cells derived from ovarian teratoma.
To clarify the aetiology of the ovarian tumour, we carried out microsatellite instability (MSI) analysis with the Bethesda panel (D2S123, D5S346, D17S250, BAT25, and BAT26). Interestingly, the DNA from the left ovarian tumour was positive for MSI in three of the five markers indicating high microsatellite instability (MSI-high). Additional immunohistochemical analysis showed positive staining for MSH2 and negative for MLH1 and PMS2 , which is in complete agreement with the germ line mutation in MLH1. These data suggested that the deficiency of mismatch repair system was associated with the ovarian tumour.
After the surgery for PMP, the patient was enrolled in a surveillance programme of PMP. In the 2-yearly colonoscopy, a transverse colon cancer of 2.5 cm in size was identified. The patient underwent right hemicolectomy where no recurrence of PMP was detected. Histological examination of the tumour revealed tubular adenocarcinoma of the colon with an UICC stage of pT2N0M0 (data not shown).
Since our case underwent complete CRS and HIPEC for PMP and curative operation for transverse colon cancer, a good prognosis of the patient is expected. However, if recurrent disease may appear in the patient, we may need to consider immune checkpoint inhibitors for the treatment, because mismatch repair-deficient tumours are more effective to anti-programmed death 1 (PD1) monoclonal antibodies .