A 71-year-old Asian woman presented with a two-day history of lower abdominal pain and vomiting, and was admitted to our hospital. She had undergone postoperative pelvic irradiation for the treatment of uterine cancer 10 years prior to the current admission. Upon admission, her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37°C; heart rate, 98 beats/min; and blood pressure, 176/70mmHg. Her lung and heart sounds were normal. An abdominal examination revealed tenderness, but no muscular tension was evident; bowel sounds were audible. No edema of her extremities was observed. She presented with hyperkalemia (potassium level, 8.1mmol/L), a serum creatinine (s-Cr) level of 9.9mg/dL and a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level of 107.2mg/dL, indicating renal failure. A work-up of her arterial blood gasses indicated metabolic acidosis (pH7.256; concentration of bicarbonate, 12.3mmol/L). Urine microscopy showed white blood cells 3 to 5 cells per high-power field (hpf) ; red blood cells, 20 to 30/hpf; hyaline casts, 8 to 10/hpf; and the presence of mesothelial cells. A urine analysis showed a value of 3+ for both protein and blood; her urine did not contain myoglobin. An abdominal CT showed intraperitoneal fluid collection, with no other abnormalities . After an initial evaluation, hemodialysis was initiated and a transurethral catheter was inserted.
Over the next three days, our patient’s s-Cr and BUN levels rapidly improved, and her daily urine output was good. Because her symptoms disappeared, the transurethral catheter was removed. However, four days after the removal of the transurethral catheter, her symptoms re-occurred; her s-Cr and BUN levels became elevated, and her urinary output gradually declined. At that time, we noted the presence of mesothelial cells in her urine , leading to the suspicion of an intraperitoneal rupture of her bladder. Cystoscopy showed a diverticulum in the apex of her bladder and a possible fistula. After the transurethral catheter was re-inserted into her bladder, her symptoms alleviated, and her s-Cr and BUN levels returned to normal.
Our patient underwent surgery to close the fistula and subsequently received 10 hyperbaric oxygen therapy sessions. The transurethral catheter was removed after these therapies and her s-Cr and BUN levels remained normal; her urine output also remained similar to that prior to the transurethral catheter removal.