A 59-year-old man with no past medical history was referred to our outpatient clinic with a 2-year history of intermittent hoarseness. He was a smoker with no history of voice abuse. On laryngoscopic examination, there was a polypoidal lesion located in the anterior half of the right true vocal fold with preserved mobility . The lesion was excised with cold instruments: cordectomy (type II) . Histological examination showed a subepithelial paucicellular lesion, which formed by regular spindle to stellate fibroblast cells. These latter were embedded within an abundant myxoid matrix. The tumor was richly vascularized. No histological signs of malignancy were found. These features were consistent with a diagnosis of laryngeal myxoma. After 4 years of follow-up, he had a recurrence located in the same site as the first lesion. He underwent type III cordectomy by cold instruments.
A 48-year-old woman with no past medical history presented with hoarseness of 20-year duration. She was a smoker with history of voice abuse. Laryngoscopic examination showed a polypoidal mass located in the anterior half of the two true vocal folds. Rest of the vocal cords was edematous. Vocal cord mobility was normal. She had also a thyroid nodule (size: 2 cm / EUTIRADS (European Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System) 5). She underwent right lobo-isthmectomy and direct laryngoscopy with excision of the laryngeal lesion by cold instruments. Histological findings were the same as the first case but the lesion was poorly vascularized in this case: a subepithelial paucicellular lesion, which formed by regular spindle to stellate fibroblast cells within an abundant and hypovascular myxoid stroma. No histological signs of malignancy were found. The lesion was lined by a normal stratified squamous epithelium . The diagnosis of laryngeal myxoma was established. Anatomopathological exam of the thyroid revealed a benign multinodular goiter. After 4 years of follow-up, she exhibited no evidence of recurrence.