Mr. A, a 37-year-old Nigerian male who has lived in the United States for ten years, traveled to Nigeria for one week with his wife to visit family. He had never taken mefloquine prophylaxis before this trip, but his childhood was remarkable for multiple episodes of malaria treated with various anti-malarial regimens. His previous psychiatric history was significant for a single panic attack experienced in his early twenties. He had no medical diagnoses prior to these events. He used no alcohol or other substances and had no known drug allergies.
Mr. A began his malaria prophylaxis regimen of once-a-week, 250 mg mefloquine two weeks prior to traveling to Nigeria. He and his wife spent a week in urban regions of his native country without incident. He discontinued his malaria prophylaxis upon returning to the United States. Two weeks later, Mr. A began experiencing fatigue and a mild headache and presented to a university-affiliated travel clinic. He denied fever, chills, night sweats, or nausea. Chemistries and cell blood count were within normal limits, and a blood smear showed no evidence of parasitaemia.
Two weeks after his visit to the travel clinic, Mr. A, still concerned that he might have malaria, took a one-time therapeutic dose of 1250 mg mefloquine. The next day, he began experiencing vertigo and insomnia, both which lasted for several days. While at work that same week, he experienced chest pain radiating down his left arm with concomitant diaphoresis and tachycardia in what the patient described as "an ACS picture," referring to acute coronary syndrome. He felt intense anxiety at this time. Mr. A's blood pressure taken in his office was 210/110. He then went to the emergency department of an outside hospital and was admitted for a hypertensive emergency. Cardiac work-up for ACS, including an exercise stress test, was negative and head computerized tomography showed no abnormalities other than a left maxillary mucosal inclusion cyst suggestive of sinusitis. Mr. A was diagnosed with hypertension and, incidentally, with Type II diabetes mellitus. He was held overnight for observation and discharged the following morning on metoprolol 100 mg qd, lisinopril 10 mg qd, rosiglitazone 1 mg bid, and metformin 500 mg bid, and zolpidem 10 mg qhs. The following Monday morning, he returned to work at his office, but left midday because he was experiencing anxiety and nervousness. He did not return to work the rest of the week and tried to relieve his anxiety with exercise and outdoor activities. During this week, he began having unusual conversations about spirituality and religion with his wife. His wife reported that he had difficulty following conversations and was remarkably suspicious of her as well, with numerous inquiries into her activities and friends.
Nine days after the previous hospital discharge, Mr. A became abruptly anxious and agitated with delusions that his wife was having an extramarital affair and began "talking out of his head." His wife, fearful of his increasing agitation and paranoia, finally coaxed Mr. A into going to the emergency department at a university-affiliated hospital. He became severely agitated and paranoid in the emergency department, becoming highly suspicious of the one-to-one sitter ordered for his safety after he had reported suicidal ideation. He attempted to escape from the hospital. Eventually, Mr. A had to be restrained to his bed due to profound psychomotor agitation. His vital signs were remarkable for a blood pressure of 157/97, and physical examination was significant only for altered mental status. Serum electrolytes, renal function, and cell blood count were within normal limits. Blood glucose was mildly elevated at 146 mg/dL. Urine drug screen was negative. Urinalysis was positive for bacteriuria, and a course of levofloxacin was initiated. Mr. A was admitted to the general medicine service, where overnight he had another acute episode of agitation, becoming increasingly argumentative with the staff. Intramuscular haloperidol was administered to treat his acute psychotic agitation.
Mr. A was transferred to the medical psychiatry inpatient unit with the DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder, Not Otherwise Specified. His vital signs remained stable. Rapid plasma reagin test, cobalamin and folate levels, liver transaminase levels, and thyroid stimulating hormone levels were within normal limits. Mr. A complained of intense anxiety with no identifiable precipitant on the first day of his hospital course. He demonstrated paranoid behaviour and was highly suspicious of the staff, frequently checking identification badges and quizzing the staff in order to verify their background and knowledge. Although generally cooperative, he questioned the utility of all procedures indicated in his treatment. He was started on quetiapine 25 mg qhs, alprazolam 0.5 mg bid and zolpidem 5 mg qhs. The latter two medicines were both started during his previous hospitalization for hypertensive crisis. He was also maintained on his previous anti-hypertensive (metoprolol 100 mg qd and lisinopril 10 mg qd) and diabetic (rosiglitazone 1 mg bid, and metformin 500 mg bid) regimens. An electroencephalogram was performed, and the results were negative and inconsistent with delirium or encephalopathy. His vital signs were stable and within normal limits.
The next day, he reported that he refused quetiapine the previous night (confirmed with the nursing staff), citing that his paranoia and delusions had resolved. His claims were incongruent with his behaviour, as he was even more inquisitive than previously, again challenging the staff on their medical knowledge and questioning the rationale behind his medical treatment. He requested that he see his medications delivered in their original packaging before taking them. He eventually took his psychotropic medications but refused diabetic management on grounds that he wanted a subspecialist to manage his diabetes. Work-up for pheochromocytoma, porphyria, and heavy metal toxicity was negative. Over the next couple days, Mr. A's paranoia remitted in response to low dose quetiapine, and he became more pleasant, agreeable, and less suspicious. He eventually agreed to the nursing staff dispensing all his medications and to routine management of his diabetes. On day six of admission, Mr. A stated that he felt more trusting and was completely agreeable to the treatment and discharge plan, although he still found it difficult to follow conversations. After confirming follow-up appointments with Mr. A and his wife and obtaining assurances that he would not return to work until after clearance by an outpatient psychiatrist, Mr. A was discharged on quetiapine 100 mg qhs, metoprolol 100 mg qd, lisinopril 10 mg qd, rosiglitazone 1 mg bid, and metformin 500 mg bid.