A 68-year-old Hispanic female, with a previous diagnosis of arterial hypertension on Enalapril treatment, obesity with BMI of 35 and bilateral knee osteoarthritis. The patient received left primary total knee arthroplasty in December 2008, and right primary total knee arthroplasty in March 2010. She had an upper respiratory tract infection 3 weeks prior to hospital admission without receiving any antibiotic therapy. She debuted in March 2013 with right knee erythema, edema, local hyperthermia, and increasing pain on engaging in any type of movement. On admission, the patient had a fever of 38.2 °C, blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 96 beats/min, she denied taking antibiotics or having food poisoning previously. Laboratory examinations revealed a hemoglobin level of 14.5 g/dL, a platelet count of 281,000/ lL, and a white-cell count of 25,400/lL, and C-Reactive Protein (CRP) of 65 mg/dL (0–6 mg/dL). A plain knee radiograph showed gas absence or prosthesis loosening . Arthrocentesis puncture was performed and Gram-positive cocci were seen; however the cell count could not be performed because the sample coagulated. Surgical debridement was performed, finding the presence of pus and necrotic tissue at vastus medialis; as well as curettage to obtain bloody weaving and properly consistency at the periphery of the prosthesis, which did not present loosening. Once observed revitalized tissue, three litters of saline solution with gentamicine were irrigated. The liner was changed. Three samples of periprosthetic tissue were obtained and transported immediately to the laboratory. All samples showed Gram-positive cocci in the initial Gram stain. The biopsy specimens were inoculated in conventional culture media and, after 24 h, there was the growth of an organism. The colonies were white, raised, and small on 5% sheep blood agar . Identification was carried out using the VITEK®2 (bioMérieux, Marcy L’Etoile, France) system, which yielded the result of a L. mesenteroides. Biochemical tests were performed as recommended in the literature ; briefly, we conducted confirmation of resistance to Vancomycin on Mueller–Hinton agar; gas production was observed from glucose, which did not grow in bile esculin media and which presented arabinose and mannitol assimilation. The broth microdilution susceptibility assay was carried out in Mueller–Hinton agar with lysed horse blood employing the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) strain 29,213 as positive control; the latter exhibited susceptibility to Penicillin and Ampicillin with MIC 0.062 μg/mL and 0.5 μg/mL, respectively. 16S recombinant RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing was performed on bacterial cultures. DNA was extracted using the QIAmp DNA Minikit method (Qiagen, Ltd., West Sussex, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Amplification of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was performed by real-time PCR in a Light-Cycler instrument (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The DNA sequence was determined with a sequence analyzer (ABI PRISM 3130xL; Applied Biosystems) employing the same primers as those with the BigDye kit (Applied Biosystems). The sequences obtained were compared with bacterial sequences in the GenBank database utilizing the BLAST program. This analysis demonstrated the microorganism as L. mesenteroides. (GenBank: KU517836).1 We evaluated biofilm production by carrying out the Christensen method, revealing a mild level of biofilm production .
The patient received treatment with Ceftriaxone 2 g OD for 10 days IntraVenously (IV) due to the lack of a supply of Ampicillin at the time, and was then switched to oral Amoxicillin-Clavulanate 875/125 mg tid for 3 months, when the patient had not knee symptoms and CRP reached 5 mg/dL, without having any side adverse events. Physical therapy was administered for 2 months, with the patient regaining leg strength. Clinical and laboratory evolution was good at 6-month time lapses for 3 years without the presentation of inflammatory knee symptoms and with CRP levels of 3 mg/dL.