A 44-year-old woman was admitted to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University in November 2022 because of erythema of the trunk and extremities for five months, edema and myalgia for two months, and fever for one month. The patient had been diagnosed as SLE in another hospital for six years ago due to malar rash, alopecia, and positive autoantibodies including ANA (cytoplasmic type), anti-dsDNA, and anti-Sm antibodies. She was treated with methylprednisolone 32 mg/d and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/d, and the condition was gradually controlled. Low dose methylprednisolone (8 mg/d) has been administered consistently since June 2022. Five months before hospitalization, she had local erythema on her chest, back, and upper limbs without pain and itching. The patient was suspected of overlap syndrome of SLE with dermatomyositis in another hospital, as autoantibodies including anti-nRNP, anti-SSA, anti-Ro 52, anti-histones, and anti-PL-7 antibodies were positive, and peripheral blood myocardial enzyme spectrum showed elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) 25,170 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB) 253 U/L and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1538 U/L. There was no improvement after treatment with cyclophosphamide (0.6-0.8 g/w), methylprednisolone (36 mg/d) and hydroxychloroquine (100 mg/d). The patient showed observable swellings and myalgia at the erythema sites three months later, although there was also a significant decrease in blood CK (749 U/L) and LDH (463 U/L). But the patient’s health worsened, exhibiting chills and a high fever that ranges from 39 to 40 degrees Celsius. Color Doppler ultrasound imaging of the swelling left thigh showed diffuse hypoechoic areas in the deep muscle layer, suggesting skin and soft tissue infection. Combinations of vancomycin 1 mg/kg plus imipenem 5 mg/kg were used for the treatment, but the patient’s condition worsened and transferred to our hospital for further treatment. At admission, the patient had obvious malaise, drowsiness and night sweats.
A physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.4 °C, a pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 121/83 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 20 beats per minute. There were diffusely soft tissue swellings on the right lower upper arm, the front of right ulna and the left femur. With rash and pain, the temperature of the skin overlying the affected area is marginally higher . The patient presented with hyperpigmented macules and patches over the face, neck, upper limbs, chest and back . The upper and lower limbs were normal, whereas the lower left limb’s manual muscle testing was rated at 2/5.
Laboratory tests showed white blood cells 6.34 × 109/L, and the percentage of neutrophil was 92.7%. Serum CK was 25 U/L and LDH 201 U/L, C3 was decreased at 0.64 g/L (0.9–1.8 g/L) but C4 was normal at 0.2 g/L (0.1–0.4 g/L). Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated at 9 mm/hour (< 20 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein mildly elevated at 5.2 mg/L (< 5 mg/L). The results of T-cell spot of tuberculosis assay (T-SPOT) and tuberculin PPD skin test were positive. Computed tomography (CT) scans did not find any active TB lesion in the lung. Ultrasound revealed signs of inflammation and local fluid in the right arm and left thigh . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed inflammatory changes along the right upper arm, ulna, back and waist and the left femur, with different fluid collection extension along the path of subcutaneous connective tissue. Large volumes of pus were drained from the abscess on the left thigh and right upper leg using ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration , and the pus tested strongly positive for Ziehl-Neelsen staining (4+) . An ultrasound-guided drainage of muscle abscesses revealed positive acid-fast staining, The metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) revealed 266,624 total reads of M. tuberculosis complex with 100% relative abundance. Once upon confirming the tuberculous muscle infection, anti-TB regimen was initiated, including isoniazid (300 mg qd), moxifloxacin (400 mg qd), ethambutol (300 mg qd), pyrazinamide (300 mg qd). In the meantime, 1.0 g of streptomycin was directly injected into the left thigh abscess after roughly 300 ml of yellow pus were removed per puncture during twice-weekly percutaneous pus drainage. No complications occurred during the process of puncture, drainage and drug injection. The patient’s general condition improved significantly within the first week, and the abscesses faded obviously after 2 months of treatment . The patient was discharged and accepted postoperative anti-TB medication for 12 months. At one-year follow-up, ultrasound did not find any abscess recurrence.