The case was a 71 year old female who had no history of abdominal disorders or abdominal surgeries. She had consumed a large meal of roast meat and vegetables for dinner, and soon after experienced nausea and abdominal pain. She visited a physician and underwent a medical examination on the next day. She was diagnosed with gastritis and was prescribed some medications prior to discharge. Two days after the meal, she was found dead lying on her back at home. A large amount of dark brown vomit was found on the floor around her.
The victim was well nourished, 152.5 cm in height, 48.5 kg in weight, and had a body mass index of 20.8 kg/m2. Anatomic deformities or surgical scars were not observed in her chest and abdomen. No vomitus was observed in the larynx, trachea, bronchi, or alveolus. Asphyxia by vomitus was ruled out as the cause of death. Her abdomen was found to be distended. When the peritoneal cavity was opened, a markedly expanded stomach and dilated proximal duodenum were found to occupy a large part of the abdominal cavity. The surface of the stomach showed pallor and the left proximal part of the greater curvature was gray colored (indicated by an arrow in Figure ), which was suggestive of gastric necrosis, and the mucosal necrosis was apparent at the dilated proximal duodenum (Figure B). A dense fibrotic and thickened degenerated area arose from the posterior parietal peritoneum around the duodenum and stretched to the root of the mesentery. The peritoneum was scarred and pulled the root of the mesentery. Dense fibrotic degeneration was found in the thickened peritoneum around the duodenum (Figure B). No pathological abnormalities such as arterial thrombosis, arteriosclerosis, aneurysm, or arteritis were observed at the SMA and celiac artery. The root involved the SMA superiorly, made the SMA tense tightly, and resulted in compression and narrowing of the third portion of the duodenal lumen (Figure A). The root of the mesentery was also thickened and adhered to the surface of the duodenum, which restricted duodenal motility. The stomach contents consisted of approximately 2 Kg of dark brown fluid containing a large amount of undigested meat and vegetables. An excessively large mass of undigested food was also found in the dilated duodenal lumen, and it had completely obstructed the compressed and narrowed region of the duodenum. We surmised that the women died from acute gastric dilatation accompanied by duodenal obstruction due to SMA syndrome with intra-duodenal aggregation of an excessively large undigested food mass.