A 71-year-old man (174 cm, 70 kg) with no known allergies was scheduled to undergo elective split-thickness skin grafting surgery on his hip. The previous skin surgery performed for skin cancer 6 months earlier under spinal anesthesia and inhalational general anesthesia without the use of NMBA had been uneventful. His medical history was also significant for myocardial infarction 15 months earlier that required a percutaneous coronary intervention to the right coronary artery lesion. The latest follow-up coronary angiography revealed 75% stenoses in the left anterior descending artery and in the left circumflex artery. At the time of the current surgery, he was under treatment with aspirin, perindopril, and rosuvastatin. His preoperative screening tests showed no major abnormalities, except for transthoracic echocardiography showing severe hypokinesia of the inferior wall of the left ventricle. The preanesthetic airway assessment revealed no signs of difficult ventilation/intubation (Mallanpati classification I).
The standard preanesthetic checkup revealed no significant abnormalities: non-invasive blood pressure, 120/55 mmHg; heart rate, 56 bpm (sinus rhythm); and SpO2, 99% on room air. General anesthesia was induced by intravenous administration of 100 mg propofol, 100 μg fentanyl, and 40 mg rocuronium. Immediately after the induction, however, difficulty in mask ventilation was perceived, with a recorded minimal SpO2 of 85%. Oral intubation was promptly performed, following which he became profoundly hypotensive, with blood pressure becoming unmeasurable with the non-invasive blood pressure monitor. Meanwhile, the electrocardiogram showed tachycardia (114 bpm) followed by significant bradycardia (44 bpm) with ST-segment elevation (maximal 0.34 μV) . As his carotid pulse became impalpable, cardiac resuscitation was initiated. Return of spontaneous circulation was eventually obtained following intravenous injection of a total of 7.2 mg adrenaline and two extracorporeal defibrillations for ventricular fibrillation, approximately 40 min after the start of resuscitation. Because the hemodynamics remained unstable, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) were established . During this entire period of circulatory collapse, the patient did not exhibit any cutaneous manifestations.
Given his past medical history, the circulatory collapse was initially suspected as caused by acute coronary syndrome. However, a coronary angiography performed immediately after the event did not reveal any new positive findings. The skin surgery was canceled, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. He was successfully weaned from ECMO and IABP on post-operative days (POD) 1 and 2, respectively. On the other hand, as his mechanical ventilatory support was expected to be prolonged due to concomitant aspiration pneumonia, a tracheostomy was scheduled on POD 9.
At arrival in the operating room on the scheduled day for tracheostomy, the baseline vital parameters were as follows: arterial blood pressure, 122/48 mmHg; HR, 56 bpm (sinus rhythm); and SpO2, 99% under an FiO2 of 40%. General anesthesia was induced by the administration of sevoflurane via the endotracheal tube. Then, following the administration of 50 mg rocuronium, the invasive arterial blood pressure monitor showed a sudden precipitous decrease up to 30/18 mmHg, which proved refractory to repeated intravenous injections of ephedrine (up to a total of 8 mg) and phenylephrine (up to a total of 0.8 mg). Although the patient still did not exhibit any cutaneous manifestations, rocuronium-induced anaphylaxis was suspected, as the onset of circulatory collapse appeared to be associated with rocuronium administration on both occasions. Consequently, 6 min after the rocuronium administration, 200 mg sugammadex was administered by intravenous injection. Apparently, coincidentally with the intravenous administration of sugammadex, the patient’s hemodynamics began to show sudden dramatic improvement, to the extent that further vasopressor administration was no longer needed . The tracheostomy was performed successfully, as planned.
Laboratory examination revealed a marked elevation of the serum tryptase level to 7.7 μg/dL at 14 h after the tracheostomy. In addition, the basophil activation test (BAT) revealed a strong positive reaction to rocuronium, indicating that the repetitive episodes of circulatory collapses were attributable to rocuronium-induced anaphylaxis. Skin testing was avoided due to the potential risk of a fatal allergic reaction. The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on POD 40 with no discernible sequelae.