A previously healthy 36 year-old Caribbean woman, G4P2012, presented at 8 weeks gestation, with a 1-week history of worsening swelling in her hands and feet. Her prior pregnancies were without complication, and she took no medications other than prenatal vitamins. She had no personal or family history of kidney disease or immunodeficiency. Her prenatal workup was unremarkable and HIV test negative. Her physical exam on presentation was significant for a blood pressure of 146/95 mmHg, and 3+ pitting edema up to her knees. Approximately 1 month prior to presentation, her 4-year-old daughter had experienced a classic presentation of “Fifth disease” from parvovirus B19. On admission, an obstetrical ultrasound revealed fetal demise and she underwent a dilation and curettage procedure. Products of conception were not sent for parvovirus staining as the obstetrical team felt her presentation was entirely consistent with acute parvovirus infection.
Notable laboratory and imaging results included serum creatinine concentration (SCr) of 557 umol/L (6.3 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen of 15.3 mmol/l (43 mg/dL), serum albumin 15 g/L (1.5 g/dL), total cholesterol 10.55 mmol/L (408 mg/dL), triglycerides 7.01 mmol/L (621 mg/dL), LDL 7.86 mmol/L (304 mg/dL), INR 0.96, PTT 33 s, and PT 10.7 s. A spot urine protein:creatinine ratio was 20.8 g/g. Urine microscopy revealed 2–5 white blood cells per high power field and maltese crosses were diffusely present upon polarization. Further serologic workup was negative, including ANA, anti-dsDNA, repeat HIV test, and for hepatitis B and C. Serum parvovirus B19 qPCR detected the parvoviral genome with a modest viral load of approximately 2000 copies, and parvovirus serologies both IgM and IgG were elevated demonstrating acute infection. While, “undetected” would be the reported result for unexposed individuals, the clinical virology lab reports that their sensitive qPCR assay allows for viral load quantification from approximately 200 copies to over 1X1010 (with the higher values only seen in immunocompromised and sickle cell patients who present early and without adequate immune response). Renal ultrasound revealed normal sized kidneys bilaterally and slight increase in echogenicity, but without hydronephrosis, cysts, or calcifications.
The patient underwent renal biopsy on day 3 of presentation, with a limited biopsy sample revealing 10 mostly unremarkable glomeruli aside from few swollen and vacuolated podocytes found focally and segmentally. There was acute tubular injury with simplification of tubular epithelium, loss of brush border staining, and dilated tubular lumina, as well as a moderate interstitial inflammatory infiltrate without significant tubulointerstitial scarring. Immunofluorescence was not done due to sample inadequacy. Electron microscopy demonstrated patent capillary loops with minor basement membrane irregularity, but no immune complex deposits or tubuloreticular inclusions. There was global podocyte foot process effacement. Immunohistochemistry for parvoviral proteins (Cell Marque R29F6 mouse monoclonal antibody [, ], 1:100 dilution, with appropriate negative controls) was performed after the time of clinical care, and demonstrated positivity in hypertrophic podocytes, parietal epithelial cells, and tubular cells . Given her clinical diagnosis of acute parvovirus infection, and the glomerular changes along with the microcystically dilated tubules, the biopsy was interpreted as showing changes suggestive of Collapsing Glomerulopathy with acute tubular injury and mild active interstitial nephritis. The hope was that, if attributable to parvovirus, this injury would improve with self-limited resolution of viral infection over time. She was treated with oral prednisone (60 mg daily) for the interstitial nephritis. Her SCr did not improve, and peripheral edema worsened despite diuretics. Two weeks later, she was re-biopsied to determine a more definitive diagnosis. A total of nine glomeruli were present, two segmentally sclerotic with more pronounced podocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia, and prominent microcystically dilated tubules. Immunofluorescence microscopy was performed and was negative for immune reactants. A diagnosis of CG, likely virally-mediated, was made.
She was discharged home after 3 weeks of hospitalization, with tapering prednisone and an aggressive diuretic regimen. She returned 6 days later with orthostatic hypotension despite persistent anasarca (80+ pounds above her baseline). Her serum albumin was 10 g/L (1.0 g/dL). Water immersion therapy with diuresis was attempted in an effort to alleviate the patient’s edema, but had little effect.
Her SCr had improved to 309 umol/L (3.5 mg/dl) by 5 weeks after presentation, but she then developed pancytopenia. Serum hemoglobin fell to 50 g/L (5 g/dL), platelet count to 15,000/uL, and ANC as low as 1700/uL with an inadequate rise in reticulocyte count. Serum lactate dehydrogenase and haptoglobin remained normal. Bone marrow biopsy showed a markedly hypocellular marrow with mild dyserythropoesis. While no viral inclusions or hemophagocystosis were found, her serum ferritin rose to 2260 ug/L. This was proposed to be from parvovirus-related inflammation, which has been reported previously . Repeat parvoviral testing showed persistently detectable low levels of virus in the 200–1000 copy range. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was started for multi-organ complications of parvovirus, despite low copy numbers. Preparations of IVIG contain parvovirus specific antibodies at concentrations capable of neutralizing parvoviral antigens [, ] and have been shown to be helpful in eradicating parvovirus B19-associated anemia [, ]. IVIG dosing was empiric, and notably, most of the infusion was lost in the urine (proteinuria up to 60 g/day following infusion). Dosing was continued at 1 g/kg every other day, and eventually quantitative PCR showed estimated viral copy number less than 200 copies, although persistently detected. Because she had no initial response to the IVIG and her pancytopenia was severe, she also received intravenous solumedrol (60 mg daily for 2 weeks, then tapering). After a total of 1 month of hematologic issues, cell counts returned to normal. Initially after beginning IVIG treatment, the SCr reached a nadir of 256 umol/L (2.9 mg/dl), but with her worsening pancytopenia, kidney function worsened, and SCr rose to over 530 umol/L (6 mg/dl).
A third renal biopsy was undertaken 10.5 weeks after initial presentation to help decide whether to consider cytotoxic therapy for FSGS in a now fairly debilitated young woman. Due to the extent of disease progression on this biopsy, the decision was made to forego any cytotoxic therapy and to initiate dialysis for uremia and volume management.
Given the uncommon severity of this case and the possibility of African ancestry given her Caribbean origin , the possibility of a genetic susceptibility to podocyte injury was considered. To investigate this, venous blood was collected in the setting of an IRB-approved research protocol and genomic DNA was extracted and sent for whole exome sequencing by Illumina HiSeq 2000 technology. The authors used well validated scripts made available by the Yale Genetics/Yale Center for Genomic Analysis to curate, align, and annotate the sequencing data. Mean coverage was 57.4 reads, and there was 92.4 % 10x coverage. As hypothesized may be the case, our patient carries two APOL1 risk alleles (homozygous missense variants p.S342G and p.I384M which together comprise the G1 risk allele). For completeness, the following 50 additional genes with published association with glomerular diseases were also assessed: ACTN4, ADCK4, ALG1, ALMS1, ANLN, APOA1, APOL1, ARHGAP24, ARHGDIA, ATGB4, B2M, CD151, CD2AP, CFH, COL4A3, COL4A4, COQ2, COQ6, CRB2, CUBN, DGKE1, EMP2, FGA, FN1, GLA, INF2, ITGA3, ITGB4, LAMB2, LMX1B, LYZ, MEFV, MYH9, MYO1E, NEIL1, NLRP3, NPHS1, NPHS2, PAX2, PDSS2, PLCE1, PLCG2, PMM2, PTPRO, SCARB2, SMARCAL1, TRPC6, WDR73, WT1, ZMPSTE24. There were no loss of function (nonsense, frameshift, splice site) variants, nor were there any rare non-synonomous variants with predicted deleterious consequence in these genes.
Over the subsequent 2 months on hemodialysis, the patient became anuric. Her serum albumin climbed to 3.0 g/L (by 5 months after her initial presentation). She was evaluated for transplantation, and successfully received a living donor kidney transplant from her sister 8.5 months after initial presentation and 6 months after starting hemodialysis. Our findings of the patient’s APOL1 genotype were made available to transplant physicians during transplant evaluation and clinical genetic testing was suggested to the patient’s donor (sister) but she declined. As there are no established guidelines in place for APOL1 testing of donor organs, the donation was accepted. With over 6 months of follow-up, her renal function fortunately remains excellent, with <500 mg proteinuria, and no anemia.