A 44-year-old female presented to the emergency room with sudden onset sharp right lower quadrant pain, nausea, and vomiting. On physical exam, she was positive for McBurney's, Rovsing's, psoas, and obturator signs. Her white blood cell count was elevated at 16.5. CT scan showed signs of appendicitis as well as suspicious intraabdominal soft tissue masses . Five years earlier, she presented to a different hospital with diffuse abdominal pain, and CT scan identified a small bowel lesion; endoscopic biopsy showed GIST. She underwent SB resection without complications. No pathology was available, and according to the patient, no adjuvant chemotherapy was given; on her one-year follow-up CT scan, no evidence for tumor recurrence was found with no additional oncologic follow-up. She remained symptom-free for the next several years, until this episode.
Secondary to the CT findings suggestive for appendicitis, nonoperative management and further workup were contemplated. The RLQ masses were most concerning for recurrent GIST, and after discussion with the patient, indication for surgery was made. On diagnostic laparoscopy, the appendix wall was found thickened and acutely inflamed with nodular lesions. In addition, multiple up to 2 cm in diameter nodules on the terminal ileum and the parietal peritoneum of the anterior and lateral abdominal walls were visualized . One larger nodule in the right pelvis could not be mobilized. The liver was found to be free of any lesions. Due to the volume of the separate masses and inability to mobilize the large right pelvic nodule out of the pelvis, the case was converted to laparotomy. A lower midline incision was made. The appendix was mobilized, the mesoappendix was secured using a stapler, and the appendix was resected at the base and handed off for pathology. All visible nodules were then removed from the peritoneum, and a partial resection of the terminal ileum was performed. When the small bowel was run from the terminal ileum to the jejunum, at 100 cm from the TI, narrow-based Meckel's diverticulum with multiple nodular lesions was found. The diverticulum was resected at the base using a stapler. On pathology, acute appendicitis was seen; however, also serosal involvement of metastatic GIST was noted in all specimens including the appendix and the Meckel diverticulum. The tumor stained positive for CD68, CD117, and vimentin.
The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day five. The patient was started on imatinib, and at the 6-month interval, she was doing well without any complaints; CT scan showed no evidence for recurrent GIST. She was then lost to follow-up when she moved.