Written informed consent for publication of the clinical data and images was obtained from the patient.
In January 2011, a 25-year-old woman was admitted to our gastroenterology unit due to recurrent epigastric pain. Gastroscopy confirmed reflux esophagitis, gastric varices and gastritis. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated splenomegaly, splenic infarction, portal and splenic vein thrombosis, and an 85x50 mm inhomogeneous necrotic lesion located between the stomach, spleen and left kidney, adjacent to the pancreas. Color Doppler ultrasonography of the abdominal vessels showed massive portal and splenic vein thrombosis. Anticoagulation treatment was immediately started. Low-molecular-weight heparin was followed by warfarin, later switched to rivaroxaban. In April 2011 bone marrow immunophenotyping by flow cytometry did not find any abnormality and chromosome analysis did not detect clonal chromosome aberration. The enlarged spleen was considered a consequence of splenic vein thrombosis. The inhomogeneous necrotic lesion in the left abdomen was assumed to be caused by thrombus in the splenic vein therefore biopsy was not performed. During regular control visits white blood cell count and hemoglobin levels were in the normal range.
While JAK2 V617F mutation was detected, the presence of FV Leiden mutation, prothrombin 20210A allele, lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid syndrome and the deficiency of antithrombin-III, protein C or protein S were excluded. The patient neither used oral contraceptives nor was a smoker.
Three years later, in 2014, while on rivaroxaban, the patient was admitted to the Emergency Department for upper left abdominal pain. Physical examination showed extreme splenomegaly, without hepatomegaly. Abdominal ultrasound found splenomegaly of 7.5 x 23 cm in addition to the previously diagnosed portal vein thrombosis and dilatation of splenic vein. Platelet count was 121 G/L . As the rapid development of painful splenomegaly may have been due to myelofibrosis, bone marrow biopsy was performed. High number of giant megakaryocytes with staghorn-like nuclei, evenly distributed in the specimen, were described, and the possibility of ET was raised by the histopathologist, albeit the peripheral blood platelet count was normal. The granulocyte and erythrocyte lineages were intact and no fibrosis was present. ET could not be proven according to the 2008 WHO diagnostic criteria, as one of the four criterion, namely sustained platelet count >450 G/L was not met .
Splenectomy was performed due to the increased risk of splenic rupture. Histopathology of the spleen revealed numerous necrotic neuroendocrine tumour foci with vascular and splenic vein invasion. By immunohistochemistry, tumour cells were neuron-specific enolase (NSE), chromogranin, cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and pan-CK positive. The MIB-1 proliferation index was 5%. There were no symptoms of hormone overproduction.
After splenectomy, the platelet count increased to 2107 G/L, mainly due to reactive thrombocytosis but the possibility of ET could not be clearly ruled out. Interferon therapy was not covered by insurance in Hungary, therefore, hydroxycarbamide was applied for rapid cytoreduction. At that time, the patient was not yet married and did not plan pregnancy. Enoxaparine and allopurinol were added. Platelet count gradually decreased to the normal range within a year.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) demonstrated a 13 cm, irregular soft tissue mass with intensive metabolism in the pancreas. Serum chromogranine-A (CgA) level was >1150 µg/L (reference range: 20-100 µg/L). Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) using 400MBq 99mTc-EDDA/HYNIC-Tyr3-Octreotide (Tektrotyd, Polatom) showed a 10 cm, irregular, multifocal, highly SRS positive lesion in the splenic bed which could not been separated from the tail of pancreas and stomach wall. Moreover, two focal accumulations with diameters 15 mm and 12 mm were observed in segment VII of the liver. For tumour staging, abdominal CT was performed; the 11 cm diameter lesion in the left hypochondrium spread to nearby organs, and several lesions with diameters between 8-17 mm in segments VII and VIII of the liver were detected. The abdominal lesion was surgically removed by distal pancreatectomy . Histological examination confirmed G2 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour according to the World Health Organization (WHO) grading system for pNETs in 2010 , with MIB-1 proliferation index of 6%. Immunohistochemistry showed tumour cells with chromogranin+/CDX2+/CK7+/synaptophysin-/CD56-/TTE1- expression pattern. The liver metastases could not be surgically removed, and radiofrequency ablation was hindered by the proximity of the diaphragm.
After pancreas surgery, lanreotide 120 mg every four weeks was started; serum CgA level decreased to 156.4 µg/L (reference range 20-100 µg/L). After one year, control SRS showed 4.4 cm and 2.3 cm focal lesions in segment VII of the liver with marked radiopharmaceutical accumulation. In 2015, peptide radioreceptor therapy (PRRT) was performed: DOTA-d-Phe -Tyr -octreotide (DOTATOC) therapy was given in 3 cycles 6-8 weeks apart (180 mCi of 90Y-DOTATOC followed by 200 mCi of 177Lu-DOTATOC and 200 mCi of 177Lu-DOTATOC). Treatments were well tolerated. The liver and kidney function remained normal. The elevated platelet count normalized after the first treatment; hydroxycarbamide treatment was stopped. One year after PRRT, in December 2016, abdominal CT, liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and octreoscan SPECT/CT showed significant regression of the liver metastases without tumour recurrence in the pancreatic region. Over the next three years, platelet counts were in the 217 to 679 G/L range without any specific treatment, followed by a rise to the current 736 G/L . Lanreotide and rivaroxaban were continued.
Later, in 2017, lanreotide was temporarily interrupted because of planned pregnancy. While on lanreotide, CgA levels were between 83.7 and 225.1 µg/L; it increased to 1137.7 µg/L when lanreotide was discontinued. After shared decision making with the patient, lanreotide was resumed and continued until pregnancy occurred. In March 2018, a 7 weeks pregnancy was confirmed. SSA treatment was immediately discontinued and rivaroxaban was switched to LMWH. In October 2018, the patient gave birth to a healthy daughter. One month after delivery, lanreotid treatment was resumed. Serum CgA level returned to the normal range and remained low during the three-monthly controls . In February 2020, a second pregnancy was confirmed, therefore SSA treatment was discontinued, and rivaroxaban was switched to LMWH again. In September 2020, she gave birth to her second healthy daughter. After delivery, no metastasis was detected by MRI in the liver, and neither SRS nor chest and abdominal CT did show metastasis in the lung or abdominal organs. Serum CgA level was in the reference range before the post-pregnancy reinstitution of SSA therapy. Complete remission was achieved.
Screening tests for MEN-1, including the levels of serum calcium, phosphorus, and pituitary hormone levels were in the normal range. Family history of the patient was unremarkable. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer system in 2 × 150 cycle paired-end mode. A Twist Library Preparation EF kit (Twist Bioscience) was used for library preparation. Raw data were aligned to the hg38 reference genome using the NextGene software (SoftGenetics). The test targets all protein coding exons and exon-intron boundaries (± 20 bps). The analysis was restricted to the following genes: MEN1, VHL, NF1, TSC1, TSC2, MUTYH, BRCA2, CHEK2. No causative variant was identified.