A 42 year-old man with past medical history of PE was brought to the ER 30 minutes after he had sudden onset of "numbness" and "tingling sensation", accompanied by leg and groin pain. He was unable to stand, which was followed by complete loss of sensation in both legs with cyanosis. In addition to his symptoms in lower extremities, he also complained of 1 week history of shortness of breath.
Six years ago, patient had a saddle pulmonary embolus after a rotator cuff repair surgery. During that episode he had acute shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain. A full hypercoagulable workup revealed protein C deficiency and hyperhomocysteinemia, but the workup was not considered definitive as patient was on coumadin at the time. He was treated with coumadin for one year and was lost to follow-up afterwards.
Upon arrival in ER, the initial physical examination revealed hypoxemia (pulse oximetry was in low-mid 80's) and arterial blood gas showed pH 7.44, PaCO2 33 mmHg, PaO2 42 mmHg on room air. His lower extremities were cold and pulseless from dorsal pedis to femoral arteries bilaterally. The blood pressure in the lower extremities was 87/44, while blood pressure in the upper extremities was 114/70, with a heart rate of 108 beats per minute. Neurological examination revealed intact cranial nerves, with preserved comprehension and speech. Muscle strength was normal in the upper extremities, but 4/5 in both lower extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were normal. Sensation was decreased in lower extremities. EKG showed sinus rhythm at 108 per minute. The patient was treated with intravenous heparin empirically for pulmonary embolism.
Within 2–3 hours after presentation, patient's symptoms improved with resolution of groin pain, and return of the sensation of his lower extremities.
CT aortogram of the abdomen and pelvis with lower extremity femoral runoff revealed occlusion in the abdominal aorta below the level of the renal arteries extending into the inferior mesenteric artery, occlusion in the distal aorta just above the bifurcation extending into bilateral common iliac arteries, internal and external iliac arteries. There was also occlusion seen in the distal right popliteal artery extending into the tibial arteries. On the left there is approximately a large 5.5 cm occlusion of the left internal iliac artery with reconstitution distally. A wedge shaped perfusion defect was also noted in the upper pole of the right kidney suggestive of a renal infarct. The renal arteries were both patent without significant stenosis. Given there was no evidence of atherosclerosis and the rapid onset nature of his symptoms, the filling defects were believed to be emboli (see figure ).
Emergent vascular surgery consult was requested and emergent thrombectomy and IVC filter insertion were scheduled. A transesophageal echo was done intraoperatively which revealed normal left ventricle with mildly depressed systolic function, with an estimated ejection fraction of 50%. There was flattening of the interventricular septum consistent with right ventricular pressure overload. The interatrial septum was mobile with a large PFO and a large right to left shunt identified by color Doppler analysis and agitated saline injection. The right ventricle was severely enlarged and hypokinetic. The right atrium was moderately enlarged. RV systolic pressure is 58 mmHg and the IVC was also dilated. There was mild-to-moderate tricuspid regurgitation with pulmonary hypertension. No other cardiac thrombi were noted (see figure ).
An emergency IVC filter was placed. The patient underwent bilateral aortic embolectomies, bilateral iliac embolectomies, and bilateral superficial femoral profunda embolectomies, and bilateral tibial-peroneal trunk embolectomies via bilateral femoral arteriotomies.
Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities done postoperatively revealed thrombosis in the left proximal superficial femoral vein and left popliteal vein extending into the posterior tibial vein.
Patient was transferred to cardiovascular step-down unit afterwards and subsequent anticoagulation with heparin and coumadin was resumed.
His anticoagulation work up showed no evidence of factor V Leiden or prothrombin gene G20210A mutation, antiphospholipid antibody screening was negative, and levels of factor VIII and homocysteine were normal. Levels of protein C, S and antithrombin III were unreliable in the setting of an acute thromboembolic event or during treatment with heparin and coumadin.
The patient was discharged 8 days after admission, no recurrent emboli have been observed. He is to stay on lifelong coumadin therapy. PFO closure was planned at a later date.