A 50-year-old Caucasian man, nonsmoker, was referred to our clinic with the chief complaint of floaters in his left eye for the past 3 days, with no significant family history. He had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder 8 years earlier and was taking olanzapine, fenofibrate, and bisoprolol. He had no other systemic disease or risk factors for CRVO.
Upon examination, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.7 in the left eye and 1 in the right eye, with normal pupillary reflexes and with no relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) in either eye. His intraocular pressure (IOP) was 18 mmHg in his right eye and 20 mmHg in his left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment of both eyes was normal, without cataracts. The fundus showed signs of CRVO, with tortuous and dilated retinal veins and hemorrhages, with subhyaloid hemorrhage and intraretinal hemorrhage in the posterior pole and superior and inferior retina, without macular edema , confirmed by optical coherence tomography (OCT) . In the fundus examination, there was no sign of neovascularization elsewhere (NVE) or at the disc level (NVD).
In fluorescein angiography and OCT angiography , although we could not completely visualize the posterior pole because of the large subhyaloid hemorrhage, there was no significant capillary nonperfusion area or ischemic area, with no posterior segment neovascularization, and we could not detect any leakage to confirm macular edema.
Although we could not completely exclude the ischemic classification of thrombosis because of subhyaloid hemorrhage, other findings such as visual acuity and the type of thrombosis seemed to be nonischemic .
We ruled out other probable differential diagnoses and risk factors which lead to CRVO through complete physical exam including blood pressure control in 24 hours, chest X-ray and whole-body computed tomography scan to identify any other hemorrhage, and blood analysis including complete blood count (CBC), glucose, urea, creatinine, lipid profile, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), bleeding time (BT), fibrinogen level, proteins, antiphospholipid antibodies (APA), homocysteine blood level, antithrombin III, protein C and S, factor V Leiden, prothrombin mutation, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level, other autoantibodies, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51.
Finally, we confirmed the probable side effect of olanzapine as another antipsychotic medication in his recent CRVO which was not previously reported.
We discontinued olanzapine to prevent any further complications related to this drug, and we added salicylic acid with an anticoagulant dose of 100 µg per day.
In the second follow-up visit after 2 months, his BCVA was 0.7 in the left eye and 1 in the right eye. His IOP was 16 mmHg in his right eye and 18 mmHg in his left eye.
Gonioscopy was performed by Goldmann gonioscopy, and the presence of neovascularization in the angle was ruled out. His fundus showed signs of exudation of previous subhyaloid and subretinal hemorrhage in the superior juxtapapillary zone, without any NVE.