A 61-year-old woman was diagnosed with anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody (ACh-R) positive MG in 2005. Initially, only ocular signs were present, but systemic symptoms arose over time showing a relapsing course. During her last myasthenic crisis in 2009 a thymectomy was performed and an immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine in combination with pyridostigmine was initiated. Neurological symptoms were fully controlled without residual symptoms. Doses of azathioprine and pyridostigmine remained stable during the regular three-monthly neurologic screening visits. In March 2016 a MCPyV-positive MCC measuring > 5 cm in diameter with a tumor thickness of 22 mm was detected on her right gluteal side. After wide local excision of the primary tumor with a 3 cm safety margin and a negative sentinel lymph node biopsy of the right groin, she received an adjuvant radiotherapy of the primary tumor site. The patient underwent a rigorous follow-up scheme with clinical examinations and ultrasound of the regional lymph nodes every six weeks and yearly chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound were planned. In September 2016, six months after the initial diagnosis of MCC, ultrasound of the right inguinal groin showed enlarged lymph nodes. A subsequent positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) confirmed right inguinal lymph node metastases. Additionally, metastases of the pancreatic tail and its surrounding lymph nodes were detected. To exclude a secondary malignancy, a biopsy from the pancreas was performed confirming MCC metastasis. Due to the extensive metastatic spread of the MCC, immune-checkpoint therapy with a PD-1 inhibitor was recommended by our interdisciplinary tumor board. The risks (i.e. exacerbation of preexisting MG with potential lethal outcome) and benefits (i.e. life-threatening metastatic MCC with a response rate of around 60% to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors) of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor therapy was discussed thoroughly with our neuromuscular specialists and the patient. As treatment with azathioprine has been identified as a risk factor for the development of non-melanoma skin cancer in transplant recipients and myasthenia patients [–] therapy for MG was switched from azathioprine to mycophenolatmofetil (MMF) (500 mg 1–0-1). After extensive education of the patient and the patients’ family, immunotherapy using PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab at a dose of 2 mg/kg every three weeks was started in November 2016. At the time of therapy initiation avelumab was neither approved for MCC nor available to our skin cancer unit . Therefore, due to published overall response data at that time , pembrolizumab was chosen.
Prior to initiation of immunotherapy, screening laboratories for hepatitis A, B and C, were performed and negative. The patient had no medical history for hepatotoxicity in the past, therefore marginally elevated transaminases were tolerated at start of PD-1 inhibitor therapy. Due to parallel induction of MMF and pembrolizumab, blood levels including liver enzymes were measured more frequently than normal. After one cycle of pembrolizumab, the patient’s liver enzymes started to rise slightly (grade 1 common toxicity criteria of adverse events (CTCAE; version 4.0)). The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary team meeting with gastroenterologists and neurologists, concluding that an immune-related hepatitis would rather be unlikely while treated with MMF suspecting MMF-induced toxic liver damage as the most likely diagnosis. At this time, a liver biopsy was not performed due to asymptomatic grade 1 hepatitis. Since levels of aspartate aminotransferase ​​increased on day 15 and were still elevated on day 21, the second pembrolizumab infusion was paused as a precaution. In addition, MMF was switched to CsA at a dose of 2 mg/kg. Within two weeks, after a slight increase of the liver enzymes, transaminases decreased to initial values and pembrolizumab was continued.
Eight weeks after the start of immunotherapy with pembrolizumab, but after only two infusions, the first regular staging with CT scans of the chest, abdomen and brain revealed a mixed response with partial response (PR) of the pancreatic tail tumor and progression of the lymph node metastases of the right groin. As the tumor of the right groin caused severe pain, surgery or localized radiation therapy was recommended. However, after the third course of pembrolizumab the patient reported significant decrease of pain, clinical examination could confirm dramatic regression of the inguinal lymph nodes. Therefore, immunotherapy continued without any further local treatment to the right groin. The patient was in constant surveillance by neurology specialists using the quantitative myasthenia gravis (QMG) score incl. measurement of vital capacity every 3 months and did not experience an exacerbation of MG at any time. She remained on treatment with CsA 125 mg/day and pyridostigmine 60 mg three times daily. The second staging after 23 weeks (six doses) showed further remission of the pancreatic metastasis and distinct remission of the lymph node metastases. So far, immunotherapy with pembrolizumab is still ongoing (27 doses) and CT-imaging of the abdomen revealed a persistent tumor regression of the right inguinal lymph node metastases and a no longer detectable metastasis at the pancreatic tail for 65 weeks without any flare of the MG.