A 24 years old, unmarried male, resident of Dera Ghazi Khan, presented at Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation (SIUT) with the complaint of left flank pain on and off for one month. He had a positive family history of stone disease. He had a history of stone passage and appendectomy being attempted in 2007. On examination, he was a young male of average height and built, well oriented to time, place, and person. Hematological investigation showed hemoglobin of 11.2g/dl, platelet count 280000 × 109 per liter, Total leucocyte Count (TLC) 5.2 × 109/L. Urine D/R and Urine culture were negative. Serum Creatinine was 0.88mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen was 18 and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.01 was found. Serologic tests for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. Vitals included pulse 74/min, afebrile, respiratory rate 16/min, and blood pressure was 136/78 mmHg. On General physical exam Anemia and Jaundice were negative, Lymph nodes were not palpable, and Abdomen was soft and non-tender. A Healed scar mark in the right iliac fossa was noted. No swelling was appreciated on the cough. The rest of the examination was unremarkable. Bladder histopathology report showed mild, chronic, non-specific cystitis. No evidence of dysplasia, TB, or tumor was seen. Cystoscopy and biopsy were done which showed no remarkable findings.
A CT scan was done in Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation (SIUT) that revealed soft tissue density mass in the left renal pelvis extending down to mid-pole calyces to pleviuretric junction leading to left renal pelvis distention and obstruction. This obstruction resulted in mild to moderate uropathy on the same side (as shown in a). The lower pole of the kidney illustrated partially obstructing staghorn calculus with substantial asymmetrical cortical thinning. The patient was planned for a left Nephro-ureterectomy but lost to follow up.
After 2.5 years patient again presented with the same complaint. On laboratory investigation, glucose, hemoglobin, erythrocytes, creatinine, urea, liver enzymes, and cholesterol were within normal limits. CT scan Abdomen was done that showed some similar findings as previous CT scan but over time enhancing tissue density mass in left renal pelvis shifted the intensity of mild uropathy to moderate. The mass lesion increase in size since the previous scan, previously it measured 2.6 × 4.2 × 4.2cm and now it was 3.3 × 4.7 × 5.0 cm (b). Multiple small calculi were also noted (c). The larger partial staghorn calculi obstructed lower calyx.
Left Robot-Assisted Nephro-ureterectomy plus excision of bladder cuff was planned in which 3 × 4 cm left renal mass involving renal pelvis was excised. Hilar vessels and the right ureter were free of the tumor as shown in a and b. Grossly, the mass was well-circumscribed with normal-appearing parenchyma with an obvious renal pelvis mass represented . Histopathology report unveiled features of benign biphasic tumor epitomized (a). The epithelial component that was composed of various numbers of tubules, which ranged from very minute to larger tubules with micro and macro-cysts, lined by a single layer of columnar cells is also illustrated in b. It shows a hob nailing pattern of the epithelial lining (a). The stromal element was composed of dense spindle cells arranged in varying degrees of short bands shown in b. Markers (estrogen and progesterone) were positive, diffusely, and strongly present in all tumor cells. The diagnosis of mixed epithelial and stromal tumor (MEST) was then established.
Postoperatively, the patient was discharged on day 3. No other complications were observed. As it was a benign tumor no adjuvant chemotherapy was given. Now the patient is on follow-up. To date, there is no radiologic evidence of disease recurrence.