A 36-year-old white man with no relevant medical history presented to our emergency department (ED) with severe left scrotal pain.
Left testicular discomfort had been present for a month, and the pain had worsened in the past few hours. A scrotal examination revealed a painful and lightly swollen upper pole of his left testicle. He experienced no fever or dysuria and urine analysis was normal. Blood analysis showed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP; 13.4 mg/L), creatine kinase (368 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 664 U/L), and white blood cell count (WBC; 12.1×103/mm3; 83% neutrophils). Viral epididymitis was suspected and therapy with oral anti-inflammatory drugs was started. He was advised to wear tight underpants and could return home.
The next day, however, he returned to our ED with aggravated testicular pain and swelling despite painkillers and anti-inflammatory medication. On physical examination, no high-riding left testicle was found. Palpation of his abdomen was normal. His WBC (15.1×103/mm3) and CRP (16.4 mg/L) had risen further. A color Doppler ultrasound evaluation revealed a reduced vascularization of his left testicle ; his right testicle appeared to be normal.
Surgical exploration was carried out to rule out a testicular torsion. During exploration, no torsion was found but the left testicle showed a white discoloration with a faint purple aspect at the upper pole, indicating a segmental diminished vascularization. His testicle was spared and a bilateral orchidopexy performed. Two days after surgery, his pain was under control and he was discharged from our hospital with painkillers, anti-inflammatory drugs, and anti-emetic drugs (paracetamol 1 g 4×/day, diclofenac 75 mg 2×/day, domperidone 10 mg 3×/day).
A month after the operation a contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. T2-weighted images showed a heterogenic hypointensity in the upper part of his left testicle , which appeared ischemic after contrast enhancement.
Tumor markers were also determined: human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG), alpha fetoprotein (AFP), and LDH. Except for a slightly elevated LDH (698 U/L), the results were in the normal range. These results increased confidence in the diagnosis of segmental testicular infarction and made the hypothesis of testicular cancer less likely.
At follow-up a few months after the incident, our patient no longer had complaints although ultrasonography showed a remaining hypo-echogenicity of the left upper pole, indicating a sequel of the ischemia .
In Table , all events that occurred during this case are summarized and provided in chronological order.