We present a case of a 25 year old Caucasian woman with no know family history of hematological disorders with a history of thrombocytopenia since childhood who was ultimately diagnosed with and treated for congenital TTP at the age of 25. She presented at the age of 22 with a platelet count of 20 × 109/L, an elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 473 U/L (normal range: 98-192 U/L), and an indirect bilirubin of 57.0 umol/L (normal range: 0.0-12.0 umol/L). She was completely asymptomatic, though she described a history of recurrent episodic easy bruising, jaundice, diarrhea, and fevers since infancy. As a child she also experienced episodes of epistaxis, gingival bleeding, and hematuria. She is Caucasian with no personal or family history of hematological disorders or consanguinity, and no family members known to share her clinical presentation. She was initially diagnosed with chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and Evans syndrome as a child, and received various treatment regimens including IVIG as well as numerous courses of prednisone and cyclosporine, none of which significantly improved her condition. Treatment options were discussed and since she was asymptomatic and her platelet levels were felt to be safe the patient elected to proceed with expectant therapy and regular follow-up, which was relatively uneventful for several years. At the age of 25 she presented to another medical institution with fever, chills, vomiting, and dark urine. Blood work was significant for elevated creatinine, a platelet count of 10 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 94 g/L and schistocytes in the peripheral smear. She was admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of TTP. Her attending physician ordered ADAMTS13 testing on the suspicion of congenital TTP. The ADAMTS13 functional assay showed an activity level of less than 10% and there was no evidence of anti-ADAMTS13 antibodies, establishing the diagnosis of congenital TTP. She ultimately recovered without undergoing plasma infusions and was discharged home. Regular screening blood work continued to show evidence of mild hemolysis. Five months after discharge the patient’s blood work showed schistocytes in the peripheral smear and a platelet count of 20 × 109 . Her blood work was also significant for indirect bilirubin of 42.9 umol/L, and a LDH level of 491 U/L. She was admitted to our inpatient service and treated with a plasma infusion at 60 ml/h continuously for a 24 hour period, which resulted in a marked improvement in her thrombocytopenia and hemolysis. One month after being discharged from hospital she again developed marked thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 19 × 109/L and laboratory indications of hemolysis. She was admitted to hospital, treated successfully, and discharged home with a plan to start prophylactic plasma infusions at a dose of 10 mg/kg every three weeks. Unfortunately, three weeks later and just prior to receiving her first prophylactic plasma infusion, she relapsed and was again admitted for treatment.
Given her recurrent episodes of TTP, the patient was scheduled to receive weekly prophylactic plasma infusions at a dose of 10 mg/kg. This regimen was followed for five weeks before the treatment interval was increased. At the time of preparation of this manuscript our patient is maintained on biweekly plasma infusions; she has not developed any further episodes of acute hemolysis and her platelet count remains normal.