A 68-year-old man with medical history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, ischemic cardiomyopathy, and atrial fibrillation was initially evaluated in the dermatology clinic for a large exophytic, fungating lesion located on his upper mid-back. The patient was hospitalized 12 months prior for an episode of heart failure, when the lesion was first documented (a) and biopsy showed angulated nests of BCC in an infiltrative pattern. He was referred for outpatient follow-up with a surgeon for planned surgical resection.
Unfortunately, the initial evaluation was missed, and he re-presented 12 months later, at which time the lesion had increased in size and measured 7 × 7 cm (b). During this clinic visit, he reported sustaining a caustic injury to his upper back with a cleaning chemical approximately 7 years prior while working as a car detailer. In the prior 3 months, he reported occasional bleeding from the lesion as well as staining of his clothes and malodor. He was unable to fully visualize the lesion due to anatomic location. On physical examination, the lesion was noted to overlie the upper thoracic spine and was immobile, raising concerns about potential deep margin involvement of the underlying muscular fascia or spinous processes. A soft tissue MRI demonstrated a 7.2 cm × 6.8 cm enhancing lesion of the skin extending into the subcutaneous fat and paraspinal soft tissues without clear invasion into paraspinous musculature or bone. A multidisciplinary discussion was conducted at our hospital’s tumor conference, and a recommendation was made for initial treatment with vismodegib to potentially downsize the tumor. It was discussed that initial surgery would likely require a skin resection of greater than 10 cm in diameter to encompass the lesion and peripheral margins, and would likely require resection of underlying muscle fascia/muscle to attain histologic clear deep margins. The surgical oncologist’s opinion was that closure of such a resection would require skin grafting overlying the bony prominence of the spine with potential wound healing issues. Additionally, there was concern about the patient’s suitability for general anesthesia with his history of congestive heart failure.
The patient underwent neoadjuvant treatment with vismodegib with multiple clinical reassessments. He was seen in surgical oncology clinic after 3 weeks of treatment, when the lesion appeared similar in size diameter, but the lesion’s central aspect seemed to have less necrosis (a). After 10 weeks of therapy, there was significant improvement in both the lesion appearance and diminishment in size (6 cm × 6 cm), and there no longer appeared to be any fixation to underlying muscle fascia (b). Given the patient’s continuous clinical response, a decision was made jointly by surgical oncology and dermatology to continue vismodegib and postpone surgery with the hope of attaining a complete response. After 14 weeks of treatment, there remained two smaller nonhealing regions (larger 2.5 cm × 3 cm, smaller lesion 1 cm × 1 cm) (c). By 18 weeks of therapy, it appeared that the central aspect of the lesion had completely resolved, but there remained three small peripheral lesions (d). At 26 weeks of therapy, only a single 7-mm nodular lesion remained (a) and vismodegib therapy was discontinued. Two punch biopsies were performed of the nonhealing areas and were negative for any persistent BCC. A shave biopsy of the residual inferior nodular lesion showed cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
The patient completed a total of 26 weeks of vismodegib therapy. Six weeks after discontinuation, a Mohs excision of the SCC nodule was performed. The frozen section showed a one-layer, 2.4-cm defect with no evidence of BCC and clear margins for squamous cell. Follow-up, 14 weeks after discontinuing therapy, in clinic (b) and subsequent surveillance visits at one and 2 years have demonstrated no evidence of local recurrence.