A 13-year-old male presented with pain around right hip and knee region with fever with an inability to walk for 1 week. The hip and knee of the right side were warm with an increased body temperature of 39.9°C. The laboratory parameters showed leukocytosis (total leukocyte count=14,780/μl), raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (36 mm in the 1st h), and raised C-reactive protein (198.48 mg/l) with differential counts of neutrophil – 79.4%, lymphocyte – 12.6%, monocyte – 6.9%, eosinophil – 0.4%, and platelet – 372,000/microliter. Radiograph and ultrasound showed collection in both the joints . The hip and knee were drained under general anesthesia and purulent nature of pus was evacuated from both the sites. An empirical antibiotic therapy was started and the entire limb was put on rest with skin traction in a Thomas splint. The culture report showed Staphylococcus aureus (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), sensitive only to clindamycin, cotrimoxazole, and levofloxacin antibiotics. As per sensitivity, an intravenous antibiotic therapy was started. The intensity of fever declined with each passing day and the child started having improved outlook with improvement in his general well-being. On the 5th day of the drainage, a new X-ray was made and it was fine. After some days of tractions, gradual mobilization of the hip and knee was started with a skating board. The wounds were healed. Gradually, he was allowed to bear partial weight on the limb with the help of a walker and discharged to home with continuous oral antibiotics.
After 3 weeks, he again presented with increasing pain in the hip with difficulty in bearing weight on the same limb with formation of a sinus at the drainage site. A fresh radiograph showed SCFE . The boy was again taken for the surgery and gentle open reduction under general anesthesia and internal fixation was done with three partially threaded cancellous screws along with debridement of the joint . The limb was put on rest and gradual mobilization with skating again started once pain was in control. The boy was restrained from full weight-bearing until following 2 months with gradual introduction of partial to full weight-bearing. In the subsequent radiographs, the epiphysis healed to the metaphysis with reduction of joint space and some collapse . Because of decrease in joint space, external rotation was restricted to 20° and flexion was of 0°–100° range. The rest of the hip motions were normal. The knee range of motion was restored to normal. At last follow-up at 18 months, the screws were in position with reduction of hip joint space and some collapse of the epiphysis due to an avascular necrosis. The patient was fully ambulatory with occasional pain; hence, the implant was kept in situ till further necessity.