A 74-year-old Japanese woman visited her local clinic complaining of tarry stool one month prior to visiting our department. She was referred to our department for further examination. Contrast radiography and endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract revealed a scirrhous type gastric cancer located in a wide area of the stomach infiltrating the esophagogastric junction (EGJ), gastric body, and antrum, with partial ulceration . Biopsy specimens obtained from that lesion showed a poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet-ring cells. Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma cells were negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2; score 0). At this point, passage of contrast agent through the stomach was possible. Whole body computed tomography (CT) scans revealed multiple metastases to the abdominal lymph nodes, liver, and peritoneum. A moderate amount of malignant ascites were also found. She had no relevant personal or family history. Her laboratory data showed no major organ dysfunction except for a slight microcytic hypochromic anemia. Her serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal limits, but carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were elevated to 50.0U/mL (normal range of CA19-9: 0.0 to 37.0U/mL). Her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) was 1. PS1 is defined as restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature. Since curative surgery was thought impossible, our patient was treated with systemic chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and S-1, an oral dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD)-inhibiting fluoropyrimidine; 60mg/m2 of cisplatin was infused over a two-hour period on day one, and 120mg/body/day of S-1 was orally administered on days one to 14 every three weeks. Two months after the initial course of chemotherapy, disappearance of the metastatic liver tumors and improvement of the malignant ascites were observed. Her serum CA19-9 levels had also decreased to within normal ranges. However, gradual appetite loss had appeared during the fourth cycle in March 2011. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination revealed two sections of stenosis in the EGJ and gastric body, showing progression of disease. A large amount of undigested food residue remained, resulting in a gastric outlet obstruction scoring system (GOOSS) score of 1 (score 0: no oral intake; score 1: liquids only; score 2: soft foods; score 3: solid foods/full diet) . Contrast radiography revealed that the length of the stenosis from the gastric lower body to the antrum was 4cm, and, fortunately, the pyloric ring was intact . CT scans showed that the metastatic lesions had not deteriorated, but PS2 is defined as ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and about more than 50% of waking hours, and the ascites increased. Gastro-jejunal bypass surgery was not thought possible due to infiltration of carcinomatous cells across a wide area of the stomach. It was finally decided to perform SEMS placement to achieve early symptom relief based on the following reasons: limited stenosis involving the esophago-gastric junction and gastric antrum, life expectancy of more than several months, and our patient’s wishes.
SEMS placement was performed targeting the gastric antral stenosis on April 2011 using the Olympus® Model GIF-XP260 and GIF-XQ240 (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). After balloon dilatation of the stenotic area, the delivery catheter was inserted from the oral side of the stenosis along a pre-placed guide wire, and then the SEMS (6cm × 22mm, WallFlex® Duodenal Stent, Boston Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) was placed under radiographic guidance . A small amount of bleeding from the carcinomatous mucosa and edematous change of the EGJ from friction with the endoscope occurred . No severe adverse events were observed during the SEMS placement procedures. For seven days after SEMS placement, our patient’s performance status and nutritional condition deteriorated because of worsening of dysphagia induced by the edematous change of the EGJ (GOOSS score 0). Along with disappearance of the edema eight days after SEMS placement, the dysphagia improved enough to allow oral ingestion. Eight days after SEMS placement, 80mg/m2 of paclitaxel (PTX) could be safely administered as second-line chemotherapy (SLC). PTX was administered on days one, eight, and 15 every four weeks. Oral ingestion and nutritional status were restored (GOOSS score 3, PS1) after starting SLC. These conditions were maintained for 117 days until EGJ obstruction occurred due to disease progression. The major adverse events of the chemotherapy were only mild general fatigue (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [CTCAE] version 4.0 grade 1) and minimal lasting peripheral neuropathy (grade 1). Our patient died of cancerous cachexia resulting from disease progression 176 days after SEMS placement and initiation of SLC.