A 47-year-old male had a road traffic accident 1 year ago. He presented with pain in his left hip and an inability to bear weight on his left lower limb. Clinical examination showed a shortening of 3 cm and a reduced hip range of motion. There was no distal neurovascular deficit. On the radiograph, an acetabular fracture with a Pipkin type 4 femoral head fracture on the left side was noted . On 3-D computed tomography, posterosuperior defects of the acetabular wall (AAOS type 1A, Paprosky type 2B) and a Pipkin type 4 femoral head fracture with posterior hip dislocation were detected . Pseudo-acetabulum formation was also apparent.
With the patient in the right lateral position, an incision was given per the standard posterior approach. The gluteus maximus was split, and short external rotators were tagged and cut. A neck cut was taken, and the femoral head was kept carefully. Postero-superior acetabulum wall defect and pseudo-acetabulum were identified . The acetabulum was cleared of all fibrosed tissues to expose the true acetabular margin and transverse acetabular ligament. Then the femoral head was used as an autograft to cover the defect and fixed with two 4mm cancellous screws. Sequential reaming was done in proper orientation to make the graft congruent with the remaining acetabular margin . The acetabular shell (Duraloc, DepuyTM, Warsaw) was fitted and fixed with one postero-superior screw. The stability of the cup, along with the graft, was checked. In cases of acetabulam defects where three-point fixation is possible, uncemented cups and cemented cups with impaction grafting have similar results [, ]. In segmental acetabular defects where three-point fixation is not possible and a shelf or bulk autograft is required, uncemented cups do well . Seeping of cement between graft and acetabular wall, and hence preventing graft union, was another reason for choosing an uncemented cup. After femoral canal preparation, the femoral stem was inserted. The head was mounted, and a trial reduction was made. The hip was stable within the range of motion with the restoration of the limb length . The posterior soft tissue capsular repair was done. For the correction of shortening, restoration of the hip center along with soft tissue release was done. The anterior and posterior capsules, gluteus maximus, and rectus femoris were released. Adductor tenotomy was also performed. Abductors and iliopsoas were not released. Achieving a normal hip center intraoperatively also helped to counteract the problem of shortening.
The patient was allowed range-of-motion exercises postoperatively. Weight-bearing was restricted for one and a half months. Then, assisted partial weight bearing was allowed until graft union. The patient was allowed to bear full weight after the union. The patient was followed for 1 year to further evaluate clinical and radiological outcomes.
At 1 year of follow-up, the patient was pain-free and could walk without assistance with a normal gait. No limb length discrepancy was present. Harris’s hip score improved from 30 to 85. On follow-up radiographs, graft consolidation was evident without any sign of implant loosening or osteolysis in any of the Gruen, DeLee, or Charnley zones .