A 28-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department (ED) complaining of gross hematuria. She arbitrarily used a herbal supplement that contained red clover and alfalfa. The patient had been drinking this herbal tea a maximum of 5–6 cups every day for two consecutive weeks. After two weeks, few episodes of epistaxis occurred, and ecchymotic lesions developed on her limbs.
In the past medical history, she was diagnosed as a case of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) about five months back and had a history of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and low platelet count from that time. She was under treatment with prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily. There was no drug history of intake of anticoagulants. She had several episodes of bleeding and epistaxis that had been treated with fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and Vitamin K.
On physical examination, the positive findings included diffuse ecchymosis in her limbs and mild bleeding from her lips. At the time of admission to ED, she had a prothrombin time (PT) of more than 37 seconds, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) more than 70 seconds, and international normalized ratio (INR) greater than seven. Other laboratory tests conducted at our hospital displayed the following results: white blood cell count 9.80 × 109/μl, hemoglobin 11.8g/dL, and platelet count 406×109/μl. The results of the liver and renal function tests were within the normal range. The level of coagulation factors were as follows: factor II 18% (normal range: 70–120); factor Ⅴ 94% (normal range: 60–130); factor III <1% (normal range: 55–190); and factor X 7% (normal range: 70–120). The fibrinogen level was 303 mg/dl (200–400). A mixing test was performed that was normal. Therefore, the main clinical suspicion in this patient was poisoning by a vitamin K antagonist. This suggestion was confirmed by the detection of warfarin in the patient's blood sample; however, our patient did not have any history of warfarin or super-warfarin consumption. The patient was treated empirically with 20 mg of intravenous vitamin K and four units of FFP within 10 days of hospitalization. In that time, the bleeding stopped, and laboratory parameters returned to normal range (PT = 11.5 seconds and INR = 1). She was discharged and was advised not to use herbal supplements without a physician prescription.