A 37-year-old woman was admitted to the renal unit for rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Medical history included fracture of the left clavicle 10 years ago. She has no smoking or alcohol, no history of hydrocarbon exposure, chemicals or heavy metal exposure, etc.
The results of physical examination on admission, including blood pressure (110/65 mmHg), were normal. Serum creatinine had risen from 72 μmol/L to 310 μmol/L over the past 2 weeks. Urinary examination disclosed microscopic hematuria and proteinuria within the nephrotic range (8.11 g/day). She had hypoproteinemia (albumin 24 g/L) with no anemia (hemoglobin 124 g/L). Routine ELISAs were positive for anti-GBM (104 RU/mL, normal range <20 RU/mL) (EA 1251-9601 G; Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika (China), Beijing, China). Tests for IgA anti-GBM were not available on admission. Other laboratory investigations showed normal C3 and C4 levels and negative anti-nuclear antibody, anti-phospholipid antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). Immunoglobulins G, M, and A were normal and no paraprotein was found in serum or urine. Ultrasound showed normal kidneys. Computed tomography (CT) excluded alveolar hemorrhage.
Kidney biopsy was performed. Immunofluorescence analysis indicated bright capillary wall staining for IgA (2+ to 3+) and IgG (2+ to 3+) . There was weakly capillary wall staining for κ, and λ (+), and segmental staining for IgM (1+) and FRA (2+). C3, C1q, HbsAg, HbcAg, and HCV-Ag were negative. All the four IgG subclassed deposition along GBM were detected. There was bright capillary wall staining for IgG1 (2+ to 3+) and IgG3 (2+), and weakly capillary wall staining for IgG2 (+) and IgG4 (+). Light microscopy showed segmental fibrinoid necrosis in five of 36 glomeruli , and fibrinoid necrosis with crescent formation in seven of 36 glomeruli . Epithelial cell foot process fusion was present, and no electron-dense deposits were found by electron microscopy . The findings of renal biopsy suggested anti-GBM disease.
Informed consent was obtained for analysis of the patient’s serum. One human serum sample was used as a negative control, and another serum sample from an IgG anti-GBM patient was used as a positive control. Human kidney cortex basement membranes and non-collagenous (NC1) hexamers of type IV collagen were prepared as described previously . Another commercial ELISA kit (EA 1251-9601 G; Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika (China), Beijing, China) using bovine kidney α3 (IV) collagen NC1 domain as an antigen was used to detect the presence of IgG anti-GBM autoantibodies in the patient’s serum. The recombinant human α3 (IV)NC1 (2 μg/L) were coated into the 96-well plates at 4 °C overnight. After blocking and washing, diluted blood samples (1:100) were added at 37 °C for 60 min. After washing, horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mouse anti-human IgA antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) diluted at 1:5000 were added at 37 °C for 60 min. 3,3′,5,5′-Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) liquid was applied as substrate and the color development was terminated by 1 mM sulfuric acid after 20 min. The plates were read at 450 nm and absorbance value of each sample was calculated. The patient’s serum contained IgA (82 RU/mL, normal range <20 RU/mL) and IgG (78 RU/mL, normal range <20 RU/mL) anti-GBM autoantibodies.
Further analysis was performed by Western blotting as described previously . Briefly, recombinant human NC1 monomers were subjected to 12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) under non-reducing conditions and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Schleicher and Schuell, Kent, UK) using semi-dry blotting. The membrane was blocked in TBSTM buffer (0.01 mol/L Tris–HCl, pH 7.2, 0.15 mol/L NaCl, 0.1% Tween 20, 20 g/L skimmed milk) for 30 min at room temperature, incubated overnight with sera diluted 1:50 in TBSTM at 4 °C, washed, and incubated with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibodies (mouse anti-human IgA antibodies and goat anti-human IgG; 1:6000; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 1 h at room temperature. Antibody binding was detected using nitro blue tetrazolium and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate as a substrate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The patient’s IgA and IgG were shown to bind to the NC1 domain of GBM collagen IV. Both IgA and IgG mainly targeted a 25-kDa antigen (α3(IV)NC1) .
The patient was treated with three sessions of pulse methylprednisolone (500 mg/day × three days), followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) and cyclophosphamide (1 mg/kg/day). Plasmapheresis was performed every other day for a total of six times. After 2 weeks of treatment, serum creatinine level had decreased from 310 μmol/L to 83.4 μmol/L. The urinary protein level decreased to 4.15 g/day, and albumin increased to 33 g/L. Two months later, renal function was stable (serum creatinine 88 μmol/L), urine protein had further decreased to 1.12 g/day, and albumin had increased to 43 g/L. The urine protein level decreased to 0.46 g/day with stable creatinine level after 4 months. Fortunately, she had normal renal function (serum creatinine 70 μmol/L) without proteinuria (0.07 g/day) at last follow-up (4 years later). The patient was satisfied with the therapeutic effect, and the written informed consent was obtained from her.