A 39-year-old woman with pulmonary space occupying lesions for 6 months was admitted to our hospital on January 02, 2018. She was firstly found to have pulmonary multiple nodules (maximum diameter 1.3 cm, in the right lower lobe) on the chest computed tomography (CT) 6 months before. And 3 days before admission, her chest CT revealed the lesion in the lower lobe grew to 1.5 cm. The positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed the nodule in the right lower lobe had abnormal metabolism increase, which was different from the multiple nodules in the right middle lobe . And the PET-CT suggested no other possibility for a primary tumor lesion site.
The patient had no clinical symptoms. She denied any past history of smoking, skin or ocular lesions. A comprehensive physical examination was performed on admission. Her axillary temperature was 36.6 °C, blood pressure was 116/76 mmHg, pulse rate was 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 20 per minute, and oxygen saturation was 100% at room air. Her blood routine test, liver function test, electrolyte and renal function test, and lung cancer markers including Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), CYFRA21-1 were all within the normal range, as were thyroid function test, coagulation function test, and pulmonary function test. The rapid test screening results for HIV, hepatitis B, and syphilis were negative. No abnormality was seen in her electrocardiogram. After excluding surgical contraindications, she underwent thoracoscopic resection of lung nodules under general anesthesia. During operation, two small nodules (around 0.3 cm in diameter) in the right middle lobe and a round, solid mass (2 cm in diameter) in the right lower lobe were removed and sent for frozen section histology. The intra-operative frozen section histology showed two small nodules in the middle lung indicated adenocarcinoma, and the nodules of the lower lung were solid short fusiform epithelioid cell nest with large hemosiderin deposition, which was considered to be non-small cell carcinoma. Then the patient converted to thoracotomy, and underwent right middle and lower lobectomy of the lung with mediastinal and hilar lymph dissection.
Four days later, the final pathological biopsy proved that two lesions in the right middle lobe of the lung were invasive pulmonary adenocarcinomas which consisted of a mixture of acinar and papillary type. The mass in the right lower lobe consisted of solid short fusiform epithelioid cell nest with large hemosiderin deposition. No tumor cells were detected in the four groups of dissected lymph nodes. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of the tumor in the right lower lobe was positive for human melanoma black-45 (HMB-45), Melan-A, and Ki-67 (hot spot 70%), Vimentin, S-100 protein, CgA, CDp56, whereas staining for cytokeratin (CK5/6, CK7), CD68, P63, TTF-1, P40, Napsin A, Syn, PCK [AE1/AE3] and EMA were negative . Since the result of histological examination highly suggested MM and CT showed no other possibility for a primary tumor lesion site, the patient’s tumor in the right lower lobe was diagnosed as PPMM. The final diagnosis of the patient was PPMM combined with invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
She refused adjuvant chemotherapy, genetic molecular testing and immunotherapy, and was discharged after recovering from the surgery. Fifteen months after the pulmonary resection, she felt dizzy and headache. Then she underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and chest CT. The MRI showed she had a brain metastasis . She received whole-brain radiotherapy at 3 Gy each day, for a total dose of 30 Gy / 10f, together with localized radiotherapy for craniocerebral lesions with a total dose of 12.5Gy/5f. Then she was discharged and underwent follow-up at the outpatient clinic regularly.