A 42-year-old multiparous woman with a gestational age of 35 + 2 wk presented to the ER with altered mentation, seizures, and a high fever of 38.3 °C.
The patient tested positive for the nasopharyngeal COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test with symptoms of throat pain two days before her ER visit. Upon arrival at the ER, endotracheal intubation was performed immediately, and an emergency call was made to the obstetrics and gynecology department. According to the widely accepted severity scale of COVID-19 , illness of severity was critical requiring mechanical ventilation.
The patient had previously delivered a healthy baby by cesarean section two years ago. According to the statements of the guardians obtained in the ER, the patient did not have any specific underlying diseases, and there were no remarkable events during the prenatal examinations in the current pregnancy.
The patient had no history of drug abuse, smoking, or drinking. Further, there was no family history of genetic, autoimmune, or thyroid diseases.
The seizure was a generalized tonic-clonic type, and the patient presented with drooling and continuous upper eyeball deviation. The pupillary reflex was prompt, symmetric, and consensual. Vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 121/71 mmHg and heart rate of 115 beats per minute.
The nasopharyngeal COVID-19 test performed in the ER was positive. Laboratory results at the emergency unit showed increased C-reactive protein of 15.7 mg/L [reference range (RR): 0-5 mg/L], erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 37 mm/h (RR: 0-20 mm/h), and D-dimer of 2.7 µg/mL (RR: 0.0-0.5 µg/mL). There was no proteinuria or other abnormality in the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio, which could be considered a sign of eclampsia. The results of the laboratory tests, such as liver function test, serum electrolytes, blood glucose, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine, were all normal. The thyroid function test showed a thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level of < 0.01 mIU/L [3rd trimester-specific reference range (3TRR): 0.38-4.04 mIU/L], free T4 level of 1.95 ng/dL (3TRR: 0.5-0.8 ng/dL), and total T3 level of 183.9 ng/dL (3TRR: 123-162 ng/dL), which reflect overt hyperthyroidism. According to the Burch-Wartofsky Point Scale (BWPS), the score was 65, which was highly suggestive of a TS.
Brain computed tomography revealed no acute intracranial hemorrhage, focal parenchymal lesions, or visible causes of seizure. In addition, there were no focal neurological signs, and the neurologist underestimated the likelihood of seizures owing to the central nervous system lesions.
No noteworthy findings were obtained from the chest X-ray and electrocardiogram. On ultrasonography, the fetal growth was noted to be appropriate for the gestational age, and the fetal heartbeat and movements were normal. No significant uterine contractions were observed in the tocomonitor.
The initial impression was eclampsia because of the seizures and altered consciousness. However, there were several points that were not suitable for a diagnosis of eclampsia. For example, the maternal blood pressure was normal, and there was no proteinuria, fetal growth restriction, thrombocytopenia, kidney failure, or hepatic dysfunction. Thus, we arrived at a diagnosis of atypical eclampsia.