A 30-year-old man presented to the cornea service at the Athens Vision Eye Institute for evaluation of a new rapidly enlarging lesion in his right eye over the last 6 months. His past medical history was significant for Escherichia coli prostatitis 1 year prior to presentation. He had significant sun exposure since childhood, and he worked as a skipper in a sailboat for the last 12 years. His best-corrected vision was 20/20 in both eyes. Upon examination of the right eye, a fleshy pink conjunctival lesion was noted in the medial canthal area . In addition, a pterygium-type lesion encroaching on the cornea was noted. Examination of the left eye revealed a smaller fleshy pink conjunctival lesion in the medial canthus . High resolution anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Optovue Avanti, Fremont, CA, USA) of the bilateral medial canthal lesions revealed homogeneous hyporeflective lesions with thin overlying epithelium . Upon further questioning the patient and his family, they reported the presence of the bilateral medial canthal lesions since the patient was a teenager, but the patient had never sought ophthalmic care. The pterygium had been present for 1.5 years and the corresponding OCT revealed mild hyper-reflectivity of the otherwise thin epithelium with underlying subepithelial hyper-reflective “stringy” tissue.
Small incisional biopsies (2 mm in diameter) of the medial canthal lesions were undertaken and samples were submitted both in formalin and as fresh tissue for flow cytometry. The slightly atypically appearing pterygium was also biopsied. The patient was started on oral doxycycline 100 mg two times a day. Histopathology of the medial canthal lesions revealed lymphoid follicles of variable size that were composed of a polymorphic population of lymphocytes, dendritic cells and tingible body macrophages. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD20, CD3, Bcl-6, CD10 and Ki-67, and negative for Bcl-2 and Cyclin D1 . Flow cytometry showed a polyclonal population of lymphocytes in both medial canthal lesions. Finally, histopathology of the other lesion in the patient’s right eye revealed elastotic degeneration consistent with pterygium. Oral doxycycline was continued for a total of 2 months. The medial canthal lesions continued to shrink as evidenced both on clinical exam and high resolution anterior segment OCT . A month later, the patient requested surgical excision of the pterygium for cosmetic reasons and the residual medial canthal lesion in the right eye was also removed. He is free of recurrence of the BRLH for the past 1.5 years. The residual medial canthal lesion in the left eye has not increased in size since stopping the oral doxycycline.