A 46-year-old female patient presented to our hospital with exertional dyspnea, chest tightness, and shortness of breath for two weeks. She had a history of uterine myomectomy four years ago. On physical examination, her blood pressure was 116/70 mmHg, pulse 78 beats/minute, and RR was 20/minute. Inspection of the chest revealed no abnormal findings. There was no abnormality found on the auscultation of the chest as well. Routine blood and biochemical tests were normal. Echocardiography showed a pedunculated solid hypoechoic mass in the right heart with the pedicle attached to the inferior vena cava not far from its opening into the right atrium . In combination with the past medical history, angioleiomyoma was considered. Lower limb Doppler ultrasound showed plaques in bilateral dorsalis pedis arteries. A gynecological ultrasound showed an isoechoic mass on the right side of the uterus (possible broad ligament fibroid) with small uterine leiomyoma. CT showed that the right atrium had a slightly low-density focus with a size of 3.7*2.2 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that leiomyoma originated from the inferior vena cava (approximately 3 cm from the opening of the inferior vena cava into RA) and occupies the right atrium . Open cardiac surgery through median sternotomy was performed under general anesthesia with a cardiopulmonary bypass established with right femoral artery and vein and an additional venous cannula in the superior vena cava. The tumor was completely resected with tricuspid valve plasty and temporary pacemaker placement. During surgery, a solid mass of about 6*4 cm in size was located in the right atrium with its pedicular attachment in the posterior wall of the inferior vena cava about 3 cm away from its opening into the atrium. The capsule of the mass was complete. The leaflets of the tricuspid valve were normal with annular enlargement which was causing incomplete closure of the valve. In this case, because the pedicel of cardiac leiomyoma originated close to the opening of the inferior vena cava into the right atrium, after the peripheral establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass the silk suture was used to make a snare to cover and ligate the pedicel of the tumor. A small scalpel was then carefully slide down the silk suture to remove the tumor with its pedicle, avoiding abdominal incision . The histopathology report showed CD34 negative and smooth muscle actin (SMA) positive markers suggesting vascular leiomyoma . The recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged one week later.