A 39-year-old homeless male patient was admitted to our emergency department presenting with general weakness, dyspnoea, intermittent episodes of fever, episodes of coughing blood, and an unspecific feeling of pain. Clinical examination showed blood pressure of 105/55 mmHg, heart rate of 94 b.p.m., and a respiratory rate of 28 per minute. Arterial oxygen saturation was 90%. Body temperature was 37.7°C. The dentition status was poor. However, there were no signs of an acute infection in that area. There were no peripheral stigmata of endocarditis present such as Janeway lesions or Oslers’ nodes. Further clinical examination was unremarkable.
The patient was a current user of intravenous heroin, amphetamine, and alcohol. He was not on any regular medication. There were no known allergies or other conditions present. There was no record of a prior episode of infective endocarditis.
Serum levels of C-reactive protein (286 mg/L; upper limit of normal <5 mg/L) and white blood cell count (16.5 cells/mm³; upper limit of normal <9.8 cells mm³) were elevated. Due to clinical presentation and elevated markers of inflammation, we performed a chest X-ray , which revealed bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. Community-acquired pneumonia was diagnosed, blood cultures were obtained and intravenous antibiotics (Ampicilline und Clarithromycin) were started. There was no evidence of tuberculosis in direct microscopy, culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Other causes of atypical pneumonia were ruled out: Aspergillus fumigatus, Mycoplasmia pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Pneumocystis jirovecii. HIV was excluded based on PCR tests. Blood cultures showed the presence of Streptococcus dysgalactiae.
We performed abdominal ultrasound and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) to evaluate alternative infective focus locations. The initial TTE showed no signs of endocarditis. Abdominal ultrasound showed two spleen lesions indicating spleen infarction. We assumed a septic embolic process and performed a computed tomography scan of the brain, thorax, and abdomen showing multiple lesions in both lungs classified as septic embolic lesions . Follow-up TTE as well as transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) showed a round and mobile vegetation of 14 × 14mm in size, with the main part attached to the right leaflet of the pulmonary valve, as well as mid- to high-grade pulmonary valve regurgitation (PR) without evidence of infection in the other valves (see ). There was no evidence of significant dysfunction of the right ventricle (RV) or pulmonary hypertension. Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 32 mmHg (upper limit of normal <36 mmHg). The size of the right ventricle was almost within normal ranges: basal RV diameter (RVD1) 30 mm (normal range 25–41 mm), mid-cavitary RV diameter (RVD2) 37 mm (normal range 19–35 mm), and longitudinal RV diameter (RVD3) 82 mm (normal range 59–83 mm) (see ). Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion indicated normal RV function as well (28 mm; lower limit of normal >17mm). The right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) was slightly enlarged . We found no evidence for the presence of a patent foramen ovale (PFO) or other shunt.
We diagnosed isolated pulmonary valve endocarditis. Based on recent guidelines, we changed the antibiotic treatment to penicillin G and gentamycin according to available antibiogram . These were administered intravenously over a duration of 6 and 2 weeks, respectively. During that time, the initial symptoms of the patient disappeared. There was prolonged fever until 12 days of antibiotic treatment. Subsequently, serum markers of inflammation returned to normal (C-reactive protein 4.26 mg/L; white blood cell count 7.6 cells mm³) and surveillance blood cultures remained sterile. Follow-up TTE revealed consolidation of the vegetation as well as a reduction in size and remaining mid- to high-grade PR without clinical or echocardiographic signs of right ventricular heart failure .
An interdisciplinary heart team discussed the case and (with consensus of the patient) decided to continue medical treatment and against surgery. The patient’s treatment was complicated by non-compliance. Although a multidisciplinary approach including social workers and psychiatrist was implemented, the patient was lost to follow-up.