A 81-year-old woman underwent colonoscopy for severe anemia (hemoglobin 6 g/dL) in the absence of overt gastrointestinal bleeding.
She had ongoing anticoagulant therapy due to atrial fibrillation. The liver enzyme test, cholestasis test and two previous abdominal sonography exams were normal. However, of note, blood tests showed carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) value repeatedly above normal values (2 × upper limit of normal) since 2016.
The medical history of the patient reported a loss of 4 kg in the previous 6 mo, and an invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast occurred 10 years prior to admission.
Family history was unremarkable. The patient did not smoke and did not drink alcohol. She was normal weight before the weight loss occurred due to the neoplasia.
The patient’s vital signs were normal. She was pale due to the anemia and reported fatigue. No abnormal findings were present at the physical examination, apart from the atrial fibrillation.
Liver enzyme and cholestasis tests were normal.
Two previous abdominal sonography exams were normal. Computed tomography scan, performed after the diagnosis of the colonic neoplasia showed local peritoneal infiltration and local lymphadenopathies, in the absence of distant organ metastasis. Colonoscopy revealed a large lesion of 40 mm in size extending from the ileocecal valve fold to the ascending colon. The superficial pattern, the spontaneous bleeding and the ulcerated surface suggested the diagnosis of primitive colonic neoplasia. Biopsies were taken. The terminal ileum results were normal. Surprisingly, the histological diagnosis was consistent with a primitive ductal adenocarcinoma of the colon . A total body computed tomography scan showed local peritoneal infiltration and local lymphadenopathies, in the absence of distant organ metastasis. Notably, both the pancreas and biliary tree did not report abnormalities. CEA was normal, whereas CA 19-9 value was 3 × upper limit of normal. Cholestasis and liver enzyme tests were again normal.