A 51-years-old woman, was admitted to the gynecology and obstetrics clinic due to severe pain in the lower abdomen, weakness, malaise, small amount of postmenopausal bleeding, difficulty with urination and stool lasting for several weeks.
Upon admission to the Clinic, the polymerase chain reaction test for SARS-CoV-2 virus was negative.
Patient was 3 years menopausal and had a history of myoma for 11 years. Eight months earlier, a fractionated exploratory curettage was performed, which did not indicate the existence of a malignant tumor.
On bimanual pelvic examination, the vagina was elastic, passing for 2 transverse fingers, the cervix was shortened with closed cervical canal and the uterus was enlarged, firm and limited mobile, adnexal without palpable tumefactions. Conventional transvaginal sonography revealed a completely altered uterus with a maximum diameter of 20 cm, with undifferentiated cavum and tumefactation on the anterior wall of the uterus of unclear borders, with hyper and hypoechoic fields within the tumefact, about 10 cm in size. The adnexa were bilaterally without pathological tumufeactions, both ovaries were of normal size. Douglas space was without free fluid. Color Doppler tranvaginal sonography revealed pathological vascularization, that is, highly pronounced and numerous blood vessels with irregular and chaotic branching (without lumen arrangement) with present arterial-venous shunts. Pulse Doppler indicated markedly reduced values of the (Pulsatily index ≤ 1) and the (Resistance index ≤ 0.40). The described changes in vascularization were especially emphasized within the tumefact.
Preoperatively, the chest, abdomen and pelvis were imaged, without suspected tumefications outside the uterus.
The patient underwent surgery and a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, adhesiolysis and partial omentectomy was performed. Tumor tissue was removed completely, without residual tumor tissue in the abdominal cavity. Intraoperatively, the uterus was about 20 cm in diameter in adhesions with sigmoid colon, left adnexa and Douglas space. A small amount of free abdominal fluid was aspirated and sent for cytological analysis. The uterus had an uneven surface, which was held intact only by a thin serosa without a clear ruptured site. During the release of the appendages, there was a spontaneous rupture of the left lateral wall of the uterus and hemorrhagic and necrotic contents came out of the uterus, bizarre in appearance, partly gelatinous.
Cytological examination of abdominal fluid revealed numerous erythrocytes and small number of mesothelial cells without finding of atypical cells. Macroscopically, the body of the uterus was enlarged, 20 × 14 × 12 cm in diameter, with some adhesions on the surface. On cross-section of the uterine body, the cavum was dislocated and inconspicuous due to the presence of a clearly demarcated intramural nodule, yellow to pink in color and soft in consistency on the cut surface, 8 cm in largest diameter. Along with the described tumor nodule, softed areas were also observed in the myometrium. Samples were taken on several occasions for pathohistological examination, embedded in paraffin blocks and stained by the standard H&E method .
Microscopically, the tumor tissue was composed of atypical spindle and round cells of medium size. Focally, atypical cells were pleomorphic with bizarre nuclei and number of pathological mitosis was increased. Tumor cells were arranged in a storiform and nesting arrangement with presence of tumor cells in numerous blood vessels. The stroma was sparse with inflammatory infiltrate and rare foci of myxoid degeneration. Larger areas of necrosis and bleeding were found in the tumor. Tumor tissue invaded all layers of the uterine wall with serosal infiltration as well as infiltration of the left adnexa.
Immunohistochemical examination was performed to establish diagnosis. Tumor cells were negative for SMA, Desmine, S-100, Caldesmon, CD34, AE1/AE3, CD31, ERG, GLUT, D2-40, CD68, CD117, p16 and progesterone receptors while CD 10, estrogene receptors, Cyclin D1, DOG, p53 were positive in tumor cells. Ki 67 proliferative index was about 80% .
According to the histological and immunohistochemical analysis, leiomyosarcoma was excluded. Major differential diagnostic problem was High-grade endometrial sarcoma and although molecular analysis was not performed, immunohistochemical results strongly support the definitive diagnosis of Undifferentiated sarcoma of uterine body.[ According to the international federation of gynecologists and obstetricians classification, it is stage II A of disease with lymphovascular invasion present. According to the indication of the oncology commission, the patient received 3 cycles of polychemotherapy postoperatively, according to the protocol, including Doxorubicin and Ifosfamide, at the Oncology Institute of Vojvodina. At the control examination after the prescribed therapy, there was a progressive recurrence in the left half of the pelvis (from vaginal cuff with involvement of the iliac region; vascular invasion; infiltration of the left ureter) with the appearance of constant pain. Teleradiotherapy was prescribed.