A 33-year-old male patient, on dialysis since the age of 26 for kidney damage of undocumented origin, referred to an internal medicine consultation for the etiological assessment of a large amyloid goiter evolving for 3 years with a normal thyroid balance initially. During the interrogation, the patient reported since the age of 16 years inflammatory low back pain associated with buttock pain, heel pain, and enthesopathy, which prompted the patient to self-medicate with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs if necessary. On clinical examination, the patient presented with kypho-scoliosis, stiffness of the cervical, dorsal, and lumbar spine as well as pain on passive and active mobilization of both hips. The rest of the somatic examination was unremarkable, including no cardiovascular symptoms.
Biologically, the assessment was in favor of an inflammatory profile with a C-reactive protein at 87 mg/l, a fibrinogen level at 7 g/l, hypochromic microcytic anemia at 8 g/dl, thrombocytosis at 500,000 / mm3, electrophoresis of serum proteins found hypoalbuminemia at 30 g/l, hyper alpha 1 and alpha 2 globulins. The HLA B27 was positive. Pro-BNP (brain natriuretic peptide) assay was frankly positive at 885 pg/ml.
X-rays were performed , showing a bamboo spine appearance at the level of the thoraco-lumbar spine, accentuated kyphosis.
Histology of thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy found a thyroid parenchyma where the interstitial tissue is enlarged by an abundant amyloid deposit comprising clusters of mature adipocytes interposed between the thyroid vesicles. A biopsy of the accessory salivary glands was performed , which revealed amyloid deposits with positive staining by anti-serum amyloid A (SAA) antibody in immunohistochemistry.
A cardiac assessment was carried out. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a sinus rhythm at 75 bpm, with diffuse microvoltage, pseudo-infarct pattern, and negative T-wave from V1 to V3. On transthoracic echocardiography the left ventricle (LV) was normal sized (indexed left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (ILVEDD) = 40 mm/m2), hypertrophied (interventricular septum (IVS) = 11 mm, posterior wall = 16 mm) , with a normal radial systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) = 65%), an altered longitudinal function with a mitral annular plane systolic excursion (MAPSE) = 13 mm, and an S’VG = 6 cm/s , and a global longitudinal systolic strain altered at -17.3% . We also noted a pseudonormal mitral profile, with biatrial enlargement (left atrium (LA) = 26 cm2, right atrium (RA) = 21 cm2) . The right ventricular (RV) was not dilated, not hypertrophied, with a normal systolic function. There was a minimal pericardial effusion next to the right cavities .
The patient received anti-TNF (tumor necrosis factor) treatment, and after 3 months of treatment, there was a significant biological improvement of the inflammatory syndrome.