A 32-year-old man from Congo presented to another regional hospital with fever, headache, confusion, rigor and tachycardia, in addition to low arterial blood pressure (70/40mmHg) despite adequate fluid infusion. His fever and headache began a week before the first admission. An electrocardiogram revealed abnormalities (segment depression (ST)), whereas laboratory tests showed thrombocytopenia (platelets: 45000/mm3) and a more than 20-fold elevation of troponin I serum levels (>2000IU/ml). He presented with an unstable polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and was admitted to the Cardiology Intensive Care Unit, where he underwent defibrillation procedures, inotropic support and piperacillin plus tazobactam administration. After his stabilization he was transferred to the Infectious Diseases Unit of our hospital for further investigation.
On admission he was icteric, with conjunctival suffusion and arthritis in both knees and ankles. His blood pressure was 120/80mmHg without inotropic support, his oxygen saturation was 98% (FiO2: 21%), whereas the laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (approximately 15000/mm3), thrombocytopenia (approximately 50000/mm3), amylase elevation (approximately 1000IU/ml), hypoglycemia, acute renal failure (creatinine levels: 3.0mg/dl), troponin I levels >2000 and elevated creatine kinase (CPK approximately 5000IU/ml) as well as aspartate and alanine aminotransferases (>x5).
Our patient had been in Greece for at least 15 months, he was previously healthy and the only risk factor for the specific infection was household exposure.
The transthoracic cardiac ultrasound revealed an ejection fraction lower than 30. A multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Neisseria meningitidis was negative as well as the tests for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever and hantavirus. A knee puncture was performed and depicted noninfectious arthritis (WBC <5000/mm3). Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies for leptospira were positive (+), whereas the IgG antibodies were negative. In addition the rapid agglutination test for leptospira was positive (+). Urine, blood and synovial fluid samples were tested for leptospira with PCR, but all results were negative probably because the specimens were collected at least one week after the initiation of antibiotic therapy.
Penicillin (1,500,000 units every 6 hours) was administered (the drug of choice for leptospirosis), however, meropenem and vancomycin were also administered to our patient due to a probable nosocomial infection (severe sepsis). Cardiac and renal function were normalized within four weeks of hospitalization, whereas our patient became afebrile after the completion of Day 7 of therapy. Unfortunately, despite the rapid improvement of the myocarditis and of his general condition, a new complication occurred during the third week of hospitalization. A slow progressive necrosis of soft tissue in both feet due to vasculitis was diagnosed (Figure ). X-rays and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed to exclude osteomyelitis. A conservative treatment was the option with antibiotics, vasodilators (ilomedin/iloprost), aspirin and minor surgical interventions instead of a both feet below the knee amputation.
At the same time, he presented with a second episode of polyarthritis, and mononeuritis multiplex, successfully controlled with prednisolone, pregabalin and analgesics.
Finally, 16 weeks after admission our patient was in excellent clinical condition, had progressively recovered and was free of further complications.