A 17-year-old female student was referred to the Department of Dentistry for the prophylactic removal of 4 unerupted third molars due to dental crowding. She had no medical history. Teeth extraction was planned in two sessions under local anesthesia .
The extraction of the left upper and lower third molar teeth was uneventful. During the second step 2 weeks later, the right upper third molar was accidentally pushed upward and laterally and became unreachable. Immediate retrieval maneuvers were unsuccessful. The wound was closed using 3/0 polyglactin sutures, and amoxicillin–clavulanate (1000 mg × 3/day) was administered orally for 3 weeks.
An immediate postoperative cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) scan showed displacement of the third molar to the ITF up to the level of the sigmoid notch of the mandible . The position of the tooth was horizontal, with the crown being posterior .
A computed tomography (CT) scan acquired 3 weeks after the procedure showed that the tooth had spontaneously returned to the vertical position with a downward crown and had migrated back down to the level of the lingula .
The lack of a solid cranial support of the tooth observed on the CT scan led to the patient being at risk of further upward displacement during a retrieval attempt. A combined surgical and image-guided approach was decided.
A retrieval procedure under general anesthesia using nasotracheal intubation was performed in the interventional 4D MSCT scan unit, 2 months after the initial extraction attempt because of organizational purposes (Additional file ). Indeed, the patient was unavailable and, as she did not complain from any significant symptoms, there was no emergency for retrieval.
In the first step, radiologists inserted a 12 Gauge bone trocar (Bonopty®-AprioMed AB, Sweden) under CT-guidance (Toshiba MEC Aquilion ONE®) through the superior buccal sulcus by an ascending approach. The trocar was positioned exactly between the tooth apices to provide cranial support .
The extraoral end of the trocar was then gently tilted upward to push the crown downward. Finally, after marking the parotid duct papilla and infiltrating the mucosa using adrenaline and epinephrine 1%, an incision was performed through the posterior superior buccal sulcus.
The crown was identified and easy retrieval using a Kelly forceps was achieved . The right lower molar was extracted simultaneously. The surgical approach was closed using 3/0 polyglactin absorbable sutures, and postoperation, amoxicillin–clavulanate (1000 mg × 3/day) was administered orally for 3 weeks.
The CT-guided insertion of the trocar in the appropriate position took a total of 19 min. The surgical retrieval took 3 min. The total dose-length Product was 284.00 mGy.cm. The patient did not feature any significant edema, pain, or mouth opening limitation after 6 h and was discharged, therefore achieving outpatient care. The patient had no edema and was very satisfied with her surgical management. Postoperative follow-up at 3 weeks and 1 year did not retrieve any complication.