A 7-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital to address recurrent cyanosis and tachypnea on exertion that had existed for 2 years.
The patient had been in his usual state of health until 2 years before admission, when intermittent facial cyanosis developed that worsened on exertion, accompanied by sweating, tachypnea, and swelling of the face and bilateral legs. Systemic pain developed, which mainly affected his chest, back, and lower limbs. The episode of pain was unclear and would resolve spontaneously. The patient had occasional dry cough without fever. He had previously been treated in a local hospital, but recurrent cyanosis and tachypnea after exercise persisted for the last 2 years.
One month before admission, the patient had one suspected episode of syncope, which manifested as falling to the ground without response to voice and had lasted for 2-3 min. He was subsequently sent to the Emergency Department of our hospital. His eyes did not appear in a staring state (i.e. no episodes of staring blankly), and he presented neither limb rigidity nor urinary incontinence. History of trauma or surgery was denied. The cranial computed tomography (CT) findings were normal. The echocardiography revealed enlargement of the right ventricle (17 mm), slight broadening of the pulmonary artery (25 mm), and normal left ventricle function (estimated ejection fraction of 70%). Tricuspid regurgitation (maximum velocity of 3.8 m/s) was also found, and pulmonary artery hypertension was suggested (pressure gradient = 62 mmHg). Chest CT revealed bilateral pulmonary opacities, pulmonary congestion, slight enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, broadening of the pulmonary artery, mild pericardial effusion, and localized thickening of the bilateral pleural. Cefdinir, diuretics, and nifedipine were prescribed. Cyanosis and tachypnea were relieved. Unfortunately, although his symptoms had been relieved, they relapsed after withdrawal of the medications.
One week before admission, the tachypnea worsened, with fatigue, and the patient was again evaluated in our hospital. Upon admission, the white blood cell count was 10.5 × 109/L (reference range: 3.6-9.7 × 109/L) and 71.2% of the cells were neutrophils (reference range: 23.6%-75.0%). In addition, the level of C-reactive protein was 10.9 mg/L (reference range: 0-8 mg/L) and the level of myocardial troponin I was 0.067 mg/L (reference range: 0-0.034 mg/L). A chest radiograph showed pulmonary congestion and enlarged cardiac silhouette. A diagnosis of cardiac insufficiency and pulmonary hypertension was made. Dopamine was administered intravenously (5 mg/kg/min). Therapy was started with vitamin C, hydrochlorothiazide, spironolactone, and captopril.
The patient had a history of recurrent respiratory infection and myoclonic jerks and snoring during sleep at night.
The patient was born at full-term, with a birth weight of 2.9 kg. The family history was unremarkable.
On examination, the patient appeared critically ill. The temperature was 36.5 °C, pulse was 118 beats per min, blood pressure was 118/60 mmHg, respiration was 24, and oxygen saturation was 60%-70% while he was receiving oxygen through nasal cannula. His weight was 40 kg (> 97th percentile) and body mass index (BMI) was 26.43 kg/m2. Orthopnea, nasal flaring, stretches of erythema on both cheeks, and soybean-sized cervical lymph nodes on both sides were present. Cyanosis was seen on his facial area and limbs. Coarse breath sounds with crackles were heard. The heart rhythm was strong and regular, with an augmented second heart sound; no cardiac murmur was heard. The abdomen was soft and nontender. The liver extended about 2 cm below the right costal margin with a moderate texture, and the spleen was 4 cm below the left costal margin. Muscle tone was normal. Notably, he had no clubbing, edema, or jugular vein distention. Other physical examination findings were unremarkable.
Laboratory tests indicated impaired liver function, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia . The 1,3-beta-D glucan assay and tuberculosis T-SPOT test were negative. The culture of sputum was unremarkable. An electrocardiogram obtained on admission day showed the following: Nodal tachycardia; axis leaning right (+ 130°); enlargement of the right atrium; ST-segment depression of 0.5 mv in leads II, III, arteriovenous fistula (AVF), and V1-V3; and T-wave depression in leads II, III, AVF, and V4-V5. Spirometry showed mild restrictive ventilation disturbance. The ratio of measured values to predicted values of forced vital capacity and forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity were 75.1% and 97.6%, respectively. Small airway obstruction was present (forced expiratory flow at 50% was 64.7%, FEF at 75% was 36.7%, and mid maximal expiratory flow 75/25 was 53.2%).
Chest CT revealed improvement of opacities, but the enlarged cardiac silhouette was persistent.