An 85-year-old man with diabetes, hypertension, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was brought by ambulance to the Emergency Department with the chief complaints of vomiting, abdominal pain, and no stool passages for 2 days. Physical examination revealed labored breathing. Patient also demonstrated peritoneal signs, including muscle guarding and rebounding tenderness. Bowel sounds were absent, but cardiac sounds were normal without rub, murmur, or gallop. Upper and lower extremity pulses were intact and symmetric. His initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with right axis deviation, poor R-wave progression, and diffuse ST-segment elevation in the anterior leads . A roentgenogram demonstrated marked cardiomegaly . Laboratory data revealed a hemoglobin level of 11.7 g/dL, a hematocrit level of 34.5%, a potassium level of 4.2 mEq/L, a creatine kinase level of 342 U/L, a creatine kinase MB fraction of 23.7 ng/mL, a relative index of 13.2%, and a troponin I level of 8.10 ng/mL. Results of the initial arterial blood gas analysis with the use of 10 L nonrebreathing mask were as follows: pH, 7.30; carbon dioxide tension, 45 mmHg; oxygen tension, 75 mmHg; base excess, −4; and oxygen saturation, 90%. On presentation, the patient’s vital signs and cardiopulmonary examination were normal. His abdomen was markedly distended, and ileus pattern was illustrated in the plain film of abdomen .
As laparotomy was suggested by a surgeon who was consulted in the intensive care unit, the patient received pre-anesthesia assessment. On the basis of the recommendation from a cardiologist who performed the assessment, the patient underwent left heart catheterization on the second day of hospitalization, which failed to show a significant obstruction in any coronary distribution . Ventriculography estimated an ejection fraction of 33% and confirmed apical dilation consistent with TCM . The patient was medically managed and discharged without adverse events. A follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram 4 months later showed normalization of his left ventricular systolic function.
The CARE guidelines were followed in this report.