A 47-year-old female farmer residing in a semi-rural area of Yaounde was brought to the emergency department of the Yaounde Central hospital of Cameroon with complaint of a bite on the pulp of her right thumb 20 h prior to presentation, while working in her farm by an Echis occellatus viper. She killed and beheaded the snake , then immediately tied a tourniquet round her right wrist, sought a traditional healer who removed the tourniquet and administered her some unknown complementary and alternative medicine both topically and orally. Due to no amelioration of her symptoms within 20 h following the bite incident, she was rushed the aforementioned emergency department and vomited twice during transportation. She complained of severe thirst, fatigue, dizziness, numbness of the entire right upper limb, anuria since the bite incident, but no complaint of haematuria, myalgia, difficult breathing or swallowing.
On examination, she was conscious, oriented, sweating profusely with moderate pallor and cold clammy extremities. Her blood pressure (BP) was undetectable, respiratory rate 28 breaths/minutes, temperature 36.4°C, and a thready pulse of 138 beats/minute. Two unclean puncture wounds were identified on the pulp of the right thumb. The right upper arm was reddish dark in colour with several ruptured blisters and covered by a white traditional balm . This limb was oedematous, indurated, and painless, with loss of all pulsations and all range of active movements. She had no clinical sign of urinary retention. The rest of her physical examination was normal. A provisional diagnosis of severe envenomation complicated by anaphylactic shock, acute pre-renal kidney injury, and gangrene of the upper limb in an ASA IVU patient was made.
She had a difficult peripheral venous access due to circulatory collapse. On admission, an urgent femoral venous access was achieved with the aid of a G 16 cannula, while waiting for central venous catheter. She received normal saline at 20 ml/kg, anti-tetanus serum 1500 IU subcutaneously, ceftriaxone 2 g/24 h intravenously (IV), metronidazole 500 mg/8 h IV, adrenaline 1:1000 dilution at 0.2 mg every 5 min IV, promethazine 25 mg/8 h IV, paracetamol 1 g/06 h IV, tramadol 100 mg/8 h IV, methylprednisolone 80 mg/kg IV, and two vials of polyvalent anti-venom sera IV. Shoulder disarticulation was envisaged after resuscitation.
Laboratory investigations on admission revealed; leucocytosis 18,800/mm3 (neutrophils 66% lymphocytes 24.6%), anaemia 9,9 g/dl, thrombocytopenia 109,000/mm3, altered renal function (serum urea 0. 55 g/l and serum creatinine 32.23mg/l), normal clotting profile and serum electrolytes.
At 4 h of hospitalisation she had received 3 l of normal saline, but was still haemodynamically unstable with persistence of anuria. Her temperature rosed to 38.9°C. Several echymoses and petechiae appeared on her limbs. A second laboratory panel showed increased leucocytosis at 26,800/mm3 (neutrophils 76% lymphocytes 20.6%), severe thrombocytopaenia of 3500/mm3, haemoglobin of 9.6/dl. Here the diagnosis of an anaphylatic shock coupled with a septic shock was made. Noradrenaline was administered at 0.3/kg/min using an electric pump syringe with (objectives to have a mean arterial pressure ≥ 65 mmHg). The management which pursued was administration of a third vial of polyvalent anti-venom serum and transfusion of three units of fresh frozen plasma and continuation of the aforementioned antibiotics, analgesics and promethazine. All attempts of internal jugular and subclavian catheterisations failed due to severe circulatory collapse and marked oedema. After repeated attempts, a left femoral catheter was successfully placed. Blood obtained from the femoral catheterisation was non-coagulable.
At 7 h of hospitalisation her blood pressure was 102/68 mmHg, pulse 108 beats/minutes and of good volume, respiratory rate netly improved. She was fully conscious, less diaphoretic and had a diuresis of 0,35 ml/kg/h. The patient and her family refused shoulder disarticulation.
At 10 h of hospitalisation her level of consciousness dropped to a Glascow Coma score scale of 13/15, with undetectable pulses, BP 88/42 mmHg. Resuscitation was continued. She deceased at 18 h of hospitalisation in a state of shock, sepsis, coagulopathy, renal failure and gangrene of the right forearm.