The patient was a 54-year-old woman with a history of 8 pack years of cigarette smoking. Her past medical history was unremarkable. During a medical check-up, a shadow in the right middle lung field was found on chest X-ray . She was referred to our department for computed tomography (CT) of the chest, which revealed a 30-mm infiltrative lesion in the right segment 4 (S4) and a 6-mm nodule in the right S8 . Blood samples did not exhibit any abnormalities, including serum immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4), and the tumor markers NSE, CEA, SCC and SLX were within normal limits. As bronchoscopy was nondiagnostic, right middle lobectomy and partial resection of the right S8 were performed. Histopathology showed non-atypical lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrates, which together had formed lymph follicles with germinal centers . Immunostaining showed that CD20-positive B cells were present in the germinal center, and CD3-positive T cells were observed around them, thus displaying a normal cell distribution. The B cells in the germinal center were positive for CD10, but negative for bcl-2, excluding the possibility of lymphoma. Infiltrates comprised of collagen fibers and damaged alveolar elastic fibers were found . Lymphocytic infiltration of the vascular walls was present . There was no preferential immunostaining for immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin M, immunoglobulin A, the kappa light chain or lambda light chain observed in antibody-producing cells, with no evidence of monoclonal proliferation of B cells or plasma cells. No increase was observed in the number of IgG4-positive plasma cells. Both the S4 and S8 tumor yielded pathological findings similar to the sort described above, and this confirmed the diagnosis of the lymphoplasmacytic type of inflammatory pseudotumor.
On 4 year postoperative follow-up, chest X-ray revealed a nodular lesion in the left middle lung field . Chest CT revealed an 18-mm nodular lesion in the left S3 and a 16-mm infiltrative lesion in the right S2 . Bronchoscopy was nondiagnotic once again. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed maximum standardized uptake values of 2.7 and 3.2 in the masses in the left S3 and right S2, respectively . These were high fluorodeoxyglucose uptake lesions with maximum standardized uptake values ≥2.5, and, considering the shape of the tumors, either primary lung cancer or recurrence of the inflammatory pseudotumor was suspected. It was critically important to differentiate inflammatory pseudotumor from lung cancer, and, even when a determination of recurrent inflammatory pseudotumors was made, resection was indicated in an effort to achieve long-term survival. Therefore, left S3 segmentectomy was performed at first. The histopathology findings were similar to those of the surgical specimens obtained in the first operation , therefore recurrence of the lymphoplasmacytic type of inflammatory pseudotumor was diagnosed. At this point, the residual right S2 lesion was also considered to be a recurrent inflammatory pseudotumor, but the patient did not wish to receive non-surgical treatment. Since the patient planned to move immediately before surgery, video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge resection of right S2 was performed at another hospital, and the same type of inflammatory pseudotumor was diagnosed histopathologically. Currently, 18 months after the last lung surgery, the patient remains free of disease.