A 48-year-old male with untreated mild diabetes presented to the emergency room of Cité de la Santé hospital (Laval, Canada) on the 30th of November 2020, complaining of one week of ongoing diffuse abdominal pain and constipation. He did not complain of nausea, vomiting or diarrhea nor did he report any respiratory symptoms. He denied any contact with known COVID-19 cases either in his household or at the sushi restaurant where he worked. Due to lockdown measures, the restaurant was only open for takeout and the patient never served customers directly. It is also worth noting that no SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern were circulating in Quebec at that time.
At admission, the patient was afebrile, had a blood pressure of 152/87, a pulse of 73 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and blood oximetry showed a saturation of 96% while breathing room air. The abdominal exam was relatively unremarkable with a negative Murphy’s sign and absence of defense or rebound tenderness. An abdominal CT was ordered and showed fat infiltration around a distended gallbladder. The latter also had wall thickening and stones. These findings were compatible with acute cholecystitis . However, at the right lung base, subsegmental ground glass opacity was also identified. SARS-CoV-2 could not be detected by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) from an oro-nasopharyngeal swab done at admission. The patient underwent diagnostic bronchoscopy the next day and the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was positive for SARS-CoV-2 with cycle threshold (Ct) values of 20.64, 24.01 and 22.00 for the E, RdRp and N genes respectively by the Seegene Allplex 2019-nCoV assay (Seoul, South Korea) . The following day, an oro-nasopharyngeal swab was once again negative . The patient had a fever of 38.9 °C on December 2nd and Piperacillin-Tazobactam was initiated. His C-reactive protein levels were at 185 mg/L. He also experienced transient auricular fibrillation, hypotension and his oxygen saturation levels dropped to 92%. He was treated with 150 mg of intravenous Amiodarone. An urgent cholecystectomy drain was placed and the patient was transferred to the ICU requiring 6 L/min of O2 to maintain a saturation of 94%. Chest X-ray on December 4th showed a rapid increase in alveolar lung infiltrates bilaterally when compared to an X-ray 2 days prior . Decadron was administered for covid as well as Lasix for possible lung edema. A salivary sample was sent for testing and came back positive with a Ct of 36.45 for the N gene exclusively. The following day, another salivary test was performed and the viral load had significantly increased to a Ct value of 24.49 for the N gene . Successive nasopharyngeal and salivary tests were performed. The values are presented in Fig. . On the 4th of December, the patient’s oxygen requirements reached 10 L/min and then slowly improved from there. Piperacillin-tazobactam was stopped on December 9th. The details of the patient’s testing and blood work results, as well as the drugs he received, can be found in the Additional file : Tables S1–S3.