A 57-year-old man presented with a long history of groin pain for several years. There was no history of trauma or injury to groin. The pain exacerbated by walking and prolonged sitting. Since last few months his pain had increased with loss of movement at the hip. Physical examination revealed slight asymmetry in the region of the iliac bone compared with the contralateral side, with no signs of inflammation or palpable mass. Hip range of motion was decreased with flexion limited to 90°, and abduction of 15°. Patient walked with Trendelenburg gait possibly because of pain. Conventional radiographs of the hip revealed the presence of a bony protuberance at the right anterior inferior iliac spine, several centimeters in length close to the right acetabulum, with no signs ofjoint degeneration. Suspecting a giant osteochondroma which could be in the process of malignant transformation we performed a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which showed the existence of a bone tumor with benign appearance, but excluding the osteochondroma as a diagnostic possibility, because there was no peripheral cartilage. Subsequently a CT scan revealed a bony lesion (6 cm long and 3 cm thick) with a well-defined cortical bone and a heterogeneous zone in the junction with the ilium suggesting a pseudo- articulation. With these studies we could establish the diagnosis of pelvic digit instead of an osteochondroma.
Initially, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications were prescribed with no symptomatic improvement. Surgical excision of the pelvic rib was planned with consent of the patient. Anterior approach to the hip (Smith-Petersen) was used. Tensor fascia latae and gluteus minimus required to be partially detached to completely expose the ‘rib’ till the base. The ‘rib’ was resected from its base and samples send for histopathology . Histopathological examination showed the presence of corticomedullary structure similar to a rib, with no accompanying cartilage; this finding was consistent with a pelvic digit.
The pain disappeared gradually after surgery, and a year later the patient remains asymptomatic, with an improvement in flexion (130°) and abduction (35°) of the hip; the radiograph shows no radiological signs of recurrence after one year .