A 2-month-old male infant was referred to the emergency department with macrocephaly. He was born at term via a normal vaginal delivery. Antenatal screening was normal with no initial post-natal concerns. Two weeks prior to admission, the head circumference increased significantly, and he started to have difficulty feeding with severe GOR. On examination, the anterior fontanelle was bulging and tense with prominent scalp veins. Urgent CT followed by MRI of the head demonstrated obstructive hydrocephalus due to a PFAC.
An endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) was performed and a Rickham reservoir connected to an intraventricular catheter was inserted. The post-operative scan revealed decompression of the ventricular system and a stable PFAC. The infant was discharged home 3 days later.
In the following weeks, he developed torticollis (left lateral flexion) and GOR refractory to medical treatment. A repeat MRI revealed an increase in the size of the PFAC such that it was extending into the spinal canal through the craniocervical junction and causing significant mass effect on the brainstem. The previous ETV was still functioning .
We proceeded with endoscopic cyst fenestration. The cyst was entered and its wall was coagulated in places (to reduce its size) then fenestrated. The fenestrations were into the craniocervical junction, the fourth ventricle, out through the right foramen of Luschka and into the pre-pontine cistern. Choroid plexus was seen within the cyst . Neuropathologically the cyst was consistent with an AC. The symptoms resolved post-operatively, with significant reduction in cyst size after fenestration . The child was discharged home 4 days later.
He was readmitted with a CSF leak 1 week later. A CT scan demonstrated that the cyst was smaller and ruled out hydrocephalus. A trans-fontanelle tap revealed a raised white cell count with no organisms detected. He returned to surgery where the reservoir and intraventricular catheter were removed and replaced by an external ventricular drain (EVD). He received 14 days of intrathecal (IT) vancomycin and 16 days of intravenous meropenem and vancomycin. He made a good recovery. The EVD was removed and he was discharged home 20 days after surgery.
Despite reduction in the size of the cyst and a functioning ventriculostomy, the patient developed communicating hydrocephalus likely due to the infection. A left ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted after serial lumbar punctures. At 18-month follow-up he is fit and well, with no recurrence of symptoms.