A 58-year-old man was noted to have 3 months of progressive renal dysfunction at routine outpatient follow-up for his bilateral sequential lung transplant, which was performed 9 months earlier for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Methylprednisolone alone was used for induction. He was found to have acute rejection (A1B0) on surveillance bronchoscopy at 2 months post-transplant and was managed with pulse methylprednisolone with good results. His immunosuppressive regimen consisted of prednisolone, tacrolimus and mycophenolate. Before the onset of renal dysfunction, his prednisolone dose was 10 mg daily and mycophenolate dose was 500 mg twice daily. Median tacrolimus trough level from months three to six post-transplant was 11.2 μg/L (interquartile range [IQR]: 8.6–13.7 μg/L). He had not experienced further rejection and his graft function was good with a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 2.44 l (82% predicted and 91% of post-transplant baseline).
Other post-transplant issues included (a) positive galactomannan on three-month surveillance bronchoscopy without invasion which was managed with itraconazole, (b) respiratory syncytial virus and rotavirus at 3 months post-transplant, (c) steroid-induced diabetes mellitus which settled with reduction in prednisolone, (d) hypertension controlled with angiotensin receptor blockade, (e) persistent small left effusion drained at 10 months post-transplant, (f) asymptomatic cytolomegalovirus (CMV) viraemia detected at 10 months post-transplant and treated with valganciclovir, (g) iron deficiency anaemia due to dysplastic colonic polyps which were removed, (h) cataracts and (i) benign squamous papilloma affecting the right main bronchus anastomosis which was detected at 15 months post-transplant due to declining allograft function and which improved with balloon dilatation. Histological assessment did not demonstrate a viral aetiology for the bronchial squamous papilloma, however specific testing for human papilloma virus was not performed.
Background medical problems prior to transplant included coeliac disease, central sleep apnoea managed with oxygen, osteoporosis and hypercholesterolaemia. Pharmacological therapy at the time of detection of renal dysfunction, in addition to his immunosuppression, included: azithromycin, pantoprazole, candesartan, atorvastatin, calcium citrate, vitamin D, annual zoledronic acid, magnesium supplementation plus prophylactic itraconazole, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and valganciclovir.
The patient had a pre-transplant glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 85 ml/min/1.73m2 and a stable baseline of 70 ml/min/1.73m2 at 6 months post-transplant; this relatively mild stepwise decline in renal function was attributed to multifactorial peri-operative renal injury, as is seen very often after lung transplantation. His renal function then progressively deteriorated over 3 months to reach a GFR of 35 ml/min/1.73m2 at 9 months post-transplant despite reduced tacrolimus trough levels over this period (median: 5.2 μg/L | IQR: 4.5–5.9 μg/L). Urinary microscopy and culture analyses were bland on two separate occasions over 3 days with no haematuria, pyuria, decoy cells or casts. Ultrasound of the renal tract performed at the same time was normal with no evidence of obstruction and normal renal size. Given the absence of another identifiable cause and the immunosuppression, PCR for BKV was performed on samples collected at the same time as those for urinary microscopy and culture; the PCR was positive at > 10 million copies/ml in urine and 358,000 copies/ml in blood. Nephrology input was sought. Mycophenolate was ceased, target tacrolimus level was reduced to 5 μg/L, everolimus was commenced with a target level of 2.5 to 3 μg/L and a biopsy was planned.
A renal biopsy was performed 3 weeks after the positive BKV PCR result . The biopsy comprised a formalin fixed 9 mm core of renal tissue including 50% each of cortex and medulla. Routine renal biopsy haematoxylin and eosin histology sections were produced and routine histochemical stains performed. There were up to 7 viable glomeruli per section and no obsolescent forms. The glomeruli showed no morphologic abnormality. There was mild cortical fibrosis, less than 10% of cortical area, with Banff ci1 assigned. There was no cortical inflammation. The biopsy included a portion of an arterial vessel with mild to moderate arteriosclerosis. Arterioles were normal. In medullary tubules adjacent to the cortico-medullary junction were cells with abnormal nuclei consistent with viral cytopathic effect; nuclear inclusions were seen along with lymphocytic tubulitis and sloughed epithelial cells. In this region, IHC with antibody to SV40 was positive in the nuclei of epithelial cells. The involved tubules were quantified according to the method described by Nickeleit et al. . This rendered a count of 2.5% and a pvl score of 2 (1 to 10%). The combination of Banff ci1 and pvl 2 produced an overall classification of polyomavirus nephropathy class 2. Tissue was not submitted by the clinician for immunofluorescence. Electron microscopy of tissue received in glutaraldehyde showed glomeruli with ischaemic alterations only; no viral particles were seen in the tissue.
The combination of the clinical, virological and histological findings allowed a definitive diagnosis of polyomavirus nephropathy due to BKV. Decline in renal function continued despite reduction in immunosuppression. The quantitative BKV PCR in blood climbed over the ensuing 8 months to reach and remain > 10,000,000 copies/ml. Three doses of IVIG were given over 2 months but this was then ceased due to an absence of effect. Patient progress is summarised in Fig. . He was regularly reviewed by nephrology and, at 20 months post-diagnosis of BKVAN and 29 months post-transplant, he had an arteriovenous fistula formed for planned commencement of haemodialysis.