A 43-year-old woman of Tibetan ethnicity was admitted to the hospital with a 3-year history of pain and discomfort in the left lower abdomen and aggravation in recent 1 year.
The pain was not obvious at the time of admission examination 3 years ago, so the patient did not receive further treatment.
The patient underwent tubal ligation 20 years ago, with no history of acute pancreatitis, abdominal trauma, chronic diseases, or infectious diseases.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours.
Admission physical examination revealed: Normal body temperature, respiration, and blood pressure, and a pulse rate of 65 beats/min; good nutritional status; flat abdomen, no intestinal pattern and peristaltic waves, and no varicose veins in the abdominal wall; soft abdomen, with left lower abdominal tenderness, no muscle tension and rebound pain, no palpable liver or spleen under the ribs, no abnormal masses palpated in the abdomen, and Murphys' sign negativity; no shifting dullness, with normal bowel sounds, and no air-over-water sounds or abnormal vascular murmurs.
Laboratory tests after admission indicated that routine blood indexes, tumor markers, and biochemical indicators were all within normal range.
On ultrasonography, a retroperitoneal cystic mass with a size of 88 mm × 62 mm was seen, with clear borders and internal separation, and no significant blood flow signal was observed on color Doplor flow image. Enhanced CT showed multiple retroperitoneal cystic hypo-intense shadows, partially fused into a mass of approximately 46 mm × 35 mm in size, with no significant enhancement on enhancement . MRI showed multiple irregular masses of long T1 and long T2 signal shadows above the pancreas, within which linear short T2 signal shadows were seen. The diffusion-weighted imaging sequence showed hypo-signal shadows . The retroperitoneal layer was clear without obviously enlarged lymph nodes. These imaging findings did not suggest evidence of mass invading surrounding organs or retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy.