We report a case of WN and DN as effective treatments for LCS-related MP.
In late June 2020 (T0), a 59-year-old previously robust and healthy Hispanic male with no prior chronic illness, presented with symptoms consistent with COVID-19 illness, and was diagnosed with by an RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2. His vital signs were within normal limits, with an SpO2 of 95%. Chest X-ray showed multifocal pneumonia. He then returned home for supportive management of his acute illness.
At T0+3 weeks, the patient continued to have difficulty breathing, chest pain, weakness, headaches, and diffuse myalgia. The patient’s vital signs were normal, with an SpO2 of 96%. Repeat chest X-ray showed unchanged multifocal pneumonia. D-dimer was 4960 ng/mL, white blood cell (WBC) count was within normal limits, with normal absolute lymphocyte count. The patient did not meet inpatient admission criteria and was therefore encouraged to rest and recover at home. At T0+6 weeks, during a phone visit, the patient described his persistent profound myalgia and associated weakness. He gave an example that he was not even able to open a water bottle without pain.
At T0+3 months, the patient presented to the clinic for disability paperwork owing to his inability to complete daily living activities caused by his persistent exertional dyspnea, “brain fog,” and myalgia. Today, we know that LCS has a significant impact on a patient’s employment . Repeat chest X-ray showed normal findings. Pulmonary function test was normal. Electrocardiogram (EKG), troponin, B-type natriuretic peptide, hemoglobin A1C, and thyroid stimulating hormones were within normal limits. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function and no significant valvular disease. Nuclear stress test was negative for arrhythmia or coronary artery ischemia. Additionally, depression screening was negative.
The patient’s symptoms persisted. At T0+6 months, the diagnosis of LCS was made, according to the few studies available at the time . The chronicity of the patient’s diffuse myalgia qualified his pain as chronic pain, and the locations were typical for MP syndrome and FM: neck, shoulder, upper back, bilateral posterior upper arms, and posterior lower legs. His widespread pain index was greater than 7. An 11-point numeric Likert pain score was used to document pain severity, with 0 being “no pain at all” and 10 being “the worst pain I have had.” The patient’s pain score was 6. At this point, the patient met the American College of Rheumatology preliminary diagnostic criteria for FM . He scored 88 out of 100 on the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), representing severe impact of his pain syndrome on his physical functioning, mood, and overall well-being.
At the visit at T0+6 months, WN with 1% lidocaine without epinephrine was performed on six points, using a 25 gauge, 1.5 inch needle: four in the neck and shoulder regions, and one on each side of posterior triceps. In all of our WN practice, each trigger point receives 1 ml lidocaine. Immediately after the injections, the patient stated an improvement in pain, with a pain score of 0–1. The benefit of this WN session lasted for 2 weeks, with improved daily living activity function and pain intensity. At this time, the patient was prescribed 30 mg duloxetine daily. On 2 week follow-up, the patient rated his pain score to be six again. The patient then received five more WN injections: three in the neck and shoulder regions, and one in each posterior tricep. Immediately after injection, the patient commented he only had “2% of pain left,” indicating a pain score of 0–1. At 2 weeks follow-up after the second WN session, the patient only reported pain in the bilateral posterior triceps region, with a pain score of two. A third WN session was performed with two injections: one in each posterior tricep. Immediately after the injections, the patient had no more pain. One month later, at T0+7 months, the patient received four more WN injections: one in the left posterior distal thigh, one in the right upper posterior deltoid, and two in the neck and shoulder regions. His pain score reduced to 0 immediately after the injection, from 2 on presentation. The patient reported feeling ready to return to work.
At T0+12 months, the patient returned to clinic with worsening LCS: numbness and tingling of hands and feet for 4 weeks, leg cramping, forgetfulness, and diffuse myalgia. Since his last visit, the patient had experienced significantly increased psychosocial stress, including COVID-19-related deaths in the family. He felt that the stress exacerbated his symptoms.
At this point, DN was trialed with a 21 gauge, 1 inch needle. A total of 10 points were needled: four in the neck and upper back region, one in each posterior tricep, and two in each posterior calf muscle. Immediately, after the first DN session, the patient had a reduction in pain score, from 8 to 2. Two weeks later, the patient reported pain score of 2, and a second session of DN was done. The same 10 points were needled as in the previous visit. The patient subsequently reported no more pain after DN.
At the time of this case report, during the last documented follow-up appointment (T0+18 months, September 2021), the patient remained pain free, with a pain scale of 0. No adverse reaction to WN or DN treatments were reported.