A 4-year-old girl was hospitalized because of a 50-d history of pallor.
Four days before admission, the child developed intermittent fever (1–2 times per day; maximum temperature, 38.5 °C), accompanied by paroxysmal cough and sore throat.
The patient had no history of hemoptysis, hematemesis, hematuria, or hematochezia. She had a history of chronic diarrhea, which was unresolved despite a diet of deep hydrolyzed milk powder. Routine blood examination revealed severe anemia. Emergency infusion of leukocyte suspension (1.5 U) and mezlocillin-sulbactam antibiotics were administered.
Birth and developmental history were unremarkable.
Physical examination at admission revealed normal vital signs (temperature, 36.5 °C; pulse rate, 119 beats/min; respiratory rate, 33 cycles/min; blood pressure, 98/64 mmHg; and oxygen saturation, 98% in room air) and a body weight of 13.5 kg. She had pallor and clubbing. Rhonchi were noted in both lung fields. The liver was palpable, 5 cm below the costal margin, with blunt edges. Other physical examination findings were unremarkable.
Complete blood cell count showed normal total and differential white blood cell counts;, decreased hemoglobin level (5 g/dL), normal mean corpuscular volume (94.3 fL), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (28.4 pg) values, and increased reticulocyte count (4.98%). The platelet count and C-reactive protein levels were normal. The direct and indirect antiglobulin tests and isopropanol tests were negative. The serum glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, folic acid, and vitamin B12 levels were normal. The serum ferritin and iron levels were normal. She was tested negative for thalassemia. Bone marrow aspiration showed granulocytosis and abnormal lymphocytes (3.5%).
Microbiologic examination for antigens of seven respiratory pathogens (influenza A, influenza B, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, and parainfluenza 1, 2, and 3), Mycoplasma pneumoniae IgM and total antibody, and chlamydia IgM antibody were all negative. The serum fungal G, GM tests, and T-SPOT test were normal. The serum anti-EBV capsid antigen IgM (> 160.0 U/mL) and IgG (> 750.00 U/mL) were positive; anti-EBV early antigen IgG was also positive (> 150.00 U/mL). The quantity of EBV DNA was significantly high (5.14 × 105 copies/mL). Humoral immunity, IgG subclasses, T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and natural killer cells were all within the normal ranges.
Exome sequencing revealed a pathogenic, pure heterozygous variant of macrophage-expressed gene 1 (MPEG1) (NM_001039396: c.946C>T; p.P316S). Both parents of the patient were genotypically heterozygous. Electronic bronchoscopy revealed many white nodules on the mucosa of the left and right main bronchi, left upper and lower lobe bronchi, and right upper and middle lobe bronchi, as well as mild hemorrhage in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe . Escherichia coli producing extended-spectrum β-lactamases were cultured in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Histopathological examination of the resected lung revealed lymphoproliferative lesions with necrosis. The proliferative and infiltrating lymphocytes were moderately sized with round nuclei and occasional nucleoli. Mitosis and infiltration of the blood vessels by these cells were noted. Small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes were observed in the background, although Reed-Sternberg cells were absent. Immunohistochemical staining [CD20(+), CD30(+), and CD3(+)] and EBV-encoded small RNA1/2 in situ hybridization (ISH) of small lymphocytes revealed approximately 200 cells/high-power field .
Chest computed tomography (CT) findings revealed multiple lower lobe nodules and shadows, multiple bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph node enlargement, mild left pleural effusion, and bilateral pleural thickening .