A 31 years old male patient attended the Accident and Emergency department after he had fallen directly onto both knees the day before. He was allegedly assaulted and tripped when he was running to safety. The patient had no past medical history. He was a keen bodybuilder who competed at a semi-professional level. His drug history included current use of anabolic steroids. He complained of pain in both knees and examination revealed effusion and pain over bilateral quadriceps tendons. There was a tender palpable suprapatellar gap on the left and to a lesser extent on the right side. There were bilateral lack of active extension and the patient was not able to straight leg raise bilaterally. Plain radiographs of both knees did not show any bony injury. ( and )
The clinical diagnosis of bilateral quadriceps tendon rupture was confirmed by urgent ultrasonography and the patient was admitted for surgical repair the next day. ( and ) The patient did not complain of any other symptoms at the time. Intraoperative findings consisted of a musculo-tendinous junction tear on the right and an insertional tear of the quadriceps tendon on the left which were surgically repaired with sutures and suture anchors respectively. The patient was discharged the following day after an uneventful postoperative recovery. Both knees were immobilised in extension splints and the patient was allowed to fully weight bear with the support of crutches.
At the first follow up appointment the patient admitted to non compliance to the post operative plan of strict immobilisation and he had taken the splints off to see whether he could move his knees on numerous occasions over the last two weeks. Furthermore he mentioned pain in his left calf, which he apparently recognised on the day of discharge from Hospital. He left this unreported to any member of the medical staff for two weeks. Calf squeeze test as described by Simmonds revealed no plantar flexion of the foot on compressing the calf muscles.
An urgent Ultrasound scan of the left TA was organised and confirmed a TA rupture. The patient declined admission to the Hospital and the left leg was immobilised in an extended above knee equinus cast. The bilateral quadriceps tendon repairs were found to be intact. The patient did not attend the urgent follow up appointment after the ultrasound scan confirming a TA rupture, but only re-resented six weeks later. Direct surgical tendon repair was not attempted due to tendon retraction. The patient therefore underwent reconstructive surgery of his left TA as a delayed procedure.