A 44-year-old woman who had had amenorrhea and galactor rhea for 10 months, had been noting progressive growth of her face and extremities over the past two and a half years. Over the last six months, she had complained of severe nasal obstruction with respiratory distress and dysphagia due to macroglossia. After referral to our service, which forms part of a tertiary-level uni versity hospital belonging to Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), she started to be followed up regarding endocrinol ogy, neurosurgery and ophthalmology.
On physical examination, acromegaly was evident. The blood hormone levels were: growth hormone (GH) 34.20 ng/ml (n = 0.06-5.0 ng/ml), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) 726 ng/ml and prolactin (PRL) ranging from 70 to 82.83 ng/ml in three samples (n = 4.79 - 23.3 ng/ml). ACTH, TSH, FSH and LH levels were all normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) depicted a large mass (3.2 x 4.1 x 3.2 cm) originating from the lower surface of the pituitary gland, which was associated with sella turcica erosion and tumor extension through the sphenoid sinus into the nasal cavity . The sella itself was of normal dimensions and, because the tumor had expanded on the lower side, the optical chiasm was not affected, as was verified through a normal visual field examination.
Initially, considering the high levels of GH and that, besides surgery, adjuvant therapy would probably be necessary in order to reduce the tumor, pharmacological treatment with octreotide 30 mg (a somatostatin analogue that inhibits GH and IGF-1) was administered every 28 days. However, after three months, the blood hormone levels were seen to remain elevated and the symptoms became severe. Therefore, endoscopic surgery was indicated.
The surgical procedure was started by setting the speculum at the nostril, so as to reach the tumor through the transsphenoidal route. Because of the volume of the intranasal mass, the procedure was halted due to technical difficulties and only a biopsy was performed.
Two months later, it was decided to perform transcranial surgery. Through bifrontal craniotomy, the anterior cranial fossa was accessed and, after drilling the sphenoid surface, the mass was aspirated and removed.
Histopathological analysis on the biopsy and the fragments from the hypophysectomy gave rise to a diagnosis of infiltrating pituitary macroadenoma with nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemistry on the samples showed that they were positive for GH and PRL . A visual estimate of marked nucleus proportions showed that 3-5% were positive for Ki-67, with several typical mitoses, thus characterizing an atypical pituitary tumor. Since the diagnosis of carcinoma is confirmed only if metastases are present, whole-body bone scintigraphy and abdominal, pelvic and chest computed tomography were performed. There was no evidence of metastases.
Two months after the surgery, the patient reported that her menstrual cycles had become regular and that her galactorrhea had ceased. Three months later, she noticed that her shoe size had decreased by two sizes. Although her GH and PRL hormone levels showed progressive reduction over this period (GH = 3.41 ng/ml; PRL= 12.44 ng/ml), IGF-1 maintained high levels (IGF-1 = 455 ng/ml). A postoperative control MRI examination showed evidence of tumor residues . The patient continues to be asymptomatic, with continuing pharmacological treatment with octreotide and endocrinological follow-up.