A 33-year-old woman (gravida 5, para 0) was referred to maternal-fetal medicine specialists at Mayo Clinic for poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus. She was at 35 weeks and 0 days gestation, as determined by her last menstrual period (and consistent with the 6-week ultrasound). Her insulin requirements drastically increased throughout the course of pregnancy and were in excess of 1,200 units daily at the time of consultation. The pregnancy was additionally complicated by pre-eclampsia without severe features diagnosed at 33 weeks’ gestation, maternal obesity (body mass index, 47 kg/m2), excess weight gain (16.5 kg), obstructive sleep apnea, and hypothyroidism. A fetal growth ultrasound estimated the fetal weight as 3,870 g. Given her worsening diabetes in the setting of multiple comorbid conditions, induction of labor the following day (35 weeks, 1 day gestation) was recommended .
Induction was initiated with misoprostol and a Foley bulb and was augmented by oxytocin and artificial rupture of membranes. Labor progressed normally, based on Consortium on Safe Labor guidelines, with the active phase starting at 6 cm . The active phase of labor lasted 4 hours and 5 minutes, with cervical dilation at a rate of 1 cm/hour. Fetal station throughout the active phase of labor remained unchanged at 0 station. The fetal heart rate tracing was category I throughout active labor. She pushed for 2 hours and 8 minutes, with appropriate descent of the fetal vertex. The fetal heart rate tracing was category II, with moderate variability, variable decelerations, and rapid return to baseline while pushing. The fetal head was delivered in the occiput anterior position without asynclitism and required manual restitution to the left occiput transverse position. The fetal shoulders failed to deliver with gentle downward traction to the fetal head.
A shoulder dystocia was diagnosed 20 seconds after delivery of the fetal head and additional providers were called to the delivery room. The fetal shoulders had traversed the pelvic inlet in the anteroposterior position at the diagnosis of shoulder dystocia. Initial maneuvers, including suprapubic pressure and McRoberts positioning, were unsuccessful at releasing the anterior shoulder. A right mediolateral episiotomy was cut to create space, followed by attempted delivery of the posterior arm. Rotational techniques were then used, with the Rubin maneuver followed by the Wood corkscrew, resulting in clockwise rotation of the fetus to a 60° oblique angle. The Gaskin maneuver was not attempted because of dense neuraxial analgesia. Replacement of the fetal head with emergent cesarean delivery (Zavanelli maneuver), abdominal rescue, and symphysiotomy were not rapidly feasible with the maternal body habitus. Repeated attempts to deliver the posterior arm were unsuccessful, as was attempted fracture of the fetal clavicle. A second faculty obstetrics physician came to assist after approximately 2 minutes of dystocia time, and another attempt at the above-described maneuvers was again unsuccessful.
At approximately 2 minutes and 20 seconds of dystocia time, a 16 French latex urinary catheter was positioned below the posterior fetal shoulder, per the PAST technique . Downward traction on the axillary sling was initially unsuccessful in releasing the posterior arm, but it allowed for rotation to access the posterior arm for another attempt at delivery. Downward traction was again applied to the axilla sling, resulting in delivery of the posterior arm after approximately 3 minutes of dystocia time. The anterior shoulder and trunk required additional rotation and traction to facilitate delivery of the fetal body. In total, the fetus was delivered 4 minutes after delivery of the fetal head.
Delivery was further complicated by a retained placenta that required manual extraction, as well as by postpartum hemorrhage due to uterine atony. Uterotonic agents, including oxytocin, carboprost, and misoprostol, were administered. Tranexamic acid was administered before placement of a Bakri uterine balloon with successful tamponade. The quantitative blood loss was 1,640 mL.
At delivery, the infant was apneic and limp, weighing 4,060 g. Initial neonatal stabilization with cardiopulmonary resuscitation was immediately required. Apgar scores were 0, 4, and 5 at 1, 5, and 10 minutes, respectively. Arterial cord gas showed a pH of 7.12, HCO2 of 25 mmol/L, and base excess of − 3 mmol/L. At 15 minutes of life, venous blood gas showed a pH of 6.78, pCO2 of 29 mm Hg, and a base excess of − 30 mmol/L, consistent with metabolic acidosis attributable to lactic acid accumulation from cardiopulmonary arrest. A large, circumferential laceration was noted on the left (posterior) shoulder of the neonate . After initial neonatal stabilization, a therapeutic hypothermia protocol was initiated. Initial electroencephalographic recordings showed slowing consistent with encephalopathy, but the neonate continued to improve, with no seizure activity noted throughout 5 days of continuous monitoring. Magnetic resonance imaging on the fifth day of life did not show diffusion restriction suggestive of anoxic brain injury. Left-sided (posterior) Erb palsy was clinically evident, but electromyography showed normal median, radial, and ulnar nerve stimulation. Injury to the right (anterior) phrenic nerve was diagnosed by intermittent paralysis of the right hemidiaphragm . The infant remained intubated for 13 days because of respiratory failure of the newborn and hemidiaphragm paralysis. The circumferential left shoulder laceration required 3 bedside débridement and irrigation procedures, and the wound was surgically closed on the twelfth day of life. The left humeral fracture was managed conservatively with immobilization. At 1 year of life, the neonate had full function and range of motion of the bilateral upper extremities. The left shoulder laceration had healed appropriately, although it may require lengthening to allow for future growth of the extremity.