A foreign African black 28-year-old pregnant woman (3 previous gestations, 1 live birth, 1 abortion) with no previous chronic comorbidities was diagnosed with mild preeclampsia (de novo hypertension plus proteinuria) at 36 weeks of gestation. The patient had regular antenatal visits, no specific signs or symptoms related with previous cardiovascular disease, and the pregnancy evolved uneventfully until the 36th week. Her obstetric history revealed a previous diagnosis of preeclampsia and preterm labor, with absence of a post-partum revision consultation to seek for underneath pathologies.
Labor was induced at 37 weeks with an uncomplicated eutocic delivery. Approximately 30 h after delivery, she presented chief complaint of increasing shortness of breath, and chest pressure. Patient also reported cough, orthopnea, and bilateral lower extremities oedema. She denied headaches, blurry vision, nausea, vomiting, fever or chills. During observation, she was in severe distress, restless, agitated, and using her accessory muscles of respiration. Vitals were recorded, which revealed normal temperature, tachycardia (120 bpm), tachypnea (28 cpm), and mild hypertension (143/86 mmHg). She had a peripheral oxygen saturation of 83%. Cardiac auscultation revealed tachycardia and a diastolic murmur more perceptible in the mitral area, and respiratory auscultation revealed fine crackles heard bilaterally with decreased basilar breathing sounds. Bilateral pitting pedal oedema was noted. Therefore, a multidisciplinary team approach with Obstetrics, Internal Medicine and Cardiology team was implemented.
Arterial blood gas analysis on Venturi mask 28% revealed pH of 7.46, carbon dioxide tension 33 mmHg, arterial oxygen tension 51 mmHg, bicarbonate 23.5 mmol/L, and arterial oxygen saturation of 88%. Routine blood investigations (full blood count, liver and kidney function tests, prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, serum electrolytes, and urine analysis) were drawn. This pannel showed no abnormalities, besides mild leukocytosis. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was raised—1011 pg/mL. Cardiac enzymes were negative. Serial 12 leads electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, with T-wave inversion in V1-V3. SARS-CoV2 Real Time-PCR was negative. A 2D bedside echocardiogram was performed revealing moderate dilated left atrium with severe mitral insufficiency suggestive of rheumatic disease, normal systolic function, and no other alterations.
After initial stabilization, patient was admitted to the ICU for further supervision. She was managed with noninvasive ventilation, loop diuretics, vasodilators (nifedipine), thromboprophylaxis, head-end elevation, and fluid restriction with progressive improving. Four days after delivery, the patient was stable and was discharged.
A Cardiology and Obstetrics post-partum revision consultation was conducted, 6–8 weeks after delivery. By that time, the patient was asymptomatic without the need for any anti-hypertensive or diuretic drug. An autoimmunity panel was conducted, in the context of preeclampsia at young age, which resulted negative. A new echocardiogram was conducted showing an improvement of parameters with mild mitral disease with a rheumatic pattern, and no other relevant changes.
Patient was also referred for dental evaluation and informed of the impact of her rheumatic cardiac disease in the current pregnancy and the need for adequate follow-up in case of eventual future pregnancies.