A 68-year-old Japanese man underwent laparoscopy-assisted ileocecal resection and D3 lymphadenectomy due to his ascending colon cancer in October 2016. The pathology revealed a stage IIIa moderately differentiated KRAS gene mutation in codon 146 and BRAF V600E wild-type adenocarcinoma, with two out of 17 lymph nodes testing positive. Microsatellite instability (MSI) testing revealed low-level MSI. The patient had undergone five courses of UFT and leucovorin as adjuvant chemotherapy. In May 2018, a laparoscopic hepatic left lateral segmentectomy was performed to treat a liver tumor, and a pathological diagnosis of colorectal liver metastasis was made. In August 2018, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple lung metastases . The patient was referred to our hospital for systemic chemotherapy in his hometown.
We started chemotherapy based on the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum’s guidelines 2019 . The patient had undergone 18 courses of the FOLFOX + bevacizumab (BV) chemotherapy regimen as their first-line therapy. After these cycles had been administered, CT revealed that the lung tumors had shrunk , and this was considered a partial response (PR) based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines Ver. 1.1 ; however, this regimen was discontinued due to anaphylactic reactions as a side-effect of oxaliplatin. The patient was administered 11 courses of the FOLFIRI + ramucirumab (RAM) chemotherapy regimen as their second-line therapy, although the fourth and fifth courses were administered as part of the FOLFIRI chemotherapy regimen because of proteinuria. After 11 courses of the FOLFIRI + RAM chemotherapy regimen had been administered, CT revealed that the lung tumors had progressed , this was deemed a progressive disease based on the RECIST guidelines.
The patient was administered the regorafenib chemotherapy regimen as their third-line therapy, starting with 120 mg per day for 3 weeks and 1 week of rest for one course, which was quickly reduced to 120 mg per day for 2 weeks and 1 week of rest after two courses based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE version 5), indicating a grade 2 platelet count decrease and bleeding of the gums. We evaluated the effects of the chemotherapy treatment effect on the lung tumors using CT after 3 , 7 , 11 , and 17 courses of the regorafenib chemotherapy regimen , and the lung tumors were found to have shrunk with time. Thus, they were each considered a PR according to the RECIST guidelines. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) decreased during the regorafenib treatment and entered the normal range. Although the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was normal from the beginning of the treatment, it decreased during the regorafenib treatment . After 19 courses of the regorafenib chemotherapy regimen, the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) declined below 40 mL/min/1.73 m2; thus, regorafenib was suspended until recovery, and the dose was reduced from 120 to 80 mg. After 21 courses of the regorafenib chemotherapy regimen, the chemotherapy was discontinued in response to the patient’s wishes. Even at 1 and 3 months after the discontinuation of the chemotherapy, CT revealed that the lung tumors had shrunk , with each considered a PR according to the RECIST guidelines. Furthermore, 9 months after the discontinuation of the chemotherapy, CT revealed scarring of the lung tumors . This was considered a CR, rather than PR, according to the RECIST guidelines. The patient remains disease-free 18 months after the discontinuation of chemotherapy. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was not performed because the patient’s consent could not be obtained.