We present a case of a 22-year-old gentleman with traumatic L1-L2 dislocation without facet fracture. The patient presented to emergency department with alleged history of road traffic accident, when he sustained skid and fall from two wheeler 4 days back at a remote place in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, India. Immediately following trauma, the patient was not able to move his lower limbs and paralysis of his bowel bladder function for which he underwent catheterization in local hospital. Basic spine investigations were done in the form of X-rays and computed tomography (CT)scan, and the patient was immobilized on spine board while he was prepared to be referred to tertiary center. Subsequently, he was referred to our institution for definitive care. There was no documentation of any steroids given in Andaman local hospital. On his presentation to our institute, he underwent detailed neurological and radiological assessment. Full-length spine X-rays were done to rule out non-contiguous spine injuries in cervical and dorsal spine. On physical examination, there was palpable step at dorsolumbar junction with tenderness of spine at that level. Neurological assessment at the time of presentation shows ASIA Grade A paraplegia with bowel and bladder incontinence with neurological level D12. His lumbar spine radiograph shows L1-L2 dislocation with Grade IIanterolisthesis of L1 over L2. CT scan ( and ) revealed bilateral facet dislocation, with inferior articular process of L1 located anterior to superior articular process of L2. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging revealed severe thecal sac and caudaequina nerve roots compression with cord edema at D12 and L1 level. The patient had associated liver laceration with intraperitoneal hemorrhage which was treated conservatively. Since it was a Grade 2 listhesis and since the patient was presented almost a week following injury, it was decided to do two-level stabilization for better leverage of reduction. Under general anesthesia in prone position, the spine was exposed through standard posterior midline approach from D12 to L3. Pedicle screws were placed bilaterally from D12 to L3 at all levels. Superior articular process of L2 was resected using high-speed carbide cutting burr, reduction was achieved, and screws were connected using interconnecting rods at both sides. Damaged disc was removed and inter body fusion was done through left L1-L2 foramina with cage filled with bone graft obtained from posterior elements. Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized with wheelchair with extensive physiotherapy of both lower limbs. At the end of 6 months, his X-rays showed sound fusion at L1-L2. The presence of bony bridge anterior to cage, i.e., sentinel sign indicates sound inter body fusion at L1-L2 in this case. Patient’s neurological status recovered to ASIA Grade C with bladder on intermittent catheterization.