A 13-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital due to a history of intractable jaundice and skin itching for 1 month. The girl was the first child of a nonconsanguineous couple with unremarkable family history and was born healthy via normal delivery with a birth weight of 3200 g. No obvious or specific abnormalities were found in the girl during the perinatal period. Skin hyperkeratosis and mild limb bone abnormalities were identified during infancy and progressed to ichthyosis and obvious claw-like hands and feet at the age of 6 years. Furthermore, the patient presented with progressive itching and recurrent hand and foot desquamation since 6 years old.
One month before admission to our hospital, she was referred to a local hospital for medical support because of worsening jaundice and severe skin itching. The patient was diagnosed with acute liver failure, cholestasis, hypoalbuminemia, and abnormal blood coagulation in the local hospital and was managed with a series of treatments, including hepatoprotective treatment, plasma exchange, albumin infusion, and methylprednisolone pulse therapy. The patient’s liver function, hypoalbuminemia and blood coagulation function improved, while jaundice and skin itching were persistent. The patient was suspected to have a genetic disorder and was recommended for genetic testing. Then, she was discharged from the local hospital after drawing peripheral blood for whole-exome sequencing (WES). On admission, physical examination revealed normal growth with a height of 150 cm and a weight of 38 kg. Moderate skin yellowing, arthrogryposis (claw-shaped limbs), , ichthyosis , and mild hepatomegaly were observed. The patient presented with mild gait abnormality and walked unsteadily on a broad base. Her muscle tone and strength were normal, and her neurological examination was normal. In addition, her hearing and vision screenings were normal. Laboratory tests showed normal routine blood testing results. Liver function tests revealed increased levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 59 U/L, reference range: 5–40 U/L), direct bilirubin (DB, 117.3 μmol/L, reference range: 0–6.8 μmol/L), (TB, 231.92 μmol/L, reference range: 3.4–17.1 μmol/L), and total bile acid (TBA, 210.5 μmol/L, reference range: 0–10 μmol/L), while aspartate aminotransferases (AST) and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) were normal. Multiple urinalysis showed positive urine bilirubin and urobilinogen but without proteinuria and amino aciduria. Her blood coagulation functions were normal. Alpha foetal protein (AFP) was normal, autoantibody analyses were normal, and liver damaging pathogens Epstein Barr virus (EBV), TORCH, hepatitis A, B, C, and E were all normal. Liver biopsy revealed the absence of the bile duct, and the gross bile ducts were severely dilated and filled with fine particles of bile . Electron microscopy showed hepatocytes of unequal size and disorganized arrangement with dilated hepatic sinuses . The mitochondria were swollen, the rough endoplasmic reticulum was hyperplastic and vesicular, the lysosomes were increased, and no viral particles were seen . A previous head MRI from a local hospital was normal. In addition, WGS results revealed novel compound heterozygous mutations of VPS33B, c.1081 C > T (p.Q361X,257)/c.244 T > C (p. C82R), which was inherited from her father and mother as the parents are heterozygote carriers. Neither variant has been reported previously. In silico analysis predicted that the variant c.1081 C > T (p. Q361X, 257) is pathogenic through abolishment of protein translation, and c.244 T > C (p. C82R) is likely pathogenic according to MutationTastor . Finally, the patient was diagnosed with ARC syndrome based on the clinical manifestations and genetic testing results.
During hospitalization, the patient was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (250 mg, TID) for cholestasis, methylprednisolone sodium succinate (10 mg, QD) for inflammation, and cholestyramine (4 g, QD) for pruritus. External applications of triamcinolone acetonide econazole cream and urea ointment were used to relieve ichthyosis. Fortunately, the patient’s cholestasis and liver function improved after 1 week of treatment. Her symptoms of jaundice and skin itching were relieved significantly; however, the dermal and arthrosis manifestations persisted. The patient was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization and was managed with maintenance treatment of ursodeoxycholic acid (250 mg, TID). To date, cholestatic jaundice has been well controlled, and her daily quality of life has improved .