The patient was a four-year-old Iranian boy, with no history of health problems or hospitalization, except for jaundice and phototherapy in the neonatal period. He had been immunized before the emergence of signs, according to the Iranian immunization program and guidelines (2015), and showed normal growth. The parents were not consanguine, and family history of neurological disorders was negative. He was admitted to the hospital with acute onset of fever and symptoms of coryza and otitis media in 2016.
Immediately after admission, the patient’s vital signs were measured: blood pressure, 110/80 mmHg; pulse rate, 130 bpm; respiratory rate, 32 bpm; and temperature, 39.3°C. Examinations revealed that the patient was conscious, aware of time and place, and able to identify his family and obey orders. The cranial nerve examination was normal, and deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were in the normal range (1+ to 2+). On the other hand, he presented with scleral icterus. The tympanic membrane was inflamed and bulged, and cardiac and pulmonary auscultations were abnormal. Examination of other organs showed normal results.
The patient had no history of trauma, food poisoning, possible drug toxicity, or hospitalization. Symptoms of loss of consciousness emerged four to six hours after hospitalization, followed by an increase in body temperature, rhinitis, and cough. He was irritable and unable to stay awake, speak properly, or obey instructions. He also showed no proper response to environmental stimuli. In addition, blurred vision, decreased muscle tone and force, increased DTRs (3+ to 4+), and bilateral Babinski sign were reported. On the following day, multiple generalized tonic-colonic seizures occurred.
The results of serological, parasitological, and urinary analyses were normal. Also, liver function was evaluated in the patient. Based on the results, a high level of liver enzymes was reported: alanine transaminase (ALT), 42 IU/L; aspartate transaminase (AST), 56 IU/L; and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 210 IU/L. In the cardiac assessment, echo and electrocardiography (ECG) findings were normal, and possibility of cardiac problems, especially endocarditis, was ruled out. The CSF examination indicated the following results: white blood cell count (WBC), 0-3; red blood cell count (RBC), 1-2; glucose level, 65 mg/dL; and protein level, 45 mg/dL. Moreover, all cultures were negative; consequently, encephalitis and infectious disease were ruled out. Also, hepatic encephalopathy was ruled out based on the gastrointestinal consultation.
In the neurological consultation, brain MRI was requested for the patient to analyze the possibility of brain damage. The results indicated the involvement of cerebellum, thalamus, and basal ganglia, which led to the diagnosis of ANEC . Methylprednisolone (20 mg/kg/day for seven days) was prescribed by the neurologist. On the third day, the patient’s fever was controlled, whereas his consciousness level was low, and he was unable to open his eyes. After seven days of treatment, he opened his eyes, and the pupils were responsive to light. Since he had oral lesions (oral thrush), nystatin was prescribed at a dose of 20 drops every six hours, methylprednisolone was discontinued, and oral prednisolone (5 mg/kg/day) was administered instead of corticosteroid pulse therapy.
About 12 days after admission, the patient’s level of consciousness improved, while his eyesight remained poor. Accordingly, optical examination was carried out, which indicated the possibility of cortical blindness. About 20 days after admission, his general condition improved, and he was able to speak; his level of consciousness was also satisfactory. Following that, he was transferred to the ward. Since he was diagnosed with strabismus in the follow-up, involvement of the sixth nerve was considered.