A 50-year-old perimenopausal woman was referred to our institution. The patient was asymptomatic, and the presence of a uterine leiomyoma had been detected by ultrasound during a physical check-up. The uterine lesion was initially diagnosed as a benign leiomyoma. She had a history of abortion but no previous operations nor a history of myoma or adenomyosis. The gynecological examination showed no abnormalities in the vulva and vagina, 2/3 erosion of the cervical surface, an anteriorly positioned uterus, no tenderness, increased volume, morphological under-regulation, and a 6 cm diameter cystic mass at the left rear side of the uterus. The mass was smooth, had defined limits, and moved properly without causing pain. There was no palpable bulk in either of the bilateral adnexal regions. Normal results were obtained from standard laboratory tests on the blood and urine. The serum concentrations of CA199 and CA125 were within normal ranges.
Pelvic MRI confirmed a tumor mass of about 7.6 × 5.5 cm in size at the left posterior wall of the uterus and extending into the parametrium. The tumor exhibited a worm-like morphology and displayed an equivalent signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and a non-uniform signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), along with a heightened signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) without any low apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value. Significant enhancement of the T1W1 signal was observed after gadolinium chelate injection . The endometrium was pressured, and the lymph nodes were normal.
A total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. During the laparotomy, the myometrium exhibited many and subserosal fibroids and appeared nodular. The maximal diameter of the fibroids was approximately 3 mm, and worm-like structures were visible between the uterine fundus and cervix. Both the left uterine vein and the left wide ligament were involved. There were no apparent abnormalities of the fallopian tubes or ovaries. Pathological evaluation of the specimen confirmed the diagnosis of IVL .