Our patient is a 92-year-old male with severe aortic stenosis whose past medical history includes umbilical and inguinal hernia, chronic diastolic heart failure, right bundle branch block, coronary artery disease, and obesity. He became significantly symptomatic in the last few months prior to his admission to the hospital, where he complained of worsened dyspnea on exertion and recurrent syncopal attacks. Physical examination did not show any significant findings except for a 5/6 systolic ejection murmur in the aortic area radiating to both carotids. Diagnostic cardiac catheterization showed no evidence of coronary artery disease. Carotid Doppler showed no significant stenosis. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block. Transesophageal echocardiography showed critical aortic valve stenosis, mean pressure gradient of approximately 72 mmHg, valve area of 0.46 cm2, and left ventricular ejection fraction of 60%. A 29 mm Edwards SAPIEN XT valve was implanted via transfemoral access. Confirmation of position was then done by aortography. The transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the adequate position of the valve with minimal aortic insufficiency. There was no pericardial effusion with normal ventricular systolic function. Postdeployment aortogram showed paravalvular leak and patent coronary arteries.
Postdeployment hemodynamics showed zero mmHg mean gradient pressure between the left ventricle and the aorta with left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP) ~ 10 mmHg.
Post-TAVR day 1 routine transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed well-seated and normally functioning bioprosthetic aortic valve with a small posterior paravalvular leak. It also showed a small-sized continuous (systolic and diastolic phases) shunt, which communicated with the aortic root into the right ventricle (aorto-RV shunt) .
Since the patient was asymptomatic following the procedure, he was managed conservatively with close follow-up. His repeat TTE a month after the procedure revealed no significant change from his post-TAVR day 1 TTE . Therefore, we decided to continue with medical management and close follow-up, since the patient was asymptomatic.
Follow-up with TTE a year later showed persistence of the aorto-RV fistula and significant improvement in the velocity across the shunt , which may be due to a decrease in the fistula size rather than an increase in RV pressure as RV systolic pressure (RVSP) remained within normal limits on follow-up TTE.