A 45-year-old male with a background of VSD repair as a child and echocardiographically-diagnosed bicuspid aortic valve presented with a four-week history of headaches, malaise, and productive cough. He had been prescribed several antibiotic courses by his general practitioner with no improvement in his symptoms. He was found to have and elevated D-dimer which prompted a computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram. This suggested an abnormal appearance to the aortic valve and convex indentation of the anterior wall of the aortic sinus into the RVOT, which gated CT scan confirmed as a fistula between the aortic root and RVOT . On examination, a continuous murmur could be heard throughout the precordium on auscultation. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed severe aortic stenosis (AS) with heavy calcification. A subsequent trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) showed a mass attached to the aortic valve (1.6 cm x 1.5 cm). A diagnosis of sub-acute bacterial endocarditis was made, with negative blood cultures and a raised white cell count of 16.1 × 109/L. MRI of the brain was also positive for scattered microhaemorrhages suggesting likely dissemination of infective detritus. The patient was prepared and consented for urgent inpatient surgery.
Redo-sternotomy was performed and the heart circumferentially freed of adhesions. Heparin was administered and routine central cannulation achieved with insertion of a right superior pulmonary vein vent. Cardiopulmonary bypass was successfully commenced, cross clamp applied and antegrade and retrograde cold blood cardioplegia administered. There was a palpable thrill in the RVOT secondary to the fistula. An oblique aortotomy was performed. The right coronary cusp sinus was eroded with the fistula communicating with the RVOT between the junction of the left and right sinuses, measuring 3.5 cm x 2 cm : The aortic valve was found to be unicuspid and was extensively calcified, with thrombus and vegetation present.
The native valve was excised, which helped to identify the fistula’s origin at the right coronary sinus with erosion of the aorto-ventricular region. This was extensively debrided of infected and necrotic tissue and washed out. The defect was closed with an oval bovine pericardial patch using a double suture line, initially with interrupted pledgeted 4 − 0 prolene followed by 6 − 0 prolene suture in a continuous fashion circumferentially. Routine aortic valve replacement with a 21 mm mechanical prosthesis in the intra-annular position was completed with a continuous suture technique and the aortotomy closed using a bovine pericardial patch. The cross clamp was removed, and the patient was successfully weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass followed by routine decannulation and closure completed.
The postoperative course was uneventful and he was treated with six weeks of antibiotics for staphylococcus sp. which grew from the tissue cultures. Transthoracic echocardiogram and gated CT scan confirmed no residual fistula .