A 50-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and management of an incidentally reported right atrial mass. The patient had a history of ankylosing spondylitis under treatment with methylprednisolone and methotrexate, and factor V-Leiden mutation that had lead to several peripheral venous and arterial thrombosis during the last 5 years. The patient also experienced multiple episodes of pulmonary embolism that had been treated with anticoagulants. Although under warfarin treatment with a good time in therapeutic range of international normalized ratio, the patient developed recurrent pulmonary embolism which was later attributed to the presence of a newly diagnosed right atrial mass. The patient was suffering from heart failure symptoms with New York Heart Association class III–IV status due to chronic thromboembolism resulting in significant pulmonary hypertension (systolic pulmonary pressure = 55 mmHg). A new transoesophageal examination was performed at admission and it revealed two pedicled, mobile, ‘myxoma-like’ masses in the right atrium, one larger (21 × 20 mm) attached to the free wall and one smaller (12 × 4 mm) attached to the mid portion of interatrial septum . These masses did not cause any extra symptoms and despite partial occlusion of the tricuspid valve by the larger mass, no functional stenosis was observed with a mean gradient of less than 1 mmHg on the valve. In order to avoid any further mass-originated embolic events and any further mass-related complications, surgical removal was suggested and the operation was scheduled within the same admission.
At her admission, the physical examination revealed normal first (S1) and second heart sound (S2), with no murmur; normal findings from the auscultation of the lungs and bilateral pedal oedema.
The operation was performed under general anaesthesia with a median sternotomy and cannulation of the ascending aorta, inferior and superior vena cava. The right atrium was vertically opened and surprisingly revealed the presence of only the smaller mass attached to the interatrial septum, which was removed along with its pedicle. Despite careful and meticulous visual and manual search of the right atrium, right ventricle (RV) and main PA, the larger mass could not be identified. A repeated intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) examination confirmed the absence of the second larger mass and as it was considered to have embolized into the pulmonary arteries. Persistent suction was applied into the right ventricle between the trabeculae and into the main PA in an attempt to capture and remove the mass. Lastly, the right atrium was closed and cardiopulmonary bypass was discontinued for clinical and hemodynamic evaluation of the patient. Since the patient was stable with satisfied oxygenation without any need of inotropic support, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Unfortunately, two hours later she developed cardiogenic shock, with severe hypoxaemia and a bedside transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated signs of acute right ventricular failure and increased systolic PA pressure. As these findings were in keeping with acute pulmonary embolism, an emergent pulmonary computed tomography (CT) angiogram was performed and it revealed a large mass occluding the left PA . The patient was retransferred to the operation room under massive inotropic support for emergent surgical embolectomy. After CBP, the main PA was incised longitudinally across its entire length and a 21 × 20 mm mass was removed from the initial part of the left PA using LeGardin graspers and suctioning. Remarkably, the RV showed a significant, dramatic recovery and the patient demonstrated immediate hemodynamic improvement allowing the surgeons to transfer her back to the ICU. After this intervention, the patient had an uneventful further hospitalization period without extra oxygen and inotropic support need, improvement of her symptoms and the pedal oedema by the physical examination. Histopathologic examination of these two masses confirmed the diagnosis of multiple cardiac myxomas .