A 17 year-old Caucasian female tourist was found floating in the sea after being caught in a strong rip and was pulled out. She was lifeless at the scene with no palpable pulse and bystander cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was commenced immediately and continued for the next 10 minutes until the arrival of paramedics. Her Glasgow coma score (GCS) was 3, and her pupils were fixed and dilated. CPR was continued for a further 6 minutes, whilst a total of 2 mg of Epinephrine and 3 mg of Atropine were administered intravenously. This resulted in return of spontaneous circulation though with limited respiratory efforts, and an endotracheal tube was inserted to facilitate ventilation during transfer to hospital.
On arrival in the emergency department after 10 minutes by helicopter she was in sinus rhythm with heart rate of 84 beats per minute and blood pressure of 120/75 mmHg. Her neurological status remained unchanged with GCS of 3 and fixed and dilated pupils. Chest x-ray revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. Initial arterial blood gases showed profound metabolic acidosis with temperature corrected pH of 6.57 (reference range [RR], 7.35 - 7.45), PCO2 of 7.83 kPa (RR, 4.5 - 5.5 kPa), PO2 of 51.9 kPa on 100% FiO2 and HCO3 of 3.6 mmol/L (RR, 22 - 26 mmol/L), base excess of -28.1 mmol/L (RR, -2 to +2 mmol/L), and lactate of 28 mmol/L (RR, <2 mmol/L). Her core temperature on admission was 33.4°C.
She was transferred to the Intensive care unit with a diagnosis of severe hypoxic brain injury and aspiration pneumonia. Conventional neuro-protective measures were commenced. This included sedation with a Propofol infusion, nursing at 15° head-up tilt with the patient's head in neutral alignment and controlled mechanical ventilation to maintain an arterial PaCO2 of 4.5-5 kPa. Intravenous fluids were administered to maintain a normovolaemic state and nutrition commenced via a naso-gastric tube. She was also commenced on antibiotics for the aspiration pneumonia. We decided to use therapeutic hypothermia to try and ameliorate her hypoxic brain injury. This was achieved by the insertion of the Cool-Guard endovascular cooling catheter, which was sited in her femoral vein.
By the time the catheter had been sited her core temperature had dropped to 30.6°C, presumably due to redistribution of cold peripheral blood to the core, so the Cool-Guard was initially used to warm her to the target temperature of 34°C. Cooling was continued, with a target temperature of 34°C for 20 hours . Active cooling was stopped after 20 hours and the patient was allowed to passively re-warm. Overall, her core temperature was an average of 34.2°C for the first 24 hours of her admission. Her severe acidaemia corrected over the first 8 hours . Her pupils became responsive to light in 8 hours and reached normal size and reaction in 40 hours. Her GCS improved by day 3 to the point of spontaneous eye opening and obeying commands. On day 2 she suffered a seizure, confirmed by electroencephalography, which was controlled with intravenous Phenytoin (18 mg/kg). On day 4 she was transferred to a high dependency unit in France where she continued to improve to a GCS of 15. She was subsequently transferred to a rehabilitation facility. Three months post injury she was independently performing all her daily activities with no neurological deficit and the last follow-up confirmed that her discharge home was expected.