The pedigree of the family is shown in Fig. . The proband (Ib in Fig. ) was a 47-year-old female of Han Chinese ethnicity (with family from Shandong province, China), who was admitted to our hospital with a chief complaint of “fatigue and chest tightness for 7 days”. She never had a similar episode before. She had neither intellectual disability nor a history of seizures. Her blood pressure was 135/85 mmHg. Physical examination revealed typical facial angiofibromas (adenoma sebaceum) and multiple periungual fibromas , and obvious abdominal distention. Her biochemical laboratory test demonstrated renal insufficiency (serum creatinine levels: 3.1 mg/dL, normal values 0.5–1.1 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate: 17.1 ml/min/1.73 m2, estimated by CKD-EPI formula) and moderate anemia (hemoglobin of 8.6 g/dL, normal values 11–15 g/dL). Ultrasonography of her both kidneys manifested a heterogeneous mass with a large echogenic fatty component and a less echogenic soft-tissue component with prominent vessels within it, which was suggestive of giant bilateral renal angiomyolipomas (AML) . Highly vascular fatty masses were seen on Color Doppler scans . Ultrasonography of the left eyes demonstrated a hyperechogenic lesion with posterior shadowing due to calcifications . Fundus photograph showed a hamartoma with central calcifications and a surrounding translucent zone in the left eye, suggesting the retinal hamartoma . Thereafter, non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen confirmed the ultrasonography diagnosis of giant bilateral renal AMLs with prominent fatty components and internal prominent vessels. Multiple variable-sized air-filled cysts throughout the parenchyma were noted in both lungs consistent with lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) on lung CT. And brain CT revealed multiple calcified subependymal nodules. Images of spine displayed multiple patchy sclerotic lesions .
Therefore, we considered that the patient fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of TSC . The patient accepted the treatment with the mTOR inhibitor everolimus (10 mg/d) because her AMLs nearly invaded all tissues of bilateral kidneys which could not be removed completely. Two months later, the patient felt a significant alleviation in the feeling of abdominal swelling. Regrettably, she had to discontinue her treatment because of financial difficulties. After half a year follow-up, the patient remained in a stable condition. Besides, she had a son (IIc) who died of epilepsy at the age of six. Her daughter (IIa) also had the presentation of typical facial angiofibromas and multiple periungual fibromas, but she denied further imaging examination. Her husband (Ia) and granddaughter (IIIa) did not show any significant symptoms or abnormalities on testing. To further confirm the diagnosis of TSC, mutation analysis of the TSC1 and TSC2 gene and bioinformatics analysis were performed by the methods in Additional file . The CARE guidelines were followed in reporting this case.
By the next generation sequencing, the proband was found to carry a heterozygous guanine to adenine substitution of the last nucleotide in exon 29 of TSC2 (c.3610G > A), resulting in a single amino acid substitution from Glycine to Arginine at amino acid position 1204 (p.Gly1204Arg) . Sanger sequencing validation of all family members revealed that the proband’s daughter (IIa) carried the same heterozygous p.Gly1204Arg mutation in TSC2 gene, whereas other family members and 100 unrelated controls did not harbor this mutation. No mutation was identified in TSC1 gene.
The c.3610G > A variant was considered as novel since it was neither present in ExAC, 1000G, nor in HGMD databases (HGMD Professional 2017.4). However, another substitution at the same codon (c.3611G > A, p.Gly1204Glu) has been reported to be related with TSC .
The p.Gly1204Arg alteration was predicted as deleterious by three different softwares (i.e. MutationTaster, SIFT and PolyPhen-2). Moreover, the p.Gly1204Arg variant is highly conserved among 8 different species (human, Callorhinchus milii, Macaca mulatta, chimpanzee, house mouse, rat, xenopus tropicalis and zebrafish) by using Vector NTI Advance 10-Align.
It was noteworthy that the c.3610G > A was a nucleotide substitution at the last position of exon 29, which was located at the upstream close neighbor nucleotide of classical donor splicing site (GT) of intron 29. Therefore, this position may play an important role as splicing modulator. The BDGP and the NetGene2 splice prediction programs were then employed to test whether this mutation could alter the splicing of the TSC2 transcript. Both predictions resulted in the abolishment of the donor splice site. Finally, the in silico analysis by ASSP software showed that the splice donor site strength remarkably decreased from a score of 8.434 to 4.895 (cut off: 4.5).
The mini-gene assay performed to study the effects at the transcript level of the novel c.3610G > A variant showed that the wild-type gave rise to a 476 bp PCR product containing exon 29, the empty pSPL3 control gave rise to a 263 bp PCR fragment missing exon 29 of TSC2 gene. However, the c.3610G > A mutant construct produced two transcripts corresponding to 263 and 476 bp PCR fragments, respectively (Additional file : Figure S1). We then investigated whether the mutation c.3610G > A really led to exon 29 skipping in an actual patient. The cDNA was reverse transcribed from total RNA extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of the proband. By cDNA sequencing, the exon 29-excluded transcript was identified only in the proband and not in a not-mutated individual. Approximately 44% of the cDNA products inserted into the pGEMT Easy vector were missing exon 29, whereas 56% were in-frame cDNA with the single nucleotide change c.3610G > A .