The patient was a 55-year-old man with no past medical history. In May 2014, a liver tumor was found via abdominal ultrasound screening, and he was referred to our department for further examination. As a metastatic liver tumor was suspected, he underwent colonoscopy, which located a circumferential type 2 lesion in his sigmoid colon. Biopsy revealed that the lesion was a well-differentiated type tubular adenocarcinoma . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed sigmoid colon cancer with regional lymph node metastases and a ring-shaped tumor measuring 50 × 48 mm2 in segment 8 (S8). Blood tests revealed no abnormalities in blood counts or biochemistry, but elevated CEA levels (9.3 ng/ml, 7.2 U/ml) were detected. First, we performed laparoscopic sigmoidectomy and hepatic segmentectomy (S5 and S8) in July 2014 for sigmoid colon cancer with liver metastasis. The pathological diagnosis illustrated that the primary and liver tumors were both well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (pT4aN1M1a [H2], pStage IV). These tumors were wild-type for both RAS and BRAF. Six months after the first surgery, multiple liver metastases (S3, 5 mm; S4, 17 mm; S6, 4 mm; S7, 9 mm) were found. Our multidisciplinary team decided to administer systemic chemotherapy following liver resection. After the patient received four courses of oxaliplatin and capecitabine plus bevacizumab (CAPOX + Bmab) as first-line chemotherapy for 3 months, CT revealed that the liver tumors in S3, S6, and S7 had disappeared, and the tumor in S4 had shrunk to 6 mm (response rate = 35%, partial response [PR]). We then resected the S4 tumor. After resection, the patient received four courses of CAPEOX as postoperative adjuvant therapy. The main adverse effects were peripheral neuropathy (grade 2) and hiccups (grade 1). Liver metastasis (S7, 14 mm) was detected 24 months after the first surgery. The multidisciplinary team decided not to administer preoperative chemotherapy because the tumor was small. Partial liver resection (S7) was performed. A fourth metastasis was detected in a right pulmonary nodule (S1) 32 months after the first resection, and it increased to 8 mm in size after 3 months. We determined that it was a lung metastasis and performed right upper lobectomy without preoperative chemotherapy because of its small size. Para-aortic lymph node metastasis was found 39 months after the first resection. Because the tumor was in contact with the duodenum and right renal vein, five courses of CAPOX + Bmab were administered. The aortic lymph node shrank from 24 to 11 mm in size (PR). Four months later, we decided that the lesion could be safely resected, and thus, aortic lymphadenectomy was performed. Three courses of chemotherapy were administered postoperatively. Right adrenal metastasis was found 53 months after the initial resection. Four courses of CAPOX + Bmab were administered, and the tumor slightly shrunk from 21 to 20 mm in size. Because treatment did not further reduce the tumor, we performed right adrenalectomy. While repeating CAPOX + Bmab chemotherapy, our multidisciplinary team resected the metastases. No features of sinusoidal syndrome were observed on clinical, pathological, or imaging examination after CAPOX + Bmab. This patient has survived for more than 5.5 years at the time of writing after undergoing six metastatic resections .