A 32-year-old woman presented with plaques and ulcers on the vulva and crissum, accompanied by pain and exudates on the surface of the ulcers.
The patient reported a rash on the vulva as the first manifestation, which gradually enlarged and extended to the perianal area. She did not complain of diarrhea, constipation, melena, hematochezia, diabetes insipidus, changes in appetite, or weight loss.
The patient denied any previous chronic diseases, hepatitis, tuberculosis, and any history of infectious disease and close contact with infected people. She also denied drug and food allergies. Her vaccination history was unknown.
The patient had no family history of cancer.
Physical examination revealed red erosive plaques and ulcers on the vulva and perianal areas, which were covered with exudates . No skull defects were observed.
A punch biopsy was performed at the intersection between the normal skin and vulvar rash during the initial visit. The tissue section was fixed in 10% neutral formalin, paraffin-embedded, sectioned, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and subjected to direct immunohistochemistry before observation under light microscopy. Each immunohistochemistry test group included a negative self-control. All primary and secondary antibodies were purchased from ZSGB-BIO, Beijing, China. The primary antibody incubation lasted 50 min at 37 °C and 20 min at 37 °C for the secondary antibody. Visualization was performed using DAB (3,3'-diaminobiphenyl), and results were assessed by capturing images with a light microscope.
Pathology revealed histiocytoid cells in the superficial and middle dermal layers with mild nuclear atypia and a population of occasional eosinophils. The atypical histiocytoid cells were positive for S100 protein and CD1a, and weakly positive for CD68 (20% +), with a Ki-67 index of 30%. These cells were negative for creatine kinase .
Computed tomography of the sacroiliac joint showed that the cortical bone of the sacral surface of the right sacroiliac joint was discontinuous.