The patient is a previously healthy 1-year-old male patient who was referred to the institution because he had the following clinical symptoms for the past 15 days: multiple diarrheic stools with mucus and without blood (6–7 per day), associated with fever spikes, the highest being 39.8 °C; abdominal distension; and irritability. No additional symptomatology. Physical examination upon admission showed a patient in poor general condition, with marked abdominal distension and a palpable abdominal mass , decreased bowel sounds, and generalized pain upon abdominal palpation. We decided to hospitalize the patient, with nil by mouth, with a nasogastric tube, and a request for an abdominal ultrasound and paraclinical tests.
The paraclinical tests showed leukocytosis with neutrophilia and thrombocytosis, high CRP (97.1 mg/dL), mild hyponatremia (Na: 134 mmol/L), potassium, chloride, and calcium within a normal range; normal glycemia; kidney function within normal parameters; and coproscopic exam does not show parasitic structures. Abdominal ultrasound shows a multiseptate image which occupies the right half of the abdomen and displaces the bowel loops and could correspond to septate ascitic fluid; distension of intestinal loops. X-ray of the abdomen where displacement of the bowel loops to the left and opacification of the right half of the abdomen is seen .
Follow-up tests were requested, since the patient presented signs of peritoneal irritation, which found leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and thrombocytosis, PCR (C-reactive protein) indicative of bacterial infection; previously requested blood cultures were negative. An exploratory laparotomy was carried out on suspicion of sepsis of abdominal origin which found a cystic lesion dependent on the greater and lesser omenta, attached to the greater curvature of the stomach and transverse colon, with greenish-yellow content and whitish particles inside, measuring approximately 30 cm in diameter and weighing approximately 1 kg .
The microscopic description of the pathology showed soft tissues with spaces that appeared to be lymphatic vessels associated with multiple lymphoid aggregates. Septal connective tissue was seen with frequent necrosis. There was no malignancy in this material.
After the postoperative period, the patient adequately tolerated oral administration. The surgical wound was in good condition and progressed adequately, so the patient was discharged with follow-up by pediatric surgery.