A 22-year-old female presented to the emergency unit of a tertiary care hospital with
complaints of shortness of breath, palpitations, and fatigue for 3 weeks. She had a
history of multiple transfusions in the past and received her last transfusion
6 years ago. On examination, she had pale conjunctiva and widespread hemangiomas,
namely on her lips, hands, and feet .
The patient had these lesions at birth, and she also noted that the lesions increased
in size as well as in number over the past 6 years.
The vital signs of the patient on arrival were a blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg, a
pulse of 100 beats per minute, oxygen saturation of 65% on room air, a temperature
of 98.6°F, and a Glasgow coma scale of 13/15. The rest of the examination was
unremarkable. She was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and baseline
investigations were ordered .
Further workup for anemia was initiated and a peripheral smear was sent, and the
patient was started on a packed red blood cell transfusion. Her peripheral blood
smear displayed hypochromic microcytic anemia prompting an endoscopic evaluation
which displayed a vascular hemangioma-like lesion in the esophagus in addition to
multiple vascular hemangioma-like lesions extending to the duodenum. On colonoscopy,
several hemangioma-like lesions were noted in the colon up to the splenic flexure.
Lastly, a colonic biopsy displayed an acute self-limited colitis.
On further investigation she had been following a balanced diet, having regular
menstrual cycles, and she did not have any positive family history of blood
disorders nor did her family have a history of similar condition. Additionally, a
specimen was collected for skin biopsy from the hemangioma lesions which revealed
angiokeratoma. Based on the clinical presentation and biopsy results, the patient
was diagnosed with a case of blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (BRBNS).
During her stay at the hospital, she received a total of 8 pnt of packed red cells,
intravenous fluids, tranexamic acid, and vitamin K. On the 7th day of admission, the
patient’s hemoglobin rose to 10.1 gm/dl, was vitally stable and was discharged home
on tablet ferrous sulfate plus folic acid (525 mg/800 mcg). The patient was educated
on her rare genetic syndrome, symptom management, the importance of genetic
counseling, and was asked to follow up after 4 weeks. The patient was also made
aware of the need for potential future surgeries as well as sclerotherapy to treat
her lesions if her lesions worsen. Other treatment options were discussed for her
cutaneous lesions such as on the first follow-up, the patient’s symptoms improved
but her hemoglobin dropped to 8.6 mg/dl.