The patient is a 72-year-old man with histologically confirmed moderately differentiated intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma . He was diagnosed in October 2015 with the following symptoms: moderate weight loss, pain in the right hypochondrium, loss of appetite and asthenia, with a Karnofsky scale index of 70%. MRI image at the time of diagnosis is shown on Fig. a. The tumor was not surgically removed because of advanced stage, multiple intrahepatic nodules and lung metastases.
Four courses of chemotherapy (2 courses Gemcitabine in combination with Capecitabine and subsequent 2 courses Gemcitabine in combination with Cisplatin) were administered till May 2016. The treatment was poorly effective, and the tumor increased in size according to MRI ; additional metastatic nodules appeared in the left and the right lobes with the spread to the bile duct, holedoch and into the gallbladder. Serum gamma glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) level, which is associated with poor prognosis and tumor aggressiveness [, ], was significantly increased, when compared to pre-treatment levels . Karnofsky scale index decreased to 60%. As the patient did not respond to the best clinical practice treatment, we decided to switch the medication and considered TKI inhibitors as further treatment option. Taking into account available data on differential response of CCA patients to TKIs we performed advanced molecular analysis of the tumor to support our choice and identify the most effective drug.
We profiled gene expression in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) patient’s tumor biopsy sample, obtained at the time of the first CCA diagnosis. Briefly total RNA was extracted using Ambion’s RecoverAll™ Total Nucleic Acid Isolation. Complete Whole Transcriptome Amplification WTA2 Kit (Sigma) was used for reverse transcription and library amplification. Hybridization was performed according to CustomArray ElectraSense™ Hybridization and Detection protocol. Hybridization efficiency was detected electrochemically using CustomArray ElectraSense™ Detection Kit and ElectraSense™ 4X2K/12K Reader.
We next used bioinformatical software Oncobox to analyze gene expression data and to identify molecular pathways differentially regulated in the patient’s tumor sample . Based on the abundance of gene transcripts for the molecular targets of anticancer drugs, Oncobox also makes it possible to generate a rating of target drugs potentially effective for the individual patients [, ]. Particularly, this analysis revealed that the ERK and Ras molecular signaling pathways were highly activated in the CCA patient’s tumor biopsy , the predicted rating of the most effective target drugs is shown in Table . Regorafenib, a multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor was on the top position of the rating. However, there were no published studies of Regorafenib efficacy and tolerability in CCA. At the same time, several case reports demonstrated efficiency of TKI target drug Sorafenib for CCA treatment [–]. We, therefore, decided to use Sorafenib as the next line therapy and it was prescribed to the patient (800 mg daily) in May 2016. Treatment with Sorafenib coincided with the decrease of serum GGT level. MRI analysis in October 2016 revealed moderate tumor growth, corresponding to disease stabilization . However, additional nodules occurred slightly below the xiphoid process in the diaphragm area. Therefore, disease progressed according to RECIST criteria. And, importantly, after Sorafenib treatment, the patient did not complain of pain in the right hypochondrium. Before Sorafenib treatment the patient received Tramadol (100 mg im once a day) and Fentanyl (75 µg/h, Duragesic transdermal tape). After 1 month of treatment with Sorafenib the pain medication was switched to Ketoral (30 mg im twice a day). Considering all the above-mentioned facts it was decided to continue Sorafenib treatment. MRI performed in January 2017 revealed progression of tumor growth and additional nodule in the left lung . In addition, the following side effects occurred: redness, swelling, pain on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. GGT level increased up to 319 U/L in December 2016.
The treatment regimen was next changed to Pazopanib, another TKI drug recommended based on the Oncobox rating. Sunitinib was not chosen because we attempted to eliminate the hand-foot syndrome, which occurred during Sorafenib administration. In the previous studies, Sunitinib treatment of CCA patients induced hand-foot syndrome in 43% of patients . On the other hand, recent clinical trial of Pazopanib in combination with Trametinib in CCA did not report hand-foot syndrome as a side effect . Pazopanib administration (800 mg daily) started since January 2017. The control MRI in July 2017 revealed progression in the lung nodes and 20% increase in sum of diameters of target lesions, which is a borderline between stabilization and progression according to RECIST . However, the change of treatment regimen resulted in elimination of Sorafenib side effects and general improvement of life quality. In addition, start of Pazopanib treatment coincided with a start of a trend towards decrease of serum GGT level . As for October 2017 (2 years after initial diagnosis), the patient was alive and physically active, with Karnofsky scale 80%. Our patient passed away due to the liver failure in November 2017.