A 73-year-old Caucasian woman with a one-year history of headaches and left temporal tenderness developed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. She was started on prednisone and a few days later underwent a left-sided STAB as an outpatient. In the recovery room, she noted difficulty closing her left eye secondary to weakness. She also noted numbness along the left portion of her face. There were no complaints of blurry or double vision, difficulty swallowing or slurred speech. She did not complain of any weakness in her arms or legs. She did not have vertigo, tinnitus, diminished hearing or lapses of consciousness. She was told at the time that she may have had an adverse effect from the local anesthetic and was discharged home with eye drops.
The patient's medical history was remarkable for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, a past transient ischemic attack, fibromyalgia and gout. She was taking levothyroxine, simvastatin, duloxetine, lisinopril, hydrochlorothiazide, clopidogrel and prednisone.
The patient presented for neurologic evaluation six weeks after the STAB. General physical examination revealed a blood pressure in her left arm (sitting position) of 110/70 mm Hg with a regular pulse. Her height was 5'3", and she weighed 152 lb. There were no carotid bruits or cardiac murmurs, and her lungs were clear to auscultation. She had a well-healed scar over the region where the left STAB had been done. Cranial nerve examination was remarkable for significant limitation of left eye closure (her eyelid could not adequately cover her sclera beneath her pupil). There was also diminished upward furrowing of her left brow with minimal mild and slow weakness seen in the left lower portion of her face, producing mild asymmetry. The right facial muscles were all completely intact. No facial synkinesis was witnessed. Facial sensation was intact in a bilateral V1 through V3 distribution to light touch and temperature. Her pupils were round, equal and symmetric to light. Visual fields were intact, and disc margins were sharp on funduscopic examination. All ocular movements were intact with conjugate gaze and without nystagmus. All muscles of mastication were intact. She had no hearing deficits, and visual inspection of the bilateral internal auditory canals did not reveal any hemorrhages, erythema, vesicles or exudates. Her palate elevated midline, and her gag reflex was intact. Her bilateral sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles all displayed intact strength, and her tongue protruded midline without any fasciculations or atrophy. The remainder of the neurologic examination revealed no focal motor, sensory, coordination, gait or reflex deficits. Her speech and mental status were both quite intact.
Investigations were significant for a magnetic resonance imaging study with and without contrast that revealed cerebral ischemic gliosis compatible with the patient's age without acute intracranial pathology. There were no abnormalities noted along the course of either cranial seventh nerve. Her left STAB incision did not show evidence of thrombus, inflammation or giant cells and hence was without evidence of temporal arteritis.