A 53-year-old male was referred to our hospital in September 2012 for re-transplantation due to severe biliary complication after the first LTx. His blood type was “O”. Complete SI without other abnormalities was identified when he was a teenager. Following splenectomy and hepatectomy due to hemorrhage after hepatitis B related cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma respectively, he underwent LTx from a deceased donor with situs solitus because of tumor recurrence in 2005 at the Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Shanghai, China. Since half a year after LTx, he suffered episodes of biliary complication characterized as jaundice and fever. Bile duct stents were inserted several times. The total bilirubin fluctuated between 70-200 μmol/L and it was gradually elevated to about 400 μmol/L before he was listed for re-transplantation. He had severe skin pruritus and sporadic slight hepatic comma.
The donor was a 32-year-old male who suffered brain injury in a motor vehicle accident and was pronounced dead shortly after admission. Image studies showed that he was situs reversus. His blood type was “B”. Given the organic situs match, the donor liver graft was then allocated to the recipient. No technical difficulties were encountered during the procurement. The liver graft showed completely inverted structure but without vessel anomaly after trimming the excess tissue on back table .
After careful laparotomy in recipient, a normal oriented liver was transplanted showing deeply bilious appearance with blunt right lobe and shrunken left lobe. The whole graft was severely rotated to the left upper quadrant. Excision of the original liver graft was performed with preservation of recipient inferior vena cava (IVC). The new liver was then brought onto the field as its original position. The structure of IVC, hepatic artery, portal vein and common bile duct of the graft were in line with the recipient’s corresponding structures. A piggy-back technique with some modifications was applied for cavo-cavostomy. In brief, a longitudinal midline incision on the posterior wall of donor suprahepatic IVC was cut to make a triangulated and wide orifice, which was end-to-side anastomosed to the corresponding similar incision in the anterior wall of recipient IVC from the orifice of hepatic veins. Donor infrahepatic IVC was ligated. The portal vein was end to end anastomosed. The donor’s common hepatic artery was anastomosed to the confluence of the recipient’s proper hepatic artery and gastroduodenal artery. Cholecystectomy was performed as usual and biliary reconstruction was achieved via end-to-end choledochocholedochostomy .
To reduce the risk of complications from ABO mismatch, the patient was treated with the protocol of our center: 600 mg Rituximab (MabThera®, Roche) before transplantation and a total of 200 g intravenous immune globulin during operation and the first ten consecutive days post transplant. The maintenance immunosuppression included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and steroid. The post-operative outcome was uneventful. He was doing well with excellent graft function at 11 months follow-up. Computed tomography assessment demonstrated the graft in normal appearance in the up left quadrant .