A 66-year-old man was referred for recurrent episodes of slow VT (108 b.p.m.) requiring interventions of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) . The patient had a history of ischaemic heart disease and underwent coronary artery bypass graft surgery 12 years ago (three grafts to the left anterior descending artery, the posterior descending artery and the marginal branch). The arrhythmia was terminated by repeated sequences of antitachycardia pacing, no shocks were delivered. However, both VT and antitachycardia pacing were highly symptomatic with palpitations and chest pain. Amiodarone (200 mg/day) and metoprolol (75 mg/day) failed to suppress the arrhythmia. Physical examination was unremarkable. Echocardiography showed eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy (the thickness of the interventricular septum was 14 mm) with hypokinesis of the apex and anterior wall. The left ventricular ejection fraction was calculated to 35%. Coronary angiography did not reveal any appropriate lesion for revascularization. During the electrophysiology study, clinical VT was located below the base of the posteromedial papillary muscle. The earliest endocardial activation preceded the QRS complex only by 5 ms with an initial far-field component . The normal uni/bipolar voltages suggested the absence of a larger scar in the area. Despite three endocardial ablation procedures, the VT remained inducible. As the clinical VT originated from hypertrophic myocardium with high voltage and endocardial catheter ablation failed to abolish the arrhythmia, we hypothesize that the VT originated deep within the left ventricular wall. An attempt for percutaneous epicardial approach failed because of adhesions from previous cardiac surgery. No suitable vessel was identified that could be used for transcoronary or coronary venous alcohol ablation. Thus, the patient was referred for SBRT. During the first SBRT, the planned target volume (PTV) was determined by a visual alignment of the presumed origin of VT from electroanatomical maps and computer tomography (CT) images. Twenty-five Gy was delivered to the PTV (21 mL) using Cyberknife (Accuracy) as described previously.
However, the first SBRT session failed to suppress VT. The patient continued to have highly symptomatic episodes of VT treated with antitachycardia pacing (around 20 episodes/month). Treatment with amiodarone (200 mg/day) was continued throughout the period of 20 months. VT episodes were of the same electrocardiogram (ECG) morphology and the patient underwent a re-do electrophysiology study. An electroanatomical map of the left ventricle showed a new, sharply demarcated, low voltage area. The detectable scar was larger on unipolar (size of 16 cm2) than on bipolar (size of 7 cm2) map. Interestingly, the earliest endocardial activity during VT overlapped with the area of low unipolar voltage, but not with a low bipolar voltage region . Additional ablation again failed to suppress VT inducibility. At this stage, we used a new integration strategy for the selection of PTV (see and ) and planned the second SBRT. The new PTV was highlighted at the site of the earliest endocardial activation during VT and radiation dose was again 25 Gy. Thanks to the precise identification of the target, the PTV was only 12 ml. This allowed an expansion of the PTV by 3 mm towards the ventricular cavity and epicardium (resulting in a final PTV of 18 ml) to ensure transmural lesion. The Dice overlap of the PTVs from both SBRT sessions was 0.68. Acutely, an increase in VT recurrences was observed (30 episodes during the first month), which gradually disappeared over 3 months period. During 1-year follow-up, no VTs were noted clinically, by ICD interrogation or by Holter ECG monitoring. No complications related to SBRT were observed, the left ventricular ejection fraction remained unchanged at 35%. No dysfunction of the implanted device was noted.