A 37-year-old male patient with mechanical AV (St Jude size 21 mm) was presented to the cardiology clinic during a regular follow up visit with generalized fatigue and loss of one of the mechanical heart sounds for 10 days duration, with no history of stopped warfarin or aspirin but has less frequency of anticoagulation visits. The patient had the mechanical AV inserted in 1998 after diagnosis of severe rheumatic aortic regurgitation, with baseline transvalvular mean gradient of 40 mm Hg. Physical examination showed normal level of consciousness, normal vital signs, and sinus rhythm. Cardiologic examination confirmed the absence of second heart sound. Chest and abdomen were unremarkable. Lower limbs showed no edema nor signs of deep venous thrombosis (DVT). The patient was admitted and had a routine nasopharyngeal swab for COVID-19 test. The patient then underwent urgent fluoroscopy which showed stuck one of the AV leaflets in a closed and opening positions (A). Same day echocardiography showed well-seated AV with high peak and mean AV gradients (170 and 80 mm Hg, respectively) and moderate intrinsic aortic regurgitation (AR), (A). Additionally, there were moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. Ejection Fraction was 50% and pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 50 mm Hg. The management plan was to redo AV replacement (AVR) and the patient was prepared for transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). However, the COVID-19 test came positive on the second day of admission with documented fever. Therefore, the patient was transferred to a specialized COVID-19 unit, surgical plan was replaced by ultraslow thrombolytic therapy, and the TEE was replaced with multidetector–row computed tomography (MDCT) with contrast. The later showed stuck right posterior disc with a thrombus size 5.9 mm × 4 mm (area 15.5 mm2) at the hinge point of fixed disc into the supra-valvular area, it has CT attenuation of 60 HU surrounded by pannus formation which is partially enhanced and CT attenuation of 194 HU (A & A). Laboratory findings showed platelets count of 317 1000/μL, prothrombin time (PT) of 15 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 36 s, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.1, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 7.0 mg/L, ferritin of 646 ng/mL, and D-dimer of 372 ng/mL. The treating cardiologist started the patient on ultraslow thrombolytic therapy following the regimen of PROMETEE trial ; alteplase 1 mg, every hour for 25 h, followed by 6 h of unfractionated heparin (70 u/kg bolus then 16 u/kg/h with a target aPTT of 1.5 to 2.0 times the control value). Repeated fluoroscopy showed normal opening and closure of both discs (B). Repeated echocardiography showed a significant reduction in the peak and mean AV gradient back to their baselines (66 and 41 mm Hg, respectively, B). Repeated cardiac CT done 48 h after starting the thrombolytic therapy showed a reduction of the thrombus size to 2.7 × 2.4 mm (B & B). The patient was discharged after 7 days with INR 3.0 for two consecutive days and continued aspirin. Before discharge, the patient was strongly advised to regularly follow up with the anticoagulation clinic. The patient had two follow up visits at three- and six-month post-discharge. The patient was asymptomatic with stable INR in both visits. Additionally, transthoracic ultrasound done at the three-month follow-up visit demonstrated normally functioning mechanical AV.