A 73-year-old man was transported by ambulance to a community hospital with chief complaints of high fever and a gait disorder. Laboratory evaluations revealed the following findings: hemoglobin, 7.0 g/dL (normal range, 13.5-17.5 g/dL); creatine phosphokinase, 572 IU/L (normal range, 60-270 IU/L); free blood sugar, 226 mg/dL (normal range, 70-109 mg/dL); and C-reactive protein, 14.0 mg/dL (normal range, <0.3 mg/dL). Computed tomography (CT) screening revealed a hypervascular tumor (size, 9 × 8.5 cm) in the lower pole of the left kidney . The tumor was clinically diagnosed as a left RCC with a classification of cT2aN0M0, according to the tumor-node-metastasis system . The patient was transferred to our hospital for surgical treatment.
Upon admission to our hospital, the patient’s general condition was poor and his performance status (PS) was judged as 3, based on the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status criteria. Laboratory evaluations revealed the following findings: hemoglobin, 6.8 g/dL; adjusted calcium, 12.7 mg/dL (normal range, 8.7-10.3 g/dL); and alkaline phosphatase, 1670 U/L (normal range: 115-359 U/L). The patient underwent renal biopsy and was diagnosed with clear cell carcinoma of the left kidney. He received 5 mg of axitinib twice daily for 3 months, because we thought that immediate radical surgery was not safe because of his poor performance status and laboratory data paraneoplastic syndrome. Fortunately, no serious adverse events were reported during this treatment. The patient convalesced during the administration of axitinib, and all laboratory data were restored to within normal limits after axitinib treatment. An abdominal CT after the axitinib therapy showed that the tumor diameter shrank by 56% . At that time, we were convinced that his renal tumor could be removed safely. Left radical nephrectomy was performed. The operation time was 95 min, and the estimated blood loss was 50 mL. No intraoperative or postoperative complications including wound healing delay or hemorrhage resulted from surgery. Macroscopic examination revealed a solid, yellowish-white tumor measuring 4 × 2.5 cm in size, with necrosis in the lower pole of the resected kidney . Pathological examination indicated pT3aN0M0, Furman grade 3, clear cell RCC with necrosis, hyaline degeneration, and hemosiderosis . Fifty percent of tumor tissue was necrosis, and it was central necrosis. The patient was asymptomatic and disease-free at 1 year post-diagnosis.