A 32-year-old, otherwise healthy Caucasian woman presented to her dentist with small, painful ulcers on her maxillary gingiva . An amoxicillin regimen for the presumed tooth infection was ineffective. Over the next month, the ulcer spread to involve the mandibular gingival, posterior alveolus, and retromolar trigone; concurrently; she became constitutionally unwell prompting a second course of antibiotics. After several days of worsening symptoms, our patient presented to the emergency department with unbearable trismus, necrotizing ulcers, and otalgia, requiring hospital admission. On admission, laboratory tests demonstrated an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (16.9×109/L), normal renal function (urea 7.2mmol/L, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 116ml/min/1.73m2, creatinine 53umol/L), and a very high C-reactive protein (CRP) (193.3mg/L). Necrotizing gingivitis with osteomyelitis was diagnosed and metronidazole and ceftriaxone were prescribed under specialty care.
Within the first three days in hospital the necrotizing region expanded into the maxillary and mandibular bone and eroded through the maxillary antrum, resulting in aoroantral fistula. Extraction of all maxillary teeth and three mandibular teeth, as well as extensive surgical debridement and curettage of the maxillary bone were performed. Further progression prompted a second round of debridement and curettage five days later.
Our patient failed to recover with antibiotic treatment and surgery throughout these first nine days in hospital. Her severely declining clinical status was apparent; she experienced disabling fatigue, fevers, and drenching night sweats. Morning joint stiffness throughout the extremities as well as a numb patch on the right thumb was noted. In addition, our patient’s otalgia had worsened as she developed hearing loss associated with bilateral tympanic membrane perforation. Laboratory testing demonstrated leukocytosis, anemia (83g/L from 128g/L on admission), an increasing CRP (299.2mg/L from 193.3mg/L), and hematuria with red blood cell casts.
At this point, a positive cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA) test and associated proteinase 3 ANCA (PR3-ANCA) levels (744.5U/ml) were received, suggesting a diagnosis of acute GPA. Our patient was reexamined in detail with specific attention to her history and physical examination features relevant to a GPA diagnosis. A thorough history revealed an active, healthy lifestyle without any significant stressors or past illnesses. Of possible consequence, we noted that she had occupational and personal exposure to various herbicides, black mold, and industrial solvents including acetone, without the use of personal protective equipment over the past 10 years. A physical examination revealed a gravely ill patient with trismus, hemorrhagic gingiva, inflamed otic canals obscured by serosanguinous discharge, bilaterally reduced air entry, inspiratory crackles as well as a patch of anesthesia on the palmar surface of the right thumb. Several 3 to 4mm erythematous nodular lesions on the dorsum of her left hand were observed.
Following the diagnosis of GPA, our patient was immediately treated with methylprednisone pulse therapy, and after several days intravenous (IV) cyclophosphamide was added. Relevant imaging tests and biopsies were carried out. Chest computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated multiple nodules, including a 2.8×3.0×1.9cm centrally cavitating pleural-based mass in the left apex, as well as bilateral pleural effusions. Histopathological examination of endobronchial biopsies from the right bronchus intermedius demonstrated necrotizing mucosal erosion and active inflammation.
Within days of treatment, dramatic improvement was seen. Our patient’s conductive hearing loss and otalgia began improving and laboratory test abnormalities including the previously elevated WBC count and CRP reversed. Due to our patient’s fertility concerns, rituximab - IV, 375mg/m2 - was substituted for cyclophosphamide. A four-week infusion cycle of rituximab along with prednisone, 60mg daily, was the core remission-inducing treatment regimen. A debriding procedure two weeks into treatment found that necrotic spread in her jaw had been halted. Chest CT imaging at one month demonstrated resolving lesions and no adverse changes.
Our patient was subsequently placed on a disease-modifying therapy regimen, including azathioprine and prednisone, and was followed by rheumatology, respirology and dental surgery specialists. Three months following her acute presentation, she underwent a partial surgical repair of the eroded maxillary antrum via iliac crest bone grafting. She continues to receive careful follow-up regarding her oral health post teeth extraction, repair of her maxillary antrum, as well as the severe damage done by the necrotizing vasculitic process to her left Eustachian tube and tympanic membrane. Our patient is regularly monitored through complete blood count (CBC), electrolyte, renal function, and CRP testing. Despite dealing with sequelae of the acute GPA, she has remained in remission from GPA for more than 15 months.