We report the case of a 54-year old male with intestinal failure due to a history of mesenteric ischemia and small bowel perforation caused by generalized atherosclerosis and chronic stenosis of the celiac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery. Initial surgical treatment consisted of a partial small bowel resection and creation of an end-jejunostomy, with subsequent total parenteral nutrition. Three years later, the patient was admitted at our center for intestinal transplantation. Since the remaining foregut organs (stomach, liver, pancreas and spleen) were only perfused by the inferior mesenteric artery via the anastomosis of Riolan, 2 weeks prior to transplantation (day-14) mesenteric revascularization was performed by means of an aorta-common hepatic artery bypass. Anal swabs taken before (day-14) and upon admission (day 0) were negative for vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and other MDRO. Prior to transplantation, a sample of allograft perfusion fluid was collected as part of the routinely pre-transplant evaluation and sent in for general microbiological testing (A, Table ). Further pre-transplant donor screening included testing for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, syphilis and toxoplasmosis.
On day 0, small bowel transplantation and partial ascending colon transplantation were performed. Induction therapy consisted of two subcutaneous doses of alemtuzumab (30 mg) before and 24 h after transplantation. Postoperative antimicrobial therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g QID) and micafungin (100 mg OD) and an immunosuppressive regime with tacrolimus (1 mg BID) and steroids were started. After the patient developed fever and blood infection parameters increased on day +2, a surgical revision was performed, intra-abdominal swabs were taken for microbiological testing and blood cultures (peripheral and central venous line) were drawn (P1, P2 and P3, Table ). Antibiotic therapy with vancomycin (1 g BID) was started on day +3 after E. faecium was detected in samples P1–P3. Further swabs (P4–P9) collected during a subsequent surgical revision were additionally sent in for microbiological testing. On day +4 antibiotic susceptibility testing results confirmed vancomycin resistance in the E. faecium isolates grown in samples P1–P3. Antibiotic therapy was modified from vancomycin to linezolid (600 mg BID), the central venous line was replaced as a preventive measure and contact precautions according to the hospital’s internal infection control standards were implemented. Microbiological results obtained on day +5 confirmed the presence of VRE in samples P4–P9 as well as in the allograft perfusion fluid (sample A).
A possible VRE transmission from the donor to the patient suggested by the presence of VRE in the allograft perfusion fluid was further investigated by analyzing VRE strains isolated from recipient and allograft via WGS. For this purpose, the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was employed as previously described . After quality trimming and de novo assembly of the sequences, the SeqSphere + software version 7.0.1 (Ridom GmbH, Münster, Germany) was used to compare coding regions gene by gene, performing a core genome multilocus sequence typing (cgMLST) and depicting the genetic relatedness of the strains in a minimum spanning tree. Sequences differing in three or less alleles were considered identical or very closely related . As observed in Fig. , patient isolates P1 through P5 and P7 through P9 were identical to the allograft isolate A, grouped in a single genetic cluster from which isolate P6 differs in only one allele. All analyzed isolates belonged to the sequence type ST80 and carried the glycopeptide resistance determinant vanB. The difference of 288 genes between the cluster and the genetically non-related reference genome of the E. faecium Aus0004 (accession number: NC_017022) highlights the very close genetic relatedness of the isolates within the detected cluster.
After continuous therapy with linezolid, control blood cultures remained negative and intra-abdominal swabs taken upon relaparotomy on day +18 showed no VRE growth.