A 55-year-old woman with known medical history of arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and aortic stenosis, presented with a subacute episode of visual loss started as an arcuate visual field defect in the left eye (LE) and evolved in the next days in a larger central defect. Visual symptoms were accompanied by the onset headache and diffuse muscular pain, in particular with proximal musculature involvement. Her younger brother was diagnosed a few years earlier with MELAS for relapsing episodes of intestinal pseudo-obstruction, followed by SLEs. In a short period of time he experienced a rapidly progressive cognitive decline, unfortunately leading to his death . He carried a high mutational load, estimated by Real-time PCR, with an amount of 52% in muscle tissue, 28% in urinary epithelial and 18% in peripheral blood. Instead, her sister here presented resulted to be a carrier of the m.3243A > G variant, with 12% of mutation load in urinary epithelial cells and no alteration detected in peripheral blood leukocytes. She did not undergo muscular biopsy. Two days after the onset of symptoms she underwent ophthalmologic examination that revealed optic disc swelling for which prednisone 50 mg/day was started, then reduced to 25 mg/day after twelve days of therapy. One week after symptoms onset she developed left ear tinnitus, orbital pain exacerbated by ocular movements and throbbing temporal pain extended to the auricular and masseteric region worsened by chewing. Diffuse muscular pain with asthenia were still reported as well. Two weeks after the onset of symptoms the case was referred to our hospital for evaluation. She was taking oral olmesartan 40 mg daily, hydrochlorothiazide 20 mg daily, prednisone 25 mg daily. She has not had any intercurrent infections or assumption of drugs with putative mitochondrial toxicity. Therapy with ubidecarenone and L-Arginine were immediately started at admission. L-Arginine was administered intravenously for the first five days at 0.5gr/kg daily. Ubidecarenone was started and continued with a posology of 300 mg/day subdivided in three administrations. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye (RE) and 20/20 in the LE. Visual field exam confirmed a dense diffuse scotoma in the affected eye . Ophthalmologic evaluation confirmed left eye optic neuropathy consisting in unilateral swelling of the optic nerve head, with cotton wool spots, splinter haemorrhages and venous congestion. The right optic disc was normal and showed a physiological excavation. Mild pigmentary changes of the posterior pole, characteristic for MELAS, were detected bilaterally . Autofluorescence images confirmed this finding . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed segmental perfusion delay in the optic disc, focal telangiectasia and papillary leakage, while indocyanine angiography ruled out delayed filling of the choroid. Late phase FA ruled out other signs of ocular inflammation such as vasculitis . OCT scans detected retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickening only in the LE and an initial thinning of macular ganglion cell layer (GCL) . Visual evoked potential showed a reduction in amplitude with prolonged P100 in the left eye. Brain MRI did not show optic nerve inflammation or any other pathological feature, while spectroscopy revealed abnormal lactate peak in the CSF. To rule out atypical presentation of multiple sclerosis (MS), neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD), spinal cord MRI was also performed nineteen days after the onset of symptoms and did not show demyelinating lesions at all. Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) and diffuse weighted imaging (DWI) sequences were performed too without any findings supporting inflammatory or SLE-related lesions. Serum myelin oligodendrocyte glyco (MOG) and aquaporin auto-antibodies were found to be negative. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) and C Reactive Protein (CRP) were assessed for the first time after ten days of steroids therapy and were both negative. Fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and temporal artery biopsy were performed without any findings that might support large-vessel vasculitis of inflammatory processes. Other possible risk factors for non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) such as anaemia, diabetes, nocturnal dip, sleep apnoea were investigated and excluded. Serum lactate was 1.7 mmol/L. CSF analysis was unremarkable. CSF infection was excluded and oligoclonal bands were absent. mtDNA sequencing analysis was performed and ruled out the possible presence of mitochondrial mutations known to be associated with MELAS/LHON overlap syndrome. Mitochondrial sequencing analysis confirmed the m.3243A > G transition, and excluded the three most common LHON mutations, as well as the m.3376G > A, described in literature for being associated with LHON/MELAS overlap syndrome.
At the follow up visit after four months, visual field defects remained stable , while the swelling of the optic disc resolved leaving an atrophic optic nerve head .