A 36-year-old man, police officer by profession, hailing from Jammu, presented to our hospital, with a history of snakebite over left foot when he accidently stepped over it. He was immediately taken to state medical college where he received around 20 vials of anti-snake venom and IV fluids, antibiotics, and other supportive care. On the very next day of bite, patient started having decreased urine output along with deranged renal functions. In view of AKI, patient was started on hemodialysis. He was then brought to our hospital for further care on day 3 of snakebite.
After initial evaluation and stabilization in emergency room (ER), he was immediately admitted to medical intensive care unit. He was received in dull drowsy state, but arousable and had stable hemodynamic. Chest examination revealed bilateral decreased air entry. On local examination, swelling at the site of bite with cellulitis and blister formation was noted.
His baseline investigations showed: hemoglobin (Hb) 7.6 g/dL, total leucocyte count (TLC) 15,000, and platelets ∼50,000. Had normal coagulation profile with activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 15 seconds and International Normalized Ratio (INR) ∼1.19, and his bedside clotting time was around 5 minutes and bleeding time was around 32 seconds. His kidney function tests were deranged with urea 167 mg/dL and creatinine 6.17 mg/dL, along with total creatine phosphokinase (CPK) ∼52,168 indicating rhabdomyolysis.
Liver function tests showed transaminitis: serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase/pyruvic transminase (SGOT/PT) ∼1,985/252 and total bilirubin 4.56 with direct 0.64 and indirect ∼3.92. Also, had component of sepsis with procalcitonin of 4.79. He was started on oxygen support at flow ∼2 L, intravenous antibiotics, and was given another 10 vials of antivenom. He continued to have acute kidney shutdown with anuric status, for which he was supported on hemodialysis heparin free and ultrafiltration. Further had persistent fall in Hb requiring multiple blood transfusions and during workup for anemia, hemolysis came out to be positive with fragmented cells and spherocytes noted on peripheral blood film and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was high ∼4,128.
Almost after 1 week of snakebite, he had worsening of hypoxemia and developed bilateral infiltrates on chest X-ray along with pleural effusion. He was then taken of high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen support with flow ∼50 L/minute and FiO2 requirement was around 0.4. He then had first episode of hemoptysis. CT chest done at this time showed: multifocal peribronchial air space opacification with ground-glass opacification in bilateral upper and right middle lobe along with moderate pleural effusion with underlying lung collapse ( and ). On the basis of clinical and radiological suspicion: probable diagnosis of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage was kept and steroids were started. Inj. methylprednisolone 80 mg/day (∼1 mg/kg/day) was started in two divided doses and that was continued for ∼15 days. Thereafter, steroids were tapered off in next 5 days. His coagulation profile was monitored, which was still within normal limits/INR ∼1.17 and thrombocytopenia had recovered to ∼2.5 lakh. He was continued on HFNC oxygen support and bilateral pleural drain was inserted for moderate effusion which on analysis yielded transudative picture and had been sterile.
Two-dimensional echocardiography showed good biventricular systolic functioning with ejection fraction (EF) ∼55% and ultrasound abdomen showed bulky hypoechoic bilateral kidneys with reduced corticomedullary differentiation (CMD).
Autoimmune pathology in view of pulmonary and renal involvement was ruled out as antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (C-ANCA), and perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA) came out to be negative. His sputum culture grew E. coli and antibiotics were upgraded to meropenem. Post-steroid and other supportive care along with regular hemodialysis, patient did not show any signs of improvement clinically and hemoptysis continued with progressive fall in Hb and persistent AKI.
Hence, plasma exchange therapy was considered as a rescue therapy.
On 20th day of admission, first plasma exchange was performed using centrifugation technology via internal jugular venous access. 5% Hum albumin was used as replacement fluid and monitoring for his electrolytes/fluid balance and proteins and coagulation profile was done. Post-first session of plex, his renal parameters started improving with urine output ∼25 to >50 mL/hour. After third plex, he had secondary sepsis hit with leukocytosis and procalcitonin ∼21; hence, polymyxin B was added empirically. He was then electively intubated in view of worsening type I respiratory failure.
Five sessions of consecutive plasma exchange were done and intermittent hemodialysis continued for renal support. During the further course of illness, patient started showing clinical signs of recovery with improving oxygen requirement and settling leukocytosis. His renal function improved and creatinine started settling to 3.5 mg/dL. His urine output gradually improved from initially 500 mL/24 hour pre plex to around ∼2,100 mL/24 hour post-third session of plex.
Pulmonary hemorrhage settled down as evident by minimal tracheal bleed and static Hb. Bronchoscopy was done, which showed clear airways.
A repeat high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest showed multifocal peribronchial consolidations and bilateral effusion ( and ). He was continued on antibiotics and supportive care. Finally, after successful weaning trials, he was extubated, following which, he maintained well on low-flow oxygen. He remained hemodynamically stable throughout the hospital stay. His serial X-rays showed clearing out infiltrates with residual right basal collapse consolidation. He was finally discharged in stable condition. At time of discharge, he had creatinine of ∼1.2 with good urine output and cleared out chest X-ray. On follow-up in outpatient department (OPD), patient was found to be healthy with no sequelae, had fully recovered AKI, and his creatinine was 0.96 and chest X-ray was clear .