A 37-year-old man with reflux symptomatic was sent to endoscopic examination. During the examination strabismus was striking. The patient reported about eye operation with 1 year of age, due to a retinoblastoma. Both eyes were affected. The right eye was enucleated. The left eye was treated with laser. There was no tumor relapse. A germline mutation in RB1 was detected in 1988. In family history there is no further case of retinoblastoma. Due to tumor prevention the patient underwent endoscopic examination. In gastroscopy, a 1 cm in diameter polypous lesion was found in the antrum of the stomach. It was suspicious to be a hyperplastic polyp or an adenoma of gastric mucosa. The polypous lesion was resected endoscopically and was sent to histopathological investigation. Representative 4 μm sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from the tumor specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and periodic acid-Schiff. Immunohistochemical staining was performed using the standard avidin-biotin method with antibodies against smooth muscle actin (SMA, 1:20, Dako Cytomation, Glostrup, Denmark), S100 (1:500, Dako Cytomation), CD34 (1:500, Immunotech, Marseille, France) and KIT (1:50, Dako Cytomation). The proliferative activity was assessed by staining the tissue with the antibody MiB-1 (1:100, Dako Cytomation).
The polypous lesion, 1 cm in diameter, showed regular foveolar gastric glands and a diffuse spindle cell infiltrate in the mucosa. The spindle cells were arranged in parallel and whorl like bundles. The nuclei were elongated with plump ends and focally mild atypia . There was an increased mitotic rate with 20 mitotic figures in 50 high power fields. In the immunoassay, the tumor cells stained strongly positive for SMA and negative for KIT, CD34, and S100. The proliferative activity, identified by MiB-1, was approximately 20% . The spindle cell infiltrate was classified as an unusual intramucosal leiomyosarcoma of low grade malignancy. The diagnosis was confirmed by a referee pathologist. The tumor achieved the resection mark of the biopsy focally. In endosonographic monitoring 4 weeks later, there was no tumor residuum observed. Because of tumor malignancy, mucosectomy followed. The biopsy revealed a scar next to regular mucosa and lamina muscularis mucosae. Tumor residuum was not seen. In the literature were neither data of tumor treatment nor data with long time follow-up of intramucosal leiomyosarcoma available. The clinical outcome was not predictable. According to an expert of the European Sarcoma Study Group, a limited resection of the gastric antrum was recommended and done 4 weeks later. Reexamination revealed a chronic gastritis and a scar after mucosectomy, but no tumor residuum. Perigastric lymph nodes and a paracaval lymph node were free of tumor. A R0-resection with high safety of the resection margin was achieved. The endoscopic and endosonographic follow-up was inconspicuous since 3 years.