The proband was a 63 year-old, Caucasian male who presented to the NCI Clinical Genetics Branch in October 2004 for evaluation of familial testicular cancer. He developed a left testicular pure seminoma at age 28 (per medical records; no pathology was available for review); he underwent a left radical orchiectomy followed by adjuvant cobalt irradiation to the retroperitoneum, and has remained free of testicular cancer.
At his initial NIH visit, the patient reported resection of multiple colonic polyps on successive colonoscopies, beginning in his early 50 s. Materials from several excised polyps were reviewed at the NIH Laboratory of Pathology, and revealed a mixed polyposis of 5 adenomatous polyps, 2 hamartomatous polyps , and multiple hyperplastic polyps.
Physical examination revealed a muscular, mesomorphic white male (he is an avid body-builder) with multiple subcutaneous lipomas in the extremities and trunk. He had multiple dark brown to black, irregularly-shaped pigmented macules on the chest, back, arms, and legs, which were clinically suggestive of dysplastic nevi. Biopsy of the clinically most atypical lesion showed a simple lentigo, without melanocytic atypia. Protocol-related blood work, including testosterone, estradiol, chemistry panel, prostate specific antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, follicle stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, and beta-HCG, were normal. Ultrasound of the right testis showed early microlithiasis. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed an unexpected left inferomedial renal mass , which was confirmed by MRI. Further evaluation of the left kidney mass was recommended, but not pursued due to other medical issues.
He returned for a scheduled clinic visit one year later and reported having an elevated growth hormone (GH) level detected during a complementary/alternative health evaluation. The patient also stated that his head and hands had been "getting bigger". He reported taking various dietary supplements, none of which was found to contain androgens upon review of their ingredients, as well as testosterone gel, which was started at the time of his complementary/alternative health evaluation due to a low serum testosterone level. On examination, he had an acromegalic appearance, including protruding supra-orbital ridges, a prognathic jaw, wide nose, and diffuse soft-tissue thickening of the hands, all of which were judged clinically to be more prominent when compared with the year before.
Laboratory studies demonstrated a normal fasting glucose, elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) [943 ng/ml; normal range 71–290 ng/ml] and IGF binding protein-3 [8.4 μg/ml; normal range 3.2–6.6 μg/ml]. A pituitary MRI revealed a hypoenhancing, diffusely-enlarged pituitary measuring approximately 2 cm, consistent with an adenoma . A follow-up renal CT showed the left inferomedial kidney mass had grown compared with the study performed one year earlier; the adrenal glands were normal.
On January 23, 2006, the patient underwent trans-sphenoidal resection of the pituitary mass, yielding a GH-producing adenoma. On February 22, 2006, he underwent a left nephrectomy for a stage III, poorly-differentiated renal cell carcinoma, with sarcomatoid features . By November 2006, his growth hormone levels had returned to normal, and he had no evidence of recurrent kidney cancer.
Detailed family history review revealed a son with seminoma (confirmed by outside pathology report) at age 34 (cancer-free at age 36), and a sister who developed urinary bladder cancer (death certificate confirmation) at age 53. His son had no evidence of lipomatosis or multiple lentigines on examination at the time of study enrollment, and has had a negative screening colonoscopy. The proband's father was reported to have lipomatosis, but was deceased. There is no history of other benign or malignant neoplasms reported in the rest of the family.
Based on his personal history of multiple cancers, a pituitary adenoma, multiple pigmented skin lesions, multiple lipomas, and multiple colon polyps with varying histology, the patient underwent genetic testing for Cowden syndrome (the PTEN gene), Carney complex (the PRKAR1A gene), and multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 1 (the MEN1 or menin gene). No germline mutations were detected in any of these genes.