The patient was a 58-year-old male without comorbidities, whose Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG-PS) was grade one. His surgical history was as follows : in 2001, he was diagnosed with PMP at the time of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which was judged to be incurable at the previous hospital. In 2004, he was introduced to us, and CRS, including total peritoneal resection, pyloric gastrectomy, splenectomy, and right hemicolectomy with HIPEC (cisplatin 50 mg) was performed (peritoneal cancer index (PCI) = 28). In 2008, first repeat CRS, including small bowel resection and partial gastrectomy with HIPEC (cisplatin 100 mg) was performed (PCI = 14). In 2011, second repeat CRS with HIPEC (cisplatin 100 mg, mitomycin 20 mg) was performed (PCI = 6). In 2014, a third repeat CRS, including small bowel resection, was performed. In 2016, a fourth repeat CRS, including partial hepatectomy with HIPEC (mitomycin 20 mg) for recurrence of the round ligament of the liver, was performed. At that time, the site around the pancreatic head was ablated via electrocautery, and a postoperative pancreatic fistula was observed.
In 2017, enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed three recurrent tumors: a tumor 5 cm in size was observed from the hepatic hilum to the pancreatic head, which infiltrated into the main pancreatic duct . Other tumors 2 cm in size on the lower surface of the liver and on the caudal side of the remnant stomach were observed (PCI = 7). Therefore, we decided to perform the fifth repeat CRS, including HPD.
The abdomen was opened by an inverted T-shaped incision using the incision of the previous operation. We found adhesions of the small intestine from around the liver to the lower abdomen. First, we began sufficient detachment of the adhesions for the reconstruction of pancreatojejunostomy and cholangiojejunostomy. Then, we resected the recurrent tumors on the lower surface of the liver and the caudal side of the remnant stomach.
Since it was difficult to approach the pancreatic head directly from the cranial side, we first mobilized the duodenum and pancreatic head from the retroperitoneal adhesions. The jejunum was pulled out to the right and dissected at its origin. We identified the distal side of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) at the inferior margin of the pancreas and the portal vein (PV) at the back of the hepatoduodenal ligament. The PV and SMV were detached from the posterior surface along with the pancreas. The pancreatic nerve plexus II was dissected along with the pancreas head, then the pancreatic nerve plexus I was dissected on the pancreatic side. We identified the splenic vein and dissected the neck of the pancreas on the PV. After the transection of the pancreas, we identified and encircled the common hepatic arteries. We resected a part of the liver around the hepatic hilum, then exposed and encircled the Glissonean pedicle. The liver resection line is shown in Fig. b. The left hepatic artery was identified in the left Glissonean pedicle. Afterward, we identified and encircled the proper hepatic artery and the gastroduodenal artery, and then the gastroduodenal artery was dissected. After subtracting the PV and the hepatic arteries from the encircled Glissonean pedicle, we cut the left and right bile ducts and removed the specimen . The resection sites of the bile ducts visualized via MRI are shown in Fig. d.
Complete cytoreduction was achieved (completeness of cytoreduction (CC) = 0). HIPEC was not performed.
Reconstruction was performed using the modified Child method. A duct-to-mucosal and end-to-side pancreatojejunostomy were used. Cholangiojejunostomy was performed in both segments of the bile duct. The operative time was 697 min, and the blood loss volume was 1453 ml.
The postoperative pathological diagnosis was a recurrence of PMP, which is equivalent to peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis (PMCA) . The mucinous tumor infiltrated into the pancreatic parenchyma destructively, and a mucinous lake was developed in the liver parenchyma .
A postoperative complication of cholangitis, Clavien–Dindo classification grade 2, was observed. He was discharged on the 22nd postoperative day. Although ECOG-PS deteriorated slightly, he survived without recurrence 4 years after HPD and was followed up at the outpatient clinic.