A 68-year-old Asian woman, 145 cm in height and 45 kg in weight, with a compression fracture of the third lumbar vertebra was admitted for vertebroplasty. Her previous medical history included osteoporosis, and her previous surgical history included appendectomy, removal of a thyroid nodule, and recent repair of the right rotator cuff under general anesthesia. All of the preoperative evaluations were unremarkable except diastolic dysfunction grade I in preoperative echocardiography.
After applying the standard patient monitoring system, including electrocardiography, noninvasive measurement of blood pressure, and pulse oximetry, vertebroplasty was performed with the patient in a prone position. To relieve anxiety, sedation was induced with sevoflurane 8 vol % and oxygen 3L/min via mask ventilation for 2 minutes. Sedation was maintained with sevoflurane of 2~3 vol % with the patient’s head turned sideways. End tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) was monitored while maintaining spontaneous ventilation.
During vertebroplasty, 6 ml of bone cement (V-STEADY, Sungwon Medical, Korea) was injected through a hollow needle into the fractured bone. There were no noticeable events during the procedure.
After the procedure, the patient was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit, at which sudden hemoptysis occurred. The amount of hemoptysis could not be measured in exact scales, but the amount of frank bleeding was enough to have drenched 4 to 5 sheets of (4 x 4) gauze. As the patient began to show complaints of dyspnea, oxygen saturation was as low as 80 %. After application of 5 liters of oxygen via facial mask, the oxygen saturation showed recovery up to 93%. The vital signs at that time were stable, and no symptoms other than dyspnea complained. Coarse breathing sounds were heard in both lung field. In the postoperative chest x-ray taken immediately afterwards, newly formed perihilar consolidation and air bronchograms which were not present in the preoperative radiograph images were observed in both lung fields .
While the patient insisted that her symptoms were tolerable, she was transferred to a tertiary medical institution for further evaluation. The vital signs at the time of transfer were stable; body temperature of 36.8 °C, pulse rate 82 beats/min, respiration 20/min, and blood pressure 120 / 75 mmHg. The oxygen saturation was 97%. The computed tomography (CT) findings were as stated: diffuse ground glass opacity and interlobular septal thickening in both lungs central portion . Bronchoscopy was not performed because the symptoms improved and the patient did not want it.
In comparison to the preoperative hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL, hemoglobin level decreased to 8.5 mg 2 days after admission. The patient received supportive care and discharged without further events. The patient requested an outpatient clinic follow up, but did not visit until 6 months of discharge.