A 57-year-old Chinese man complained of fever and lumbago for the last 3 d.
The patient presented to the emergency room with a history of sudden onset persistent right flank pain, fever and fatigue for 3 d. POCUS was performed immediately and EPN was initially diagnosed. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to septic shock and an abdominal CT scan was carried out.
The patient had a 10-year history of poorly controlled diabetes.
The patient had a 30-year history of smoking and drinking, which he had recently stopped.
On admission to the ICU, physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.8 °C, heart rate of 130 bpm, and blood pressure of 108/74 mmHg with a moderate dose of continuously pumped norepinephrine (0.56 μg/kg/min) and respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min. His heart beat fast without murmurs and lungs sounded clear without crackles. His abdomen was soft and was not tender. He had severe knocking tenderness in the right flank. These findings indicated septic shock provoked by acute pyelonephritis.
Table shows the initial laboratory findings. Blood analysis revealed leukocytosis of 10.37 × 109/L with neutrophils of 81%, hemoglobin of 11.9 g/dL, and thrombocytopenia (platelet count 69 × 109 /L) induced by sepsis. Alanine aminotransferase (21 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase (23 IU/L), and bilirubin (0.58 mg/dL) were normal. He had a slightly elevated serum creatinine level (1.66 mg/dL) indicating acute kidney injury induced by severe infection of the kidney and septic shock. Inflammation markers were significantly increased, including C-reactive protein (175.1 mg/L) and procalcitonin (> 100 ng/mL). The glycosylated hemoglobin level (9%) was elevated, indicating poorly controlled diabetes. His urine analysis showed heavy pyuria with a white blood cell count of 325/μL. Arterial blood gas analysis on admission showed a pH of 7.43, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 36.8 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen of 64.4 mmHg, bicarbonate of 24.8 mmoL/L, and an elevated lactate level of 2.9 mmoL/L with room air, indicating septic shock. Blood and urine samples were sent for culture, with positive results of extended spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli bacteremia.
Emergency POCUS on day 3 after symptom onset showed hyperechoic spotted or patchy foci in the right hepatorenal space with dirty shadowing and comet-tail artifacts . We called this imaging feature a “falls” sign to describe the shadowing and “comet tails” radiating from the gas gathering in the hepatorenal space. It also presented a mini waterfall in Chinese landscape painting style . The typical imaging findings speeded up the initial diagnosis of EPN.
An abdominal CT scan on day 3 after symptom onset revealed gas collection in the right perirenal space, an enlarged right kidney with perinephric fat stranding (PFS) and mild right hydronephrosis without urinary stones. The CT scan confirmed the initial diagnosis of EPN based on emergency POCUS.