A 12-year-old boy with a 2-year history of bipolar I disorder presented to the hospital with a self-inflicted GSW to the head. This attempted suicide occurred in the context of a major depressive episode. On presentation, the boy's Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 6. Entry and exit wounds were evident in the left frontal and right temporal regions, respectively. He was fluid resuscitated.
Computed tomography (CT) head revealed bony, soft tissue, and parenchymal injury consistent with a GSW to bilateral frontal lobes . Multiple radiopaque fragments (i.e. shattered bullet) were visualized. Intracranial hemorrhages included an irregularly shaped hematoma across both frontal lobes (bullet trajectory), plus subdural hematomas along the cerebral falx, over the left temporal lobe with extension into a left middle cranial fossa arachnoid cyst, and over the left convexity. There was a leftward midline shift of approximately 5 mm.
The patient was rushed to the operating room (OR) for bifrontal craniectomy. Active bleeding from the right distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) was identified and hemostasis achieved. The hematoma associated with the bullet's tract in the right frontal lobe was drained, the falx cerebri crossed, and the hematoma from the left frontal lobe also evacuated. An external ventricular drain (EVD) was inserted.
The patient had a long and complicated hospital stay, including development of a left hemiplegia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) of the circle of Willis done on post-operative day 4 showed multiple areas of restricted diffusion in the right MCA distribution, parasagittal frontal lobes, and left frontal lobe, with scattered areas of hemorrhage . There was an asymmetric decrease in the right internal carotid artery circulation, suggesting vasospasm. Other complications included seizures, cerebral salt wasting, wound dehiscence, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, cognitive deficits, dysphagia, and speech and language difficulty. By 3-month follow-up, the patient exhibited phenomenal recovery. He spoke with a slow, but deliberate speech. He answered questions appropriately and was able to tell jokes. He was participating in homebound schooling and had taken up tennis. Attempts to wean antiepileptic drugs resulted in clinical seizures; hence, he was maintained on levetiracetam. Four months later, he returned to school in a regular classroom with minimal special education support. He has consistently scored A's and B's in school since making his return.
Approximately 2 years prior to the accident, this boy was seen by the psychiatry service for mood lability, anxiety, depression, psychomotor agitation, indiscretion, irritability, and grandiose ideas. His symptoms were consistent with bipolar I disorder by Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) IV criteria, and he was started on lamotrigine and risperidone, with a good response. By 7 months following the accident, the boy's symptoms of bipolar disorder had regressed completely and he no longer required mood-stabilizing or antipsychotic drugs. His depressive symptoms were maintained in full remission for >8 months on citalopram. However, he demonstrated continued hyperactivity, distractibility, and impulsivity. He would poke, pinch, and bite family members and relatives (behaviors not previously demonstrated) and think it was playful. He would also make threatening statements (i.e. “I am going to kill myself” or “I am going to kill someone”), for example, when angered or being disciplined by his mother. These were impulsive statements that he did not wish to carry out minutes after calming down. On examination, he was distractible, requiring persistent redirection. He was given a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and started initially on methylphenidate and later switched to atomoxetine due to poor tolerance (i.e. side effect of dysphoria). He has demonstrated a good response to therapy. Formal neuropsychological testing was done 6 months following the injury. The patient obtained a full scale IQ score of 93 (average) on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-IV (WISC-IV). He showed above average verbal comprehension, average working memory, and below average perceptual reasoning and processing speed. Measures of executive function revealed difficulty with inhibition, processing speed, inattention, and alternating attention. The boy's academic functioning was above age-appropriate norms, with the exception of math and reading fluency tasks.