A 38-year-old man of Nilo-Hamitic ethnicity was admitted to our spine unit with paraplegia following an injury to his lumbar spine. He was hit in the back while trying to escape from a collapsing concrete wall. He presented with severe lower back pain, inability to move his lower limbs, urine retention and altered sensation in his legs and feet. He was fully conscious, and had an obvious hyperlordotic deformity and bruising in his lumbar region. He had muscle power grade 0/5 and cutaneous sensory loss below the L3 level bilaterally. He had no perianal sensation and rectal tone was absent. We graded him as ASIA A. Plain radiographs showed sagittal misalignment of his lumbar spine with complete anterior translation of L4 on L5. There also was a left transverse process fracture of L4. We had no access to computed tomography scans and magnetic resonance imaging.
The patient was stabilized and had spine surgery 4 days after injury. He had no chronic diseases and this was his index surgery. He was positioned prone on a spine frame and his spine approached through a longitudinal midline incision, exposing L3-S1 vertebrae. We found: extensive contusion and disruption of his musculoligamentous structures; an obvious dislocation at the L4/5 level with disruption of the zygapophyseal joints; fractures of the pars, tip of the spinous process and left transverse process of the L4 vertebra; and cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Decompression of the neural elements was done first, through an L4 laminectomy. The thecal sac was found to have ruptured, but with no obvious injury to the cauda equina. Good reduction of the dislocation was achieved through a process of distraction and leverage of the L4 vertebra using a laminar spreader and periosteal elevators. Posterolateral spinal fusion was then done using pedicle screw instrumentation. Pedicle screws were placed bilaterally into the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies using a free hand technique. Then, pre-bent titanium rods were placed in the screw heads and the screw caps tightened. A bone graft was then harvested from the right posterior iliac crest; and together with morselized bone obtained from the surgical site, the graft was packed into the lateral gutters. The dura was carefully repaired and wound closure done in the standard manner. There was no intraoperative fluoroscopic guidance or neurophysiological monitoring during the entire procedure.
The patient started regaining motor power 48 hours after surgery. Two months postoperatively, his hip flexion had improved to muscle power grade 4/5; knee extension, dorsiflexion of his feet and big toe had improved to grade 3/5; but dorsiflexion was still absent (grade 0/5). He also still had bladder dysfunction and was using a condom catheter. We graded him as ASIA D at the last follow-up. He is currently in a wheelchair and undergoing rehabilitation.