A 37-year-old man was referred to the Department of Oral-Maxillofacial Surgery, Dentistry and Orthodontics at the University of Tokyo Hospital for diagnosis and management of a swelling in the right submandibular region, which had been present for approximately 1 month and was associated with sublingual discomfort on eating . On clinical examination, the swelling was localized to the right side of the floor of the mouth , and the amount of saliva produced from the right orifice of the right Wharton’s (submandibular) duct was reduced. Computed tomography (CT) views revealed a 50 × 36 mm submandibular adenopathy with a clear border but no regional lymph node enlargement. The provisional diagnosis was of submandibular gland inflammation, with a differential diagnosis of malignant lymphoma (ML). Panoramic radiography showed no radiolucent areas that would be characteristic of bony erosion, invasion or destruction, nor were there any radiopaque areas that may be indicative of a sialolith. The medical history was unremarkable. The results of cytology investigations in the right lateral region of the neck indicated a Class II lesion. Exploration of the right orifice of the right Wharton’s duct restored the volume of saliva to normal. Taken together, these findings suggested that the right submandibular swelling was caused by inflammation of the submandibular gland secondary to obstruction of the salivary duct. However, after exploration, the swelling enlarged rapidly and the patient was admitted to hospital for biopsy and further investigations without delay. Fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) CT imaging showed maximum intensity signals in the submandibular area and lymphadenopathy in the axillary, inguinal and deep cervical nodes , findings that are highly suspicious of ML. Surprisingly, immunological and hematological investigations revealed the presence of anti-HIV-1/2 antibodies, HIV-1 ribonucleic acid (3200 copies/ml) and increased LDH levels; however, the levels of sIL-2R and other parameters were normal . More detailed immunological examination found that anti-VCA-IgG and EBNA antibodies were increased, although anti-VCA-IgM antibodies were at normal levels . Taken together, these findings indicated a likely diagnosis of HIV-associated malignant lymphoma with no involvement of Epstein Barr virus (EBV). The patient was referred to the Department of Hematology and Oncology at our institution, and, as he was unaware of his HIV-positive status, he was also referred to the Department of Infectious Diseases.
At the same time, we also undertook a biopsy of the right submandibular area under local anesthesia. The swelling had a clear border covered with a membrane and exhibited no adhesions to the surrounding tissue. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed numerous pathognomonic apoptotic cells with a so-called ‘starry-sky’ appearance . The c-myc translocation was identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization, which identified that the rearrangement was positive for IgH/MYC, but negative for IgH/BCL-2 . Furthermore, representative fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis showed negative staining for T-cell associated markers (CD3, CD4 and CD8) and positive staining for B cell-associated antigens (CD19, CD20 and the germinal center-associated marker, CD10; Figure ). The final diagnosis of HIV-associated BL based on the revised World Health Organization (WHO) classification was confirmed from the clinical, hematological, radiological, histopathological, immunohistochemical and cytochemical analyses. According to a classification based on the Ann Arbor scheme in conjunction with FDG-PET, the disease was diagnosed as being at Stage III.
HIV infection was treated with highly active anti-retroviral therapy at a specialist center, and BL was treated with four cycles of R-HyperCVAD/R-MA chemotherapy administered without radiotherapy. Two years after diagnosis, he continues to receive treatment at the same hospital with no evidence of recurrence. The patient has no apparent risk factors for HIV infection.