We observed a 41-year-old Caucasian male patient who underwent, at the age of 10 years, resection of epileptogenic tubers for tuberous sclerosis. He was also treated with anticonvulsants for postoperative secondary refractory epilepsy (last therapy: phenobarbital 200mg per day; levetiracetam 1000mg per day; lamotrigine 150mg per day; vigabatrin 1500mg per day). He had giant kidney angiomyolipomas and polycystic kidney disease. At 35 years old, he was started on standard three-weekly HD treatment required for end-stage renal disease. A bilateral nephrectomy was then performed.
Our patient developed severe 2HPT, and was managed by paricalcitol (Zemplar®, 5μg three times a week) and sevelamer (Renvela®, 7.2g per day). Subsequently, he developed acute alcoholic pancreatitis, and during this period his compliance to therapy was insufficient. In addition, he was ineligible for transplantation because of his severe comorbidities. His 2HPT became resistant to medical treatment and was associated with an iPTH serum level of 1123pg/mL (normal range 4.6 to 58.1pg/mL), serum calcium of 7.3mg/dL (normal range 8.9 to 10.3mg/dL, value corrected with serum albumin), serum phosphate (P) of 4.7mg/dL (normal range 2.4 to 4.1mg/dL) and 25-hydroxy vitamin D of 15ng/mL (normal range 30 to 74ng/mL) . Cinacalcet hydrochloride (30mg per day) was administered from January 2010, and the dose was titrated upwards in the following period. In March 2011, his iPTH level was 1367pg/mL, and a cinacalcet hydrochloride dosage of 180mg per day was required. Our patient was referred to surgery for 2HPT resistant to medical treatment, associated with persistently elevated serum iPTH levels and clinical symptoms - anemia resistant to erythropoiesis-stimulating agent therapy, arthromyalgias, osteopenia and mood alterations. However, due to several intervening complications (arteriovenous fistula closure, catheter infection), surgery was postponed and performed in February 2012.
Preoperative instrumental work-up had consisted of measurements of his iPTH, calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, free tri-iodothyronine, free thyroxine, thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroglobulin serum levels; high resolution neck ultrasound (US); ear, nose and throat examination; and technetium-99m sestamibi scintigraphy. The LIAISON® intact PTH Assay (DiaSorin Inc., Stillwater, MN, USA), based on a chemiluminescence immunoassay, was used for the quantitative determination of iPTH. A cardiac evaluation included a 12-lead echocardiogram and epiaortic two-dimensional and color Doppler transthoracic echocardiogram. US examination showed two bilateral hypoechoic hyperplastic parathyroid glands, of 2.8×1.5×1.5cm (right gland) and 2.3×1.3×1.4cm (left gland). A technetium-99 sestamibi scintigraphy revealed hyperactive uptake activity in the same areas. Twelve months after initiating cinacalcet hydrochloride therapy, a regression of the parathyroid gland hyperplasia was detected by US (right gland: 2.2×1.0×0.9cm; left gland: 1.9×1.0×0.7cm).
After an extensive neck exploration, including comprehensive exploration of the thyrothymic ligament, bilateral thymic tongues and the jugular-carotid axis to rule out the presence of ectopic and supernumerary glands, only three glands were removed. Extemporary histological examination confirmed the nature of these removed glands. We performed a, presumed total, PTx, not associated with autoimplantation. We also carried out a right loboisthmusectomy associated with thyrothymic ligament resection to look for an intrathyroidal parathyroid gland. Parathyroid tissue was not cryopreserved for re-transplant.
Our patient’s iPTH serum level was 629pg/mL before anesthesia induction, 45pg/mL 20 minutes after surgery, and 4pg/mL 24 hours after surgery. Severe hypocalcemia was observed postoperatively, which was, however, never associated with hypocalcemic seizures. A pathological examination showed three hyperplastic nodular parathyroid glands and a multifocal small papillary thyroid carcinoma. The macroscopic parathyroid gland features are reported in Figure . Parathyroid tissue showed diffuse hyperplasia of chief cells with minimal fat. A focally nodular pattern was observed, while infarction, and fibrous or cystic degeneration were not observed. In order to assess the degree of apoptosis in the examined parathyroid tissue, an immunohistochemical study with the B-cell lymphoma-2 protein was performed, with adequate controls, using a monoclonal antibody, clone 124-Ventana® (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ, USA). No B-cell lymphoma-2 positive-staining cells were detected in any of the examined glands.
Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on day 4. Hypoparathyroidism (iPTH <4pg/mL) associated with persisting severe hypocalcemia was recorded two weeks and one month after surgery. Two months postoperatively, our patient had a subarachnoid hemorrhage and was moved to our intensive unit care in a comatose status. Fourteen days later, after recovery to generally acceptable clinical conditions, our patient was discharged.