The patient, a 73-year-old Chinese man, with no significant past medical history, presented with hematuria and was initially treated with a left nephroureterectomy in May 2009. The pathology report showed a papillary transitional cell carcinoma in the renal pelvis measuring 2.6 cm with evidence of lymphovascular invasion. At that time, the patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy and did well until October 2010.
In October 2010, the patient underwent staging workup which revealed multiple pulmonary metastases. He received 7 cycles of gemcitabine combined with carboplatin. Initially, he experienced response to treatment. However, there were residual pulmonary nodules and these were noted to be stable in repeat restaging study.
In September 2011, the patient sought evaluation at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center for further care. Due to residual pulmonary nodules, he received 2 courses of dose-dense MVAC (Methotrexate 30 mg/m2, doxorubicin 30 mg/m2, vinblastine 3 mg/m2, cisplatin 70 mg/m2) without further improvement of the residual lung nodules. After this, he was followed closely without further treatment.
In July 2013, he presented with dysuria. He underwent cystoscopy which confirmed tumor involvement in the bladder. In August 2013, he underwent a radical cystoprostatectomy. Pathology revealed a stage 4a urothelial carcinoma with invasion into the prostatic stroma, surgical margins were negative, and none of the lymph nodes were involved by metastatic disease. He received 3 cycles of chemotherapy consisting of dose-dense MVAC, which was completed in November 2013. After this, he was followed closely without further treatment.
In August 2014, he presented with progressive metastatic disease including new right external iliac lymphadenopathy and increase in size of pulmonary nodules. He received 3 cycles of pemetrexed every 3 weeks (500 mg/m2) with no detectable change in the size of measurable disease.
In November 2014, the patient agreed to participate in a randomized phase 1/2, open-label study of nivolumab monotherapy or nivolumab combined with ipilimumab (approved by the Institutional Review Board). He was randomly assigned to receive treatment with nivolumab (3 mg/kg) combined with ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) every 3 weeks. He received the first treatment on November 14, 2014, which was well-tolerated with no immediate adverse effects. On December 4, 2014, he received his second treatment. At that time, he reported mild throat discomfort and tightness in his jaw when he swallowed; the etiology of these symptoms was unclear and not thought to be related to the immunotherapy agents. The patient denied any skin rash, diarrhea, or abdominal pain. His blood test results were within normal limits, except for an asymptomatic alanine transaminase (ALT) level of 157 IU/L and an aspartate transaminase level (AST) of 703 IU/L, which was a grade 3 adverse event per the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, Version 4 (CTCAE). Since the patient did not have any clinical symptoms such as abdominal pain or nausea/vomiting associated with elevated liver function test (LFTs), a plan of close observation without changes in treatment was instituted as per the guideline of clinical trial protocol.
On December 8, 2014, the patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of significant lower back pain, profound weakness including inability to ambulate, and difficulty opening his mouth, eating, and speaking. On physical examination, the patient was noted to have bilateral ptosis and extraocular muscle weakness. His vital signs were stable. Laboratory tests showed creatine kinase (CK) level of 13,710 U/L (reference range; 55–170, CTCAE grade 4), AST level of 1346 IU/L (reference range; 15–46, CTCAE grade 4), ALT level of 378 IU/L (reference range;7–56, CTCAE grade 3), CK-MB level of 149.1 ng/mL (reference range; 0.6–6.3), creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dL (reference range; 0.7–1.3), blood urea nitrogen level of 43 mg/dL, troponin I level of 7.98 ng/mL (reference range; <0.03), alkaline phosphatase level of 44 U/L (reference range; 38–126), lactate dehydrogenase level of 3697 IU/L (reference range; 313–618), and the presence of myoglobinuria. An electrocardiogram was unremarkable. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for further care and subsequently diagnosed with acute rhabdomyolysis associated with severe polymyositis, which were suspected to be immune-related toxicities. He received intravenous fluids and methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg twice daily).
His muscle strength and laboratory tests improved after the initiation of steroids . However, on December 12, 2014, he was noted to have increasing use of accessory muscles to assist in breathing. Due to his worsening respiratory status, which was also thought to be secondary to muscle weakness, infliximab was administered as an additional immunosuppressive agent and the patient was also intubated.
On December 12, 2014, a paraneoplastic antibody panel was negative with the exception of elevated anti-SM-titer (1:61440 [normal ≤ 1:120]). The presence of elevated anti-SM-titer provided a potential immunologic mechanism for the patient’s presentation with rhabdomyolysis and polymyositis. We had not previously checked an anti-SM-titer prior to treatment but, we had a pre-treatment blood sample and used it to retrospectively evaluate the patient’s pre-treatment anti-SM-titer. We found the patient’s pre-treatment anti-SM-titer was already elevated at 1:15360. In retrospect, it appears that this patient had an underlying autoimmune disorder that was exacerbated by treatment with nivolumab plus ipilimumab immunotherapy.
On December 15, 2014, a muscle biopsy of the patient’s left thigh revealed fragments of connective tissue and skeletal muscle fibers with a single minute focus showing a multinucleate giant cell juxtaposed to a muscle fiber with very mild features of degeneration. We analyzed the muscle biopsy, which did not show any immune cell infiltration and this was likely due to the fact that the patient already received immunosuppressive therapies prior to the biopsy .
The patient ultimately received 2 doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, which was completed in December 2014, and 12 rounds of plasmapheresis, which completed in February 2015. These treatments resulted in improvement of his antibody titer and other laboratory tests . The patient’s muscle strength improved and tracheostomy was performed in December 2014 to provide intermittent respiratory support while the patient was participating in physical therapy rehabilitation. Unfortunately, on March 2015, imaging studies showed progressive disease and the patient was referred to hospice care where he died in April 2015.