The proband was a 10-month-old boy who was admitted because of ocular and oropharyngeal dyskinesia for 1 day. The patient had apnea for 15 min after birth and was diagnosed with “neonatal asphyxia, meconium aspiration syndrome, neonatal pneumonia, respiratory failure, hemolytic disease of the newborn, and atrial septal defect.” He was given Continuous Positive Airway Pressure as an auxiliary treatment and anti-infection treatment for 7 days. The child’s condition improved.
The baby was delivered at 39 weeks of gestation by Cesarean section because of the mother’s placenta hypofunction; the baby’s weight was 3.89 kg at birth. Apgar score was 7 points for 1 min and 8 points for 5 and 10 min after birth. Both parents are healthy. The developmental milestones of the patient were normal. Findings from physical examination followed up at 10 months were as follows: weight 7.7 kg, height 70 cm, tracking parallax, paroxysmal binocular vision, paroxysmal oropharyngeal involuntary movement, hypotonia, and no abnormality in lung and abdomen. Routine laboratory testing revealed normal complete blood counts, and the liver aspartase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and electrolyte levels were all within normal ranges. EEG showed abnormal waveforms with spike slow waves and slow waves in the bilateral frontal, central, parietal and midline areas. Head MRI showed mild brain atrophy. With the informed consent of the proband’s parents, 2 ml of the proband’s venous blood and his father’s and mother’s venous blood was collected in EDTA anticoagulant tubes for sequencing. The MECP2 gene in the parents was wild-type, and the child had a de novo mutation in the MECP2 gene (NM_001110792(MECP2): c.799_800insAGGAAGC), which causes a frameshift mutation (p.R267fs*6) .
Following the diagnosis of severe neonatal encephalopathy phenotype caused by MECP2 gene mutation (c.799_800insAGGAAGC). Movement and intelligence rehabilitations were prescribed. However, the patient has not shown much improvement.