A previously healthy African American male in his 20s with no known drug allergies or smoking history presented to the chronic pain management clinic complaining of neck and low back pain for 3 months, which started following a motor vehicle collision. He was the driver, seat-belted, going around 75 km/hour when he was hit on the passenger side. The airbag was not deployed, and he did not lose consciousness. The pain was initially located over bilateral neck and lower back. However, 2 months after the accident the pain also started to radiate to bilateral lower extremities in an L5 distribution. The pain was continuous, described as sharp and dull, and was rated as 6.5 out of 10 on a 10-point visual analog scale. Running and extension of the neck were described as worsening factors. Previous evaluations by the emergency department, patient’s primary care physician, and orthopedic spine surgery clinic (on the day of, 5 days and 2 months after the accident, respectively), revealed myofascial pain syndrome. Prior to evaluation at our chronic pain clinic, the patient was prescribed cyclobenzaprine 10 mg per oral every night at bedtime and acetaminophen 650 mg per oral every 6 hours as needed, with minimal relief of the pain. He also was referred to physical therapy, which provided mild temporary relief. Physical examination revealed positive straight leg rise test bilaterally and positive lumbar facet loading tests bilaterally. Lumbar spine X-rays were normal. Cervical spine X-rays showed mild straightening of the cervical spine. Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results showed mild disc bulging at L4/L5, small central disc protrusion at L5/S1 level without significant stenosis, and mild bilateral neural foraminal stenosis at L5/S1 level. The patient was initially treated with a fluoroscopically guided caudal epidural corticosteroid injection using 10 mg of dexamethasone, which provided more than 90% pain relief for 1 month. Because relief was significant but short-lived, the patient returned for a bilateral L5 transforaminal epidural corticosteroid injection of 10 mg of dexamethasone, which provided the patient with 50% relief of his pain for 1 month. Due to the short-term pain relief provided by the second procedure, the patient was started on gabapentin 300 mg per oral twice per day and cyclobenzaprine was stopped.
Four days after starting gabapentin, the patient presented to the emergency department complaining of palpitations for the past 8 hours. The patient confirmed consumption of one cup of coffee per day and two glasses of wine per week but denied recent alcohol or caffeine binges. The patient also denied family history of Afib. Physical examination showed tachycardia with heart rate of 126 beats per minute with normal blood pressure. Telemetry monitor showed the presence of an irregularly irregular rhythm. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and left ventricular hypertrophy . Laboratory workup including complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and toxicology screen, was unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed and showed normal left ventricle (LV) size with mildly increased wall thickness and mild left atrium dilation (volume index of 38 mL/m2) . Gabapentin was discontinued and the patient was started on diltiazem 30 mg per oral four times a day and apixaban 5 mg per oral twice daily. which led to a decrease in the patient’s heart rate to ~60 beats per minute. Transesophageal echocardiogram followed by direct current cardioversion were performed 24 hours after presentation to the emergency department . The transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the presence of mild left atrium dilatation and showed a patent foramen ovale with right-to-left shunt. However, contrary to the previous transesophageal echocardiogram, it showed a normal left ventricle size and wall thickness . The patient was discharged on diltiazem 120 mg per oral daily and apixaban 5 mg per oral twice daily. Apixaban was stopped 1 month after cardioversion and aspirin 81 mg per oral daily was started.