A 76-year-old man visited our outpatient clinic with chest pain. He stated that the chest pain first occurred 10 months ago when he was hospitalized with pneumonia of unknown etiology. The pain was exacerbated by cold weather. The patient was treated with aspirin and warfarin 2 years ago when he underwent stenting of the stenotic iliac artery. In the general blood test, no hematologic disease was detected other than increased prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (PT/INR 1.93) caused by warfarin treatment). Under the impression of unstable angina, coronary angiography was performed, which revealed left-main and triple-vessel disease (left-main coronary artery (LM): 80% stenosis; left anterior descending artery (LAD): 90% stenosis; left circumflex artery (LCx): 80% stenosis; and right coronary artery (RCA): 80% stenosis). We scheduled a CABG surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).
After median sternotomy, we harvested the left internal thoracic artery (LITA) and saphenous venous graft (SVG). We infused heparin (20,000 U), which increased the activated clotting time to more than 500 s. We cannulated the proximal ascending aorta and the right atrium. The nasal and rectal temperatures after the initiation of CPB were 36.0 °C, and the operating room temperature was maintained at 25–27 °C to ensure mild hypothermia. Shortly after aorta cross-clamping (ACC) and cold blood cardioplegia (4 °C) infusion, we found massive blood clots in the cardioplegia line . Suspecting that the abnormal blood clotting was caused by CHAD, we stopped the cold cardioplegia infusion and changed the thrombosed cardioplegia line immediately. We infused the warm (35 °C) blood cardioplegia with high potassium in a retrograde manner to induce cardiac arrest and raised the temperature of the body and the operating room . After the cardiac arrest, we opened the LAD, posterolateral branch (PL) and obtuse marginal artery (OM) and found a few blood clots, which were eliminated and the coronary artery was irrigated inside with warm saline . With the coronary artery open, we infused warm-crystalloid cardioplegia simultaneously in an antegrade and retrograde manner to wash the hidden blood clots out of the coronary artery, and to protect the myocardium and raise the myocardial temperature . Subsequently, we infused high-potassium warm blood cardioplegia every 15 min in an antegrade and retrograde manner, followed by warm saline surface irrigation to maintain normothermia (36 °C, Fig. -e). After anastomosis of distal SVG to OM and PL, additional warm-blood cardioplegia was directly infused through the SVG, to effectively eliminate hidden microemboli and perfuse warm blood cardioplegia to the distal coronary artery . Before the anastomosis of the proximal SVG to the ascending aorta, we evaluated for the presence of residual clots in the ascending aorta through the small opening for the proximal SVG graft. Finally, we flushed out the warm crystalloid cardioplegia simultaneously in an antegrade manner and directly through the SVG to the aorta opening . After proximal SVG anastomosis, the LITA to LAD was anastomosed on the beating heart to reduce the ACC time.
After the surgery, we transferred the patient to the intensive care unit. Blood was drawn for the cold-reactive antibody titer tests and stored in the refrigerator (4 °C). We also observed abnormal blood clotting . The cold-reactive antibody titer increased over 1024-fold. The patient was diagnosed with CHAD and left the hospital without any complications.