We report the case of a 51-year-old Caucasian man who received the first dose of the ChAdOx1-S recombinant (Vaxzevria, AstraZeneca, Oxford, UK) coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine and was diagnosed with Parsonage–Turner syndrome. The patient had no history of chronic diseases and did not use any continuous medications. His immunization schedule was complete, and he had never had any major vaccine reactions. He denied any recent trauma or infectious disease. The first clinical manifestations occurred shortly after vaccine administration. Initially, the patient presented fever, malaise, and asthenia and, 4 days later, there was a progressive increase in pain in the region of vaccine administration, which made him self-medicate with paracetamol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), and pregabalin. One month later, the patient developed symptoms of hypoesthesia and muscle weakness on abduction and elevation of the left upper limb. Neurological examination revealed atrophy of the proximal muscles of the left upper limb, accompanied by paresis of the left deltoid, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, and infraspinatus muscles. There were no changes in superficial and deep sensation, and there were no motor deficits in other segments of the body. All deep tendon reflexes were normoactive and symmetrical. The patient was always lucid, oriented, and collaborative. No sensory deficits, fasciculations, or pathological upper motor neuron signs were seen. There were neither meningeal signs nor alterations in any cranial nerve.
Electroneuromyography (ENMG) carried out 3 months after the onset of symptoms showed signs consistent with brachial plexus neuritis. There was mild to moderate peripheral neurological damage with signs of reinnervation in the region of the deltoid, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, infraspinatus, extensor pollicis longus and brevis, and first interosseous muscles. A reduction in the amplitude of the left axillary nerve action potential was also observed. The clinical manifestations, the onset of symptoms soon after vaccine administration, and the absence of a past significant medical history, together with the physical examination findings and the typical alterations in electroneuromyography, allowed us to establish the diagnosis of Parsonage–Turner syndrome. The adverse reaction has been properly notified to the Italian Pharmacovigilance System (Italian Medicines Agency—Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco (AIFA), ). The patient was treated with NSAID, pregabalin, and physiotherapy. Five months after the initial presentation, he presented a partial recovery, persisting only with local muscle weakness.