A 94-year-old male with past medical history of dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented with chief complaint of fever and weakness.
Patient denied recent history of sore throat, ear pain, cough, diarrhea, urinary frequency or dysuria. On further inquiry, patient mentioned that he had constipation and had to strain a lot to pass stools. Even after passing stools, he used to feel as if he still had a lot of stool to pass. Patient’s blood pressure at the time of admission was 141/69 mmHg, heart rate of 108 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 28/min and temperature of 101.4 degree fahrenheit. Blood oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Physical examination revealed slightly distended abdomen, however, rest of the physical examination, including neurological examination was completely unremarkable. Patient had good oral hygiene with no evidence of periodontal disease. Complete blood count revealed white blood cell count of 7.4 x 103 and hemoglobin of 12.1 g/dL. Urinalysis came out to be unremarkable for any evidence of infection. ESR was 32 mm/hour, whereas, serum CRP and pro-calcitonin were within normal limits. Sputum and blood culture sensitivity tests were ordered and the patient was empirically started on IV antibiotics (ceftriaxone). Two blood cultures grew Parvimonas micra and Gamella morbillorum. Infectious disease was consulted and they recommended switching the patient to ampicillin-sulbactam given the blood culture susceptibility results. Furthermore, they recommended doing CT scan chest/abdomen/pelvis and echocardiogram. There was no evidence of infective endocarditis on echocardiogram. However, CT scan abdomen/pelvis showed soft tissue mass in the ascending colon just superior to the ileocecal valve with shouldering suggesting an annular malignancy (,). Patient’s fever and weakness started improving and infectious disease recommended to treat patient with at least 2 weeks of antibiotic duration. Gastroenterology was consulted and they performed colonoscopy which showed non-obstructing, eccentric, ulcerated, fungating, 4-5 cm diameter mass with necrotic areas . Biopsy of the mass revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Given the fact that there was no evidence of distant metastasis, clinically and radiologically, oncology recommended surgical resection of the mass as definitive curative intervention. Also, patient was not deemed a candidate for systemic chemotherapy given his advanced age and comorbidities General surgery performed right hemicolectomy and removal of the mass. Pathology report of the mass revealed T3N0 and extension of the mass to the muscularis propria layer. At 2 weeks follow up visit with general surgery, patient was found free of constipation and fever.