A 30-year-old woman was admitted to Emergency Department for abdominal pain and vomit. She was a student, not a smoker, from southern Italy. A CT scan showed an expansive roundish capsulated cystic lesion (58 mm × 71 mm) with solid projections. The mass, located on the right side of the mediastinum, impinged and dislodged anteriorly the right Superior V. Cava and displaced oppositely the trachea (A–C). The lesion did not catch at CT/PET (D). At first, it was thought to be a teratoma.
We decided to remove the mass through a Uniportal Video-assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery, performed by Professor Crucitti.
We started the intervention performing a mini-thoracotomy at the IV intercostal space along the right medium axillary line. Once the access to the pleural cavity had been gained, an Alexis size S depressor was positioned. The mass adhered to the right Superior V. Cava and Azygos vein, which appeared narrowed and not completely cleavable from neoplasia. In addition to that, the lesion adhered to the Phrenic nerve and the Vagal nerve. The neo-formation was isolated from the structures mentioned above and from the tracheal surface. The Azygos vein was isolated and sectioned upstream of the lesion and of the caval confluence, using an echelon flex stapler. The extraction was made through the protection of an endobag, but the mass was larger in its dimension than the incision made, so we have sucked up part of the liquid from the mass . No intraoperative complications occurred. A pleural drainage was performed (B).
No post-operative complications occurred. The pleural drainage was removed on the first post-operative day and on that same day the patient left the Hospital.
Subsequent anatomo-histological exams identified it as a hyperplastic colloidal nodule belonging to the thyroid gland with haemorrhagic and cystic aspect . According to the analysis, its proper dimension was the following: 65 mm × 60 mm × 28 mm. Weight: 98 g. 30 days after the surgical procedure the patient underwent a follow-up thoracic CT without mdc. The woman is currently in good clinical general conditions, without any kind of distress surgery-related.