A 63-year-old man, without any chief complaint, was referred to our hospital because of abnormal duodenal mucosa found during an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy during screening. The patient had been on medications for diabetes mellitus, diabetic neuropathy, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, and hypertension. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory examination results revealed liver damage B; Child-Pugh, A; and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), 8.4%. An enhanced computed tomography scan revealed thickening of the wall of the duodenum. There was no invasion outside the wall or lymph node swelling . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination revealed a type 2 tumor in the second portion of the duodenum . Additionally, an upper gastrointestinal image revealed a clearly demarcated filling defect in the second portion of the duodenum . Finally, histological analysis of the biopsied samples revealed papillary adenocarcinoma.
Based on the imaging and pathological studies, the tumor was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. A surgical duodenectomy was planned. Although pancreaticoduodenectomy was initially considered, partial duodenectomy was the final choice to reduce operative stress due to comorbidities, such as uncontrolled diabetes, liver cirrhosis, and suspected hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [from magnetic resonance imaging ]. Additionally, the lesion was identified as a non-invasive carcinoma from the imaging findings; therefore, partial duodenectomy was preferred in this case. Radiofrequency ablation was scheduled for HCC after the surgery.
Prior to the endoscopic procedure, the jejunum was clamped using removal forceps. Tumor location was confirmed using both endoscopy and laparotomy, and the periphery of the tumor was marked by endoscopy. A circumferential mucosal incision was made around the tumor by endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) technique . A partial full-thickness incision was made, and seromuscular incision was performed by surgical operation along the mucosal incision line made using an endoscope technique from the full-thickness incised portion . Subsequently, the duodenal wall defect was closed with a hand-sewn suturing technique. Thereafter, the endoscope was inserted and passed over the resected location to confirm that there was no stenosis or leakage.
Histopathological assessment of the resected specimen revealed proliferation of the Brunner’s gland. Atypical cells with dense chromatin forming irregular glandular structure were found in the superficial layer . Immunohistochemical studies revealed that proliferated Brunner’s glands were positive for mucin-6 (MUC6) and negative for mucin-5 AC (MUC5AC) . The tumor was 8 × 8 mm in size, with no lymphatic invasion, no venous invasion, and negative lateral and vertical margins, and the final pathological stage was IA according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma (T1a(M)N0 M0).
The patient did not have any specific post-operative complications; he was postoperatively discharged after 11 days. After the operation, liver tumor with alcoholic nodules was diagnosed by hepatic angiography. There was no recurrence at the 2-year follow-up.