A 50-year-old woman was diagnosed with left ovary cancer and underwent an extended total hysterectomy with lymph node dissection, total omentectomy, and resection of splenic metastasis. On 1 week after a surgery, she was performed a TIVAP (DistricAth, 9 Fr, Districlass Medical SA, Chaponnay, France) placement via right IJV with a duplex ultrasonography for a chemotherapy. After then, a function of TIVAP was good, and a chest radiography showed the TIVAP located at the optimal position . So, she had been performed a chemotherapy via this TIVAP by a planned schedule. After the completion of a chemotherapy, she had been not followed-up for 3 months. During that period, TIVAP had been not evaluated and not managed with the heparin lock flush solution. During 3 months, she refused to be followed-up and didn’t visit our hospital. But, after 3 months, she visited an emergency room (ER) of our hospital with complaining an abdominal pain. In the ER, a doctor tried to infuse saline with a 10 mL syringe via TIVAP for a fluid therapy, but she complained a right neck bulging during saline infusion via TIVAP. So, we quickly checked a chest radiography. It showed the TIVAP had been fractured at the junction between the port and the catheter, and the fractured catheter was migrated into right atrium . There was no special etiology such as trauma. She obviously denied a history of trauma, and she had a little sports activity and was a housewife. And then, we emergently tried to remove the fractured catheter. We inserted a 7 Fr sheath into right femoral vein by a percutaneous puncture under local anesthesia. The fractured catheter fragment was subsequently caught and moved into the right femoral vein using a goose neck snare (Cook Inc, Bloomington, IN, USA) . And then, the fractured catheter fragment was removed successfully with venous sheath . Venous access site was compressed manually. After the confirmation of hemostasis on venous puncture site, the remnant port was removed surgically under local anesthesia. There was no complication during these procedures.