A 67-year-old man with esophageal cancer presented with acute-onset horizontal diplopia for two days after ten cycles of Camrelizumab treatment. The patient had no complications of ocular pain or headaches. His ocular examination was normal. A neurological examination showed isolated right abducens cranial nerve palsy. The right eye could not abduct completely, which was confirmed by the Hess screen . An MRI examination revealed thickening and post-contrast enhancement at the cisternal segment of the right abducens nerve . There was no evidence of brain tumor metastases, cerebrovascular disorder, or orbital lesions. The laboratory tests showed negative antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/Hepatitis C virus (HCV), rapid plasma regain (RPR), and Hepatitis B surface antigens (HBsAg).
The patient was diagnosed with middle-lower section esophageal cancer with lymph node metastasis one year ago (esophageal poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma; immunohistochemistry result: CK5/6(−); CK7(+); P40(−); Ki-67(>50%+); CDX-2(−); MSH2(+); MSH6(+); MLH1(+); TTF-1(+); NapsinA(+); P63(−)) .
The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, hyperlipidemia, cerebrovascular disease or autoimmune disease. He accepted radiotherapy and chemotherapy (Albumin-bound paclitaxel combined with carboplatin/Cisplatin/Nedaplatin). The chemotherapy drugs had to be changed frequently due to severe tertiary hemopenia, and the cancer was not well controlled until combined immunotherapy (Camrelizumab) was performed six months ago . After this, he was in good physical condition but had diplopia. The levels of the serum tumor marker were normal (CEA: 2.18 ng/mL; CYFRA211: 2.8 ng/mL; NSE: 12.33 ng/mL; Pro-Grp: 32.71 pg/mL). It was interpreted as immune-related abducens neuritis caused by Camrelizumab. The paraneoplastic syndrome-associated autoantibodies in the serum were negative. (anti-Hu, Ri, CV2, Amphiphysin, Ma1, Ma2, SOX1, Tr, Zic4, GAD65, PKCγ, Recoverin, Titin).
We put the patient on oral corticoids (methylprednisone, 48 mg/d) for neuritis treatment after the diagnosis, and a subsequent taper was also administered. Prior to methylprednisone therapy, the patient was treated with enhanced microvascular perfusion drugs, but these failed to work. Camrelizumab was continued without interruption. After one week of treatment, the ability of the right eye to abduct partly recovered. One month later, the diplopia was completely resolved. . At the last follow-up, one year after the onset of diplopia, the patient was in good condition without tumor progression or neurological symptom recurrence.
Importantly, potentially toxic drugs were adopted before ICIs in this case. However, paclitaxel combined with platinum was administered almost fourteen cycles before the onset of abducens neuritis, which appeared abruptly and was resolved with corticosteroids, suggesting that an inflammatory rather than toxic etiology complicated ICI treatment.
Only a few case reports have reported abducens neuritis following PD-1 as possible complications , and therefore, information on the spectrum, treatment and outcome of PD-1-induced abducens neuritis is limited.