Ms. A is a 26-year-old single unemployed woman referred to a tertiary Neuropsychiatry Unit for ongoing management of neuropsychiatric symptoms of SSADH deficiency. Delayed developmental milestones and seizures were noted from an early age. At 4 years of age, Ms. A was diagnosed with epilepsy and global developmental delay of unknown aetiology. No further work-up was conducted. She was treated with antiepileptic medication and early psychosocial intervention, attending specialised primary and secondary schools.
At 12 years of age, Ms. A was diagnosed with SSADH deficiency following the diagnosis of her younger brother with the same condition. Her diagnosis was confirmed via urinary organic acid quantification, with elevated 4-hydroxybutyric acid and 4,5-dihydroxy hexanoic lactone levels. Genotyping was not performed. Formal neuropsychological testing at the time revealed mild-to-moderate intellectual disability.
From age 14, Ms. A experienced significant functional decline with manifestation of worsening OCD symptoms. She displayed marked difficulties initiating tasks, obsessional slowness and hesitancy in her activities of daily living, particularly when toileting and eating resulting in incontinence and weight loss, driven by obsessional doubt (about whether she was eating correctly or too quickly, had lifted her leg the correct way to put on trousers), and fears that certain behaviours may result in harm to her mother or brother. She exhibited motor rituals, particularly regarding the placement of food utensils and the correct “cutting” of food, and stereotypies of her hands and face involving wiping and chewing. Mealtimes were particularly problematic: prefaced by 30 min of pacing, 30–45 min of ordering cutlery, and then 1–2 h of slow mastication, marked by frequent pauses, requiring prompting to continue. She denied intrusive internal imagery. There were no religious or sexual preoccupations, counting or cleaning behaviours. Delusions and hallucinations were not apparent. Ms. A also showed increasing agitation and anxiety. When 22-years-old, Ms. A was referred to the Neuropsychiatry Unit for assessment and symptomatic management of these symptoms. Her score on the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) at initial assessment was 33, denoting extreme OCD (0–13 mild, 14–25 moderate, 26–34 moderate-severe OCD; 35–40 severe OCD) . On mental state, she was well-groomed and politely-engaged. She had markedly reduced eye contact and a mild fine tremor of her upper limbs. Her speech was slow, had low tone and was mildly dystonic. Her vocalisations were slow, with long latency and were brief. Her affect was restricted yet congruent with her mood. There were no psychotic phenomena, yet she was preoccupied with internal cognitions of doubt and uncertainty. Neurological examination revealed mildly elevated tone, particularly on augmentation, with cogwheeling and hyperreflexia bilaterally. She demonstrated occasional orobuccal lip-sucking movements and athetoid movements of the trunk. She had reduced arm swing when walking, pedestal turning, with reduced foot clearance and stride length. Eye movements showed some saccadic intrusions into slow pursuit movements, and saccadic over-and under-shoot requiring multiple small corrections. Her only treatment at this time was lamotrigine 75 mg bd.
Neuroimaging revealed significant increased T2 signal in the pars interna and externa of the globi pallidi, substantiae nigrae and dentate nuclei bilaterally . Moderate volume loss was also evident involving primarily the frontal lobe white matter, deep grey matter nuclei, brainstem and cerebellum.
Ms. A commenced the serotonergic medication escitalopram, which was gradually up-titrated from 10 mg to 70 mg od. This moderately improved her obsessional slowness, psychomotor retardation and motor rituals. Spontaneity in initiating movements and complex activities remained problematic. Her Y-BOCS scale decreased to 24 over 18 months, and the duration of mealtimes halved.
Further attempts to optimise Ms. A’s residual OCD symptoms were made: the adjuncts risperidone 0.5 mg od, methylphenidate 5 mg od, mirtazapine 7.5 mg od were added cumulatively. These medications offered no benefit with her obsessive-compulsive phenomena. These were discontinued in turn due to worsening extrapyramidal side effects, agitation and social withdrawal, and hypersomnolence respectively. Conservative and non-pharmacologic therapies were also trialled to manage Ms. A’s OCD symptoms to improve her obsessional slowness and break compulsive rituals.
At age 25, Ms. A’s anxiety improved using lorazepam 1 mg bd. Shortly thereafter Ms. A commenced the dopaminergic pramipexole hydrochloride, up-titrated from 0.25 mg to 0.5 mg bd. This significantly improved her obsessional slowness, motor initiation and psychomotor speed, with a reduction in mealtime duration by a further 50%. Further attempts to increase the dose of pramipexole hydrochloride yielded increased initiation and volition, yet increased Ms. A’s anxiety and agitation. She continued with pramipexole hydrochloride 0.5 mg bd. Ms. A had significant functional improvement in undertaking her activities of daily living, increased social engagement and a markedly increased hedonic response.