A 44-year-old right-handed African American woman with a history of chronic hypertension, asthma and former substance-use disorder (cocaine) presented with a 2-day history of acute-onset headache. The headache was severe, throbbing, holocranial, associated with photophobia and worsened with cough. The review of systems was negative, except for poor appetite and polyuria. On examination, she was afebrile with blood pressure of 149/89mmHg, heart rate of 65 beats/minute and blood oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. She was in obvious distress due to the headache, but her general physical examination was unremarkable. Her neurological examination was normal, except for mild restriction in complete abduction in both eyes. Fundoscopic examination was negative for papilledema.
Laboratory investigations included a complete blood count, which was normal, except for thrombocytopenia (107kg/μl). A complete metabolic profile showed blood glucose 959mg/dl, sodium 121mmol/L, potassium 5.2mmol/L, chloride 84mmol/L and an anion gap of 15 (reference range: 0 to 15mmol/L). Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were 10 and 0.78mg/dl, respectively. Serum osmolality was 308mOsmol/kg. Arterial blood gas showed pH 7.34, carbon dioxide pressure of 35mmHg, oxygen pressure of 73mmHg and bicarbonate of 19mmol/L. Her urine was positive for ketones, and her serum β-hydroxybutyric acid level was 1.76mmol/L (reference range: 0.00 to 0.30mmol/L). The rest of the evaluation, including electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, urinalysis, urine toxicology screen and blood cultures was negative.
She was diagnosed with HHS, given the findings of plasma glucose ≥630mg/dl, minimal ketones in serum and serum bicarbonate ≥15mmol/L
. She was treated with intravenous insulin and fluid resuscitation. This was a new diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. To evaluate the headache, she underwent a computed tomography (CT) of the brain. The head CT revealed diffuse leukoencephalopathy involving the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes. The cortex was distinctively spared, and the deep gray matter structures were preserved. Given the clinical presentation of acute severe headache and findings of possible partial bilateral abducens nerve palsy, there was concern for cerebral edema secondary to her HHS. However, treatment for raised intracranial pressure was not started, given her intact sensorium and neurolo-gical examination. Close neurological follow-up was instituted, and she remained stable while her hyperglycemia was treated.
Her condition was further analyzed by performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. The brain MRI scan did not reveal an acute intracranial process, but rather white-matter abnormality throughout both hemispheres, greatest in the superior convexities and extending into the anterior temporal lobes . The findings were predominantly numerous collections of cystic spaces with smooth margins and were roughly elongated parallel to the expected direction of the vascular and radial fibers. The posterior fossa was free of dilated spaces. Many of the spaces had adjacent parenchymal hyperintensity on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted images. There was no abnormal enhancement after gadolinium administration. This pattern was suggestive of tumefactive perivascular spaces (PVSs). There was no evidence of osmotic myelinolysis.
The patient's headache improved with correction of the HHS. No further neuroimaging was performed. At the time of discharge, there were no neurological deficits evident upon examination.