A 9-year-old Nigerian boy was referred by his general dentist for “root canal treatment of hypoplastic and necrotic upper left incisors” and removal of “a supernumerary tooth” in the region. The chief complaint was concern about “discolored and rotated top front teeth with pus discharge in the area”. No history of recent trauma was reported. The child was otherwise physically well and with clear medical background.
Clinical examination revealed hypoplastic enamel defects and malalignment of the upper left permanent incisors (teeth # 21&22) with a labial sinus tract between the two teeth (A). An increased probing depth, in line with the sinus tract, was also recorded between the two teeth (highest reading 9 mm mid-buccal of 22) (B). However, the teeth responded positively to cold sensibility testing with ‘Endo-Frost’ (Roeko; Coltene, Germany), had normal mobility and were not tender to percussion. The child had otherwise intact and caries-free dentition with no previous dental treatment.
Using the horizontal parallax technique, the “extra tooth” appeared to be in a labial position . In the same radiographs, a gutta-percha point was used to trace the origin of the sinus tract. The radiographic evaluation revealed the abscess was related to the “extra tooth” .
Detailed questioning of the child’s parents revealed a traumatic dental injury at the age of 18 months. The mother reported that the child had fallen off his bed at home and “lost” one of his “baby” teeth that was never found at the time of injury. The mother sought assessment at the Accident and Emergency service, however, the missing tooth was erroneously diagnosed as an avulsion by the attending physician. No further intervention was provided.
A full history and thorough clinical examination, independent of the information in the referral letter, revealed that these permanent incisors were not necrotic and had no sign of pulp degeneration. The ‘extra’ tooth in the radiograph was assumed to be a completely intruded primary incisor and not a supernumerary tooth.
Extraction of the abscessed primary tooth was planned and completed under general anesthesia due to potential behavior management problems and the complicated access to the intruded tooth . Closer inspection of the removed tooth revealed it was a primary incisor and confirmed the preliminary diagnosis. Furthermore, the tooth was located buccal to the cortical plate in a subperiosteal position, and was not incorporated in the growing maxilla. The permanent incisors that had hypoplastic enamel defects were partially erupted at the time of the operation, therefore the decision was made to closely monitor these teeth with intensive prevention until complete eruption.
At the postoperative review (2 weeks after the surgery), there was a satisfactory healing with a complete resolution of the sinus tract. The periodontal examination showed resolution of the increased probing depths. The patient was then placed on a 3-monthly recall interval to monitor the development and eruption of the upper left incisors. Owing to the hypoplastic enamel defects, intermittent sensitivity later developed in the upper left permanent incisors, and desensitizing agents (e.g., tooth mousse) were used and oral hygiene instructions were reinforced. Nevertheless, a normal eruption rate of these incisors with appropriate root formation and satisfactory apical closure was evident on subsequent follow-up visits, confirming pulp vitality and favorable outcomes in these teeth .
Following complete eruption of the affected permanent incisors, aesthetic restorations were provided with light-cured composite (Z350; 3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN, USA), using a minimally invasive cavity preparation . The aesthetic improvement re-established the patient’s self- esteem, and controlled tooth sensitivity. The patient was then referred for orthodontic treatment for correction of the malalignment.