A previously healthy 6-year-old Moroccan girl, feverish for a day, presented to the Emergency Department (ED) of a secondary-level hospital complaining of a sudden, painless, and complete bilateral vision loss, noticed about one hour earlier, upon awakening. Family and past personal medical histories were negative, no history of trauma or other acute events was reported, except for the recent fever, and the girl was not vaccinated for SARS-CoV-2. Once admitted, the nasal swab resulted positive for SARS-CoV-2 antigen. A first ophthalmologic examination showed bilateral nonreactive mydriasis and a visual acuity limited to hand motion at 30 cm in the left eye and no light perception in the right eye. At the fundus oculi exam, the left eye appeared ophthalmoscopically normal whereas pathognomonic findings of CRAO (white ischemic retina and a cherry-red spot in the foveal region) were revealed in the right eye. The remaining clinical examination, including a detailed neurologic evaluation, was normal. Radiological imaging of the brain (i.e., CT, MRI and MRA) did not reveal any abnormalities.
After her immediate transfer to the tertiary-level Meyer Children’s University Hospital, the ophthalmologic assessment confirmed the right CRAO and suspected a left posterior optic nerve affection.
The optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a bilateral macular thickness reduction, even more in the right eye (183 μm) than in the left one (185 μm).
During the following days, the fluorescein angiography (FA) confirmed the right CRAO, revealing poor and delayed blood flow in the right eye circulation . Flash visual evoked potentials (VEP) supported the hypothesis of a left optic neuropathy showing a reduced left optic nerve conduction velocity (P100 latency 150 ms), with a preserved right one (P100 latency 101 ms).
Considering that symptoms started more than six hours earlier, thrombolytic treatment was excluded. Anticoagulant therapy (100 mg/kg/day low molecular weight heparin [LMWH]) was therefore initiated, together with intravenous (iv) steroids (30 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone) for three days followed by oral prednisone (2 mg/kg/day).
Meanwhile, a new brain MRI (T2-weighted, FLAIR and 3D T1-weighted contrast-enhanced, DWI and SWI sequences), together with orbits MRI (axial T2-weighted and FLAIR, coronal STIR, 3D T1-weighted contrast-enhanced and Dixon sequences), resulted normal, also excluding any morphological alteration or signal change in the optic nerves and gadolinium-enhancing. Even a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed, and no vessel alterations have been documented.
All the performed blood exams, including inflammatory and coagulation markers , hemoglobin electrophoresis, extensive thrombophilic and autoimmune screening, metabolic and infectious tests, resulted negative, except for the positivity of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) with a 1:640 titer and SARS-CoV-2 serology (IgG against SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein S1 and nucleocapsid protein). The presence of SARS-CoV-2 was confirmed on the nasal swab even by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique.
In addition, an eventual cardiac affection was excluded by performing an electrocardiogram and echocardiography.
Three weeks later, LMWH was switched to acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) provided at the anti-thrombotic dose, and steroid therapy was gradually tapered. These therapies were interrupted after four and five months, respectively.
During the one-month hospitalization period, regular ophthalmologic assessments were performed but visual impairment resulted substantially unmodified despite the treatment and optic disc pallor developed in both eyes. Therefore, at discharge, the patient was pointed toward a learning path for visually impaired people.
Throughout the ophthalmological follow-up, the girl showed a mild left-eye visual recovery with light perception and the capability of counting fingers at 30 cm. Nevertheless, right-eye blindness persisted without any improvement, as well as the extreme bilateral reduction of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) at the OCT examinations at 3-month and 5-month follow-ups .