An 18 year old male, Muslim by religion, student by occupation, residing in rural region of North West Maharashtra presented in our institute with pain in the right hip region since 1 week. Pain was continuous type, acute in onset, throbbing in nature initially relieved on analgesics. There was history of fever on and off for one and half months, Pain was associated with swelling and induration. On physical examination, swelling was tender, non fluctuant, Trans illumination was negative, non-pitting. No bony mass was palpable due to bulk of gluteal muscles. Local temperature was slightly raised. Patient had selective restriction of movements and associated pain at hip joint with flexion possible up to 80 degrees and internal rotation restricted to 10 degrees. All other movements were normal. There was no previous history of trauma or massage. No history of systemic illness. No similar complaints in family or any hereditary trait. A general surgery opinion was sought, the surgeon opined of it being a deep seated abscess as the patient had history of fever, pain, induration, restricted movements with supportive MRI report. The patient underwent the following investigations. Investigations
The laboratory blood investigations were done with reports as Hb – 10.2, WBC - 11400, ESR – 30, Deranged PT – 17 sec, INR 1.4, control - 14 sec.
Radiographs were taken, AP and Lateral views , which were inconclusive.
Ultrasonography with 7.5Mhz linear probe revealed a hypoechoic solid mass with linear calcifications within, seen in gluteal muscle plane of size 65 × 42 cm. Aspiration was done with 18 gauge needle, aspirate was blood and sent for cytology, culture and sensitivity. Aspirate was reported as sterile, ruling out any infection or malignancy.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed evidence of large loculated collection in right gluteal region just posterior to greater trochanter of size 3.9 × 4.3 cm, collection was hyperintense on T1 and STIR images, hypointense on T2 images suggestive of an abscess.
The patient was operated primarily assuming as abscess for incision and drainage. A mass of bony consistency was noticed between the gluteal muscles and external rotators ( & ). The mass was excised and sent for histopathology.
On histopathological evaluation. Gross appearance showed non capsulated, irregular mass of size 6 × 5 × 3 cm, firm consistency, friable bony tissue with central area showing brownish haemorrhagic and necrotic areas. On microscopy, ( & ) (a) central zone showing congested capillary network showing plump endothelium surrounded by zonal proliferation of fibroblasts merging with peripheral bone forming osteoblastic elements and cartilage. (b) Peripheral area showing ill defined trabeculae lined by osteoblasts diagnostic for myositis ossificans.