A 22-year-old man was evaluated in the primary care clinic for discomfort and red lesions that had involved the toes of both feet for several weeks. The toe discomfort was a hypersensitivity, which was worst over the red lesions. He was not aware of any recent trauma or injury. He also reported that both feet felt cooler and that his right foot had a blue-purple discoloration for the past several months. He did not have associated numbness, weakness, or fever, and he could bear weight without pain.
His past medical history was notable for localized Ewing sarcoma of the right femur. He had completed therapy 1 month earlier with vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and etoposide in accordance with the Children’s Oncology Group protocol AEWS1031 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01231906). The primary tumor was located in the right femoral diaphysis. Local control for the primary tumor consisted of wide local excision and reconstruction with a vascularized fibular allograft harvested from the right fibula. The patient had internal fixation hardware at the site of tumor resection. Expected toxicities of the treatment included chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression, which had resolved. No unexpected or severe toxicities had been apparent during the therapy for Ewing sarcoma. The patient attended regularly scheduled follow-up appointments with the oncology team, but he did not discuss his current symptoms during those appointments.
On examination his right foot appeared dark blue and felt cool. Toes on both feet had multiple erythematous papules that were not painful on palpation . The dorsalis pedis pulse and the posterior tibial pulse were 2+ bilaterally. The patient had intact motor and sensory function in both lower extremities, and he did not have any gait disturbance.
The differential diagnosis included arterial occlusion, venous thrombosis, musculoskeletal injury, and a vasospastic process. The next day, to rule out an acute process, lower-extremity arterial and venous ultrasonography and the ankle-brachial index test with transcutaneous oximetry were performed, and the findings were normal. In addition, radiography of the right ankle and foot did not show abnormalities.
The case was discussed with the patient’s oncology team, and in light of the unremarkable results from the diagnostic testing, the conclusion was that the appropriate diagnosis was medication-induced acrocyanosis of the right foot and bilateral erythema pernio. Over the preceding 10 months, the patient had received a cumulative vincristine dose of 36 mg; vincristine was identified as the most likely cause of the acrocyanosis and erythema pernio because of the drug’s adverse effect profile. Supportive care recommendations included wearing warm socks and footwear, avoiding cold temperatures, and continuing to exercise to promote circulation to the feet.
The patient returned for follow-up 2 weeks later with marked improvement in symptoms and appearance after adhering to the recommended supportive care measures. The symptoms were expected to continue to improve over time with cessation of vincristine, and the patient was advised to continue regular follow-up with his oncology team.