A 45-year-old Chinese woman, with no obvious symptoms, was found to have a pancreatic neoplasm in the physical examination and admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
She denied any special personal or family history of VHL syndrome or other disease.
Abdominal palpation revealed a painless, mobile mass in the epigastrium, and no abnormalities were observed in an examination of the nervous system and ocular system.
Laboratory tests for blood glucose, amylase, and tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (0.51 ng/mL, normal 0-10 ng/mL), cancer antigen-19-9 (11.11 U/mL, normal 0-27 U/mL), and cancer antigen-242 (8.54 U/mL, normal 0-10 U/mL) were within normal limits.
A computed tomography scan showed multiple cystic lesions involving the whole pancreas ranging in diameter from 0.4 to 2 cm and also revealed an enhanced mass, 2.2 cm in diameter, in the head of the pancreas . Moreover, multiple cysts were found in the kidneys bilaterally , and the right lobe of the liver contained a small cyst . No abnormalities were noted on brain magnetic resonance imaging.
Grossly, the pancreatic parenchyma was replaced with numerous discrete and confluent cysts. The pancreatic parenchyma displayed spongy-like changes on histological section, which was composed of cystic, honeycomb-like, and cystic-nodular areas. The cysts varied in size, ranging from 0.1 to 1.1 cm in diameter. The nodular area was demarcated by grayish-white fibrous septa, and a radial scar was observed in the center of some nodules. Clear fluid was found in the cystic cavity. A grayish-yellow solid mass, which was 3.5 cm × 2 cm × 2 cm in size, was in the pancreatic head with a clear boundary separated from the cystic area .
Microscopically, the histological morphology of the diffuse cystic lesions and the solid mass appeared significantly different, and the two components of the pancreatic tumor were separated by compressed fibrous tissue without any overlapping zone . The diffuse cystic area was composed of prominent microcystic serous cystadenomas lined with a single layer of cubic to flattened epithelium with clear cytoplasm; the nuclei were uniformly small, round-to-oval, and bland with dense homogenous chromatin . The pancreatic duct was normal, without any communication with the cysts. The solid tumor in the head of the pancreas demonstrated a well-differentiated grade 2 PanNET: The tumor cells were arranged in a ribbon-like and trabecular architecture with fine chromatin, and the mitotic count was 1 per 10 high power fields (HPF) .
Immunohistochemically, the lining epithelium of the diffuse serous cystadenoma stained positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK19. The low-grade PanNET was positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A , and CD56. Both of the two pancreatic tumors were negative for HER-2 (Supplementary Figure 1). The Ki67 labeling index of the PanNET was 5% . In addition, the tumor cells were hormone-negative (including insulin, glucagon, and gastrin), which, along with the patient’s clinical presentation, suggested a nonfunctional PanNET.