A 44-year-old male smoker (15 pack-years) with no significant surgical, medical, or family history was referred to our rhinology clinic with a 1-year history of right-sided nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, postnasal drip, snoring, mouth breathing, sleep disturbances, occasional sternutation, and itching. He denied other sinonasal symptoms, such as epistaxis, hyposmia, headache, and facial pressure. Endoscopic examination of the right side revealed a solitary nasal polyp originating from the middle meatus occupying the NP and almost entirely obstructing the right choanae. The left side showed a much smaller polyp that barely extended from the middle meatus, with marked left nasal septal deviation at the same level. Bilateral hypertrophy of the inferior nasal turbinates (HIT) was also noted . The remaining otorhinolaryngological examinations were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinuses without contrast showed a homogenously opacified soft-tissue density in the maxillary sinus bilaterally, with a marked extension of the mass lesion from the widened right maxillary ostium, occupying the nasal cavity and NP with no evidence of bone destruction or remodeling. Other associated CT findings included mucosal thickening in both sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses. Left nasal septal deviation with spur was observed near the left maxillary ostium including a right concha bullosa and HIT . Consent for an endoscopic biopsy from both polyps under local anesthesia was granted, and histopathological evaluation revealed an inflammatory nasal polyp, ruling out malignancy.
Based on the recorded history, endoscopic nasal examination, and CT findings, a diagnosis of bilateral ACPs was made. The patient was then counseled for functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS), but he refused and decided to undergo medical treatment. The Arabic Sino-Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT)-22 score was obtained to monitor symptom progression and was 73. The medical preparation consisted of a course of clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily for 10 days, mometasone furoate 50 µg/actuation aerosol spray twice daily, together with nasal rinses (0.9% sodium chloride irrigation solution) twice daily for 3 months. The patient was seen after the specified period, reporting significant improvements in his sinonasal symptoms with a SNOT-22 score of 34. The patient was satisfied with the results. He has been on regular 2–3 months follow-ups, with no reports of worsening symptoms till date.