A 35-year-old Chinese woman with no significant past medical history, family history, or medication history was admitted via our emergency department with a 1-week history of gradually worsening left lower limb weakness and numbness. She was without pain, and had no significant past medical history or recent illnesses. On examination, her left-sided ankle deep-tendon reflex was absent, and there was diffuse weakness (modified medical research council scale grade 4) of hip extension, hip adduction, knee extension, knee flexion, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion in the left lower limb. Sensory testing demonstrated diminished proprioception and pain perception in the left lower limb, distal to the mid-calf. The rest of the neurological examination was unremarkable. Her gait was slow and cautious, but otherwise normal despite her subjective complaints of gait difficulty.
A nerve conduction study (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) performed eight days from symptom onset suggested a plexopathy. Specifically, there was an asymmetrically absent left-sided tibial H-reflex, diminished left saphenous sensory response of 1.93 μV compared with a right saphenous sensory response of 4.2 μV, and reduced recruitment on EMG of the left-sided vastus lateralis, gastrocnemius, and tibialis anterior muscles. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral plexuses and lumbar spine demonstrated enhancement of the cauda equina nerve roots bilaterally, sparing the lumbosacral plexuses . A lumbar puncture was performed 12 days from symptom onset, showing a normal opening pressure of 12 cm H2O. Importantly, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed cytoalbuminologic dissociation (CSF protein 1.03 g/L, with a CSF white blood cell count of 1/μL) but was otherwise negative for oligoclonal bands. Microbiological and autoimmune assays performed on blood and CSF samples were unyielding . Computed tomography (CT) of her neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis showed no suspicious masses.
The patient was diagnosed with nondiabetic LRPN and was treated with IVIg at 2 g/kg divided over 5 days (13–17 days from symptom onset). The patient was reviewed by a physiotherapist once during her hospital stay, but did not require further rehabilitation. Other than a brief 3-day period of postdural puncture headache, which resolved with bed rest and hydration, she tolerated the evaluation and treatment well. She was discharged upon resolution of headache (18 days from symptom onset) with no change in clinical examination findings. On subsequent outpatient follow-up, she reported that her symptoms gradually resolved over the 2 weeks succeeding her discharge from hospital, and a subsequent MRI scan of her lumbar spine performed 18 weeks after symptom onset showed resolution of the cauda equina nerve root enhancement . She remained asymptomatic when reviewed 20 weeks after symptom onset, and examination was normal, demonstrating a return of her left ankle tendon reflex and full power in all limbs. One year after the episode, the patient reported by phone interview that she had no recurrence of symptoms.