A previously healthy, fully immunized, 18-month-old boy was admitted to our pediatric emergency department for an acute onset of left-side facial palsy. He was on oral antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin (80 mg/kg/day) for fever and bilateral AOM since the day before.
On admission, his vital signs were: body weight 13 kg; heart rate 106 beats/min; body temperature 38,5 °C; oxygen saturation in room air 98%. The patient was in good general condition, with normal cardiorespiratory and abdominal examinations. No skin rash was observed. There was no sign of meningitis. The neurological examination revealed a loss of the left nasolabial fold, a left facial drop with sparing of the forehead muscles, and ptosis of the left upper eyelid, consisting of a grade IV peripheral left facial nerve palsy with the House-Brackmann scale .
Otoscopy showed bilateral tympanic hyperemia with evidence of middle ear effusion but no tympanic membrane bulging. No vesicles in the ear canal and no parotid masses were observed. Furthermore, no postauricular swelling or erythema was detected. No auricular displacement or mastoid region tenderness was documented.
Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 13,750/mmc, with neutrophil predominance, and a C-reactive protein of 3,18 mg/dl (normal value < 0.5 mg/dL). A blood bacterial culture was performed and provided negative results.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head was promptly performed, which showed bilateral middle ear and mastoid effusion with complete opacification of the mastoid air cells and tympanic cavities without any bony wall erosion neither in the middle ear nor in the external meatus . The diagnosis of acute AOM-related facial nerve palsy was achieved. The child was immediately started with intravenous cefotaxime (100 mg/kg/day), intravenous antiviral therapy with acyclovir (30 mg/kg/day in 3 doses), and oral steroids with betamethasone (0,2 mg/kg/day), which was progressively tapered off and discontinued within 15 days.
To protect the left eye from corneal damage, artificial tears were applied numerous times a day along with ophthalmic lubricating ointment and an eyelid patch at night. To identify infectious causes of peripheral facial nerve palsy, serologic tests for herpes simplex virus, varicella virus, human herpes virus type 6, coxsackie virus, adenovirus, and Borrelia burgdorferi were performed and resulted negative; consequently, antiviral acyclovir was discontinued. Furthermore, a primary EBV infection was serologically detected, which resulted positive for anti-VCA IgM whilst negative for anti-VCA IgG, anti-EA, and anti-EBNA.
On day 4, a Three Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head confirmed the presence of middle ear and mastoid effusion, and showed the presence of a slight FLAIR hyperintensity together with a subtle enhancement of the geniculate ganglion and labyrinthine portion of facial nerve indicating an inflammatory reaction . On day 5, a left myringotomy with placement of a ventilation tube was performed. The bacterial culture of the purulent drainage resulted negative. The patient progressively recovered from the paralysis and was completely apyretic after 2 days of hospitalization. The antibiotic treatment with intravenous cefotaxime was continued for a total of 15 days; afterwards, the patient was discharged. Caregivers were instructed to keep the ear dry, and the child was trained to perform facial muscles gymnastics and tactile stimulation under the supervision of our speech therapist.
On follow-up examination after a few days from discharge, the patient developed a picture of herpangina with pharyngeal hyperemia and vesicles in the oral cavity without a worsening of facial paralysis. After 3 months, the facial paralysis was completely recovered.