An 87-year-old Chinese male was first admitted to our department with a 1-year history of progressive dysuria and urinary retention for 24 h.
One year ago, the patient presented with progressive dysuria, including urination hesitancy, decreased force of urination, straining, and dribbling. Although his urine flow was fine, he complained of frequent urination and nocturia. There were no odynuria and gross hematuria with no interruption of urinary stream. Even though the patient was on finasteride tablets (5 mg po qd × 1) and tamsulosin (0.2 mg po qd × 1) treatment, symptoms did not improve significantly. The patient developed acute urinary retention 24 h prior to admission.
The patient suffered from epilepsy 2 years prior to hospital admission and was currently on compound sodium valproate and valproic acid sustained release tablets (0.5 g po bid × 1) treatment. In addition, he was suffering from a poor health due to concomitant medical issues including hypertension, mild anemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypothyroidism, though no other medications were given to the patient for the noted additional medical conditions.
He smoked for more than 60 years but quit recently. His family history was ordinary, and there was no history of genetic heritability of cancer. The patient had no prior imaging examination of the urinary tract system.
No tenderness in the bilateral kidneys, ureters or bladder was discerned on examination. Furthermore, no evident abnormality was found in the external genitalia. Digital rectal examination (DRE) revealed normal anal sphincter tension, though with profound hyperplasia of the prostate gland at a level that the entire boundary could not be examined digitally. The prostate surface was smooth, while its internal bulk felt soft and cystic with an absent central fissure and no palpated nodule.
Serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) was 8.30 ng/mL (normal range: 0-4 ng/mL), free PSA was 3.30 ng/mL, with a total PSA/free PSA ratio of 0.398. Urine cell analysis results revealed white cell count of 2-4/high powered field (HPF) (normal range: 0-5/HPF) and red blood cell count of > 50/HPF (normal range: 0-10/HPF). Urine culture for bacteria was negative. There were no obvious abnormalities in routine blood tests, coagulation function, liver and kidney function, blood electrolytes and other blood biochemical tests.
Initial chest computed tomography (CT) revealed no evident nodules in either lung field. Subsequent findings from urinary tract area color ultrasound suggested an evident, enlarged prostate sized at approximately 9.29 cm × 10.98 cm × 9.62 cm protruding into the urinary bladder. Multiple cystic, hypoechoic lesions were detected within the prostate gland. No obvious signs of blood flow were identified within the hypoechoic lesions. Prostate hyperplasia with cystic degeneration was considered . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the prostate was profoundly enlarged with resultant compression and right-sided deviation of the urinary bladder and rectum. Irregular density shadows could be seen in the prostate gland area. T2 weighted imaging revealed nonhomogeneous and height signals inside with nonhomogeneous enhancement visible (post enhancement). The prostate peripheral zone was unclear with bilateral seminal vesicles atrophied, though with no evidence of lymph node involvement in the pelvic cavity or tumor invasion to surrounding structures . A preliminary diagnosis of benign prostate hyperplasia with prostatic cysts was concluded.