A 42-year-old male was admitted to our emergency department 3 h after a motor vehicle accident. He was thrown out of the car because he was not wearing a seatbelt. His complaint was back pain, and he was unable to move both lower limbs. His medical history was unremarkable.
Upon physical examination, the patient was not ambulatory. Sensory examination revealed the absence of sensation below the T12 level. The strength of the bilateral lower limbs was grade 0. The patient underwent radiographic evaluation, which showed wedging of the T11 vertebra suggestive of a compression fracture . An initial diagnosis of T11 fracture with complete paraplegia of the lower limbs was made based on these findings.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was further conducted to evaluate the spinal cord. Sagittal MRI demonstrated an isointense lesion on T1-weighted images and a high-signal spindle-like lesion on T2-weighted images of the spinal cord adjacent to the T11 vertebra . The fat-suppressed sequence also revealed hyperintensities of the cord . Injury to the posterior ligament complex (PLC) was detected by MRI, and the integrity of the complex was considered indeterminate. There was no evidence of acute injury of the T11 vertebral body except for cuneiform anterior wedging. Then, we reevaluated the anteroposterior view , and the appearance of the vertebral body defect was symmetrical with corticated margins, suggesting a T11 butterfly vertebra. Finally, a primary diagnosis of complete paraplegia with a T11 butterfly vertebra was made. According to the AOSpine classification, the fracture type was B2 N4.
The patient underwent urgent posterior decompressive and fixation surgery from T10 to T12. The disruption of the PLC was confirmed during the operation. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful. There was no wound infection, and no complications were observed. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) examinations were performed, confirming the presence of a T11 butterfly vertebra consisting of two lateral hemivertebrae. The patient was discharged after 25 days of hospitalization and was transferred to a rehabilitation center. After 12 months of follow-up, the patient did not show any improvement in neurological status (American Spinal Injury Association, ASIA, grade A), and radiographic images revealed no evidence of implant migration or disruption .