A 65-year-old Japanese woman, who was known to be infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), underwent rectal resection for advanced rectal cancer, which represented serosal invasion and lymph node metastasis. In spite of HCV infection, the results of her liver function test were normal and she did not hope to receive antiviral therapy because of socioeconomic reasons. At the age of 68, she developed two CRLMs located in segments 4 and 6. She received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, including oxaliplatin, leucovorin, and fluorouracil, and subsequently underwent surgery composed of microwave tissue coagulator (MCT) ablation for segment 4 tumor and segmentectomy 6. The segment 4 tumor was considerably small with a diameter of 1 cm and it was exposed to the liver surface; thus, we performed MCT ablation. A histological examination of the resected S6 tumor revealed adenocarcinoma and was confirmed to be CRLM but not intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma with negative cytokeratin 7 and positive cytokeratin 20 in immunohistochemistry. Although she was diagnosed histologically as having a cirrhotic liver, by a microscopic examination for background non-tumoral liver, antiviral treatment was again not conducted due to socioeconomic reasons at that time. At the age of 71, abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor that was adjacent to the previously ablated lesion in segment 4 of her liver . The tumor was irregularly shaped and in contact with her middle hepatic vein (MHV). Based on a three-phase CT study, the tumor showed neither early enhancement nor washout and was less enhanced compared to non-tumoral background liver through all phases. Furthermore, no other tumor was detected in any phases of the three-phase study. Based on these findings and her previous history of rectal cancer liver metastases, we considered the segment 4 tumor to be a recurrent liver metastasis originating from rectal cancer. Because her liver function was well preserved and corresponded to Child-Pugh A (5 points), surgery was undertaken. During the surgery, a small tumor was identified in segment 8, which could not be diagnosed preoperatively. Taking her history into account, we considered that the segment 8 tumor was also a recurrent CRLM. The segment 4 tumor was broadly in contact with her MHV and less distinguishable from the lesion previously treated by MCT. Thus we performed segmentectomy 4 including MHV for the segment 4 tumor. With regard to the segment 8 tumor, it was exposed to the liver surface and well recognizable. Hence, we considered applying MCT ablation to the segment 8 tumor. However, the segment 4 tumor, which was resected at that time, might have been a local recurrence of the segment 4 tumor previously treated by MCT ablation. In other words, MCT ablation might not have been effective enough or might have induced tumor implantation into her liver even if the tumor was small and exposed to the liver surface. Thus we performed partial hepatectomy for segment 8 tumor; methods of hepatectomy were described according to the Brisbane 2000 system of nomenclature of liver anatomy and resections .
Histological findings showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the segment 4 tumor, confirming that the segment 4 tumor was a recurrent rectal cancer liver metastasis as diagnosed preoperatively . The diagnosis of recurrent CRLM was corroborated by the immunohistochemistry that showed negative for cytokeratin 7 and positive for cytokeratin 20, indicating that the segment 4 tumor was CRLM but not intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma that often develops in cirrhotic liver. However, histology of the segment 8 tumor showed findings of well-differentiated HCC . According to the Metavir system , we determined the inflammation and fibrosis status of the non-tumoral background liver to be A1F4 . As to the HCC, it was classified as early stage (A) of the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer staging system because the tumor was solitary and 1 cm in size, the liver function of the patient corresponded to Child-Pugh A, and performance status corresponded to 0 .
Although she had a cut surface abscess postoperatively, she was discharged from hospital 21 days after the surgery and is currently doing well 18 months after the second hepatectomy . She is currently receiving interferon and ribavirin therapy to eliminate HCV .