A 53 years old woman with diabetic macular edema in her right eye and decreased vision to 20/160 was recommended to have an intravitreal bevacizumab injection. In the operating theater, however, 0.05 ml of 0.2% Mitomycin C solution inadvertently was injected intravitreally. The ophthalmologist immediately referred the patient to the emergency department of a tertiary referral center for urgent vitrectomy, but the patient presented to the hospital 2 days later. Due to the distance, she came late till visual loss became severe.
At presentation, visual acuity was hand motion (HM), with relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD). In slit lamp exam, conjunctival injection, corneal edema with Descemet fold, and deep anterior chamber with inflammatory cell was seen. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 4 mmHg. Cataract was nuclear sclerosis, and red reflex was reduced. Anterior vitreous cell was observed. Optic disc was round in shape, erythematosus, with sharp borders and cup/disc ratio of 0.4. Fundus exam revealed macular edema with hard exudates and diabetic retinopathy as mild to moderate non proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Visual acuity of her left eye was 20/20 with mild non proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
23 gauge pars plana deep vitrectomy with posterior vitreous detachment induction and peripheral vitreous shaving was performed. Retinal venular tortuosity, arterial narrowing and diffuse retinal edema were seen. No retinitis or infarction was observed. As the patient was hypotonic, silicone oil tamponade was used. Sclerotomies were sutured and subtenon triamcinolone acetonide (TriamHEXAl, Hexal AG, Holzkirchen, Germany) was injected.
The day after vitrectomy, visual acuity was HM. Cornea was still edematous. Retina was attached and featureless, and arteries became narrower. IOP was 8 mmHg. Fundus photograph, fluorescein angiography, optical coherent tomography (OCT) and electroretinography were requested . In fluorescein angiography, due to media opacity, details were not evaluated. Only large vessels were visible. Vascular stating and tortuosity was remarkable. In OCT, although the quality of the images was low due to haziness of the media, retina was shown edematous with cystic changes. In electrophysiology, undetectable flat ERG response was recorded in right eye and normal responses in the left eye. Patient was discharged and followed by 10 days topical Ciprofloxacine (Ciplex, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) every 8 h, high frequency (every 3 h) topical Betamethsone (Betasonate, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) and every 8 h cycloplegic as Homatropine (Homydrin, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran). Moreover, topical NaCl 5% (Natrisalt, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) eye drop every 6 h and ointment for nights was prescribed. Two weeks later, IOP reduced to 6 mmHg. The ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed ciliary body shortening and detachment. Retina was attached with patchy intraretinal hemorrhages. In OCT evaluation, edema was less and small pockets of subretinal fluid were seen. In temporal to macula, retinal thickness was reduced and atrophy was initiated After 2 months, visual acuity declined to poor light perception. Corneal edema was mild. Iris became atrophic with pigments distributed on the endothelium, over the lens and also the spongy iris stroma. Retina was clinically attached and became atrophic and featureless. Optic disc became semi-pale. In OCT, atrophy with all layers became intertwined and indistinguishable . After 1 year, visual acuity was no light perception. IOP was 4 mmHg. Patient had mature cataract, diffuse iris atrophy, mid dilated iris and mild corneal edema . In specular microscopy, cell density was near half of the other eye (1670 vs. 2409) and mean cell size was half larger (598 vs. 415 µm2).