A 26-year-old female presented with normal vitals and weakness in all four limbs with pain in the right proximal thigh . On detailed history, it was noted that 5 years ago, she had fracture of proximal shaft of femur in the left side following a ground level fall for which she had medical and surgical treatment . On detailed examination, motor weakness in all four limbs, diminished deep tendon reflexes, downgoing plantar reflex, absent clonus, and normal sensory and cranial functions were noted. There was negative history for fever, trauma, drug intake, or any chronic illness. On laboratory analysis, thyroid profile, blood counts, random and fasting blood sugar, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, kidney function test, liver function test, and urine analysis were in normal range. Antinuclear antibody test was negative and serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) was in normal range (23.4 pg/ml) with Vitamin D insufficiency (value – 24.9 ng/ml). Serum electrolytes were in normal range except potassium level which was low (2.31 mg/dl). Specific electrocardiogram changes for low potassium were absent. The patient had normal acid base balance with urinary potassium level in normal limit. On plain radiograph, there was an atypical fracture of proximal diaphysis of femur in the right side with united fracture of the left proximal diaphysis of femur with IM nail in situ. The current fracture was transverse in orientation with an increase in anterolateral bowing. There were sclerotic changes at the lateral cortex. Coxa vara of femoral head and neck in both sides was noted . As there was no laboratory finding abnormality except for decreased serum potassium level and marginally low serum Vitamin D3 level, the patient was diagnosed as FHPP with an atypical femur fracture in the right side with operated left femur with implant in situ. On oral therapy of potassium replacement, the patient completely recovered from weakness. Since the fracture was incomplete, the fracture of femur was managed by non-weight-bearing for 6 weeks followed by guarded weight-bearing and activity modification. Injection teriparatide was started to stimulate the bone healing. By 3 months, she again started walking with full weight-bearing and radiologically the fracture showed signs of bone union . Local pain and tenderness at the fracture site disappeared completely.