A 72-year-old male Caucasian patient with a past medical history of ischaemic cardiomyopathy, carrying a two-chamber ICD for secondary prevention, was admitted to the emergency department due to persistent tachycardia. For several days, he had noticed an accelerated heartbeat. Associated symptoms such as angina pectoris or syncope were denied. Apart from a regular tachycardia, physical examination remained unremarkable. Since 2017 he was on long-term drug therapy with amiodarone (200 mg once daily) and bisoprolol (5 mg twice daily). The electrocardiogram (ECG) performed upon arrival revealed a regular broad complex tachycardia with a ventricular frequency of 117/min, superior axis, positive concordance in precordial leads (V1–V6) and a deflection time >100 ms in lead V1 compatible with VT or antidromic AVRT involving a left-posterior accessory pathway (AP). Remarkably, monophasic positive P-waves in leads V1–V6 with an atrial rate of ∼235/min were registered, suggestive of atypical atrial flutter with 2:1 conduction. The ECG is displayed in . Interrogation of the ICD, which had been implanted in another hospital in 2015 for secondary prevention, clearly showed atrial flutter (cycle length, 260 ms) with 2:1 atrioventricular (AV) conduction . Device settings are shown in . Electrical cardioversion (eCV) was performed successfully after atrial overstimulation remained ineffective. The ECG after eCV showed normal sinus rhythm (SR) with positive P-waves in inferior leads and biphasic P-waves (+/−) in lead V1, a PQ-interval of 160 ms, a narrow QRS complex in all 12 leads, and preterminal T-wave inversions in inferior leads . The absence of initial positive deflection (septal r-wave) in lead aVR and absence of an initial negative deflection (septal q-wave) in lead V6 was observed. A comparison of central ECG features of i) broad compex tachycardia and ii) normal SR is provided in the section. Echocardiography after the restoration of SR revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 48% due to septal-basal and inferior-basal akinesia, which may additionally have triggered the misdiagnosis of this broad complex tachycardia as VT before. The electrophysiological study, performed in normal SR, revealed a bidirectionally conducting, left-posterior AP. Right ventricular (RV) pacing induced a C-shaped activation sequence of the 10-pole coronary sinus (CS) catheter and atrial pacing with decreasing cycle length led to increasing preexcitation of the QRS complex ; 12-lead ECG-morphology of the pre-excited QRS complex was identical to the broad complex tachycardia upon admission . The refractory period of the AP was 360 ms in the context of long-term drug therapy with amiodarone and no administration of catecholamines. Importantly, subsequent re-evaluation of the broad complex tachycardia leading to ICD-implantation in 2015 showed i) irregular RR-intervals and discrete beat to beat variations of the QRS-complexes suggestive of a fast-broad-irregular (FBI) tachycardia and ii) a nearly identical QRS morphology compared to the pre-excited QRS complex induced during the electrophysiological study . The patient underwent AP ablation. The left atrium was accessed via a transseptal approach. RV pacing revealed the earliest atrial activation at the posterior mitral annulus (CS 5/6). An electro-anatomical activation map was acquired during RV-stimulation, and the AP could be effectively ablated slightly septal from CS 5/6 as annotated . No recurrence of the AP was registered during the 30-minute waiting time after ablation. Amiodarone therapy was stopped. As the underlying electrograms (EGMs) of ICD therapies in 2017 and 2018 were deleted beforehand, retrospective differentiation of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) involving the AP (atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter) or antidromic AVRT from VT was not possible anymore. Therefore, and in the context of structural heart disease (ischaemic cardiomyopathy, LVEF 48%, septal-basal and inferior-basal akinesia), the ICD was left in situ and the patient was discharged. Three months after catheter ablation the patient was examined routinely in the outpatient clinic. He reported a good physical state and denied any form of palpitations, and device interrogation revealed no arrhythmias since catheter ablation.