A female patient aged 45 years with no known comorbidities came to our department at the university hospital Sahloul Sousse with the chief complaint of a right-sided swelling in the mandible. This swelling has caused slight asymmetry of the face since 6 months, which gradually enlarged up to the present size .
The patient gave a history of generalized weakness, lethargy, and weight loss noticed since past few months. Her family history and past medical history were nonsignificant.
Intraoral examination revealed a 4.0 × 4.0 cm bulbous mass hard to palpation arising from the mandible and extending from the distal aspect of the lower right first premolar (44) to the second right molar (47) . She had no associated bleeding or superficial ulceration of the mass. The patient denied pain but mentioned difficulty in eating. Positive response to sensitivity testing was found in the lower right premolars and molars. Neither mobility nor teeth dislocation were noticed.
Radiographic examination with orthopantamogram showed unilocular radiolucency close to the mandibular first right molar's roots, without involving the mandibular canal. Roots erosion of the relative tooth was noted .
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiloculated ground-glass ossification of the lesion .
After the first molar extraction (46) and the surgical excision of the lesion, the histological report was akin to the giant cell tumor .
So, serum parathormone level was advised to rule out metabolic bone disease. Laboratory investigations were done: serum PTH level was slightly high, and serum calcium and phosphorus levels were normal .
The lesion was identified as a brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism, and the patient was referred to the endocrinology department.
Kidney function blood tests were done. Serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were normal. Chronic renal failure could not be considered the cause of hyperparathyroidism. However, we noted severe vitamin D deficiency . The initial impression was of secondary hyperparathyroidism due to this vitamin D deficiency.
It was decided that vitamin D supplementation was the best therapeutic option. The patient was started on vitamin D 100,000 IU per fortnight for 6 weeks which is the equivalent of half an ampoule of 200,000 IU/1 ml. Thereafter, the patient was kept on 200,000 IU every 6 months. Her PTH levels decreased after 6 months on vitamin D therapy, and her calcium and phosphorus levels remained in the standards.
The patient underwent ultrasound scan of the neck, which showed a left lower lobe parathyroid solid nodule. The lesion had irregular hypoechoic component and was suggestive of parathyroid adenoma. Parathyroid technetium scintiscan (99mTc Sestamibi; Technetium-99 MIBI; methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile) was requisite and revealed left lower parathyroid adenoma . Skeleton exploration was done by technetium 99 scintigraphy and did not reveal any abnormally high uptake.
Accordingly, we retained the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism masked by vitamin D deficiency and caused by parathyroid adenoma.
There was a normalization of calcium, PTH, and vitamin D serum levels. The bone mineral density test was not lower than normal which excludes osteopenia and osteoporosis. So, surgical treatment of the adenoma was not indicated. The patient was compliant and presented a favorable evolution .