A 7-year-old Chinese boy of Han ethnicity presented to our Department of General Surgery, Children’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University with an abdominal mass that was revealed on ultrasound examination after a tumble. His serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was elevated to 163.1 ng/ml (normal, 8.5 ± 5.5 ng/ml). An abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that there was an inhomogeneous low density mass in the hepatic portal area, the size of which was approximately 3.2 × 4.3 cm, and it slightly adhered to the surrounding tissue. Contrast-enhanced CT showed that the mass was not uniformly enhanced, the center of the tumor had obvious enhancement, and there was no significant invasion of his liver . An abdominal examination showed his abdomen was soft, there was no gastrointestinal peristalsis, no obvious abdominal mass, and no abdominal tenderness and rebounding pain. Bowel sounds were normal. An exploratory laparotomy was performed after preoperative examination and an abdominal approach through abdominal median incision was chosen. A mixed mass of approximately 4 × 3 cm was found in the hepatogastric ligament. The mass was not attached to large vessels and was nourished by the capillary vessels in the hepatogastric ligament. There was a small amount of bleeding in the mass, which had complete tumor capsule and adhered mildly to the lesser omentum. We removed the tumor completely after loosening it from surrounding tissue. The operation was performed successfully and the intraoperative diagnosis was teratoma. The postoperative specimen showed: specimen was dark red with a size of 2.5 × 3.5 cm and it had a complete capsule. The cut surface of this tumor had a soft, hemorrhagic necrotic and yellow nodular appearance . Pathology showed hepatoblastoma in the hepatogastric ligament: subtype, mixed fetal and embryonal hepatoblastoma . Immunohistochemistry showed: creatine kinase (CK), (+); epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), (+); glypican-3, (+); human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), (−); vimentin, (−); S100, (−); cluster of differentiation (CD) 34, (−); and Ki-67, (40%+). His AFP dropped to 18.33 ng/ml on the 13th day and returned to normal on the 28th day after the operation. He underwent six cycles of postoperative chemotherapy. There was no sign of recurrence through abdominal CT in the 3 years after surgery .