A 24-year-old woman with a 6-month history of swelling in the left floor of her mouth was referred to our institution. Although she experienced slight difficulty in swallowing, she did not experience pain or tongue paralysis. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable.
Intraoral examination revealed a well-defined 3.5 × 3 × 2 cm-sized solid, spherical submucosal nodule adjacent to the sublingual gland; the nodule was covered with light bluish smooth mucus . The patient experienced slight pain when pressure was applied to the tumor. Mobility and sensory functions of the tongue were normal, and no lymphadenopathy in the submandibular region was detected on palpation. All relevant laboratory test results were normal. Enhanced computed tomography revealed a 2.8 × 1.8 × 2.1 cm-sized well-defined, solid, heterogeneous nodule that did not appear to involve the mandible . In addition, a three-dimensionally reconstructed image showed a nodular lesion occupying the left floor of the mouth with abundant blood flow . No enlarged lymph nodes were found in the submental or submandibular regions.
The initial clinical impression was a benign salivary gland tumor, dermoid cyst, or benign connective tissue neoplasm. The patient was scheduled for surgery via an intraoral approach. First, an elliptical incision was made around the periphery of the sublingual gland through only the oral mucosa, and a full-thickness tissue flap was prepared along the lingual aspect of the sublingual gland. After the sublingual gland was freed from its surrounding tissue with blunt dissection, a well-circumscribed tumor without capsular extension was found beneath the body of the sublingual gland and located above the submandibular gland duct and lingual nerve. The submandibular gland duct and lingual nerve were carefully freed from the tumor surface, and the complete tumor was excised along with the sublingual gland . The tissue sample was fixed with 10% formalin and submitted for histopathological diagnosis.
Microscopically, the tumor cells were round, oval, polyhedral, or fusiform and were arranged in organoid and sheet-like patterns with vascular lumens. Most of their nuclei were small and round within an amphiphilic or slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm. Nuclear atypia was rare .
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells yield positive results for vimentin and alpha-smooth muscle actin, but negative results for desmin, anti-cytokeratin (AE)1 or AE3, cluster of differentiation (CD)31 and CD34, and S-100, and exhibited a Ki-67 index of 5%. These findings were consistent with those for a glomus tumor.
After surgery, the patient had an uneventful recovery with primary healing and had no evidence of recurrence over 4 years of follow-up.