A 49-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with dysphagia for solids and food impaction around the neck for several years. His medical history was otherwise unremarkable, and he had not continuously taken any medications for an extended period. A physical examination revealed no abnormalities, and the results of laboratory tests were within normal ranges. Upper intestinal endoscopy revealed a diverticulum on the left side of the cervical esophagus below the piriform recess . There were no mucosal abnormalities or neoplastic lesions in the diverticulum. Barium esophagography showed a left-sided outpouching sac just below the cricopharyngeal bar. This outpouching sac from the cervical esophagus was conspicuous on the front view . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 35-mm-diameter diverticulum containing gas and food debris behind the left thyroid lobe, connecting to the cervical esophagus at the level of the cricothyroid cartilage . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as having a KJD. Transcervical diverticulectomy was performed under general anesthesia. An 8-cm collar skin incision was made two fingers above the sternoclavicular joint with a scalpel. After elevation of the skin flap, the left sternohyoid muscles were preserved. The thyroid gland was exposed, and posterior and lower dissection of the left thyroid lobe was performed. The lower border of the left thyroid lobe was mobilized, and the diverticulum was exposed. The thickened diverticulum was identified without difficulty; however, there was adhesion at the base of the diverticulum. The left RLN was identified and marked for monitoring. The diverticulum was carefully dissected from the surrounding tissue using an IONM system (Nerve Integrity Monitoring Response 3.0 system; Medtronic Japan, Tokyo, Japan) . The left RLN is typically located in the tracheoesophageal groove. A handheld probe, which was used to avoid mechanical or thermal injury, revealed that the left RLN was active at the base of the diverticulum. Therefore, it was considered possible to preserve the RLN with a high degree of certainty. The base of the diverticulum was below the cricopharyngeal muscle and lateral to the longitudinal esophageal muscle and was diagnosed as a KJD . In definitive diverticulectomy, a partial cricopharyngeal myotomy was performed to expose the cranial side of the base of the diverticulum. The transection line was selected under the guidance of intraoperative upper intestinal endoscopy to ensure both appropriate dissection of the diverticulum and an adequate caliber of the cervical esophageal lumen. The diverticulum was transected transversally using a linear stapler . Because of the proximity of the RLN course to the diverticulum stump, the staple line was not buried with sutures. To reinforce the staple line, a TGF was prepared. The TGF was directly supplied by the superior thyroid artery and harvested from the superior aspect of the designated thyroid lobe . The size of the left thyroid gland was adjusted to fit and then placed on the area of the partial cricopharyngeal myotomy . The TGF was fixed so that it completely covered the staple line on the cut surface of the thyroid gland . Thus, this weakened area was completely covered with the TGF, which had a rich blood flow from the superior thyroid artery. The total blood loss was 79 mL, and the total surgical time was 153 min. Histopathological examination showed a pseudodiverticulum with a defect of the muscle layer, which was compatible with a KJD. The postoperative course was uneventful, without vocal cord paralysis. Postoperative barium esophagography confirmed that there was no leakage or remnant diverticulum . Enhanced computed tomography showed that the TGF was accurately located corresponding to the defect . Oral intake was resumed on postoperative day 3, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8. He developed no findings suggestive of recurrence or other complications.