A 51-year-old female Chinese patient without arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus or significant past ophthalmic history presented to our hospital complaining of painless, suddenly impaired vision in her right eye for 11 days. Prior to that, she had been hospitalized at the local county hospital with visual acuity of 0.06 and 0.80 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Based on the results of ophthalmologic, fundus and fluorescein angiography (FA) examinations, clinical diagnosis of CRVO was established and traditional Chinese medicine was prescribed to activate blood circulation and decrease blood stasis. Upon presentation to our hospital, the anterior segment examination under a slit lamp biomicroscope (SLE) was unremarkable in both eyes, and visual acuity of 0.10 and 0.80 was revealed in the right and left eyes, respectively. Intraocular pressure was in the normal range. A dilated fundus evaluation demonstrated an edematous macula, tortuous and dilated retinal veins with radially patterned hemorrhages, blurred and elevated disc margins in her right eye, and retinal paleness in the upper region of the macula . On the basis of these signs, combined with the results from FA performed at the local hospital, the diagnosis of CRVO was reconfirmed. The FA examination was repeated at our hospital, which showed signs suggestive of BRAO and the patient was recommended to undergo SD-OCT examination. SD-OCT showed macular edema with a shallowly detached fovea, an edematous retina in its all sections, subfoveal liquid, a detached peripapillary retina, intact inner segment-outer segment (IS-OS) line and a strong reflected signal from thickened inner layers of the superior retina (ILSR) in contrast to the inferior retina, suggesting the possibility of merging BRAO in this region . A retrospective view of the fundus photographs showed that, in addition to radial hemorrhages in the fundus of the right eye, a clearly demarcated pale area at the superior region of the retina existed. Because of the obvious CRVO manifestation, this region had been neglected during the previous examinations. Subsequently, the complete clinical diagnosis of combined unilateral CRVO and BRAO was made. The patient had neither medical history nor signs and symptoms of cardiovascular, hematological, systemic and parasitic diseases. The instrumental examinations, such as chest X-ray and echocardiography, did not reveal any pathology and blood and urine laboratory test results, namely enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), plasma and urine homocysteine quantitative tests, full blood count were within the normal range. The ELISA and PCR testes were used to screen for β2-glycoprotein 1 dependent anticardiolipin (ACA), immunoglobulin G antibodies and Toxoplasma gondii B1 gene. Owing to a late presentation (>24 hours), the only treatment offered was one periocular injection of triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg). One week later at the first follow-up visit, the patient had visual acuity of 0.40 and 0.80 in the right and left eyes, respectively. A SD-OCT examination showed decreased volume of the accumulated fluid in the sub-neuroepithelial space as well as weakened reflected signal from the ILSR and reduced retinal thickness . Two weeks later at the second and last follow-up visit, SD-OCT examination showed a further decrease of the sub-neuroepithelial fluid volume, reduced nonuniform reflected signal from and atrophy of the ILSR . The patient's visual acuity was 0.60 and 0.80 in the right and left eyes, respectively.
The SD-OCT features of combined unilateral CRVO and BRAO in our case were:
1. hyperreflectivity and increased thickness of the nerve fiber and inner retinal layers in the superior ischemic retina compared to the inferior unaffected area near the BRAO retina;
2. decreased reflectivity of the outer retinal layers in the superior half, probably due to an optical shadowing effect;
3. macular edema and serous macular detachment typical for CRVO;
4. no cystoid macular edema was observed either on presentation or at follow-up visits;
5. a well-defined demarcation line between the affected and unaffected areas near the BRAO retina6. peripapillary retinal detachment