A 67-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a history of dysphagia for 6 months. Upper gastrointestinal fiber endoscopy revealed a thoracic esophageal lesion. On histopathology, the biopsy specimen of the esophageal lesion revealed squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Esophagography showed a localized lesion in the upper middle thoracic esophagus , and PET-CT showed no distant or local lymph node metastases . A preoperative diagnosis of upper thoracic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) of clinical stage T2N0M0 (stage IB) was made based on the TNM classification of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) . He then underwent thoracoscopy-assisted esophagectomy and lymph node dissection, with reconstruction using a gastric tube through the retrosternal route. On histopathology, the resected specimen revealed well to moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with invasion of the muscularis propria. According to the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer, the tumor had an infiltrative type b growth pattern, with lymphatic (ly) 2, and venous invasion (v) 1. Intramural metastasis was not seen, and the resected margin was adequate. There were no metastases in the resected LNs, and the tumor was finally staged as T2N0M0 (stage II according to the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer). The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged without any complications. He received no adjuvant therapy in view of pathological stage T2N0M0 (stage IB) disease. He was regularly followed up monthly for 3 months after surgery and at 6 months thereafter. CT scanning was used to check for recurrences, twice a year.
At 3 years after surgery, a solitary metastatic lesion was detected by CT and PET-CT in the upper lobe of the left lung . A segmentectomy of the left lung was performed , followed by chemotherapy with CDDP and 5-FU. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. The well-demarcated nodular lesion consisted of squamoid cancer cells proliferating in nests, with tumor necrosis. The pathologists suggested that the findings were more in favor of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma than primary lung cancer.
The year after the lung surgery, a metastatic lesion was detected on CT and PET-CT in the upper lobe of the right lung, invading the chest wall . This was managed with a partial lobectomy of the right lobe with local chest wall resection . The specimen revealed squamous cell carcinoma and contained lung tissue with the proliferation of severely atypical squamoid cells, arranged in nests. The histologic findings were similar to the previously resected lung specimen, and it was diagnosed as a metastasis from ESCC.
The year after right lobectomy, follow-up CT revealed multiple LN metastases in the mediastinum, right supraclavicular region, right axilla, and abdomen ; PET-CT revealed increased uptake of FDG in the intra-abdominal LN, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 6.1. The metastatic LNs were managed with chemoradiation to a dose of 50.4 Gy with concurrent CDDP and 5-FU. A partial response was achieved .
Locoregional LN metastases in the left cervical region were detected in the year after chemoradiation . As the patient had a good performance status, and the nodes were operable at ease, they were resected. . Histopathologic examination of the resected LN in the left neck and supraclavicular LNs revealed metastatic cancer cells in 9 of 16 LN. He then received additional chemoradiation to a dose of 50.0 Gy with CDDP and 5-FU.
The fifth recurrence occurred in the LNs of the mediastinum and right hilum, a year after the cervical nodes were treated . Chemotherapy was administered with an alternative regimen, combining nedaplatin and docetaxel. The follow-up CT scans after chemotherapy revealed complete response . At present, 11 years after esophagectomy, he is still alive with good disease control.