A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for hematemesis and anemia. He had conjunctival anemia. Other physical examination was normal. Abnormal laboratory values included hemoglobin level at 9.5 g/dL and hematocrit level at 30.9%. Gastric wall thickness was detected in the lower gastric body in abdominal computed tomography scan . Gastrointestinal endoscopy demonstrated type 2 lesion with a maximal size of 32 mm in the anterior side of the lower gastric body and type 0–IIa + IIc lesion with a maximal size of 24 mm in the anterior side of the gastric angle . The latter lesion was bleeding and electric cauterization was performed to stop the bleeding. In addition, a small submucosal tumor was found in the antrum region of the stomach . On hospital day 8, second gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and biopsies were taken from both lesions. Rapid urease test was positive. Histological examination of the gastric body revealed MALT lymphoma and the lesion in the gastric angle was diagnosed with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The preoperative diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma was cT1b cN0 cStage IA (8th TNM classification).
We performed laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D1 + lymph node dissections and R-Y reconstruction . The operation was successfully performed with uneventful outcome.
Histological findings of the sample taken from the tumor in the gastric angle confirmed the diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma which infiltrated into deep submucosa. MALT lymphoma was the preoperative diagnosis of the tumor in the lower gastric body; however, postoperative histological findings confirmed the diagnosis of DLBCL. Large diffused atypical lymphocytes were observed in whole layer of the lower gastric body, and the tumor cells were stained with bcl-6, CD10 and CD20 . In the tumor tissue, lymphoepithelial lesion (LEL) of characteristic of MALT lymphoma was observed, but strong atypical lymphocytes and high level of MIB-1 (70–80%) were observed. Taken together, the final diagnosis of the tumor in the lower gastric body was DLBCL. In addition, a 1.0-cm nodule was found on the serosal surface of the anterior wall of the antrum of the stomach in the process of histocytological preparation. Sections of the serosal nodule showed a GIST composed of uniform spindle cells. Immunostaining for CD34 and c-kit were positive while S-100 and desmin were negative. GIST was classified as very low risk in the Fletcher risk table. No perigastric lymph nodes contained malignant component was found. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged with a good clinical prognosis. We prescribed medicine to eradicate H. pylori after gastrectomy.