A 41 year-old Caucasian woman with a history of Ehlers-Danlos type III syndrome, migraine headaches, and sciatica received a lumber 4/lumbar 5 translaminar epidural steroid injection from a contaminated compounded steroid lot (06292012@26) on August 31, 2012 . Seventeen days after her injection, she developed headaches, nausea and vomiting and was diagnosed with sinusitis and migraines. Thirty-seven days after injection she received a notification letter of exposure from the compounding facility and presented to her local emergency department. She underwent a lumbar puncture (LP) showing pleocytosis . Given these results and otherwise negative workup for alternative etiologies, and in the context of the ongoing contaminated steroid outbreak, she was treated with liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg daily) and voriconazole (5 mg/kg IV q12h) for presumptive fungal meningitis. Repeat lumbar puncture (LP) performed one week after initiation of therapy showed no increase in pleocytosis . She was discharged from the outside facility three days later on oral voriconazole, though medication initiation was delayed due to medication supply issues.
She presented to this hospital three days after discharge with fevers, worsening headache and vomiting. She also had developed new left face, hand and foot numbness. Neurological exam revealed diminished light touch and temperature sensation in the region of the left cranial trigeminal nerve, mandibular division, left hand and the dorsal aspect of left foot, as well as 4/5 strength on left foot dorsiflexion. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on October 21 showed evidence of acute infarct at the right pons with the suggestion of a prominent vessel in the right perimesencephalic cistern suspicious for a mycotic aneurysm and evidence of diffuse vasculopathy of the vertebrobasilar arteries, . A computed tomography (CT) angiography showed a 4.1 mm aneurysm at the right superior cerebellar artery in the right perimesencephalic cistern . Repeat LP showed stable pleocytosis . She was restarted on liposomal amphotericin B (7.5 mg/kg daily) and intravenous voriconazole (6 mg/kg q12h).
One week later, repeat brain MRI with gadolinium showed evidence on gradient echo sequences of subarachnoid signal changes consistent with either blood or inflammation in the prepontine cistern, bilateral occipital horns, and right hemispheric subarachnoid space. The aneurysm appeared stable in size, though more irregular. In consultation with Neurosurgery, the risks of operation given the location, size and friable appearance of the aneurysm outweighed the potential benefits of surgical intervention. She had a MRI lumbar spine due to new onset urinary retention during her hospitalization (November 13th) which showed evidence of arachnoiditis affecting intrathecal and bilateral dorsal extradural components. The patient underwent a repeat LP on November 9th, now 10 weeks after initial contaminated steroid injection, which indicated persistent pleocytosis . The voriconazole level, 5 days after reinitiation of 6 mg/kg intravenous therapy was less than 1 mcg/mL and dosing was increased to 9 mg/kg dosing despite presence of hallucinations on the lower nontherapeutic dose begun at this second hospitalization on October 21st.Prior to discharge repeat CT angiography showed slight decrease in aneurysm size to 3.8 mm and no subarachnoid hemorrhage (not shown). Three months into therapy the right superior cerebral artery aneurysm was diminished but not resolved in February, 2013 .
Microbiological studies resulted in negative fungal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures on October 8, 15, 21 and Novemberz 9 at the hospital clinical laboratory. CSF PCR was also negative for fungal and Exserohilum species detection at Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . Archival CSF from the three October and single November LPs held in the state lab were retrospectively evaluated for (1,3)-β-D-glucan (BDG), with results showing levels greater than 500 pg/mL (positive >80 pg/mL).She received a total of 32 weeks of antifungal treatment, initially with 14 weeks of combined voriconazole and liposomal amphotericin B, followed by 8 weeks of voriconazole alone due to renal insufficiency from liposomal amphotericin B, followed by 4 weeks of combined therapy and ending with 6 weeks of liposomal amphotericin B alone which was discontinued secondary to renal dysfunction, nausea, emesis and myalgias. She completed 26 weeks of voriconazole and 24 weeks of liposomal amphotericin B. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was performed at the end of antifungal therapy, which showed resolution of the aneurysm. Her symptoms resolved forty weeks after onset. MRA was performed at the end of antifungal therapy, which showed resolution of the aneurysm. An August, 2013 CTA performed 3 months after discontinuation of all antifungal therapy did not show any recurrence of aneurysm . More than a year after onset of symptoms and 6 months off therapy she remains well and is considered a “cure”.