A 77-year-old man with a chief complaint of persistent dry cough had an abnormal giant mass on chest radiography (CR) and was referred to our hospital. There were no remarkable findings noted during the physical examination and in blood test results including tumor markers. The giant mass occupied the left-sided mediastinum on CR; however, there was no abnormal finding on the previous year’s CR . Chest-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-circumscribed 11-cm mass in the left-sided anterior mediastinum . The mean CT value of the mass was 40 Hounsfield units (range, 20–70), and there were no areas of fatty density. Positron emission tomography-CT showed accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the tumor, with a maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.3 . We preoperatively diagnosed the benign tumor as a thymoma, solitary fibrous tumor (SFT), or neurogenic tumor, or as a malignant tumor such as thymic cancer, based on the radiological evaluation.
Tumor resection was performed without preoperative biopsy via left posterolateral thoracotomy for diagnosis and treatment. Median sternotomy is considered an alternative surgical approach for mediastinal tumors. In the present case, however, the hilar approach was considered necessary and posterolateral thoracotomy was selected. The tumor was located on the mediastinum and was suspected to invade the left phrenic nerve but not the vagus nerve. The tumor was resected with the left phrenic nerve, thymus, and a part of the pericardium (9.5 × 8.0 cm); therefore, we reconstructed the pericardium using an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene sheet (GORE-TEX®, W. L. Gore & Associates, Co., Ltd., Flagstaff, AZ, USA).
Grossly, the tumor measured 11.9 × 11.2 × 8.1 cm, and it was an elastic, well-circumscribed, yellowish, and grayish-white mass . Histopathologically, the tumor consisted of rich collagenous fiber and pattern-less spindle cells, and these findings suggested SFT . The tumor, however, comprised a few adipocytes, some of which looked like lipoblasts . Moreover, few blood vessels were recognized, and there was no “staghorn vasculature” appearance, which is characteristic of SFT.
Immunohistochemical staining to determine the pathological diagnosis of the tumor was performed using the Leica Bond III automated system (Leica Biosystems, Melbourne, Australia). Necrosis was absent, with up to 10% positivity of Ki-67 (clone, MIB-1; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark; diluted 1:200) . Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for CD34 in the endothelium (diluted 1:5; clone, NU-4A1; Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan) and mouse double minute 2 homolog (MDM2) in the nucleus (diluted 1:100; clone, IF2; Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Osaka, Japan) , while it showed negativity for signal transducers and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) (diluted 1:200; clone, YE361; Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom) ; these findings were consistent with a diagnosis of WDLS. Furthermore, fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed MDM2 gene amplification.
Based on its histopathological and immunohistochemical patterns, the tumor was diagnosed as a sclerosing variant of WDLS. Sarcoma staging was Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) grade 1 (tumor differentiation = score 1, mitotic count = score 1 [Fig. b], tumor necrosis = score 0, total score = 2). The tumor partially invaded the pericardium , but not the phrenic nerve. Although gross complete resection was performed, the pathological margin was positive. Postoperative adjuvant therapies such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy were not performed because of insufficient evidence regarding their efficacy. The patient was alive at 5 years after surgery, with no evidence of disease recurrence.