A previously healthy 45-year-old female presented to our hospital from the outpatient clinic with a 3-year history of a slowly growing mass on the anterior aspect of her left mid-thigh which was painless and only caused her slight discomfort. She has a family history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia. She is a non-smoker and non-alcohol consumer. She did not a have a significant drug history nor drug allergies. On examination her vital signs were within normal range. There was a palpable 10 × 10 cm non-tender mass on the anterior left thigh which was solid and had regular borders. The mass did not transilluminate and was not attached to overlying skin.
The initial laboratory investigations were unremarkable. She then underwent left thigh magnetic resonance scan (MRI) which revealed a globular shaped intramuscular soft tissue mass lesion 9 × 6 × 4.5 cm implicating the left distal vastus medialis muscle. The lesion demonstrated homogenous low T1 (A) and high T2 (B) signals with marked heterogenous post contrast enhancement (A-C). There was another smaller 3 × 2 cm intramuscular lesion with the same criteria noted between the quadriceps and adductor muscles (, ).
Following that she underwent fine needle aspiration which showed only benign spindle cell lesion. It was followed by core needle biopsy which showed stellate cells that are positive for CD34 and SMA. These cells were negative for PanCk, S100 and Desmin. The final impression was suggestive of intramuscular myxoma.
Subsequently, she was admitted electively and underwent excision of the left thigh mass under general anesthesia. Preoperatively, the patient was sent to radiology department for metallic marker application within the smaller mass for easier intraoperative identification.
An incision was made on the left anterior thigh 10 cm from the left knee, dissection of layers was done until reaching the mass. The mass was dissected from overlying muscles and released from dense attachments bluntly and using electrocautery. Furthermore, a C-arm machine was used intraoperatively to locate the smaller mass that was preoperatively marked. A skin incision overlying the identified site was created and similar steps as described earlier were followed until the mass was completely excised. There were no complications post-operatively, the patient was able to ambulate on the same day with minimal pain at the surgical sites and was discharged on post-operative day two with surgical outpatient follow up. The patient presented to our surgical outpatient clinic 2 weeks later complaining of minimal swelling at the knee joint with limited knee mobility. She was advised referred to orthopedic outpatient clinic for further evaluation. Otherwise the wound healed well with no signs of hematoma or infection. The final histopathological examination revealed a benign lesion consisting of bland cells and basophilic matrix showing few spindle cells. The lesion was capsulated by a collagenized capsule and shows bundles of striated muscle fibers at the periphery . Immunohistochemistry test was positive for Vimentin and CD34, positive for Alcian blue and Mucicarmine in mucoid matrix, and negative for S100 and PanCk.