A 62-year-old gentleman presented with complaints of pain in his left groin area and difficulty in weight bearing on his left lower limb for 3 weeks. The pain was sudden in onset and started while he was on his morning walk. He did not have any problems with his left hip before this episode and he did not give a history of any significant trauma. At the time of presentation to the clinic, he was able to take a few steps – but with extreme pain. Examination revealed a shortened, externally rotated left lower limb with restriction of movements of his left hip due to severe pain.
The patient also complained of back pain and bilateral knee pain for the past 10 years while walking – but this did not limit his activities significantly. On enquiry about his personal habits, he mentioned that he had a past history of “blackening of urine” since childhood but had not had any treatment for the same.
X-rays revealed a subcapital fracture of the left neck of the femur with partial destruction of the femoral head . Bilateral knee radiographs confirmed the clinical diagnosis of chronic arthritis . X-ray of the lumbosacral spine showed gross calcification in the disc, vacuum phenomenon, and loss of height of the intervertebral discs accompanied by fusion (pseudo-block) vertebrae formation (, ).
Following routine evaluation, he underwent an uncemented total hip arthroplasty of his left hip under general anesthesia. No special precautions were taken for the surgery. The hip joint was found to have black pigmentation of the femur head which was partially destroyed, along with degenerated pigmented articular cartilage (, ).
The acetabulum was also black, but the underlying bone quality was good. An uncemented hip was implanted (Depuy-Corrail Pinnacle, with a ceramic head and ALTRX polyethylene liner). Screws were added for additional stability of the cup . The surgical time was 45 min and blood loss was only 250 ml. There were no pre-operative complications. Post-operative drain output was minimal and the drain was removed at 48-h post-operative.
The patient was ambulated on the 2nd post-operative day and was discharged without any complications.