Early gastric cancer was incidentally detected in a 55-year-old man during a regular medical checkup. His medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). Histopathological examination of the endoscopic biopsy specimen revealed a 55-mm, moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma at the lesser curvature of the stomach . Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed no evidence of metastasis (N0 and M0); however, two multilocular cystic lesions connected to the main pancreatic duct at the pancreatic tail were observed, without main pancreatic duct dilation but the solid component within the cyst was enhanced and the cyst wall was thickened. Subsequent MRCP revealed a gradual increase in the diameter of one of the lesions (from 18 mm to 25 mm over 3 years; ). The patient was diagnosed with a branch-duct type IPMN with a low malignant potential according to the 2017 international guidelines for IPMN. The levels of serum tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within the normal range.
Although there were no features suggestive of IPMN malignancy, considering the patient's young age and the difficulty in performing distal pancreatectomy (DP) after gastrectomy, simultaneous LDG and LSPDP with Roux-en-Y reconstruction were performed. To avoid gastric necrosis, we planned to preserve the gastrosplenic ligament and splenic vessels, including the short gastric arteries (ShGA), during LSPDP, and performed ICG angiography to visualize the blood flow to the remnant stomach. First, we performed LDG with D2 lymph node dissection and completed the LSPDP procedure , while preserving the gastrosplenic ligament . Next, we injected 7.5 mg of ICG (Dianogreen; Dai-Ichi Pharm, Tokyo, Japan) and assessed blood flow to the remnant stomach using a 1588 AIM camera system with endoscopic near-infrared visualization (Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, USA) . We then performed Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The total operation time was 555 min, and the blood loss was 512-ml.
Postoperatively, the patient developed a pancreatic fistula, which was conservatively treated with abdominal drainage tube insertion. On postoperative day (POD) 29, the tube was removed, and the patient was discharged on POD 32. Histopathological examination revealed poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma, well-differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma, and intraductal papillary mucinous adenoma. The overall stage of these cancers was T1b, N0, M0 (stage IA) according to the 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer gastric cancer TNM staging system. CT and fiber gastroscopy revealed no evidence of recurrence or splenic artery or vein thrombosis at 46 months postoperatively.