A 73-year-old European woman presented with abnormal vaginal discharge. On clinical vaginal examination, a brown pigmented flat lesion of 2 × 2 cm was seen on the posterior vaginal wall just beyond the vaginal introitus. The lateral and anterior walls of the vagina did not show any abnormalities. No inguinal lymphadenopathy was found. Her medical history included only hypertension. She was a non-smoking female, gravida 4—para 4, with four vaginal deliveries. Her surgical history included a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and an appendectomy. Her family history showed her mother died of metastatic breast cancer.
A primary excisional biopsy was performed, and pathology reports showed a malignant melanoma with a minimal diameter of 20 mm and a thickness of 8 mm. There was no lympho-vascular or perineural invasion. The margins were positive on the lateral and distal sides. The patient was subsequently referred to our tertiary cancer center for robotic oncological surgery. Preoperative imaging involved magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound scan of the groins, and FDG-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) scan. All of these investigations did not reveal any lymphadenopathy nor distant metastases. To exclude primary melanoma from other sides such as ocular melanoma, an ophthalmologic investigation was performed, which did not reveal any pathology. On the basis of these investigations, a primary melanoma from another side was excluded. The patient was clinically staged according to the 2009 International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics staging for vaginal cancer as FIGO-stage I (cT1bN0M0) and according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC; eighth edition) for (cutaneous) Melanoma Staging as clinical stage IB (T4bN0M0, with T4: >4 mm thickness and b: with ulceration) (–). The patient was planned for a combined vaginal and robotic en bloc resection of the total vagina and uterus, in order to achieve a complete resection of the vaginal melanoma, together with a pelvic sentinel lymph node dissection.
The robot da Vinci Xi platform (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with near-infrared fluorescence imaging (Firefly® technology) was used. As a fluorescent agent, indocyanine green (ICG: Verdye 25 mg, Diagnostic Green GmbH ©, 85609 Aschheim-Dornach, Germany) was used at a concentration of 1.9 mg/mL H2O. A total of 2 mL ICG was used for the patient and 0.5 mL was injected, just beyond the vaginal introitus, in the submucosa of the anterior, posterior, and lateral vaginal walls.