A woman in her late 20s was admitted because of a huge liver mass detected during evaluation for fever and abdominal pain. She initially came to our hospital with fever, intermittent right quadrant abdominal pain for 1 week and a palpable abdominal mass. The patient had a medical history of extensive resection and postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma of the left femur 15 years previously. Serum levels of tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA19-9, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin were all within normal limits and she was negative for hepatic viral markers (HBsAg and anti-HCV). The laboratory data revealed no specific findings except for elevated C-reactive protein (8.56 mg/dL).
Computed tomography showed a well-defined mass measuring 9 cm in the largest dimension in the right posterior segment of the liver. The tumor was slightly enhanced, but a major part was hypo-vasculated . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a mixed intensity of high and low signals. The cysts had low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, suggesting a high water content. Furthermore, areas with a partially high signal intensity on T1-weighted images and a low signal intensity on T2-weighted images were suggestive of intratumoral hemorrhage . Positron emission tomography showed the uptake of 2-(fluorine-18)-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose in part of the solid components of the cyst (SUV-max 11.11; Fig. F).
A liver needle biopsy was performed due to the possibility of recurrence of osteosarcoma. Histopathological studies showed a proliferation of malignant pleomorphic atypical cells associated with necrosis, and the tumor cells were positive for epithelial marker (AE1/AE3 and CAM5.2) by immunohistochemical analyses. The patient was diagnosed with an unspecified malignant tumor, ruling out metastatic osteosarcoma or primary poorly differentiated carcinoma. Therefore, we decided to perform right hemi-hepatectomy with the aim of both treatment and definitive diagnosis. Upon laparotomy the huge tumor was observed, but extrahepatic invasion was not found. No peritoneal dissemination or ascites was observed. The right lobe was completely mobilized. Then the right hepatic artery, the right branch of portal vein, and the right hepatic duct were divided individually. The hepatic parenchyma was divided along the Cantlie line, and the right hepatic vein was divided. The right hemi-hepatectomy was performed with an uneventful course. The operation time was 6 h 34 min, and the operative blood loss was 340 ml. The resected specimen showed a heterogenic tumor measuring 9.0 × 6.5 × 4.5 cm. The cut surface of the specimen revealed a multilocular mass with the various components of hemorrhage, necrosis, and a mucinous substance .
Histopathological studies revealed that the circumscribed tumor was composed of a proliferation of atypical epithelioid to spindle-shaped cells with pleomorphic nuclei arranged in haphazard pattern, accompanied by massive necrosis and hemorrhage . Cells with granular vesicles positive for periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) were scattered in the cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical analyses showed that the tumor cells were positive for pan cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) , CAM5.2, glypican 3, vimentin, and desmin, and were negative for CD34, ETS-related gene, D2-40, S-100, human melanoma black 45, melan A, and smooth muscle actin (SMA). The MIB1 labeling index was 80% in a hot spot. Therefore, a histological diagnosis of UESL was made.
We submitted the excised specimen to genomic analysis using FoundationOne CDx, which revealed 11 somatic mutations in TP53 and STK11, among other genes . One year after hepatectomy, we were able to follow up without recurrence while administering adjuvant chemotherapy with ifosfamide and etoposide. The patient received ifosfamide (1.8 g/m2) and etoposide (100 mg/m2) on days 1–5. This treatment was repeated at 28-day intervals (3 cycles). There is still no consensus on chemotherapy for UESL. Therefore, the decision of these drug was made based on a conference with medical oncologists, hepatologists, and surgeons, while referring to previous reports .