The patient in this case report was a 31-year-old woman (height, 160 cm; weight, 63 kg [57 kg when she was not pregnant]). She was diagnosed with TA at the age of 23 years and started treatment with steroids and immunosuppressive drugs. She had a spontaneous pregnancy and was admitted to our hospital at 23 weeks of pregnancy because of cardiovascular disease associated with TA. Her gravidity was two times, including artificial abortion at 18 years, and she was nulliparity. After admission to our hospital, daily vital signs, weight measurement, and cardiac ultrasonography once every 2 weeks were performed. As the pregnancy progressed, some signs of cardiac failure, such as postprandial chest tightness, cardiac enlargement, and pericardial effusion, became apparent. A cesarean section was planned at 34 weeks and 1 day of pregnancy, considering the risk of increased systemic vascular resistance and exacerbation of heart failure by straining, hyperventilation, and labor induction.
She had a medical history of bare-metal stent placement for a stenotic lesion in the left main trunk of the coronary artery at the age of 23 years and drug-eluting stent placement for a stenotic lesion in the circumflex branch at the age of 24 years. She was undergoing aspirin and clopidogrel antithrombotic therapy after drug-eluting stent implantation; however, clopidogrel was discontinued after 23 weeks of pregnancy in preparation for delivery, and antithrombotic therapy with aspirin alone was continued. She was also undergoing nifedipine and carvedilol therapy for hypertension.
The patient’s pulse in the bilateral radial arteries was not palpable due to inflammatory changes in the arteries associated with TA; however, the bilateral dorsalis pedis arteries were palpable. Blood pressure could not be measured in the upper arm. Her blood pressure was 131/65 mmHg, measured on the lower legs, and her pulse rate was 82 beats/min on admission. Her oxygen saturation levels using a pulse oximeter were available and 99% in fingers of both hands.
Imaging examinations, including head computed tomography, head magnetic resonance imaging, and brain single-photon emission computed tomography, revealed severe stenosis of the left common carotid artery, bilateral vertebral arteries, and bilateral subclavian arteries, with preserved blood flow from the right common carotid artery to the entire brain via the circle of Willis arteries . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed aortic regurgitation, with a pressure half time of 309.7 ms, effective regurgitant valve opening area of 0.24 cm2, sinus of Valsalva diameter of 41.9 mm, and ascending aortic diameter of 40.7 mm. These findings indicated severe aortic regurgitation associated with aortic root dilatation.
Cesarean section was planned under spinal anesthesia. In addition to standard monitoring, we monitored arterial pressure, cardiac output at the dorsalis pedis artery using the FloTrac™ sensor (Edwards Lifesciences), and regional cerebral tissue oxygen saturation (rSO2) using the INVOS™ 5100C system (Covidien Japan K.K.).
A continuous dose of nicorandil was initiated after admission at 2 mg/h, followed by a continuous dose of noradrenaline at 0.02 μg/kg/min. Spinal anesthesia was performed with a 26-G pencil-point needle from the third and fourth lumbar intervertebral spaces, and 1.8 mL of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine was administered with 10 μg of fentanyl and 100 μg of morphine. Immediately after the regional anesthetics administration, the systolic blood pressure decreased to 73 mmHg, and the mean blood pressure was 42 mmHg. rSO2 temporarily decreased from 56 to 50% on the right and from 63 to 52% on the left; however, there were no abnormal neurological findings. A single dose of 0.1 mg of phenylephrine was administered, and the patient’s blood pressure improved rapidly. Intraoperatively, the systolic blood pressure was maintained at 110–120 mmHg, the mean blood pressure was 60–70 mmHg, and the heart rate was 70–80 beats/min. After 10 min of regional anesthetics administration, a loss of cold sensation occurred in the Th5–S dermatomes. The infant was delivered 3 min after the initiation of surgery. Intravenous 10 units of oxytocin were administered immediately after placental delivery. Favorable uterine contractions were obtained; however, the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate did not change. The infant had Apgar scores of 8 and 9 points at 1 and 5 min, respectively, and weighed 1888 g. The umbilical artery blood pH was 7.364, pCO2 was 38.3 mmHg, base excess was − 3.2 mmol/L, and lactate was 2.8 mmol/L. The operative time was 57 min; blood loss was 1470 mL, including amniotic fluid; and the volume of fluid infusion was 693 mL of extracellular fluid preparation and 750 mL of hydroxyethyl starch preparation . The postoperative course was uneventful; signs of cardiac failure are chest tightness, cardiac enlargement, and pericardial effusion disappeared, and both the mother and child were discharged without any complications on the 11th postoperative day.