The patient is a 77-year-old Caucasian woman. She was diagnosed with a left epithelioid mesothelioma on video-assisted thorascopic biopsy in 2009 with pleurally based nodules in the left hemothorax on radiologic assessment. She underwent talc pleurodesis and four cycles of cisplatin and pemetrexed. Sixteen months later, she developed progressive disease and was treated on a trial of NGR-hTNF (a selective vascular inhibitor) for 4 months to disease progression. She underwent rechallenge with four cycles of pemetrexed and cisplatin, achieving disease stability for 11 months. She then received six cycles of carboplatin and gemcitabine achieving disease stability for 6 months.
From June 2014 to June 2016, she received 52 cycles of pembrolizumab (MK-3475) at a dose of 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks on a phase Ib clinic trial (KEYNOTE-028). The tumor biopsy fulfilled criteria for PD-L1 positivity as per trial protocol. She tolerated drug well with immune-related adverse events of grade 2 pruritic rash and grade 1 mucositis, remaining ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status 1. A partial response was seen on imaging after 3 months, with a 91% reduction in target lesions, which was maintained until June 2016 . In April 2018, 21 months after completing 2 years of pembrolizumab, she developed asymptomatic, small volume, radiologic disease progression and recommenced pembrolizumab on study, per protocol, on the same schedule. Following three cycles, a 12% reduction in tumor size by RECIST (Response evaluation criteria in solid tumour) criteria from the prerechallenge baseline was seen. Stable disease was maintained for 25 cycles when radiologic disease progression was confirmed.
A left pleural biopsy from 2014, taken as baseline biopsy for KEYNOTE-028, and a left pleural biopsy taken in 2018 at relapse prior to pembrolizumab rechallenge were analysed. Histopathology was consistent with malignant epithelioid mesothelioma with cells expressing WT1, calretinin and HBME-1 and negative for BerEP4.
Immunohistochemistry for PD-L1 was performed using Dako 22C3 and Ventana SP263 clones (supplementary data for methods). PD-L1 staining was increased in the relapse compared with baseline biopsy (1%–49% in relapse biopsy by SP263; ).
CD3 immunohistochemistry was performed on baseline and relapse biopsies and intensity of staining quantified using the HALO software (supplementary data for methods). Intratumoral T cells were of a higher density in the relapse compared with baseline biopsy (2092.06/mm2 vs 348.53/mm2) .
A T cell panel immunofluorescence panel for CD4, CD4+ FOXP3+, CD8 and PanCK (pancytokeratin) was performed and analyzed with inForm Cell Analysis software (supplementary data for methods). Intratumoral CD8 T cells demonstrated an almost fivefold increase in relapse compared with baseline biopsy and CD4+ FOXP3+ T cells demonstrated over a 30-fold increase in relapse compared with baseline ( and ).
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on both biopsy samples and a matched germline sample (supplementary data for methods). Tumor content was 80%. The baseline biopsy had 0.92 somatic mutations per Mbp. The relapse biopsy had 0.26. No mutations were found in key drivers such as BAP1, NF2, TP53, LATS2 and SETD2. On copy number variant analysis copy number alterations (CNAs) were apparent mostly similar in frequently altered genomic region between baseline and relapse biopsy such as chr8q gain, and chr3p and chr9p loss, but also some regions were different such as loss of heterozygosity on chr6q and chr4q in baseline only . Three independent measurements of genomic instability (basis of loss of heterozygosity, telomeric allelic imbalance and large-scale state transitions) show baseline biopsy had unstable genome with higher HRD (homologous recombination deficiency) score. Immune-related somatic mutations are detailed in . All immune-related somatic mutations present in the baseline biopsy were not present in the relapse biopsy. The relapse biopsy had missense mutation in BTN2A1 (c.1352G>C).