A 40-year-old male presented with 2-week history of subjective headache, nausea, and blurry vision. MRI brain revealed a large right frontal lobe neoplasm consistent with high-grade glial neoplasm. Craniotomy was performed and postoperative imaging demonstrated gross total resection with marginal enhancement along the posterior margin of the surgical cavity thought to imply postoperative blood and hemostasis product . Pathology confirmed glioblastoma WHO grade IV with primitive neuroectodermal tumor-like components (MG-PNET) [Figure –]. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated abundant GFAP immunoreactivity and frequent p53 nuclear staining. Fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was negative for MYC rearrangement, but did confirm extra copies of the MYC region in 70% of the tumor nuclei. MIB-1 nuclear labeling approached 100% in solid component regions of the mass with abundant EGFR expression. 1p 19q were intact. Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) was wild type, and unmethylated MGMT was observed.
Due to the PNET-like component of the tumor, MRI of the spinal axis was performed and was without evidence of drop metastasis. Subsequent treatment with radiation therapy and concurrent temozolomide chemotherapy was completed. Twelve weeks after the initial resection and post radiation therapy/temozolomide, surveillance MRI scan revealed multiple new enhancing foci within the left frontal lobe . Due to the MGMT unmethylated status and the areas of new enhancement, open resection was performed, with pathology demonstrating cortex and white matter with very mild hypercellularity; no obvious tumor was recognized . Chemotherapy was continued. Seven weeks later (and prior to his next planned MRI scan), the patient presented to the emergency department with acute onset of worsening headaches, nausea, vomiting, and left-hand weakness. He proceeded to develop status epilepticus. MRI brain revealed a diffusion restricting subdural collection overlying the prior craniotomy site [Figure –]. Considering the possibility for empyema, the patient was taken to the operating room for evacuation with intraoperative inspection of the subdural space revealing a thick, gelatinous mass adherent to the pia mater and invading the brain parenchyma. Biopsy results demonstrated PNET-like only recurrence of the previously treated MG-PNET . The small blue cell tumor component was histologically identical to the original MG-PNET tumor. Due to mixed-glial nature of the original tumor, biomarker molecular profiling was performed to assess the molecular characteristics of the tumor to determine chemotherapy sensitivity and provide targeted treatment. Considering that gliomas can exhibit multiple histologic and molecular subtypes with different clinical phenotypes and responsiveness to treatment, molecular profile testing provides the ability to evaluate tumor cell genetic characteristics and biomarkers. Specifically, molecular profiling evaluates gene amplification, deletion, and methylation-specific PCR to determine MGMT promoter methylation status and FISH for 1p and 19q deletion status. Though not routinely performed at our institution on gliomas demonstrating a homogenous histology, this study can be obtained and analyzed at an outside facility to assist in developing focused treatment regimens for mixed-gliomas. In our patient, Caris Life Sciences comprehensive molecular tumor profiling test was conducted and included analysis of DNA, RNA, and proteins utilizing immunohistochemistry, in-situ hybridization, next-generation sequencing, and pyrosequencing techniques. Based on molecular testing results, chemotherapeutic agents with potential or lack of benefit have been suggested in clinical trials. In our patient, biomarker results were positive for PTEN, TOPO1, and TOP2A; chemotherapeutic agents with potential benefit included carboplatin, cisplastin, and irinotecan.
Because PNET is typically treated with platinum-based chemotherapy, studies confirmed MGMT unmethylated status and demonstrated potential sensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy. In addition, biomarker results demonstrated topoisomerase activity. Given these findings and that PNET is traditionally treated with platinum-based chemotherapy, the patient was treated with salvage cisplatin and irinotecan. These agents were selected as cisplatin gains superior central nervous system penetration and irinotecan has been used in this setting on primary brain tumors. Given the toxicity associated with the selected regimen, a long discussion was held with the patient prior to initiating therapy. Initially, the patient responded well both clinically and radiographically to therapy; however, surveillance imaging at 8 weeks demonstrated significant tumor progression . Following discussion, platinum-based chemotherapy was discontinued as the tumor demonstrated resistance, and salvage therapy with bevacizumab was undertaken. The patient continued to decline clinically and eventually succumbed to the disease burden 8 months following the initial diagnosis.