A 48-year-old man presented with diminished ejaculate volume lasting for several years. The patient underwent transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS), which identified a 3.5 cm solid mass with cystic and solid areas arising from the right seminal vesicle . These tumors can cause hematuria, obstructive urinary symptoms, painful ejaculation, and diminished ejaculate volume or they can be asymptomatic. In our case, the only complaint of the patient was decreased ejaculate volume.
The patient underwent a digital rectal examination with no specific findings. MRI was then planned, which revealed a 3.5 cm complex cystic mass arising from the right seminal vesicle. To exclude malignancy, a TRUS biopsy of the tumor was planned, but due to the patient's refusal, close follow-up was scheduled.
After 3 months, a new MRI revealed a growth of the tumor from 3.5 cm to 6 cm. Although benign tumors of the seminal vesicles do occur more frequently, the mass has increased its size in a short follow-up period, and therefore, malignancy had to be excluded to plan the therapeutic strategy for the patient. Primary malignant tumors are extremely difficult to diagnose, but they may require more radical procedures. Due to the above-mentioned reasons, a TRUS biopsy of the mass was arranged with a pathology report of the specimen revealing no malignancy but being inconclusive of the type of the tumor.
Management of benign tumors of the seminal vesicle remains debatable due to the limited data in the literature. Nevertheless, the presence of symptoms, which often relates to the tumor size, seems to be the trigger point for surgical intervention in most cases reported. The robot-assisted laparoscopic approach was chosen for the surgical excision of the tumor with the use of a four-arm Da Vinci Si system. Preoperatively, a 4.8F Double-J catheter was placed into the right ureter for easier ureteral identification. Port configuration was similar to transperitoneal robot-assisted radical prostatectomy. The peritoneum was incised over the seminal vesicle, as in the Montsouris technique. Right vas deferens was identified, dissected, and divided. Weck clips were used to control the vessels avoiding thermal damage to the ureter. There were severe adhesions blocking the posterior side of the seminal vesicle. The right seminal vesicle was dissected out carefully with the athermal technique. Then, the anterior aspect of the seminal vesicle was exposed. Once the specimen was freed, it was taken out through a 12 mm assistant port within a 10 mm organ retrieval bag . A frozen section of the specimen revealed no malignancy. A Hasson balloon trocar was inserted to reestablish pneumoperitoneum. The cavity was filled with saline to perform the bubble test, ruling out any rectum injury. The peritoneum was closed, and a Jackson-Pratt drain was placed. Operative time and estimated blood loss were 240 minutes and 200 mL, respectively.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. The final pathology report revealed a benign cystadenoma of the right seminal vesicle .
The patient was followed for a 1-year period. During this period, he had normal erections, effective sexual intercourse, and complained for no other symptom except ejaculate volume, which remained diminished in the follow-up period.