A 50-year-old African–American male presented to the hospital with complaints of decreased urine output, dark urine color, and constipation for the past couple of days. The patient denied any other symptoms. Medical history was remarkable for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and legal deafness and blindness. The patient denied smoking, use of any recreational drugs, or alcohol abuse. Home medications included atorvastatin 20 mg daily that the patient had been taking for the past 2 years, lisinopril 5 mg daily, and metformin 500 mg daily. Vital signs upon admission were grossly unremarkable. Initial laboratory studies revealed significant elevation of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (AST 2222 IU/L, ALT 432 IU/L), creatinine (Cr) of 2.29 mg/dL, hypocalcemia (ionized calcium of 0.92 mmol/L), hyponatremia (127 mmol/L), and a moderately increased high-sensitivity troponin level (HST) of 102 pg/mL. Further AKI workup yielded an enormously high level of CK 359,910 IU/L (no laboratory errors were reported, the result was consistent on repeated measurements) and hyperuricemia (11.4 mg/dL); urinalysis showed cloudy urine with a large amount of blood and only 3–5 red blood cells per high-power field.
Additional tests demonstrated a very high aldolase level (> 250 U/L, reference range 1.2–7.6 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (> 6000 IU/L, reference range 140–271 IU/L). Hence, the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis was made. Since statin use alone did not seem enough to cause such high CK levels, further workup was conducted. Urine toxicology screen, serum levels of acetaminophen and salicylates were all negative. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies to 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase did not yield a positive result. Infectious studies were negative for influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, HIV 1/2, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, coxsackievirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila; respiratory viral panel and blood cultures also came back negative. Since computed tomography of abdomen and pelvis done in the emergency department revealed bibasilar ground-glass opacities, COVID-19 PCR was also sent, which turned out to be positive, although initially, the patient did not have any symptoms of respiratory tract disease.
The patient was started on aggressive intravenous fluids resuscitation. Eventually, his kidney function improved with a decrease in Cr and significant down trending of CK . Besides that, the level of transaminases started to go down synchronically with the initiation of rhabdomyolysis treatment . Viral hepatitis panel was negative, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), total bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase levels remained normal throughout his hospitalization. The conclusion was made that isolated transaminitis resulted from rhabdomyolysis, and hepatotoxicity from COVID-19 is known. Two days into the hospitalization, the patient became symptomatic from a COVID-19 standpoint: he developed fever and hypoxia, and was placed on supplemental oxygen and started on a 10-day course of dexamethasone. Overall, the patient responded well to the treatment and supportive care for COVID-19, and was successfully discharged home.