Institutional ethics committee approval was obtained (Ethics Committee of the School of Medical Sciences, State University of Campinas, UNICAMP) under protocol number 020/2016, subsequent to obtaining signed parental consent for submission of this communication.
A male child aged 14 months presenting recurrent episodes of suspected laryngitis and upper airway obstruction was diagnosed with laryngeal papillomatosis after nasofibroscopy revealed typical papillomatous lesions of the larynx .
The diagnosis was confirmed through a biopsy specimen and hybridization confirmed the presence of infection with HPV type 11. Initially, the treatment consisted of multiple airway procedures to remove obstructive lesions from the airway. The criterion for surgical removal of lesions was respiratory distress. After eight surgical procedures, at the age of 17 months the child underwent tracheostomy and adjuvant treatment with cidofovir was introduced, following parental informed consent. At this time, the lesions involved both of the vocal cords and also the laryngeal ventricles, false vocal cords, epiglottis and peristomal trachea .
Intralesional applications of cidofovir were performed under general anesthesia and were scheduled every 2 to 4 weeks but no sustainable control of disease was achieved, with respiratory distress occurring repeatedly, three weeks after the application. Progression of papilloma lesions to the lower airway was also observed during the course of cidofovir treatment, which was halted after 12 applications.
A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed after use of cidofovir had been halted and after observation of papilloma lesions in the lower airway. It revealed multiple pulmonary nodules ranging from 3 mm to 14 mm in size; cavitary lesions with thick, irregular walls; multiple diffuse small centrilobular nodules; and bilateral hilar and right lower paratracheal and subcarinal lymphadenopathy . A biopsy on one of the pulmonary nodules confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary papillomatosis.
A trial using intralesional bevacizumab was attempted, but was also halted after three applications, since no noticeable improvement of recurrence rates was achieved and the patient presented moderate hair loss.
Up to the age of 5 years, the tracheostomy helped alleviate the patient’s respiratory distress. The intervals between surgical procedures were as long as 83 days during the fourth year of follow-up . Just before the patient reached six years of age, although the recurrence rates were still high, the significant growth of the airway allowed decannulation. After this, without the tracheostomy, deobstruction of the airway was required almost on a monthly basis (year 5 in ) with profuse lesions involving the laryngeal inlet , despite progressive improvement of the lesions in the lower airway .
A six-month treatment with PEG-IFN α2 β IFN-α2b (1.0 μg/kg/wk) was proposed in an attempt to increase the intervals between surgical procedures. This was started after receiving informed parental consent. The child was six years old at the time. The detailed yearly follow-up of the child can be seen in .
Subcutaneous injections of PEG-IFN (1 μg/kg) were given once a week. Fever, headaches and general flu-like symptoms were observed after the first applications during the initial 48 hours but were well managed with the usual antipyretic drugs. Complete blood count, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), gamma-glutamyl-transferase (GGT), albumin, international normalized ratio (INR), thyroxine (T4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) were monitored monthly.
For more than three consecutive months, for the first time, surgical intervention was not needed. This interval between procedures had not been seen, even when the child still had a tracheostomy. After 102 days, surgery was indicated, for the first time, not due to respiratory distress or stridor but because of vocal demands and progressive moderate to severe dysphonia, which was a hazard at school.
Unfortunately, after a three-month treatment, a threefold elevation in liver transaminase levels was noted and treatment was halted. Despite withdrawing the treatment, the mean interval between procedures improved considerably over the months following PEG-IFN treatment (year 6), in comparison with the previous year (year 5). CT scans performed at yearly intervals showed improvement in the number of solid nodules, particularly in years 5 and 6, in comparison with years 3 and 4 .
Throughout the years of follow-up, the child has maintained mild to moderate and sometimes severe dysphonia, depending on the progressive and intermittent infiltration of the vocal cords with papilloma lesions, but also secondary to the vocal cord scarring that has inevitably occurred. Pulmonary function has remained stable, despite persistent pulmonary lesions. Spirometry performed during follow-up in year 5 was normal.