Our manuscript reporting adheres to CAse REport (CARE) guidelines .
We present a case of a 63-year-old male patient with no clinical symptoms but revealed a left adrenal mass in a CT scan for a regular physical checkup.
His past history included II diabetes mellitus treated with gliclazide, and he had been controlled with propranolol and amlodipine for hypertension. Upon admission, he had good general condition and stable vital signs, without palpable abdominal mass. Laboratory measurements demonstrated elevated blood Epinephrine (0.71 nmol/L, normal values <0.34 nmol/L). The serum levels of the tumor biomarker as well as thyroid hormones were normal. CT-scan showed a left adrenal mass of 5.1×5.1cm. The lesion manifested as a mixed-density shadow that contain certain amounts of adipose tissue . Based on imaging features, we highly suspected that was an adrenal myelolipoma. Even though the patient was asymptomatic and the tumor size was moderate, we planned to proceed with surgery combined with his wishes. On 29-04-2022, the patient underwent a left-sided laparoscopic procedure at our department.
During the operation, the patient was placed in the supine and parted-legs position. Using Veress needles, a 1-cm transverse incision near the right navel edge was made to establish pneumoperitoneum with a constant pressure of 13-14 mm Hg. Five trocars were used: a 5-mm trocar was inserted under the xiphoid process. A 12-mm trocar was placed below the left costal margin in the midclavicular line, and the other two 5-mm trocars were placed in the midaxillary and anterior axillary lines. The fifth trocar (12 mm) was installed a little to the left of the navel as a laparoscopic observation hole. The resection was carried out with an ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA; Cavitron Laser-sonic Corp., Stamford, Connecticut, USA), harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Blue Ash, Cincinnati, OH, USA), and a bipolar clamp coagulation system (ERBE, Tubingen, Germany). Intraoperative ultrasound sonography (IOUS) was performed for exploration and localization. The posterior peritoneum was gradually opened along the lower margin of the pancreatic body, and a 5×5cm neoplasm was observed behind the pancreatic body, demarcated clearly with the left kidney and spleen. The blood vessels around the left adrenal gland were separated and clipped, then severed with an ultrasound knife. The tumor was completely removed and the resection specimen was collected in a plastic bag and removed via a 6-cm incision on the low abdomen. A plasma drainage tube was placed to monitor the left retroperitoneal cavity drainage concerning volume, content, and color. Operating time was 270 min and blood loss was 50ml. However, free gas within the left pleural cavity was revealed in the immediate postoperative color-Doppler ultrasound examination. Pneumothorax was suspected after a CT scan of the left lung. Closed thoracic drainages were initiated following instant thoracic surgical consultation. Thoracentesis was smooth and the patient was transferred to the PACU (post-anesthesia care unit) for resuscitation. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged after 4 days. He was satisfied with the operative outcome and complied with the follow-up recommendations. Neither dysfunction nor tumor recurrence was observed so far.
Grossly, a 5×5×4cm left adrenal tumor, in which, some necrosis and tumor-like changes were observed. Histopathology revealed a mixture of normal adrenal cells, adipose tissue, and three major hematopoietic components: myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic lines . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of adrenal myelolipoma.