A 50-year-old male complained of impaired vision, redness, pain, and watering in the right eye for over 10 days while admitted to the hospital with fever, dysuria, abdominal swelling, and generalized malaise. Laboratory investigation revealed that the patient had microcytic hypochromic anemia, polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, azotemia, and abnormal liver function. Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed hepatomegaly with fatty changes and ascites ; 2D Echo imaging showed bilateral pleural effusion. Radiographs of the musculoskeletal system of the upper and lower limbs were normal. The patient was treated for septicemia.
Ocular examination revealed visual acuity of hand movement close to the face in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. External examination showed thinned eyebrows, loss of eyelashes, and thickened eyelids. A hypo-pigmented growth measuring 4 × 4 mm in the inferotemporal quadrant involved 4 clock hours of the anterior chamber and was suggestive of a Busacca nodule, obscuring the pupil with medium-size keratic precipitates in the right eye. Both cornea and lens were transparent. Iris was muddy and lusterless without a demonstrable pattern. The pupil was partially obscured by Busaca nodule and it was small and irregular because of multiple posterior synechiae and was non-reactive to light. Anterior chamber was hazy because of flare. Corneal sensation was reduced in the right eye. Intraocular pressure was 14 and 16 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. The right fundus was not visible. The ocular examination of the left eye was within normal limits. Ultrasonography b-scan of the posterior segment showed no abnormality. The patient was negative for Mantoux test, human leukocyte antigen B-27, antistreptolysin O titer, rheumatoid factor, Widal test, hepatitis B surface antigen, and anti-hepatitis-C virus antibody. Unilateral iridocyclitis was provisionally diagnosed, but no cause was identified.
The patient developed erythema nodosum over the legs four days after admission. Slit skin smear from erythema nodosum and anterior chamber (AC) tap were performed after dermatology consultation. AC tap revealed numerous acid fast bacilli in each field; the slit skin smear showed lepra bacilli [Figure and ]. The patient was diagnosed with lepromatous leprosy. The diagnosis was confirmed by the detection of a granulomatous nodule in a skin incisional biopsy. Other ophthalmic features of leprosy including lagophthalmos, keratitis, exposure keratopathy, corneal ulceration, conjunctival or scleral leproma, retinal pearls, and retinal detachment were not seen in this case. The patient was sent to the Leprosy Centre, and multidrug therapy (MDT) comprising dapsone (100 mg), rifampicin (600 mg), and clofazimine (300 mg) were started. Systemic involvement and iridocyclitis gradually improved with MDT.