Ms. G was a 61 year-old divorced woman with a remote medical history of renal transplant maintained on azathioprine 125 mg daily and prednisone 5 mg daily and a psychiatric history of schizoaffective disorder maintained on ziprasidone 20 mg twice daily. She was brought to the hospital due to a subacute history of progressive inability to care for self, poor sleep, and psychomotor agitation in the setting of a several month history of derogatory auditory hallucinations, paranoia towards family, and the delusional belief that the hallucinations were due to a transmitter placed in her head. She was brought to the medical hospital by family, who denied any other family history of psychiatric illness. They reported that the patient was independent with activities of daily living and otherwise with good functioning when compliant with medication. She had had multiple prior psychiatric hospitalizations due to psychosis in the setting of medication non-compliance. Prior medication trials included olanzapine and risperidone, but these were discontinued for oversedation and tremors, respectively. Medical work-up revealed a urinary tract infection treated with cefuroxime, but it was otherwise unremarkable with respect to infectious workup including comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood counts, and thyroid stimulating hormone. The patient was irritable on initial interview and demonstrated multiple signs of catatonia over 24 h of observation such as grimacing, negativism, manneristic and high-pitched speech, staring, and echopraxia, leading to a cumulative Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS) score of 12. The patient’s home medication of ziprasidone was resumed at 20 mg twice daily.
The patient’s symptoms fluctuated with alternating periods of stupor, psychomotor agitation, grimacing, and manneristic speech, but the length and frequency of these episodes decreased as ziprasidone was up-titrated. On day 3 of hospitalization, the patient was sufficiently lucid to discuss her symptoms with the treatment team. She endorsed significant paranoia towards family, continued hallucinations, and the desire to read a book to distract herself. The next day, the patient reported a new hallucinatory experience distinct from her presenting auditory hallucinations. She reported that whenever she read the text of a book, she would hear a different voice from her typical auditory hallucinations yelling the text of the book at her. This would stop immediately when she closed the book, and it would begin again once she re-opened a book. This improved as ziprasidone was titrated to a final dose of 40 mg in the morning and 60 mg in the evening, and her derogatory auditory hallucinations and delusional beliefs also abated after 3 weeks of treatment. During this time, the patient’s periods of irritability resolved, and they were generally pleasant and engaged in the inpatient milieu. Supportive psychotherapy techniques were utilized throughout hospitalization, and the patient reported benefit from this and pharmacological interventions at the conclusion of her hospitalization. The patient was discharged to outpatient follow-up without residual psychotic or catatonic symptoms and fair insight.