A 68-year-old woman was admitted 2 weeks after returning from Bali, Indonesia, with symptoms of pneumonia including dyspnoea on minimal exertion, chest pain, and a productive cough. This was preceded by viral upper respiratory tract symptoms (e.g. coryza and sore throat) experienced during her holiday. She did not report smoking, alcohol, or recreational drug use. She had no family history of cardiomyopathy, heart failure, or sudden cardiac death. HIV screening was not performed. On admission, her respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Her blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg, and her jugular venous pressure was not elevated. On auscultation, she had dual heart sounds with no murmurs. However, there were crepitations and reduced breath sounds bibasally.
An admission ECG confirmed sinus rhythm, a heart rate of 64 b.p.m., with frequent monomorphic PVCs, which were asymptomatic. Normally conducted complexes were low-voltage but did not exhibit any abnormal waveforms. Her initial chest X-ray was suggestive of cardiomegaly and a high-sensitivity troponin I was negative. A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram revealed right lower lobe consolidation with bilateral pleural effusions. There was no pulmonary embolism or pericardial effusion.
Her pneumonia was treated with moxifloxacin 400 mg orally daily due to previous anaphylaxis to penicillins. The baseline corrected QT interval (QTc) was 490 ms with no significant increase after starting moxifloxacin. She completed a 7 day course of moxifloxacin after discharge and did not require diuresis given her euvolaemic state.
Outpatient investigations included biochemistry for endocrine, autoimmune, rheumatological, and infiltrative causes, all of which were unremarkable. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed DCM with global systolic dysfunction (LVEF <30%) and mildly reduced right ventricular systolic function without valvular pathology or congenital cardiac abnormalities.
At 4 months post-discharge, she was minimally symptomatic [New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification I], was able to walk 4–6 blocks on an incline, and did not have orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, or peripheral oedema. However, due to systolic dysfunction on her TTE, she was started on guideline-based medical therapy (GBMT) in the form of daily perindopril 2.5 mg and bisoprolol 1.25 mg. Bisoprolol was switched to nebivolol 1.25 mg on alternate days due to intolerance manifesting as fatigue and myalgia. Further, perindopril was changed to candesartan 4 mg daily due to a dry cough. These were the maximal tolerated final doses prior to ablation. Despite GBMT, her condition progressed to NYHA Class II symptoms within 7 months of diagnosis, with a rapid reduction in her exercise tolerance to only 1–2 blocks on level ground. Furosemide was initiated for fluid overload and changed to spironolactone 25 mg daily 5 weeks later.
A 24-h Holter monitor detected a significant PVC burden of 27% (27 522/101 027 beats) with 154 runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (longest run of 5 beats). The PVCs mainly comprised monomorphic ventricular bigeminy and, to a lesser degree, couplets. Coronary angiography was normal. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is only funded for selected indications in Australia, and is not widely available; it was not performed in this case, as she did not fulfil the criteria for Medicare subsidy.
Given the above results, it was thought plausible that the patient had developed PVC-induced DCM. ECG morphology suggested an anterior papillary muscle origin for the PVCs . Upon retrospective review of the patient’s medical records (12-lead ECGs), frequent PVCs preceded the admission with pneumonia by 2 years, thus reinforcing PVCs as a potential causative aetiology of the DCM.
Serial TTEs at 6 and 9 months since the initial TTE demonstrated progressive deterioration in cardiac function (, Video S1). With tolerated medical therapy, the ectopic frequency was reduced, but incompletely suppressed.
As an alternative to cardiac resynchronization therapy and implantable cardiac defibrillator for primary prevention, the decision was made to attempt ablation targeting the PVC origin. An electrophysiology study was performed, which confirmed the PVC origin seen on surface ECG. This was then combined with intra-cardiac echocardiography (together, termed ‘electroanatomical mapping’) to ensure accuracy of delivered radiofrequency ablation. Real-time imaging allowed active visualization and verification of target sites and ablation probe positioning. After localizing the origin through pacing and activation mapping, targeted ablation of the region was successfully performed , which led to complete suppression of ectopy.
Post-procedure echocardiograms ( online, Video S2) and 24-h Holter monitoring demonstrated return to normal systolic function and considerably reduced PVC burden to 2.6% (2324/96 510 beats) without non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. There was no pre-excitation on serial ECGs. Maintenance therapy with beta-blockade has been uptitrated to 1.25 mg daily nebivolol and will be continued indefinitely. The remainder of her medications remained unchanged, maintaining her heart rate and blood pressure at nominal levels (64 b.p.m. and 120/84 mmHg). Twenty months post-ablation, the patient reports profound improvement in cardiac function which has enabled a return to her baseline level of function and quality of life.