A 72-year-old woman was admitted at the ER for acute, severe chest pain started 90 min earlier. She had a history of hypertension under treatment with valsartan, smoking, and chronic bronchitis. Her physical examination showed normal heart sounds, tachyponea without signs of pulmonary or peripheral congestion, and no mucocutaneous or other obvious clinical sign of bleeding. Her blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction in anterolateral leads . She received 250 mg intravenous lysine acetylsalicylate according to local standard and soon underwent emergent coronary angiography showing proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery occlusion. A drug-eluting stent (DES) was implanted with final angiographic evidence of slow-flow and only partial symptom relief and ST-segment elevation reduction on ECG despite good stent position on angiography (see , , ). A 12-h tirofiban infusion was started as a bail-out strategy (0.04 µg/kg/min loading dose, followed by 0.01 µg/kg/min infusion) and ticagrelor loading dose (180 mg) was administered after the procedure due to concerns over drug absorption, the patient being nauseous before coronary intervention. The patient was eupnoeic soon after the procedure, with no clinical sign of congestion, bleeding, or thrombotic manifestations; her blood pressure decreased to 90/60 mmHg and pulse oxygen saturation was 96% room air. Transthoracic (TT) echocardiography showed moderately-to-severely reduced (35%) left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), with no intracardiac thrombus or clinically relevant valvular disease. The patient developed cardiogenic shock that resolved in a few days with supportive therapy by means of temporary intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) therapy and vasopressors. Mechanical complications were excluded by TT echocardiography and CT scan. Despite uninterrupted dual antiplatelet therapy, on day 8, the patient experienced acute chest pain and de novo ST-segment elevation in anterolateral leads. A new emergent coronary angiography confirmed the suspected stent thrombosis at the proximal edge of the recently implanted DES (see , ). Balloon angioplasty was performed at the level of stent thrombosis, and a new DES was implanted distally due to persistent coronary slow-flow (see , ). A second tirofiban infusion was started. Chest pain resolved, and vital parameters were stable after the procedure, with no clinical sign of systemic hypoperfusion or procedural bleeding or thrombotic complication on physical examination. Due to her critical conditions, the patient received the transfusion of one unit of red blood cells on the same day for persistent but stable moderate-to-severe anaemia (haemoglobin level prior to transfusion 8.4 g/dL).
A few hours later, the patient developed severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count 35 000/uL) . Tirofiban was immediately stopped. As platelet count fell below 30 000/uL (nadir 19 000/uL) dual antiplatelet therapy was discontinued. Pseudothrombocytopenia was excluded by performing platelet count with sodium citrate. Suspect heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was likewise excluded by negative test results for antiplatelet factor 4 (anti-PF4) antibodies. Also, the search for antiplatelet antibodies was negative. High platelet fluorescence intensity (31.1%, normal range 1.0–7.0%) and high reticulocyte count excluded bone marrow failure syndrome (see showing blood tests on day 9). No exposure to other drugs potentially associated with thrombocytopenia was identified. On the same day, a significant increase in white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin prompted broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy (piperacillin/tazobactam + ceftarolin). Urine and blood cultures tested negative.
On day 9, the patient rapidly developed confusion, anuria, and creatinine abruptly increased within 24 h from 0.9 to 3.2 mg/dL. After consultation with a nephrologist, there was a first attempt with high-dose furosemide and a second attempt with fluid challenge, both unsuccessful in restoring urine output. After repeated consultation with a nephrologist, the need for a diagnosis for such a rapid increase in creatinine levels prompted a subsequent thoraco-abdominal contrast-enhanced CT scan that showed signs of cortical ischaemia of the left kidney and apical left ventricular thrombosis .
Finding of schistocytes (>1%) on peripheral blood smear , together with signs of haemolysis (rapid increase of serum lactate dehydrogenase and reduced haptoglobin) and compatible coagulation parameters (normal prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen, see ) lead to suspect thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood test for ADAMTS13 (A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin motifs-13) activity was performed before starting any treatment and showed a mild reduction (53%, reference range 65–130%) without evidence of anti-ADAMTS13 antibodies (5 U/mL, reference range below 16 U/mL). Isovolaemic plasma exchange (PEx) was promptly arranged. After PEx, dual antiplatelet therapy was restored, and sodium heparin infusion (12 U/kg/h) was started. Ticagrelor was resumed with a loading dose 30 min before the end of PEx. At the end of PEx, 250 mg i.v. lysine acetylsalicylate was administered. An increase in platelet count was observed 8 h later (45 000/uL).
The patient remained anuric and developed both clinical and radiological signs of pulmonary congestion , without signs of respiratory distress nor hypoxaemia upon oxygen therapy. There were frequent consultations with nephrologists and haemodiafiltration was planned the morning after PEx. However, during the night her respiratory and haemodynamic status rapidly deteriorated, with signs of hypoperfusion and acute respiratory failure . The patient was rapidly transferred to the Nephrology unit for emergent haemodiafiltration. Non-invasive ventilation was started while waiting for intubation and mechanical ventilation, but the patient died due to sudden worsening of her respiratory and haemodynamic status.