A 51-year-old woman was seen in consultation for right arm discomfort and edema . She had a past medical history of multiple bronchiectasis infections in context of congenital ectodermal dysplasia. Recurrent sepsis led to acute kidney injuries and eventually to anuric ESRD. She required hemodialysis 3 times a week, currently through using a right radiocephalic arteriovenous (AV) fistula, for almost 25 years. A renal transplant had failed immediately, 15 years prior. She had a right brachiocephalic vein stenosis, previously stented, and a suspicion of breast calciphylaxis diagnosed 3 years earlier. Her weight was 36 kg (BMI of 12) and she had negligible subcutaneous fat.
A right upper extremity ultrasound revealed a segmental nonocclusive thrombus in the lower part of the right internal jugular vein (IJV). She then had an angiogram and was diagnosed with a severe brachiocephalic vein in-stent stenosis and a moderate stenosis along the juxta-anastomotic cephalic vein fistula. Balloon dilatations of both stenosis were done but the intervention on the stent was complicated by a small focal contained rupture, which was again balloon dilated to ensure hemostasis. Soon after the intervention, the patient was seen at the thrombosis clinic. She reported improvement of her right arm symptoms and the initially described right nonocclusive IJV thrombosis was thought to be chronic. Surveillance by repeat ultrasound 1 week later without anticoagulation was chosen as initial management.
The next ultrasound reported interval progression of the known thrombus in the IJV (now occlusive) and nonocclusive extension into the subclavian vein. The stent was still patent. The patient was reporting worsening pain and swelling over the right side of her neck and her right arm for the last week. As such we diagnosed an acute right upper extremity deep vein thrombosis, most likely provoked by the initial flow disturbance caused by the in-stent stenosis and thereafter by the angiographic intervention.
She was treated as an outpatient with apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for 6 weeks. Apixaban was taken at 10 am and 10 pm, while dialysis treatments were scheduled at 6 pm. At her 1 week follow up visit, the pain and swelling were improved. Over 4 weeks, apixaban anti-Xa levels were measured on dialysis days 8 h (i.e. 6 pm, before dialysis) and 12 h after the morning dose (i.e. trough levels, obtained at 10 pm, after dialysis and before the next dose). Anti-Xa were obtained using a CS-2000i (Siemens) analyzer with Innovance heparin reagent (Siemens) and calibrated by a STA®-Apixaban Calibrator kit (Diagnostica Stago, working range: 20–500 ng/mL). Surveillance ultrasound done 1 and 5 weeks after treatment initiation revealed stability of the upper extremity deep vein thrombosis and patency of the stent.
Over 4 weeks, the anti-Xa trough levels ranged from 58 to 84 ng/mL, while levels obtained before dialysis, i.e. 8 h after the morning dose, were 92–135 ng/mL. Monitoring was not continued up to the end of the treatment considering there was no trend of anti-Xa levels to increase overtime. There was no concomitant medication with significant apixaban interactions and liver function was normal. These range of anti-Xa levels are similar to what would be expected as a trough level in patients with preserved renal function. There were no adverse events in the 3 months after anticoagulation initiation.