A 77-year-old Caucasian male presented with chest discomfort and progressive exertional dyspnea, for which he was admitted to the hospital. Medical history of the patient revealed hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, acute coronary syndrome for which a percutaneous coronary intervention of the left descending artery was performed (2016) and atrial flutter, converted to sinus rhythm after electrocardioversion. He was SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive on nasopharyngeal swab a month before surgery, with minor symptoms of cold. He developed pulmonary embolism, for which oral anticoagulation (dabigatran) was initiated. His surgical, family and social histories were unremarkable.
Upon admission, physical examination revealed a systolic murmur, most pronounced at the apex, in a clinically stable patient with adequate vital functions. The chest was clear with equal air entry and no added sounds. No other physical abnormalities were noted.
ECG showed sinus rhythm, with normal conduction times and no signs of ischemia. Echocardiography (transthoracic and transesophageal) revealed severe mitral valve regurgitation caused by a prolapse of the P2 segment of the posterior leaflet with flail leaflet. Chordal rupture was also noted. In addition, moderate tricuspid regurgitation and a tricuspid annular diameter of 38 mm was observed. The left ventricle was non-dilated and hypertrophied, with good systolic function. Coronary angiography showed a significant stenosis of the left circumflex artery. In corroboration with interventional cardiologist and imaging cardiologist, the patient was accepted for mitral valve repair, tricuspid valve repair and a single coronary artery bypass graft on the left circumflex artery. The anticoagulant dabigatran was discontinued 5 days prior to surgery. Preoperative complete blood count showed a platelet count of 192 × 109/L (normal range, 150–400 × 109/L), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 31.1 s (normal range 24.7–31.7 s), prothrombin time (PT) 13.9 s (normal range 12.5–14.9 s) and an INR of 1.0.
The baseline ACT value in our patient was 100 s. After sternotomy the surgeon requested systemic heparinization to be administered to achieve an ACT > 400 s, the cut off for adequate heparinization required for extracorporeal circulation in our practice. After 25,000 IU (312 IU/kg) of heparin was given the ACT was 363 s. Additional doses of 5000 IU and subsequently 10,000 IU of heparin were administered but failed to increase ACT values. To rule out measurement error we used three separate devices [all Hemochron Signature Elite (Instrumentation Laboratory, Bedford, MA 01730-2433 USA)]. During multiple ACT measurements all devices demonstrated ACT values < 400 s, except for one measurement with one of the three devices that showed an ACT of > 600 s. We suspected that the ACT might not be in an adequate range after extra boluses heparin due to an antithrombin deficiency. Therefore, as per our protocol, we decided to administer two units of fresh frozen plasma after which the ACT still did not increase. We gave an extra bolus of heparin (10,000 IU) and two units of fresh frozen plasma. In the meanwhile we consulted the hematologist. As in COVID-19 patients dysregulation of the ACT/APTT is described, we were advised to measure the anti-Xa level and APTT in plasma. While awaiting the laboratory results, ACT was again measured, which was still < 400 s. We administered an additional bolus of 25,000 IE of heparin. After an hour the lab values were available: APTT > 120 s, heparin level in serum > 2.00 IU/mL, antithrombin activity 88% (normal range 84–116%). The ACT level was now also > 500 s. In turn, we could then start the cardiopulmonary bypass and perform the surgery.
After admission to the intensive care unit patient experienced excessive blood loss (1400 cc) which was not responsive to administration of Fresh Frozen Plasma (2 units), blood platelets (1 unit) and tranexamic acid. Rethoracotomy was performed, however a bleeding focus was not found. After the re-operation an additional 1100 cc of blood loss was observed. Patient went to the ward on the first postoperative day. Two units of packed red cells were administered in the early postoperative period because of low hemoglobin levels. Further hospital stay went uneventful.