Dyspnea, cough, expectoration and abdominal distension for 1 mo.
A 62-year-old man presented with a 1-mo history of dyspnea, cough, expectoration and abdominal distension. Due to mild proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia and elevated blood creatinine levels, he was diagnosed with glomerulonephritis at the local hospital, and was treated with diuretics and drugs to lower urine protein levels. Despite treatment, dyspnea worsened. Therefore he was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient reported no history of hepatitis, tuberculosis or heart disease before.
The patient reported no personal or family history.
Physical examination revealed multiple effusions in the chest, pericardium and abdominal cavity, accompanied by nonpitting edema of the chest and abdominal walls, as well as pitting edema of both lower limbs (heavier in the right lower limb). The patient’s toenails were thickened and yellow, with increased curvature and slow growth (0.2 mm/wk), as were his nails .
Clinical assessment revealed mild proteinuria (0.32 g/24 h), severe hypoalbuminemia (23.39 g/L), elevated serum creatinine levels (139 umol/L) and D-dimer (3270 pg/mL) levels. Even though white blood cell counts were elevated (11.33 × 109/L), the neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio was normal. Blood coagulation, electrolytes, serum lipids, antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens spectrum, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, immunoglobulin (κ and λ light chains), hepatitis virus detection, double-stranded DNA, tumor markers, T-cell interferon- release assays and B-type natriuretic peptide were all normal. We performed bilateral thoracentesis and abdominal puncture to detect tuberculosis and tumors. Both pleural and peritoneal effusions were composed of exudates, mainly lymphocytes (60% and 77%, respectively). Chyle test of the pleural fluid was positive. There were no tumor cells in the pleura, pleural as well as peritoneal effusions , and the tuberculosis nucleic acid test was negative. Lymph node biopsy (right axillary) revealed proliferative lesions of the lymphoid tissue, lymphatic sinuses and lymphoid follicles. The toenails were negative for fungi or parasites.
Effusions in these areas, subcutaneous edema, pleural thickening, and enlarged axillary as well as mediastinal lymph nodes were confirmed by computed tomography (CT) . Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scans revealed multiple symmetrical distributions of enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and left ethmoid sinusitis . Doppler echocardiography revealed pericardial effusion and a mild decrease of the left ventricular diastolic function. Radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy revealed interrupted lymphatic vessels of the right lower limb, with the imaging agent being accumulated in subcutaneous tissues, inguinal lymph nodes on the right side were not clear, and lymphatic vessels of the left lower limb exhibited collateral circulations .