A 61-year-old male patient is admitted to our emergency department due to a complaint of progressive worsening of the previous left ocular symptoms. He reported having been diagnosed with CCF nearly 2 months ago and being under outpatient follow-up at another neurosurgical department. However, in the past 4 days before hospital admission, the patient worsened from of the previous proptosis and chemosis, in addition to the onset of ipsilateral eye ache and diplopia when looking to the left. He denied history of trauma and emphasized the spontaneous onset of the condition. He reported a personal medical history of hypertension, myocardial infarction, nondialysis chronic kidney disease, and smoking.
Admission brain computed tomography angiography (CTA) demonstrated the left superior ophthalmic vein engorgement and proptosis, suggesting the diagnosis reported by the patient. Brain angiography confirmed the diagnosis and showed that it was an indirect CCF (Barrow type D) whose arterial supply was through multiple small-caliber branches from the cavernous segment of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) and distal branches of the left maxillary artery. The arteriovenous shunt in the left cavernous sinus (CS) drained retrogradely into the ipsilateral superior ophthalmic vein (which was enlarged). During angiography, venous access was attempted to the CS for the endovascular treatment of the fistula; however, the thrombosed inferior and superior petrosal sinuses prevented the endovascular staff from reaching the CS.
After multidisciplinary discussion, a new endovascular approach to the fistula through the angular vein was chosen. Unfortunately, the transition from the angular to the superior ophthalmic vein proved to be too small and angled, preventing navigation with the microcatheter. On the 1st day after this new treatment attempt, the patient evolved with progressive worsening of symptoms and onset of visual deficit. This left visual deficit rapidly progressed to monocular blindness.
We assumed that such an unfavorable evolution would be due to thrombosis (post catheterization) of the angular and facial veins, and secondary increase in ocular venous hypertension. Given the impossibility of endovascular treatment and the unfavorable evolution of the case, we chose to perform a pretemporal craniotomy with peeling of the dura mater at the middle fossa and exposure of Parkinson’s triangle on the lateral wall of the CS. After surgically exposing the CS and observing slight arterial bleeding in the middle fossa peeling, we performed a temporary clipping of the common carotid artery to decrease arterial flow in the CS. Immediately after cervical clipping, a change in the appearance of bleeding (coloration) along the lateral wall of the CS was observed. Puncture of the lateral wall of the CS was performed in the Parkinson’s triangle and fibrin glue was injected (Tisseel Lyo, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) for direct thrombosis of the CS and superior ophthalmic vein (about 3 ml of fibrin glue was injected). The temporary clip from the common carotid was then removed and no bleeding was observed through the lateral wall of the CS.
Postoperative CTA showed no surgical complications and no arterial filling of the CS or retrograde venous filling of the superior ophthalmic vein . The patient evolved with excellent postoperative clinical evolution and explicit regression of proptosis, chemosis, and diplopia. Hospital discharge on the 3rd postoperative day. At the outpatient consultation, 21 days after surgery, the patient had complete resolution of proptosis and chemosis, decreased of the VI left cranial nerve previous paresis, and persistence of ipsilateral blindness .