A 75-year-old man visited a local ophthalmologist because of discomfort and a foreign body sensation due to a mass at the inner canthus of his left eye. He had first noticed the mass about 10 years ago, and it had enlarged recently. He was referred to the Ophthalmology Department of Juntendo University Shizuoka Hospital for detailed examination and treatment. His past medical history included hypertension and prostatic hyperplasia, while the family history was not contributory. At the first visit, corrected vision was 1.2 in both eyes using a Snellen chart. There were no significant abnormalities of eye position or eye movements. Slit-lamp microscopy revealed a tumor at the lacrimal caruncle of the left eye. The mass measured ~2×2.5 mm. Its base had a smooth surface and was whitish with dilated capillaries . These findings were suggestive of an enlarged lacrimal caruncle. However, the apical portion of the tumor showed mild hyperemia and had a papilloma-like appearance. After inverting the protruding portion of the tumor, which appeared to be growing from the palpebral fissure, with a cotton swab, a “navel-like structure” was observed near the center of the lesion . In addition, early cataracts were detected in both eyes, but there were no significant changes of the fundus and the intraocular pressure was normal.
Based on these findings, a benign tumor of the inner can-thus was suspected, such as sebaceous gland hyperplasia. To alleviate the patient’s symptoms, complete resection of this lesion was performed 2 weeks after the first visit. Surgery was done under topical instillation of 0.4% oxybuprocaine hydrochloride ophthalmic solution (Benoxi®l; Santen pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan) and local anesthesia by injection of 1% lidocaine (Xylocaine®; Aspen Japan, Tokyo, Japan) into the bulbar conjunctiva along the circumference of the lesion. The tumor arose from the conjunctival tissue at the lacrimal caruncle, but did not involve the eyelid or the punctum. Complete resection of the tumor, including a region that seemed to contain the sebaceous glands of the lacrimal caruncle, led to removal of not only the whitish sebaceous glands but also the caruncle itself. The defect was closed with a single suture through the bulbar conjunctival epithelium using 8-0 Polysorb™ thread (Covidien, NY, USA). There were no adhesions between the tumor and surrounding tissues. The patient’s symptoms, including a foreign body sensation and ocular discomfort, gradually subsided after surgery.
The resected tumor was subjected to histopathological examination after staining with H&E . At the base of the tumor, sebaceous gland hyperplasia was observed involving adipocytes and there was moderate inflammatory cell infiltration. The apical portion of the tumor resembled a conjunctival papilloma and papillary proliferation of the epithelium was seen, although its surface was smooth. The tumor parenchyma consisted of a pedunculated mass formed by highly vascular fibrous connective tissue, and the boundary between the lesion and the epithelium was clear.
In order to investigate possible HPV infection, we have employed the genotyping procedure that allows the simultaneous detection of 16 high- and low-risk genital HPV types by multiplex PCR in a single reaction tube analyzed by GeneticLab Co., Ltd. (Sapporo, Japan). The apical portion of the tumor with papilloma-like features was subjected to in situ hybridization using an HPV DNA probe.9 The assay targeted HPV types -6, -11, -16, -18, -30, -31, -33, -35, -39, -45, -51, -52, -56, -58, -59, and -66, among which only HPV-51 was detected .
There has been no recurrence of the tumor up to 2.5 years postoperatively .
Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of case details and images.