A 75-year-old male farmer was brought by his family to the emergency surgical department with a complaint of failure to pass faeces and flatus of 1 day duration, associated with colicky abdominal pain, abdominal distension and two episodes of vomiting which were bilious, non-projectile, foul smelling and non-bloody. Nineteen years previously, he had a laparotomy plus sigmoidectomy with end-to-end descending Colorectal anastomosis for large bowel obstruction secondary to sigmoid volvulus. There had been no associated complications in the intervening time. He has no history of bloody stool, anorexia, weight loss or back pain. He has no history of headache, tinnitus, vertigo or easy fatigability. He has no history of psychiatric illness.
On admission, he looked acutely unwell. His vital signs were in the normal range (blood pressure=130/70 mmHg, PR=64 beats/min, RR=18/min, T=36.8°C, SpO2=92% on atmospheric air). He had pink conjunctiva and non-icteric sclera. He had a distended abdomen which moved with respiration. The abdomen was soft, non-tender and hyper-tympanic. There were hyperactive bowel sounds. There was a midline healed surgical scar. Digital rectal examination demonstrated an empty and ballooned rectum with no stool. The prostate was enlarged and firm with findings consistent with asymptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
White blood cell count was 7.5×103/mm3 and showed a left shift with 92% neutrophils and 4.7% lymphocytes. The platelet count was 172×103/mm3 and haematocrit was 43%. Other CBC profiles, liver function test, renal function tests and serum electrolytes were in the normal range . Erect plain abdominal X-ray showed dilated large bowel loops, paucity of air in the colon and few air-fluid levels suggestive of large bowel obstruction . A computed tomography (CT) scan was not available in the hospital. On the 1st postoperative day, CBC and serum electrolyte were repeated. WBC count was 7.23 × 103/mm3 and showed 68% neutrophils and 24.4% lymphocytes. Hematocrit was 33.9%. the serum electrolytes were in the normal range .
Initial management included IV Ringer lactate as a 1L bolus followed by maintenance infusion. Deflation with a rectal tube was not successful. During subsequent exploratory laparotomy, the intraoperative finding was 360° counter-clockwise rotated descending colon also involving part of distal transverse colon and splenic flexure . The descending colon was entirely intraperitoneal. The caecum, ascending colon, hepatic flexure, transverse colon, splenic flexure and descending colon were significantly dilated . The previous descending Colorectal anastomosis site was intact and minimally constricted . The colonic volvulus was derotated and deflated with a rectal tube intraoperatively. Then extraperitonealization of the descending colon was done by fixing the lateral coli of the descending colon with the lateral peritoneal reflection of the abdominal wall . Postoperative recovery was smooth and the patient was discharged after 3 days of hospital stay. On his 12th postoperative day, he was examined at the surgical referral clinic and he was able to tolerate oral feeds, with no abdominal pain, distension, fever, vomiting or constipation. Further out-patient follow-up done at 4 weeks and 6 months, following the surgery, the patient remained stable and he had resumed normal activities.