A 37-year-old man was referred to our clinic in December 2019 with the chief complaint of recurrent frequency, urgency and odynuria for 3 months. Routine urinalysis showed 102 WBC/ul and 21 RBC/ul), but the result of urine culture was negative. Ultrasound of the urinary system revealed bladder stones attached to the anterior bladder wall and further abdominal CT-scan showed the existence of bladder stones and calcified tissues around the right inguinal region . Subsequent cystoscopy demonstrated bladder stones and part of the eroded mesh on the right anterior wall . The patient received open mesh repair for right inguinal hernia in September 2014, which recurred 9 months after the previous surgery, for which a TAPP repair was performed in May 2015. According to the second operation, a hernial orifice about 3 cm was identified on the right inguinal region, for which a 6 cm × 13 cm polypropylene mesh (COOK, USA) was applied and fixed with four non-absorbable metallic tacks on the dorsal side of the Cooper’s ligament and the pubic bone. In February 2019, the patient came to our clinic primarily with dysuria and hematuria for 2 days. CT scan identified urethral and bladder stones, for which a day-case transurethral cystoscopic holmium laser lithotripsy was performed. During the fragmentation, we found that the mesh was partially eroded and therefore cut the eroded portion by holmium laser under cystoscopy.
For the recurrent bladder stones caused by the residue mesh, an open surgery was performed to remove them through a 7-cm incision along the midline of the lower abdomen. The rectus abdominis was dissected bluntly; the linear alba was incised straightly; and the peritoneum was separated and pushed upward to expose the anterior wall of the bladder. Under the excellent exposure of the field, a tough tissue was touched around the anterior bladder wall. By nipping the tissue with forceps, we dissected into the bladder with scissors and forceps. At the end of the tissue where the eroded mesh and bladder tissue were located, we found stones and four tacks attached to the dorsal side of Cooper’s ligament and the pubic bone. After taking off these four tacks, we noticed that two of them were eroding into the bladder . The bladder defect was closed in two layers with 2–0 suture. Finally, the bladder was inflated from the indwelling urethral catheter and demonstrated no leak. A closed drainage was indwelled in the preperitoneal space. A urinary catheter was inserted and retained for 3 weeks. No mesh residue or stone recurrence was found by cystoscopy during the 3-month follow-up period.