A 12-year-old Han Chinese girl (30 kg), who was a middle school student, presented to our hospital with several masses on the abdomen and back with low-grade fever for five months.
Five months previously, a painful tender mass was found in the right upper quadrant of the girl’s abdomen. The patient reported low-grade fever with a temperature of 37.5℃ and fatigue. Chinese herbal medicines for external application were used for the mass; however, the mass enlarged and an abscess gradually formed, and then ulcerated with suppuration. Subsequently, three other masses appeared, one by one, with one on the left back and two on the right back, which were similar to the first mass . She also had a mild cough without sputum. There was no night sweating, diarrhea, or nausea.
The patient did not recall any previous back or abdominal injury.
The patient and her family had no previous medical history.
The patient’s temperature was 37.5℃, heart rate was 105 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, blood pressure was 105/62 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. Four painful subcutaneous masses were palpable, one on the right upper abdomen, one on the left back, and two on the right back. The masses ranged from 3.0 to 4.0 cm in diameter, were tough but pliable in texture, with tenderness, an irregular margin and discharging pus. Moist rales were found at the bottom of both lungs.
Complete blood cell counts showed that the white blood cell count (WBC) was 25.24 × 109/L with 40% neutrophils, 8.20% lymphocytes, red blood cell count (RBC) was 2.48 × 1012/L, and hemoglobin (HGB) was 54 G/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was > 140 mm/h and procalcitonin (PCT) was 2.39 ng/mL.
Whole abdomen computed tomography (CT) on September 13th showed obvious swelling of both bilateral psoas, iliopsoas and back muscles, suggesting infection and multiple abscesses, peritonitis and a moderate amount of ascites. The chest CT on September 21st showed massive pleural effusion in the left chest, a small amount of pleural effusion on the right, patchy and streaky cloudy opacities in both lungs, suggesting inflammation . Color Doppler echocardiography on September 28th showed a markedly enlarged right atrium and left atrium, aortic insufficiency, tricuspid insufficiency, pulmonary hypertension, mild to moderate pericardial effusion, left ventricular contractile and diastolic dysfunction.
As the patient had signs of heart failure and multiple abscesses, she was transferred to the intensive care unit of the local hospital. A series of assays were performed as follows: C-reactive protein (CRP) 74.2 mg/L, serum amyloid A (SAA) 421 mg/L, PCT 1.69 ng/mL, creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CKMB) 0.97 ng/mL, and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP): 18136 pg/mL. Her hepatic and renal function were normal. HIV screen was negative, and CD4 and CD8 counts were normal. Tuberculosis-antibody and T-SPOT were negative. All autoantibodies were negative except for anticardiolipin antibodies. She was treated with intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam for 9 d, plus linezolid for 3 d for anti-infection, and deslanoside and digoxin for anti-heart failure. The child’s chest congestion and polyserositis improved after these treatments, but the abscesses and lesions in both lungs did not improve. Abscess aspiration and drainage were then performed. No pathogens were found in pus from the abscess, ascites or sputum smear including acid-fast smear. Multiple culture of blood, aspirated pus, ascites and sputum, including common bacteria and fungi culture, as well as incubation in Loewenstein-Jensen medium at 37℃ for 42 d, were all negative. Adenosine deaminase (ADA) in abscess drainage fluid was 2 U/L. The pathological manifestations in abscess tissue from the right psoas showed numerous lymphocytes and neutrophils infiltration. A small number of multinuclear giant cells, and granulation tissues were found, indicating suppurative and granulomatous inflammation . Due to her cardiac insufficiency, fiber bronchoscopy was not feasible at the time.
Therefore, NGS of the patient’s FFPE specimen was performed to identify the causative pathogen.