A 27-year-old man presented with left flank pain. On the hemogram, he had white blood cell of 7000/mm3, hemoglobin (Hb) of 16.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 49.6%, and platelet of 193000/mm3. Bleeding time, coagulation time, prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time values were within normal limits. Laboratory investigations were as follows: Urea, 32 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.8 mg/dL. The results of liver function tests were within normal limits. On physical examination, tenderness was found on the left lumbar region. Examination findings of other organ-systems were normal. Ultrasonography (US) findings revealed the agenesis of the right kidney, the size of left kidney was 151 × 71 mm, its parenchymal thickness was 22 mm, and there was a 27 mm calculus in the major lower calyx. On the intravenous pyelogram, the left kidney stone was 27 mm in size and the nephrogram and pyelogram findings were insignificant . No activity was observed in the right kidney. Diagnosis of the solitary kidney was confirmed by DTPA and DMSA.
Under general anesthesia and after inserting a 6-Fr catheter in the left ureter, the patient was put in lithotomy position by placing cushions under his knees, iliac bones, and shoulder. The collector tract was visualized with contrast medium. An 18-gauge needle was advanced to the lower calyx. Stone-free standard PCNL procedure was performed with pneumatic lithotripter using low-pressure isotonic solution and semi-rigid Amplatz dilators under the guide of rigid nephroscope. A 20-Fr reentry was used as nephrostomy catheter. Hypotension and oliguria (400 mL/day) developed during the first 24 postoperative hours. The patient was supported with intravenous colloidal solution and blood transfusion. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed retroperitoneal hematoma extending to the left fossa iliaca . Hb levels progressively decreased to 6.5 g/dL. Level of urea and creatinine were respectively 98 mg/dL and 5.5 mg/dL at the 48th postoperative hour. At the 72nd postoperative hour, level of urea and creatinine were 145 mg/dL and 9.3 mg/dL, respectively. The results of renal Doppler US showed a 28 mm thickness and heterogeneous parenchyma with grade II echogenicity. After consultation with nephrology department, the patient underwent hemodialysis. On the 96th postoperative hour, selective renal angiography was performed with presumed diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm. Pseudoaneurysm was found on the posterior segment of the left inferior renal artery . Segmental aneurysm was corrected by applying three simultaneous endocoils. Hemodialysis was done twice on the 120th and 144th postoperative hours. Following hemodialysis, urinary output increased from 3750 mL to 12000 mL, and creatinine level fell from 10 mg/dL to 1.3 mg/dL. The patient was discharged after recovery of his renal function. The findings of the patients are summarized in .