A 75-year-old woman was presented to our hospital with 10 years of mild exertional dyspnea and palpitation. She didn’t see any doctors until 1 month before presentation, when the symptoms of dyspnea and palpitation aggravated. She was found to have cardiomegaly and left lung infection by chest radiograph, and a presumptive diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy was made in a local hospital. Diuretics and inotropic agents were given but provided no relief of symptoms. She was then referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
On admission the patient’s blood pressure was 121/68 mmHg, heart rate was around 110 bpm and irregular. The jugular veins were distended. Cardiac examination revealed an irregular tachycardia and a systolic apical murmur of grade 2/6. Rales were heard over the left lung base. The liver edge was palpable below the costal margin with tender. Edema was present in the both lower extremities. Laboratory tests revealed unremarkable findings except for the reduced blood oxygen pressure of 57 mmHg. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation and evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed PAH with the estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure of 77 mmHg and dilatation of the right ventricle (RV) and right atrium (RA) . Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was unable to complete successfully.
Pulmonary embolism was suspected and MCTA was performed then, which confirmed the diagnosis of PAPVC and SVD. The anatomical and morphological features of this congenital defect were clearly revealed by MCTA. The RUPV was unroofed and drained into the SVC at the level of the caval atrial junction . The atrial septum was actually intact and no true atrial ASD was present . The SVC overrode across the intact atrial septum and had bi-atrial connection with one opening connecting to the right atrium and another opening to the left atrium .
Right heart catheterization and surgery correction of the anomaly was suggested but was declined by the patient. Intravenous infusion of Alprostadil was initiated with 20 μg twice daily and then Beraprost with 40 μg three times daily. Sildenafil was recommended but declined by the patient due to the high cost. The patient was discharged a week later with improved 6-Minute Walking Distance (300 meters at baseline and 320 meters at the day of discharge).