A 30-year-old male was admitted to the Shenzhen Baoan District Central Hospital due to weakness of the left limbs for 2 h. The patient suddenly experienced weakness and numbness in the left limbs and the inability to stand, accompanied by dizziness, slurred and nonfluent speech, and dysphagia when the neck was massaged 2 h previously. He had a history of hypertension, but the details were unknown. A physical examination on admission revealed the following: pulse (P), 82 times/min; blood pressure (BP), 152/95 mmHg, D-dimer 0.17 mg/L, AST 95U/L,LDH 293U/L. On neurological examination, he was poor spirit; clear consciousness; nonfluent speech; ability to answer questions; equal-sized and round pupils with a diameter of 3.0 mm; sensitivity to light; symmetrical bilateral frontal lines; not significantly shallow of bilateral nasolabial folds; middle placement of the tongue; no edema in the lower limbs. There were weakness of left limbs (muscle strength in the left upper limb weakness of grade 3; muscle strength in the left lower limb weakness of grade 3 with weakened muscle tone; superficial hypoesthesia of the left limbs). there was normal in the right limbs. No bilateral pathological signs. He had a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score of 9. A computerized tomography (CT) examination showed no significant abnormalities. His diagnosis was acute ischemic stroke and hypertension grade 1. The patient had an indication for rt-pa thrombolysis without related contraindications according to the Chinese guidelines (2014 and 2018 and AHA/ASA criteria 2013 and 2018). The patient’s muscle strength in the left upper and lower limbs recovered to grade 5 after thrombolysis for 30 min. The patient was sudden with cough, blood in sputum without a headache, vomiting, vertigo, pallor, chest pain or dyspnea after thrombolysis for 45 min. At 50 min, he experienced chest pain and a heart rate of 167 beats/min, and his blood oxygen saturation decreased rapidly from 99 to 89 %. When rt-pa was infused 53 min later, his blood oxygen saturation decreased to 65 % and he went into cardiac arrest. Despite various rescue measures, the patient eventually died.
An autopsy was performed on the second day after death. The body was 167 cm long. No rashes, hemorrhages or ecchymosis were found on body surface examination. The autopsy mainly found a large amount of bloody edema fluid in the oral, nasal cavity and tracheal cavity with significant mucosa congestion. Both lungs exhibited congestion and edema macroscopically, showing a large amount of foamy bloody edema fluid overflow . No significant pathological changes were observed in other organs. Microscopically, numerous arteriolar walls showed thickening and hyalinization, and some wall calcification in the brain. The pulmonary interstitium was hyperemic with diffuse pulmonary edema with local hemorrhage . Some of the alveoli showed compensatory emphysema, but the rest of the structures were unremarkable. Submucosal edema was observed in the larynx. Some mast cell degranulation signs were observed in the larynx, hilum, and digestive tract . The total serum IgE content was 11.55 IU/ml.
The patient died of respiratory and circulatory failure due to acute pulmonary edema caused by rt-pa thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke.