An 81-year-old Hispanic man presented to the emergency department complaining of progressive fatigue and shortness of breath 6 days after being diagnosed with COVID-19 (positive nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 PCR). He reported myalgia, sore throat, intermittent dry cough, loss of smell and taste, poor appetite, and nausea without vomiting. He also had diarrhea and an episode of urinary incontinence. He denied fever or chills, chest pain, and headache. Because of hypoxemia requiring high-flow oxygen, the patient was admitted to the critical care unit.
Previous medical history includes prostate cancer treated with chemotherapy and androgen deprivation therapy in 2013, in remission with undetectable prostate-specific antigen (PSA) since 2014, prediabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 3 (baseline creatinine 1.2 – 1.6 mg/dL) attributed to hypertension with prior urine analysis in 2017 showing proteinuria of 385 mg/day, aortic valve stenosis, and cervical radiculopathy. Home medications included olmesartan 20 mg twice daily and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg daily. Notably, he had a history of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) use, 400 – 800 mg of ibuprofen per day for chronic neck pain. He is a former smoker but quit in 2012 and did not have lung disease.
Initial vital signs: temperature 37.4 °C, blood pressure 166/69 mmHg, heart rate 68 beats per minute, respiratory rate 27 breaths per minute, and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) 95% on high-flow nasal cannula (50 L/min with FiO2 of 100%). Physical examination was notable for tachypnea with the remainder of physical examination unremarkable.
and show his laboratory results. Repeat SARS-CoV-2 PCR via nasopharyngeal swab was positive. He had evidence of AKI stage 3 with a serum creatinine of 7.1 mg/dL. Urinalysis demonstrated 3 – 10 red blood cells per high power field, nephrotic range proteinuria of 4.6 g per 24 hours, glycosuria, and tubular epithelial cells. He had anemia with hemoglobin of 10.3 g/dL, hypoalbuminemia of 1.7 g/dL, and multiple elevated inflammatory markers, including interleukin-6 (IL-6), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and ferritin. Kidney ultrasound revealed bilaterally increased parenchymal echogenicity consistent with CKD. Chest radiograph showed indistinct pulmonary vasculature bilaterally with bronchocentric ground glass, and bilateral patchy infiltrates, consistent with COVID-19 pneumonia. Lower extremities Doppler did not reveal deep vein thromboses, and transthoracic echocardiogram was normal.
He was enrolled in a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of lenzilumab (monoclonal antibody targeting GM-CSF) 600 mg for 3 doses, in addition to intravenous antibiotics for possible superimposed community-acquired pneumonia. He completed a steroid trial with 5 days of intravenous methylprednisolone. Due to increasing D-dimer to 100,000 ng/mL, low-intensity heparin infusion was initiated.
Over the first few hospitalization days, creatinine remained elevated at ~ 7 mg/dL. He did not require dialysis as he maintained excellent urine output. Serologic testing for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), tuberculosis, as well as C3, C4, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM), and anti-phospholipase A2 receptors (PLA2R) were all negative. Anti-THSD7A was indeterminate due to high background. No serum monoclonal proteins were detected. Kidney biopsy was performed on hospital day 4.
On hospital day 7, the patient’s respiratory status worsened requiring intubation, mechanical ventilation, and initiation of vasopressors. Despite that, his AKI was slowly recovering and creatinine reached 3.7 mg/dL on hospital day 11. However, the shock state subsequently worsened, continuous dialysis was started but eventually the patient died on hospital day 16. Family declined an autopsy.