A 79-year-old Japanese woman presented with dyspnoea due to congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association Class III). She had been diagnosed with moderate MR for the past 11 years and repeatedly hospitalized for congestive heart failure for the past 3 years. During the follow-up, her MR had progressed to severe. She received oral medications including bisoprolol (1.25 mg o.d.), furosemide (40 mg o.d.), spironolactone (25 mg o.d.), tolvaptan (15 mg o.d.), and warfarin (2.5 mg o.d.). On admission, her blood pressure was 130/66 mmHg with a heart rate of 70 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 98% in room air. On physical examination, pan-systolic murmur was evident at the apex and bilateral lower legs were mildly oedematous, but jugular venous distension and lung murmur were not evident. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left atrium enlargement and severe MR deviating from the A2P2 coaptation to the posterior wall of the left atrium . Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed functional shortening and limited motion of the posterior mitral leaflet retracted to the posterior wall (; Video 1). The A2 leaflet was slightly thickened and prolonged, suggesting pseudo-prolapse. The coaptation length, coaptation depth, and P2 length were 2, 4, and 11 mm, respectively. The mitral valve area was 4.6 cm2 and the mitral annular diameter was 36 mm. There was no evidence of valve perforation, tendon rupture, or vegetations. Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) risk score for isolated mitral valve replacement was estimated as 11.8%. The blood tests and echocardiographic parameters are summarized in .
Based on these findings, we established a diagnosis of atrial functional MR (AFMR) plus mild anterior mitral valve degeneration. In addition to the history of ascending and descending aortic replacement for aortic dissection, her comorbidities such as atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, and advanced frailty precluded repeat open-chest surgery for severe MR. Therefore, the Heart Team planned TMVr using the MitraClip NT (G2) (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
During the procedure, the first clip was placed slightly medial to the A2P2, after which the MR decreased to mild to moderate. After placing the second clip slightly lateral to the A2P2, the MR became milder . The mean mitral valve pressure gradient was 1 mmHg post-procedure . Although there were two small regurgitant orifices bilateral to the second clip (; Video 2), the procedure was uneventfully completed with mean left atrial pressure dropping from 20 mmHg to 15 mmHg. However, MR was progressed to moderate on the 5th day and to severe on the 12th day after the procedure , thereby worsening congestive heart failure with significant systemic fluid retention. Notably, she had a low-grade fever and dark-coloured urine but jaundice was not evident. The blood test showed normocytic anaemia concomitant with serum haptoglobin below the limit of measurement. Schizocytes were evident in the blood smear . Based on these findings, we established a diagnosis of mechanical haemolysis induced by recurrent MR. Transesophageal echocardiography detected protrusion of the clip on the lateral side into the left atrium with a high degree of MR (; Video 3). The Heart Team finally made an agonizing decision for conservative medical therapies because repeat MitraClip procedure was considered to be extremely challenging to control severe regurgitation. Fluid retention and haemolytic anaemia were stabilized after our intensive treatment including β-blocker, haemodialysis, and haptoglobin replenishment. However, the patient had a significant progression of disuse syndrome and eventually died of aspiration pneumonia.
An autopsy revealed that the lateral side of A2 was dehisced and the clip on the lateral side was deviated to the left atrium, concluding as a single leaflet device attachment (SLDA) . Microscopic findings revealed that the A2 leaflet was thicker with a layered structure obscured with severe fibrosis, but there were no findings of calcification or vegetations or abscesses .