The patient was 23-year-old healthy woman with chief complaints of a mandibular deviation and crowded dentition. The facial evaluation showed an asymmetric face with a mandible shift to the right side and a soft-tissue asymmetry. A convex profile and a deep mentolabial sulcus were noted. The maxillary dental midline was coincident with the facial midline; whereas, the mandibular dental midline deviated 1.5 mm to the right. Intraorally, a half-step Class II molar and canine relationship was observed on the right; a Class I molar and canine relationship was observed on the left. The dentition was mildly crowded in both arches with a 5-mm overbite and a 4-mm overjet . The dental cast analysis showed a normal Bolton index but a disharmonious arch width between the maxillary and mandibular arch: the mandibular arch width was 1.5 mm wider than the maxillary arch in the premolar region. A reduced vertical height of the posterior region on the right side was observed . The cephalometric analysis showed a normal vertical skeletal pattern (Frankfort-mandibular plane angle (FMA), 28.2°; sella-nasion to Gonion-Gnathion angle (SN-GoGn), 33.5°) and a mild Class II sagittal pattern (sella-nasion A-point angle (SNA), 82.9; sella-nasion B-point angle (SNB), 79.0; A-point-nasion-B-point angle (ANB), 3.9). The incisors were slightly retruded in the maxillary and mandibular regions (interincisal angle, 134.6°; 102.3° from the maxillary incisor to SN; incisor mandibular plane angle (IMPA), 89.6°). The JSI was calculated with CBCT as previously described . The JSI of the right condyle was smaller than that of the left (right, − 30.7, left, − 8.7), which meant that the right condyle was in a more posterior position than the left condyle . The three-dimensional reconstruction of the CBCT image showed that a right-deviated mandible (skeletal landmarks sella, basion, and anterior nasal spine were used as midsagittal plane reference to orient CBCT images and measure asymmetry ), the ramus, body, and total length of the right side were mildly shorter than those of the left side . That is, her deviation presented both functional and skeletal factors.
With a focus on the patient’s chief complaints, the primary objectives of treatment were to coordinate the dental midlines and correct the asymmetrical facial appearance. The other treatment objectives were to resolve the dental crowding, establish normal overbite and overjet relationships, and obtain an ideal occlusion.
The patient was told that if orthodontic treatment could not correct her asymmetric appearance, surgery could be an alternative choice. However, because of the surgical risks and costs of surgical intervention, surgical treatment was not recommended for this patient.
To meet her esthetic demand, a ceramic preadjusted bracket (0.022-inch slot, Damon Clear; Ormco, Orange, CA) was placed on the labial side of both arches. A 0.014-inch round nickel–titanium wire was used to initiate alignment. At 7 months, a 0.018 × 0.025-inch stainless steel working wire and a 0.014-inch round nickel–titanium wire were placed in the upper and lower arch, respectively. Bite turbos were added to the occlusal surfaces of the mandibular right first molar and left molars to control the vertical height of the lower molars . After 5 months, both arches were leveled and aligned, and the arch forms were coordinated by matching the archwires with archform chart. A unilateral Class II elastic (Penguin, 5/16-in, 3.5-oz; Ormco) and an anterior diagonal elastic (Penguin, 5/16-in, 3.5-oz; Ormco) were used from the upper right side to the lower left side to correct the mandibular functional shift . Furthermore, the bite turbos on the mandibular right first molar were progressively reduced to reestablish a normal vertical dimension and ideal bilateral occlusion. After 8 months, the dental midlines were coordinated with Class I molar and canine relationships, and the use of the elastics was stopped. Short-term efficacy stability was observed for another 3 months before removing the fixed appliances. The treatment period was 24 months, and a Hawley retainer was used for retention.
Class I molar and canine relationships with coincident dental and facial midlines and adequate overbite and overjet relationships were achieved. The facial photographs showed a symmetrical appearance . The dental cast analysis indicated that the maxillary interpremolar (14–24) and intermolar (16–26) widths increased by 2.3 mm and 1.3 mm, respectively, and that the arch forms were coordinated between the two arches. The reduced vertical height of the right posterior region was also corrected . No resorption or deformity in the condylar structure was found with CBCT of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) regions. The panoramic radiographs showed parallel roots without root resorption . The superimposition of the cephalometric radiographs showed normalization of the incisor inclination. A slight clockwise rotation of the mandibular plane was observed in response to the molar extrusions. A GoGn-oriented superimposition of three-dimensional mandible reconstructions also verified the extrusion. The right lower first molar and left lower first molar extruded 1.8 mm and 1.1 mm, respectively . The JSI of both sides increased after treatment (Δright JSI = 37.4, Δleft JSI = 28.1), indicating that the right condyle presented a more significant anterior relocation than the left condyle . A three-dimensional superimposition based on cranial base and zygoma showed that asymmetry has improved as the mandible is repositioned back to the left . The patient was satisfied with the result of the treatment, and did not complain of temporomandibular disorder (TMD) symptoms throughout the treatment period. After 14 months of retention, the patient came for a follow-up. Her symmetrical appearance and occlusion were still stable .