A fifty-one-year-old man known for active e-cigarette smoking and history of cigarette smoking, type 2 diabetes mellitus and a personality disorder was brought to the Emergency Department 30 min after injecting himself intravenously in his right forearm with 10 ml of e-liquid with 100 mg/ml of nicotine diluted in propylene-glycol in a suicidal attempt.
On arrival, the patient already complained of diffuse abdominal cramps. He confirmed the intravenous injection of 10 ml of e-liquid in the forearm and brought the product with him. Initial vital signs showed a heart rate of 139 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 170/113 mmHg, a temperature of 36 °C (96.8 °F), a respiratory rate of 41 breaths per minute and a saturation of 100% on room air. Physical examination was irrelevant except for psychomotor agitation and mydriatic pupils poorly responsive to light. No local reaction was visualised around the injection site (on the forearm). The ABG showed a mixed acidobasic disorder with metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.56, pCO2 1.31 kPa, pO2 15,8 kPa and bicarbonate 8.9 mmol/l, lactate 11.1 mmol/l). The anion gap was elevated (31.1 mmol/l) as was the osmolar gap, reaching 16 mOsm/kg. Venous blood analysis showed hypokalaemia (3 mmol/l) and hypophosphataemia (0.23 mmol/l). The ECG showed a sinusal tachycardia without repolarisation changes and the troponins were negative. The patient was initially rehydrated; IV potassium and phosphate infusion was initiated and morphine was administrated to control pain. Two hours post-injection the patient became stuporous with bradypnoea and desaturation. The subsequent ABG showed persistent uncompensated lactic acidosis with the appearance of alveolar hypoventilation, (pH 7.22, pCO2 5.25 kPa, bicarbonate 16.6 mmol/l and lactate 5.7 mmol/l). The patient fell into a coma and was quickly transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) where he was immediately intubated using rapid sequence induction (etomidate, succinylcholine and fentanyl). For the next 3 h, the patient was not sedated but remained in a profound coma, being unarousable (GCS 3/15) and showing insufficient spontaneous respiration needing controlled ventilation. He presented periodic myoclonic movements of both lower limbs with no abnormal movement of the upper body without improvement after 1 mg of IV clonazepam. Seven hours post-injection the patient recovered spontaneous ventilation and woke up progressively. Ten hours post-injection, the patient was alert and answered simple questions by shaking his head, but his pupils were still mydriatic and poorly responsive to light. We noted a right lateral gaze palsy and flaccid tetraparesia 2/5 with hypoactive deep tendon reflexes, thus preventing extubation. A brain CT excluded any cerebral lesion. Eleven hours post-injection the patient showed complete recovery of motor response and normalisation of deep tendon reflexes allowing extubation.
His mean arterial blood pressure stayed in the normal range without vasopressive agents. We observed a sinus tachycardia (110–130 bpm) and short runs of atrial tachycardia. No ventricular arrhythmias were noted during monitoring. The troponins peaked at 1450 ng/l 24 h post-injection. We concluded a type II myocardial infarction due to sympathetic overstimulation. Daily aspirin was introduced and an ambulatory cardiac assessment was organised.
We noted polyuria up to 400 ml/h with a normal urine analysis and a urine osmolality of 620 mOsm/kg. IV hydration was initiated to compensate for the polyuria, which resolved spontaneously after 8 h. Metabolic acidosis with hyperlactataemia persisted on serial ABGs but it normalised after 11 h.
Cardiologic and neurologic monitoring was performed for 24 h. The patient was discharged after a psychiatric evaluation and the organisation of an out-patient follow-up. A summarized view of the patient’s evolution is shown in Fig. .
Knowing the concentration of nicotine and the quantity injected of a labelled product, we did not ask for more investigations. We confirmed the poising by performing nicotine and cotinine dosages, which were 18 h post-injection12 mcg/l and 3210 mcg/l respectively. The toxicology screen for other common drugs was negative. The presence of Propylene glycol was confirmed as an adjuvant on the label of the bottle the patient brought with him, but its dosage was not available in several universitary laboratories.