A 50 year old male with chronic kidney disease in the terminal stage receiving hemodialysis and no history of abdominal surgery or bowel disorder was admitted in our surgery department for acute abdominal pain with a rapidly progressive intensity which evolved for 24 h, with nausea, vomiting and abdominal distension. At the initial physical examination, the patient had stable vitals and had no fever, but he was agitated with a poor general condition. The Abdominal examination found a distended tympanic abdomen, with a generalized tenderness, and a large, irreductible but painless right inguinal hernia, which was against the diagnosis of an intestinal obstruction due to a strangled hernia. Rectal examination found an empty rectal bulb. Biology assessment showed a normal white blood cell count but an elevated level of C-Reactive Protein (170 mg/L).
After conditioning and reanimation, a radiological assessment was done. Abdominal x-ray showed air-fluid levels. Abdominal CT scan revealed an abnormal position of the duodenojejunal (D-J) flexure which was located to the right of the midline, the third portion of the duodenum was not included in the arterial clamp. The caecum was in the midline in a transverse position, in contact with the anterior abdominal wall with an important distention of small bowel and a transitional zone next to the deep inguinal ring . We decided to perform an emergency laparotomy by a senior surgeon. We proceeded by a right inguinal incision. Exploration showed distended small bowel with no restriction signs at the deep inguinal ring. We then decided to proceed to a midline laparotomy. We found caecal volvulus with a coecum located in the midline and an important distention of small bowel which were located at the right side of the abdomen . There was also an abnormal position of the duodenojejunal (D-J) flexure which is located to the right of the midline (normally to the left). The final diagnosis was therefore a caecal volvulus associated with an incomplete common mesentery. Ischemic lesions were noticed in the caecum . W performed an ileo-caecal resection with an ileostomy and a colostomy in the right iliac fossa, we preferred not to do an immediate anastomosis, as there was an important edema of the bowel wall. A suture repair of the right inguinal hernia was also performed. Post-operative course was marked by hyperkaliemia that needed hemodialysis. The patient was discharged after 20 days. Pathology showed signs of chronic ileocolic ischemia.