A 65-year-old Russian male, not known to have chronic medical illnesses, came to the ED complaining of painful swelling in the lower abdomen which had been going on for five days. Abdominal pain was severe colicky in nature with no relieving factors, associated with nausea and vomiting multiple times. There had been no change in bowel habits, fever or change in appetite. The patient had a history of lower abdominal surgery at the age of two, but he had no medical report
On physical examination the patient was conscious and had a normal body built. His blood pressure was 126/92, pulse was 88 and temperature was 36.2 °C. is symmetrically distended with a swelling in the lower abdomen 12 × 15 cm in size with negative cough impulse, erythema and tenderness on the overlying skin. The rest of the abdomen was soft on palpation with positive bowel sounds. Investigation of his hemoglobin gave 10.8 wbc’s with 11.5 sodium 139 potassium 3.2 creatinine 0.7.
The patient was admitted as a case of abdominal pain for investigation. The CT of abdomen and pelvic with IV and oral contrast was done showing thickened terminal ileum with marked luminal narrowing which appeared adherent to the urinary bladder wall with no line of cleavage. Two fistula tracts were seen superior and inferior; the superior one lead to a pocket of collection filled by contrast 36 × 20 mm in size. The inferior tract was connected to an anterior abdominal wall collection measuring about 18.7 × 14.4 mm with marginal enhancement denoting an abscess. There was diffuse anterior abdominal wall fat stranded with subcutaneous pockets of air denoting infection. Subcentemetric mesenteric lymphadenopathy was observed .
Patient was taken to the OR for exploratory laparotomy and drainage of the abscess. Upon internce to the abdomen a large pocket of pus in subcutaneous layer was opened and evacuated and a swab was sent for culture and sensitivity. A firm mass inclosing the pelvic was dissected and found to be a large diverticulum 10 cm from the ileocecal junction. The mass was attaching to the urinary bladder and was fistulating to the subcutaneous pus collection. Urology was called in at this point and the urinary bladder was checked by injecting methylene blue dye; there was no leak. Limited right hemicolectomy was performed with a primary iliocolic anastomosis .
Histopathology was consistent with diverticulum of the small bowel and serosal lipoma with a pocket containing multiple staghorn-type black stones, negative to tuberculosis . Patient wound culture from OR showed E. coli which was sensitive to Tigacyclin. Treatment was started with this antibiotic and patient’s condition improved. Postoperative course was uneventful except for a small dehiscence at the lower part of the abdominal wound, which was treated conservatively with VAC dressing. Patient was discharged to travel to his country, and the wound was left for secondary closing.