A 47-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of a submucosal tumor in the middle of the gastric body that was detected during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed for screening. There were no notable physical findings and the patient had no relevant medical history. Blood test results revealed no significant abnormalities. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and contrast imaging showed a submucosal tumor of 20 mm in diameter on the posterior wall of the gastric body . Because of previous biopsy, a depression on the mucosal surface was observed . Computed tomography demonstrated slight thickening of the gastric wall of the tumor and no distant metastasis. Endoscopic ultrasound revealed a lesion with an uneven internal echo image originating from the muscle layer. Examination of biopsy specimens obtained by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration revealed spindle-shaped cells with fibroblast-like nuclei in tumor cells. Immunohistochemistry showed partial positivity for CD34 and negativity for c-kit. Based on these findings, KIT-negative gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) was suspected. Therefore, a surgical resection was performed.
Intraoperative findings showed a tumor lesion with a white color change on the serosal surface at the posterior wall of the middle part of the stomach after dividing the greater omentum . After suturing the stomach wall to the abdominal wall and suspending the stomach, marking was performed on the external wall of the stomach was marked along a line that secured a sufficient margin from the tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed from the inside of the stomach along the marking line; when the dissection had progressed to a certain extent, the tumor was excised along the dissection line from the extragastric wall under a laparoscopic view . The excised specimen was endoscopically removed from the oral cavity. Closure was performed using an automatic suturing device after suturing the stomach wall with a support thread. After closing the stomach wall, absence of bleeding and deformation was confirmed endoscopically. The operation time was 3 h and 26 min, and there was little blood loss.
The resected specimen measured 36 mm × 32 mm with a sufficient margin . A gray-white tumor measuring 27 × 17 × 11 mm was observed from the submucosa to the serosa . Histopathological examination revealed proliferation of collagen fibers from the submucosal layer to the muscular layer, accompanied by the infiltration of spindle-shaped cells, lymphocytes, and numerous inflammatory cells . Immunohistochemistry showed that the nuclei of spindle-shaped tumor cells were positive for SMA and negative for CD34, desmin, and c-Kit . Additionally, IgG4-positive cells were observed with an IgG4/IgG ratio of > 50%. Elastica van Gieson (EVG) staining revealed obstructive phlebitis in two venules . An additional immunohistochemical study revealed positivity for IgG4 and a specific nuclear positivity for ALK . The mitotic index was 5% , and immunostaining of Ki-67 was partially positive, while the MIB-1 index was 2–3% . Therefore, in addition to the absence of an increase in serum IgG4 levels, a diagnosis of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) was made. The patient was discharged on the eighth day after surgery and showed no signs of recurrence during the follow-up period of 1 year and 6 months after the operation.