A 69-year-old man was referred to our Emergency Department for resting dyspnea after 2 months progressive shortness of breath, 2 years after transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
In 1994 he underwent aortic valve replacement with a 23 mm Biocor™ valve (St. Jude, MN, USA) for native valve endocarditis. Eleven years later (2015) he was re-operated for structural valve deterioration. In that occasion – due to the presence of extreme calcification of the aortic annulus and root – we had to replace the prosthesis with a 23 mm Edwards Sapien 3 transcatheter valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) under direct view, as previously described .
The patient revealed anticoagulants discontinuation due to excessive bleeding after surgery for a chordoma of the nose within the last 2 months (he was on anticoagulant after an episode of atrial fibrillation). He took Aspirin 100 mg/day with a good compliance. He had no history of hyper-coagulation state or previous documented thrombosis.
The transthoracic echocardiogram showed increased trans-valvular gradients (mean left ventricular outflow tract/aorta gradient of 62 mmHg with 0,43cm2 of valvular area) and ipo-echogenic images evocative of intra-valvular thrombosis. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of valvular thrombosis in the presence of diseased-free coronary anatomy. After discussion in the Heart Team setting it was decided to attempt systemic anticoagulation with heparin to achieve dissolution of the thrombus. After 1 week of systemic anticoagulation a control CT did not show any evidence of improvement, so we planned a surgical re-intervention. The day before the scheduled surgery the patient suddenly experienced thoracic pain and electrocardiographic signs of myocardial ischemia. An urgent coronary angiography was performed while the clinical and hemodynamic state worsened. He had a cardiac arrest during the procedure; an immediate cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed while a peripheral extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support was instituted and the patient transferred into the operating room for an emergent surgery.
After cardioplegic cardiac arrest and transverse aortotomy the thrombosed transcatheter valve was excised and a new 23 mm Edwards Sapien 3 valve was deployed in an off-label fashion under direct view with good echocardiographic result . The valve thrombosis was confirmed once excised .
Unfortunately he developed an incoercible cardiogenic and septic shock and finally died on the 10th postoperative day.