The patient was a 65-year-old woman who developed a dark skin lesion on the third toe of her left foot in February 2013. This skin was excised surgically in December 2013 but unfortunately was not sent for biopsy, and the lesion recurred at the same location in February 2014. A skin biopsy now confirmed the presence of a Clark’s level II melanoma with surrounding hyperkeratosis and invasion of the epidermis and superficial dermis. Then, with further diagnostic workup, ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed normal liver, gall bladder, spleen, kidneys, urinary bladder, ovaries and pelvic lymph nodes. However, three lymph nodes in the left inguinal canal and a few in the right canal were enlarged, such that the largest one measured 35 × 29 × 17 mm. T1 and T2-weighted gadolinium-contrasted phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the results obtained from ultrasonography, thereby confirming the presence of metastasis to the inguinal lymph nodes.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest on January 18, 2015, revealed left basal lung consolidation of heterogeneous density with spots of calcification, measuring 50 × 42 mm, which was suggestive of metastasis. Bilaterally enlarged axillary lymph nodes, measuring up to 13 × 6.5 mm, presence of fatty hilum and small hypodense lesions of 7 × 6 mm in the left lobe of the liver were also seen. MRI of the abdomen confirmed the presence of solitary, well-defined lesions in the left liver lobe with dimensions of 8 × 7 mm, which appeared hypo-intense in the T1-weighted and hyper-intense in the T2-weighted and STIR images, respectively.
The patient was administered chemotherapy comprising cisplatin, vinblastine and dacarbazine for three sessions starting at the end of January 2015, for three months, after which abdominal ultrasonography was performed to assess the status of the metastasis. This showed vascularized hypoechoic lesions in the left femoral region with a maximum size of 50 × 35 × 50 mm, thus indicating malignant lesions or lymphadenopathy. A pelvic MRI confirmed the presence of lymphadenopathy through detection of three enlarged lymph glands in the left femoral region.
This was followed by surgical removal of the diseased toe and resection of the inguinal lymph nodes in May 2015. Gross analysis on the amputated toe revealed ulceration up to the phalangeal bone, lymph node necrosis and hemorrhage. Histopathological analysis confirmed the presence of recurrent malignant melanoma of Clark’s level V with malignant melanocytes present down to the subcutaneous layer, a Breslow thickness of > 4.0 mm with stage T4b ulceration, and total effacement of the inguinal lymph nodes with pigmented malignant melanocytes. The disease was in stage T4N1bM0 of the TNM classification of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), and in pathological stage IIIC.
A CT scan of the chest was performed in June 2015, and this revealed two well-defined hypodense pulmonary lesions of 8 × 7 mm and 7 × 6 mm, respectively, which were indicative of secondary metastasis. However, there was a reduction in the size of the primary lung lesion that had been observed prior to chemotherapy. Nonetheless, the chemotherapeutic regimen was continued for another three months with a reduced dose.
On July 22, 2015, the patient suddenly complained of altered consciousness and hemiplegia on the right side of her body, with a score of 9 on the Glasgow coma scale (GCS). A CT scan revealed an intracerebral hemorrhagic mass, which was treated with urgent resection by means of parieto-occipital loop-assisted craniotomy on the same day . Histopathological and cytological reports on the intracranial hematoma showed positivity for melan A and HMB-45. The patient was discharged after the surgery, on August 1, 2015, with improved consciousness (GCS 15).
Unfortunately, she died from renal failure on September 16, 2016, 14 months after the brain surgery and approximately 4 years after the first presentation of this case. This is a rare and unprecedented case among the among known occurrences of metastatic melanoma that were already multisystemic .