An 84-year-old man with nephrotic syndrome and congestive heart failure was transferred to our hospital after falling from his bed and hitting his chest. He had chronic ascites and right pleural effusion from pleuroperitoneal communication. He had daily taken azosemide 120 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, mefruside 75 mg, and tolvaptan 15 mg.
On arrival, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 178/64 mmHg; pulse rate, 70 beats/min; respiration rate, 21 breaths/min; oxygen saturation, 92% on room air; and body temperature, 36.6 °C. He complained of right chest pain and dyspnea. Auscultation revealed normal heart sounds and diminished breath sounds on the right side. There was swelling around the right acromioclavicular joint. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed right clavicle fracture and massive pleural effusion in the right intrapleural space. The cause of his dyspnea was considered the pleural effusion. An ICD was placed by an emergency medicine fellow (postgraduate year 4) in the right seventh intercostal area on the middle axillary line, and approximately 1000 mL of serous pleural effusion was drained. The dyspnea improved, and the ICD was temporarily clamped.
He complained of chest pain and dyspnea again several hours later. Chest radiography suggested right pneumothorax. We placed another ICD in the right third intercostal space on the midclavicular line. Approximately 1500 ml of hemorrhagic pleural effusion was drained from the second ICD immediately after the placement. We clamped the second ICD and initiated transfusion. A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed the bleeding from the parietal pleura traveled along the first ICD and dropped into the intrapleural space . We intubated the patient and two surgeons (postgraduate year 10 and 14, respectively) performed a right lateral thoracotomy in the intensive care unit (ICU).
There was intramuscular venule bleeding from the right serratus anterior muscle which was ligated to stop the bleeding. We separated the intercostal muscles and performed a right anterolateral thoracotomy to look for another bleeding source. After clearing the intrapleural space of hemorrhagic effusion and clots, no bleeding source was identified. We concluded that the bleeding from the serratus anterior muscle caused the massive right hemothorax.
We removed the first ICD at the end of the surgery. The patient's respiratory and hemodynamic states improved, and the patient was extubated and discharged from the ICU on the fourth day after admission. On the seventh day, the second ICD was removed. The patient was discharged on the 73rd day after admission.