A 61-year-old man was transferred to the emergency department because of fainting. He did not present with any prodromal symptoms before this catastrophic event. Approximately two hours before admission, the patient fainted and was found unresponsive in his bathroom. He regained consciousness after about 30 min. He was admitted to the hospital with persistent confusion, weakness, nausea, dry retching, and cold diaphoresis. His arms and legs were cold and clammy, with no edema. Distal pulse was weak. On arrival at the hospital, additional medical history was obtained from his wife. He had a previous smoking history of one pack/day, but no alcohol or illicit drug use history. His father had hypertension, while his mother had diabetes mellitus. There was no other significant medical, surgical, or family history of any cardiovascular disease. In the emergency department, the systolic blood pressure was 67–70 mm Hg, the heart rate was 106 beats/minute, the respiratory rate was 22 breaths/minute, and the oxygen saturation was 98%, while he was breathing 3 l of oxygen through a nasal cannula. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed within 10 min of arrival was normal. Bedside troponin I level was ≤ 0.05 ng/ml (normal range 0–0.4). Three hours later, the laboratory high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) T was elevated, at 104.500 pg/ml (normal range 0–14), and six hours later, it had increased to 841.100 pg/ml. The repeat ECG showed atypical non-ischemic changes. Other test results are shown in Table .
Emergency transthoracic echocardiography was performed to evaluate cardiac function, which revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 60%, and a small volume of pericardial effusion with an 8 mm liquid dark area in the apex of the heart, 8 mm in left ventricular lateral wall, and 5 mm in right ventricular lateral wall. No major myocardial wall motion abnormalities were seen at the initial evaluation by the emergency physician. Bedside color Doppler ultrasound imaging of abdomen and urinary bladder was normal. After normal saline and norepinephrine were administered, the patient’ condition was relatively stable. Then he was transferred for percutaneous coronary intervention for suspected acute coronary syndrome. Emergency coronary angiography showed severe proximal RCA stenosis, which was related to the external compression due to a large mass (30 mm × 45 mm). It also showed severe cardiac hypokinesia, possibly caused by circumferential pericardial effusion. The patient was immediately transferred for complete aorta CTA to achieve an accurate and rapid diagnosis, and for guiding surgery. The aorta CTA revealed the presence of a giant outward aneurysm (40 mm × 34 mm; Fig. ) of aortic root, which was compressing the ostium of the RCA, as well as moderate pericardial effusion. The patient was rushed to the cardiac surgery unit. The intra-operative findings included moderate hemorrhagic pericardial effusion (about 400 ml), massive blood clot on the right atrioventricular surface, ruptured right SVA, ruptured ostium of RCA, hematoma on the right atrial side and medial pulmonary artery . Ruptured right SVA repair and RCA reconstruction were successfully performed. Finally, the patient was discharged with no residual symptoms. The ECG after surgery is shown in Fig. .