A 55-year-old Nepalese woman was admitted to our hospital with cholangitis. She had undergone surgery 11 years earlier for cholelithiasis, when a laparoscopic procedure was converted to an open one. Her postoperative course was complicated by biliary peritonitis, for which she underwent reoperation. Eleven years later, the patient presented with fever as well as pain over her right upper quadrant with jaundice for the last 4 weeks. Initially, she was admitted and managed conservatively with symptomatic relief. On further evaluation, she was icteric with moderate dilation of intrahepatic biliary ducts (IHBDs) and the common hepatic duct (CHD) with nonvisualization of the common bile duct (CBD) by ultrasonography. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed severe stricture at the CHD (CHD stump length 1.4 cm below hilar confluence) with grade II dilated IHBDs . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed a nondilated CBD with complete cutoff and no passage of contrast or guidewire above the stricture level, likely representing CHD stricture.
The patient underwent percutaneous biliary drainage , following which full symptomatic relief was achieved with resolution of cholangitis, including normal biochemical and hematological parameters (except alkaline phosphatase of 457 U/L and cancer antigen 19.9 of 86.7 U/mL). A diagnosis of Bismuth type II biliary stricture (Strasberg bile duct injury E2) was made, and bilioenteric anastomosis was planned.
The operative findings were dense adhesions with 15-mm-long remnant CHD and small hepatoduodenal fistula, and the liver was grossly normal. A Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy (HJ) was made in a single-layer duct to mucosa in a continuous manner using polypropylene 5-0 suture . The postoperative period was uneventful with a normal T-tube cholangiogram , following which the abdominal drain was removed, and the patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. Six weeks after surgery, the T-tube cholangiogram was repeated, which showed a well-functioning HJ, and the tube was removed with normal liver function tests. The patient was doing fine through 10 months of follow-up.