A 71-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with high fever and severe cough, and was admitted for bacterial pneumonia. Before her admission, she had developed fever and cough, and had received treatment with the anti-inflammatory drug loxoprofen. However, her symptoms deteriorated. Her initial vital signs on admission were as follows: temperature, 37.8 °C; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/minute; and oxygen saturation (SpO2) on room air, 94 %. A physical examination revealed fine crackles in both her lower lung fields. Her laboratory test values were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count, 6000/μL; neutrophil count, 3780/μL; serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level, 230 IU/L (normal, 119 to 229 IU/L); and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level, 6.3 mg/dL (normal, <0.3 mg/dL). A chest radiograph showed reticular shadows in both her lower lung fields. Chest computed tomography (CT; Fig. ) showed consolidation. A sputum Gram stain revealed only normal bacterial flora. Mycoplasma antigen was absent. Urinary antigen tests for Legionella and Streptococcus pneumoniae also yielded negative results.
She was treated with ceftriaxone (2.0 g/day) for 7 days. She was retreated with loxoprofen a few times when she had high fever and pain. After these treatments, although her symptoms resolved almost completely, she still had a slight fever. Chest radiograph findings showed improvement of reticular shadows in almost all her lung fields. However, 7 days after initiation of ceftriaxone treatment, she again developed high fever. She was treated with loxoprofen to alleviate her fever, and the antibiotic was changed from ceftriaxone to levofloxacin. After 3 days, she had intermittent high fever, severe cough, and dyspnea, which gradually worsened. Her initial vital signs at this time were as follows: temperature, 39.0 °C; respiratory rate, 24 breaths/minute; and SpO2 on room air, 88 %. A physical examination revealed fine crackles in both her lower lung fields. Her laboratory test values were as follows: WBC count, 10,600/μL with a left shift; neutrophil count, 9110/μL; serum LDH level, 255 IU/L; serum CRP level, 14.8 mg/dL; Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) level, 320 IU/L (normal, <500 IU/L); surfactant protein-D (SP-D) level, 140 ng/mL (normal, <110 ng/mL); and plasma (1→3) beta-D-glucan level, 13 pg/dL (normal, <20 pg/mL). Arterial blood gas values obtained on 3 L/minute oxygen delivered via nasal cannula were as follows: pH, 7.45; partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2), 58 Torr; partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2), 36 Torr; and bicarbonate level, 27 mg/dL. A chest radiograph showed areas of bilateral ground-glass opacity in almost all her lung fields. A chest CT scan revealed bilateral, peripheral, subpleural peribronchovascular consolidation in almost all her lung lobes. Sputum, urine, and blood cultures yielded negative results. Four days after she was treated with loxoprofen for recurrent high fever, we performed bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from the left B4. The total cell count and lymphocytes in her BAL fluid were elevated to 5.0×105/mL and 38 %, respectively. The result of a drug lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) in peripheral blood was strongly positive (stimulation index, 330 %) for loxoprofen and negative for ceftriaxone and levofloxacin. The patient was diagnosed with loxoprofen-induced pneumonia. Her respiratory status rapidly worsened after BAL; therefore, she was treated immediately with high-dose methylprednisolone therapy (1 g/day for 3 days) for acute respiratory failure. Her respiratory status and chest radiography findings improved dramatically after initiation of steroid therapy . The patient had a Naranjo adverse drug reaction (ADR) probability score of 6 , so her symptoms were classified as a probable ADR .