The proband was a male infant, uneventful cesarean delivery by a 33-year-old G2P2 mother. He was born to nonconsanguineous healthy parents without the family history of metabolic diseases. The patient was the second child of the family, his 10-year-old sister was healthy. He was born at 37 + 6 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3500 g and Apgar Score of 10 at 5 min. No obvious malformations were noted at birth. On the 5th day of age, he was referred to the local hospital with a 4-h history of shortness of breath, poor reaction, lethargy, and poor crying. After the examination, he was diagnosed with neonatal pneumonia, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. He was treated supportively and appeared to improve the clinical manifestations. Subsequently, he was discharged home on the 14th hospital day.
At the age of 26 days, he was transferred to the Wuhan Medical & Health Center for Women and Children with a history of poor reaction and decreased feeding since birth. The tests of blood gas analysis, routine blood test, plasmic electrolyte, myocardial enzymogram, cerebrospinal fluid, and liver function were performed. The results indicated increased creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CK-MB) level of 116 U/L (normal range 0–24 U/L), increased creatine kinase CK level of 221 U/L (normal range 30–170 U/L), decreased platelets (PLT) level of 25 × 109/L (normal range 242–378 × 109/L) .
MS/MS (UPLC-TQD, WATERS, USA) showed significantly elevated propionyl carnitine level of 10.111 uM (normal range 0.5–5 uM), and propionyl carnitine/acetyl carnitine ratio at 1.373 (normal range 0.04–0.25), which was indicative of methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) or PA. Urine organic acid analysis with GC/MS showed elevated 3-hydroxypropionate (normal range 0–1.1 (u)mol/mol creatinine), propionyl glycine (normal range 0 (u)mol/mol creatinine), and methylmalonate (the normal range 0.2–3.6 (u)mol/mol creatinine), which indicated PA . Serum total homocysteine was 20.16 umol/L (normal range 5–15 umol/L). Serum VitB12 was 184.5 pmol/L (normal range 100–300 pmol/L), folic acid was 17.68 nmol/L (normal range 11-54 nmol/L). The brain CT demonstrated that the density of falx cerebri raised slightly, diffuse symmetry density of the white matter of bilateral brain parenchyma decreased, with unshifted midline structure. Therefore, the proband was diagnosed as mild neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE). Brain ultrasound showed no obvious abnormalities. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a little more multifocal spike discharges, especially in the bilateral frontal region. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed at the age of 40 days demonstrated decreased T1/T2, FLAIR and DWI signals in the white matter of bilateral brain parenchyma, slightly wider in outer space of the frontotemporal region. Based on these results, the infant was clinically characterized as PA. He was treated with antibiotics treatment, phenobarbital, L-carnitine, folic acid, hydroxycobalamin, and protein restriction. GC/MS testing at the age of 39 days showed that the results were improved than previous tests .
At the age of 45 days, he was hospitalized again. After admission, the patient’s condition continued to worsen, he developed a seizure, lethargy, irritability. Subsequently, he was referred to intensive care unit (ICU) for therapy. Finally, his family withdrew aggressive therapies after 6 days treatment and he was discharged from the hospital. The outcome was poor, the patient was dead at the age of nearly 2 months.
In order to identify the etiology, targeted NGS was performed on peripheral blood DNA samples from the patient. The captured DNA array was described in the previous study . The captured DNA probes of the PCCA and PCCB target regions were listed in Table . The target region with 3867 bp of the PCCA and PCCB gene was for the subsequent analysis. The DNA sample of the case was fragmented to generate 200–250 bp paired-end library by Covaris LE220 (Massachusetts, USA). Library Construction was conducted as a previously published procedure . The final amplified library was sequenced on the BGISEQ-500 platform (Shenzhen, BGI) to generate 90 bp paired-end reads. The original sequencing data were analyzed using previously published criteria .
The average coverage is 100.00% of the target region, and the average sequencing depth is 108.26 fold. Targeted NGS identified only one heterozygous mutation c.937C > T (p.Arg313Ter) (NM_000282) on exon 12, and no CNV detected on exon-level. Since the clinical phenotype of the proband was consistent with the PA patient, and PA is an autosomal recessive disease, we checked the sequencing reads of the whole genome of the PCCA gene in the binary alignment map (BMA) file and noticed some reads were unable to match the reference. This inspired us to find deletion inside the exon. Therefore, we retrieved these reads and found a heterozygous mutation chr13:100915039-100915132delinsAA.It named as c.773_819 + 47delinsAA (GRCh37.p13) according to Mutalyzer (, released on 11 June 2018). It is a novel complex deletion–insertion, which results in a 94 bp deletion encompassing the last 47 nucleotides of exon 10 plus the first 47 intron bases and 2 bp AA insertion of the PCCA gene.
Sanger sequencing and quantitative PCR (qPCR) were performed to confirm the existence of the identified variant in the patient and his parents, respectively. The pairs primers for c.937C > T mutation were F-TCTCCCAGTTTTTGGCTCGAA, R-AAGGGTGGAGAAGGAAGGGT. The pairs primers for c.773_819 + 47delinsAA mutation were F-CTTCTCCTTCTTCCCCTTCC, R-AGCACAGGAGTCCAGGTCAG. The mutation c.937C > T was detected in the proband and his mother. . The mutation c.773_819 + 47delinsAA was detected in the proband and his father . The deletion sequence is TACTAATAGAAAAATTTATTGATAATCCTCGTCATATAGAAATCCAGGTTGGTACATTTAAGATGCTTTTTCATTATTATTTTAAAATAATATC .
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to detect the DNA copy number of the partial exon 10 in the proband and his parents, with one primer designed to hybridize the deletion region, the other one for the upstream or downstream of the deletion region. The primers are as follows, F-GCTGCTTCTAGTTTTGGCGA, R-ACCAACCTGGATTTCTATATGACGA. The results showed that the quantity of partial exon 10 in the DNA sample of the proband was close to the father, almost 50% of his mother and the control sample .
The results above indicated that the proband’s healthy parents were heterozygous carriers. The heterozygous c.937C > T allele was inherited from his mother. The c.773_819 + 47delinsAA allele was inherited from his father.
The parents were willing to have a healthy child and expressed a desire to undergo prenatal diagnosis in the subsequent pregnancy. We collected 20 ml amniotic fluid samples approximately at 18-week gestation from the mother under ultrasound guidance. Extraction of fetal DNA from the amniotic fluid was performed using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Sanger sequencing was performed to validate the status of the mutations in the fetus. The pairs primers of the mutations were the same as that of validation in the family. Meanwhile, elimination of maternal contamination was proceeded according to a paper reported . The result showed the fetus carried neither of the two mutations. Therefore, the couple decided to continue the pregnancy and subsequently gave birth to a healthy infant. Newborn screening of inherited metabolic diseases (including PA) with MS/MS (UPLC-TQD, WATERS, USA) was carried out, the result was normal.