The patient was a 70-year-old man with a history of cerebral infarction (no paralysis), hypertension, and duodenal ulcers; he had no history of allergies. On admission, he was independently ambulatory. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS; range, 0–4; with higher scores indicating worse disability) was 0 . Serum transferrin, pre-albumin, and retinol-binding protein levels were 237 mg/dL (range: 190–300), 23.4 mg/dL (range: 22–40), and 1.90 mg/dL (range: 3.6–4.2), respectively, before the operation. He underwent resection of the right and caudate lobes of the liver, extrahepatic bile duct resection, choledochojejunostomy, and jejunostomy for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma.
During the first 3 months after the operation, the patient experienced hepatic failure, AKI, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and pneumonia. Hemodialysis was performed three times per week. The patient was bedridden for the entire day, and his ECOG PS was 3–4. The enteral tube was placed in the jejunum to administer medicine and nutrition; however, enteral nutrition was stopped repeatedly owing to the worsening of postoperative complications or gastrointestinal symptoms. Consequently, he received both parenteral and enteral nutrition with a total energy of 1200 kcal/day and 25.0 g/day protein. Physical findings and serum levels related to renal function are shown in Table . When his body composition was analyzed using the InBody® (Inbody S20; Biospace, Seoul, Korea) system, the skeletal muscle mass, skeletal muscle mass index (SMI), fat mass, body fat, and extracellular water (ECW) to total body water (TBW) ratio were 14.2 kg, 5.85 kg/m2, 19.4 kg, 39.0%, and 0.436, respectively. The patient had edema, ascites, and a pleural effusion. His dry weight estimated by subtracting the excess fluid from the actual body weight was 47.0 kg; the patient lost 10.0 kg in about 5 months. He met the diagnostic criteria for sarcopenia by the Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia (AWGS) and was classified as severely malnourished. He underwent repeated cycles of constipation and diarrhea.
The target energy intake was set at 35.0 kcal/kg/day (1700 kcal/day). The target protein intake was 1.20 g/kg/day (60.0 g/day) and 0.80 g/kg/day (40.0 g/day) when on and off dialysis, respectively, based on the consensus among the NST, the nephrologist, and the gastrointestinal surgeon, and consistent with the 2016 Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury in Japan and recommendation of the third revision (2013) of the guidelines for parenteral and enteral nutrition in Japan . The use of intravenous- and enteral-nutrition routes was evaluated continuously. The patient was assessed as having AKI which gradually improved but transitioned from acute to chronic kidney disease. The nephrologist assessed the need for weekly hemodialysis, which the patient received as needed. Priority was given to patient mobilization, balance of energy intake and expenditure, prevention of complications associated with bed rest, and prevention of the progression of generalized deconditioning.
The patient was fed via a combination of total parenteral nutrition, peripheral parenteral nutrition, and enteral nutrition; blood-glucose levels were monitored. We evaluated the patient’s physical findings, renal function test values and adjusted laxative prescriptions to improve bowel movements. Dialysis was stopped on day 56. On day 112 of the NST intervention, the protein dose was 1.40 g/kg/day, and the energy and protein doses were stabilized. The intake of essential nutrients was sufficient with continuous enteral nutrition alone at a slow rate throughout the day .
The patient’s limbs were strong enough to perform activities of daily living (ADL) in bed, so upper body muscle training was started 5 days a week for 20 min. The aim of this training was to extend the sitting time on the bed and to acquire ADL-movement ability. Moreover, lower-limb muscle training was initiated to prevent the loss of skeletal muscle. As the patient’s nutritional status improved, the proportion of strength training in the regimen was gradually increased. The patient was able to stand unassisted on day 100 of the intervention; hence, walking training was started.
Renalen®MP was administered via an enteral route as an energy-dense nutrition formula to meet the target energy goals. Furthermore, we added branched-chain amino acids (BCAA)-enriched nutritional supplements (i.e., ENEVO® and Aminoleban®EN) because they are expected to promote protein synthesis . Initially, Renalen®MP was administered during the daytime, and the patient frequently complained of gastroesophageal reflux and bloating during tube feeding, probably because of the high fat content in Renalen®MP. Because of these complaints, it was difficult for him to continue rehabilitation. Therefore, we changed the time of administration of Renalen®MP from daytime to nighttime . The patient was able to walk independently on day 150. He could also ingest a small amount of food orally. On day 200, the skeletal-muscle mass, SMI, fat mass, body fat, and ECW/TBW ratio were 19.1 kg, 7.95 kg/m2, 17.6 kg, 31.4%, and 0.436, respectively. The ECOG PS was 2. The rehabilitation was continued, so that the patient could be discharged.
The patient was able to receive daily nutrition both enterally and orally. The dynamic nutritional-assessment parameters and brachial muscle analysis increased over time . Body weight and LBM slightly decreased by day 103 but increased after day 103. On day 200, they have improved to what it was almost before the surgery . He continued rehabilitation because his bowel movements were controlled.