A 22-year-old woman (married, gravida 0, para 0) presented to our department with cessation of menstruation for 73 days and slight vaginal bleeding for 4 days. She reported no nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or bloating. Physical examination revealed a small amount of blood in the vagina and an abnormally enlarged, soft uterus. The serum β-hCG was 582,621 mIU/ml. Transabdominal ultrasound showed the uterus was 10.4 × 11.0 × 7.7 cm, with an uneven echo area of 8.7 × 6.6 cm in the uterine cavity, which looked like falling snow. The patient underwent suction and curettage, and a pathological examination revealed a complete hydatidiform mole. A week later, an ultrasound examination suggested a residual lesion in the uterine cavity (2 × 1.5 cm), and the β-hCG was 8,407 mIU/ml. Subsequently, she underwent a second suction and curettage, and the β-hCG level further decreased to 5,718 mIU/ml . The results of the second pathological examination were consistent with those of the first .
The patient was then recommended weekly β-hCG assessments for surveillance. However, she did not comply with the follow-up schedule. Within 21 days after the second molar evacuation, her serum β-hCG level was elevated to 183,309 mIU/ml, despite an unremarkable ultrasonography examination. She didn’t take the high hCG level seriously so that she forgot to consult doctor in time. After that, the β-hCG level continued to rise, reaching 489,190 mIU/ml on day 39 after the second procedure. An ultrasonography examination showed that the uterus was 9.2 × 8.9 × 7.8 cm in size, an uneven echo area of 6.9 × 5.2 cm was near the fundus of the uterine cavity, the convex anterior wall had lost its normal muscle layer, and the outer margin was about 0.24 cm from the serosal layer . Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an enlarged uterus with multiple cystic mixed abnormal signals in the left anterior wall. The lesion was about 7.1 × 6.1 × 8.2 cm, extending from the muscular layer to the serosal layer . The patient was diagnosed with an invasive mole. Chest and cranial CT scans were performed, and no metastatic lesions were detected. These findings indicated an invasive mole at stage I according to the FIGO 2000, with a World Health Organization (WHO) score of 6, and belonged to the low-risk GTN.
The patient was very young and had the willing to perserve her fertility, and we proposed methotrexate (MTX) chemotherapy. The day before the planned chemotherapy, she experienced sudden abdominal pain accompanied by shortness of breath, blood pressure of 76/48 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 116 bpm. An emergency abdominal ultrasound scan showed acute intra-abdominal bleeding (approximately 2,000 ml) , and blood tests showed a hemoglobin concentration of 7.9 g/dL. We recommended emergency surgery, but she rejected. Given she was experiencing an acute intra-abdominal bleeding which risked her life, then we chose to perform the MTX chemical therapy and uterine artery embolization simultaneously which can suppress the tumor and stop bleeding at the same time, and is a relative conventional way to stop bleeding in a short time. So uterine artery embolization was performed, and 35 mg of MTX was administered bilaterally through the uterine arteries. Simultaneously, four units of packed red blood cells (RBCs) were transfused. The next day, the serum β-hCG decreased to 83,530 mIU/ml, and the hemoglobin concentration was 8.2 g/dL. Four units of packed RBCs were transfused again. There were no signs of persistent intraperitoneal bleeding, and the patient was stable. Seven days later, chemotherapy with etoposide, methotrexate, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine (EMACO) was administered. After the first cycle, the serum β-hCG dropped to 894.2 mIU/ml and was normalized after cycle five. Consider the cost and the severe side effects such as myelosuppression, vomiting, hair loss and so on. We decided to use the MTX regimen with 1mg/kg/day intramuscularly on days 1, 3, 5, 7, with folinic acid 0.1 mg/kg/day orally 24 hours after MTX on days 2,4,6,8); repeat every 2 weeks. The patient received two additional courses of chemotherapy with MTX to reduce the risk of relapse. At the 13-month follow-up after therapy completion, the patient was disease free with negative β-hCG.