A 31 year old nulliparous housewife presented initially to the Gynaecology unit of Enugu State University Teaching Hospital (ESUTH), Nigeria in February 2012 with a history of progressive abdominal swelling of 8 years duration, six years duration of infertility and weight loss and dyspnoea on exertion. Her menstrual cycle was regular and menstrual flow was moderate. She had been diagnosed to have uterine fibroid 6 years prior to presentation and had refused to have surgery due to her belief that the fibroid and infertility were spiritually inflicted on her by her enemies. She took local medications with the belief that it would dissolve the fibroid.
Physical examination revealed a cachectic woman, who was pale and had a massively protuberant abdomen. The pulse rate was 96 beats per minute and blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. The respiratory rate was 18 cycles per min. There was a firm nodular abdominal mass measuring 52 cm from the pubic symphysis to the epigastrium. The mass also extended to both flanks . Pelvic examination revealed normal cervix with both adnexae filled with nodular masses.
The patient had hemoglobin level of 7.3 g/dl (PCV = 22%). Serum urea, electrolyte and create-nine level were within the normal limit. A trans-abdominal ultrasound scan showed multiple large masses resembling fibroid. The marker of CA-125, CT Scan and MRI could not be done due to their cost and unavailability.
She was counseled for surgery. She consented to myomectomy with an option of hysterectomy as a life saving procedure, as she desired to have children. She was transfused with three units of packed cells prior to surgery. Intra-operative findings included very thin subcutaneous tissue, 300 ml of ascitic fluid, collateral blood vessels involving the omentum and rectus muscle. A part of the omentum was adherent to the fibroid masses. Large conglomerate fibroid masses measuring 24×32 cm with a broad stalk connecting it to the fundus of the uterus was seen. It had an area of calcification and weighed 12.4 kg. The uterus had multiple intramural fibroid seedlings. The aggregate weight of all the fibroid extracted was 16.8 kg. Estimated blood loss was 1000 ml.
A size 16 urethral catheter was tied round the uterus at the isthmic region i.e. level of the internal Os to control bleeding at surgery. The pedun-culated one was then excised at the base. Three subserous fibroids measuring 4.5×6.2 cm, 6.0×6.2 cm, 5.4×8.7 cm respectively were found and two intramural fibroid seedlings were enucleated. The uterus was repaired in layers and haemostasis was achieved. A peritoneal drain was inserted before closure of the anterior abdominal wall.
She had intravenous crystalloids and two units of fresh whole blood intra-operatively. Her post-operative recovery was uneventful. The packed cell volume on the 3 rd post-operative day was 30%. Abdominal skin stitches were removed on the 7 th post-operative day . Histology confirmed multiple uterine fibroids.
She was followed up at the Gynaecology outpatient clinic. Seven months later, she presented to the clinic with history of nausea and amenorrhea. Urine pregnancy test was positive. Ultrasonography confirmed a viable intrauterine pregnancy. She registered for antenatal care and had an uneventful antenatal period. She had an elective caesarean section at 38 weeks of gestational age and delivered a live female baby that weighed 2.8 kg.