An 80-year-old Caucasian female was referred for left renal mass and multiple expansile bone lesions resulting in back and chest wall pain in September 2016. She had a history of in situ high-grade papillary transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder, status post radical cystectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection in May 2012. She underwent left renal mass biopsy which revealed invasive urothelial carcinoma. She received first-line palliative chemotherapy with gemcitabine and carboplatin along with palliative radiation therapy for pain control. Subsequently she also received denosumab, a bone modifying agent, for symptomatic bone metastases after dental evaluation. Due to progressive disease, she started second-line systemic treatment from December 2016 with atezolizumab 1200 mg intravenously over 60 min every 3 weeks, an inhibitor of programmed cell death ligand 1 . She tolerated atezolizumab well but developed progressive disease in May 2017. At the end of atezolizumab treatment course, she developed clinically significant hypothyroidism with cold intolerance, insomnia, constipation and extreme fatigue in the setting of elevated thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level to 21 uIU/mL (reference range 0.8–7.7 uIU/mL). Therefore, she was started on levothyroxine, and her symptoms resolved with normalization of TSH.
Afterwards she was enrolled to a phase II study (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02465060) and underwent tumor biopsy at sternum for next-generation sequencing assay which revealed an actionable mutation at FGFR3. She received AZD4547 80 mg orally twice a day from June 2017 on clinical trial. After 2 months of AZD4547 treatment, she experienced recurrent hypothyroidism symptoms, and was hospitalized twice for small bowel obstruction responding to medical treatment. Her TSH level at that time was significantly increased to 2957 uIU/mL, and daily levothyroxine dose was increased from 50 to 100 mcg accordingly. Her thyroid function returned to normal 1 month afterwards, and she did not experience recurrence of small bowel obstruction.
She achieved stable disease on AZD4547 for approximately 6 months prior to development of progressive disease. She progressed through subsequent lines of treatment with cisplatin and docetaxel and finally pemetrexed before succumbing to disease in June 2018.