A 54-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our neurosurgical department for the investigation and treatment of acute visual loss of his left eye. He had been treated for left serous otitis media and left facial pain mimicking trigeminal neuralgia for 10 months by the otolaryngologist of a local hospital. Neurological examination on admission showed left visual acuity of no light perception and left eye movements disturbed in all directions. Gadolinium-enhanced, fat-suppressed, T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed a lesion in the left fossa of Rosenmüller, pterygopalatine fossa, sphenoid and ethmoid sinus, and the left cavernous sinus extending to orbital apex through the superior orbital fissure . With a tentative diagnosis of malignant skull base tumor, an endoscopic tumor biopsy from nasopharyngeal tissue was performed, but failed because the nasopharyngeal tissue appeared normal and the tumor could not be identified. Subsequently, the intraorbital tumor was explored by performing a left frontotemporal craniotomy with an anterior clinoidectomy. There was no clear plane between the tumor and the extraocular muscles; therefore, an infiltration was suspected. A biopsy of the tumor was performed and an intraoperative diagnosis of a malignant tumor was obtained. Histopathological findings were characterized by small round blue cells that were immunohistochemically positive for Ep-CAM/Ber-EP4 (epithelial marker) and CD117/c-Kit. Ki-67 positive cells totaled more than 90%. EBV was detected by EBV-encoded ribonucleic acid in situ hybridization (EBER-ISH; Figure ). Considering the MR imaging appearance, the clinical course, and the histopathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with nonkeratinizing undifferentiated NPC, which originally occurred in the fossa of Rosenmüller and was perineurally invading along the V3 to the cavernous sinus.
He received focal radiotherapy at a dose of 46Gy in 23 fractions, which remarkably reduced the tumor size and relieved left facial pain, facial palsy, facial hypoesthesia, ocular motor disturbance, hearing loss, and hypoglossal palsy. However, his left visual acuity did not improve. After the radiation therapy, 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was negative. Therefore, adjuvant chemotherapy was not strongly advised and was eventually suspended. However, cervical lymph node metastases were detected by a repeat FDG-PET scan 8 months later. The patient underwent cervical lymphadenectomy followed by chemoradiation therapy. Although three cycles of cisplatin were scheduled, only one cycle could be completed because of leukopenia. He then received additional radiation therapy (60Gy/30 fractions/43 days). There was no recurrence 18 months after the initial treatment. However, left temporal and frontal lobe dural metastasis and lung metastasis were detected by repeat MR imaging and FDG-PET. Subsequently, he has received stereotactic radiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy with docetaxel hydrate, cisplatin, and fluorouracil. At present, 39 months after the initial treatment, he is still able to perform his daily activities (Karnofsky Performance Scale 80%).