A 72-year-old man came to our department with progressive dysphagia for nearly 2 months. At presentation, he could only take down fluid. The patient used tobacco and alcohol before he underwent left pneumonectomy for a pT2N0M0 primary squamous cell lung cancer 12 years ago, which was followed by 4 cycles of gemcitabine/carboplatin doublet chemotherapy. At postoperative follow-ups, he had been shown to be recurrence free.
Barium swallow and esophagogastroduodenoscopy were ordered and a distal esophageal mass was identified which was 36 cm from the incisors with extension to the cardia. Biopsy confirmed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen demonstrated marked anatomic changes as a result of previous pneumonectomy, i.e. hyperexpansion of the right lung, mediastinal shift to the left hemithorax, elevation of the left hemidiaphragm and reduced left intrathoracic space with heterogeneous opacification . No metastasis or lymphadenopathy was found after thorough examination including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and bone scan. Pulmonary function test showed a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 0.98 L (46.6% of predicted) and a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.12 L (40.8% of predicted). No neoadjuvant treatment was given to the patient.
Based on the patient’s will and examination results, a left transthoracic esophagectomy with the ad hoc design of retrograde esophageal dissection and superior diaphragmatic reconstruction was pursuit for curative intent. This procedure was initiated with a regular posterolateral thoracotomy. Thoracic probing identified the imaging-proven anomalies that highly obscured normal anatomy. As such, retrograde dissection starting from the abdomen was justified.
This was achieved by the standard abdominal component of a typical left transthoracic esophagectomy , which included exploration of the upper abdomen, gastric mobilization with vascular pedicles and lymph node dissection.
Retrograde dissection of the esophagus was facilitated by the elevated diaphragm, which stretched and widened the esophageal hiatus. It was carried cephalad until 5 cm proximal to the esophageal mass, at which point the esophagus was transected. After the frozen section confirmed negative margin, the gastric conduit was prepared, and an end-to-end esophagogastric anastomosis was performed with an intraluminal circular stapler (Frankeman International Ltd., Suzhou, China), reinforced by several 4–0 absorbable sutures. An abdominal drainage tube was placed, and the diaphragmatic was reanastomosed superior to the esophagogastric anastomosis for an intentional precaution of postoperative anastomotic complications . In the end, one chest tube was inserted, and decompression and nasojejunal feeding were initiated right after surgery.
In the postoperative course, ambulation was initiated on postoperative day (POD) 4. Oral feeding was restored on POD 7. Thoracic and abdominal drainage were terminated on POD 11 and POD 12 respectively after confirmation of anastomotic integrity. The patient was discharged on POD 14 with a normal chest CT. Postoperative pathology revealed a stage IIA primary adenosquamous esophageal carcinoma adventitia involvement (pT3N0M0).
The patient was followed up for 12 m, and was readmitted once for incision wound infection on POD 30, which required open drainage but no antibiotic use. No relapse was found.