A 14-year-old boy presented to our neurogenetics outpatient clinic with his parents in a wheelchair. He barely walked without assistance and complained with eight years of progressive disabilities. He was born through full-term vaginal delivery without birth injury nor neonatal asphyxia. At six years old, he developed tremors in his right hand when he wrote or held food. By the time he was seven years old, his tremor became more pronounced, and he started staggering with penguin-like gait and accompanied by slow reactions. Meanwhile, he began to have speech problems with slurred pronunciations and slow speed while talking. At the age of nine, he developed dysphagia and occasionally coughed when drinking water. At the meantime, his dysarthria and ataxia were getting worse. He needed assistance to be able to walk. He developed painful walking spasms when he was 12 years old. Ataxia and dysarthria became more pronounced with occasional fall while walking. Meanwhile, he became irritable and often cried, according to his guardian. He was easy to sweat at the extremities and developed uracratia during his disease course. The boy was taken to a local hospital and underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which showed cerebellar atrophy. He was diagnosed with ataxia syndrome or spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and treated with vitamins and neuroprotective drugs but without symptoms improvement. There was no genetic evidence suggesting SCAs at that time. His parents were not consanguineous and both of them had been very healthy.
On physical examination, the boy looked emaciated, and his BMI was 17, which was below normal. His up and low extremities were damp and cold. Neurological examination showed that he had slow horizontal saccades with uneven velocity of eye movements and obvious horizontal gaze nystagmus. He had obvious dysarthria during speech and manifested as “poetic” language. His muscle was atrophic, but muscle strength in all four limbs was 5/5. His muscle tone was increased with limb contracture and brisk tendon reflexes. He had bilateral Babinski signs, and ankle clonus was evident. He was unstable on nose-finger test, heel-shin slide test and fast alternating hand movement test. He had obvious intention tremor and difficulty in balancing while sitting and getting worse while standing.
His International Cooperation Ataxia Scale (ICARS) score was 54/100 and Scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA) was 18.5/49. Psychiatric assessment confirmed a slight depressive state (Beck depression rating scale [BDI] 17/63). His Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 18/30. Ophthalmological examination revealed no cherry-red spots in the macula area of the fundus. Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed no enlargement in liver, spleen, or any other organs. Brain MRI showed atrophy in bilateral cerebellar hemispheres, vermis and crus cerebellum. Other regions of the brain were of normal size .
Based on his presentations and physical examinations, we ordered genetic tests on the patient and his parents. There was no consanguineous marriage in this family . The whole exome sequencing (WES) data showed that this boy had a known point variation (c.1509-26G > A, rs201580118) and a novel copy number variation (CNV) variant (chr5: g.74012742_74052694del) in HEXB. The results were further confirmed by Sanger sequencing and CNV analysis, indicating he inherited the rs201580118 variant from his mother and the CNV variant from his father . The point variation in HEXB c.1509-26G > A was considered as pathogenic/likely pathogenic according to ClinVar database. Another CNV variant chr5: g.74012742_74052694del contained a part of two coding genes HEXB and GFM2. It covered from the 9th intron of HXEB gene to the 5th intron of GFM2 gene, which was not reported in the Decipher syndrome, ClinVar and gnomAD databases. The patient had a fragment deletion in HEXB inherited from his father and a maternal c. 1509-26G > A variation of HEXB, which fell within the paternal fragment deletion region of HEXB. demonstrating a homozygous form in Sanger sequencing, although it should be attributed to a compound heterozygous variation of HEXB in this patient . To confirm loss function of HEXB caused by these variations, we ordered the blood tests to examine leukocytic total β-Hex (HEXA&B) and HEXA activities. Results showed that leukocytic HEXA&B and HEXA actives of this patient were decreased by 92.4% and 21.7% compared to the low limit of normal ranges, which were 75.4-158.6nmol/mg/h and 54.5-140.3nmol/mg/min. The diagnosis of juvenile onset SD was then made. The enzyme activities of HEXA&B of his father and his mother were at 83.5 and 92.2 nmol/mg/h, which were below the median but within the normal range. All family members have consented to publish their clinical data and signed the informed consents.