A 66-year-old Syrian male, nonsmoker with a history of psoriatic arthritis presented in July 2022 for evaluation of 2-month nonpainful ulcers on his feet and hands. He had a 4-year history of psoriasis and one year of psoriatic arthritis, respectively. The other medical history was unremarkable. He had no family history, no stress, or psychological trauma. Daily medications included 5000 I.U. of oral vitamin D, tazarotene (a topical retinoid), and methotrexate 7.5 mg/week for the last year.
The patient noticed the presence of a small dark lesion on the finger, which ulcerated and expanded over the next 2 months. It was treated with enoxaparin and then warfarin by a vascular surgeon who then referred him for evaluation.
His BMI was 26 kg/m2. A cutaneous examination demonstrated psoriatic lesions on the knees and elbows [<2% body surface ], with tenderness in the hand joints, feet joints, and knees. On his fingers and feet, there were small tender necrotic ulcers (the largest one was measured 1–2×1–2 cm) .
Laboratory studies showed normal values of white blood cells, hemoglobin, platelet count, liver enzymes, serum uric nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, parathyroid hormone, and 25 Hydroxy-vitamin D. Thrombophilia evaluation include bleeding time, coagulation time, and partial thromboplastin time, and the rheumatological immune profile including RF, anti-CCP, ANA, anti-ds DNA, P-ANCA, and C-ANCA were negative.
An radiograph of the hands and feet revealed calcifications .
Biopsies confirmed the diagnosis by Von Kossa stain .
According to the characteristic clinical cutaneous lesions, the biopsy results, and the associated risk factors, calciphylaxis was diagnosed.
The patient received 25 mg of intravenous (IV) sodium thiosulfate, an IV infusion of 4 mg zoledronic acid, one round of intralesional sodium thiosulfate injections (250 mg/ml), and one IV infusion of vitamin K in the hospital after admission; with daily wound care in the form of ointment for enzymatic debridement and foam dressings. The patient continued the 7.5 mg/week methotrexate and oral vitamin D. Topical retinoids (tazarotene) and warfarin were discontinued.
Lesions showed a dramatic improvement by the first month of hospitalization. Postdischarge, the patient received another five cycles of 25 mg/IV sodium thiosulfate and 5 monthly infusions of 4 mg zoledronic acid. By the third month of follow-up, his wounds had been completely remitted.
This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria.