A 24-year-old right-handed man with no relevant medical history presented with a history of epilepsy since 4 years of age. Initially, his seizures occurred at night accompanied by bouts of crying and bad dreams. His semiology then progressed to seizures consisting of loss of balance, increased muscle tension, and “zoning out.” In the 3 years before epilepsy surgery, his seizure semiology changed and consisted of an aura of confusion and anxiety followed by an ictal period of arousal, body tingling, leg extension, and thrashing of the arms and legs lasting 30–50 s. Sometimes, the thrashing would progress to generalized bilateral tonic-clonic seizures, followed by postictal confusion. His seizures mainly occurred while asleep and occurred up to every other night.
Since turning 21, the patient’s seizures have become more frequent, and he reported increased anxiety associated with the seizures despite no clear life events that may have triggered the increase in anxiety. The patient reported avoiding situations or conversations that may cause distress, such as attending college courses or discussing his health condition. The patient took sertraline to manage his anxiety, which provided moderate relief of baseline anxiety but had no therapeutic effect on his anxious auras. His anxiety-induced avoidance behavior substantially impaired his quality of life.
Following his initial diagnosis, the patient was treated with oxcarbazepine and was seizure-free for 1 year between 6 and 7 years of age. After his seizures returned, the dosage of oxcarbazepine was increased without benefit. Topiramate, levetiracetam, zonisamide, and lacosamide were added to his antiepileptic drug regimen at various points but were discontinued due to side effects. Before surgery, the patient was on oxcarbazepine and cannabidiol for his epilepsy.
The patient was admitted to the epilepsy monitoring unit for scalp EEG, during which he had six habitual seizures. EEG was nonlocalizing, as no clear ictal pattern was discerned. However, the clinical characteristics of nocturnal predominance, brief duration, maintained awareness, and hyperkinetic features suggested a mesial frontal epileptogenic zone. The patient’s head turning to the right suggested lateralization to the left hemisphere, but a “Figure of 4 sign” seen late in the generalized seizure with the left arm extended was suggestive of a right hemisphere source. Complex bilateral and hyperkinetic movements suggested a midline or supplementary motor area involvement. As there were no clear ictal EEG changes or interictal epileptiform discharges, deeper structures such as the mesial parietal or frontal areas were hypothesized to be involved. Observations of ictal tachycardia further suggested a mesial temporal source.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) appeared normal. Positron emission tomography showed hypometabolism in the temporal lobes bilaterally, with a greater reduction in the right temporal lobe. Magnetoencephalography showed a single right-sided posterior insular cluster. Both magnetoencephalography and positron emission tomography findings were discordant with the semiology. Neuropsychiatric evaluation showed elevated baseline anxiety and poor distress tolerance.
The patient’s case was presented to a multidisciplinary epilepsy surgery conference. Given that the data obtained from the noninvasive work-up were non-conclusive, the clinical team decided that the patient would be a suitable candidate for intracranial evaluation using sEEG for further localization of the seizure focus.
The patient underwent a sEEG study with bilateral frontotemporal and parietal coverage including the insular cortex and CC . Initially, 20 SEEG electrodes were placed using robotic guidance with ROSA planning software (Zimmer, Montpellier, France). After 1 week in the epilepsy monitoring unit, sEEG captured three electroclinical seizures. All three seizures consisted of slowing with attenuation of background EEG signal and superimposed low voltage fast activity over the two deepest contacts in the left cingulate electrode. Due to the observed activity in the left CC and poor lateralization and localization of onset and spread of seizure activity, the clinical team opted for expanded electrode coverage in the left CC. Consequently, four additional depth electrodes were inserted targeting the left ACC, MCC, and posterior CC to better localize the epileptogenic foci within the cingulate gyrus . After expanding left CC coverage, six seizures were captured, all localized to the left ACC and MCC. On EEG, all nine seizures showed spread to the insula and mesial temporal lobe bilaterally. All seizures were preceded by a patient-described anxious aura. Interictal repetitive sharp spikes and high-frequency oscillations were seen in the left CC, right insula, and bilateral hippocampi. Electrical stimulation of the deepest ACC and MCC contacts reproduced a strong sense of anxiety typical of his habitual auras. In addition, stimulation of the deepest contacts in the posterior CC reproduced the sense of confusion that was typical of the post ictal period.
Throughout his hospital stay, the patient expressed an overwhelming sense of anxiety regarding constant pain, headaches, and desires to leave the hospital. Notably, the severity of his anxiety increased as he was weaned off antiepileptic drugs to induce seizures.
After intracranial evaluation, the patient had nightly habitual seizures with a strong aura of anxiety. Based on Phases 1 and 2 evaluations, we presented the patient with laser ablation, surgical resection, responsive neural stimulation, or deep brain stimulation as treatment options. After deliberation, the patient chose to proceed with laser ablation. Roughly 3 months after his discharge from the intracranial evaluation, the patient underwent LITT ablation of his epileptic focus.
Under general anesthesia, the patient’s head was affixed to the ROSA using a Leksell (Elekta, Atlanta, GA, USA) frame, and fluoroscopic computed tomography (CT) was performed (O-arm O2, Medtronic, Minnesota, United States). The images were fused with the preoperative planning MRI and CT. The preoperative plan was loaded into the ROSA stereotactic robot and the robot was registered using the frame pins as skull fiducials. Our full stereotactic workflow has been described in detail. Two trajectories were planned for ablation: left ACC and left MCC. A parasagittal posterior approach was used to insert both optical fibers and cooling cannulas with robotic guidance. Intraoperative CT was used to confirm probe placements. The patient was placed in the MRI scanner for ablation under MRI thermometry control. Background images were obtained to verify catheter probe placements before ablation. A test dose of 30% power was used to confirm the fiber location, after which power was increased to 80% to create a lesion. For the ACC trajectory, a primary lesion was made followed by a secondary lesion after one pull back to cover the desired area in the ACC. For the MCC trajectory, six pull backs were performed to cover the entire region [, ]. Total ablation volume was 17.86 cm3 . The patient was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit for further postoperative care and was discharged the following day in satisfactory condition.
After surgery, the patient reported complete elimination of his anxiety. For 3 weeks after laser ablation, the patient experienced transient right upper and lower extremity weakness, congruent with ablation of the posterior MCC near the left supplemental motor area. After 4 months, the patient reported a constellation of nonhabitual seizures consisting of abnormal sensations starting in both feet moving up through the body. Anxiety was not present in the semiology of seizures after laser ablation. The patient had a dramatic reduction in seizure frequency from daily seizures to a total of four seizures since ablation. The patient’s outcome at 8 months was categorized as Engel Class IIB.