A 59-year-old female patient in junior high school began illness in 2010. After a family conflict, she felt sadness, decreased interest, self-blame, worry, concern, always thinking badly, panic, chest tightness, overall pain, dry mouth, loss of appetite, abdominal distention, and belching. Accompanied by sleep disturbances, manifested by difficulty in falling asleep, easy waking up at night, dreaminess, and difficulty in falling asleep after waking. Unfortunately, she did not see a doctor or get any remedy at that time.
In December 2014, she came to our hospital and felt that being alive was meaningless, what’s more, she had suicidal thoughts and was lazy to say and move. Besides, she did not like to do housework and even did not wash her face. Blood routine, biochemical liver function, kidney function, electrolytes, thyroid function, urinary routine, hepatitis virus, syphilis, and HIV were normal. No abnormality was found on the MRI examination of the head. The patient had a previous history of psoriasis spanning more than 20 years. Allergy to painkillers and fish. She denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, and heart disease. No history of surgery or trauma. No history of attraction or alcohol consumption. Denied the history of hereditary disease, infectious disease. We have a diagnosis of “depression,” and antidepressant treatment with duloxetine hydrochloride. Initially, outpatient visits were conducted every 2 weeks, but then they were changed to outpatient visits every 4 weeks. The above symptoms were completely relieved, and life functions were restored.
In July 2017, there was another negative life event; she experienced depression, decreased interest, reduced volitional behavior, and the idea of suicide reappeared. Memory loss occurs for the first time, such as forgetting to put salt in cooking. MMSE scale: 23 points. MOCA scale: 20 points. No abnormalities on head MRI.
In March 2018, the patient was followed up with a partial resolution of emotional symptoms and no improvement in memory. The MMSE scale and the MOCA scale were administered and there was no significant change in the scores. No abnormalities on head.
In November 2020, the follow-up continued, there was a delay in thinking, irritability, and being unable to control her temper. MMSE 23 points and MOCA 17 points. A head MRI showed signs of brain atrophy. Diagnosis: 1. depression 2. cognitive dysfunction given duloxetine hydrochloride antidepressant combined with memantine for improving cognitive function.
In March 2022, the patient had significantly worse memory loss, slowed thinking, and was unable to do housework. MMSE 19 points, MOCA 12 points. The MRI showed signs of brain atrophy. Following up with her family members, the patient has not taken her medication regularly since 2021. We readjusted the dosage of the medication and advised her to take it on time.
In February 2023, the patient had worsened memory loss due to recent events, disorientation, and personality changes, such as forgetting what she ate for breakfast and moving around the house in the wrong direction. More seriously, the patient used to be frugal but now often buys things she does not need. MMSE 14 points. MOCA 12 points. PET/MRI showed brain atrophy in the bilateral hippocampus, right amygdala, bilateral frontal, temporal, occipital, and right parietal lobes. DWI and SWI did not show any abnormal signals. The 18F-FDG image showed decreased glucose metabolism in the right parietal lobe, bilateral partial lobe, bilateral frontal lobe, bilateral parietotemporal joint region, and bilateral partial posterior cingulate gyrus. The 18F-AV45 PET image showed Aβ deposition was present in the cerebral cortex. Finally, we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease.
Adjusting the medication venlafaxine 150 mg to improve mood, gradually add memantine 5 mg to 10 mg, then 5 mg in the morning and 10 mg at night. During a follow-up visit 2 weeks after discharge, the patient’s family reported that the patient had increased daytime sleep when taking 15 mg, so it was adjusted to 15 mg at night to alleviate daytime sleepiness.