This 23-year-old female has been repeatedly visiting a nearby hospital for worrisome lower urinary tract symptoms in the last two years. For her complaint, she was being treated for a recurrent urinary tract infection. She was not associating the illness with previous procedures. The patient had a history of right pyelolithotomy six years ago for a diagnosis of pelvic stone. There were no remarkable findings on the physical evaluation except for an old surgical scar on the right flank. She was not informed of the placement of the stent during the pyelolithotomy. She lost her follow-up in between. For the above complaints, a plain abdominal X-ray was taken, which showed a radioactively opaque shadow at the pelvic region measuring 45 mm × 27 mm and the right flank area with a size of 12 mm × 75 mm . During the ultrasonographic imaging of the patient, there was an echogenic material in the bladder with a posterior acoustic shadow measuring 50 mm × 30 mm, and there was a right pelvic echogenic focus with a size of 30 mm and mild pelvicalyceal dilation. A computed tomographic scan was taken, revealing a 51 mm × 13 mm × 30 mm hyperdense area in the bladder. There was also a right pelvic hyperdense area with a size of 70 mm × 20 mm × 30 mm extending to the upper ureter and a 9 mm × 6.8 mm lower pole stone . Other laboratory investigations were all in normal ranges.
Finally, she was diagnosed with a neglected, encrusted, and fragmented double-J stent with both bladder and right pelvic stones and a lower pole stone. The patient was managed both by open surgery and endourologic treatment in separate sessions. First, the bladder stone is managed via an open cystolithotomy. The intraoperative finding was a stone in the shape of a coiled stent in the bladder. The stone was removed with a 7-cm anterior longitudinal cystotomy . In the second session, the proximal fragmented stent with the pelvic and lower pole stones was managed with PCNL after 6 weeks of cystolithotomy. The intraoperative finding was an encrusted stent with stone, which is difficult to remove with stone forceps, so pneumatic lithotripsy was used to crush the encrustation and the stone . The patient is stented with a 6F DJ stent and nephrostomy left in situ. The nephrostomy tube was removed after the control X-ray showed a well-placed DJ stent within 24 h of the PCNL . Her post-operative course was smooth, and she was discharged after 48 h of surgery. During discharge, the patient was counseled about the presence of the stent and not to neglect it. The stent was removed after 4 weeks of surgery. Her 2-month post-operative ultrasound was unremarkable during follow-up.