A 3-year-old boy presented with a large bosselated swelling over the cheek extending to the submandibular, submental, postauricular region and which was still further increasing in size . A trucut® biopsy was suggestive of fibromatosis. Computerized tomogram (CT) scan revealed a large soft tissue mass infiltrating the massetter, parotid gland, floor mouth, submandibular gland, the lateral oro-nasopharyngeal wall and the pterygoid muscle. The horizontal ramus of mandible was eroded and the mass extended across the midline. Excision of the mass with segmental mandibulectomy was performed. Reconstruction with a free fibula was deferred for a later stage in view of the young age, large mass and concern of recurrent disease. Since the mucosal defect following excision was not large enough primary closure was performed. Histopathology confirmed juvenile fibromatosis and all cut margins of resection were free of tumour. The patient presented after 13 months with recurrent swelling over the cheek with significant difficulty in swallowing and constant dribbling of saliva due to inadequate mouth closure . A CT scan revealed presence of a large recurrent mass in the floor of mouth, infiltrating the infratemporal fossa (ITF) and reaching up to the base of skull . In view of the extensive recurrence low dose chemotherapy (weekly vinblastine, methotrexate and tamoxifen) was started. After completion of 12 weeks of chemotherapy, a partial response was achieved. Excision of the mass with ITF clearance was performed subsequently. A portion of tongue and its base along with the lateral oropharyngeal and the soft palate was also excised The defect following resection was large and a free flap was not feasible as the external carotid artery was ligated at previous surgery. Reconstruction with a PMMC flap for providing mucosal cover and soft tissue bulk for defect was considered. In view of the large mucosal defect a large skin paddle was taken incorporating the nipple-areola complex. The technique for harvesting the PMMC has been described previously . The edges of the flap were sutured circumferentially to the mucosa of the oral cavity except superiorly where the mucosa was deficient; the flap was anchored to the hard palate with non-absorbable sutures.
Patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged after ten days. The flap was well taken without any necrosis or other complication. Guide bite prosthesis was used after a week of surgery to prevent malocclusion. Histopathological examination revealed all cut margins to be free of tumour. Patient further received 12 weeks of low dose chemotherapy. At one year follow-up the patient is having normal speech and swallowing and is free from recurrent disease.