A 47-year old, Caucasian Turkish man presented with a progressively enlarging, painful mass over his right inguinal region which he first noticed 6 months ago. On physical examination, he had an athletic body habitus and a normal gait. He has exercised regularly for the past 27 years. A general physical examination was normal except for a firm, mobile and tender mass approximately 10 × 8 cm over the antero-medial aspect of his right thigh. It has increased slightly since its discovery. Hip and knee movements were in normal range. There were no lymph nodes palpable in the groin. No neurovascular abnormalities were found.
Plain films revealed dispersed soft tissue calcifications close to the medial proximal thigh . Computerized Tomography showed a well-delineated, encapsulated 10 × 8 × 7 cm tumoral mass containing peripheral calcifications located in the proximal quadriceps muscle . Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed a well-circumscribed oval, lobular lipomatous mass that had high signal intensity on Tl-weighted images and low signal intensity on fat-suppressed, T2-weighted images. The dense, osseous layer circumscribing the fatty core appeared as a hypo-intense cortical line on magnetic resonance imaging .
The pre-operative differential diagnosis was primarily a lipoma with tumoral calcinosis or an osteochondroma.
After initial imaging, ultrasound guided needle biopsy was performed revealing only benign mature fat cells and evaluated as non-diagnostic. Given the benign imaging characteristics and fine needle aspiration, an excisional biopsy was undertaken. During the operation, the tumour was found to be located in the quadriceps. At the base of the tumour a pedicle with several blood vessels was attached. Neither the tumour nor its pedicle showed any connection to bony structures. It was removed surgically by blunt dissection and the pedicle was tied and excised. We performed a multi-layered closure and the postoperative course was uneventful.
Grossly, the resected specimen consisted of a mass measuring 10 × 8 × 7 cm, with a smooth surface. Cut sections of the mass revealed mainly yellow soft tissue with numerous interlacing thin lamellar bony structures and surrounded with a thin fibrous capsule.
Histological examination revealed that the tumour consisted largely of mature adipose tissue with surrounded by a thin layer vascularized fibrous tissue. A haphazardly distributed and interlacing thin vital lamellar bone structures were found throughout the tumour. In some areas, these bony structures were alongside the thin fibrous tissue with myxoid degeneration. No myeloid cell islands were determined. The adipocytes were uniform in size and shape. No nuclear atypia, hypercellularity, mitosis nor necrosis was seen . The definitive pathologic diagnosis was intramuscular osteolipoma without evidence of malignancy. No recurrence was observed after 18 months follow up.