A 57-year-old Caucasian male patient with a 4-year history of IgG-kappa MM was referred to Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City in early February 2020 because of disease progression. He was penta-refractory (refractory to two proteasome inhibitors, two immunomodulatory agents, and an anti-CD38 antibody) and had previously received nine lines of therapy.
In early February 2020, approximately 3.5 weeks prior to the first confirmed case of COVID-19 in New York City, the patient was enrolled in a clinical study (NCT03274219) of bb21217, an investigational BCMA-directed CAR T cell therapy. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and International Conference on Harmonisation guidelines for Good Clinical Practice, and the protocol was approved by local or independent institutional review boards (IRB) at each study center. Informed consent was obtained from each patient. The patient received bridging therapy with melphalan and bortezomib while awaiting CAR T cell manufacturing. He was asymptomatic and screened negative by PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 two days prior to a planned 3-day course of lymphodepleting chemotherapy (LDC). Approximately 24 hours after receiving the first dose of LDC [cyclophosphamide (300 mg/m2)/fludarabine (30 mg/m2)], the patient returned to clinic with fever, cough, and diarrhea. Nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection.
CAR T infusion was held in the setting of active COVID-19 infection, and the patient was admitted to the hospital for observation. He was afebrile upon admission with a mild cough that resolved within 1 day. He was given granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) for grade 1 neutropenia and discharged with instructions to self-isolate at home after 3 days of hospitalization.
The patient was monitored weekly, and further therapy was held until SARS-CoV-2 clearance was confirmed by nasopharyngeal PCR test, 39 days after COVID-19 diagnosis. Upon approval by the sponsor and our IRB, the patient reinitiated the full 3-day course of LDC in preparation for CAR T cell administration. At this point, inflammatory markers were normal, and SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were detected at a titer of 1:2880 using an IgG assay developed by Mount Sinai . On the day of CAR T cell infusion, lymphocytes in the peripheral blood were undetectable and the patient showed profound leukopenia . Twelve hours after CAR T cell infusion, clinical signs consistent with Grade 1 CRS developed, including fever and tachycardia . On day 2, CRS escalated to Grade 2 and was accompanied by hypotension (81/52), only transiently responsive to fluids; thus, tocilizumab (8 mg/kg) × 1 was given. The patient experienced 2 more days of low-grade fever and grade 1 hypotension. CRS resolved by day 6, and cytokines returned to pretreatment levels by day 9 . Blood counts improved by day 12 except lymphopenia, which persisted through day 14 . Based on 1-month follow-up post-CAR T cell infusion, the patient did not experience other complications, remained SARS-CoV-2 negative, and showed normalization of free kappa light chain with a 61% decrease in serum M protein , consistent with partial response per international myeloma working group (IMWG) criteria. Repeat SARS-CoV-2 antibody titer at his 1-month follow up was 1:960 and at 2-month follow up was 1:320.