A 56-year-old Caucasian woman with high-myopia (-6.00) presented with a one month history of sudden, painless distortion of vision in her left eye. She noted that reading had been more difficult for the last two weeks. Previous documented best corrected visual acuity (seven years ago) was 6/5 in the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye. Previous ocular history of note was macular change secondary to myopia, diagnosed by her optician eleven years previously. Both of her parents were myopic, but her medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
On examination, best-corrected visual acuities were 6/6-1 in the right and 6/36, improving to 6/24 with pinhole, in the left eye. The left eye was noticed to have an Adie (tonic) pupil. Both anterior segments were deep and quiet and the intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg in each eye.
Examination of the left fundus revealed a myopic, tilted disc and staphyloma and an elevated grayish lesion associated with small pre-retinal haemorrhage. The vitreous was quiet and retinal vessels were of normal calibre . Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) showed no sub-retinal fluid but did reveal a choriodal neovascular membrane (CNVM). Fundus fluoroscein angiogram (FFA) showed a classic subfoveal CNVM, with early, well-defined hyperfluorescence and late leakage. Therefore, the drop in the vision of her left eye was attributed to the development of a CNVM. Myopic changes were seen in the right eye but it was otherwise unremarkable.
After considering discussion of various treatment options, the patient decided to proceed with 0.5 mg of intravitreal ranizumab (Lucentis). One month following intravitreal injection into the left eye, her visual acuity improved from 6/32 to 6/12. OCT and FFA showed no subretinal fluid and furthermore regression of CNVM complex . However, the patient still complained of distortion and that the images are still smaller and darker in the left eye compared to the right eye.
Three months post-treatment, her visual acuity in the left eye was 6/18, improving to 6/12 with pinhole. She noticed further improvement in left reading vision. The patient re-presented four and a half months post-treatment with new distortion in the left eye. FFA showed a small area of new leakage away from the centre of vision. It was decided to withhold further treatment at that time as her visual acuity was 6/12, improving to 6/9 with pinhole, which remained stable for 16 months. The patient agreed to monitor for any changes with an Amsler chart. VA and OCT findings in her subsequent follow up appointments were stable up to one year after treatment with Lucentis.