A 58-year-old man was hospitalized for haemorrhoid surgery. His medical history featured only hypercholesterolaemia.
On day 1 after surgery, he developed fever and symptoms of prostatitis, with no digestive symptoms. Following blood and urine cultures, antibiotherapy (ofloxacin and gentamycin) was initiated. Platelet count was 100 G/L (normal before surgery), haemoglobin (Hb) was normal (14.5 g/dL). Renal function was normal (serum creatinine = 1.02 mg/dL).
Urine and blood cultures came back positive for Escherichia coli and ofloxacin was continued. No E.coli was found in the stools (culture and PCR).
On day 4, platelet count decreased to 27 G/L, without anaemia, and creatinine rose to 1.75 mg/dL, but the patient had urinary retention.
Day 6, although the infection was under control and the patient had remained haemodynamically stable throughout (blood pressure 120/62 mmHg), he developed acute kidney injury (AKI) with anuria (creatinine = 7.36 mg/dL) and neurological signs which included confusion, hallucinations, anterograde amnesia, static cerebellar syndrome and transient motor deficit of the left lower limb. The renal CT-scan was normal, as was cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Laboratory tests showed: Hb = 11.8 g/dL, haptoglobin = 1.53 g/L, LDH = 2615 U/L (upper limit 480 U/L), platelet count = 61 G/L.
This renal and neurological presentation was initially attributed to sepsis and possible drug toxicity (antibiotics). Haemodialysis was started and antibiotherapy modified to ceftriaxone.
On days 9–12, the patient’s neurological state worsened: he presented seizures, controlled using anti epileptic treatment. The spinal tap was normal. At this point Hb had dropped to 8 g/dL, LDH remained elevated (1265 U/L) and schistocytes 3% were detected. Platelet count, however, normalized (250 G/L). ADAMTS13 activity was normal (38%, with FRETS-VWF73 technique), thus excluding a diagnosis of TTP. Antinuclear antibodies and ANCA were negative.
A hypothesis of HUS associated with “non-intestinal” STEC infection was made.
An initial complement work-up revealed no abnormalities .
A kidney biopsy, performed on day 15, confirmed the diagnosis of HUS. Light microscopy showed 13 permeable glomeruli with endothelial cell swelling, widening of the subendothelial space, and double contours of the glomerular basement membrane. Fibrin and platelet thrombi were observed in glomerular capillaries. Images of regenerating tubular necrosis were also observed. An immunofluorescence study revealed no significant immune deposits .
Haemolysis subsequently disappeared and the patient’s neurological state improved. Although urine output increased, the patient remained on dialysis.
While waiting to identify the type of E. coli involved, we were unable to exclude a diagnosis of non-intestinal STEC-HUS. In view of the favorable outcome, the patient did not receive any plasmatherapy, or complement inhibitor. However, we were able to discontinue dialysis after 1 month as renal function improved.
When testing for anti-LPS antibodies in serum was repeated 3 weeks after disease onset, no E.coli typically associated with HUS in France was found (detection of IgM and IgA (‘line-blot’) anti-LPS antibodies in the serum, for serogroups O26, O55, O91, O103, O111, O128, O145, O157). Moreover, screening for virulence factors of the E.coli found in blood cultures came back negative (stx1 and stx2 gene amplification negative; eae and ehxA gene amplification negative; fyuA, hlyC, sfa/foc, papC, iucC, papGIII, cnf1, papGII, iroN, vat, clbB genes negative).
After 3 months, serum creatinine was 2 mg/dL and proteinuria was 0.4 g/day. After 1 year, serum creatinine remained stable at 1.5 mg/dl, with normal blood pressure and clinical state. No recurrence has been observed over a 3 year period.
Screening for rare variants in complement alternative pathway genes was performed (Technique: EUrenOmics NGS panel) and showed the presence of a heterozygous variant in the gene encoding complement factor H (p.Val215Ile; c.643 G > A). This variant is located in the N-terminal domain of the protein (SCR4) and is not present in the ExAc data base .