A 64-year-old female underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and paclitaxel, with subsequent quadrantectomy and axillary lymph node dissection due to a right-side breast neoplasm. Histopathological examination revealed a ductal carcinoma classified as T2N2M0, consisting of a 4-cm tumor with spreading to six axillary lymph nodes but without distant spreading to bones, liver, brain or lungs). It was triple-negative, for estrogen, progesterone and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) receptors. Radiation therapy was subsequently implemented. The patient was then followed up with serial investigations (mammogram, bone scintigraphy scan and computed tomography scans of the cranium, thorax and abdomen) for locoregional and distant relapses every six months.
Twenty-four months after receiving the diagnosis, she evolved with a complaint of left-flank pain, inappetence and loss of seven kilograms in four months. She presented dyspeptic symptoms characterized by early satiety and pain in the upper abdomen after feeding. On physical examination, the abdomen was painful to deep palpation. There was no evidence of relevant laboratory abnormalities.
Abdominal computed tomography demonstrated a hypervascularized solid lesion of 6.6 cm x 6.0 cm x 7.0 cm in the tail of the pancreas. It had an irregular outline and partially defined borders, presented a central area of necrosis and was in contact with the anterior margin of the spleen and greater gastric curvature. It was not possible to determine any cleavage plane. A small amount of free liquid was present . Cancer antigen (CA)-19.9, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-125 levels were within the normal ranges. No other sites with suspected lesions were detected through positron-emission computed tomography.
Because the hypothesis of pancreatic neoplasia needed to be clarified and no endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy was available, prompt surgery was warranted given that there was no evidence of other sites of active disease. The patient underwent distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy and left adrenalectomy , with uneventful postoperative outcomes. She had good evolution in the postoperative period, with complete remission of symptoms.
The histopathological diagnosis consisted of metastasis from breast carcinoma. The results from the immunohistochemical analysis were positive for the cytokeratin-7 (CK7) marker and negative for the mucin 5AC (MUC-5AC), CEA, CA-19.9, estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and Breast-2 (BRST-2) markers. Although negativity for ER, PR and BRST-2 does not favor a breast origin, these markers do not preclude this origin. On the other hand, negativity for the MUC-5AC, CEA and CA-19.9 markers does not favor a pancreatobiliary origin and favors the breast as the primary site. A chemotherapy regimen consisting of paclitaxel was administered for 12 weeks following the patients recovery from the operation, and currently she is being followed up with serial screenings for locoregional and distant spreading of disease every six months. As of 18 months after the diagnosis was made, there is no evidence of active disease.