The patient was a 74-year-old male who had suffered a cerebral infarction being diagnosed with secondary polythemia (JAK2V617F; Negative), who was scheduled for a surgery for maxillary cyst at the oral surgery department.
Preoperative examination revealed obstructive ventilation disorder; thus, the patient was referred to the respiratory department. His medication regimen at the time consisted solely of 100 mg of aspirin once a day. As part of the workup, a chest computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed a thoracic aortic aneurysm (84 mm). A saccular aneurysm protruded ventrally and caudally from the left subclavian artery to distal arch. The distance between the left carotid artery and proximal portion of the aneurysm was 11 mm. The depth of sac and width of neck were 42 × 55 and 84 mm, respectively . Accordingly, the patient was referred to the cardiovascular department. His blood test showed hemoglobin 19.1 g/dL and hematocrit 54.9%; however, serum erythropoietin level was not measured (usually below the normal reference range in patients with polythemia vira) .
He was afebrile, with white blood cell count and C-reactive protein levels within the normal range, and negative blood culture results.
There was an aneurysm, which was 3 cm distal to the left subclavian artery, and to avoid distal anastomosis, we decided to perform an elective tortal arch replacement with a 29 mm ×90 mm frozen elephant trunk (J Graft FROZENIX; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) surgery on the 26 mm aorta in Zone 4. Elective surgery was planned. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established through median sternotomy with cannulations on the ascending aorta, and the superior and inferior vena cavae. The prosthetic graft was anastomosed to the left axillary artery. Bicaval drainage was established, and warm blood retrograde cardioplegia was administered every 20 min. We discontinued CPB and initiated selective cerebral perfusion from the left axillary artery at minimum laryngeal and bladder temperatures of 16.7 and 21.2 °C, respectively. Subsequently, we opened the aneurysm and placed cannulas (SP-GRIPFLOW™; Fuji Systems, Tokyo, Japan) in three carotid branches. Viewed from inside the aorta, the lumen of the saccular aneurysm was completely covered with a mural thrombus . A frozen elephant trunk (J Graft FROZENIX; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was deployed under the guidance of a transesophageal echocardiogram. Following the completion of distal anastomosis with a 26-mm four-branch graft (Triplex; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), anterograde perfusion of the lower body and rewarming were initiated through a graft branch. The duration of circulation arrest time to lower body perfusion was 55 min. The aneurysm contained a mural thrombus . We transected the arch at zone 2 and reconstructed the left subclavian artery, left common carotid artery, and brachiocephalic artery. This was followed by a proximal anastomosis . The total CPB and cardiac ischemic times were 240 and 128 min, respectively. On postoperative day 10, the patient was discharged without any neurological deficits or infection. After thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery, we aim to follow up with CT scans 1 week and 6 months after surgery. The next CT will be in 6 months.