A 61-year-old female smoker with history of hypercholesterolaemia presented via the pPCI pathway with sudden onset of shortness of breath, dizziness and chest pain while walking. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST elevation inferiorly and V1–V3 with transient right bundle branch block (RBBB) and junctional bradycardia . She was loaded with Aspirin 300 mg, Ticagrelor 180 mg orally on presentation, and then regular doses of Aspirin 75 mg daily, Ticagrelor 90 mg b.i.d. with prophylactic dose Enoxaparin 40 mg daily in line with our hospital’s pPCI protocol.
Transradial coronary angiography revealed a normal left main coronary artery, large left anterior descending artery that wrapped around the apex and a dominant left circumflex artery with non-obstructive disease (, Videos S1 and S7). The RCA was not visualized and subsequently engaged despite multiple attempts using a variety of diagnostic catheters . A left ventriculogram showed normal left ventricle (LV) systolic function . Physical examination revealed an elevated jugular venous pressure, clear lung fields, normal heart sounds with a pansystolic murmur, and signs of hypoperfusion.
Her National Early Warning Score (NEWS) was 10 based on respiratory rate of 27/min, oxygen saturation of 88% (room air), temperature 35.9˚C, blood pressure 98/54 mmHg, and pulse rate of 53 beats/min with signs of hypoperfusion and oliguria (initial serum lactate of 2.5 mmol/L, urine output of <0.5 mL/kg/h within the first 4 h, respectively). She was started on oxygen therapy (4 L/min via nasal cannula) and intravenous dobutamine at a rate of 2.5 µg/kg/min and repeat haemodynamic observation after 30 min revealed a NEWS score of 4 based on respiratory rate of 20 per minute, oxygen saturation of 94% (on oxygen), temperature 36.6˚C, blood pressure 120/67 mmHg, and pulse rate of 69 beats/min.
She was in cardiogenic shock with a persistent ectopic atrial rhythm with retrograde p-waves indicative of ventriculoatrial conduction, present , but stabilized with intravenous dobutamine thus avoiding the need for a transcutaneous venous pacing system. Using Fridericia correction, her QTc 479 ms which was prolonged became normalized upon discharge. A bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a normal LV size and function (ejection fraction > 55%), leftward systolic septal wall motion suggestive of right-sided pressure overload and moderate RV dilatation (basal RV diameter of 44 mm). Right ventricular systolic function was severely impaired with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 5 mm and free wall akinesis. There was severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with evidence of flow reversal in the hepatic veins and the estimated RV systolic pressure, based on the TR gradient and estimated right atrial pressure, was 45.76 mmHg (right atrial pressure 10 mmHg) (, Videos S8 and S9).
Admission bloods revealed a normocytic anaemia with a haemoglobin 109 g/L (normal range 115–165 g/L), raised white cell count 16.2 × 109/L (normal range 4.0–10.0 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein 55.1 mg/L (normal value <5 mg/L). High sensitivity cardiac Troponin T level was elevated from 46 to 1998 (normal value <14 ng/L), with a N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide level of 3550 ng/L (normal value <263 ng/L).
Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH 7.51 (normal range 7.35–7.45), pO2 7.0 kPa (normal range 10–14 kPa), pCO2 4.20 kPa (normal range 4.5–6 kPa), lactate 1.4 mmol/L (normal range 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), HCO3¯ 27.8 mmol/L (normal range 22–26 mmol/L) with an oxygen saturation 94.4% on 4 L of oxygen via nasal cannula indicating hypoxic respiratory failure with alkalosis.
The differential diagnoses included massive pulmonary embolism (PE), bradycardia with haemodynamic disturbance, right ventricular myocarditis, and isolated right ventricular myocardial infarction (RVMI).
Her chest radiograph was normal, computed tomography pulmonary angiogram demonstrated no evidence of PE, an urgent cardiac gated computed tomography (, ) revealed a recessive RCA with ostial occlusive lesion. A cardiac MRI was performed once the patient had stabilized demonstrated a normal RV end-diastolic volume (78 mL/m2), an elevated RV end-systolic volume (42 mL/m2) with an ejection fraction of 46% with marked regional wall motion abnormality along the RV free wall coupled with extensive late gadolinium contrast enhancement, consistent with infarction (, , and ). A departmental agitated saline TTE study, performed prior to the MRI, revealed the presence of a patent foramen ovale but this was not haemodynamically significant on MRI. Left ventricular systolic function was normal across all imaging modalities.
She was managed conservatively and discharged to her local district general hospital (DGH) after 5 days in our tertiary centre. She had a nocturnal sinus pause lasting 5 s on telemetry at Day 10 post-index presentation. Multi-disciplinary device team discussion felt there was not enough of an indication to proceed to a permanent pacing system. She was enrolled in a cardiac rehabilitation programme and discharged home on Aspirin, Ticagrelor (b.i.d. for 12 months), Atorvastatin, Spironolactone, and Lansoprazole with plan for an outpatient follow-up.