A 76-year-old woman lost 3 kg in 3 months and visited a primary care clinic in September 2014. She had never smoked, and her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) was 1. Computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor of about 6 cm in the left lower lobe. Bronchoscopic biopsy did not show malignant cells, but sarcomatoid cancer was suspected with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Preoperative brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no brain metastasis, and metastasis was not found in whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) CT. In contrast CT, the tumor was widely in contact with the pericardium and the diaphragm. After examination, a non-small cell lung cancer with pericardial and diaphragmatic invasion, cT4N1M0, stage3A, was diagnosed. The left lower lobectomy with concomitant resection of the pericardium and diaphragm and nodal dissection (ND)2a-2 was then performed. The pathological diagnosis was pleomorphic carcinoma , pT2bN0M0, stage 1B. The patient was followed in the surgery clinic without chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Two months after surgery, she visited an emergency room with chief complaints of headache that the throbbing of the left temple makes it impossible to open her eyes and diplopia.
On neurological examination, she showed left trochlear (IV) and abducens (VI) nerve palsies and had pain in the left trigeminal nerve first branch area (V1). Head CT showed bone destruction at the left sphenoid sinus . Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the brain showed a contrast-enhanced tumor . Based on the neurologic examination and imaging findings, Garcin syndrome caused by sphenoid bone metastasis of lung cancer was diagnosed. Five-gray irradiation was performed four times to control her neurological symptoms, but they did not improve. Subsequently, she was given zoledronic acid in the surgery clinic, but it was ineffective. Three months after surgery, whole-body PET and CT showed cancer spread to involve the right ninth rib and the left adrenal gland. Her general condition gradually worsened, and she died in March 2015, about 5 months after surgery.