A 35-year-old female with a medical history of progressively increasing painless left arm swelling for 1 year, underwent excision biopsy in an outside hospital facility. Histopathology revealed that ESMC, 13.6 cm in size, was within 1 mm of the resection margin. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) left upper limb was performed that showed satisfactory post-surgical changes with no residual disease. Computed tomography (CT) scan through thorax was negative for pulmonary metastasis. Bone scan was also negative for distant osteoblastic metastasis. The case was discussed in Multidisciplinary Team (MDT), which recommended wide local excision of the scar. However, patient refused surgery and opted for surveillance.
Follow-up with CT thorax and MRI left upper limb was continued at three-month interval; there was no evidence of local disease recurrence or pulmonary metastasis. However, CT thorax at 6 months from presentation showed interval development of destructive lesion in T12 vertebral body with Grade 3 compression fracture and associated soft tissue component extending into spinal canal . The patient was called to the emergency department, and a detailed medical history and physical examination were performed. She had a history of low back pain radiating to both legs for 2 months. However, there was no motor or sensory loss or sphincter dysfunction.
Further evaluation was done with MRI of the whole spine with contrast to exclude myelopathy. MRI redemonstrated Grade 3 pathological compression fracture of T12 vertebral body with suspicious marrow infiltration and extraosseous soft-tissue extending posteriorly within the spinal canal deep to the posterior longitudinal ligament causing effacement of the anterior thecal sac and compression of the conus medullaris. No edema seen within the conus medullaris . The rest of the vertebral bodies were unremarkable with no evidence of metastasis. In addition to this, a note was made of a rim enhancing lesion in the body of the pancreas.
Furthermore, CT abdomen and pelvis with contrast was performed that showed a hypodense lesion measuring 13 mm × 9 mm in the body of pancreas on the background of normal pancreatic parenchyma without any surrounding fat arborization . While the follow-up MRI of the left limb showed stable post-surgical changes with no evidence of local disease recurrence. These findings were discussed in MDT to decide the further management plan. As patient did not develop local recurrence and pulmonary metastasis; CT guided biopsy was recommended for T12 vertebral body lesion for histopathological confirmation of metastasis and exclude the possibility of second primary bone tumor. In addition, an endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) for pancreatic lesion was planned. A CT guided bone biopsy was performed and histopathology confirmed metastatic MC.