The patient was a 66-year-old man with complete situs inversus that was identified in early youth. In October 2021, the man consulted our outpatient clinic for two pulmonary nodules discovered by computed tomography (CT) 2 years ago during his routine health checkup. The patient was referred to our hospital for detailed examination and surgical treatment because his bigger pulmonary nodule was developed and increased significantly.
The patient had no recent history, such as cough, fever, chest pain and blood sputum. Also he had no previous medical history, whereas his smoking history lasts about 30 years, 90-pack/year. His grandmother once died of lung cancer while his mother died of breast cancer. Upon admission, vital signs were normal. For example, body temperature was 37℃, heart rate was 85 beats/min, respiration rate was 12 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 128/85 mmHg. Hematological tests, urinalysis and stool analysis revealed no abnormal findings. Physical examination was done methodically which revealed that the apex beat was located in a mirror image of those normally found on the left side. All serum tumor markers were within their normal ranges except carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), which was 5.5 ng/mL. In addition, respiratory function, arterial gas analysis, electrocardiogram and bone scan were performed to rule out surgical contraindications, which showed no abnormalities. Chest X-ray revealed dextrocardia and right aortic arch, but no tumor shadow could be differentiated. Contrast enhanced CT scans of the brain, the chest and abdomen showed typical radiographic features of SIT and two GGO located in the left upper lobe and middle lobe separately with no swollen mediastinum and hilar lymph nodes and/or distant metastases . The two nodules were presented as ground-glass opacity (GGO), in which the bigger one was a mixed GGO adjacent to the mediastinal pleura, 3 × 4 cm in diameter, in the apical segment of left upper lobe and the smaller one was a pure GGO closer to the mediastinum, 0.8 cm in diameter, in the medial segment of left middle lobe . Bronchoscopic examination showed that the arrangement of the bronchi were mirror images of those normally found on the other side, and that tracheal and bronchial mucosa were normal. Trans-bronchial tumor biopsy and positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) was not performed because the tumor was not a solid tumor and could not be identified by chest radiography.
The patient used thin-Sect. (1 mm), enhanced CT (manufactured by American GE) scanning of the chest to obtain the images, which were recorded as digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) data and subsequently transmitted to a computer and reconstructed with the Mimics Medical 21.0 software installed on a Windows 10 platform (manufactured by Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd). According to instructions of the software, three-dimensional computed tomography bronchography and angiography (3D-CTBA) was reconstructed to separate pulmonary structures from each other, including GGO, bronchi, pulmonary arteries, and veins, which were marked out in different colors . The result of reconstruction was consistent with the diagnosis of SIT, one GGO in the upper left lung and the other nodule in the middle left lung. We could rotate the three-dimensional model arbitrarily on the computer, so as to further analyze the targeted structure carefully, identify the vascular variations except SIT and ascertain the surgical margin, which finally helped us facilitate the discussion of the surgical procedure and make reasonable preoperative decisions.
Because the possibility of variations of the pulmonary vessels and the abnormality of SIT were taken into consideration, the operation was performed via robot-assisted thoracic lobectomy. The surgical procedures were as follows. The patient was administered general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation, which was performed with double-lumen endotracheal tube. And he lied on his healthy side in a lateral position and expanded his intercostal space. The robot was placed behind the patient’s head. The port placement is shown in Fig. as what we done in our usual robot-assisted left lung surgery. For the da Vinci Xi system, we use three ports: a 8-mm camera port incised in the eighth intercostal space of the mid axillary line, a 3 cm operation port was set at the sixth intercostal anterior axillary line for the operating hole before the 30-degree 3D endoscope was inserted into the thorax. The incision was made for the assistant to staple and exchange the items of rolled-up sponges, titanium clips and hem-o-lok clips, as well as the left robotic arm working channel after placing the trocar sleeve. The last 8-mm port used for the right operated robotic arm was located in the eighth intercostal space of the rear axillary line. Slight changes to these locations are necessary once the dextrocardial anatomy is visualized, for example, the location of the observation port was less lateral than usual with the heart absent from our surgical area in this SIT patient. During surgery, the superior vena cava and azygos vein were located in the mirror images of their normal distributions, the aortic arch disappeared from the left thoracic cavity , which was relatively easy for mediastinal lymph node dissection. The left lung was composed of 3 lobes separated by poor-defined fissures . With the poor-developed pulmonary fissures, we designed to deal with the blood vessels from the pulmonary hilum at the beginning of the surgery. When we incised the mediastinal pleura above the posterior hilum of the upper lung, apical branch of pulmonary artery (A1)was exposed, as well as thick anterior branch of pulmonary artery (A3), which was confused with the superior trunk of the pulmonary artery . Although careful identification of the targeted blood vessels could be gained from preoperative 3D-CTBA imaging, we just cut off A1 and A2a without A3 to avoid accidental injury of blood vessels. Afterwards, with the help of precise moving multi-joint forceps of da Vinci, the assistant lifts the left upper lobe (LUL) up with oval forceps while the arm 1 and the arm 3 were used to dissect the oblique fissure between the LUL and the left lower lobe (LLL) with a stapler, which was called the tunnel technique . As this dissection proceeds, the pulmonary artery branches to the lingula become visible in the fissure, including posterior ascending branch artery (A2), A3, central vein (CV) and pulmonary trunk. The smaller branch artery (A2) was directly resected using an ultrasonic knife, while larger branch (A3) and left upper lobe bronchus was cut and stapled with a linear cutting stapler. Then the dissection of pulmonary veins and pulmonary bronchus were performed after we ensured the lowest branch of the upper pulmonary veins was the middle lobe vein, which represents the usual pattern of the right side. Finally, the horizontal fissure was cut and the specimen was stapled shut. The other smaller pure GGO was located in the left middle lobe near the middle lobe vein root adjacent to the mediastinal pleura according to the CT images and 3D-CTBA reconstruction. The lesion was resected after the lung surrounding the GGO was retracted posteriorly and isolated from the hilum and the middle vein. As the aortic arch was absent within the left thoracic cavity, systemic lymphadenectomy was relatively easy. The No. 10, 11, and 7 lymph nodes were dissected. The total operation time was two hours, with blood loss of 50 mL.
The final histopathology showed that the bigger nodule was highly differentiated invasive adenocarcinoma(3.8 cm in diameter), composed of a mixture of acinar subtype and adherent subtype, and the smaller nodule was adenocarcinoma in situ with a tumor diameter of 0.8 cm. Lymph nodes were pathologically negative. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient did not need chemotherapy or radiotherapy, only with the regular follow-up at the outpatient clinic. Six months after the operation, the patient is doing well with no signs of recurrence.