An anterior conchal skin and cartilage defect occurred in a 24-year-old female patient after she underwent rhinoplasty with a concha cartilage graft in another clinic. She started to feel pain in her right ear 2 days after rhinoplasty and then received antibiotic injections for 5 days. However, the pain only intensified. When the bolster was removed 7 days post operation, a 2.5 × 1.5 cm full-thickness skin and cartilage defect was observed in the anterior surface of the concha. Mismanagement of the tight dressing was considered the cause of the iatrogenic conchal defect. Before defect reconstruction, the necrotic tissue was debrided surgically, and the wound was dressed for another 1 week . Thereafter, a revolving-door (RD) flap was performed to cover the anterior concha defect as a single-stage procedure.
The patient was in the supine position, and local anaesthesia was administered via an injection of lidocaine with 1:100 000 epinephrine. The RD island flap mainly included the retroauricular and mastoid subcutaneous tissue and skin and the subcutaneous pedicle. As shown in Figs. b, c and , the size of the flap was 2.5 × 1.5 cm based on the size and shape of the anterior conchal defect, and the flap was divided into retroauricular (A) and mastoid (B) parts by the cephalon-auricular sulcus. The flap was dissected around the periphery and meticulously elevated along a deep plane. Furthermore, great care should have been taken to leave its base unattached at the cephalon-auricular sulcus to maintain the completeness of the vascular pedicle, which contained tributaries of the posterior auricular artery (PAA). After a through-and-through opening space was created, parts A and B of the flap were rotated 180° and 30°, respectively, from the distal edge to the vertical axis through the defect and were placed at the margin of the anterior conchal defect. Part A of the flap settled at the medial half of the conchal defect, and part B covered the lateral half of the defect. It is important to make an opening space with a proper size to allow the passage of the flap with no resistance. Meanwhile, the subcutaneous pedicle should also be kept adequately loosened, without physical constriction, to facilitate the blood supply to the skin flap. Thus, the transposed flap could settle appropriately, with no entrapment or deformation, as well as with a lower risk of skin flap necrosis. Both the flap and the donor site were closed with interrupted mattress sutures (nylon 5/0), which were removed 7 days following the surgery.
The operative time was 1 h and 30 min. The RD flap survived completely without total or partial failure . There were no obvious scars or retraction in the recipient or donor site. Moreover, the cephalon-auricular angles of the reconstructed auricle were similar to those on the normal side. The aesthetic and functional outcomes were satisfactory at 6 months post operation . The patient recovered with no deformities or complications.