A 29-year-old woman, gravida 6, para 1-0-4-1, at 12 weeks gestation, presented to the ED with a chief complaint of fever (reported maximum 103°F) and sacral pain. She denied chest pain, shortness of breath, and any vaginal discharge or bleeding. Her pain was located mid-sacrum at a 5/10 intensity with radiation to the suprapubic area. Additionally, she denied dysuria but complained of increasing difficulty with emptying her bladder. Her past medical history was significant for endometriosis with four laparoscopic procedures, an adenexal cyst, four previous miscarriages, a prior cesarean section, and Perry-Romberg syndrome (localized scleroderma of childhood). An ultrasound completed a week prior for pelvic pain revealed a viable fetus in an otherwise normal uterus with no retroversion noted.
The vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 121/53 mm Hg, pulse 94, respirations 18, temperature 100.4°F, and pulse oximetry of 100% on room air. The abdominal exam was remarkable for tenderness to palpation on the midline at and below the umbilicus. The patient’s complaints of pain in the sacrum and lower lumbar spine could not be further elicited through palpation. There was no costovertebral angle tenderness. The patient reported in previous speculum examinations that her cervix could not be visualized due to severe anterior location, and this was found on our examination also. Bimanual examination revealed diffuse tenderness and a palpable mass in the posterior cul de sac consistent with a retroverted uterus, but otherwise no gross abnormalities. The remainder of her physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory studies including a basic metabolic panel, complete blood count, and urinalysis were unremarkable. The patient was given a one-liter intravenous (IV) fluid bolus, 1mg hydromorphone IV x 2 for pain control, and ondansetron 4mg IV for nausea. An obstetric/gynecologic consultation was requested for persistent pain.
The consultant agreed with the prior examination and lab review and made the diagnosis of incarcerated uterus due to the presenting symptoms in combination with the markedly retroverted uterus without repeat ultrasonography. Attempts to manually reduce the incarceration by intravaginal pressure in the ED were unsuccessful due to patient discomfort. She was taken to the operating room for reduction of the incarcerated uterus under spinal anesthesia followed by placement of a vaginal pessary. Her recovery was complicated with a low-grade fever and some pain in the absence of abnormalities in the chest x-ray, urinalysis, or blood count. Her postoperative pain warranted the use of parenteral narcotics and was significantly improved with the removal of the pessary. She was discharged with a viable pregnancy.