A 40-year-old Sinhalese woman who was previous healthy presented with a history of intermittent colicky left-sided abdominal pain for 2 months’ duration. There were no other lower gastrointestinal symptoms, loss of weight or loss of appetite. She was hemodynamically stable. There was no palpable abdominal mass or evidence of peritonitis, and the rest of the history and examination were unremarkable. She did not have a significant family history of illnesses. She was unemployed. Basic biochemistry, which included complete blood count and renal and liver profile, was within normal parameters. Colonoscopy revealed a narrowing of the lumen of the descending colon a few centimeters distal to the splenic flexure. Biopsy showed evidence of resolving infective colitis, with no evidence of malignancy. Computed tomography of the abdomen and colonogram showed a circumferential thickening of the wall and narrowing of the lumen of the descending colon extending from 3 cm below the splenic flexure downwards, with evidence of extraluminal spread through the serosa and infiltration of adjacent parietal peritoneum and abdominal wall, suggestive of a stage IV neoplasm. There was no evidence of abdominal metastasis.
Surgical exploration and excision of a probable malignancy was planned. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a mass lesion with multiple abscesses attached to the transverse and descending colon with a narrowed segment at the proximal descending colon. The mass was attached to the omentum and pericolic fat. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes along the inferior mesenteric artery were noted. The patient underwent extended left hemicolectomy with end-to-end colocolic anastomosis.
The surgical specimen consisted of transverse colon and descending colon together measuring 370 mm in length and 50 mm in diameter. The lumen of the descending colon was narrowed in a region 130 mm from the proximal resection margin. A mass lesion with multiple abscesses measuring 90 x 70 x 45 mm was attached to the transverse and descending colon at the narrowed segment.
Microscopic examination of sections of the mass lesion showed multiple abscesses surrounded by a fibroblastic reaction and a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with foreign body type giant cells. Occasional abscesses contained a few basophilic colonies suggestive of actinomycosis. The lymph nodes showed reactive changes. There was no evidence of tuberculosis, inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy .
The patient received intravenous penicillin treatment for 10 days followed by oral penicillin for 6 months after reviewing with histology. There were no complications related to surgery. Follow-up assessment after 1 year revealed that the patient was free of symptoms, with no clinical evidence of bowel obstruction.