A 44 years old female Caucasian was diagnosed with autoimmune hepatitis. Histologically, giant cell hepatitis was discussed. The disease did not respond to a high dosage of steroids (100 mg for 5 days with consecutive reduction) with acute-on-chronic decompensation and the patient was evaluated and listed for LT. The Model of End Stage Liver Disease score (Lab-MELD) was 33 and the Child-Pugh score was C. Liver transplantation was performed 5 weeks after first admission in January 2015 with a full-size graft of 1200 g. The female donor was 72 years old. The cytomegalovirus status was D+/R- and the cold ischemia time lasted 10 h 8 min. The donor received 11 red blood cell concentrates, five platelet concentrates, and 18 fresh frozen plasma doses. At the time of LT, microbiological smears showed negative results. Reoperations with lavage were needed after initial liver packing. Already on pod 6, cultures from tracheal and bronchial samples yielded growth of Aspergillus spp., and Aspergillus galactomannan antigenemia was demonstrated from pod 0 to 39. During the concomitant postoperative time, the patient suffered from an aspergillus infection which was primarily suspected after cranial imaging and subsequently detected following the craniotomy due to the abscess removal.
Initial immunosuppression consisted of a steroid induction dosage of 500 mg prednisolone administered perioperatively, a basiliximab induction 20 mg i.v. on pod 0 and 4, followed by a low dose tacrolimus and a prednisolone taper schedule (starting dosage of 20 mg). The tacrolimus dosage was achieved to a trough level in the range of 4–6 ng/ml .
The standard antibiotic treatment was escalated based on the evidence of pneumonia within computed tomography (CT) diagnostics with piperacillin, tazobactam and meropenem, and was switched to daptomycin after vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) had been isolated repeatedly . Antifungal therapy was not applied as a standard treatment. An intermittent haemodialysis was started on pod 5 due to acute renal failure after LT and continued for 3 weeks, until spontaneous diuresis returned.
Focal seizures occurred on pod 9. Subsequent cranial diagnostics demonstrated an expansion of the lesion to the frontal lobe. Further differentiation in cranial magnetic-resonance imaging (cMRI) revealed multiple cerebral lesions . A calculated therapy was started with anidulafungin on suspicion of an invasive fungal infection. Repeated cMRI scans were performed . Following, alongside increasing infectious parameters, progressive unilateral symptoms and somnolence developed. Nevertheless, repeated MRI showed unaltered findings. The symptoms were classified as septic encephalopathy. The antimicrobial therapy was escalated again, and the aforementioned antifungal therapy was changed to voriconazole. Immunosuppression was administered with a continuous hydrocortisone infusion.
With further neurologic exacerbation, the MRI showed progressive cerebral disease. Hence, craniotomy and abscess removal were executed on pod 48. Microbiological analyses confirmed invasive fungal infection with A. fumigatus. Hereupon, neurologic symptoms slowly improved. Three months posttransplant, the patient was discharged from hospital. The antimicrobial prophylaxis was cotrimoxazole, valganciclovir and amphotericin B, as well as a continued antifungal therapy with voriconazole.
In the time that followed, the patient returned to hospital for 1 week because of gastroenteritis and cytomegalovirus DNA load (DNemia from pod 74 to 117). Four months posttransplant, the patient was hospitalized again due to acute-on-chronic renal failure with exsiccosis and hyperkalemia after a tacrolimus overdose. With widespread intensive care management, dialysis was evaded. The cMRI suggested intracerebral abscess progress, thus, the antifungal therapy was switched to posaconazole.
Five months posttransplant (pod 142), a temperature difference in the legs were noticed. In the following CT angiography , an occlusion of the left common iliac artery (CIA) and of the left internal iliac artery was detected. After the subsequent operative thrombectomy on the following day, histopathology proved the presence of A. fumigatus in the thrombus . Additionally, after notice of visual impairment, an invasive fungal infection of the vitreous body was diagnosed and a vitrectomy was executed. The visual capacity improved satisfactorily afterwards.
Under hydrocortisone, the serum bilirubin levels increased and rejection was histologically diagnosed (RAI 6) on pod 195. Galactomannan antigenemia was demonstrated again, starting on pod 197. The antifungal therapy was changed to voriconazole and amphotericin B. A variceal hemorrhage occurred and the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit. After all therapeutic approaches had been exhausted, the patient was moved to our palliative care ward and died 7 months (pod 210) posttransplant.