A 66-year-old Japanese male patient was discovered to have anemia (hemoglobin level, 6.1 g/dL) at a medical checkup. He underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which revealed Borrmann’s type IV gastric cancer, and the biopsy findings resulted in a diagnosis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. He then consulted with our hospital for surgical treatment.A detailed examination revealed T3N1M0 (stage IIB) cancer according to the Union for International Cancer Control tumor, node, and metastasis classification. Although a laparotomy was performed for curative resection, serosal invasion of the primary tumor and multiple peritoneal metastases in the peritoneal cavity were discovered intraoperatively. Peritoneal lavage cytology was also positive according to the Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma. We performed a total gastrectomy for cytoreduction and implanted an IP access port system (Bardport-Ti; CR Bard Inc., New Jersey, United States) comprising of a titanium port with a bottom diameter of 31.47 mm, a height of 14.5 mm, and a 14.3- Fr single-lumen silicone catheter for postoperative IP chemotherapy. The subcutaneous space was dissected and a pocket for implantation of the port was created in the right lower abdomen. A catheter was then inserted from the subcutaneous pocket into the peritoneal cavity, penetrating the abdominal wall, and the end of the catheter was placed in the pelvis.
The postoperative course was uneventful. On postoperative day 14 the patient began chemotherapy with S-1 (TS-1®; Taiho Pharmaceutical Company, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 mg/m2/day (2 weeks on, 2 weeks off) and docetaxel administered intraperitoneally at 45 mg/m2 (days 1 and 15). He was discharged on postoperative day 29 and underwent outpatient chemotherapy.
Two months after implantation of the IP access port the patient developed vomiting and abdominal pain. An abdominal X-ray showed dilatation of the small intestine. He was alert upon admission to department of gastroenterologic surgery of our hospital, with a blood pressure of 110/53 mmHg, a pulse rate of 64 beats/min, and a body temperature of 36.8°C. A physical examination was performed and localized tenderness was seen in the left lower abdomen apart from the port site. Neither port-site erythema nor swelling was observed. Laboratory data showed normal leukocyte and neutrophil counts (8420/μL and 4910/μL, respectively) and a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (3.6 mg/dL). He was admitted with a diagnosis of ileus and a nasogastric tube was inserted. However, the left lower abdominal pain persisted.Anabdominal computed tomography scan revealed marked wall thickening and narrowing of the lumen of the sigmoid colon adjacent to the catheter of the IP access port system . A barium enema also demonstrated extrinsic irregular stenosis of the sigmoid colon . We initially suspected peritoneal metastasis from gastric cancer and considered colostomy as a palliative operation. However, the stenosis was determined to have resulted from inflammation due to catheter infection because the intestinal stenosis was confined to the sigmoid colon, which was not a common site of peritoneal metastasis such as transverse-colon or rectum, and the disease progression was too fast compared with the usual course of peritoneal metastasis. Therefore, we removed the IP access port system under local anesthesia for a therapeutic diagnosis and began cephalosporin administration. At the time of port system removal, there was no abscess in the subcutaneous space and no fibrin clots were occluding the lumen of the catheter.However, after the port system removal the patient’s abdominal pain immediately disappeared and he could ingest food normally several days later. In addition, an abdominal computed tomography scan demonstrated improvement in the thickening of the sigmoid colon wall seven days after port system removal . Coagulase-negative staphylococci were detected by catheter culture. A colonofiberscopy showed no diverticula in the sigmoid colon, and that the mucosa was intact. Based on the patient’s clinical course and the above-described findings, we conclusively attributed the colonic stenosis to infection of the catheter. He was discharged on the 21 days after admission. The stenosis of the sigmoid colon had completely disappeared four months after port system removal as shown by a barium enema .
Outpatient chemotherapy with S-1 and intravenous docetaxel was performed. A re-laparoscopy was subsequently performed to evaluate the patient’s response to chemotherapy. There were abnormal findings such as fibrosis, scar formation, or macroscopic progression of peritoneal metastasis in the sigmoid colon and its mesentery.
An IP access port system was re-implanted four months after removal. The patient remains alive without progression of peritoneal metastasis six months after surgery.