A 78-year-old white man with productive cough as his single symptom presented to the pneumological unit in our hospital. The clinical findings including blood tests (complete blood cell count, electrolytes, serum biochemistry profile) were normal. CT scans of his thorax demonstrated, in addition to a chronic bronchitis, a large incidentaloma (6 cm) of his right adrenal gland . Further imaging with magnetic resonance demonstrated a multilocular cystic mass with hypointensity in T1-weighted images and hyperintensity in T2-weighted images . After injection of contrast the cystic walls enhanced and an infiltration to the liver was suspected. All hormonal tests illustrated a normal function of his adrenal glands; Cushing’s syndrome could be excluded by normal salivary cortisol at midnight (6.7 nmol/l), hyperaldosteronism by normal plasma aldosterone renin ratio (5.7 ng/mU) and pheochromocytoma by normal 24-hour urine catecholamines and metanephrines. In suspicion of a cystic malignant tumor of his right adrenal gland a diagnostic laparoscopy and open adrenalectomy were performed. On intraoperative examination, the incidentaloma infiltrated his inferior vena cava and segment VI of his liver. The macroscopic aspect was different from a classic malignant tumor and a benign etiology was suspected. Due to this intraoperative evaluation and the advanced age of the patient a limited resection without reconstruction of his inferior vena cava was performed. The resected mass was 7.2×7.4×3.5 cm and consisted of multiloculated cysts with scolices, necrosis, and inflammation . The pathological results reported alveolar echinococcosis of his right adrenal gland. This result was confirmed by serological tests: Echinococcus granulosus hydatid fluid (EgHF)-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), EgP-ELISA, AgB-EITB Western blot, Em18-ELISA, and Em2G11-ELISA. A lifelong treatment with albendazole was installed postoperatively. Follow-up after 1 year with clinical examination as well as CT scans showed no recurrence .