A 77-years-old woman presented with a complaint of a reducible mass in the left inguinal since 1 year. The patient was diagnosed as an indirect left inguinal hernia by Abdominal CT at the local hospital. The patient had a history of 3 inguinal hernia repairs. All three repairs were open herniorrhaphy and a mesh was placed in the previous third operation, unfortunately, the remaining details were not well clear.
Physical examination after admission: The blood pressure was 220/110 mmHg, the remaining vital signs were normal. An about 10 cm surgical scar was seen in the left inguinal area. A reducible mass in the left inguinal area was detected, which could drop in standing and coughing. The mass can reach the midpoint of the thigh when it drops to its maximum size(18 cm × 14 cm). The circumference of the left and right thighs is unequal(Left:47 cm vs Right:52 cm, Fig. ), The anteromedial sensation of the left thigh was lost, the sensation of the right side was normal. The bilateral knee-extensor motor was normal. The contraction test of sartorius muscle was positive on the left side and was negative on the right side, and the patellar reflexes, achilles tendon reflexes, and plantar responses of both lower limbs were normal.
After admission, relevant laboratory and imaging examinations were completed: blood routine examination and coagulation function examination were normal. Abdominal ultrasound finding suggested that the diagnosis was left inguinal hernia. The results of the computed tomography (CT) conformed to an inguinal hernia , the atrophy of rectus femoris, adductor muscle, and sartorius muscle were visible in the CT scan . Also, electromyography(EMG) and nerve conduction velocity(NCV) of the lower limbs showed the reduction of conduction velocities with prolongation of motor latency of left femoral nerve and reduced proximal rectus femoris amplitudes, indicating that the left tibial nerve and femoral nerve were damaged .
After the preoperative preparation, we selected a laparoscopic pre-peritoneal technique because of three open surgery histories. The patient was positioned supine, underwent surgery under general anesthesia and indwelling catheterization. The laparoscope was inserted through a 10-mm umbilical port. Surgical exploration showed a few focal adhesions, omentum which is entrapped inside a hernia sac and a hernia orifice whose size was 6 cm × 5 cm. Another 10-mm port was placed at the lateral edge of the right abdominal rectus muscle and a 5-mm port was placed at the lateral edge of the left abdominal rectus muscle. Following lysis of the adhesions, the content in the hernia sac was reduced by pulling the contents carefully using forceps. And then an about 8 cm peritoneal incision was made superiorly concerning hernia orifice and the boundaries of which was 2 cm beyond the medial and lateral sides of the hernia orifice. The hernia sac was dissected, a negative pressure drainage tube was placed in distal hernia sac(between the mesh and the transversalis fascia), and the opening of hernia sac was closed by continuous self-locking suture. At that time, we wanted to complete the extraperitoneal repair, but the peritoneum could not be closed due to the high tension. Finally, a 20 × 15 cm bioresorbable coating mesh that comes from BARD Corporation was placed to cover hernia defect and fixed by BARD absorbable tacks on its upper edge and by suture on its lower edge. The operation time is 110 min, the Intraoperative bleeding volume is 10 ml and none of the complications occurred during the operation .
In the final, the drainage tube was subsequently removed 72 h after the surgery and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the tenth postoperative day. At the time of patient discharge, the anterior medial skin sensation of the patient’s left thigh recovered a little and the sartorius contraction test was still positive . As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the recovery of the femoral nerve is not known without physical examination and auxiliary examination, but the patient did not experience recurrence over the six-months telephone follow-up period.
Although the results of EMG and NCV suggested that patients still had left tibial nerve injury, the patient did not have the relevant clinical manifestations of tibial nerve injury. So the authors thought that the evidence of tibial nerve injury was insufficient, so we did not discuss the tibial nerve injury in this paper.