A 54-year old man presenting with progressive cognitive impairment was admitted to the memory clinic at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy. His Mini-Mental State Examination score showed a cognitive impairment (24 out of 30 points). Furthermore, he had mild orofacial dyskinesia, which was suggested to be a side-effect of his medication with melperone. The patient received this treatment because of a sleep disorder and restlessness. After clinical examination he was referred to the Department of Nuclear Medicine with the suspected diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease for an 18F-FDG PET/CT study. Family history was empty showing no neurodegenerative or psychiatric diseases in first degree relatives. The patient’s father had suffered from a stroke with persisting disability and died at the age of 66 years.
While CT and MRI showed no pathologic findings, the 18F-FDG PET/CT (Philips Gemini TF16, Best, Netherlands) of the brain revealed a severe bilaterally decreased uptake in the striatum . Additionally, we performed two different voxel-based intersubject statistical analyses to a reference database. First, using NEUROSTAT we performed 3D standard surface projections (3D-SSP) from patient’s 18F-FDG-PET and compared them to an age-matched 3D-SSP database in order to detect dementia-related hypometabolism in the cortical areas . In a second step, focusing on subcortical regions, we used SPM 12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging at UCL, London) implemented in Matlab 9.0 (MathWork, Sherborn, Mass.) and performed a voxel-by-voxel single subject analysis of the whole brain. We then compared our patient to an age-matched healthy group used in NEUROSTAT . Concordant to the visual findings we found a significant reduced bilateral uptake in the striatum .
Following imaging Huntington’s disease (HD) was being favored as underlying cause for the patient’s cognitive impairment. Subsequently, a molecular genetic testing was initiated, which confirmed the diagnosis of HD. One allele showed an abnormal CAG repeat of the Huntingtin gene (HTT) in chromosome 4p16.3 of 41 ± 1, while the other allele was normal (CAG repeat of 20 ± 1).