On 22 April 2022, a 61-year-old black female retiree was brought into the emergency department with the main complaints of frequent nighttime urination, shortness of breath, cloudy eyesight, and tingling in her hands and feet. She had had stomach discomfort, vomiting, and increasing weakness throughout the previous day. She had no family medical or medication history. With the exception of type 2 diabetes, she had no history of hypertension, chronic heart failure, hyperlipidemia, or chronic kidney disorders. She had no prior history of alcohol consumption or cigarette smoking. Her daughter was hospitalized, and she frequently traveled outside of the city to visit her. Her daughter had approved the COVID-19 infection. Three days prior to admission, she contacted her daughter, who confirmed a positive COVID-19 test. Seven years prior, she had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus. She received metformin 1 g twice daily and glibenclamide 10 mg twice daily as part of her treatment plan. She had taken her medications consistently.
At the time of her admission to the emergency room, she had a 1-day history of frequent urination, excessive thirst, hyperglycemia, excessive hunger, fever, headache, and dehydration. Three days before being admitted, she was in good health. Her vital signs upon entry into the emergency room were as follows: 39.4°C body temperature, 82.3 kg weight, 1.58 m height, 32.9 kg/m2 BMI, 124/88 mm Hg blood pressure, 17 cycles per minute respiratory rate, 109 beats per minute peripheral pulse, and 87% oxygen saturation on room air.
Her blood chemistry done upon her admission to the ICU showed serum creatinine of 2.1 mg/dl, serum sodium of 109 mEq/l, serum potassium of 3.2 mEq/l, hemoglobin of 15.5 g/dl, blood urea nitrogen of 38 mg/dl, fasting blood glucose of 234 mg/dl, 2-h postprandial blood glucose of 247 mg/dl, leukocytes of 4290/µl, platelets of 140 200/µl, neutrophils of 66%, pH arterial blood of 7.08, anion gap level of 18 mEq/l, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 29 mm Hg, serum bicarbonate level of 9.0 mEq/l, serum phosphate level of 2.4 mg/dl, white blood cell count of 19 500 cells/mm3, serum chlorine level of 90, an aspartate aminotransferase level of 78 units/l, alanine aminotransferase level of 91 units/l, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 11 mm/h, 47% hematocrit, lymphocytes of 27%, low-density lipoproteins and high-density lipoproteins are normal, and urine analysis was positive for urine ketones of 2+.
Her electrocardiograph revealed ST depression in the anterior-lateral leads and sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 109 beats per minute. A chest radiography revealed bilateral diffuse, patchy airspace opacities that could be caused by viral pneumonia or multifocal pneumonia. The wheeze was audible on both sides of the chest when it was auscultated, along with crepitations in the right infrascapular region and bilateral airspace consolidations, which were more noticeable on the left side and involved practically all zones. SARS-CoV-2 was detected in a test. The presence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-PCR testing from nasopharyngeal swabs. After spending 2 days in the emergency room and having the SARS-COV-2 virus confirmed, she was transferred to an ICU with the diagnosis of previously well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, recently diagnosed DKA, and a recently confirmed COVID-19 infection.
She started oxygen inhalation with 5 l of oxygen as soon as she arrived. She began receiving 1000 ml of fluid resuscitation (0.9% normal saline) and insulin delivery through drip as soon as she was admitted to an ICU. She was then tested every day for fasting and 2 h after a meal to check blood sugar levels. A fasting blood glucose level of 100–140 mg/dl and a 2-h postprandial blood glucose level of 140–200 mg/l were maintained by adjusting the insulin dose in accordance with the patient’s blood glucose levels. She was given 80 mg of subcutaneous enoxaparin 12 h a day for prophylaxis of deep venous thromboembolism due to her confirmed COVID-19 infection.
On day 7, when her blood sugar started to stabilize, syringe pump delivery of insulin was stopped, and subcutaneous insulin injections were once again offered. She received neutral protamine-Hagedorn insulin 70/30 after 2 days of insulin drip in order to decrease her poor metabolic control. She received 500 mg of acetaminophen as needed to reduce her temperature. When her blood sugar levels were under control after 12 days, neutral protamine-Hagedorn was stopped, metformin 1.5 mg was reintroduced twice daily, and glibenclamide 10 mg was administered twice daily. With the help of subcutaneous insulin and nutritional management, good glycemic control was maintained.
After spending 16 days in the hospital, the patient was eventually released on 8 May 2022, after two consecutive COVID-19 throat swab tests came back negative. She was discharged with her existing antidiabetic medications after her blood glucose level was close to normal. She had sufficient glucose control up to 1 month after discharge, and follow-up and monitoring were conducted there. Her continued monthly follow-up at the ambulatory clinic was advised.