A 31-year-old male presented to us with severe persistent headache, right-sided weakness, and difficulty in speaking for 2 weeks at the height of the COVID pandemic. His admission GCS was E3V4M6 with Grade 4 power in the right upper and lower limbs. MRI brain showed the left frontal intra-axial heterogeneously enhancing tumor with an area of hemorrhage. Significant mass effect, perilesional edema, and mid line shift were also noticed . With a working diagnosis of high-grade glioma, surgery was planned. During his preoperative surgical workup, he was found to be COVID-19-positive. However, as patient’s clinical and neurological condition was deteriorating, it was deemed to be an emergency and gross total excision was performed. Intraoperatively, the tumor was friable with both solid cystic components and areas of hemorrhage with thrombosed veins in between. Clear plane between the brain and tumor was absent. A frozen section was not sent as the patient was COVID-positive and surgery was performed in specially designated operating room for COVID patients. Postoperatively, his recovery was smooth. His weakness and speech improved gradually.
Histopathological examination revealed a spindle cell tumor with brisk mitosis and large areas of necrosis. Tumor cells were arranged in fascicles and had scant and ill-defined cytoplasm. High mitotic activity averaging 15–16/hpf was noted. IHC showed tumor cells staining for TLE-1 and focally for desmin. CD-99 was also diffuse and strongly positive. GFAP, STAT-6, SOX-10, EMA, S100, CD34, ATRX, CD31, NKX2.2, Caldesmon, and Bcl2 were negative in the tumor cells. IHC and histological findings were suggestive of primary monophasic intracranial synovial sarcoma. For confirmation, the block was sent for fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) testing of SYT-SSX2 translocation, but was consistently reported negative in two reputed laboratories. In view of the classical histological features, further testing with RT-PCR was done and was positive for both translocations SYT-SSX1 and SYT-SSX2, confirming the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma.
Whole body PET CT was done to exclude a metastasis confirming the diagnosis as a PrISS. Postoperative imaging revealed a small residual disease. He received radiotherapy for the same (60 Gray in 30 fractions). At 6 months of follow-up, he was noticed to have tumor progression in spite of radiotherapy. Patient died at 11 months after first surgery.