A 32-year-old pregnant woman at 34 weeks of gestation was admitted to the hospital due to polyhydramnios lasting for 11 days that was diagnosed via examination. The pregnant woman was healthy in the past and without any history of surgery or drug allergy. She had regular outpatient prenatal examinations and no obvious abnormality was found in the fetus during early and middle pregnancy. An ultrasound examination indicated an amniotic fluid index of 38–40 cm (normal range is about 8–18 cm) and a maximum amniotic fluid depth of 17 cm 11 days before admission.
There were no positive routine examination results after admission. The obstetric examination results were as follows: uterine height of 50 cm, abdominal circumference of 111 cm, fetal heart of 150 times/min, fetal position ROA, head exposure, no contractions, closed uterine orifice, and intact membranes. Relevant data from the ultrasonic examination were as follows: double parietal diameter of 8.2 cm, head circumference of 30.0 cm, abdominal circumference of 28.1 cm, femur length of 6.5 cm, amniotic fluid index of 40 cm, and cord blood flow systolic/diastolic blood pressure of 3.5. The size of the fetus was about 34 weeks, which was close to the actual gestational age. Fetal gastric vesicles were faintly visible at examination, with a range of about 1.4 cm × 1.1 cm × 0.7 cm and low tension. A slightly hypoechoic mass was observed in the pharynx of the fetus. It had a clear boundary and a size of about 5.4 cm × 4.4 cm × 3.4 cm . The amniotic fluid index was about 40–42 cm. At the same time, the maternal renal pelvis was slightly hydronephrotic and about 1.0 cm wide. Routine urine testing results suggested proteinuria (++). The patient also suffered from hydronephrosis due to hydramnios and the increase in intra-abdominal pressure. If the disease developed further, it may have caused maternal organ dysfunction and even abdominal space syndrome. A pelvic MRI was performed in order to further understand the nature and composition of the mass.
The MRI results demonstrated a slight hyperintensity in the fetal pharynx mass on a T2WI, which was about 4.5 cm × 3.7 cm × 3.3 cm in size. The mass capsule was complete , reaching the top of the nasopharynx and down to the epiglottis. The esophagus and the airway were obviously compressed. The amniotic fluid had a maximum depth of 17 cm. Combined with the above-mentioned relevant examination results, it was evident that polyhydramnios was related to the fetal pharyngeal mass. Dysphagia and dyspnea may have occurred after birth due to compression by the mass. Tracheotomy and mass resection would have to be performed immediately after birth. The prognosis of the fetus depended on the nature of the mass. After a detailed consultation with the pregnant woman and her family, she decided to give up the fetus. The clinician used a puncture needle to extract an appropriate amount of amniotic fluid to relieve the symptoms of intrauterine compression and injected 100 mg of rivanol. Two days later, the pregnant woman naturally gave birth to a female stillborn fetus weighing 2,000 g and with immature appearance. An oral examination showed a lump in the pharynx, which was solid and hard in texture. A pathological examination was carried out after the excision and revealed pharyngeal glial heterotopia . Immunohistochemical results were as follows: SOX-10 [+], S-100 [+], NSE [+], GFAP [+], SMA [−], Ki67 [+], mucous gland CK7 [+], CK20 [−], and special staining: AB [−], PAS [+] . The process of discovery and diagnosis of this case is shown in the figure .