We report the case of a 62-year-old female patient of European origin, who presented with slowly progressive camptocormia. Her progressive inability to walk upright started at the age of 52 years and was accompanied by generalized myalgias, which were independent of exertion. Her family history was negative for neurological and neuromuscular disorders and neurological examination at age 60 revealed isolated axial muscle weakness resulting in camptocormia . During 2 years follow-up, camptocormia slightly progressed and very mild facial weakness and mild weakness of pelvic-girdle muscles developed. There were no signs of movement disorder, myasthenia or cardiopulmonary involvement. Laboratory tests, including standard parameters, creatine kinase (70 U/l), thyroid-stimulating hormone, routine rheumatologic tests, protein electrophoresis and immunofixation of serum and urine were within normal limits. HIV-testing was negative. Needle electromyography of the right vastus lateralis muscle showed some muscle unit action potentials with increased amplitudes, but was otherwise normal. Whole body 3 T-MR-imaging revealed marked fatty atrophy of the lumbar and thoracic paraspinal muscles in T1-weighted sequences without signs of active myositis in STIR-sequences (data not shown). Apart from a moderate bilateral fatty atrophy of the antero-lateral part of the gluteus medius muscles and less marked of the gluteus minimus muscles, MR-imaging of shoulder- and pelvic-girdle- as well as arm- and leg-muscles was regular . Light and electron microscopy analysis of a diagnostic muscle biopsy from the left vastus lateralis muscle showed a myopathic pattern with nemaline rods in about 4% of the muscle fibers along with some lobulated fibers. In addition, type-I- and type-II-fiber-grouping consistent with a mild chronic neurogenic pattern was noted. Next-generation sequencing did not show any mutations in genes associated with hereditary nemaline myopathy (α-tropomyosin 3; Nebulin; α-Actin; β-tropomyosin; Troponin T1; KBTBD13; Cofilin-2; KLHL40; KLHL41; LMOD3; MYPN; Ryanodine receptor 1) or any other myopathy-associated genes.