A 72-year-old man presented with icterus and melena and was referred to our hospital. A biochemical blood test showed abnormal values for hepatobiliary enzymes (total bilirubin, 18.0 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 310 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 417 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1958 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 1141 IU/L) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 had increased to 168 U/mL. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed wall thickening of the lower bile duct with dilatation of intra- and extra-hepatic bile ducts and PVTT . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed a defect in the lower bile duct and dilatation of intra- and extra-hepatic bile ducts . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed and a biopsy of the lower bile duct demonstrated a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, gastroduodenoscopy demonstrated a type 3 tumor at the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum , and an endoscopic biopsy demonstrated a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Because abdominal CT scan did not demonstrate swollen lymph nodes compressing the bile duct and gastric cancer was not adjacent to the bile duct tumor, we diagnosed concomitant primary cancer in the stomach and the bile duct accompanied by PVTT.
Pancreatoduodenectomy with combined resection of the portal vein was planned. After laparotomy, liver or peritoneal metastasis was not found, and cancer cells were not detected in peritoneal cytology. Thus, we proceeded with the surgery as planned. Since gastric cancer was located at the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum based on gastroduodenoscopy, we secured a sufficient margin using a classical pancreatoduodenectomy procedure, where the stomach was divided at the border between right and left gastroepiploic arteries. Lymph nodes around the left gastric artery, celiac artery and splenic artery, and along the lesser curvature of the stomach were dissected in addition to standard lymphadenectomy through pancreatoduodenectomy. Combined resection of the portal vein to remove the PVTT was performed with clamping just upstream of the bifurcation and just downstream of the spleno-portal junction. A 4-cm right external iliac venous graft was excised and used to interpose the stumps of the portal vein. The resected specimen revealed a tumor measuring 50 × 50 mm in the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum and circumferential wall thickening in the lower bile duct measuring 35 mm in length . Pathological examination revealed infiltration of a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma from the mucosal layer to the subserosal layer of the stomach and showed advanced lymphatic and venous infiltration. In contrast, no cancer cells were found in the mucosa of the lower bile duct, while a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma demonstrating the same histological type as the gastric cancer had spread mainly to the fibromuscular layer . Immunohistochemical staining showed identical patterns between gastric cancer and the bile duct tumor: negativity for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and positivity for CK19 and 20 . Moreover, cancer cells infiltrated the portal vein, forming a tumor thrombus . Based on the above findings, the final diagnosis was extrahepatic bile duct metastasis from gastric cancer with PVTT (T3, N3a, M1 (extrahepatic bile duct), Stage IV, according to the 8th Edition of the TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours by Union for International Cancer Control). Gastric cancer showed HER2-negative (score 2 + in immunohistochemical staining and HER2/CEP17 < 2.0 in fluorescence in situ hybridization).
The postoperative course was uneventful without pancreatic fistula. However, abdominal CT scan on postoperative day 48 revealed multiple metastases in the whole liver. Chemotherapy using low-dose fluorouracil plus cisplatin instead of the recommended first line regimen for HER2-negative gastric cancer such as S-1 plus cisplatin and capecitabine plus oxaliplatin was commenced because we had to reduce the treatment intensity due to deterioration of general condition after the surgery, but unfortunately lung metastases emerged in addition to liver metastases, resulting in the death of the patient 12 months after the surgery.