A 68-year-old Japanese man, who was being treated for right Achilles tendinosis, felt pain in his Achilles tendon when walking and started to find plantar flexion of his ankle joint difficult. As his symptoms persisted, he visited us after 4 weeks. Pain and slight concavity were palpated in his Achilles tendon, and the Simmonds–Thompson squeezing test produced a positive result. A ruptured Achilles tendon was observed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Surgery and orthotic therapy were recommended, but he did not want to undergo these treatments. However, he started to find walking difficult and underwent surgery 6 months after suffering the injury. At this point, the Simmonds–Thompson squeezing test produced a positive result. A palpable deficit in his Achilles tendon was identified on examination, and he could not raise his heel. The Japanese Society of Surgery of the Foot (JSSF) ankle/hindfoot scale [, ] was 53 points. On MRI, it was found that parts of the Achilles tendon were intact, but the tendon was elongated .
During surgery, a 7-cm skin incision was made centering on the ruptured region of our patient’s tendon. The ruptured region had been cicatrized. When it was incised, it was found that the interior of his tendon had become hollow, and some yellow exudate was found within it . The interior of the ruptured region was curetted, and scar tissue around the ruptured region was plicated with 3-0 absorbable sutures . At this point, his ankle joint was able to undergo 20° plantar flexion; that is, his Achilles tendon exhibited favorable tension. Then, a percutaneous Achilles repair system (PARS; Arthrex Inc.) jig was inserted at a proximal site. The PARS needle guide pins were inserted in order, a FiberWire was passed through the jig, and two simple sutures and one locked suture were applied . Two skin incisions were made on the medial and lateral sides of his calcaneus in the region surrounding Achilles tendon attachment, SutureLasso™ (Arthrex Inc.) was passed through, and the proximal FiberWire suture was relayed. Two burr holes were prepared in his calcaneus, and fixation was achieved with 4.75-mm Bio-SwiveLock anchor (Arthrex Inc.). After surgery, his foot was put in a cast at 20° plantar flexion of his ankle joint.
The plaster was removed 1 week after surgery, and postoperative treatment was initiated with active dorsiflexion training. No orthosis was used after surgery; partial weight bearing was started after the acquisition of 0° dorsiflexion, and full weight bearing was initiated after 4 postoperative weeks. Our patient started jogging at 8 postoperative weeks and was permitted to play sports from 4 postoperative months. As of 16 postoperative months, no re-rupture had occurred, he was able to raise his bilateral heels and unilateral heel normally, and the JSSF ankle/hindfoot scale was 100 points. Continuity of the Achilles tendon was observed on MRI obtained at 6 postoperative months .