A 65-year-old obese lady (body mass index, BMI of 30.16) with hypertension, hypothyroidism, recent inferior wall myocardial infarction (thrombolysed at an outside centre), moderate left ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction of 38%) with hypokinetic infero-posterior wall on echocardiography, presented with unstable angina, diagnosed as a case of left main triple vessel disease on coronary angiography at another centre. There was no known COVID-19 infection in the family at that stage, and there was no significant travel history. She tested negative for COVID-19 reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at admission for elective, isolated OPCAB. Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient for the procedure and further management.
Isolated OPCAB was done via median sternotomy. The surgery was uneventful, wherein she received four grafts off-pump (skeletonised left internal mammary artery to the left anterior descending artery, reversed saphenous vein graft, RSVG to the ramus intermedius and distal left circumflex artery sequentially and another RSVG was done to the posterior descending artery). She was shifted to the intensive therapy unit (ITU) with stable haemodynamics, in sinus rhythm, under elective mechanical ventilation and minimal inotropic supports. She was extubated after 12 h and had good urine output, her drainage overnight was 240 mL, and her post-operative chest X-ray was acceptable. Her intercostal chest drains were removed on the post-operative day 2 with an overall drainage of 510 mL, and she was off inotropic supports. She was haemodynamically stable, in sinus rhythm, maintaining a room air saturation of 98 and was mobilized from day 3.
On day 4, she became febrile and her total leukocyte count (TLC) was raised to 15,100/cmm. Urine was sent for routine examination and it showed numerous pus cells per high power field. Urine culture and blood culture tests were sent. Intravenous antibiotics (Meropenem 1 g thrice daily and Teicoplanin 400 mg once daily) were started and continued for 5 days. She had two episodes of low-grade fever on day 5. Her urine culture revealed no growth after 48 h, and subsequently, her blood culture was also negative. On day 6, she continued having low-grade fever and became dyspneic. Her room air saturation was 93 despite moist oxygen inhalation at 6 L/min. Her chest X-ray showed a hazy left hemithorax. A picture collage depicting her chest X-rays, from the pre-operative stage onwards, is presented in Fig. .
A repeat COVID-19 RT-PCR test was positive. The hospital staff underwent the COVID-19 RT-PCR test and came out to be negative. Subsequent contact tracing was done, and the patient’s husband also tested positive for COVID-19. He was diagnosed as a case of mild disease and managed in home isolation. The institutional management protocol followed, for COVID-19, is shown in Table .
The lady was started on oral steroids (Dexamethasone 8 mg daily), zinc (50 mg orally, daily) and vitamin C (orally, 500 mg twice daily after meals) and shifted to the COVID-19 isolation ward under the hospital COVID-19 team of physicians. Her symptoms suggested moderate COVID-19 infection. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 111.9 mg/L, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) level was 78.1 pg/mL. Her computed tomography (CT) chest revealed features suggestive of acute COVID-19 pneumonitis. Medical management continued, and her CRP dropped to 57.9 mg/L, and TLC to 12,200/cmm. Her CRP level dropped further to 18.7 mg/L, and she maintained a room air saturation of 97 at discharge, after two weeks at the hospital. She was subsequently followed up by the cardiac surgical team and the COVID-19 team of physicians at one month, six months, one year, at eighteen months and has been haemodynamically stable, in sinus rhythm, fully ambulant, maintaining a room air saturation of 98. Her follow-up chest X-ray at six months is shown in Fig. .
The patient was happy with the way she was managed in hospital and at follow-up and the way her husband was managed during his home isolation period, through Tele-consultation with the hospital COVID-19 team of physicians.