A 56-year-old woman was admitted as an emergency, after a sudden loss of consciousness. The multislice CT (MSCT) of the brain performed in a local medical centre showed the presence of intracerebral hematoma 7x4cm in the temporobasal region, with the penetration of blood into the venticular system . On admission, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 8 with right-side hemiplegia and sensorimotor aphasia was observed. Urgent angiography revealed a duplicated left MCA, which merged in the area of the M2 segment and then immediately divided in the dorsal and ventral branch. In the dorsal branch of the MCA duplication, 6x4mm aneurysm was detected. In addition, in the area of the ICA bifurcation itself, between the dorsal branch of the DMCA and the origin of the left ACA, a 4x3mm aneurysm and another aneurysm on the distal part of the left ACA were detected . Emergency surgical intervention was performed by using the pterional approach to the left, with the opening of the Sylvian fissure. The intraoperative finding was in correlation with the angiographic finding. A clear MCA duplication was found, with both branches of the MCA and the initial segment of the ACA being of almost identical diameters . The branches of the DMCA merged at the level of the insular segment of the MCA and, immediately thereafter, the normal branching of the MCA in the dorsal-frontal and ventral-temporal branches was found. In the central part of the dorsal branch of the DMCA, the 6x4mm ruptured aneurysm was located. It had a perforating branch arising from the neck. Two smaller aneurysmal changes were observedone in the ICA bifurcation area between the initial segment of the ACA and the dorsal branch of the DMCA, and another one on the distal part of the ACA . All three aneurysms were clipped. At the very origin of the ICA bifurcation, in the area between the MCA duplications, a caruncule was observed with the perforating branches arising from it. This lesion was wrapped. The intracerebral hematoma was removed. A second angiogram was performed 7 days after surgery, the aneurysms were occluded but there was evidence of vasospasm . In the postoperative period, recovery of consciousness occurred with a preoperative neurological deficit in the form of hemiplegia and motor aphasia. After stabilization, the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation center. Examination performed after 6 months showed hemiparesis and aphasia.