A 30-year-old female was initially referred to our clinic with a four-day history of central blurry vision in the left eye.
Her past medical history was significant for dysautonomia treated with oral fludricortisone and propranolol, and HEELP syndrome that developed during her previous pregnancy. Past ocular history was only positive for mild myopia (− 1.50 D) in both eyes. She had been followed yearly by a general ophthalmologist prior to consultation. Family history was non-contributory.
Her exam revealed a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/25 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16 mm of Hg in both eyes. Her external ocular exam, anterior segment and vitreous were normal bilaterally. Retinal exam in the right eye was unremarkable, and in the left eye an optic nerve pit was noted with the presence of intraretinal fluid temporal to the disc, sparing the fovea. Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography (SD-OCT) showed the right eye with a normal foveal contour and the left eye with a blunted foveal contour, inner layer hyperreflectivity nasal to the fovea, and large cystoid spaces centrally. Fluorescein Angiography (FA) revealed a normal vasculature with good fill and outflow in the right eye and the left eye with hyperfluorescent spots temporal to the optic nerve. Since her visual acuity was good and appeared stable on review of old records and anatomically there was no macular detachment, the decision was made to monitor.
Two years later, after remaining stable during follow-up, the patient presented to the clinic with a 3-day history of decreased vision. Interval history was significant for pregnancy of 10-weeks gestation. On examination BCVA was 20/25 and 20/60 in the right and left eye respectively, and IOP of 16 mmHg in both eyes. Right eye examination was still unremarkable. Left eye retinal exam disclosed subretinal and intraretinal fluid from the optic nerve pit extending to the fovea. SD-OCT confirmed the presence of sub-foveal, intraretinal (IR) and subretinal (SR) fluid. Due to pregnancy, close observation was recommended. The patient was followed-up weekly for the following three weeks and IR and SR fluid continued to worsen. Since she was losing vision, treatment was recommended and laser photocoagulation was deemed to be the least stressful option. Thermal laser photocoagulation at the temporal edge of the pit was performed in an attempt to stop the edema from progressing. One-month after laser treatment, the edema continued to progress and concurrently vitreomacular traction was noted on SD-OCT . At this point, the patient was only 19 weeks pregnant; after discussion with her OB-GYN and maternal fetal medicine specialist, pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) with internal limiting membrane (ILM) peel was planned under local anesthesia. Surgery was uneventful and there was some anatomic improvement, but 3-weeks after surgery a full-thickness macular hole (FTMH) developed. As such, at 24-weeks gestation vitrectomy was repeated by extending ILM peel temporally and out of arcades in an attempt to further relieve tangential traction and give more pliability to allow for macular hole edge apposition. Nine-months after surgery, macular hole closure was achieved and the patient continued to improve with BCVA at last follow-up of 20/20 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye .