A 6-year-10-month-old boy was referred to the pediatric endocrinology department with short stature and developmental delay. This boy was the first child of non-consanguineous parents. He was born at full term. His birth length was 48 cm (− 1.33 s.d.) and birth weight was 2.65 kg (− 1.80 s.d.). His mother noted he had poor growth after the age of 1, but didn’t know the exact growth velocity. His developmental milestones were delayed. He first walked by himself and spoke at 4 years of age. He also suffered from constipation. At 6 years, he started primary school, but struggled to socially adapt to his peer group. He was unable to express phrases and communicate with other children of his age. His father is 147 cm (− 4.01 s.d.) tall, with unusual facial features such as a round face, broad nasal bridge, short upturned nose and arched eyebrows. He has mild intellectual disability. Paternal grandparents’ heights are 160 cm and 150 cm, both are of normal intelligence. The patient’s mother is 141 cm (− 3.63 s.d.) tall, with facial features such as sparse scalp hair and a pear-shaped nose. She is of normal intelligence. However, maternal grandparents’ details are unknown due to adoption.
At the time of presentation at 6 years 10 months, his height was 94.5 cm (− 5.8 s.d.), his weight was 12.8 kg (− 4.3 s.d.), and his head circumference was 50.1 cm (− 1.0 s.d.). Physical examination showed facial dysmorphic features such as sparse scalp hair, a pear-shaped nose, long flat philtrum, thin upper vermillion border and short stature . Standard blood and urine screening tests were normal, and a growth hormone (GH) provocation test with arginine/levodopa showed appropriate GH peaks. No disturbances of calcium/phosphate metabolism were found. The bone age, performed according to the atlas of Greulich and Pyle was significantly delayed (bone age 2 years at 6 years and 10 months chronological age). Echocardiography was normal. MRI of the brain and pituitary region revealed a reduced size anterior pituitary gland. On the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (Chinese Revision) (WISC-RC) he was found to perform at the level of severe intellectual disability (Intelligent Quotient < 40).
His parents have given informed consent for his pictures and medical data to be published.
Peripheral blood samples were collected from the patient and his parents after obtaining written informed consent. Single WES was done on this patient’s blood, then Sanger sequencing was performed on his parents’ blood samples to verify the variants. The genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples by using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 1.5 μg genomic DNA was fragmented into an average size of 300 bp, then the fragmented genomic DNA was used for preparation of sequencing libraries. 8 bp barcoded sequencing adaptors were then ligated with DNA fragments before final hybridization with xGen® Exome Research Panel v1.0 focused exon probes (IDT, USA). All the exons were sequenced by Illumina HiSeq X-10 platform. Purified sequencing libraries were pooled together and massively parallel sequenced by Illumina HiSeq X platform to produce a sequencing yield of 10.0 Gb raw data. The reads were mapped to the reference human genome using NextGene software (SoftGenetics LLC, State College, PA). All the variants were compared with databases such as 1000 Genomes Project, the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) and dbSNP. The variants with a minor allele frequency greater than 0.01 in the control databases were excluded. Pathogenic predication analysis was carried out on platforms of SIFT, Polyphen-2 and mutation taster. All the variants were studied to confirm if they were located in the conserved gene region and if the variants affected the protein function or structure. Following these filtering steps, potential variants were considered to cause disease and were subsequently validated by Sanger sequencing. The mean read depth of this patient against RefSeq protein-coding regions was 93.24 reads with 97.71% being covered by ⩾20 reads, and 93.70% covered by ⩾30 reads.
We identified a CSNK2A1 variant (NM_177559: c.593 A > G, p.K198R) and a TRPS1 variant (NM_014112:c.2174delA, p.N725fs), which were vertically transmitted from his father and mother, respectively . The variant c.593 A > G(p.K198R, rs 869,312,840) on CSNK2A1 gene has previously been reported in the medical literature as ‘pathogenic’ on at least six previous occasions (PS4-Strong) [–]. This variant is in the critical protein domain (PM1) and it is extremely rare in the general population (PM2). The patient’s phenotype is consistent and specific for Okur–Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome (PP4). According to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/The Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) variant interpretation guidelines , this variant can be classified as pathogenic. The variant c.2174delA(p.N725fs) on TRPS1 was a novel variant, which causes a frame shift. This variant affects the amino acid residue number 725 and introduces a premature stop codon after 39 residues in the gene sequence. This is a loss of function variant (PVS1), which is absent in general population (PM2). The patient’s and his mother’s phenotypes are highly specific for TRPS I (PP4). This can be classified as pathogenic based on ACMG/AMP guidelines .