A 45-year-old woman presented to pulmonary clinic for evaluation of worsening dyspnea, cough, and hypoxemia. Her medical history was significant for limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (lcSSc), pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), and interstitial lung disease (ILD) . She had no history of atopy or food allergies and used an albuterol inhaler as needed. PAH had been diagnosed seven years prior to presentation when she had a reported pulmonary artery (PA) pressure of 80/39 mmHg, mean PA pressure of 56 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 12 mmHg, and cardiac output by thermodilution of 3.17 L/min. Her pulmonary function tests (PFTs) at that time showed a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 3.06 L (75% predicted) and a diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 19.61 mL/min/mm Hg (66% predicted). Per her medical records and history, the patient had been treated with dual therapy (tadalafil and macitentan) for PAH and was subsequently able to wean from oxygen supplementation that she had previously required, indicating a therapeutic response. Her ILD was considered mild, and she did not require supplemental oxygen at rest or with exertion. She was treated with mycophenolate mofetil for a year after her initial diagnosis, but the patient discontinued this medication about 6 years prior to presentation due to fear of reactivating remote Lyme infection after she had read about chronic Lyme disease on the internet. The patient had been stable on her regimen of tadalafil and macitentan until 3 months prior to presentation when she began to experience rapidly progressive dyspnea and new onset hypoxemia. Right heart catheterization (RHC) revealed that her PAH had worsened with a mean PA pressure of 72 mmHg and a new drop in cardiac index (1.7 L/min/m2), requiring initiation of subcutaneous treprostinil.
Additional history revealed she had taken oral helminth therapy as an alternative treatment for lcSSc. She ingested Necator americanus larvae on 3 separate occasions, 12 weeks apart, with an increasing number of helminths with each dose (3, 5, and 15 larvae). She experienced abdominal pain and diarrhea after the first ingestion. Her respiratory symptoms started 6 weeks after the third and largest dose of helminths.
In the clinic, patient appeared to be in mild respiratory distress with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and she required 6–8 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannula to maintain saturations above 90%. She was tachycardic (104 beats/min) with a loud second heart sound, jugular venous distension, and severe lower extremity pitting edema up to her thighs. Auscultation of the chest revealed bibasilar rales. Dermatologic exam was notable for scattered telangiectasias over her face, arms, and hands.
Complete blood count showed leukocytosis (13.5 × 103/uL) with 10% eosinophils (absolute count of 0.98 × 103 cells/uL). Of note, prior blood counts from 2017 had shown normal eosinophil counts (291 × 103 cells/uL). Basic metabolic profile was significant for an elevated creatinine (1.31 mg/dL) but was otherwise normal. Serum brain natriuretic peptide level was elevated at 578 ng/L. IgE was also elevated at 1372.9 IU/mL, and IgG antibodies to Strongyloides were detected. Multiple stool analyses were negative for ova and parasites. PFTs at that time revealed an FVC of 2.03 L (49% predicted), a decline of over 1.0 L since her prior testing; complete testing was not possible due to her respiratory symptoms.
High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed worsened subpleural reticulations, traction bronchiectasis, and diffuse ground glass opacities suggesting chronic pulmonary fibrosis in a pattern consistent with non-specific interstitial pneumonia. The patient’s CT scan revealed progressive ILD and showed new diffuse ground glass opacities compared imaging from four years prior . There were also signs of decompensated right heart failure, including markedly enlarged dilated right heart chambers, pericardial effusion, and flattening of the interventricular septum . Though some of the ground glass opacities could have been consistent with pulmonary edema or parenchymal inflammation, additional areas had tract-like abnormalities leading to pleural edge, atypical for either of those entities and not conforming to normal pulmonary vasculature .
Immediately after her disclosure of the ingestion of parasites, the patient was treated with albendazole and corticosteroids for presumed Löffler’s syndrome with transient improvement in her dyspnea and hypoxemia. However, due to progressive hypoxemia and signs of decompensated right heart failure on her examination at her outpatient visit, she was admitted to the hospital.
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed preserved left ventricular function but severely dilated right sided chambers, with a right ventricular systolic pressure estimated at 90 mmHg. Repeat RHC revealed persistently elevated mean PA pressure of 73 mmHg, worsened PCWP of 17 mmHg, and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance of 11.5 Wood units. Due to rapid decompensation and severity of hypoxemia, bronchoscopy was not able to be performed.
Respiratory failure progressed, with the development of refractory hypoxemia and right heart failure that did not respond to aggressive medical therapy in the intensive care unit, including intravenous diuresis and treprostinil as well as inhaled epoprostenol. She was emergently evaluated for lung transplantation but was not offered listing due to her comorbidities, which included severe esophageal dysmotility and renal dysfunction. Her respiratory status continued to deteriorate despite aggressive medical intervetion, and the patient decided to transition to comfort-focused care. She passed away shortly thereafter, and post-mortem examination was declined by her family.