A 33-year-old male patient started experiencing discomfort in the bilateral groin without any history of trauma and visited our outpatient clinic 2 weeks after the onset. He had begun a routine of jogging 2 km/week, a month previously. A medical interview revealed that he had become socially withdrawn and had not gone out during the day for 3 years, and he jogged after dusk only. Thus, he had not received sunlight exposure for 3 years. We considered that he had no obvious risk factors associated with bone fragility, such as type II diabetes, chronic kidney disease, rheumatoid arthritis, alcohol consumption, or corticosteroid, anticoagulant, or antipsychotic medication use , based on the results of laboratory tests or medical interview. His body mass index was 18.2 kg/m2 (normal range: 18.5–25.0 kg/m2) . Bone mineral density measured using dual X-ray absorptiometry in the lumbar spine and in the left femoral neck were 0.639 g/cm2 (T score: − 3.4 standard deviation [SD]) and 0.512 g/cm2 (T score: − 2.8 SD), respectively, which were considered indicative of severe osteoporosis. The patient could walk, but with discomfort, and a non-antalgic gait was observed. The ranges of motion of both hips were 120° flexion, 0° extension, 30° abduction, 20° adduction, 30° external rotation, and 30° internal rotation, which were within the normal ranges.
The results of laboratory tests that were conducted during his first visit to our hospital are summarized in Table . An examination of the patient’s bone metabolism revealed decreased 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] level (19 ng/mL) [–] and an elevated P1NP level (84.8 ng/mL), but calcium and phosphorus levels were within the normal ranges. The patient’s rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody were also within the normal ranges. Regarding nutrition status, the total protein (7.2 g/dL) and albumin (4.4 g/dL) levels were also within the normal ranges. Although his serum squamous cell carcinoma level (3.0 ng/mL) was slightly elevated, no abnormal finding was observed in the chest computed tomography (CT) scan.
An initial radiograph showed bilateral femoral neck fractures (right: Garden II, non-displaced fracture; left: Garden III, displaced fracture) . Regarding the anatomy, developmental dysplasia was not observed in either hip, but the cross-over sign, which is a radiological sign of acetabular retroversion associated with femoroacetabular impingement, was observed in the left hip . On magnetic resonance images, bone marrow edema was observed at the bilateral femoral neck and acetabulum . A coronal T2 fat-saturated image revealed the fracture line in the bilateral femoral neck and in the right subchondral region of the acetabulum .
The patient was diagnosed with simultaneous non-traumatic bilateral femoral neck fractures. Although it was long past the appropriate timing for osteosynthesis (i.e., within 24 h after the onset) , bilateral osteosynthesis using the multiple pinning method was performed simultaneously because the patient was young. Postoperatively, walking with full weight bearing and daily subcutaneous injections of teriparatide acetate (20 μg/day) were started soon after the surgery. Oral alfacalcidol (1.0 μg/day) was administered alongside according to safety information . Bone union of the bilateral femoral neck and non-occurrence of osteonecrosis of the femoral heads were confirmed via radiography and magnetic resonance imaging 8 months post-surgery, and the bone marrow edema at the acetabulum disappeared . The patient’s symptoms also disappeared.