A 68 years old female, with a history of smoking habit, was diagnosed with high-grade muscle invasive urothelial bladder carcinoma after undergoing transurethral bladder resection for gross hematuria. The tumor involved the left lateral wall and the bladder neck. A positron emission tomography showed enlarged iliac lymph nodes and a neoadjuvant chemotherapy based on platinum (M-VAC: methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin) was prescribed. No pelvic irradiation was necessary.
A robotic radical cystectomy, hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy, extended pelvic lymphadenectomy and urethrectomy with heterotopic Bricker urinary diversion was performed. Due to the locally advanced disease prior to chemotherapy a broad resection was performed including a complete urethrectomy.
The postoperative recovery was marked by a delayed vestibule healing and an inguinal hematoma that required surgical drainage. The pathologic examination retrieved a high-grade muscle-invasive bladder urothelial carcinoma, and a final TNM score of pT2 No M0 with negative surgical margins.
After one month of the surgery, an anterior perineal bulge appeared during efforts, increasing its volume during the following months. The patient had severe discomfort, despite not complaining of pain or digestive symptoms.
Upon physical examination, an anterior perineal hernia was observed between the ischiopubic rami, at the level of the vestibulum with labia majora bulging but without vaginal prolapse ( A and B and ). The content of the hernia was reducible and the skin covering the hernia had a diminished thickness.
A magnetic resonance scan showed a small bowel content at the level of the perineal hernia, without vaginal prolapse . No radiologic signs of cancer recurrence were observed.
A multidisciplinary meeting was held and, based on the patient's discomfort, possible complications, and after patient's consent, surgery was scheduled.
Under general anesthesia, with the patient placed in a lithotomy position with Allen stirrups, broad-spectrum antibiotic provided, an infiltration of the perineal skin with a solution of lidocaine and 1% adrenaline was performed. Sub - clitoridian vestibular and lower portion of the anterior vaginal wall incision. Dissection of the voluminous enterocele and opening of the peritoneum sac .
Dissection was extended behind the fat tissue of the labia majora and to the level of the ilio-pubic rami, where two polypropylene 2/0 sutures were placed bilaterally on the inferior pubic ligaments. The peritoneum was closed with a purse-string polydioxanone 1 suture, and reinforcement of 2/0 poliglecaprone interrupted sutures. The urogenital diaphragm and bulbo-spongiosus muscles were then sutured in the midline using 2/0 poliglecaprone interrupted sutures to cover the peritoneum sac.
A transobturator light weight polypropylene mesh (Surgimesh®, Aspide Medical Laboratoire, La Talaudière, France) was placed, fixed to the iliopubic rami with the 2/0 polypropylene sutures and with one arm placed through the transobturator foramen on each side (C and D). Finally, the mesh was attached to the anterior vaginal wall with polypropylene 2/0 interrupted sutures. This type of mesh and fixation was chosen since the vaginal vault was not accessible through this surgical approach. The mesh was partially covered medially by labia majora fat tissue using absorbable sutures. Finally, the skin and vestibular mucosa were closed with a 3/0 poliglecaprone running suture .
After a follow-up of 6 months, there was no evidence of recurrent hernia and no scar defect .