A 13-year-old male castrated domestic shorthair cat was referred to our clinic for a
2-month history of hindlimb lameness. In addition to progressive lameness, clinical signs
included the cat avoiding jumping and withdrawing to rest most of the day. The owner did not
witness any trauma prior to the onset of lameness; however, as the cat was allowed to go
outdoors as it pleased, a traumatic event could not be excluded. The orthopaedic examination
revealed a decreased passive range of motion of the right hindlimb and moderate pain upon
palpation of the stifle joint. Initial radiographs of the right stifle joint revealed a solid bony
mass-like lesion and additional smaller, partially ill-defined mineralisations superimposed
on the cranial aspect of the stifle joint. There were mild periosteal new bone formations
mainly at the distal aspect of the patella, and no signs consistent with an aggressive bone
lesion. Thoracic radiographs and blood work were reviewed and judged to be within normal
limits.
CT scans (Somatom Emotion; Siemens) of both hindlimbs were performed pre- and postcontrast
(Xenetix; Guerbet [ and
]). The images revealed a large,
well-delineated mineralised mass-like lesion with a cauliflower multilobulated shape,
positioned within the cranial aspect of the right stifle joint at the level of the patellar
fat pad with secondary cranial and proximal displacement of the patella. Additionally, the
right stifle joint was moderately distended with fluid-attenuating material and the joint
capsule was mild-to-moderately thickened. Furthermore, the scan revealed additional
multifocal periosteal osteophyte and enthesophyte formations surrounding the stifle joint.
The left stifle joint was unremarkable.
Surgical resection was elected by the owner and performed under general anaesthesia. The
cat was administered midazolam (0.2 mg/kg [5 mg/ml] IV) and methadone (0.1 mg/kg [10 mg/ml]
IV) for premedication, propofol (3 mg/kg [10 mg/ml] IV) for induction and isoflurane in
oxygen for maintenance. To access the whole stifle joint, an osteotomy of the tibial
tuberosity was performed in addition to a medial parapatellar arthrotomy. The patella,
embedded in the patellar tendon, was also lifted and displaced laterally. The mass was
located inside the joint capsule and without apparent adhesions to the joint capsule or
cartilage. After in toto resection of the mass (approximately 2 × 3 × 2 cm; ,), the tibial tuberosity was re-fixed with 2 × 0.8 mm
Kirschner wires (Aesculap; B Braun) and tension band fixation (orthopaedic wire).
Intraoperatively, there were no macroscopic or biomechanical changes to the menisci,
cruciate ligaments or the patellar mechanism. The joint capsule was closed using absorbable
suture (3-0 Polydioxanone [MonoPlus; B Braun]) and the remaining layers were closed
routinely.
Histopathological findings revealed a homogeneous appearance of bony trabeculae with embedded osteocytes
surrounded by uniform osteoblasts and few osteoclasts, which were connected by fibrocytes.
This benign new bone formation was diagnosed as an osteoma.
At 8 weeks postoperatively, the patient was presented for a follow-up examination and
radiographs were taken. The orthopaedic examination showed physiological gait, physiological
range of motion of the stifle joint and absence of pain during palpation. The owner
described the cat’s full recovery to normal activity without limitations in movement.
Radiographs confirmed
the absence of the osteoma. The implants within the tibia showed no signs of failure. The
few residual periarticular periosteal osteophyte and enthesophyte bone formations and the
previously described intra-articular mineralisations that were left in the stifle joint were
unchanged from the preoperative imaging.