A 28 year-old male was admitted to the trauma Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of ′12 de Octubre′ Hospital after having suffered a traffic accident. He had been run over by a car suffering a severe head trauma, and deteriorated to Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 3 and bilateral reactive mydriasis. He was transferred to the hospital hemodynamically stable, and presented a GCS of 3 and bilateral reactive mydriasis. A head Computed Tomography (CT) was performed, showing a left frontotemporal subdural hematoma 11 mm width, collapsed quadrigeminal cistern and a 3 mm midline shift. A left fronto-parieto-temporal craniotomy was performed and a subdural hematoma was evacuated. Due to intraoperative brain swelling, the bone flap was not replaced. A control CT scan showed improvement of visualization of basal cisterns and resolution of the midline shift. He was treated under the Brain Trauma Foundation guidelines,
showing good intracranial pressure (ICP) control. His condition gradually improved, and 25 days after trauma the patient was tracheostomized, partially recovering from a right hemiparesis and presented a GCS of 11. During the following days, several CT scans were performed, showing a growing liquid collection under the skin flap. The patient was scheduled for cranioplasty, but before the operation could be performed, the patient′s condition deteriorated to a GCS of 4 (M2). Dysautonomic changes in patient′s vital signs occurred, along with bilateral decerebration posture and bilateral reactive mydriasis. A new CT scan was obtained, showing a greater subdural hygroma, with a left to right midline shift of 13 mm. A subdural catheter was placed percutaneously to evacuate this collection. This catheter was linked to a pressure gauge, which showed pressures between 0 and 5 mmHg at all moments. Subdural collection biochemistry analysis showed high levels of protein (1.96 g/L), without decreased glucose. Patient condition improved, and draining was stopped, but patient condition started to deteriorate again, therefore it was decided to keep it draining until cranioplasty was eventually performed. During surgery, a depressed brain parenchyma was found with neomembranes with thick vessels. Those membranes were removed but brain did not recover to its normal volume. On the assumption that the patient could present another episode of deterioration, a closed subdural drainage was kept in place for 5 days. It didn΄t have to be open at any time. The cranioplasty completely resolved the subdural hygroma, and the patient΄s condition improved drastically, so that he could be discharged with GCS 14 and very mild right hemiparesis. At 6 months follow up the patient had recovered and could independently carry out his basic daily activities. Control Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) showed only subcortical white matter lesions related to diffuse axonal injury, and no recurrence of the hygroma.