A fifty-two-year-old male presented with a four-year history of intermittent upper epigastric discomfort and projectile vomiting following meals. Past medical and surgical histories were only significant for a laparoscopic cholecystectomy a year prior which failed to relieve his symptoms. The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan which demonstrated an oval-shaped filling defect in the third portion of the duodenum without evidence of metastatic disease . Octreotide scan revealed an increased activity in the target area. Serotonin and chromogranin assays, however, showed normal values. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and endoscopic ultrasonography using a radial probe discovered a 22 × 16 × 35 mm elongated smooth-edged heterogenous submucosal lesion extending down to the muscularis propria without evidence of nodal enlargement or invasion of the surrounding structures. Endoscopic fine needle aspiration biopsy initially suggested the diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) based on cells positivity for synaptophysin , neuron specific enolase , and chromogranin using immunoperoxidase staining. Differential diagnosis includes carcinoid tumor, paraganglioma, and adenocarcinoma of either the pancreatic head or the duodenum.
Due to position, size, and abutment of the tumor into the muscularis propria, an endoscopic resection was not feasible. An exploratory laparotomy was performed in which a long-stalked tumor was successfully excised through a 4-cm longitudinal duodenotomy. No evidence of other intraabdominal pathology was seen.
The duodenotomy was primarily repaired followed by placement of a T-tube duodenostomy and a postpyloric nasogastric tube for duodenal decompression. Early in the postoperative period, the patient made a progressive recovery without events. The nasogastric tube was removed on postoperative day 5. Unfortunately, a pulmonary embolism occurred on POD 10 despite properly administered prophylactic anticoagulation. The final pathology report showed a completely excised gangliocytic paraganglioma with negative nodes.