We present a 70 year old male with a medical history of hepatitis B cirrhosis with a liver transplant 11 years prior to presentation, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 4/A3 who presented to our hospital for evaluation of progressive anorexia and nausea. CKD was thought to be secondary to chronic calcineurin inhibitor toxicity as well as hypertensive nephropathy. Of note, he was admitted six months prior for acute cellular allograft rejection and chronic ductopenic rejection. At that time, he received one dose of 1 g intravenous methylprednisolone with a corticosteroid taper and was started on mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 1000 mg twice a day in addition to continuing maintenance tacrolimus.
On the day of initial presentation, vital signs were within normal limits and examination revealed a pale, thin appearing man. Cardiovascular and pulmonary examinations were normal, and the remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. Laboratory values revealed a creatinine of 2.4 mg/dL near his prior baseline and corrected calcium of 12.0 mg/dL. The patient’s liver function tests revealed: alanine aminotransferase 48 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 57 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 69 U/L total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL and direct bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL respectively. The mild hypercalcemia was attributed to calcium and vitamin D supplements which were discontinued. After receiving intravenous fluids, the patient was discharged with a plan for close outpatient follow up.
He presented again seven days later with persistent failure to thrive. Physical exam was similar to prior examination. Laboratory values now revealed a corrected calcium of 14.6 mg/dL, ionized calcium of 1.7 mmol/L, and a creatinine of 2.3 mg/dL. He again received intravenous fluids. Further evaluation showed an intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) level of less than 4 pg/mL (reference range: 10–65 pg/mL), PTH-related peptide less than 2.0 pmol/L (reference range less than 2.0 pmol/L), calcidiol (25-hydroxy vitamin D) level of 33.0 ng/mL (reference range 30–100 ng/mL), and calcitriol (1, 25-dihydroxy vitamin D) level of 72.4 pg/mL (reference range: 15–75 pg/mL). The angiotensin-converting enzyme level was 33.0 U/L (reference range: 14–82 U/L). Of note, serum protein electrophoresis showed no monoclonal protein. Serum free kappa and lambda light chains were minimally elevated at 51.0 mg/L (reference range: 3.3–19.4 mg/L) and 27.3 mg/dL (reference range: 5.6–26.3 mg/L), respectively. The day after presentation, the patient developed dyspnea and hypoxia, requiring bilevel positive airway pressure therapy. Chest x-ray showed bilateral airspace opacities, and intravenous fluids were held given concern for possible pulmonary congestion. Serum calcium remained persistently elevated despite treatment with loop diuretics, multiple doses of subcutaneous calcitonin, and 30 mg of pamidronate.
On day five after presentation, the patient developed worsening azotemia and now had altered mental status thought to be related to uremic encephalopathy and hypercalcemia. Dialysis was initiated for hypervolemia and uremic encephalopathy. Within a few minutes, the patient developed acute respiratory failure and hemodynamic instability requiring intubation and vasopressor support. Computed tomography of the chest revealed pneumomediastinum and ground glass opacities . Empiric therapy for PJP with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and steroids was initiated upon transfer to the intensive care unit. Bronchoalveolar lavage confirmed a diagnosis of Pneumocystis jirovecii. Continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated. He remained on high dose vasopressors without clinical improvement and intensive care was withdrawn at the family’s request.