A 15-year-old Pakistani girl reported to our clinic with complaints of generalized rash, painful swollen small joints, and cyanosis since 2 years of age. She also complained of low grade fever, breathlessness, and fatigue. Examination revealed an emaciated, anemic, centrally cyanosed girl with weight and height below 5th percentile. Oxygen saturation was 84% and respiratory rate 24/min. Grade IV clubbing was present. Generalized, erythematous, maculopapular rash was present, mostly on the trunk. Tender, swollen joints were also found with limited range of movement. Abdominal exam showed gross hepatosplenomegaly and positive shifting dullness. Chest and precordium exams were normal. Initial assessment of autoimmune disease, cyanotic heart disease, systemic vasculitis, and failure to thrive was made.
Initial laboratory workup showed hemoglobin (Hb): 11.3 g/dl, hematocrit (HCT): 35.7%, white blood cells (WBC): 6.1 × 109 (PMN: 57.4%, L: 34.5%), Platelets: 306 × 109; all within the normal range. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was raised (35 mm in first hour), along with alanine transaminase (ALT), which was 164 IU/l, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), which was 148 IU/l, and alkaline phosphatase (AP), which was 553 IU/l. Viral markers for hepatitis (B and C) were non-reactive. Autoimmune profile [anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-DNA, Anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), rheumatoid factor (RF), cytoplasmic anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), and perinuclear anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA)] was negative. Chest x-ray was normal. Ultrasound of abdomen showed an enlarged spleen (13 cm) and an enlarged liver with normal echotexture. Liver biopsy revealed moderate portal lobular inflammation (Grade 3) and peri-portal fibrosis (Stage 2). Skin biopsy revealed histiocytic reaction with multinucleated giant cells with no evidence of telangiectasia or vasculitis, thus suggesting chronic granulomatous disease. Further investigations were done on the lines of sarcoidosis. Expectedly, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was raised with a value of 100 U/l (normal: <52 U/l); however, serum calcium was normal at 8.9 mg/dl (normal: <10.5 mg/dl). The eye exam did not reveal any abnormality.
Echocardiography was done to investigate cyanosis and breathlessness. Conventional echocardiography ruled out any structural lesions of the heart but bubble echocardiography showed contrast bubbles in left atrium after three cardiac cycles, suggestive of pulmonary AV malformation . CT angiogram was thus done and revealed three soft tissue density nodules. These were in the right upper lobe, right lower lobe, and a smaller one in the left lower lobe. Vessels were seen to be arising from the nodules. No signs of infection of interstitial lung disease were seen . All these findings were complementing pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (PAVM).
Final assessment of sarcoidosis with PAVM was made. She was started on oral steroids and monitored closely. ACE and ALT levels declined significantly over the next few weeks to 53 (normal: <52) and 65 (normal: <35), respectively. Hepatosplenomegaly began to regress. Her cyanosis and exertional dyspnea improved gradually too. It was decided to not carry out pulmonary angio-embolization as she had multiple AV malformations and it was less likely to benefit her. On a 3-year follow-up, she was clinically stable with no active symptoms and her laboratory parameters were back to normal.