An 87-year-old Saudi male on medication for non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, frequent premature ventricular contractions, renal impairment, hypertension, and dyslipidemia, presented to the emergency department with acute diffuse abdominal pain, abdominal distension, constipation and vomiting of two days duration, with no history of fever, abdominal surgery or trauma. Medications received by the patient for the last four years included, mainly, daily acetyl salicylic acid 81 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, irbesartan 300 mg and hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg. Abdominal examination revealed stable vital signs along with positive findings of abdominal distension and mild epigastric tenderness. Laboratory investigations showed leucocytosis (16.6 k/μl with 89% segmented cells), mild normocytic normochromic anemia (Hgb 11.5 g/dl, MCV 93.7 fl, MCH 31.7 pg), elevated serum lipase (1123 U/L), amylase (269 U/L), and creatinine (1.4 mg/dl), and low potassium (3.1 mEq/L). Plain abdominal X-ray showed a markedly dilated stomach . The patient was admitted to the hospital with an impression of gastric outlet obstruction. NGT was inserted & aspiration yielded a large amount of greenish fluid. The patient was then immediately put on empiric antibiotic coverage for 5 days with 2 doses of IV levofloxacin and 3 doses of IV metronidazole administered. Contrast CT-scan, performed to rule out an organic cause for the gastric outlet obstruction, showed a significantly distended stomach with thickened wall and abnormal configuration, and a single air-fluid level . Two gastroscopies were then performed, 1 week apart, and revealed a deformed stomach with a hard mass infiltrating the greater curvature in the fundic area, covered by necrotic greenish brown material, along with absent peristaltic movement and no apparent organic obstruction to the gastric outlet . Based on the radiologic and gastroscopic findings, a non-infectious etiology was suspected, possibly adenocarcinoma or lymphoma. Biopsies obtained from the edge and the centre of the fundic mass during both gastroscopies were sent for pathological examination. Histologic examination showed an actively inflamed, focally ulcerated, atrophic fundic mucosa with variable, focal eosinophilic infiltration, edema, and variably dilated foveolae with focal regenerative epithelial atypia . There were also fragments of a fibrinopurulent exudate mixed with brownish, iron negative pigment (Perl’s stain) and abundant PAS, Grocott’s, and Gram positive rod-like and filamentous bacteria, morphologically consistent with Actinomyces . The organisms were overlooked in the first biopsy. The second biopsy was performed because a diagnosis of malignancy was still in suspicion, despite the negative result of the first biopsy. A revisit to the first biopsy confirmed negativity for malignancy but revealed the presence of organisms identical to those noted in the second biopsy. Culturing of gastric contents following the second gastroscopy, yielded only Streptococcus viridans with no Actinomyces identified. However, anaerobic culture was not specifically ordered by the clinician. Consequently Actinomyces, known to be strictly anaerobic, were not detected. Despite the negative culture, the typical morphology of the organisms in tissue sections confirmed by positive Grocott, PAS and Gram staining was considerd sufficient for diagnosis with no necessity for confirmation by repeat culturing under anaerobic conditions.
The patient was then managed conservatively in the hospital. A third gastroscopic biopsy two weeks later revealed chronic atrophic gastritis with no Actinomyces detected, and the patient appeared in a good health status. A plan was set up to start him on the appropriate antibiotic therapy for actinomycosis with follow up gastroscopy after one month. However, the patient chose to continue treatment somewhere else. So he was discharged on his request and never showed up again in our institution.