The patient, a 42-year-old male, came to the hospital in December 2019 because of "fluttering black dots and decreased vision in his left eye for 3 months". He was diagnosed as having "floaters" at a community hospital. His symptoms worsened despite 2 months of oral medication (lecithin-bound iodine < Jolethin > , 1.5 mg orally 3 times/day), and he was referred to our hospital. His general condition was normal, and his past medical history was unremarkable. He denied a history of ocular trauma or previous surgery. The physical examination results were as follows: The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 1/20 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 18 and 14 mmHg in the OD and OS, respectively. The anterior and posterior segments of the right eye were normal. The cornea and lens of the left eye were clear, and there was no sign of a penetrating injury wound. A small patch of pigmentation was noted in the temporal sclera .Vitreous hemorrhage + + and pigment + . Temporal retinal detachment between 12 and 4 o’clock involving the macula was observed. B-ultrasound and OCT examinations of the eye indicated retinal detachment only . A dilated fundus examination with a Goldmann three-mirror contact lens revealed an elliptical peripheral retinal hole (a single hole is seen in the image) with a suspicious subretinal hyperreflective strip at 2:30 o’clock, which was confirmed to be an intraocular foreign body by orbital CT . Upon further questioning, even though the patient denied a definite history of ocular trauma, he admitted to engaging in cutting and grinding aluminium metal objects in his long-term vocation as a mechanic. We therefore speculated that the patient may have been injured by the high-speed sputtering of fine broken metal pieces caused by the cutting machine. Because the foreign body was small and entered the globe at a high speed, it did not cause significant eye discomfort. Blood tests, liver function tests, kidney function tests, and other preoperative tests were within normal limits. In January 2020, the patient underwent vitrectomy of the left eye combined with removal of the intraocular foreign body under local anaesthesia. During the operation, a fine strip of a white metallic foreign body was successfully removed under the tear hole of the anterior lip of the retina . It was a nonmagnetic metal (due to his long history of cutting and grinding aluminium metal objects, we concluded that it was aluminium), approximately 0.5 × 3 mm in size. After surgery, the patient was treated with tobramycin, dexamethasone and levofloxacin topical eye drops. He was followed regularly in the outpatient department, and his latest examination at one year after surgery was as follows: visual acuity was 12/20 in the left eye, and retinal reattachment was good .