A 22-year-old previously healthy, coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) unvaccinated male with no significant cardiac risk factors presented to the A&E Department with a 2-day history of central pleuritic chest pain. The patient denied shortness of breath or syncope but claimed that the pain worsened on taking a deep breath in and improved on sitting up. Systems review revealed a 4-day history of non-bloody loose stools, abdominal discomfort, nausea, and an episode of emesis. The patient denied fever, unwell contacts, or recreational drug use and was not on regular medications. The patient denied any recent change in diet or consumption of food which may precipitate a diarrhoeal illness.
On examination, parameters were stable with a temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 161/72 mmHg, pulse of 100 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18, and saturations of 100% on room air. Cardiovascular examination revealed normal heart sounds with a three-component pericardial rub at the left sternal edge. His chest was clear on auscultation and the abdomen was soft and non-tender.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST elevation in leads 1 and aVL, ST depressions in leads II, III and aVF, and T-wave inversions in leads II, III, aVF and V5–V6 .
Laboratory investigations showed normal serum electrolytes and blood cell counts but revealed a high C-reactive protein (CRP) of 151 mg/L (0–5 mg/L). Initial troponin-T level was 27 ng/L (3–14 ng/L) with repeat value of 19 ng/L. A viral screen was carried out including Cytomegalovirus IgM and IgG, Epstein–Barr Virus IgM and IgG, Parvovirus IgM and IgG, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus antigen and antibody which were all negative. A routine COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) swab was taken on admission which was negative.
Echocardiography showed normal biventricular function, without valvular disease and no pericardial effusion.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed pericardial enhancement over basal lateral left ventricular (LV) wall, small pericardial effusion, and global myocardial oedema findings of which were in keeping with ongoing mild acute myopericarditis. It also confirmed a non-dilated left ventricle with preserved systolic function.
Stool cultures and PCR were taken for microscopy, culture, and sensitivity with C. jejuni cultured from the stool samples. No growth was detected on blood cultures.
The patient was admitted on monitor for observation and was started on Colchicine 0.5 mg BD and Ibuprofen 600 mg TDS. The patient was also given Ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD orally for 5 days, with an intravenous infusion of 0.9% normal saline 1 L TDS, which was eventually stopped once the patient was tolerating oral intake.
The diagnosis was C. jejuni-associated myopericarditis. The patient showed signs of improvement over a span of three days and ST changes on ECG resolved in leads 1, aVL and inferiorly with residual T-wave inversions laterally (V4–V6) . On discharge, troponin and CRP levels were 9 ng/L and 22 mg/L, respectively showing considerable clinical improvement.
The patient was visiting the country when he was admitted and was discharged back home asymptomatic. Repeat ECG and echocardiogram 6 weeks later back in his home country were reportedly normal.