A 78-year-old woman visited the dermatology department of our hospital with a complaint of multiple subcutaneous nodules on her face, upper arms, and back. A needle biopsy was performed on a subcutaneous mass on her back. The histological assessment showed a lymphoid-like structure with slight infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells, but no definitive diagnosis was made. However, blood tests showed elevated serum IgG4 (947 mg/dL; normal range: < 121) and positive antinuclear antibody (320 units [normal < 19 units]), while anti-SSA/Ro antibody was negative, suggesting IgG4-related disease. Hence, she was referred to the department of collagen disease for further checkup. A whole-body computed tomography (CT) revealed a thickening of the skin of the right breast , and she was referred to our department for further investigation. There were no obvious physical and imaging findings in other organs, such as the salivary glands or pancreas. Her medical history included cataracts, glaucoma, nasolacrimal duct obstruction, left heart enlargement, osteoarthritis of the knee, and reflux esophagitis. As for family history, an older sister had rheumatoid arthritis. There was no family history of breast or ovarian cancer.
On physical examination, a large area of thickened skin, without redness, was observed on the lower part of the right breast. No breast mass or axillary lymph nodes were palpable. Mammography showed a thickening of the skin and areola in the right breast, and mammary gland density was higher than that of the left breast . Ultrasonography revealed a thickening of the skin of the right breast , increased fat echogenicity, and development of intramammary vessels. Although a hypoechoic area was observed in the upper-outside of the mammary gland , there was no obvious mass formation. Thus, close follow-up imaging was deemed appropriate for the patient.
Three months later, the skin findings were unchanged, with no erythema or obvious palpable mass, but the skin thickening remained in the right breast . Wrinkles were prominent when the right breast was pinched that were not seen in the contralateral breast . Ultrasonography also showed no obvious change in findings with no improvement; thus, a needle biopsy was performed on the hypoechoic area in the mammary gland. Histopathological findings are shown in Fig. . A high degree of IgG4-positive plasma cell infiltration was observed (200 cells/ high power field), with an IgG4/IgG rate of > 80%. Fibrosis was also prominent, although there was no specific florid fibrosis or phlebitis obliterans. No neoplastic lesions, including primary breast cancer, were observed. Considering other clinical symptoms and data, she was diagnosed with IgG4-associated mastitis.
After obtaining the diagnosis of IgG4-related disease, the patient was started on prednisolone (PSL; 30 mg/day). After initiation, the right brachial nodule reduced in size and other nodules gradually disappeared. She has been in remission for 6 months, with 15 mg/day of PSL to date.