A 25-year-old female with a history of recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection presented to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status and lower abdominal pain of several days’ duration. The patient was confused and agitated but was redirectable. The patient’s mother at bedside reported that her daughter had an episode of urinary incontinence and appeared to be delusional. She reported that the last time her daughter had acted similarly she had a supposed spider bite to her finger. The mother reported that the patient had fallen the previous day and struck her head. She also reported that the patient had a etonogestrel (a synthetic progesterone) birth control implant placed in her left arm 10 days prior. She endorsed inability to sleep. The patient denied any shortness of breath, constipation, back pain, fevers, or chills.
The physical examination was limited due to acute confusion, but vitals showed a blood pressure of 156/110 millimeters of mercury, a heart rate of 135 beats per minute, and respiration rate of 26 breaths per minute. The patient was noted to have a three-centimeter contusion to the right forehead. Abdominal examination revealed a soft and flat abdomen with intermittent voluntary guarding and no localizable tenderness, rebound, or rigidity.
Our review of the medical chart revealed that the patient had been seen at an outside hospital four days prior for similar complaints and discharged from the ED. Medical records showed she had a negative computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast, negative transvaginal ultrasound with Doppler, unremarkable speculum exam, negative Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae deoxyribonucleic acid probe, normal vaginal wet mount, and unremarkable lab work. Her pain had been treated and she was discharged with dicyclomine, ondansetron, ibuprofen, and docusate sodium. She reportedly had difficulty urinating despite having the urge and drinking plenty of water.
The patient was given droperidol 1.25 milligrams (mg) IV and morphine 2 mg IV without relief. A set of CTs of her head, neck, and abdomen were negative for acute pathology. A qualitative urine drug screen was positive for cannabinoids at a screening cutoff of 50 nanograms per milliliter (mL). A clean catch urine sample was collected and found to be red in color. The specimen tube was wrapped in Coban to protect against light, and spot urine porphyrin was sent to an outside facility for analysis. Her sodium was 118 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (reference range,135–145 mEq/L); 3% sodium chloride continuous IV infusion at a rate of 50 mL/hour (hr) was started after consultation with the nephrology service. She was admitted to the intensive care unit under the hospitalist service.
The patient remained acutely altered during her admission, and cardiology placed her on carvedilol 12.5 mg orally twice a day and clonidine 0.1mg/24hr transdermal patch to control her hypertension and tachycardia. She complained of weakness, and her creatine kinase was found to be over 5000 units/L (reference range, 30–145 U/L) on serial draws. Coronavirus disease 2019 antibody immunoglobulin (Ig) G was found to be positive, and the IgM was negative. An autoimmune panel was significant only for a slightly elevated anti-centromere antibody level. A work-up for pheochromocytoma via CT abdomen was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging with and without contrast did not reveal acute pathology. Cerebrospinal fluid was drawn via lumbar puncture, and testing for viral, bacterial, and fungal infections was negative.
The results of the spot urine porphyrin test, which were returned six days after admission, were significantly elevated as shown in . Concern was raised that the progesterone implant had triggered her attack, and it was removed the following day. The results of a 24-hr collection of urine porphyrin and porphobilinogen (PBG) (returned eight days after admission) were also elevated as shown in , which confirmed the diagnosis of AHP. The patient was started on dextrose 10% in water. Plasma porphyrins were also tested and demonstrate elevated plasma porphyrins of 34 nanomoles (nmol)/L (reference range, 0–15 nmol/L). The patient had returned to baseline mental status but was unable to ambulate. She was transferred to a tertiary care center where she received four hemin infusions at 4 mg per kilogram per day.
The patient had a prolonged hospital course after transfer for a total of 33 days inpatient. She had severe weakness and myopathy that prevented her from ambulating and required 14 days of inpatient physical therapy. She required 22 visits at outpatient physical therapy over the course of three months and subsequently suffered a second attack of porphyria five months after the initial presentation, which resolved with four days of hemin infusion. Genetic testing showed a positive heterozygous hydroxymethylbilane synthase pathologic mutation, which indicated a final diagnosis of acute intermittent porphyria (AIP).