A 74-year-old, right-handed man, with no past medical history or vascular comorbidities and no prior head trauma presented with sudden left arm weakness, paresthesia, word finding difficulties and involuntary movements of the fingers. Symptoms remitted after 20 min, except paresthesia. Within the past two month, the patient had experienced multiple transient episodes of left arm paresthesia.
The neurological examination was unremarkable. Brain MRI revealed restricted diffusion of the white matter substance in relation to the right lateral ventricle and multiple cortical microbleeds on the susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) sequence. A cluster of microbleeds could be seen in relation to the right central sulcus (see Fig. ). Lab results, carotid ultrasound and 7-day Holter monitoring were normal. Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele status was unknown. The patient was diagnosed with transient ischemic attack and dual antiplatelet therapy was prescribed for 3 weeks followed by antiplatelet monotherapy together with a statin.
Eight days later, the patient presented with recurrent paresthesia of the left upper arm and the left side of the face. A second MRI was unchanged (not shown). The symptoms were thought to be caused by recrudescence and the patient was discharged.
Fourteen days after the first admission, the patient developed transient slurred speech and weakness in the left arm and face. Duration was approximately 1 h. Neurological examination revealed discrete pronator drift of the left hand and slightly reduced sensibility in the left upper limb. Shortly after admission, the patient developed expressive aphasia, dysarthria, left-sided facial paresis, paresis and reduced sensation and ataxia of the upper limb. A third brain MRI was performed showing that cSS had now developed in the right central sulcus (see Fig. ). All three MRIs were perfomed on the same 3 Tesla scanner.
Transient focal neurological episode secondary to cSS was diagnosed together with probable CAA. Antiplatelet therapy was discontinued. Attention was drawn to intensive blood pressure management