An 80 year-old man underwent ultrasound-guided FNA of the thyroid gland with a 23-gauge needle for the evaluation of a 1.8 × 2.2 cm well-defined, cystic nodule with internal tiny solid portion in the right lobe, which was identified by contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) taken one month before FNA . Two passes were made into the lesion during the procedure. There were no complications during the procedure. Three hours later, the patient experienced swelling and progressive pain in the anterior neck. He was referred to the emergency room of our hospital with severe respiratory distress, four hours after the FNA. Emergency intubation was performed, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable. The patient was on a long-term anticoagulant medication prescribed for cardiovascular disease. Although the platelet count and liver functions were within normal range, the International Normalized Ratio (INR) was 1.35 (normal range: 0.085–1.15). An axial neck CT taken on emergency department revealed a large hematoma in the retropharyngeal space that caused anterior tracheal deviation . The sagittal neck CT showed extravasation of contrast media, suggesting active bleeding within the hematoma . Angiography was performed as a primary diagnostic and therapeutic procedure. Right subclavian angiography showed active bleeding arising from the right thyrocervical trunk in the neck, corresponding to the CT image . The right thyrocervical trunk was selected, and the culprit vessel was identified as the branch of the right inferior thyroid artery (ITA) . After superselection of the right ITA using microcatheter, embolization of the right ITA was performed using NBCA, and a post-embolization angiogram revealed successful hemostasis without active bleeding . Although the retropharyngeal hematoma still remained, the patient’s respiratory rate was very stable under intubation state, and there was no evidence of increase in hematoma, which was confirmed on a daily follow up neck x-ray. Considering the risk of procedure-related complications, we decided to maintain conservative management for the hematoma. Six days after the embolization, when the patient was able to breathe around the endotracheal tube, it was removed without accident. Follow-up CT taken three weeks after TAE revealed a low-density lesion in the retropharyngeal space, indicating an old hematoma, which was smaller than it was before TAE without further treatment such as percutaneous drainage or open excision . The patient recovered well and was discharged four weeks later. The hematoma in the retropharyngeal space was completely eliminated, which was confirmed by follow-up CT taken three month after the TAE, performed in an outpatient clinic. Unfortunately, we failed to obtain enough blood sample through the FNA, so failed to obtain the final pathological report. Additional FNA was not performed because the patient refused to take further work up for the thyroid nodule.