A 61-year-old Japanese man who had no significant medical, family, or psycho–social history was admitted with a 2-week history of fever, whole-body lymph node swelling, and abdominal swelling caused by hepatosplenomegaly. He was diagnosed with peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS), by histopathological analysis of the lymph nodes. On admission, his laboratory data showed pancytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, acute kidney injury (AKI), and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) . Bone marrow aspiration revealed proliferating hemophagocytosis and lymphocytes, and we diagnosed the patient with lymphoma associated with hemophagocytic lymphoma (LAHS). The day after he was admitted to our hospital, he was treated with etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (EPOCH) chemotherapy. He responded to the chemotherapy; on day 9 after admission, DIC, hyperbilirubinemia, AKI, and hepatosplenomegaly improved. However, the period of bone marrow suppression from day 9 to day 19, lasted for 11 days, and he developed febrile neutropenia (FN). From day 9 after admission, he was treated for FN with meropenem 6 g/day and micafungin 100 mg/day, and was administered granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). His blood cultures were negative. On day 10, computed tomography of the chest revealed bilateral diffuse infiltration shadow of the lungs, and due to progressive respiratory failure, he required noninvasive positive pressure ventilation . However, on day 15, type 2 respiratory failure progressed. The findings from a blood gas test were as follows; pH 7.18, PaO2 77.6 mmHg, PaCO2 72.3 mmHg, 26.8 mmol/L, and PaO2 to FiO2 (P/F) ratio 110. He underwent tracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation. Bronchoscopic findings revealed a widespread pseudomembranous necrotizing tissue formation covering the trachea and the bronchi, and numerous filamentous fungal hyphae infiltration were revealed in the pathologic examination . In addition, the β-d-glucan level was significantly increased to 1160 pg/mL, and the Aspergillus galactomannan antigen level [on enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay(ELISA)] was > 5.0. Aspergillus fumigatus was isolated from a pseudomembrane culture. We started L-AmB at 3 mg/kg/day. After intubation, he developed AKI with worsening of his general condition; therefore, we started continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). We performed daily bronchoscopy for pseudomembrane and necrotic tissue removal to release atelectasis. However, he was placed under deep sedation and fully controlled ventilation, and type 2 respiratory failure was worsened for atelectasis and obstructive pneumoniae. The findings from a blood gas test were as follows; pH 7.141, PaO2 67.9 mmHg, PaCO2 67.9 mmHg, 22.9 mmol/L, (FiO2 0.8, PEEP 15 mmHg), and P/F ratio, 86. The patient showed severe hypoxemia (P/F = 86) under PEEP 15 mmHg, and severe respiratory acidosis with a Murray score of 4, so we initiated VV-ECMO as a reversible condition. Since severe respiratory failure occurred due to Aspergillus pseudomembrane that fills the tracheobronchial airway, systemic administration of only L-AmB was thought to be inadequate. After VV-ECMO, we continued to perform bronchoscopy three times a week for pseudomembrane removal and intratracheal instillation of aerosolized L-AmB. With the informed consent of his family, off-label use of L-AmB was administered via intratracheal instillation as a life saver. The L-AmB dose was referenced as an AmB attachment; 1 vial (50 mg) was dissolved in 10 mL of distilled water and 0.2–4 mL (1–20 mg) of the vial was added to it and further diluted (0.1–2 mg/mL of amphotericin B) in about 10 mL of distilled water. The L-AmB instillation allowed targeted high local drug concentration, which led to an improvement. In addition, we increased the systemic dose of the L-AmB to 6 mg/kg/day (the dose was increased to twice the normal dosage). Ten days after initiating VV-ECMO, a bleeding event from the gastric vestibular area was reported; however, VV-ECMO was successfully weaned after 14 days, with the improvement of lung function. Bronchoscopy revealed disappeared pseudomembrane necrotizing tissue . However, although ITBA improved, the patient developed an impairment of consciousness caused by central nervous system involvement of the lymphoma, at the same time, splenomegaly and enlarged inguinal lymph nodes were revealed again, soluble IL2 receptor was elevated (8527 U/mL), and uncontrollable metabolic acidosis had developed by lymphoma; the patient developed recurrent lymphoma and he died 50 days after admission.