A 28-year-old woman visited our hospital due to a palpable painless lump in her left breast. Eight years ago she had visited another hospital for the same reason. At that time, the nodule was about 1 cm in size, and cytological examination suggested a benign tumor. Recently, during her lactation period for her second child, she visited our hospital because the size of the lump had increased. She had no family history of breast or ovarian cancer and no medical history worth considering. Physical examination revealed a relatively well-circumscribed mass measuring about 2 × 1 cm in the upper outer quadrant of her left breast, at a distance of 7 cm from the nipple. There were no other symptoms such as skin alterations, nipple discharge, or lymph node swelling in the axillary area.
Bilateral mammography showed no significant findings. Breast ultrasonography showed an oval hypoechoic mass with partially obscured anterior and lateral borders. This mass had internal heterogeneity, posterior echo enhancement, and poor blood flow . Contrast MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) showed a low-intensity signal on the T1-weighted image, a uniform high-intensity signal on the T2-weighted image, and an abnormal high-intensity signal on the diffusion-weighted image . The mass was classified as category 3 upon cross-referencing with the Breast Imaging and Reporting Data System.
Fine needle aspiration cytology revealed small clumps of degenerated ductal cells, and aggregate of adipocytes and stromal cells. There was no evidence of malignancy. The core needle biopsy showed proliferation of spindle cells with mild atypia. Spindle cells were arranged without any specific pattern in a fibrous stroma. In hypercellular areas, tumor cells proliferated in a bundled arrangement, and some had infiltrated the surrounding fat in a storiform-like pattern. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CD34 and STAT6. We suspected SFT and planned excisional biopsy. As we were concerned about the differential diagnosis of DFSP morphologically, the tumor was excised with a margin of 1 cm along with the surrounding tissue, and the skin directly above the tumor and the pectoralis major fascia were sufficiently excised. No oncoplastic approach as volume replacement was required, because the tumor was located in the supra-marginal border of the mammary gland and volume of the specimen (4.3 × 3.6 cm) was small.
Macroscopic inspection of the surgical specimen revealed a well-circumscribed, partially encapsulated mass. Tan lesions with scattered gray-white consolidations were observed (a, b). Histological examination of the surgical specimen showed that spindle cells with mild atypia had proliferated invasively, and arranged into irregular bundles. Residual breast ducts and lobules were entrapped within the lesion (c). The tumor had a relatively monomorphic aspect with alternating hypercellular (d) and hypocellular areas. In the hypocellular areas, collagenized stroma was predominant (e). Mitosis was rare, and nuclear pleomorphism, necrosis, vascular invasion, and hemorrhages were absent in both areas. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CD34 (g) and STAT6 (h), and negative for smooth muscle actin, desmin, S100-protein, and epithelial membrane antigens. The overall tumor MIB-1 index was <1 %.
Based on the morphological and immunohistochemical features of the tumor, SFT was suspected. However, as a storiform-like pattern (f) was observed in the hypercellular areas, leading to a differential diagnosis of DFSP. The presence of the COL1A1-PDGFB fusion gene, a characteristic feature of DFSP, was evaluated by fluorescence in situ hybridization. We confirmed the absence of the COL1A1-PDGFB fusion and DFSP was denied. There has been no evidence of recurrence after a follow-up period of 60 months.