A 75-year-old female, known to have hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and recurrent urinary tract infections, was referred to the colorectal surgery outpatient clinic in a tertiary university institute as case of rectosigmoid mass for investigation. The patient reported one-month history of generalized abdominal pain, anorexia, weight loss of about 16 kilograms within two months and multiple episodes of per-rectal bleeding. Her family history was significant for malignancy as her father passed away after being diagnosed with brain tumour and her daughter had thyroid cancer. No clear history of asbestos exposure was reported by the patient. The initial colonoscopy in the referring hospital was aborted because of inability to pass beyond the obstructing mass.
In our institute, the patient was investigated. All laboratory parameters were unremarkable including inflammatory markers. Her computed-tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a fistulizing sigmoid mass extended to the urinary bladder and the left adnexa with anterior cul-de-sac collection. As well, multiple enlarged lymph nodes were noted along the inferior mesenteric artery with omental nodulation . The patient underwent a second colonoscopy in our institution which revealed a large fungating mass. Endoscopic biopsies were obtained and sent for histopathological examination. Microscopic evaluation of the sigmoid colon biopsies using H&E stain revealed predominant neoplastic proliferation of colonic glands arranged in tubular and cribriform/back-to-back patterns . The cell lining exhibits hyperchromatic nuclei with visible nuclei, loss of nuclear polarity, and amphophilic cytoplasm. There are scattered mitotic figures situated in the colonic crypts. The lamina propria is mildly inflamed with mixed chronic and acute inflammatory cells. The overall morphology is that of moderately differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma, grade 2 .
After multidisciplinary discussion, the plan was to proceed with laparoscopic low anterior resection. Intraoperatively, the patient underwent a routine double J- stent insertion, as per our protocol. However, the diagnostic laparoscopy revealed several nodules disseminated all over the peritoneum, suggestive of peritoneal mesothelioma rather than metastatic peritoneal nodules from the sigmoid adenocarcinoma. Therefore, the decision was made intraoperatively to perform transverse colostomy only after obtaining multiple biopsies from the omental and peritoneal nodules. The histopathological examination (H&E stain) of the peritoneal nodules revealed malignant mesothelioma of the predominant epithelioid subtype. The specimen typically consisted of fibrofatty tissue infiltrated by neoplastic cells arranged in solid nests, cords, trabeculae, and rare papillae and acini . The cells displayed epithelioid morphology with amphophilic cytoplasm, round nuclei, vesicular chromatin, and visible nucleoli . There are also occasional psammomatous calcifications . By immunohistochemical studies, the tumor cells are diffusely and strongly reactive to pan-cytokeratin , CK7, and calretinin . In addition, podoplanin/D2-40 and WT-1 (nuclear staining) are diffusely positive in the tumor cells (, respectively). However, CK20, PAX-8, and CDX2 are immunonegative. Thus, the overall pathologic and immunoprofile of this tumor is in keeping with mesothelial cell origin (malignant peritoneal mesothelioma, epithelioid subtype) rather than metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma and the patient was diagnosed as sigmoid adenocarcinoma with synchronous malignant peritoneal mesothelioma.
A subsequent tumor board discussion in a specialized oncology center was conducted, for which the patient was started on palliative chemotherapy in the form of reduced-dose capecitabine (Xeloda) for the sigmoid adenocarcinoma and a consensus was made to avoid active management of the peritoneal mesothelioma because of her age and general condition. She was followed up in the oncology out-patient clinic for nine month and she was tolerating the chemotherapy with a good clinical course.