This 71-year-old woman with ESRD related to chronic interstitial nephritis started renal replacement therapy in December 2016. Her past medical history included high blood pressure, paroxysmal junctional tachycardia, peptic esophagitis and multinodular goiter.
She was treated from the beginning by post-dilution OL-HDF through a left arm fistula, 4 h, 3 times per week. Her dry weight was around 62 kg. The dialysis monitor was a 5008 Cordiax equipped with ‘AutoSub plus’ (Fresenius Medical Care) to maximize HDF substitution volume which was usually 28–30 l per session. The dialyzer was a Phylther HF20SD (a 2.0 m2 heat sterilized HF polyphenylene membrane from Bellco).
At the initiation of dialysis, total serum protein and albumin were 6.0 g/dl and 4.0 g/dl, respectively. Urine albumin was 0.38 g/l, 3 months before starting dialysis. During the following months, the patient developed severe hypoalbuminemia. The lowest value observed was 2.26 g/dl in July 2017 (see Fig. .). At that time, albuminuria was measured at 105 mg/24 h. There was no symptom of malabsorption. A 72-h stool collection show no steatorrhea. Duodenal biopsies were normal. There was no sign of liver failure.
We hypothesized that hypoalbuminemia might result from albumin loss across the dialyzer. In September 2017, the patient was shifted from OL-HDF to standard HF HD, keeping the same dialyzer and dialysis schedule. During the following months, we observed a progressive correction of the hypoalbuminemia as illustrated in Fig. .
In October 2018, we shifted the patient on a medium cut-off (MCO) filter, the Theranova 400 (a 1.7 m2 polyarylethersulfone – polyvinylpyrrolidone membrane from Baxter). The albuminemia remained stable.
To better delineate the impact of the epuration technique on the albumin losses we measured recently in this patient the amount of albumin in the total dialysate collection during one session with the Phylther HF20SD on OL-HDF and one session with the same filter but on standard HD. The convective volume was 29.0 l for the HDF session. The total albumin losses were 23.6 g on OL-HDF and 4.6 g on HD.