A 46-year-old female patient was referred to the Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism due to suspected hypoglycemia. She had history of dyslipidemia and had lost 50 kg after being submitted to sleeve gastrectomy in 2016. She was under therapy with omeprazole 20 mg/day and simvastatin 20 mg/day. She had no family history of diabetes. About 18 months after sleeve gastrectomy, she started complaining about episodes of lipothymias preceded by sweating, nausea, and dizziness. During one of these episodes, a capillary blood glucose was obtained with a value of 24 mg/dl. After this episode, she had several admissions to the emergency department with the diagnosis of “hypoglycemia” after capillary measuring blood glucose at home. In this setting, she was admitted several times to another hospital to clarify her clinical picture. The performed blood tests relative to glucose metabolism are reported in . The remaining blood tests did not show any changes including normal blood count, kidney function, liver enzymes, thyroid function, and calcium. Different imaging exams were performed including abdominal computed tomography (CT), abdominal magnetic resonance (MRI), upper endoscopy, endoscopic ultrasound, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)–positron emission tomography (PET), and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT. No changes were found.
Due to persistent complaints even after all the investigation, she was referred to the Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Central.
She had the first appointment in our department in December 2020. According to the patient, she needed to eat sugary foods or beverages every 2h during the daytime and twice during nighttime to solve symptoms. She was previously treated with acarbose due to suspected Dumping syndrome with no improvement. Her weight increased 6 kg in 1 year. She reported capillary glycemia between 23mg/dl and 45 mg/dl during those episodes.
On examination, the patient was alert and cooperative. Her weight was 82 kg and height was 1.65 m (body mass index of 30.1 kg/m2). Blood pressure was 147/81 mmHg and heart rate 78 bpm. She reported having had a coffee with sugar 1h before the appointment. A capillary blood glucose was obtained with a value of 54 mg/dl. At the same time, a first venous blood sample was obtained. After 15 min, she started complaining about palpitations, headache, and tremors. Vital signs were measured again with blood pressure 194/130 mmHg, heart rate 84 bpm, and capillary blood glucose 24 mg/dl. A Raynaud’s phenomenon was observed. The remaining examination was unremarkable. The patient did not have any changes from her baseline neurological status during these episodes. A second venous blood sample was obtained; the results are displayed in . Hypoglycemia was not confirmed and a diagnosis of artifactual hypoglycemia was considered. Plasma-free metanephrines were in the normal range.
The patient reported that Raynaud’s phenomenon was concomitant to the several episodes suggestive of hypoglycemia. She was advised to fractionate meals and to avoid fast-absorbing carbohydrates. An Autoimmune Disease appointment was requested.
The complementary study on the Autoimmune Disease appointment revealed HLA-B27 positivity and increased Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) 66 mm/h (<16). The remaining investigation was negative for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear (ANA), anti-dsDNA, anti-nucleosome, extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), including SSA, SSB, RNP/Sm, Sm, Jo-1, Scl-70, histones, and ribosomal-P. Anti-centromere B, anti-fibrillarin, anti-NOR 90, anti-TH/To, and anti-citrulline antibodies were also negative. The remaining laboratory results were unremarkable (haemoglobin 12.6 × 10 g/L (12.0–15.0), normal leukocyte count, blood urea nitrogen test 31 mg/dl (15.0–40.0), creatinine 0.74 mg/dl (0.57–1.11), estimated glomerular filtration rate 97 ml/min/1.73 and normal liver enzymes). She also presented lower limb dactylitis. Capillaroscopy revealed a secondary Raynaud's phenomenon with early scleroderma pattern. A presumptive diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis was made while radiological studies are ongoing. At the last appointment (February 2022), she was medicated with amlodipine 5 mg/day, salazopyrine 3 g/day, and etoricoxib 90 mg as needed with symptoms improvement. No hypoglycemic episodes were observed after nutritional intervention.