A 35-year-old male Carpenter presented with right forearm supination and pronation restriction for the past 8 months and also had difficulty in tightening and loosening of screws with minimal pain at the elbow region. There was no history of previous trauma, no history of any elbow or forearm surgeries. The patient was apparently normal 8 months back without any restriction of movements and pain. On examination, supination and pronation of the right forearm were completely restricted and had normal elbow flexion and extension with no distal neurovascular deficit.
X-ray of the right radius ulna with elbow and wrist was taken, and it revealed a bony bridge (synostosis) between proximal radius and ulna at the level of radial tuberosity (, ), Type 3b according to Jupiter and Ring classification . CT scan of proximal radius ulna with elbow was done for better delineation of synostosis anatomy, location, and for pre-operative planning. It showed the bony connection between proximal radius and ulna .
As the patient was having functional limitations in his occupation and daily routine activities due to restriction of forearm rotatory movements, and also patient demanded for surgery, we planned for surgical excision of synostosis after explaining the risks involved in surgery such as neurovascular injury, fracture, incomplete restoration of the forearm rotatory movements, and recurrence of synostosis.
The patient was operated in a supine position using tourniquet by posterior approach initially. After identification of the posterior interosseous nerve, it was separated and protected and the synostosis site was reached . Using 1.5 mm K wires, multiple holes were made at the margin of the synostosis. Then using osteotome, posterior part of the synostosis was separated and removed. Anterior part of the synostosis could not be removed completely from the posterior approach. Hence, it was removed using anterior approach to the proximal radius without sacrificing the biceps insertion. After the completion of excision, bone wax and forearm fascia were used as interposition materials to prevent recurrence and the wound was closed in layers. The excised synostosis part was sent for histopathological examination.
Post-operative physiotherapy was started on the 2nd post-operative day, including both active and passive supination, pronation of forearm and flexion, extension of the elbow, aggressive physio-therapy was continued up to 3 months post-surgery. The patient was able to perform good forearm rotatory movements after the surgery. Histopathology examination was suggestive of sclerotic bone fragments with no any other specific pathology. Post-operative X-ray and CT scan showed complete excision of the synostosis (, ).
At present 2 years follow-up, the patient is having good forearm rotatory movements with complete restoration of supination and pronation restoration of about 40 degrees (, ) with no pain and difficulty in his occupation and also there is no radiological evidence of recurrence. We are still following up the patient regularly to check for recurrence.