A previously healthy 63-year-old man presented to the local hospital with a 1 month history of chest pain and dyspnoea on exertion. Blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg; heart rate regular at 105 b.p.m., with no distention of neck veins, heart murmurs, or peripheral oedemas. There were reduced breath sounds at the lung bases. ECG showed sinus tachycardia with general T-wave inversions. Initial laboratory tests, including haematology, electrolytes, and troponin T were negative. C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated to 40 mg/L (normal range 0–4 mg/L). D-dimer was >4 mg/L (normal reference <0.5 mg/L). Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram was negative for pulmonary embolism, but showed bilateral pleural effusions and moderate pericardial effusion . Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated pericardial thickening and effusion, normal ventricular dimensions with good contractility, bi-atrial enlargement, and a distended inferior vena cava without diameter changes on respiration. Doppler recordings demonstrated marked reciprocal respiratory variations in right ventricle (RV) and left ventricle (LV) diastolic inflow velocities, annulus paradoxus, and septal bounce, consistent with the diagnosis of effusive-constrictive pericarditis . Comprehensive testing for infectious or immunological causes were negative . Anti-inflammatory treatment [naproxen 500 mg twice a day (b.i.d) and colchicine 0.5 mg b.i.d] was initiated, with a follow-up plan at the outpatient clinic.
One month later, the patient’s symptoms returned, now also including bilateral leg oedema and distended neck veins. Chest X-ray revealed massive right-sided pleural effusion , and drainage was performed. Analysis of the pleural fluid showed a transudate, with negative tests for malignant cells or microbiological aetiology . Thoracic and abdominal CT scans showed no evidence of malignancy or lymphadenopathies. Repeat echocardiography revealed regression of pericardial effusion, and persistent constrictive haemodynamics.
Despite 3 months of anti-inflammatory treatment and diuretics the condition did not improve. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed pericardial thickening and late pericardial contrast enhancement after intravenous gadolinium, findings consistent with active pericardial inflammation . Comprehensive testing for infectious or immunological causes were still negative, and a corticosteroid was added (prednisolone 40 mg q.d). Due to the suspicion of an ongoing inflammatory or immunological process, additional therapy with anakinra (sc 100 mg q.d) was initiated 2 months later, still without clinical response. During the following 6 months of treatment, the patient suffered from recurrent symptomatic right-sided pleural effusion, with the need of a total of 15 pleurocenteses. Approximately 60 L of pleural fluid was drained during this period.
The patient was referred to the University Hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Echocardiography, cardiac MRI, and simultaneous left and right catheterization confirmed the presence of constrictive pericarditis . There was consistent pericardial thickening. At this point, pericardial effusion was minimal and laboratory findings were normalized with CRP levels <5 mg/L and D-dimer <0.5 mg/L. Drainage of recurrent right-sided pleural effusion now demonstrated a milky/yellowish fluid . Analysis of the pleural fluid still revealed a transudate but with strikingly elevated triglyceride levels of 4.5 mmol/L (normal reference <1.24 mmol/L) and cholesterol level 1.6 mmol/L (normal reference <5.18 mmol/L), findings diagnostic for chylothorax. Lymphoscintigraphy was normal, with no signs of damage to the thoracic duct or its major branches. In view of chronic constrictive pericarditis with no response to medical therapy and probable secondary chylothorax, the patient was scheduled for surgical pericardiectomy. A complete pericardiectomy through a median sternotomy was performed. Resection of the pericardium extended beyond the left, right, and inferior cardiac border, to the great vessels superiorly and to the diaphragmatic surface and inferior vena cava inferiorly.
Operative findings demonstrated a calcified, thickened pericardium, with adhesion to the heart. The heart immediately expanded and the heart rate decreased. Histopathological findings showed pericardial fibrosis with calcifications, while there were no granulomas or carcinomatosis . Tissue cultures for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria were negative. The patient was discharged, anti-inflammatory treatment stopped and corticosteroids gradually withdrawn. During outpatient follow-up 3 and 6 months post-operative, clinical improvement was substantial and the patient resumed full-time physical work. The pleural effusion did not recur . Echocardiograms were normal without evidence of constrictive haemodynamics and normal ventricular interdependence.