A 55-year-old man with a height of 160 cm and weight of 65 kg was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma in the liver segment 7 during the patient’s follow-up for hepatitis B and esophageal varices. He underwent laparoscopic hepatic subsegmental resection for 6 h under combined general and epidural anesthesia. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia was introduced postoperatively, and intravenous patient-controlled analgesia with morphine was added to treat refractory abdominal pain. The anesthesiologist’s acute pain service was ended on the fourth postoperative day. The patient’s pain was managed with celecoxib 400 mg per day and on-demand use of loxoprofen 60 mg and tramadol 25 mg. He was discharged on the tenth postoperative day but readmitted because of suspected wound infection. The antibiotics controlled the surgical site infection; however, he suffered from severe recurrent abdominal pain refractory to tramadol and loxoprofen sodium. He was referred to our pain clinic 15 days after surgery.
At the first visit, he complained of an upper abdominal pain rating of 2 at rest and 8 during physical activity on the 11-point Numerical Rating Scale (NRS). He experienced constant aching and posture-induced paroxysmal pain in the right epigastric region. The rotation and lateral bending induced severe pain, indicating positive Carnett’s sign of abdominal wall pain. There was also a muscular hypersensitive tender spot with stiffness compatible with the taut band in the right lateral subcostal area. He felt a pain radiating to the right epigastric region when the tender spot was pressed. Therefore, we diagnosed myofascial trigger point (MTrP) in the tender abdominal muscle. Pregabalin was not effective for muscular pain. After confirming the improvement in inflammatory findings (C-reactive protein level, 1.57 mg/dl) at the second visit, we injected 7 mL of 1% mepivacaine into the MTrP. Immediately after the injection, the pain was relieved.
Nineteen days after the first visit, the patient again complained of severe pain with NRS 4 at rest and 8 at physical movement. We decided to apply ultrasound-guided trigger point injection (USG TPI) to the MTrP. The tender spot was located on the lateral side of the right upper abdomen and 5 cm away from the nearest port insertion site. We examined the tender muscle with ultrasound using a linear probe (SONIMAGE HS2TM, 11-3 MHz, Hitachi) and found a hyperechoic spot of 5 mm in diameter surrounded by a hypoechoic area in the internal oblique abdominal muscle . The ultrasound image of the muscle surrounding the high echo did not show any loss or abrupt discontinuation of the muscle fibers, which was observed at the port insertion sites. The high echo existed in the internal oblique muscle fibers and seemed different from an entrapped anterior cutaneous nerve echo which should run vertically to the muscle fibers. A 22 G block needle (UNIEVER™ disposable nerve block needle, 70 mm, Unisys, Japan) was proceeded at approximately a 30° angle in the in-plane technique and visualized the needle going into the trigger point. When the tip of the block needle reached the hyperechoic site, the pain was elicited, and the ultrasound showed a local twitch response of the muscle. The pain in the upper abdomen and tenderness disappeared approximately 10 min after injection of 20 mL of 1% mepivacaine to the hyperechoic spot. A total of seven USG TPI sessions were performed once a week.
The hyperechoic spot observed at the third to fourth visit was gradually reduced in size by the treatments. Since the fifth visit, the hyperechoic site disappeared, and the MTrP changed to an irregular muscle bundle alignment with faint echo images . The pain gradually decreased, and simultaneously, the degree of muscle stiffness on palpation gradually disappeared. Eventually, the patient’s pain NRS decreased to zero at rest and 1 at physical movement. He felt no pain in his daily life. We ended our treatment on postoperative day 117.