A 15-year-old male patient, born in Bangladesh, was admitted to our facility in March 2019 with complaints of the swelling chest wall for 3 months and painless multiple cutaneous nodules with a history of watery discharge in the anterior chest wall, which had progressively increased in size. This was associated with an on-and-off fever, night sweats, and anorexia with more than a 6-kg loss of weight over the previous 3 months. The patient also had bilateral cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy, showing no signs of improvement after a broad-spectrum antibiotics treatment prescribed by the general practitioner. He also took anti-tubercular treatment for approximately 2 months but failed to find any relief. It is important to note that there was no significant family history of a similar disease.
Physical examination revealed afebrile condition with multiple erythematous and serpiginous nodular lesions varying in size from 1 × 1 cm2 to 6 × 5 cm2 on the anterior chest wall, protruding right mammary region, collection intercostals space . Bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy in the left posterior triangle was also observed.
Laboratory data reported an increased white blood count (23 860/mm3) with neutrophilia (77%), platelets (612 000/mm3), C-reactive protein (CRP; 171 mg/L), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 39 mm). The viral screen was negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). No acid-fast bacillus (AFB) was seen on AFB testing . Bone marrow aspiration cytology (BMA) showed normocellular marrow with trilineage hematopoiesis, a mild increase in eosinophils, and plasma cells . Bone marrow (trephine) biopsy showed normocellular marrow with mild eosinophilia and plasmacytosis with negative focal lesions .
A whole-body CT scan revealed prominent bilateral level II and V nodes in head and neck regions. Multiple enlarged left supraclavicular, bilateral axillary, subpectoral, deep pectoral, bilateral internal mammary, and prevascular nodes in the chest were observed where the largest left internal mammary nodal mass extending into the left chest wall (6.0 × 5.5 cm2) and left axillary node (3.2 × 3.0 cm2). Multiple ill-defined soft tissue deposits were seen in the anterior chest wall muscles, and necroses were noted within these deposits. Multiple well-defined cutaneous soft tissue deposits were also seen in the chest wall, and the largest measure was 4.0 × 2.5 cm2. Ulceration was noted within a few of the lesions. Nodular pleural thickening was also observed in the bilateral upper hemithorax. No evidence of pleural effusion was found.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed increased 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake involving enlarged left supraclavicular node (SUV max 10.4), axillary/subpectoral (SUV max right 8.8; left 10.6), prevascular (SUV max 8.6), paraaortic (SUV max 7.1) anterior cardiophrenic (SUV max 9.1), and supradiaphragmatic (SUV max 8.1) nodes, large pleural based deposit in the left internal mammary region (SUV max 11.5), pleural based deposits in both hemithorax (SUV max 9.3), bilateral pectoralis muscle (SUV max right 10.4; left 7.7), and cutaneous and subcutaneous deposits in the anterior chest wall (SUV max 9.3) . Imaging features consistent with lymphoma with a coexisting fungal skin infection.
Histopathological examination of the right axillary lymph node and nodular lesions on the chest wall by excision biopsy got the impression of atypical lymphoid infiltrates, consistent with lymphoma . Immunohistochemistry (Lymphoma panel) of right axillary lymph node and “nodular lesion,” chest wall, excision biopsy got the impression of consistent with classical Hodgkin Lymphoma, nodular sclerosis with stage 2B disease . Lymph node biopsy revealed an immunohistochemical staining positive for CD15, CD30, PAX5, and negative for CD3 and CD20. Nodal tissue was also examined for microbiological testing, which excluded the presence of active tubercular infection.
There is no specific treatment for HL with skin lesions. Standard treatment is chemotherapy with ABVD/ BEACOPP/Stanford V with or without involved field radiation depending on the stage and bulk of the disease., Among these, the most common chemotherapy protocol used as in our present case is ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine), that is, doxorubicin 25 mg/m2, bleomycin 10 mg/m2, vinblastine 6 mg/m2, and dacarbazine 375 mg/m2 as days 1 and 15 schedules and to be repeated after every 28 days for six cycles .
Overall, HL has a good prognosis with greater than 80% 5-year survival. However, cutaneous involvement is usually associated with diffuse lymphadenopathy, late-stage disease, and poor prognosis. In our case, the outcome was favourable with a good dermatological response. To date, the patient has completed the six planned cycles, showing significant clinical improvement in both lymphadenomegalies and in skin lesions with no sign of swelling chest wall . Imaging features are suggestive of significant response to therapy with residual disease. He is doing well 18 months after stopping chemotherapy, with no evidence of lymphoma recurrence.