A 12-year 7-month-old Caucasian female with no significant medical or family history
was referred to pediatric endocrinology for progressively worsening acne, hirsutism,
and a deep voice. She described excessive hair growth to the face, chest, abdomen,
and back. She denied salt craving, increased thirst, or prolonged illnesses, and
denied dizziness, headaches, or vision changes. She had breast development for about
2.5 years and was premenarchal. Review of her growth chart demonstrated linear
growth acceleration around age 9 to 10 years with stable height for the past year
and a body mass index at the 29th percentile.
On physical examination, she was a normotensive, normocardic female with a deep
voice. She had mild acne on the face and upper chest, significant hirsutism with a
Ferriman-Gallwey Score of 22 (upper lip: 4, chin: 4, chest: 3, upper abdomen: 2,
lower abdomen: 3, thighs: 3, lower back: 2, and upper back: 1) as seen in to and grade 1 acanthosis
nigricans to the neck. Her pubertal examination revealed mild clitoromegaly (5 cm
long by 0.5 cm wide) with slightly enlarged labia minora that were larger than the
labia majora, Tanner stage V pubic hair and axillary hair, and Tanner stage III
breast development.
Initial laboratory values drawn at 2 pm are shown in and demonstrated a 46 XX karyotype,
and estrogen, prolactin, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone
(LH) in the pubertal range with LH–FSH ratio greater than 2:1. Electrolytes and
thyroid function were normal. Notably, the patient had an elevated androstenedione
and testosterone, and a borderline elevated 17-hydroxyprogesterone. A bone age was
read as 14 years (close to 2 standard deviations advanced).
Due to the borderline elevated 17-hydroxyprogesterone, a 250-µg adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH) stimulation test was performed. Nine am laboratory values
prior to the stimulation test demonstrated multiple elevated steroids and androgens
including 17-hydroxypregnenolone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, 11-deoxycortisol,
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), androstenedione, and testosterone . Additionally,
she had a normal progesterone, estrone, and estradiol. There was minimal response of
any axis to ACTH. This pattern of elevation and response was not consistent with a
single enzyme defect causing CAH raising concern for an autologous
androgen–producing tumor.
Based on results of the ACTH stimulation test, abdominal/pelvic imaging was obtained.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed normal adrenal glands and no focal
lesion. Pelvic ultrasound was notable for normal size ovaries (2.1 × 3.6 × 3.1 cm on
the right and 2.5 × 2.7 × 2.7 cm on the left) with small peripheral cysts and normal
blood flow and an anteverted uterus measuring 4.5 × 1.7 × 3.7 cm with a suboptimally
visualized endometrial stripe.
Due to concern for a hormone-secreting mass too small to visualize, a
dexamethasone-suppressed ACTH stimulation test was performed to further delineate
the source of elevated androgens. Adrenal androgens (progesterone,
deoxycorticosterone, 11-deoxycortisol, and cortisol) suppressed whereas the ovarian
androgens (11-hydroxypregnenalone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, DHEA, androstenedione,
and testosterone) did not suppress, as shown in indicating an ovarian source of
androgen production. This led to the presumptive diagnosis of PCOS.
With a suspected PCOS, metabolic laboratory tests were performed and were normal
except for elevated fasting and postprandial insulin concentrations as shown in
. As the
family’s primary treatment goal was to decrease hirsutism, the patient was started
on 100 mg spironolactone daily and a 20 µg estrogen combined oral contraceptive. A
lower dose estrogen was selected as she was premenarchal with incomplete breast
development. Given her elevated postprandial insulin she was also started on 1000 mg
of metformin twice a day, with a titration to full dose over a month.
After 3 months of multidrug treatment, the patient’s androgen (DHEA, androstenedione,
and total testosterone) and glucocorticoid (17-hydroxyprogesterone,
17-hydroxypregnenolone, and 11-desoxycortisol) concentrations normalized confirming
the presumption that the androgen source was the ovaries, and that she did not have
an autonomously secreting mass. She had menarche with 2 days of very light bleeding
rather than full menses and mild improvement in hirsutism and acne, with no changes
in her voice. At that time, she was transitioned to a 30 µg estrogen containing
combined oral contraceptive with a non-androgenic progesterone and then achieved
full menses. At her 6-month follow-up, her hormone profile remained consistent with
oral contraceptive therapy, and her hirsutism was dramatically improved ( and ). She was also menstruating
regularly. Her voice was still unchanged.