An 84-year-old male presented with a medical history of sarcoma in 1999 located on the right flank (treated with surgical removal, chemotherapy, and radiation), ischemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation, and a pacemaker (St. Jude 5816, atrial lead Medtronic 4076, and ventricular lead Medtronic 4074) since 2010 due to sick sinus syndrome and AV block II Mobitz type 2. Three months prior to the present episode, he was diagnosed with urinary bladder cancer (pTaG1), and one month prior to the present admission, he underwent a diagnostic transurethral resection of bladder tissue (TUR-B).
On admission, the patient reported malaise and dysuria since the TUR-B. He was afebrile and respiratory and circulatory stable and had macroscopic haematuria, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 204 mg/L, and leukocytes of 12 × 109/L. After cultures had been taken from blood and urine, he was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Clinic. On the third day, blood (4/4 bottles) and urine cultures grew A. urinae (>105 cfu/mL). Species determination was performed with MALDI-TOF MS (Bruker Microflex) with a score of 2.23. Antibiotic treatment with ampicillin 2 g × 3 was initiated. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed, and no signs of vegetation on valves or pacing leads could be demonstrated. After five days, the patient's condition had improved, CRP was 124 mg/L, and he was discharged with amoxicillin 500 mg three times daily for another seven days.
Forty days after the initial admission, the patient was readmitted due to a two-week history of malaise and general pain of the joints. Two days before, he experienced chills but was on admission afebrile and respiratory and circulatory stable, CRP was 250 mg/L, and leukocytes were 21 × 109/L. Treatment with intravenous penicillin G 3 g four times daily was initiated, and renewed blood cultures grew A. urinae (6/6 bottles), whereas the urine culture was negative. Minimum inhibitory concentrations were 0.008 mg/L for penicillin G, 0.25 mg/L for ceftriaxone, and 256 mg/L for tobramycin. A renewed TEE demonstrated a 10 × 5 mm vegetation on either the tricuspid valve or one of the pacing leads . After 19 days of treatment using penicillin G 3 g four times daily, the patient was referred to a tertiary centre for pacemaker system extraction. The extraction was performed using transvenous techniques, the device and leads were completely removed without complications, and a temporary VVI pacemaker was implanted on the ipsilateral side. The explanted electrode demonstrated macroscopic signs of infection in the form of nonfibrous material. Culture from the tip was however negative. Two weeks after extraction, a permanent dual-chamber device was implanted at the contralateral side while the patient was still treated with penicillin G.
Thirty-seven days after the second admission, the patient was discharged with ceftriaxone 2g daily for another three days. The recovery is uneventful. On follow-up 4 weeks after the end of the treatment, the patient was recovered apart from some shortness of breath during walks.