A 29-year-old woman with a complaint of diminished vision in her left eye since 7 months ago was referred to our clinic. She had a history of left eye redness which did not respond to topical medications. In past medical history, she had a seizure attack 4 years before and had received appropriate treatment.
Examination in the right eye (OD) was normal. In the left eye (OS), visual acuity was one meter finger count, anterior segment examination was normal, intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg, and relative afferent pupillary defect was 2+. In the posterior segment examination, there was a dome-shaped partially pigmented mass with vitreous hemorrhage obscuring tumor features.
Orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an enhancing nodular mass lesion in the posterior aspect of the left globe protruding into the vitreous and associated with exudative or nearby hemorrhagic retinal detachment [Figures , and ]. B scan of left eye revealed a dome-shaped solid mass with high internal reflectivity 16.5 × 12.5 × 11 mm in size with point calcifications [Figures and ].
Intraocular tumor, possibly retinoblastoma or aggressive astrocytoma, was considered as a provisional diagnosis and biopsy was suggested. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed but the specimen lacked enough cells for definitive diagnosis. Vitrectomy (23 G) assisted biopsy was carried out. The sample was obtained from the vitreous after removing the vitreous hemorrhage and also from the tumor by high aspiration and low cut level.
With a histologic diagnosis of choroidal melanoma, enucleation was proposed but was refused by the patient. After one month, the patient presented with severe left eye pain, visual acuity was no light perception, anterior segment showed circumcilliary congestion, neovascularisation of the iris and angle with intraocular pressure of 60 mmHg. Due to severe pain and loss of vision, at the time, the left eye was enucleated.
In the pathology report, macroscopically, a blood filled globe cavity and a tumor with hypo and hyperpigmented areas and foci of hemorrhage 20 mm in diameter and 5 mm in thickness was shown . The microscopic section was composed of atypical proliferation of cellular elements with small round hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm, arranged as closely packed cells forming a nodule occupying half of the posterior chamber. The neoplastic cells were differentiated in some areas accompanied by Flexner-Wintersteiner rosette formation [Figure and ]. No calcification was reported. For a definite diagnosis immunohistochemistry (IHC) study was recommended. IHC stains were positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), retinoblastoma protein and synaptophysin and negative for human melanoma black 45 (HMB45) and leukocyte common antigen in the tumor cells and hence the final diagnosis was retinoblastoma.