In August 2020, a 13-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital due to prolonged and intermittent fever. She first developed a fever 10 months previously that lasted for 7 days. During that time, her body temperature was elevated twice per day, reached as high as 40 °C, and was accompanied by nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and chills, but no rash. Subsequently, she had a fever almost once per month, lasting for about 5 to 7 days and resolving after antipyretic treatment.
Previous examinations at the local hospital (December 2019) determined her white blood cell (WBC) count was 10.18 × 109/L (75.1% neutrophils), eosinophil count was normal (0.13 × 109/L, reference range: 0.04 ~ 0.49 × 109/L), hemoglobin was 123 g/L, platelet count was 213 × 109/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 13.22 mg/L (reference range: 0 ~ 8 mg/L). Then in March 2020, a routine blood test indicated a WBC count of 7.01 × 109/L (63.6% neutrophils), hemoglobin of 107 g/L, platelet count of 227 × 109/L, and CRP of 79.6 mg/L. There were no microbiological tests.
She came to our hospital at that time because her fever was frequent and the duration was prolonged. She also had a history of right upper limb fractures after two falls when she was 6 and 10 years old. There were no abnormalities in her personal or family history and no abnormal signs on admission (bodyweight: 66 kg, stable from disease onset; blood pressure: 126/81 mmHg; height: 170 cm). The blood pressure in her extremities was symmetrical, and she had no abnormal vascular murmur.
Laboratory results in August 2020 indicated that the WBC count and neutrophils were in the normal ranges, and the hemoglobin was slightly low. Indicators of infection and inflammation, including procalcitonin (PCT), CRP, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), were obviously increased. We also measured the levels of multiple cytokines. The level of interleukin (IL) -6 was significantly elevated, the level of IL-10 was slightly elevated, but the levels of IL-2, IL-4, IL-17, INF-γ, and TNF were normal. Tests for mycoplasma and herpes simplex virus-IgM antibodies were positive. Screening for tumor markers, such as neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and alfa-fetoprotein (AFP), indicated no abnormalities. Bone marrow aspiration results were negative. Pulmonary computerized tomography (CT) and whole abdominal enhanced CT results indicated no apparent abnormalities, while echocardiography and subclavian artery ultrasound were also normal. We administered anti-infective therapy with ceftriaxone and azithromycin after hospitalization. After 3 days, her body temperature returned to normal, and her CRP level decreased to 40.4 mg/L.
At 2 days after admission, her serum creatinine was slightly increased at 87.9 μmol/L (reference range: 33 ~ 75 μmol/L), and 99mTc-DTPA renal dynamic imaging indicated the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 74.4 mL/min/1.73 m2 (reduced renal function). Urinalysis indicated hematuria and proteinuria, and analysis of urinary sediment indicated 2 erythrocyte casts per HPF and 34.7 RBCs per HPF, with a dysmorphic rate of 60%. She tested positive for ANA (1:1000), but negative for anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-GBM, ANCA (PR3-ANCA, cANCA, MPO-ANCA, pANCA), and anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibodies (PLA2R). The complement C3 and C4 levels were in the normal range, although the serum IgE was increased. Kidney ultrasound showed that both kidneys were enlarged with increased renal cortex echoes and blurred cortical and medullary boundaries.
Therefore we performed a kidney biopsy and examined 25 glomeruli using microscopy . Seven glomeruli had global sclerosis, 1 had cellular crescents, 11 had fibro cellular crescents, and 4 had fibrous crescents. The remaining glomerular aberrations were mild, with open capillary loops and no significant alterations in the mesangial area. However, the visceral and parietal epithelial cells were swollen, and Bowman’s capsule thickened and stratified. The renal tubular epithelial cells had granular degeneration, multifocal tubular atrophy (45%), the absence of tubular structures with interstitial fibrosis, and infiltration of lymphocytes and monocytes. There were no apparent changes in the arterioles. Immunofluorescence microscopy indicated 6 glomeruli had granular deposition of IgG (+) in the mesangial area and capillary wall, but the other results were negative (IgA−, IgM−, C1q−, Fib−, and C3±). Electron microscopy indicated one glomerulus had a slightly increased segmental glomerular mesangial matrix, a small number of electron-dense regions scattered in the mesangial area, swollen podocytes and parietal epithelial cells, and a collapsed capillary basement membrane. The thickness of the GBM was normal, and there was no evidence of delamination, tearing, or arachnoid changes. There were also no thickened inner lighter layers of the GBM. The mitochondria of the renal tubular epithelial cells were swollen, and the endoplasmic reticulum was expanded. The basement membranes of some tubules were thickened, and collagen fibers and a small number of monocytes and lymphocytes were present in the interstitium. There were no apparent changes in the arterioles.
Our results indicated the patient had ANCA-negative PICGN. We administered 2 courses of intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg/day for 3 days each), and then oral prednisone (60 mg/day) with gradual tapering. We simultaneously administered intravenous cyclophosphamide (500 mg/day for 2 days each month) and oral mycophenolate mofetil (MMF, 0.75 in the morning, 0.5 in the evening). At the 3-month follow-up (November 2020), the child’s 24-h urine protein level decreased but remained slightly elevated at 0.59 g/day (previously 1.90 g/day), her serum creatinine decreased to the normal range (42.6 μmol/L; previously 87.9 μmol/L), and her serum albumin increased to the normal range (40.2 g/L; previously 32.6 g/L).