A 23-year-old Chinese primigravida with PTLS was transferred to the hospital in her 40th week of gestation, owing to facial edema and blurred vision for two days. In the 17th week of pregnancy, she was diagnosed with PTLS (17p12p11.2 segment 3.1 Mb repeat) by testing her peripheral blood chromosome, but amniocentesis showed the fetus had no abnormal autosomes in the 29th week of pregnancy. Her past medical history included IgA nephropathy and she denied a history of obstructive sleep apnea, past anesthesia and medications. She was 155 cm tall and 63.5 kg weighted. She presented speech delay, intellectual disability, and behavioral disturbances. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, a heart rate of 80/min, a respiratory rate of 18/min, and a temperature of 36.0℃. Her heart rate was regular in rate and rhythm. Lung fields were clear to auscultation. She had peripheral facial paralysis and anhidrosis in the right face. Her neurological reflexes and muscular strength were normal. She could bend her spine well and her lumbar intervertebral spaces were palpable. Her airway evaluations were normal and the modified Mallampati classification was II. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm at a rate of 100/min. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated no abnormalities in cardiac structure and function. Urinary ultrasound scan showed that the left kidney was 12.5*4.8 cm and the right kidney was 12.3*5.5 cm. Obstetrical ultrasound scan revealed that the fetus was normally developed and in a transverse lie. The laboratory results were normal with the exception of a serum creatinine of 94 μmol/L (normal value, 45–84 μmol/L) and a 24-h urine protein quantitation of 2.93 g (normal value, 0.028–0.141 g). There was a preoperative multidisciplinary consultation, including nephrologist, neurologist, otolaryngologist. The neurologist consulted that she has right peripheral facial paralysis, her right eyelid could not close totally, her limbs could move freely, her muscle strength was V, her neural reflexes were normal and bilateral pathological signs were negative. The otolaryngologist consulted that the pharynx was slightly congested, and the tongue was not skewed. The nephrologist consulted that she should terminate the pregnancy as soon as possible because of elevated creatinine. Since her cervix was not favorable, the decision for caesarean section was made by the obstetrician. We planned to administer spinal anesthesia with a backup plan of general anesthesia for elective cesarean section.
Routine non-invasive monitoring was established, including non-invasive blood pressure, heart rate, pulse oximetry, and electrocardiography. We prepared video laryngoscope and general anesthetics (propofol, sufentanil and rocuronium). We decided not to use depolarizing muscle relaxants and inhaled anesthetics for avoidance of malignant hyperthermia-triggering agents.The patient was placed in the lateral decubitus position after intravenous access was obtained. Three milliliters of 1% lidocaine was used for local infiltration anesthesia at L2-3 interspace. A 18G 3.5 cm syringe needle was used as the guiding. Then a 25-gauge pencil-point spinal needle was inserted via it. After cerebrospinal fluid was detected, 1.7 ml 0.5% hypobaric bupivacaine was given into the subarachnoid cavity, resulting in a bilateral T8 sensory level by blunt pinprick five minutes later. The Apgar score for the newborn infant was 10 at 1st, 5th, and 10th minute. A total of 1100 mL solution was infused to maintain adequate fluid status. Her intraoperative vital signs were stable without using any vasoactive drugs. Postoperative pain control was maintained by PCIA (Patient-Controlled-Intravenous-Analgesia) Apparatus with morphine at a rate of 1 mg/h for 48 h. No complications of anesthesia were observed. The patient was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 3. Three months later, the patient and her family were followed up by phone and satisfied with the medical service. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal husband for publication of this case report.