A 69-year-old female with a past ocular and medical history significant for remote CRAO in the left eye, indolent B-cell lymphoma with associated cryoglobulinemia, and treated hepatitis B infection presented with flashes and acute decreased central vision in the right eye over 1 day. Blood pressure measured in the clinic was 240/110. Ophthalmic examination of the right eye demonstrated a vision of counting fingers, normal intraocular pressure, and normal anterior segment. A grade 3 rapid afferent pupillary defect and vision of hand motions was observed in the left eye. Dilated fundus examination in the right eye revealed superficial retinal opacification of the posterior pole with a cherry red spot . External examination of the patient’s extremities revealed rashes on her lower legs and purple discoloration of her feet. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) of the right eye revealed increased inner retinal hyperreflectivity and thickening with a prominent middle limiting membrane sign . Fluorescein angiography was deferred due to the patient’s impaired renal function. SD-OCT of the old CRAO in the left eye shows inner retinal thinning and atrophy .
Given the patient’s complicated medical history and elevated blood pressure at presentation, multiple aetiologies were considered including embolic, vascular, vasculitic, and neoplastic causes. She underwent a complete inflammatory and neoplastic workup including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti–β2 glycoprotein, cardiolipin antibody, hepatitis B serology, C3 complement, C4 complement, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, angiotensin converting enzyme, serum free light chains, and serum electrophoresis. Additional testing included carotid angiogram, echocardiography, and temporal artery biopsy. Laboratory studies revealed a cryocrit of 55% (normal < 1%), elevated titres of cryoglobulin IgG at 1.98 g/L and cryoglobulin IgM at 3.78 g/L (normal < 0.3 g/L) , and elevated kappa free light chain at 283.5 mg/L (normal < 0.06 g/L). The rest of her workup testing was unremarkable. Thus, detection of elevated tires of cryoglobulins raised suspicion of cryoglobulinemia associated CRAO.
As such, the patient was promptly referred for a rheumatology consult, oncology follow-up, and admitted by internal medicine to receive intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days. Rheumatology proposed that patient’s CRAO was likely associated with cryoglobulinemia vasculitis secondary to her kappa light chain restricted B-cell lymphoma. As such, she was started on rituximab as well as bendamustine chemotherapy for her lymphoma. Intravenous immunoglobulin and plasma exchange were also considered as potential treatment options but were refused by the patient due to religious beliefs as a Jehovah’s Witness. Unfortunately, visual acuity of the right eye was diminished to counting fingers at later follow up (day 10) with SD-OCT revealing resolving inner retinal thickening .