A 62-year-old, left-handed, Caucasian man undergoing HD every-other-day due to diabetes mellitus related ESRD, presented with intermittent episodes of involuntary blinking, speech stuttering and neck flexion on attempted oral communication. These episodes were particularly severe with stress or anxiety. Patient denied a preceding urge to move or talk. Patient denied oscillopsia, diplopia, ear clicking, tinnitus, dysphagia or hallucinations. There was no history of prior exposure to dopamine-blocking medications or quinolones. Patient was compliant with multiple medications for diabetes mellitus and ESRD. Three days prior to the onset of abnormal movements, patient had been empirically prescribed levofloxacin 500 mg. orally twice daily for urinary symptoms. No other medication had been recently added or discontinued, and there was no recent dose change on his usual medications. There was no family history of abnormal movements.
On examination, the patient was alert and fully oriented. Dystonic movements of upper facial, oromandibular and cervical muscles causing involuntary blinking, blepharospasm, tongue tremor and protrusion, dysarthria, platysmata contractions and anterocollis were observed. Bilateral ocular and palatal movements were normal without motor impersistence on voluntary tongue protrusion [Additional file : Video 1]. There was no facial or cervical muscle weakness. There were no other associated abnormal movements including limb dystonia, chorea or parkinsonism. There were no upper motor neuron or cerebellar signs.
Laboratory studies disclosed stable values in complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel including electrolytes and renal function tests (creatinine level range: 3.8–5.1 mg/dL). Urine culture was negative. No imaging studies were obtained.
Levofloxacin was discontinued and patient noted progressive improvement in the duration and severity of the dystonic episodes. Seven days later they had completely disappeared [Additional file : Video 2]. Furthermore, there were no more episodes in the following 3 months.