A 2-month-old asymptomatic female infant presented to our dermatological department, complaining of a steadily growing nodule located on the left mid-parietal scalp . It appeared as a mobile, well-circumscribed, smooth swelling, forming an alopecic area measuring approximately 3 cm × 3 cm. No dysmorphic features or other remarkable clinical signs or symptoms were observed. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly were not observed. Her birth and family history were unremarkable, and her nutritional status was good. On suspecting malignancies, dermatologists performed a punch skin biopsy from the scalp nodule. The biopsy results revealed multiple dermal nodules composed of monomorphic lymphoblasts, diffusely infiltrating the dermis and subcutis, consistent with LC. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive expression of CD22, CD19, CD34, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) in the nodules, which points toward a B-cell lineage. Meanwhile, laboratory examination showed a white blood cell count of 21,940/µl, a hemoglobin level of 7.6 g/dl, and a platelet count of 38,300/µl. The peripheral blood morphologic evaluation showed 45% circulating blasts. A bone marrow aspiration revealed 88% blast cells, with rare myeloid cells and lymphocytes upon morphological examination, while the bone marrow immunophenotype confirmed the presence of 83% of pro-B/B-I cells in ALL (with positive expression of CD19, cyCD22, and cyCD79a and negative expression of CD10), without any coexpression of myeloid markers together with B-lineage antigens. Cytogenetic analysis performed on bone marrow specimens detected the presence of chromosomal translocation t(9;11) (p21;q23). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis did not reveal leukemic infiltration of the central nervous system. The patient was subsequently treated according to protocol AIEOP BFM ALL 2017, high-risk (HR) pB-ALL . The immunophenotype of bone marrow on day 15 after the start of the treatment showed the presence of 43% blasts, which reduced to 18% on day 33. A month after the start of chemotherapy, the cutaneous lesion on the scalp completely regressed. The bone marrow evaluation by flow cytometry and molecular biology on day 65 confirmed the absence of blasts. The patient underwent Extended Consolidation (Consolext) for early HR pB-ALL in the R-eHR control arm, followed by Intensified Consolidation: Block HR-1′ followed by HR-2′ and HR-3′ (control arm in randomization R-HR). The patient was randomized without bortezomib and blinatumomab . Six months after the diagnosis, the patient finally received allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) with an HLA-identical matching donor after a preparatory induction regimen with treosulfan–fludarabine–thiotepa. No signs or symptoms of graft vs. host disease were reported. She developed hypertension, which is well controlled with antihypertensive drugs. She is now 20 months old and is still in remission 12 months post-HSCT. The timeline with relevant data from the episode of care is reported in .