A 25-year-old otherwise healthy male presented to our Emergency Department after a simple fall on his right outstretched hand. A thorough history did not reveal any predisposing risk factors, previous fractures or tumors. Upon clinical examination, there was a severe swelling and tenderness of the right wrist with a reduced range of motion.
Plain radiographs showed a dorsally displaced, intra-articular distal radius fracture. The distal metaphysis was almost entirely substituted by a cyst-like lesion containing free bony fragments, suggesting the ‘fallen fragment sign’. The subsequent computed tomography (CT; Discovery CT 750HD; GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) confirmed a pathologic DRF AO type 23-C2 as a result of a bone cyst. The lesion was surrounded by a sclerotic rim measured 3.8 × 2.3 × 1.7 cm (length × width × height) and displayed a cyst index of 3.77 . The intra-cavity density ranged between 40–55 Hounsfield Units (resembling blood). The radiographic findings are summarized in Figure . Taken together, the lesion was highly suggestive of a unicameral bone cyst (UBC). Differential diagnoses included an aneurysmatic bone cyst (ABC), a giant cell tumor (GCT) or a non-ossifying fibroma.
Because the tumor was suspected to be benign, we carried out surgical treatment without prior biopsy. Firstly, autologous intramedullary bone graft harvesting was performed at the ipsilateral femur with a reamer-irrigator-aspirator system (RIA, Synthes, Umkirch, Germany). The intraoperative setup and gathered bone graft are illustrated in Figure A and B. Secondly, the unicameral bone cyst was thoroughly debrided via a combined volar and dorsal approach to the distal radius. After collection of histological specimen, the anatomy of the radius was restored by open reduction and internal fixation using an angular stable volar plate (Distal Radius Plate, Aptus, Medartis, Basel, Switzerland). We then filled the debrided bone cyst with the harvested bone graft through the dorsal approach. To restrain the dorsal fragments and bone graft, a small double-rowed 6-hole plate (Aptus Hand Plate, Medartis, Basel, Switzerland) was used.Although the postoperative radiographs and CT scan revealed a complete filling of the bone cyst, it showed an intra-articular step of 2-3 mm as well as a distended scapholunate (SL) interval indicative of an SL-ligament tear .Therefore, arthroscopically assisted revision surgery was scheduled four days later. Despite the apparent SL distension, the SL-ligament was intact. Under arthroscopic guidance, the screws of the radial and intermediate column of the volar plate were loosened, the gap smoothened and the screws repositioned . Postoperative CT scans showed good restoration of the articular surface. To ensure sufficient pain therapy and early functional treatment the patient was kept in inpatient care for five more days. He recovered without any further complications.
The histopathological workup of the specimen revealed scattered giant cells and remains of fibrous membranes surrounded by red and white blood cells. There were no signs of any malignant transformation. The lesion was classified as a unicameral bone cyst (UBC). Two representative histological sections are presented in Figure . The collected material was decalcified with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and was stained with picric acid and acid fuchsin (elastica van Gieson’s stain).
Regular follow-ups were conducted six weeks, three and six months after the second surgery. Plain radiographs showed a well reconstructed and anatomically united distal radius as well as full bony integration of the autologous bone graft . At six months, the patient was pain-free without restrictions in range of motion or grip strength as compared to the unaffected hand (80° flexion, 80° extension, 30° ulnar deviation, 20° radial deviation, 90° pronation and 85° supination). The Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation Score(PRWE-Score) was excellent (4 points). The patient returned to work as a cook ten weeks after trauma.