A 21-year-old healthy man presented voluntarily for a routine research appointment involving the assessment of retinal vessel reactivity using the Dynamic Retinal Vessel Analyser (DVA) at the Aston Academy of Life Sciences, Aston University, Birmingham. This device consists of a digital fundus camera combined with a CCD camera for electronic online image acquisition coupled to a video recorder for archiving . During a routine experiment, a chosen vessel segment of approximately 500 μm is scanned at a rate of 25 Hz. After baseline measurements, flicker light is generated optoelectronically by chopping the fundus illumination at a frequency of 12.5 Hz.
After 20 minutes of room acclimatization to obtain stabile haemodynamic conditions, systemic blood pressure (BP) was measured three times (1 minute apart) using a manual sphygmomanometer. Systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) values were obtained; the average readings for SBP and DBP were then used to calculate the mean arterial BP (MABP) using the formula: MABP = 2/3 × DBP+1/3 × SBP. After instilling one drop of oxybuprocaine hydrochloride 0.4% in the right eye, intraocular pressure (IOP) was also measured by means of a handheld contact tonometer. The IOP and MBP measurements were used to calculate the mean ocular perfusion pressure (MOPP) according to the formula: MOPP = 2/3 × MABP-IOP.
After full pupil dilation was reached by using tropicamide 1.0% retinal diameters of the superior temporal retinal artery and vein, measured approximately 1.5 disc diameters away from the optic nerve head, were assessed continuously over 350 seconds by using the DVA machine according to a previously established protocol . Briefly, the measurement steps were: 50 seconds of still illumination (baseline recording) followed by three cycles of 20 seconds of flicker stimulation interspersed with 80 seconds still illumination (representing recovery time). The main measured outcome is the vessel width expressed in units of measurement; for the stimulation with flicker light, the outcome was defined as percent changed to baseline. In addition to this standard measure, the time needed to reach maximum dilation in both the artery and the vein during fasting and normal conditions (called the 'reaction time') was calculated.
The results of the initial measurements under fasting conditions and after a meal are shown in Table , and Figure and Figure . As compared with what is expected in a healthy subject under normal conditions [,] our results have shown a subnormal retinal vessels response in both the arteriole (mean dilation = 2.59 ± 1.98%) and venule (mean dilation = 5.19 ± 2.53%). This observation has triggered a more detailed history of the patient's background and dietary habits; this later step revealed that the subject had been voluntarily fasting for 20 hours prior to the research appointment. In order to enable us to see if this particular aspect has had any influence on the measurements, the subject was sent to have a meal and all measurements were repeated immediately afterwards.
The results of the second set of measurements are shown in Table . The difference between the measurements performed before and after the meal were statistically significant for the retinal venous dilation (p = 0.03) but not for the retinal artery dilation (p = 0.08).
With the subject's consent, the experiment was repeated on three additional occasions, each one month apart. During these subsequent tests, the subject was in a similar physiological condition to the initial experiment. Results of all observations are shown in Table , and Figures , and . Retinal vein dilation and reaction time, but not artery dilation and reaction time, were statistically significantly lower in fasting versus non-fasting conditions (dilation: p = 0.02 and p = 0.08; reaction time: p = 0.03 and p > 0.05, respectively). These results were comparable with the first observation that triggered the subsequent tests (a blunted vascular response during fasting and a normal response during after a meal).
Although SBP was statistically different when measured in the fasting versus non-fasting state (111.5 ± 1.17; 113.5 ± 1.17; p = 0.01) the MABP, IOP and OPP were not statistically different in the fasting versus non-fasting state (p = 0.24, p = 0.11 and p = 0.64, respectively).