A 54 years old female first presented to hematology department of West China Hospital in November 2012 with numbness and pain of right upper extremity lasting for 2 months. She denied any past medical history. A 5 × 5 cm mass in upper outer quadrant of right breast was palpated during the physical examination. A neurological examination showed diminished flexion and extension of right fingers. Electromyogram (EMG) showed peripheral neurogenic damage of right upper extremity. Fine needle aspiration of the mass revealed some atypical cells scattered or focally infiltrated in the breast stroma. Immunohistochemistry of the atypical cells showed diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). CT scan of chest and bone marrow studies were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no nucleated cells, protein 0.56 g/L, normal chlorides and glucose. A flow cytometry examination showed no abnormal cells. She received 2 courses R-hyperCVAD(rituximab + scheme A: cyclophosphamide + vindesine + doxorubicin + dexamethasone/scheme B: methotrexate + cytarabine), 2 courses R-CHOP (rituximab + cyclophosphamide + vindesine + liposomal doxorubicin + prednisone) and 4 times intrathecal preventive chemotherapy (methotrexate + cytarabine + dexamethasone). Protein level of CSF fluctuated between 0.54-0.61 g/L and no abnormal cell was detected by flow cytometry. She was considered in complete remission. The patient was stable during regular follow-ups.
In February 2014, right upper extremity numbness reoccurred and developed nonproductive cough, and shortness of breath which worsened at night. She was hospitalized. Tactile hypoesthesia and hypoalgesia of right forearm and dorsal ulnar side of right palm were also noted again. Her lungs were clear by auscultation and a chest CT scan was normal. She was given an empirical treatment using antibiotics and glucocorticoid. Her symptoms deteriorated. She developed marked numbness and severe pain in the right arm, also strength reduction and limited activities. She showed paroxysmal choke to cough and hoarse voice. Twenty days after admission she developed acute respiratory distress and stridor. An urgent laryngoscopy revealed bilateral vocal cord paralysis and laryngeal obstruction. An emergency tracheotomy was performed due to the trachea asphyxia. Enhanced MRIs of head neck and thorax were unremarkable . PET/CT, however, showed significant abnormally in the area of the right vagus nerve running zone and right brachial plexus running zone, indicating tumor invasion . CSF protein level was 0.52 g/L and no abnormal cell was detected by flow cytometry. Considering the patient’s medical history of lymphoma, symptoms and signs as well as the PET/CT results, a diagnosis of peripheral neurolymphomatosis (involving the right brachial plexus nerve, vagus nerve) and extranodal relapse of DLBCL was established after other factors, such as chemotherapy, infections, tumor compression and paraneoplastic neuropathy had been taken into account.
The patient was given five courses R-DHAP(rituximab + cisplatin + cytarabine + dexamethasone) and high dose methotrexate impact chemotherapy. The patient received 30-35Gy involved field radiotherapy. All her symptoms resolved and her tracheostomy tube was removed. A follow-up PET/CT showed complete remission of the tumor involvement in the right vagus and right brachial plexus nerve . She remains stable as of now.