A 14-year-old boy went to the hospital for a health examination, which detected a slight increase in bilirubin that was followed up regularly. Then, the boy suffered from an intermittent fever, mainly a moderate-to-high fever, lasting for 1 week. After a health examination, we found that the boy’s levels of CK, myoglobin, bilirubin and uric acid were all significantly increased. Serum biochemical test results are shown in Table . Physical examination showed that his body mass index was 22.73 kg/m2 (reference: 17.1–23 kg/m2), and muscular tone and power in both lower extremities were normal. We suspected this was as characteristic of RM. Then, the boy was advised to take oral sodium bicarbonate to alkalize urine, fructose and vitamin C to improve metabolism and promote cell repair until another health examination 1 month later. We found that the boy’s levels of CK, myoglobin, bilirubin and uric acid CK were higher than the previous levels. The results of these serum biochemical test are also shown in Table . This was the highest CK level and myoglobin level we had detected so far. His vital signs were stable, and although he had no discomfort at rest, discomfort manifested as calf myalgia after strenuous exercise. Immune function, abdominal and cardiac ultrasound, dynamic electrocardiogram, electromyography, and calf muscle MRI were all unremarkable. At the age of 12, he joined the school’s athletics team, and at the age of 13, he joined the school’s tennis team. Appropriate exercise can be tolerated by the boy. When experiencing high-intensity exercise, the boy had myalgia throughout the body. To cope with the physical education test, the boy performed high-intensity long jump training every day. However, after 5–6 long jumps, the boy began to experience fatigue, low back pain, calf pain and dark urine, while this kind of signs did not manifest among his companions. After he sat down and rested for a while, his symptoms were relieved. The parents claimed that when their child was 13 years old, he suffered from leg pain during the night-time. At that time, there were protein and red blood cells in the urinalysis, and the urine was light red. Unfortunately, no further examination was performed at that time. The boy had hyperbilirubinaemia and hyperuricaemia since the age of 14 because of high-intensity long jump training, while CK and myoglobin levels were normal in between episodes. Sometimes, there was a small amount of red blood cells and protein appearing in the urinalysis, and a slight increase in serum creatinine. Strangely, the boy underwent a bronchoscopy under general anesthesia at the age of 12 due to mycoplasma pneumonia, prior to diagnosis and this did not trigger an episode of RM. He had no chronic diseases and was not on any long-term oral medications. There was no family history of RM or any other musculoskeletal disease. His parents were both Chinese and non-consanguineous. His father was obese and had fatty liver, hyperbilirubinaemia and hyperuricaemia, but he had never experienced myalgia. His mother suffered from acute nephritis when she was young. Considering the risk of anaesthesia and invasive nature of the procedure, the parents of the boy did not give consent for the muscle biopsy.
Peripheral blood samples from the proband and the parents were collected and high-throughput genomic sequencing (next-generation sequencing) of 233 genes related to neuromuscular diseases was performed by Beijing Mygenostics Co. Ltd. Informed consent was obtained from the proband and his guardian for gene detection. The results showed that the LPIN1 gene variants in this proband included the missense variant c.2047A > G(p.I683V) and in-frame variant c.2107_2108 insAGG(p.Q703delin sQE). The c.2047A > G variant of the 2047th nucleotide in the coding region from adenine to guanine results in the 683rd amino acid changing from isoleucine to valine; c.2107_2108 insAGG changed by way of indels, and the 703rd amino acid changed from glutamine (Q) to glutamine (Q) and glutamate (E), which caused the protein length to change . Sanger sequencing confirmed that the proband had compound heterozygous LPIN1 variants; the former was from his father, while the latter was from his mother . According to the standards and guidelines of the American Society for Medical Genetics and Genomics in 2015 , both variants were classified as variants of uncertain significance. The frequency of the missense variant and the in-frame variant detected in our case in the normal population database was 0.00002, indicating that both were low-frequency variants (criteria: PM2), and each bioinformatics protein function prediction software predicted the missense variant to be harmful (criteria: PP3) and the other to be unknown. The in-frame variant resulted in a change in protein length caused by a small insertion in the nonrepetitive sequence region (criteria: PM4).
Although the result of genetic testing was uncertain regarding pathogenicity, we communicated the possibility of LPIN1-related RM to the parents and recommended that the boy restrict strenuous exercise, have proper rest, drink adequate water, supplement enough energy and take oral sodium bicarbonate (0.5 g/time, 3 times/day) for urine alkalization when myalgia and dark urine occur. Under our guidance, his daily life and studies have not been affected.