An 8-year-old male Ugandan child presented with a 1-year history of a progressive abdominal swelling and flank pains. His mother reported they have been in and out of hospitals with the child due to frequent complains of abdominal discomfort. He was treated with antipyretics and unspecified antibiotics for 6 months prior to their referral to our facility for further investigation and management. There was no history of constipation, hematuria, jaundice, urinary retention, or bleeding diathesis. He was the third born in a family of 5 siblings. There was no history of similar condition in the family. There was no family history of malignancy. His father is a businessman, and the mother is a housewife. His childhood was uneventful.
On clinical examination the child was stable and active (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Functional Status 3). His vitals were within the normal limits. Conjunctivae was pink and Chest was essentially normal on physical examination. The abdomen was distended and had mild generalized tenderness. There was a palpable mass, approximately 7 finger breaths in the right upper quadrant, which was firm, non-tender, and not ballotable and did not cross the midline. The mass was dull to percussion and active bowel sounds appreciated. There were no enlarged peripheral lymph nodes.
Complete blood count showed mild anemia with a hemoglobin level of 9.5 g/dl, while the other indices were normal. Renal function test and liver function tests were all normal.
Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed a heterogeneous huge mass in the right lobe of the liver, involving segment V, VI, VII and VIII measuring about 11.8 cm by 9.71 cm. The liver was enlarged in size measuring 17.88 cm at mid clavicular line. There was a moderate flow in color Doppler in the mass. Besides there were multiple hypoechoic solid lesions on both kidneys of varying sizes, the largest on the left measured 3.02 cm by 2.55 cm. The inferior venacava showed normal caliber and flow. The origins of the right and left renal veins were visualized but the mid and distal portions were compressed by the masses. There were no enlarged lymph nodes noted in the abdomen .
Contrast enhanced chest-abdomen-pelvis computed tomography (CT) scan showed huge ill-defined, homogeneously enhancing (43–70 HU) hypo-dense solid mass in V, VI, VII and VIII segments of the liver, measuring 16.39 cm by 11.21 cm by 10.2 cm. There was an ill-defined enhancing (30–63 HU) hypo dense solid mass in the right kidney measured 4.89 cm by 4.96 cm by 3.9 cm. There was an ill-defined enhancing (35–62 HU) hypo dense solid mass in the left kidney measured 4.88 cm by 5.92 cm by 4.5 cm with areas of central necrosis. The right renal vein was infiltrated. The right renal artery however was normal. The left renal artery and vein were normal. The ureters and urinary bladder were normal. The portal vein, intrahepatic ducts and common bile ducts were normal. The abdominal aorta and inferior vena cava were normal. There were no enlarged abdominal lymph nodes. There was no ascites. The visualized bones were normal with no focal bone lesion. The radiologic chest anatomy was normal . Histological examination of renal biopsy specimen was favorable for chemotherapeutic regimens.
In consultation with pediatric oncology tumor board, nephron-sparing surgery was deemed in appropriate given the poor long-term survival even in patients without distant metastasis. Our patient was commenced on combination chemotherapy (adriamycin and vincristine) with a palliative intent. The dose of vincristine was 1.5 mg/m2 body surface area administered as intravenous bolus injection and that of Adriamycin was 50 mg/m2 BSA infused over 4–6 h were given at 21-day interval. After three cycles of chemotherapy, the abdominal distention had reduced, and the child gained some weight. He remained well until first 6-months from the initiation of his chemotherapy until we unfortunately lost him to follow up.