A 73-year-old woman was admitted to Chosun University Hospital, Gwang-ju, Korea. She was complaining of painful swelling and tenderness on the dorsum of the proximal left wrist and hand. The symptoms had persisted for approximately 2 months. A local clinic suspected cellulitis and administered cefoperazone/sulbactam for 10 days. However, the wound became worse, and erythema formed on the left hand. She had a clinical history of hypertension (20 years), diabetes (2 months), and a left distal radial and ulnar styloid process fracture that had occurred 2 years prior. In addition, she had undergone a discectomy at the L4-5 level one year previously.
A physical examination revealed a 4 × 3 cm, poorly defined, erythematous papule which was fluctuant, with pustules and crusts on the dorsum of left hand. Movements of the wrist, hand and fingers were slightly restricted and painful. Aspirated fluid from the lesion was obtained for mycological examination, and skin biopsies were obtained for histological and mycological examination.
The laboratory findings revealed that the white blood cell (WBC) count was 9360/mm3, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 24 mm/h, and the C-reactive protein (C-RP) level was 1.13 mg/dL. An X-ray of the left hand revealed a healed fracture of the distal radius. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left wrist revealed cellulitis of the dorsum of the wrist and hand and tenosynovitis of the extensor tendons . Histological sections of the skin biopsies were stained with Gomori methenamine silver and revealed acute and chronic granulomatous inflammation with fungal hyphae and spores.
The clinical specimens were cultured on Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (SDA) containing chloramphenicol at 30 °C. On the 9th day, the culture yielded grey soft fungus on the front and dark-brown fungus on the other side. The clinical isolate was initially identified as an Alternaria species via a microscopic examination with lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) staining. No other microorganisms were isolated from the clinical specimens. Because the wounds had improved, we continued treatment with wound irrigation, debridement and adjuvant fluconazole therapy with IV fluconazole 400 mg once a day for 14 days and changed to oral fluconazole 200 mg for 24 days. DNA sequencing of total genomic DNA extracted from purified colonies was performed to confirm the microbiological species.
Gene sequence analysis of the ITS region and D1/D2 regions of the 26S ribosomal DNA of rRNA genes was carried out. The ITS region (including the 5.8S rRNA gene) and 26S rRNA gene D1/D2 domains were amplified with the primer pair pITS-F (5′-GTCGTAACAAGGTTAACCTGCGG-3′) and pITS-R (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) and the primer pair NL1 (5'-GCATATCAATAAGCGGAGGAAAAG-3') and NL4 (5'-GGTCCGTGTTTCAAGACGG-3'), respectively . The fungus was identified as Pseudallescheria boydii (anamorph: S. apiospermum) with 100% homology according to the BLASTn program.
In vitro susceptibility testing of the mold isolate against amphotericin B, itraconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole, caspofungin and micafungin was performed by a broth microdilution assay according to the methods of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38-A2 . Briefly, 100 μl culture preparations (standard RPMI 1640 broth [0.2% dextrose], final inoculum concentrations ranging from 0.4 × 104 to 5 × 104 CFU/ml) were inoculated into 96-well microtiter plates containing 100 μl drug dilutions, and the plates were incubated at 35 °C for 48 h. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for amphotericin B, itraconazole, posaconazole, and voriconazole were determined visually as the lowest concentrations with no visible growth (100% inhibition) . For echinocandins (caspofungin and micafungin), the end points were determined as the lowest concentrations of drug leading to the growth of small, rounded, compact hyphal forms in comparison to the hyphal growth observed in the control well (MEC, minimal effective concentration). The quality control strains Candida krusei ATCC 6258 and C. parapsilosis ATCC 22019 were employed as controls.
A follow-up culture of the wound was performed after 1 month and revealed no fungal growth. Ultimately, we reached a definitive diagnosis of tenosynovitis caused by S. apiospermum.
The patient was treated with oral fluconazole 200 mg for 4 weeks. After her discharge from the hospital, we obtained the results of in vitro susceptibility testing of the isolates obtained from the aspirated fluid . The last follow-up in the outpatient clinic was 4 months after treatment. The patient recovered completely, with no recurrence.