A 36-year-old otherwise healthy male presented to an outside hospital with blurred vision for few days and acute onset of aggressive behavior and agitation. While in the emergency department, he deteriorated rapidly to a Glasgow Coma Scale of 8 requiring intubation. A head computed tomography (CT) revealed a large, bifrontal extra-axial mass of the anterior skull base, measuring 52 mm × 37 mm. The lesion also involved the ethmoid cells and frontal sinuses as well as the right orbit. It was infiltrating the dura. Extended peritumoral brain edema with significant mass effect was also noted . The patient was emergently transferred to our hospital. On arrival, he had fixed mid-dilated pupils, with minimal flexion movement to pain and intact corneal and gag reflexes. Laboratory tests were within normal limits. He was treated with intravenous push of high- dose dexamethasone (20 mg) and mannitol (70 g) and was immediately transferred to the operating room for a bifrontal decompressive craniectomy and tumor debulking.
At surgery, the tumor was found to be very vascular. On opening the dura, the brain was swollen and of firm consistency with no pulsations. A debulking operation was performed along with bifrontal decompressive craniectomy. An intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor was inserted to the parenchyma. The ICP levels were <25 mmHg on average during the postoperative course, the patient was in Glasgow Come Scale 3, with no brain stem reflexes. Postoperative head CT demonstrated persistent, bilateral, massive edema, the patient’s condition remained critical and he passed away 1 week later.
Histological examination for hematoxylin and eosin stain showed a tumor comprised small to medium size cells, some of them with clear cytoplasm. Rhabdoid cells were not noted. The tumor shows areas of necrosis and high levels of mitotic and apoptotic activity [ and ]. The stain for INI1 was negative (loss of expression) . Immunohistochemical stains were diffusely and strong positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and P63, partially positive for smooth muscle antigen (SMA) , glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) , B-cell lymphoma 2, and vimentin (VIM), focally positive for pan-KER and KER 8, and negative for OLIG2, S100, desmin, synaptophysin, NEU-N, and chromogranin. The proliferative index Ki-67 was 25–30%. The initial diagnosis was ATRT. Later, the possibility of SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal carcinoma was added as a differential diagnosis.