We present a case involving a 76-year-old female patient who was first seen by her doctor for problems and discomfort with deglutition. Upon an objective examination, the thyroid gland appeared to be mildly enlarged (more on the right side of the neck) with a hard consistency, but mobile relative to the underlying tissues. The only comorbidity was a mental illness.
An ultrasound (US) of the neck was immediately performed and revealed a multinodular retrosternal goiter, for which the larger nodule in the right lobe presented with a diameter of approximately 6 cm and complete ring calcification. The goiter extended into the upper mediastinum and was lying on the aortic arch.
Due to the goiter’s retrosternal configuration, we performed a CT scan of the neck and thorax. The scan showed the posterior dislocation of the epiaortic vessels and lateral dislocation and compression of the pharynx. The large nodule described previously based on US exhibited a mixed type of calcification; in fact, in the context of a large egg-shell calcification, multiple spots with microcalcifications were observed (A and B).
Given the notable dimensions of the goiter, its symptomatic disposition and the extreme calcification of the nodule, we chose to avoid an ultrasound-guided ago-biopsy due to the low probability of obtaining a good tissue sample and the consequent diagnosis, and in agreement with the patient’s endocrinologist, we decided to directly perform a standard thyroidectomy through a cervicotomy. The primary difficulty during the operation was the complete calcification of the entire right lobe, which was adherent to the trachea and vascular structures (A and B). However, no major bleeding or complications occurred during surgery.
Macroscopically, the pathologist described a nodule with a weight of 130 g that was partially cavitated and extremely hard when cut (A and B).
A microscopic histological examination excluded the presence of atypical cells and revealed nodular hyperplasia in fibrotic areas.
The patient’s postoperative course did not involve any complications related to the surgical procedure, and she was discharged two days after the surgery.