Patient J. K. is an 8-year-old girl who suffered from osteosarcoma in the left proximal tibia. After biopsy confirmed her diagnosis, she received two courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, including cisplatin, doxorubicin, and ifosfamide. After that, a limb-salvage operation was undertaken in July 2022 . The first step was to remove the tumor mass with an appropriate margin, along with its surrounding soft tissues. The surrounding bone was then inactivated by microwave ablation, and the necrotic tumor tissue and surrounding soft tissue were completely removed. Thereafter, the weak area of the bone structure was filled and strengthened with bone cement, and the inactivated bone was fixed with bone plate after reimplantation. Postoperative treatment was routine, and the drainage tube was pulled out when the drainage volume was less than 20 mL over 24 h. Postoperative hematological examination showed the following: WBC (white blood cell) 9.35 × 109/L, CRP (C-reactive protein) 51 mg/L, ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) 20 on the first day. One week later, the values were as follows: WBC 7.98 × 109/L, CRP 8.79 mg/L, ESR 77. Postoperative temperature was normal, and there was no other sign of postoperative infection. Two weeks after the operation, the patient presented with a 2 cm incision in front of her tibia with poor healing, so the sutures in this area were retained while elsewhere they were removed. Postoperative chemotherapy was carried out on schedule, and local small wounds were treated with dressing change.
During the second chemotherapy after the operation, the patient's temperature rose abnormally, with a recorded high of 39°. The wound healed poorly with redness and swelling. Secretion from the wound was tested, and bacterial culture tested positive for staphylococcus aureus. In response, we halted the patient's chemotherapy regimen, placed her on antibiotic treatment, and performed vacuum sealing drainage treatment on the wound. After 2 weeks of antibiotics, the patient's temperature returned to normal, and the swelling of the nonunion wound had subsided. The patient continued to change the dressing after discharge.
At 3 months after the operation, the patient returned to the hospital for the third round of postoperative chemotherapy. The patient's condition was evaluated as local wound nonunion, and, as no obvious signs of systemic infection were apparent, and the third round of chemotherapy was completed. However, 3 days after the completion of chemotherapy, the patient once again experienced a temperature spike of 39°, local redness and swelling, and knee joint redness and swelling. Staphylococcus aureus was again detected by bacterial culture, and WBC 0.87 × 109/L, CRP 143 mg/L, and ESR 109 were detected by blood routine examination. The patient was treated with elevated leukocytes and antibiotics. After 2 weeks of drug treatment, although the patient's white blood cells returned to normal, her temperature still fluctuated between 37° and 38°, her knee joint was still red and swollen, and viscous fluid exuded from the wound, necessitating surgical intervention .
For this patient, removal of internal fixation and inactivated bone, thorough debridement, placement of ALCS, and secondary joint prosthesis proved effective methods to control infection. Considering that the patient is still in her growth stage, we hoped that the implanted ALCS could also play a certain role in the design of the surgery. Drawing on past clinical experience with children's half joint prosthesis, we used 3D laser printers to make a personalized ALCS mold.
The preoperative design steps are as follows.
1. Referring to the initial surgical osteotomy position and the size of the proximal tibia of the healthy limb, optimize the structure and design the size of the spacer .
2. The spacer mold is designed in two parts, with the joint end processed with titanium alloy to obtain a better joint surface, and the other parts printed with nylon material into four components. Nylon components and metal components are fixed with screws to form a complete structure .
3. Design a space occupying device and use it as a medullary needle for internal support and fixation of the cement spacer .
Preoperative experimental use of the model to make a bone cement spacer was successful, and the joint surface shape was satisfactory, faithfully simulating the shape of the autologous tibial joint. To prevent adhesion between the ALCS and the mold, two innovative measures had been applied: first, we applied paraffin oil inside the mold, and second, we took out the ALCS before it was fully solidified.
The patient underwent reoperation according to the preoperative plan in November 2022 . During the operation, a large amount of viscous yellow liquid was found in the joint, which was not connected with the damaged skin. There is also a large amount of inflammatory fluid around the metal plate. There was a slight bony connection between the replanted bone and the host bone. After the screws were removed, the inactivated bone was taken out for thorough debridement. During the operation, a 3D printing mold was used to make an ALCS. After successful production, it was fixed at the site of the bone defect of the proximal tibia in the form of a half joint prosthesis. Following the operation, the wound was rinsed and drained before being reclosed.
Three days after operation, the patient's temperature returned to normal. The irrigation tube was pulled out 1 week after the operation, and the drainage tube was pulled out 3 days after that. Suture was removed 2 weeks after the operation. At 2, 3, and 4 weeks after the operation, routine blood examination showed that WBC, CRP, and ESR were all normal, so antibiotics were stopped. In total, antibiotics were used intravenously for 32 days. No recurrence of local infection was detected in follow-up, and the patient returned to normal postoperative chemotherapy. Afterwards, the incision healed normally.
The knee joint was fixed with a hinge brace for 6 weeks after operation to promote scar healing of the surrounding soft tissue. The patient could walk with the help of a cane at 3 weeks after operation. Although the patient had lateral instability of the knee joint, it did not affect the patient's walking. The patient was required to wear hinged braces to improve her knee stability. There was no obvious pain in the knee joint. At 3 months after the operation, the range of motion of the knee joint was 0°–60°.