A 45-year-old Caucasian lady, with no significant past ocular or medical history, presented with bilateral ocular pain, redness and photophobia. Visual acuities at first attendance were 6/9 OU. She had evidence of 3+ anterior chamber cells and 2+ flare bilaterally with no fibrin, hypopyon or posterior synechiae. There was no vitritis or retinitis. Initial intraocular pressures (IOP) were 10 mmHg OU by Goldmann applanation tonometry (GAT). There were no systemic symptoms, no predisposing factors for uveitis and no personal or family history of HLA-B27-related disease. The patient was commenced on regular guttae Dexamethasone 0.1 % six times per day and Cyclopentolate 1 % twice daily.
On review one week later visual acuities had deteriorated to hand movements at one metre, bilaterally. Anterior chamber activity was unchanged but intraocular pressures were now unrecordable and there were bilateral Descemet’s membrane folds. Fundal examination revealed bilateral choroidal folds , with optical coherence tomography confirming no cystoid macular edema or epiretinal membrane . There was no evidence of optic disc edema, peripheral choroidal detachment or exudative retinal detachment. Gonioscopy revealed open iridocorneal angles.
A diagnosis was made of hypotony maculopathy secondary to acute anterior uveitis with iridocyclitis. She was commenced on guttae Prednisolone 1 % hourly and Atropine 1 % twice daily and received intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g on three consecutive days, before continuing with oral Prednisolone 60 mg, reducing gradually over the next several months.
All investigations were unremarkable, with normal full blood count, urea and electrolytes, c-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, angiotensin converting enzyme, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, immunoglobulins, complement C3 and C4 and protein electrophoresis. Treponemal and Bartonella serology were negative, as was that for HIV. HLA-B27 was negative. Chest X-ray demonstrated no abnormality. No aqueous sample or vitreous biopsy was taken.
Hypotony continued for the next two months, with IOP measured at 2 – 4 mmHg bilaterally and visual acuities varying between hand movements and 6/24, but eventually stabilized with IOP of 13 mmHg on each side. With resolution of hypotony maculopathy visual acuities returned to 6/6 OU. The patient’s vision remains stable with no further episodes of anterior uveitis or hypotony, six months after resolution of the episode.