A 58-year-old African black woman with a medical history of diabetes presented to our institute with a rapidly growing skin lesion that was initially a small, round, painless nodule on the posterior face of the right elbow. In a physical examination at the time of admission, a 50 × 30-mm purple lesion with an irregular surface on the posterior face of the right elbow and extending to the forearm was found. No ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes were found. The patient had stage II disease. A biopsy excision was performed. The pathological examination showed a proliferation of round, small cells . An immunohistochemical study using specific staining techniques confirmed the diagnosis of MCC and, more specifically, cytokeratin 20 (CK20) expression, which is often evident as a paranuclear globule ; synaptophysin ; CD99; neuron-specific enolase; and negativity of the melanocytic and muscular markers. The patient was lost to follow-up and consulted us 4 months later. The physical examination done at that time revealed a large inflammatory lesion of 100 × 50 mm on the third inferior side of the right arm with three ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the right arm showed a process of the soft parts of 103 × 63 × 50 mm with three metastatic ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes .
A biopsy of one of the axillary lymph nodes confirmed the diagnosis of MCC. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no distant metastasis. The treatment planning consisted of surgical amputation of the right arm with ipsilateral axillary lymph node dissection. A histopathologic examination revealed negative surgical margins. The margins were found to be microscopically uninvolved by carcinoma, with the closest margin at 4 mm (deep margin). Of 31 excised lymph nodes, 13 that were metastatic with capsular rupture were found.
The patient was referred to our radiation therapy department. At that admission, the examination revealed a clean amputation stump and no axillary lymphadenopathy, but the patient had a fixed mass in the right axilla. A CT scan showed a process in the right axillary region extending to the right subscapularis fossa . No surgical treatment was possible. A decision was made to perform radiation therapy of the right axillary and subscapularis regions. The total dose was 66 Gy with a conventional fractionation of 2 Gy per fraction in 33 sessions, 5 days per week, in the right axillary and subscapular areas in two oblique fields: anterior right and posterior left fields. The patient had grade 2 radiodermatitis as the only acute toxicity of radiotherapy.
Six months later, the patient presented with dyspnea caused by lung metastasis, and she died 1 month afterward as a result of respiratory failure.