A 64-year-old man, referred by a private doctor, walked into the accident and emergency department of our major regional hospital. He had been experiencing abdominal discomfort for over a month, weight loss and poor appetite. He was a chronic smoker and user of alcohol, with benign colon polyps. He reported having no fever, tea-colored urine, or symptoms of gastrointestinal bleeding. Hard, irregular hepatomegaly was present on physical exam, and liver ultrasound revealed cirrhosis and bilateral liver masses. On admission, his liver function was within normal range. However, alpha feto protein (AFP) was 4522 ng/mL . HbsAG was negative. An abdominal CT, performed one week later, showed a 15 × 10 x 13 cm bilobar mass, involving segments 4, 5, and 8 of the liver, without evidence of portal vein thrombus or extrahepatic spread. The patient was classified as having Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage B disease, and a Child-Pugh score of A . Hepatic angiogram revealed that approximately 90% of the tumor vasculature was supplied by right hepatic artery branches. Both portal veins were compressed by the tumor, but still patent.
Downstaging the tumor was a priority. Y90 radioembolization has been shown to contribute to a reduction in tumor size in patients with bulky disease, and was considered as a therapeutic choice. At 5 weeks post admission, Tc-99 m macroaggregated albumin (Tc-99 m MAA) SPECT-CT was utilized to assess the lung shunting percentage and tumor-to-normal (T/N) ratio , which were 9.06% and 1.56, respectively, and to determine the patient’s eligibility for Y90 radioembolization. In an attempt to promote a better T/N ratio, coil embolization of 2 branches of the right hepatic artery supplying S7 and S8, which did not supply the tumor, was conducted. Tc-99 m MAA SPECT-CT was repeated one week later at which time the T/N ratio improved to 3.1. Y90 radioembolization proceeded with administration of 3.7 GBq SIR-Spheres resin microspheres (SIRTEX Medical; Sydney, Australia): 0.92 GBq and 2.78 GBq to the left and right hepatic artery, respectively .
On follow-up CT scan of the liver 3 months after Y90 therapy, the tumor was reduced to 6.5 cm . However, while the patient’s bilirubin levels remained within normal range, AFP levels began to rise, suggesting residual tumor activity . At that time, resection was considered.
According to the follow-up CT scan, the volume of the lateral segment (S2 + S3) and the total liver volume were analyzed by Syngo.Via (Siemens Healthineers; Erlangen, Germany) at 621 mL and 1324 mL, respectively (a,b). The functional remnant volume (FRV) for right hepatectomy was 47% by volume (FRV% = volume of reserve lobe / whole liver volume X 100%).
An indocyanine green (ICG) dye test, used to estimate hepatic functional reserve and ICG retention at 15 min, was 22%, higher than the common parameter for right hepatectomy, <14%. [,] After discussion with surgeons, oncologists, and radiologists, at five and a half months post Y90 radioembolization, a Tc-99 m SC SPECT-CT scan was introduced.
An outside facility prepared 3 mCi of Tc-99 m SC, heated without filtrating , with the anticipation that these larger particles would accumulate mainly in the liver and spleen. The colloid was injected intravenously. Twenty minutes after injection, planar images (abdomen) and SPECT-CT with attenuation correction were performed. A dual-head SPECT-CT camera with low-energy, high-resolution collimators was used (GE Discovery NM/CT 670). A total of 60 pair views, each of 20-second duration, were acquired over 360°, in a 128 × 128 matrix. The SPECT-CT data were reconstructed using ordered 3-dimensional subset expectation maximization (OSEM-3D) with 2 iterations, 16 subsets, and a Butterworth filter (GE Xeleris Functional imaging workstation; GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) [, , ,], The percentage uptake on the left lobe of total liver was calculated from both SPECT-CT data by OsiriX software (Geneva, Switzerland) and the 2 anterior and posterior planar views by using the geometrical mean method.
A large photopenic area in the right lobe of the liver was observed, attributed to necrosis resulting from the Y90 treatment, with minimal uptake in the remaining areas of the right lobe. Conversely, the left lobe experienced liver hypertrophy (a,b). By using the falciform ligament as a boundary, the percentage of left lobe uptake to whole liver uptake was calculated at 87.1% (% left lobe uptake = left lobe uptake count / total liver uptake count x 100%).
Liver function tests remained within the normal range ; ICG was 20% after recheck. As the tumor occupied a large volume of a portion of the liver that was determined to be nonfunctioning, extended right hepatectomy was offered to the patient, with consideration of both benefits and risks of the procedure.
During the operation, the right lobe and segment 4 of the liver were visualized. Both were shrunken and fibrotic, with the tumor at the right lobe encroaching onto the right pedicle. Viable tumor was also visualized at the gallbladder bed and segment 4/5. An enlarged lymph node was identified at the porta region. The patient’s albumin level was 26 g/L, in the week following surgery, however returned to 37 g/L one-month postsurgery . No other complications were found.
Pathological analysis revealed a moderately differentiated HCC, stage pT3. The tumor was close to but not involving the capsular margin. The resection margin was negative for tumor, and the enlarged lymph node at the porta region did not contain metastatic tissue.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 without complication and returned to the follow-up clinic one-month postoperation. He reported feeling well; had a fair appetite; no fever, wound, or other infection or disease; no weight loss or tea-colored urine; and walked unaided. The AFP was much reduced from 573 ng/mL to 14 ng/mL. Blood tests for liver function were normal demonstrating sustained functioning of the left liver lobe .