Three years ago, a 65-year-old male, with history of controlled arterial hypertension and without past ophthalmological history, was referred to our eye clinic due to vision loss in the left eye. He had been diagnosed with CRVO in the left eye a week before and promptly treated with deflazacort 30 mg and nepafenac (1 mg/ml). On our examination, the patient’s best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/100 in the left eye and 20/20 in the right eye, swinging-flashlight test was performed being normal with no relative afferent pupillary defect. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16 mmHg without therapy. At that time, dilated fundoscopy and optic coherence tomography (OCT – Cirrus HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss. Meditec Inc, Dublin, CA, USA) showed the presence of peripapillary hemorrhages and papillary edema with dispersed exudates . Fluorescein angiography was then performed showing in the left eye a delay in arteriovenous transit time, retinal hemorrhages, vessel wall staining, with perfusion over the peripheral retina and no visible neovascularization .
One day later, a dexamethasone IV implant (Ozurdex®, Allergan Pharmaceuticals, Ireland) was injected into the left eye .
Visual acuity gradually improved in the following 2 months from 20/100 to 20/20 with a decrease on central subfield foveal thickness (CSFT) from 608 µm to 319 µm ( and ). The IOP in the left eye increased from 16 mmHg to 30 mmHg in the second month after dexamethasone IV implant, without IOP change in the right eye. Bimatoprost + timolol (0.3 mg/ml + 5 mg/ml) eye drops were then initiated, at the second month after the first dexamethasone implant, and the IOP was successfully managed decreasing to 18 mmHg. Dilated fundoscopy revealed tortuous and dilated retinal veins with a significant reduction in macular edema on the left eye. Three months after, BCVA decreased again to 20/200 and the CSFT increased to 680 µm. One month later, the patient underwent vitrectomy with ILM peeling, presenting at the postoperative visit both improvements in macular anatomy and visual acuity (20/32), although macular edema could be encountered in the macular papillary beam. At the second month postoperative, the patient presented vision loss and OCT revealed macular edema worsening to 546 µm . The IOP was stable at 18 mmHg with bimatoprost + timolol (0.3 mg/ml + 5 mg/ml). A second fluorescein angiography was performed during follow-up to rule out conversion into ischemia-typed RVO confirming the perfusion of peripheral retina and absence of neovascularization.
Three more dexamethasone IV implants were injected in the course of a year with a mean interval between injections of approximately 3 months to control the frequent relapse in macular edema and associated visual acuity loss. During this period the vision ranged between 20/32 and 20/200, according to the presence of macular edema. This constant fluctuation on visual acuity was very limiting and uncomfortable for the patient being a frequent complaint. IOP tended to increase at the peak of effect of dexamethasone IV implant, maximum of 24 mmHg, but was well managed with the bimatoprost + timolol (0.3 mg/ml + 5 mg/ml) eye drops without additional topic medication or glaucoma surgery. The patient developed a corticonuclear cataract in the left eye with subsequent uneventfully cataract surgery, 1 year and 4 dexamethasone implants after the diagnosis of the CRVO. At the time of cataract surgery, topical glaucoma medication was switched from bimatoprost + timolol (0.3 mg/ml + 5 mg/ml) to brimonidine and timolol (2 mg/ml + 6.8 mg/ml).
Constant recurrence of macular edema and visual impairment was observed despite repeated dexamethasone IV implants, in addition to compliance issues due to multiple IV injections. After 20 months and 6 dexamethasone implants since the diagnosis of the non-ischemic CRVO, a year ago the patient received a fluocinolone acetonide IV implant (ILUVIEN®, Alimera Sciences Limited, UK), although not licensed for this pathology. At the time of fluocinolone acetonide IV implant injection, the IOP was in 16 mmHg with brimonidine and timolol (2 mg/ml + 6.8 mg/ml). The benefit/risk ratio was evaluated and the patient gave and signed an informed consent. The patient presented in this report also has given informed consent for this publication.
After 12 months, visual acuity improved from 20/200 to 20/25 being stable since the first month after the injection of fluocinolone acetonide IV implant with a progressive decrease in CSFT from 578 µm to 392 µm, without significant changes since month 3 . The IOP remained controlled in the left eye during the fluocinolone acetonide IV implant follow-up, with brimonidine and timolol (2 mg/ml + 6.8 mg/ml) since the fluocinolone acetonide IV implant, increasing from 16 mmHg previous to fluocinolone acetonide IV implant to 18 mmHg at the last visit, without additional topic medication or glaucoma surgery. A maximum of 21 mmHg was noticed at the ninth month of follow-up, but after discussion with the patient additional therapy was not started and a better compliance was recommended. At the 10th month IOP was 16 mmHg with brimonidine and timolol (2 mg/ml + 6.8 mg/ml). In the right eye, IOP remained within normal parameters without therapy during all follow-up being 18 mmHg in the last visit. No additional IOP-lowering medication or procedure has been required during follow-up. No significant changes were noticed in the optic disc appearance and morphology during follow-up, the mean Retinal Nerve Fibre Layer (RNFL) at the Cirrus HD-OCT was 92 µm at the time of the injection of fluocinolone acetonide IV implant and remained stable through the follow-up, being 91 µm at the 12th month.
Despite the good functional and anatomical results observed at the 12th month without additional therapies, it is still possible to observe residual macular edema on the OCT . However, the patient is pleased with his current visual acuity, being stable and independent of IV injections for long time with a significant improvement in his quality of life, not being interested and rejecting any additional treatment.