A fifty-one-year-old female presented complaining of 6 weeks of slowly increasing foreign body sensation, pain, tearing, fluctuating visual acuity and nyctalopia. She had a history of diarrhea, lasting for 2 months (6–10 depositions per day), polyphagia and weight loss of 15 kg in the last 3 months. Family history was positive for systemic hypertension, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome), ovary, colon and uterine cancer. Past medical history was positive for stage III obesity (2003), type 2 diabetes mellitus (2003), dyslipidemia (2003), Roux-en-Y gastro-jejunal bypass (2006), Lynch syndrome and colon adenocarcinoma (stage IIa) diagnosed in 2013 treated with a right hemicolectomy with ileo-colonic anastomosis. She also referred to an additional unspecified bowel resection (2015).
In the ophthalmologic examination, best corrected visual acuity was 20/30 and intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg in both eyes. Anterior segment biomicroscopy revealed a dry and thickened conjunctiva with wrinkles , multiple subtle grey-white small, round, confluent, foamy lesions in the interpalpebral conjunctiva of both eyes, compatible with Bitot’s spots , and a superficial punctate keratitis in both eyes. The rest of the ophthalmologic examination was unremarkable in both eyes.
Xerophthalmia due to malabsorption was suspected. Topical preservative free lubricants and topical fluorometholone were prescribed. Interconsultation with gastroenterology and blood tests were requested.
On blood work, vitamin A was 0.1 mg/dl (normal range 0.4–1.2 mg/dl), vitamin D 5.1 mg/dl (30–80 mg/dl) and albumin 2.3 mg/dl (3.5–4.8 mf/dl). With these results the diagnosis of xerophthalmia stage X2 secondary to malabsorption syndrome was confirmed. Vitamin A 200,000 UI supplementation was added to treatment and the patient was referred to a third-level institution for systemic management and control. Six months later, a complete resolution of ocular and systemic signs and symptoms was achieved, including dry eye, nyctalopia and diarrhea.