A 43 year old non-smoking man was admitted in June 2008 because of rapidly progressive exertional dyspnoea, fever and haemoptysis for one week. He reported three cases of pulmonary TB in his family (his father, a sister and an uncle). Past medical history was remarkable only for arterial hypertension, well controlled with amlodipin. He denied exposure to gases, fumes or toxic chemicals. He had never taken any illicit drug in the past.
At admission the patients was dyspnoeic with 30 breaths/min. Chest examination revealed fine bilateral rales. Physical examination of the heart revealed a regular tachycardia (110 beats/min) with normal heart sounds and no murmurs. Arterial blood pressure was 135/90 mmHg. Abdominal findings were normal. There were no signs of lower extremity deep venous thrombosis. Wells score was -2, rendering the diagnosis of venous thromboembolism very unlikely. Chest CT scan showed bilateral areas of increased attenuation with a prevalent pattern of ground glass opacities; focal areas of consolidation and scattered micronodules could be observed . We did not find upper lobe nodules or cavities.
Routine blood tests showed normocromic normocytic anaemia (Hb 11.1 g/dl) with a normal platelet count (118·103/mm3; reference range 80-400·103/mm3). Coagulation function was normal (aPTT 34 sec, PT 84%, INR 1.13, fibrinogen 559 mg/dl). Urinalysis was unremarkable. ESR 41 mm/h (reference value <15). Auto antibodies (ANA, ENA, AGBM, anti-dsDNA and ANCA) and the lupus anticoagulant test were negative. Anticardiolipin (aCL) IgG antibodies were found (76 UGPL; reference value <13) while anti-β2-glycoprotein-I (β2-GPI) antibodies were absent. Tuberculin skin test (5 U PPD) was negative such as a T-cell INF-γ release assay for TB infection (QuantiFERON-TB gold: 0.10 UI/ml; cut-off value 0.35 UI/ml). Screening test for HIV-Ab was non reactive. Arterial blood gases breathing room air revealed hypoxemia (66 mmHg) and hypocapnia (31 mmHg).
Flexible bronchoscopy (FBS) showed fresh blood in all segmental bronchi. BAL in the left upper lobe obtained a progressively bloodier return in the five 20 ml aliquots. Microscopy revealed red blood cells and alveolar macrophages (90% of total cells, lymphocytes and neutrophils accounting for 4% and 6% respectively). About 40% of alveolar macrophages had cytoplasmic haemosiderin inclusions (iron staining). No tissue biopsies were taken.
Bacterioscopic examination of BAL and sputum were negative for acid fast bacilli such as culture for common bacteria, while molecular test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (16S rRNA) gave a positive result in a few hours, so that a standard therapy with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide was started on the same day. Corticosteroids were not added to the therapy. Fever, cough and haemoptysis resolved in the first week while chest X-ray cleared in about 4 weeks. Cultures grew M. tuberculosis in 21 days and drug susceptibility test did not show any resistance to first line drugs.
After 8 weeks, anaemia resolved (Hb 14.5 g/dl) and aCL antibodies became negative. Ethambutol and pyrazinamide were discontinued, and isoniazid and rifampicin were continued for 16 weeks.