A 73-year-old Japanese woman with an unremarkable medical history and no previous diagnosis of opportunistic infection, was admitted to our institution complaining of aggravated dysarthria and weakness in the right upper extremities with onset 5 days earlier. Her general status was stable, and her vital signs were as follows: clear consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale E4 V5 M6), body temperature 36.9 °C, blood pressure 128/92 mmHg, and pulse rate 89 beats per minute. On neurological examination, she had mild-to-moderate dysarthria and facial palsy. No other abnormal signs of cranial nerve involvement were evident, and her motor and sensory systems were intact with a manual muscle strength scale grade of 5/5 for the upper extremities. Her preliminary laboratory works were as follows: leukocytes 11,100/μl (percentage neutrophils 82.4%), C-reactive protein 3.48 mg/dl (normal range < 0.03 mg/dl), creatinine 0.89 mg/dl, and HbA1c (National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program) 6.5%. Liver enzymes were in the reference range. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed a space-occupying lesion in the left basal ganglia . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the lesion to be a brain abscess . Furthermore, a routine workup for the abdominal CT revealed a low-density space-occupying lesion in the liver (segment 7, S7), which strongly suggested a liver abscess .
These results indicated simultaneous abscesses of the brain and liver. On admission, cultures of both spinal fluid and blood yielded no microorganism growth, and empirical treatment with 1 g meropenem three times a day plus 700 mg vancomycin three times a day was initiated. Nevertheless, the patient’s dysarthria symptoms became increasingly worse over the next few days, so surgical drainage via a frontotemporal craniotomy was performed on admission day 3. During the craniotomy, the left putaminal lesion was found to be filled with pus, and the subsequent culture showed the growth of multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, confirming a diagnosis of pyogenic brain abscess. The operation lasted 347 minutes, and intraoperative bleeding was 165 cm3. After surgery, the patient had slight residual neurological sequelae, including mild motor aphasia and weakness in the upper extremities.
On admission day 9, percutaneous transhepatic drainage of the liver (S7) abscess was undertaken. The pus culture also showed growth of multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, thus associating the liver abscess with the brain abscess. Following long-term conservative treatment with antibiotics and abscess drainage, the liver abscess disappeared.
Although she received rehabilitative care after the brain surgery, the patient presented with right upper quadrant pain, nausea with vomiting, and low-grade fever during continuous hospitalization on admission day 74. Abdominal CT showed swelling of the gallbladder , consistent with a diagnosis of acute phase on chronic cholecystitis. Conservative therapy with 1 g meropenem twice daily and percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder drainage (PTGBD) was initially administered, and the bile culture was also positive for multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae. For radical treatment, the patient subsequently opted to undergo a cholecystectomy on admission day 99. A laparoscopic cholecystectomy was initially attempted; however, due to severe inflammatory adhesions and to mitigate excessive risk, a laparoscopic subtotal cholecystectomy was performed. The operation lasted 87 minutes, and there was little bleeding. A subsequent histopathological examination revealed developing granulation, residual inflammatory cells, and abscess formation in the thickened wall of the gallbladder, confirming a diagnosis of acalculous cholecystitis. Unfortunately, the postoperative period was complicated by an intraabdominal abscess. The causative bacterium of the intraabdominal abscess was multidrug-resistant Enterococcus faecalis, which was not consistent with the bacterium in the brain and liver abscesses, and it was treated with 700 mg vancomycin once daily. The patient was subsequently discharged, and 12-month follow-up revealed no further sequelae.