A 69-year-old male presented to the Mount Sinai Saint Luke's Emergency Department with intermittent fever and increased urinary frequency for 1 week. His past medical history was significant for Streptococcus sanguinis tricuspid valve endocarditis, bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement, coronary artery disease (status of post-triple vessel coronary artery bypass grafting), paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (Afib), and type-2 diabetes mellitus. On physical examination, his vitals were notable for an irregular pulse of 112 beats/min, blood pressure of 136/77 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 18/min, rectal temperature of 98°F, and oxygen saturations of 98% on room air. Chest auscultation revealed pulmonary right basilar crackles. There was a cardiac grade 2/6 ejection systolic murmur 6 cm of water at 45° position. Splinter hemorrhages or Osler's nodes were absent.
Laboratory studies were significant for glucose 204 mg/dL and troponin-I 0.05 ng/mL (normal <0.034 ng/mL). Complete blood count, lactic acid, and creatine phosphokinase were within normal limits. Urinalysis was positive for leukocyte esterase and pyuria with 35–50 white blood cells/high-power field. Electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission showed sinus rhythm with first degree AV block and frequent premature atrial complexes. The patient was administered one dose of levofloxacin after drawing blood cultures which came back positive for Gram-positive cocci. On the next day, his antibiotics were changed to vancomycin and gentamicin for suspected endocarditis.
On day 1 of admission, the patient developed acute pulmonary edema and hypoxia following an episode of sub-sternal crushing chest pain. Repeat ECG showed Afib with rapid ventricular response and ST-depressions in leads II, aVF, and V2–V6. He was managed with nitroglycerine, furosemide, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, and was transferred to Cardiac Care Unit. Immediate trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) did not show any vegetation or aortic insufficiency. His next troponin-I came back to 10.19 ng/mL and CK-MB was 163.8 ng/mL (0.5–4.7 ng/mL). He was treated for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction with intravenous heparin, aspirin, clopidogrel, statin, and a beta blocker. The patient could not tolerate transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and had a repeat TTE, which showed inferior and lateral akinesis, moderate systolic dysfunction, and probable vegetation on the noncoronary cusp of aortic valve.
On day 3 of admission, blood cultures grew Enterococcus faecalis. Vancomycin was stopped, and ampicillin was started along with gentamicin. His troponin-I level peaked at 172.09 ng/mL. A presumptive diagnosis of Enterococcal endocarditis of prosthetic aortic valve with embolic myocardial infarction from vegetation was established. Eventually, the patient underwent TEE. It showed moderately decreased left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 40%, regional wall motion abnormalities with mid and basal anterior and lateral akinesis, bioprosthetic aortic valve with an abscess (thickened intervalvular fibrosa), and small vegetation on the left coronary cusp. Coronary angiography revealed new 99% occlusion of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) and proximal left circumflex artery, chronic total occlusion of ostial left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right coronary artery, patent saphenous vein graft to posterior descending artery, and patent left internal mammary artery graft to the LAD artery. No intervention was done. The patient improved clinically on medical management and stayed hemodynamically stable.
On day 9 of admission, the patient underwent revision of aortic valve replacement, drainage of annular abscess, and LMCA embolectomy. His aortic valve as well as the embolic debris was removed from LMCA grew E. faecalis. Subsequently, he was discharged to the skilled nursing facility in a stable condition where he completed 6 weeks of intravenous ampicillin.