A 10-year-old girl with no prior medical history presented to the emergency department of our hospital for persistent fever and odynophagia despite 48 h of antibiotics (Cefaclor). She reported abdominal pain and vomiting with diarrhoea. Physical examination revealed diffuse petechiae and abdominal tenderness but was otherwise unremarkable. Her vital signs were normal for age. Laboratory testing showed important leukocytosis (52.9 g/L) with elevated eosinophil count (53%), blast cells (8%), and platelet count (41 g/L) .
Cardiac troponin T (2009 ng/L; Nl < 14 ng/L) and ProBNP (20 722 ng/L; Nl < 300 ng/L) were also elevated . The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST-segment changes in V4–V6 derivations . Transthoracic echocardiography showed diffuse myocardial infiltrates of the left ventricle (LV) with moderate dilatation and mild mitral insufficiency (
Video 1 and 2). Left ventricular systolic dysfunction was identified by the measurement of the LV fractional shortening using M-mode (25% and 30%) and by the calculation of the LV ejection fraction using the Simpson method (43%). In addition, a two-dimensional strain analysis identified a reduced global longitudinal peak strain (average of −13% vs. normal value of −25%) and a basal septal and posterior hypokinesia . Micro-thrombi in the LV were suspected .
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) identified eosinophilic infiltrates and sub-endocardial enhancement of both ventricles strongly suggestive of EM . Left ventricular function was slightly decreased with an ejection fraction of 47% .
Specific tests excluded viral infections and parasitic diseases (schistosomiasis, echinococcosis, or helminthiasis). Hypersensitivity reaction to Cefaclor was possible but less likely because of the extent of hypereosinophilia and other blood abnormalities.
Haematological disorder was strongly suspected. Thus, a bone marrow biopsy was performed and confirmed B cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) CD34+ CD19+.
Treatment with high dose steroids (methylprednisolone 48 mg/day intravenously IV for 1 week) and chemotherapy, in cycles as per protocol, was initiated. IV steroids were then shifted to oral for 20 days (60 mg/m2/day) and tapered afterwards over 8 days. Anticoagulation with warfarin in the presence of micro-thrombi, although controversial, was initiated after several discussions among the team. Her hospital stay was complicated by well tolerated, isolated monomorphic ventricular premature beats which resolved without treatment.
Leucocyte and eosinophil counts normalized within a month . Progressive improvement of cardiac function was noticed on follow-up echocardiography (
Video 3) and cardiac MRI. In addition, cardiac MRI demonstrated a significant decrease in eosinophilic infiltration and micro-thrombi ( and ). Sub-endocardial enhancement also normalized within 6 months, leaving no sequela . However, a two-dimensional strain analysis, repeated at 12 months, showed a mild posterior and apical segments dysfunction that was not noted on echocardiography or on MRI .