A 13-year-old female student with right hip pain was admitted to our emergency department (height 140 cm; weight 35 kg; BMI 17.9 kg/m2). Six hours before admission, she fell from a slippery road while riding a bicycle, injuring her right hip. After the incident, she could stand and walk without aid (antalgic gait), but the pain in the right hip increased. Then, her family brought her to another peripheral hospital before being referred by ambulance to our hospital. At the prior hospital, an x-ray of the right hip was taken after an analgesic injection. No previous injuries or complaints history were obtained, such as nausea, vomiting, or fainting. A bone fracture or surgery had never occurred before. Her mother and sister both suffered from OI. The COVID-19 test was clear.
Patent airway, spontaneous breathing, and stable hemodynamics were found during the primary survey. The blue sclera was observed in both eyes without dental malformations or short stature. Leg shortening with abduction and external rotation was evident on the corresponding lower limb. A 1 cm leg length discrepancy was shown in the apparent length (R: 77 cm / L: 78 cm) and the true length (R: 71 cm / L: 72 cm), but no anatomical length difference was observed. We observed a stable pelvic ring, no swelling, and bruising over the right hip, but we found tenderness around the right hip. The right hip joint range of motion (ROM) was limited (35° of flexion, 10° of abduction, 10° of external rotation, 0° of adduction) with a numeric pain rating scale (NPRS) of 6 and the Harris Hip Score (HHS) was 54.8 (poor). The clinical presentation of this patient is shown in .
The radiological examination of the X-ray pelvis was taken in anteroposterior (AP), right obturator oblique, right iliac oblique, pelvic inlet, and pelvic outlet views, as shown in . The bone density showed general rarefaction with discontinuity of the right acetabular rim and comminuted fracture associated with slight intrapelvic displacement of the femoral head. Neither the femoral head nor neck fractures complicated the acetabular fracture. Three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT) scans revealed greater comminution and displacement than plain radiographs . In the right acetabulum, the anterior column showed a comminuted fracture, and the posterior column showed a slightly displaced transverse fracture. In this 3D-CT scan, the discontinuity of the acetabular rim that leads to femoral head dislocation is visible due to severe comminution of the anterior column acetabulum. This patient was diagnosed with OI type I with an acetabular fracture Judet-Letournel both of column type and central hip dislocation. We planned to do ORIF with a reconstruction plate and bone graft augmented by rhBMP-2.