Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to publication of this manuscript.
A 31-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of Marfan syndrome and an anterior chamber intraocular lens (IOL) in her left eye was referred to us for management of a subluxed crystalline lens in her right eye. She was complaining of floaters and photopsias in her right eye. On examination, a mild exotropia with left gaze preference was noted. Snellen visual acuity was 20/80 in the right eye, pinholing to 20/30 and 20/20 in the left eye. The right lens was superonasally subluxated with the lens still within the visual axis. The right eye was without intraocular inflammation, had an intraocular pressure (IOP) of 17 mmHg, and was without other abnormality aside from an area of peripheral congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium. The left eye had a centered anterior chamber IOL (ACIOL), IOP of 8 mmHg, a peripheral iridotomy, and a normal posterior segment.
Over the next 2 years, the patient’s vision worsened in the right eye attributed to progressive crystalline lens subluxation. She subsequently underwent lensectomy with ACIOL implantation, but experienced persistent visual symptoms attributed to implant instability. She sought removal of the ACIOL and placement of a scleral-fixated IOL. This was performed using two 25-gauge trocars that were passed through bare sclera at an angle and into the vitreous cavity. End-gripping 25-gauge forceps were used to grab the tip of the IOL haptic and pull it through the trocar. The trocar was then removed leaving the haptic in the scleral tunnel. Postoperatively, she healed well and her central vision improved to 20/40.
Approximately 5 months later, the patient reported a sudden onset of redness and pain in the right eye while participating at a Marfan patient care conference abroad. She was evaluated by a local ophthalmologist who prescribed a topical antibiotic drop. Within a week, the patient returned to our center complaining of sharp, persistent periocular pain. Evaluation revealed the right eye to be mildly injected with a tender 3 mm × 3 mm lesion with tan layered material . There was no active leakage from the lesion and the anterior chamber of the right eye was deep and quiet. IOP and best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) were 15 mmHg and 20/200, respectively. The patient was referred to the glaucoma department for further management of a possibly infected inadvertent filtration bleb. Antibiotic therapy was switched to broad spectrum fortified antibiotics as well as oral antibiotics. Despite broadened antibiotic treatment the conjunctival injection and lesion appeared unchanged, with persistent tan material within. The patient’s periocular pain worsened over the course of 2 weeks. A stable appearance on antibiotics as well as normal intraocular pressure and examination led to a high suspicion for a conjunctival epithelial cyst. The lesion was surgically excised at the patient’s request to relieve the pain. Histopathologic analysis confirmed the diagnosis of conjunctival epithelial inclusion cyst . A month after cyst excision, the patient developed a similar lesion a few millimeters beyond the original site . BCVA in the right eye was 20/500 and the anterior chamber was deep and quiet. Again, to alleviate pain, the lesion was excised uneventfully with copious mechanical debridement of local epithelium. Histopathologic examination revealed a conjunctival epithelial inclusion cyst.