A 32-yr old Caucasian female patient presented in September 2004 with progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion. Since 2002, she had suffered from typical CD with arthritis, which had been diagnosed on clinical, endoscopic and histological grounds. She had undergone colonoscopy and biopsy in order to investigate symptoms of persistent diarrhea with abdominal pain, weight loss and fever. Colonoscopy had revealed mucosal ulcerations involving the distal ileum and right colon alternating with areas of normal-appearing mucosa and histological examination had shown transmural inflammation and epithelioid granulomas, typical of CD. In the following years, her gastrointestinal symptoms were well-controlled on sulphasalazine 3000 mg·day-1, azathioprine 100 mg·day-1 and folic acid 5 mg·day-1 and she experienced no exacerbations. Over the past year she has suffered from recurrent episodes of acute bronchitis. She has been repeatedly treated with antibiotics and short courses of oral steroids, followed by improvement of symptoms of infection (cough and sputum production). She complained, however, of progressive deterioration of her dyspnea and was referred by her family doctor to the Thoracic Department of the University Hospital of Heraklion for further evaluation and treatment.
On presentation, severe dyspnea on exertion subsiding at rest was noted. On physical examination, the patient was tachypnoeic and had stridor, reduced breath sounds and diffuse wheezing on auscultation. She was a lifelong non-smoker and had no history of occupational or environmental exposure relevant to lung disease. Her temperature was 36.6°C and her arterial oxygen saturation at rest was 97% (room air). Post exertion arterial blood-gas analysis did not reveal hypoxemia (alveolar-arterial oxygen tension gradient at peak exercise was 10 mmHg). The electrocardiogram and chest radiographs were normal. Laboratory investigations showed normal serum values of electrolytes, glucose, protein, liver function tests, urea and creatinine. Other laboratory tests showed a moderately increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 31 mm·1 h-1, and normal C-reactive protein (< 0.32 mg/dl). Complete blood count revealed mildly elevated white blood cell count (12.3 K·μl-1, 90.8% neutrophils). Assessments of anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA, both cytoplasmic- and perinuclear-ANCA), and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (sACE) were normal. Serologic tests for Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, and influenza viruses were all negative. Tuberculin skin test was negative. Sputum cultures for mycobacteria and fungi were negative. Pulmonary function tests showed airway obstruction and flow-volume curve intra-extrathoracic airway obstruction. There was no improvement in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) following inhalation of β2-agonist. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the trachea revealed a 2-cm region of severe subglottic tracheal stenosis with marked increase in tracheal wall thickness . High resolution computed tomography scan (HRCT) of the thorax did not show any abnormalities.
A fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) was performed, and showed severe circumferential tracheal stenosis, greater than 70%, 1–2 cm beneath the vocal cords and marked inflammation of tracheal mucosa . The patient did not tolerate penetration of the bronchoscope through the obstruction. Bacteriologic studies of bronchial washings, including cultures for mycobacteria and fungi, were negative. Cytologic studies of bronchial washings showed inflammatory cells and no malignant cells. Histological examination of several biopsies of the stenosed areas revealed acute and chronic inflammation and extended ulceration of bronchial mucosa, without granulomas .
The patient received inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1 and methylprednisolone 120 mg·day-1 iv for 5 days. Then she continued on oral methylprednisolone 24 mg·day-1 and inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1. During the following months she reported improvement of her shortness of breath, accompanied by gradual improvement of her lung function tests . In May 2005 she was referred to the Complex Airway Center of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center for further evaluation.
On presentation in the Complex Airway Center, her throat on auscultation revealed mild inspiratory stridor. There was otherwise no wheezing, chest exam was normal, as was the remainder of her examination, and room air oxygenation was 99%. A specialized airway CT was performed, which demonstrated a 2-cm region of circumferential subglottic stenosis with focal narrowing that did not spare the membranous portion of the trachea . The remainder of the trachea appeared unremarkable without evidence of tracheobronchomalacia. There were regions of patchy ground glass opacity in the superior segment of the right middle lobe, with some centrilobular nodular opacities and patchy opacities in the right lower lobe superior segment with air trapping.
At flexible bronchoscopy a high-grade subglottic obstruction was visible at about 7 or 8 mm diameter opening. The obstruction was complex, reaching from the posterior subglottic area close to the vocal cords and posterior arytenoids all the way down to the cricoid ring in a circular fashion. Rigid bronchoscopy confirmed the subglottic stenosis and showed that it extended into the first tracheal ring. The area was biopsied, dilated sequentially to 12 mm and the remaining tissues were cleanly ablated with the help of a microdebrider. The diameter achieved in the end was approximately 14 mm and appeared normal for her size. Five cc of 0.04% mitomycin-C was also applied for four minutes. During the rigid bronchoscopy several additional abnormalities were visualized. The left upper lobe was near-totally occluded by a web-like obstruction, which was also biopsied and dilated. Moreover, the right medial segment of the right lower lobe was near-totally occluded with what appeared to be mucosal and submucosal swelling, which was again extensively biopsied and a lumen was reestablished. The pathology results revealed partially ulcerated respiratory mucosa with squamous metaplasia, lamina propria fibrosis, recent hemorrhages and acute and chronic inflammation in all three locations, but no granulomas.
This treatment led to complete remission of the patient's respiratory symptoms up to the point that this report is written, 10 months after dilatation. She continued treatment with oral methylprednisolone 24 mg·day-1, inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1 and oral omeprazole 20 mg·day-1. The patient will be closely followed with pulmonary function tests and endoscopic approaches, if necessary, and progressive tapering of oral steroid treatment over the following months will be attempted.