A 67-year-old female patient was admitted with a 3-h history of acute onset chest pain radiating to the interscapular region. On examination, she was haemodynamically stable with normal heart sounds and a normal respiratory examination. She was hypercholesterolaemic, obese and had a family history of aortic disease (her brother had been diagnosed with dilatation of the ascending aorta and subsequently died suddenly; her niece had aortic coarctation repair and has a biscuspid aortic valve).
At presentation minimal ST depressions in V3–V4 were evident on the electrocardiogram (ECG), troponin I was significantly elevated [99.0 ng/L (<0.01 ng/mL)] as was creatinine kinase [1769 U/L (22–198 U/L)]. A computed tomography (CT) aortogram performed due to a wide mediastinum on chest X-ray showed an elongated and dilated aorta (5.2 cm × 5.1 cm) without evidence of dissection. An echocardiogram showed a moderately dilated left ventricle (LV) with reduced global function (ejection fraction 35%), akinesia in the basal and mid lateral segments, inferior hypokinesia, and moderate aortic regurgitation (, Video S1). An aortogram confirmed CT findings of aortic dilatation . A coronary angiogram revealed a 20 mm long severe stenosis (70%) in the 1st obtuse marginal which featured abrupt changes in calibre from the surrounding normal artery and unimpaired distal flow . Since there were no other coronary lesions in other parts of the coronary tree and in view of the generalized tortuosity of the coronaries, SCAD was suspected. The suspicion of type 2 SCAD was confirmed with optical coherence tomography (OCT) which revealed an 18 mm long IMH causing a true minimal luminal area of 1.6 mm2 with an intimal tear in its distal aspect .
Conservative management of the SCAD with β-blockers (nebivolol 5 mg daily) was opted for and an aortic root replacement was planned electively, but after 2 months she was readmitted with chest pain similar in nature to the index presentation. A repeat CT thorax showed no interval change in the aorta and a repeat angiogram showed normalization of the 1st obtuse marginal’s calibre . A repeat OCT confirmed resorption of the IMH and normalization of luminal calibre . Two months later she underwent an aortic valve replacement with a biological valve and substitution of the ascending aorta with a 30 mm hemashield prosthesis. Histological examination of the ascending aorta showed myxoid degeneration of the media.
Based on the histological examination a diagnosis of CMN was made. At 3-month follow-up, she has remained asymptomatic in New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class 1 with no other cardiovascular events.