In accordance with the case report (CARE) guidelines , this report describes a patient with a histologically proven angiosarcoma of the adrenal gland who underwent an open adrenalectomy at the department of general, visceral, and transplantation surgery of the University Medical Center of Mainz, Germany.
A 46-year-old white Spanish male, who was a previous smoker and nondrinker and was slightly overweight [92 kg, 176 cm, body mass index (BMI) 29.7 kg/m2] presented to the internal medicine emergency department of our hospital with an unclear 12 cm tumor of the right adrenal gland and an unclear 2.5 cm tumor of the left adrenal gland.
Prior to the computed tomography (CT) scan, which was indicated by the patient’s family doctor, there had been persistent episodes of fever in the evenings for 4 months . Additionally, an unintended weight loss of 5 kg was reported. Shortly before the onset of the fever episodes, an infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) had been present. No further complaints were reported. There was no abdominal pain. Food intake was possible without restriction. Bowel movements and urination were regular and possible without discomfort.
Chronic preexisting conditions and allergies were denied. There was no need for a long-term medication. In the past, a pilonidal sinus had been surgically treated. The family’s medical history was unremarkable. Previous exposure to radiation or chemicals was not recalled.
Physical examination revealed that the patient was in good clinical condition, with regard to his nutritional status, he was slightly overweight.
He had tachycardia (107 bpm), he was slightly hypertonic (140/70 mmHg), and his respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute. Further cardiopulmonary examination did not reveal pathological findings.
No cervical lymph node or thyroid gland enlargement was noted, his skin and visible mucous membranes were without lesions, and there was no exanthema.
There was no abdominal pain, no tenderness, and no resistance.
Neurological grossly orienting was also unremarkable.
Sinus rhythm, normal conduction, and sinus tachycardia were noted, and no relevant excitation recovery disorders were detected.
The patient’s hemoglobin was 12.1 g/dl (normal range 13.5–17.5 g/dl).
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 78.5 fl (normal range 83–100 fl).
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) was 26.0 pg (normal range 27–33 pg).
International normalized ratio (INR) was 1.3 (normal range = 1.0).
C-reactive protein (CRP) was 140 mg/l (normal range < 5 mg/l).
Endocrinological diagnostics ruled out the presence of a hormone-producing tumor.
The contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated a heterogeneous mass (11.5 × 10.5 cm) in the right adrenal gland with a central calcification . In addition, there was a 2.5 cm mass in the left adrenal gland with no signs of malignancy. There was no evidence of distant metastases in either the thorax or the abdomen.
The patient’s case was previously discussed in our interdisciplinary tumor board. As it was not possible to determine with certainty what type of tumor it was and to prevent the spread of tumor cells through biopsy, a complete resection was recommended. Surgical presentation led to the indication for open adrenalectomy owing to tumor size in accordance with the German guideline . The patient consented to surgery.
The operation was performed electively under general anesthesia 1 week after the surgical presentation . Surgery was performed in supine position via right costal arch incision with an additional extension cranially to the xiphoid. The tumor was found dorsal to the right lobe of the liver stretching and compressing the liver. Inspection of the abdomen revealed no further pathology and no peritoneal metastases. Mobilization of the liver was challenging owing to tumor size and its adherence to the adjacent tissue. We performed a subtle dissection to detach the tumor step by step. To ensure tumor integrity, partial decapsulation of the liver was necessary as a part of the preparation. Luckily, the vena cava and the right kidney were not infiltrated by the tumor. It was possible to remove the tumor completely with an intact capsule, which was later confirmed by pathology. At the end of the procedure, the left adrenal gland was examined. Owing to the nature and size of the left-sided tumor, there was no indication for resection of the left adrenal gland. An adrenal incidentaloma is to be assumed.
The operation lasted 150 minutes. Blood loss can be estimated at around 100 ml. The patient was taken to the post anesthesia care unit after operation. After a short monitoring phase, the patient was transferred to the normal ward on the day of surgery. On the second postoperative day, the patient complained shortness of breath, which is why a CT scan was performed to rule out a pulmonary embolism. The CT scan revealed suspected postoperative pneumonia. Antibiotic therapy was started. The patient received intensified respiratory training. Afterwards, the patient did well and was discharged on the eighth postoperative day.
Histologically, the nodule of the right adrenal gland measuring 14 × 12 × 11 cm consisted of bulging elastic tissue. The nodule showed a centrally strongly softened, reddish-blackish, macroscopically predominantly necrotic surface with somewhat firmer areas at the margins. The nodular lesion was completely surrounded by a fibrous capsule, and the yellowish adrenal parenchyma was sparse and marginalized. Microscopically, only few areas with vital epitheloid cells with variations in nuclear size, occasional mitoses, and increased apotosis were found. The cells formed partly solid, partly pseudoglandular, and anastomosing structures, some of which were filled with erythrocytes and granulocytes .
Immunohistochemically, the epitheloid cells showed a strongly increased proliferation (Ki-67 90%) with a strong expression of erythroblast-transformation-specific-related gene (ERG), platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule (CD31), cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and, only sporadically, CD34, leading to the diagnosis of a highly proliferative vascular tumor .
We found no mismatch repair gene deficiency (pMMR/MSS) and no Her2 amplification. PD-L1 expression of the tumor proportion score, the combined positive score, and the immune cell score were 30%, 40%, and 10%, respectively. Molecular pathology of the tumor tissue in the RNA-based next generation sequencing analysis (Archer FusionPlex Sarcoma NGS Panel) revealed no fusion in the examined gene regions. Finally, the findings were compatible with a completely resected angiosarcoma of the right adrenal gland.
The patient was seen again 2 weeks after surgery. Physical examination showed normal findings. The recovery went well. In accordance with the recommendation of the postoperative interdisciplinary tumor board, the patient was advised to attend the sarcoma outpatient clinic at our hospital for evaluation of adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy.