A 21-year-old male patient was admitted to the anorectal department of a tertiary hospital for acute and severe recurrent bleeding after RBL. The patient was diagnosed with mixed hemorrhoids (connective tissue external hemorrhoids with internal hemorrhoids of third grade) and underwent RBL on July 2, 2020. Pulsatile bleeding occurred at Day 18 and Day 23 after operation, both resolved by suture hemostasis in a community hospital. And this was the third time of bleeding, 26 days after RBL.
At admission, the patient’s body temperature was 38.0 ℃, heart rate 90, blood pressure 147/75 mmHg, respiratory rate 18, and oxygen saturation 98% under oxygen inhalation. He was weak, dizzy, and sweaty. His abdomen was soft with the bowel sound 7 times/min, and there was no tenderness or rebound pain in palpation. Massive anorectal bleeding was observed and the wound in the operation area had not healed. His blood test showed that hemoglobin was 145 g/L (normal range 130–175 g/L) and PLT was 178 × 10 9/L (normal range 125–350 × 10 9/L). Coagulation study showed that his PT was prolonged to 13.8 s (normal range 9.8–12.1 s) and his FVIII was 117% (normal range 70–150). Leucocyte, biochemical examination, infection markers (AIDS, syphilis, and hepatitis), abdominal ultrasound and chest X-ray examination results were all negative.
The patient received patient-controlled analgesia pump (PCA) to control the pain and was sent to the operating room to stop bleeding immediately after admission. Fluctuating bleeding occurred at 11 o’clock and 7 o’clock in the lithotomy position during the operation, which was stopped by suturing. He was given a full liquid diet for 3 days. Human prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC) were given after the operation and maintained for 3 days. At Day 6 after operation, the patient developed joint pain and sore throat with a body temperature of 38–39 ℃. Blood test showed that the percentage of neutrophils was 87.6%. Coagulation study revealed that factor VII (FVII) was 40%, FIX 11%, FX 71.4%, FXII 35%, and PT 16.7 s, APTT 59.2 s. At 1: 30 a.m. Day 8 after operation, the wound bled again. Under anesthesia, mucosal hyperemia and bleeding was found at 7 o’clock and 11 o’clock in the lithotomy position. The patient underwent suture hemostasis in the operating room, and then received 4u cryoprecipitate. At 16:30, bleeding occurred again. During the operation, active bleeding was found at 11 o’clock and blood oozing at 5 and 7 o’clock of the wound in the lithotomy position. The wound was sutured again . The patient was then strictly forbidden to eat and drink, given total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and treated with the compound of etamsylate and PCC. At Day 14, the patient was diagnosed with mild hemophilia B. PCC (300iu) was precipitated twice a day. There was no further bleeding. During the treatment, immune system examination and DADE'PFA Collage/EPI test were performed to rule out other diseases that might lead to bleeding. The changes of coagulation indexes are presented in Fig. A and B. The process of diagnosis and treatment are shown in Fig. . At Day 25, the patient was discharged. At the one-month follow-up, his coagulation FIX was 9.1%. The patient’s mother was tested for clotting time after the patient’s discharge, showing negative results. Genetic test was not performed.
By reviewing literature in Pubmed, we found 5 hemophilia cases with hemorrhoidectomy, including 4 hemophilia A cases and 1 hemophilia B case [–] . Among them, 3 patients were diagnosed with hemophilia and received basic treatment for hemophilia before the operation. They had blood coagulation factor examination and the blood coagulation factors were supplemented to normal or above normal level preoperatively. After bleeding, their coagulation factors and coagulation factor inhibitors were checked, and coagulation factors were supplemented quickly in large doses. The other two cases had not been diagnosed with hemophilia before operation. One of them who developed repeated bleeding 8 days after the operation was sutured for many times to stop the bleeding, and even received abdominoperinectomy. The other one was diagnosed with hemophilia in the preoperative examination and given epsilon amino caproic acid (EACA).
In addition, the cases of PubMed for 10 years were searched with the MeSHs of “Postoperational Haemorrhage” and “Haemophilia” [–] . All patients were male and diagnosed for the first time, with no preoperative related coagulation factors were mentioned. The second patient eventually died of fulminant hemorrhagic shock. Due to it was difficult to find a definite bleeding point in the examination after postoperative bleeding, so it was difficult to stop bleeding by surgery. Once these patients received the supplement of coagulation factors and reduce the inhibitors, the bleeding can be alleviated and the wound will eventually heal. This suggests that hemophilia should be taken into account for unexplained and recurrent postoperative bleeding.
Hemophilia B presents with less severe symptoms compared to hemophilia A, in terms of imaging score of joint diseases, serological indexes, HSS score and joint replacement rate [–]. In clinical practice, surgeons tend to pay more attention to the shortening of coagulation time or the screening of hemophilia A during the perioperative examination, and thus ignore the screening of hemophilia B. Yet, hemophilia B can also increase the risk of bleeding in patients undergoing surgery.
Hemophilia patients are classified into three categories according to the activity level of coagulation factors . The level of clotting factors in patients with mild hemophilia is 5–40 IU/dl; their major symptom is severe bleeding following major trauma or surgery, and spontaneous bleeding is rare. The level of clotting factors in patients with moderate hemophilia is 1–5 IU/dl; their symptoms include occasional spontaneous bleeding and prolonged bleeding following minor trauma or surgery. The level of clotting factors in patients with severe hemophilia is < 1 IU/dl; their symptom is spontaneous bleeding into joints or muscles, predominantly in the absence of identifiable hemostatic challenge. It is difficult to detect mild to moderate hemophilia by symptoms before operation. In China’s guidelines for hemophilia patients, hemophilia A patients should be given 80–100 IU/dl factor replacement therapy for the initial treatment and the dosage should be maintained at 50 IU/dl for 7–14 days, and hemophilia B patients should be given 60–80 IU/dl factor replacement therapy for the initial treatment and the dosage should be maintained at 30 IU/dl for 7–14 days. The expected dosage in the perioperative period of minor surgery is 50–80 IU/dl, which should be maintained for 1–5 days according to the type of surgery. The WFH’s surgical recommendations for hemophilia patients state that the coagulation factor level of all patients should be greater than 50 IU/dl before anesthesia, and the preoperative and postoperative evaluation of all hemophilia A and B patients should include inhibitor screening and determination. For patients with mild hemophilia A (no medical contraindication) with slight bleeding or undergoing surgery, DDAVP (1-deamino-8-D-argininevasopressin) may be an effective hemostatic treatment. For hemophilia patients, the surgical treatment should consider the risk of thrombosis, and fibrinolytic drugs and local hemostatic drugs should be used as appropriate. Whether to use factor replacement therapy or not should be determined after intraoperative blood loss evaluation. Intraoperative blood loss of hemophilia patients are divided into four levels: < 10%, 10%–25%, 25% and > 50%. For the first two levels, no extra (unplanned) dose of FVIII/FIX/bypass agent is needed, and the blood component transfusion demand is similar to that in non-hemophilia patients. For the third level, additional (unplanned) doses of FVIII/FIX/bypass or blood components are needed and the expected blood transfusion demand should be increased (within 2 times). For the last level, accidental hypotension or accidental transfer to the intensive care unit due to bleeding should be considered and a significant increase in blood component transfusion demand is expected (> 2 times).