A 29-year-old female South American tourist with known OI was admitted to our emergency department after a stumble fall on her left side. According to the typical presentation of her basic disease, an anterolateral bowing of the left femur was present before the injury, whereas correction osteotomy was performed earlier on her right femur in South America . She reported about forty fractures and more than thirty surgical treatments since birth. The patient is of a short stature with 1.24 m.
On presentation, the patient was conscious, orientated, hemodynamically stable, and complained massive pain on her left hip and femur. The left lower limb presented with shortening and malpositioning in distinct external rotation. The diagnostic workup revealed an intertrochanteric fracture with subtrochanteric extension of the left femur with severe bowing deformity . An initial closed reduction of the distinct dislocation of the fracture under analgosedation was performed. Then, the fracture was treated with a LISS-DF (LISS® for the distal femur, DePuy Synthes, Zuchwil, Switzerland) in reversed contralateral application . The patient was placed in the lateral decubitus position, and a subvastus approach to the left femur was performed. Fracture reposition was achieved with axial traction, rotation, and a k-wire as joystick in the proximal trochanteric fragment. Preliminary reposition was achieved using cerclages. The insertion of the LISS-DF in reversed contralateral application was performed after pre-bending of the proximal plate in a slight valgus direction to match the patient anatomy. A preliminary k-wire fixation and fluoroscopic control followed by screw fixation of the plate were performed. Furthermore, impaction grafting of the proximal metaphyseal fracture comminution with allograft was carried out. To limit the length of the bridging osteosynthesis, a locking attachment plate was used. This plate facilitated additional screw placement at the apex of the curvature of the femur although the plate was not in line with the femur at this site . The post-operative regimen consisted of non-weight bearing mobilization for 8 weeks with crutches. Clinical and radiographic follow-up showed no displacement with consolidation of the fracture after 8 weeks . Hence, the patient was allowed to progress with partial weight bearing for 4 weeks, followed by full weight bearing. The patient was followed up for 12 months and presented already after 5 months with a physical status comparable to the pre-operative level without any limitations (, , ).