A 42-year-old woman diagnosed with myotonic dystrophy at age of 15 was referred to our department in 2013 with symptoms of bilateral blurred vision and progressive vision loss. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in both eyes (OU). The patient presented mild bilateral ptosis with abnormal elevator function. Ocular motility was normal. Slit lamp examination revealed a moderate punctate keratopathy and minimal posterior subcapsular opacities in both lenses. Intraocular pressures (IOP) by applanation tonometry were 10 mmHg in OU.
The patient’s father and sister also suffered from myotonic dystrophy. They both presented normal slit lamp examination, only to mention the presence of a mild posterior subcapsular cataract in both cases and a low grade exposure keratitis in the sister. Fundoscopy was normal in the father and the sister, with no retinal findings.
Dilated fundus examination of the case reported showed multiple deep yellowish deposits scattered throughout the posterior pole and extending out to midperiphery, sparing the peripapillary area and with a moderate degree of macular atrophy in OU resembling a fundus flavimaculatus .
Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging showed multiple patched areas of increased autofluorescence probably corresponding to lipofuscin within the flecks, surrounded by regions of decreased autofluorescence from adjacent atrophic RPE in the posterior pole and midperiphery. The central 1500 μm of the fovea and the peripapillary area were respected .
Regarding electrophysiological test, the patient presented normal visual evoked potential but pathological full-field electroretinography in OU, showing reduced amplitudes in photopic and scotopic conditions more severe in right eye (OD) . The electrooculography revealed an infranormal Arden ratio in OU (OD 1.64, OI 1.63), findings that were compatible with a RPE dysfunction.
24–2 Humphrey visual field (VF) revealed a severe peripheral visual loss in OU. Subsequent annual 10–2 Humphrey VF were performed with non-progressive temporary involvement .
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) images revealed atrophic RPE and retinal thinning with foveal sparing in OU. No subretinal or intraretinal fluid was observed .
The patient was followed-up every 6–12 months for 7 years with no remarkable changes at slit-lamp or fundoscopy examination. IOP, measured by applanation tonometry, have always been low (between 6 mmHg and 12 mmHg depending on the visits). BCVA on the last visit performed in october 2020 was 20/60 in OD and 20/50 in left eye (OS).
No progression was observed in FAF and VF performed annually. However, subsequent OCT scans showed a slow progression of atrophy in OU over the years, also with an involvement of the inner layers and the appearance of intraretinal hyporeflective cavities in OU .