A 4-year-old girl was considered as having phenylketonuria (PKU) at the age of 1 month due to her less dark pigmented hair and a positive neonatal screening for Phe.
Her condition was confirmed by detecting homozygous mutation of PAH at nucleotide c.331 in exon 3 (c.331T > C) in the patient and heterozygous in both parents. The genetic sequencing was made in Beijing Kangxu Medical Research Center, Haidian District, Beijing, China. She was a term infant with a birth weight of 2700 g. There was no family history of arthritis or PKU. The baby was given a Phe-restricted diet. L-Amino acid-based medical foods (without Phe) provide ~ 80 % of the protein needs. The proportion of modified low-protein food was adjusted according to the concentration of regularly monitored blood Phe. She presented with normal motor development including walking and running, slight language delay and intellectual disability at 2 years old. At the age of 3.5 years, she presented with pain and swelling of her right ankle, right knee, and right hip joint (see Fig. ). At that time, serum Phe concentration was 22.8 mg/dL. Unresolved ankle pain and elevated serum Phe concentration prompted referral to West China Second University Hospital of Sichuan University at the age of 4.5 years. She had severe pain of bilateral ankles, knees, and knuckles. She could not walk or jump. The affected joints were swollen, hot, and painful. A radiograph of the lower limbs showed bone demineralization. Laboratory investigation demonstrated an increase in Phe (19.52 mg/dL reference range: < 1.8 mg/dL), C-reactive protein (33.6 mg/L; reference range: 0-5 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (36mm/h; reference range: < 21mm/h), tumor necrosis factor alpha (10.9pg/ml; reference range: <8.1pg/ml), and interleukin 6 (41.87pg/ml; reference range: < 5.9pg/ml), and a positive rheumatoid factor. Liver function, renal function, bone marrow biopsy smear and bone marrow culture were normal. Autoantibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anticardiolipin antibody, mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody, HLA-B27, and PPD tests were all negative. She was diagnosed with JIA and treated with a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (naproxen), methotrexate and low dose prednisone. Her joint pain responded well to the therapy. The patient has had followed-up appointments every 3 months for 1 year. Now she is thriving and can walk normally, with no further complaint of joint pain. Serum Phe concentration has been maintained within the high-normal range. (The last serum Phe concentration is 12 mg/dL)