A 16-year-old female with a history of allergic rhinitis, sinusitis, and chronic asthma since 4 years ago was admitted in our service to rule-out CSS. She was under treatment with oral prednisolone and seretide inhalation to control her severe asthma, and antibiotics for recurrent sinusitis. She had fatigue, malaise, muscle weakness, general musculoskeletal pain, exertion dyspnea, and weight loss at admission.
She also had two previous hospital admissions for pneumonia during the past year. Physical examination at admission revealed auxiliary temperature 37°C, respiratory rate 25/min, pulse rate 90/min and blood pressure 120/80 mmHg. Except for a Cushingoid face, physical findings were unremarkable.
CXR revealed bilateral reticular and alveolar opacities. Heart size was within normal limits. Pulmonary function test (spirometry) was acceptable indicating controlled asthma. Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity also were normal. Bone mass densitometry disclosed osteoporosis.
Laboratory findings at admission showed leukocytosis (WBC count 19.0×109/L) with eosinophilia (eosinophils 8.12×109/L), hemoglobin 11.5 g/dL, normal platelet count, negative rheumatoid factor, normal IgG, IgA, and IgM levels but raised IgE level (157 IU/mL, normal level<144), ESR 72 mm/h (normal range, 4–14 mm/h), C-reactive protein 4.0 mg/dL (normal range, 0.01–2 mg/dL), positive ANCA (C-ANCA 1.5 U/mL, P-ANCA 1.5 U/mL), negative anti-dsDNA, negative F-ANA, and negative cryoglobulin.
We decided to taper the dose of prednisolone because of Cushingoid face and osteoporosis. She developed vomiting and tachycardia (rate 160/min) one week after admission. BP was normal. A systolic murmur grade 2/6 was heard at apex. Electrocardiogram revealed paroxysmal atrial tachycardia . Echocardiography disclosed dilated cardiomyopathy with systolic and diastolic dysfunction; systolic ejection fraction was about 24%-43%. The patient was transferred to intensive care unit. Serum levels of myocardial enzymes were as follow: Troponin I 0.8 ng/mL (normal value <0.1) and Troponin T 0.45 ng/mL (normal value <0.2) indicating massive myocardial damage probably due to myocarditis.
She received one pulse of intravenous immunoglobulin, three pulses of methyl-prednisolone and one pulse of cyclophosphamide in addition to cardiac inotropic agents and treatment for heart failure.
High resolution chest CT scan showed nonspecific findings. She was discharged after three weeks with stable cardiac condition.
Five months after the previous admission, she was readmitted for acute hemiparesis of right side of her face and left side of the body in favor of right hemisphere stroke. Brain CT scan did not show any hemorrhagic changes, but brain MRI showed signal changes lesion in cortex of right temporoparietal lobes due to ischemia . The patient was treated with pulses of methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide promptly together with physiotherapy. The left lower limb and then her face improved during 10 days but she had some disability in her left arm on discharge.
After control of stroke, the treatment continued with oral prednisolone (1mg/kg) and azathioprine. She also underwent brain magnetic resonance angiography being suspect of vasculitic involvement of brain vessels. Physical rehabilitation continued for hemiparesis and after 2 years follow up, her disease was under control with minimal hemiparesis symptom. Prednisolone was reduced gradually to physiologic dose (7.5 mg/day).