A 48-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a 1-year history of macroscopic hematuria.
In the past year, the patient was found to have recurrent macroscopic hematuria. Her urine was intermittently bright red with blood clots. There were no accompanying symptoms, such as frequent urination, urgent urination, painful urination, fever, or weight loss.
The patient had no significant medical history.
There were no special personal or family illness histories.
The physical examination revealed no abnormities. The patient had no percussion pain in the renal area bilaterally, and no tenderness in the ureteral and bladder areas.
Tumor marker analysis revealed that the serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) level of the patient was elevated (67.44 U/mL), while other tumor markers were negative. Routine blood tests revealed that the percentage of neutrophils was 77.6%, which was slightly elevated. Routine urinary tests revealed that the patient had a urinary tract infection (the urine white blood cell count was 2510.5/mL, and the urine bacteria count was 27736/mL), accompanied by hematuria and proteinuria (the urine red blood cell count was 37.9/mL, and the urine protein level was 1+). The thrombin profile revealed that the patient had coagulation function abnormalities (the prothrombin time was 17.4 s, the international standardized ratio was 1.45, the activated partial thromboplastin time was 49.4 s, the activated partial thromboplastin ratio was 1.5, and thrombin time was 21.3 s).
Ultrasound examination revealed a large hypoechoic mass in the bladder, and the size of the mass was 128 mm × 78 mm. Its boundary was not clear, and the shape was irregular. The mass had a homogeneous hypoecho with fine linear echogenic strands distributed inside. No signs of calcification or large patches of necrosis were encountered. Color Doppler flow imaging showed rich blood flow signals in the mass. An artery was detected within the mass, and it had a maximum flow velocity (Vmax) of 22.9 cm/s and a resistance index of 0.57 . The right renal collection system was separated by 13 mm, and the right ureter was fully dilated. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated that the bladder wall was thickened, and there were multiple low-density nodules in the bladder with unclear boundaries and irregular morphologies. A continuous enhancement of the nodules was observed. The ureteral and renal pelvis of the right kidney were dilated . The CT images indicated bladder carcinoma, and a biopsy was recommended.