A 60-year-old Persian man presented to the clinic with a chief complaint of headache for the last 2 months ago. He also suffered from progressive bitemporal hemianopia. His past medical history was significant for a non-functional pituitary macroadenoma which culminated in a transsphenoidal surgery (TSS) and complete resolution of symptoms, 11 years ago; however, microscopic examination of the tumor is not available, currently. Moreover, he received a total thyroidectomy because of MTC, 3 years ago. Also, he had mild hypertension controlled by anti-hypertensive drugs, with no history of hypertension crisis, and an asymptomatic kidney stone for the last 3 years. His familial history and habitual history were not remarkable. A physical examination was not significant, except for lymphadenopathy in left cervical chain.
With the impression of PA, the patient underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). It demonstrated an isointense and high intense heterogeneous 34 × 27 mm solid mass, in T1 and T2 sequences, respectively, which was enhanced after contrast media administration. The lesion consisted of cystic and hemorrhagic centers with involvement of sella turcica and suprasellar cistern, and suprasellar extension. Moreover, it caused a mild mass effect on adjacent optic chiasm and bilateral involvement of cavernous sinuses. All of these findings suggested pituitary macroadenoma as the most probable diagnosis. Laboratory measurements failed to detect pituitary hormones in plasma; however, they had not been coupled with stimulation tests. Furthermore, level of serum prolactin was normal even after a dilution study.
The adenoma was resected through a non-complicated TSS. Post-operation MRI showed a non-enhancing center rimmed by a solid enhancing tissue consistent with tumor remnant in the sella area. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical (IHC) findings of the lesion were in favor of gonadotroph cell adenoma with a Ki-67 index of 4%; however, staining of the specimen was negative for luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, which confirmed the non-functional nature of the adenoma. Our patient’s symptoms, including headache and impaired visual field, were resolved remarkably after the surgery.
Further assessments were performed in order to evaluate the possible coexistence of MEN syndromes. Metabolites of cathecholamines including metanephrine, normetanephrine, and vanillylmandelic acid in 24-hour urine collections were in normal range, excluding pheochromocytoma. Furthermore, genetic testing for mutation of exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16 of RET proto-oncogene was negative. Plasma calcium and parathyroid hormone levels were normal with no signs or symptoms of pancreatic adenoma (PA).
A neck ultrasonography was done due to the detected lymphadenopathy in the physical examination, which revealed a 15 × 7 mm lymph node with a bizarre shape and hilum in the left cervical chain suggestive of a metastatic lymph node. Furthermore, a 6 mm hypoechoic nodule in the left thyroid bed was detected that might be attributed to the thyroid gland remnant or local recurrence of MTC. Therefore, our patient underwent cervical lymph node dissection and surgical removal of the nodule. Consequently, histopathologic examinations delineated the nature of the lymph node and nodule as MTC metastatic lymph node and recurrence of MTC, respectively.