The patient is a 52 year-old male with past medical history significant for coronary artery disease, hyperlipidemia, gout and obesity. He had undergone cardiac catheterization and stent placement 4 years ago and continued on anti-platelet therapy with aspirin and Plavix. Two years prior to current presentation, he underwent work-up for melanotic stools with upper, lower and capsule endoscopy. He was diagnosed at that time with duodenitis, attributed to Arcoxia, a COX-2 inhibitor he had been prescribed for treatment of gouty arthritis, with likely synergistic effect due to concomitant aspirin intake. Past surgical history was notable for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy earlier this year with resultant 35 kilogram weight loss.
His current presentation was marked by intermittent melanotic stools, fall in hemoglobin to a low of 7.3 g/dl and orthostatic symptoms. He was resuscitated and required a blood transfusion. Nasogastric tube placement did not reveal evidence of bleeding. Further work-up included upper and lower endoscopy which failed to reveal the source of bleeding. Capsule endoscopy, however, showed active bleeding localized to the jejunum, which prompted small bowel enteroscopy, which failed to show pathology to a depth of 160 cm. This was followed by double balloon enterosopy to a depth of 2m reaching the ileum. Again, this was negative for any responsible lesions. At this time, we elected to perform CTA of the abdomen both to exclude a mass lesion and attempt to localize a possible AVM. Of note, the patient was not experiencing any active bleeding at this time.
In the selected cut from his CTA (Figure ), an ectatic, antimesenteric blood vessel was noted adjacent to a loop of jejunum in the left side of the abdomen. This appeared to be an anomalous AVM as evidenced by early filling of an associated vein on arterial phase. Also notable was the finding of replaced left and right hepatic arteries. Given the CTA findings, he was referred for angioembolization. During this procedure, the visualized fourth jejunal branch from the superior mesenteric artery appeared to give rise to the AVM seen on CTA (Figure ). This was cannulated distally with a super-selective 2.7 Fr microcatheter, but the lesion was not amenable to embolization given robust collateralization. The decision was made to leave the micro-angiocatheter in-situ to facilitate intraoperative identification of the small intestinal AVM. The sheath and catheter were secured at the groin entry site, 2500 units of heparin were administered intravenously and the patient was transported directly to the operating theater.
A limited midline incision was utilized to gain access into the peritoneal cavity and expose the small intestine. Two mL of dilute methylene blue were then injected via the super-selective angiographic microcatheter, immediately staining a 10 cm segment of the distal jejunum and corresponding mesentery (Figure ). A segmental small bowel resection was performed. The patient had an unremarkable post-operative course and pathology demonstrated angiodysplasia in the small bowel segment with clean margins. At 6 month telephone follow-up the patient is doing well and denies any further episodes of melena.