We hereby report the uncommon case of a 27-year-old female patient, gravida 2 para 2, with a first pregnancy complicated by premature delivery at 33 weeks' gestation of a newborn of 1870 g with good psychomotor development, whose second pregnancy is estimated at 32 weeks of gestation. She had no antenatal check-ups. The patient presented to our facility with uterine contractions. Physical examination revealed blood pressure at 140/89 mmHg and a negative urine dipstick for proteinuria. Obstetrical examination revealed fundal height of 26 cm corresponding to 33 weeks, cephalic presenting fetus with regular heart rate with a baseline of 140 beats per minute and a 2 cm dilated cervix with partial effacement. She was therefore admitted to the hospital for risk of premature delivery with incidental findings of gestational hypertension. She was immediately given Tocolytic therapy by nicardipine and an intramuscular injection of 12 mg betamethasone to allow fetal lung maturation. Antibacterial treatment was also carried out with 2 g of ampicillin intravenously. She suddenly presented a sudden vaginal bleeding as well as spontaneous rupture of the membranes during the ultrasound scan.
Given the context of hypertension, the presence of uterine contractions and the sudden vaginal bleeding, the diagnosis of retroplacental hematoma was suspected. It was then quickly decided to do an emergency caesarean section. The operation was performed in less than 15 min and allowed the delivery of a pale male newborn weighing 1340-gram with an Apgar score of 1. Placental examination showed, instead of retroplacental hematoma as we initially suspected, rupture of the vessels running along the membranes connecting the placenta to an aberrant cotyledon. Operative time was 27 min and blood loss were quantified at 200 mL.
The newborn's condition required immediate management by the pediatrician. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was then initiated and bag mask ventilation was subsequently placed improving oxygen saturation back to 100%. Suction was also used. Thanks to intraoperative diagnosis of Benckiser's hemorrhage, neonatal hypovolemic shock was recognized. Endotracheal intubation with positive pressure ventilation was then initiated, in addition to vascular filling with 20 mL isotonic serum in 1 min via an umbilical venous catheter while waiting for blood transfusion. Due to bradycardia, external cardiac massage for 20 min and cardiac stimulation with adrenaline injections were carried out. At 37 min of life, the newborn recovered a stable hemodynamic state and benefited from a transfusion of 20 mL per kg of group O-negative red blood cells. After 7 days in the neonatal intensive care unit and 3 weeks in the neonatal unit, the newborn was discharged from the hospital.