A 58-year-old woman was referred to our hospital in September 2021 with acute urinary retention. She complained of frequency, urgency and progressive obstructive urinary symptoms for the last 3 months. She denied pain, haematuria or bleeding. Her surgical history revealed a hysterectomy due to hysteromyoma 8 years prior. Her past medical and family histories were unremarkable.
The ultrasound in emergency department showed urinary retention, but no other abnormalities were found. To find the possible cause of urinary retention, we performed a pelvic Computerized Tomography (CT) scan and a periurethral mass was found . On physical examination, an immobile hard mass was palpated on the ventral wall of the vagina, suggestive of a solid tumor. The inguinal lymph nodes were not enlarged on palpation. A pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was then performed which showed a soft tissue mass of 5 × 4 cm surrounding the entire urethra . Cystourethroscopy was performed which revealed no urethral or intravesical invasion . A needle biopsy was done and revealed adenocarcinoma with intestinal-type features (CDX-2+ CK20+, CEA+). To rule out the primary colorectal adenocarcinoma, the patient subsequently underwent abdomen CT scan and gastrointestinal endoscopy which showed no evidence of gastrointestinal primary tumors and disseminated disease.
Considering the high malignancy of this tumor, radical cystourethrectomy was suggested. But the patient refused the plan and insisted on bladder preservation. The tumor was removed by a simultaneous laparoscopic abdominal and transperineal approach. The mass was firmly adherent to its surrounding tissue and part of the anterior vagina wall was resected. Gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a solid mass (5 × 4 × 3 cm) with irregular margins . The pathological results showed a positive surgical margin and urethra and vagina wall invasion . Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were positive for CK20, CDX-2, CerbB-2, MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, PMS2 and P53. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The patient received adjuvant systemic chemotherapy comprising S-1 and oxaliplatin (SOX, oxaliplatin 200 mg [day 1] and S-160 mg bid of a 3-week cycle). The chemotherapy went smoothly and the patient showed no obvious discomfort. Follow-up with pelvic MRI 6 months after surgery showed no signs of local recurrence.