An 81-year-old Thai woman presented to her local hospital with generalized lymphadenopathy for 3 months, a 5 × 3 cm left forearm mass (stable for 2 years), and a 3 cm left neck mass that developed rapidly over 3 months concurrently with appetite loss. Laboratory investigations showed a normal complete blood count and blood chemistry. After surgical excision, both masses were pathologically diagnosed as DLBCL; the woman was referred to Siriraj Hospital for definite treatment.
During the month preceding her Siriraj appointment, another left forearm mass grew rapidly near the previously excised area. Physical examination at Siriraj revealed a 7 × 5 cm left epitrochlear lymph node (LN) and a 2 cm right inguinal LN. Noticing ptosis of the left eyelid, the attending physician suspected a paraneoplastic syndrome such as MG. The patient reported that she had diplopia and progressive dysphagia before the excisions, with concurrent development of hoarseness during lengthy conversations. Her left palpebral fissure (0.3 mm) was narrower than the right (1 cm) and she had limited left upward gaze. Antiacetylcholine receptor antibody testing was positive, and electromyography revealed postsynaptic neuromuscular junction disorder. A neurologist confirmed oculobulbar MG. A chest X-ray failed to show any mediastinal mass for thymoma.
The original slides and corresponding tissue blocks were received for review along with a photocopy of the pathology report for verification. The gross examination record showed a mass in the left neck (9 × 5 × 4 cm) and a mass in the left arm (8 × 3 × 2.8 cm). According to the original pathology report, both masses had a diffuse, grayish-white, cut surface, and they were composed of abnormal large lymphoid cells with oval-to-round vesicular nuclei, conspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm, together with some admixed small- and medium-sized lymphoid cells in the background. Immunostained slides of the left arm mass were received for review, including CD3, CD20, cyclin D1, BCL2, and MUM1.
Pathologic review was performed. The mass of the left forearm was confirmed to be a typical DLBCL . Lymphoma cells were large B-cells of the nongerminal center B-cell phenotype (CD20+ CD10− BCL6− MUM1+; Fig. A). They expressed BCL2 protein and had a high Ki-67 proliferation index (90%; Fig. ). The neck mass comprised smaller cells with more delicate nuclear chromatin and small nucleoli. They were intermingled with elongated cells with delicate nuclear membranes, more open nuclear details, and inconspicuous cytoplasmic borders . Initially, without knowing the growth rate of each mass or the presence of MG in the patient, the neck mass was suspected to be an indolent B-cell lymphoma; however, immunostaining did not reveal lymphoma B-cells. The small cells were predominantly CD3+ with a cytoplasmic pattern and a high Ki-67 proliferation index (90%). They expressed TdT, CD1a, CD4, and CD8, indicating an immature T-cell phenotype and suggesting T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-LBL). Nevertheless, immunostaining for AE1/AE3 cytokeratins showed the typical reticular pattern of neoplastic thymic epithelium, confirming that the neck mass contained type B1 thymoma . To distinguish metastatic thymoma from cervical LN and cervical thymoma, immunostaining for D2-40 was performed. It confirmed that the neck mass was the cervical thymus as there were no D2-40+ lining cells for the LN subcapsular sinuses. Hence, the patient had cervical thymoma and a concomitant forearm tumor with DLBCL. A review of the imaging findings confirmed that she did not have any mediastinal mass.
There was no marrow involvement. Computed tomography found a right interlobar LN (1.4 cm in diameter). The patient did not receive standard treatment for DLBCL [an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) plus CHOP (R-CHOP) regimen] as she was not eligible to access R-CHOP. Instead, she received mini-CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone), which produced a very good response. She achieved complete remission after the sixth chemotherapy course. The cervical thymoma was in a limited stage and was totally excised at the first operation. Her oncologist recommended 6-monthly computed tomography scans. The MG was controlled with pyridostigmine and prednisolone. Currently, 14 months after the diagnosis and 8 months after the CHOP regimen, she is still in remission for both thymoma and lymphoma.