A 19-year-old male, B.K., presented to the department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics at the Lebanese University, Hadath. His chief complaint was that he was unpleasant with his appearance and his lower teeth are too far forward. He also stated that he was not comfortable with his occlusion. He did not present any medical problems. He had a dolichocephalic facial pattern with flat cheeks, an adequate extension of the chin, an increased naso-labial angle, and a concave subnasal profile. Upon smiling, he had a moderate lip line with excessive dark buccal corridors, the smile arc was not consonant with the lower lip curvature.
Intraorally, the maxillary arch had a lyratic form with several extracted teeth including both maxillary right premolars and second maxillary left premolar, and a severe arch length discrepancy (ALD) of 23mm. It is apparent that both first maxillary molars were mesio-palatally rotated .
His mandibular arch was intact and presented an anterior crowding of 5mm.
Lateral occlusal assessments showed severe Angle Class III canine relationships on both sides with a negative overjet of 3 mm and an overbite of 2.5 mm. However, the molars had a Class II end-on relation mainly due to the maxillary arch extractions. In addition, a posterior crossbite was found on the right side extending from the canine to the first molar .
In relation with his facial midline, his maxillary dental midline was deviated 3 mm to the right and the mandibular dental midline was deviated 0.5 mm to the right. Although he had anterior and posterior crossbites, a functional shift was not found when his mandible was guided into centric relation. A temporomandibular joint (TMJ) evaluation did not reveal any TMJ symptoms, such as pain, restricted jaw movement, or joint noise.
A panoramic radiograph showed a mesially tipped maxillary right first molar and a slightly distally tipped maxillary right canine. All third molars were present, with normal anatomic structures in addition to absent bone and sinus pathologies ( and ).
The lateral cephalometric analysis demonstrated a skeletal Class III (ANB, -7°; Wits appraisal, -10 mm) due to a severely retrognathic maxilla (SNA, 71°) with a slightly hyperdivergent pattern (MP/SN, 34°). He had well positioned maxillary incisors (I/SN, 103°) and retroclined mandibular incisors (i/MP, 85°). The analysis was done using the Viewbox Cephalometric tracing software (Viewbox Version 4.0.1.7, 2013, dHAL Software, Kifissia, Greece).
The postero-anterior cephalometric radiograph portrayed a narrow maxilla relative to the mandible .
The following treatment objectives were established: to correct the concave subnasal profile, to manage the severe maxillary ALD, to level and align mandibular arch and normalize lower incisors inclination, to establish a functional Class II occlusion, to correct the skeletal Class III, to obtain normal overjet and overbite, to enhance the lower facial height, to level the curve of Spee, and to enhance facial and dental esthetics by improving the smile.
An orthodontic camouflage treatment in this case would have required extracting two mandibular premolars or the use of TADs to distalize the lower dentition. Both methods would have resulted in further retroclination of the mandibular incisors, and hence, worsened the concave subnasal profile. Orthodontics alone could not lead to adequate function and esthetics.
Therefore, orthognathic surgery to advance the maxilla in this case was the only option that targeted the chief complaint of the patient. Mandibular set back was not necessary since the patient has an adequate extension of the chin, and a brachygnathic maxilla was the main cause of the existing skeletal Class III. Skeletal discrepancy correction along with obtaining maximum facial and dental esthetics, and establishing an ideal occlusion would all be possible with this approach.
Because his mandibular incisors were retroclined and a negative overjet was required for surgical preparation, extraction of 2 mandibular first premolars was not chosen to relieve the anterior crowding. Instead, the crowding was targeted by proclination of the lower incisors.
Given the three premolars extracted on maxillary arch and the 3 mm midline deviation to the right, it was decided to open a space for one premolar implant on the right side. The space opening was achieved partly by placing one TAD on the left side to distalize and correct the midline, and an open coil between the right canine and molar to partially distalize the first molar.
After discussing the treatment alternatives, the patient accepted the surgical option. This treatment option required the joint efforts of the orthodontist, orthognathic surgeon, oral surgeon, prosthodontist and periodontist.
The patient was initially referred to the restorative department to treat the dental caries. Meanwhile, the case was discussed with the department of oral surgery regarding the space required for the future implant. Rapid palatal expansion was not performed in this case since the patient is an adult and most of the crossbite was caused by the Class III occlusion that existed i.e. there was no posterior crossbite present once the study models were placed in Class I.
Pre-surgical preparation commenced by bonding both arches with preadjusted appliances using Roth prescription and .022 x.028-in slots . The patient’s arches were levelled and aligned using a series of nickel-titatnium (NiTi) wires starting with a .012-in NiTi (total alignment phase was 6 months). Once .017 x .025-in stainless steel wire was reached on the maxilla, the patient was sent to the oral surgery department in order to extract his impacted right maxillary third molar, and an open coil was placed on the right side between the canine and first molar to create a space for the premolar implant. In addition, a TAD was placed on the left side between canine and premolar, and distalization was performed using a NiTi coil spring. Once implant space opening and midlines correction were achieved (total distalization time 6 months), continuous build up of the wires was done until reaching .019x.025-in stainless steel to control torque and slightly expand the maxillary arch for crossbite correction. Pre-surgical models were taken to evaluate the occlusal contacts, and the surgical wires were then placed. The surgical preparation resulted in a negative overjet of 8mm, and the patient was ready for surgery.
Le Fort I was performed in the surgery to advance the maxilla, and mandibular intervention was not necessary in this case. Post-surgery, the patient finished in a functional Class II occlusion ( and ) and he was sent to the oral surgery department to place the implant (total treatment time 20 months). After that, a connective tissue graft was performed for the premolar implant in order to enhance the gingival esthetics of the eventual crown .
Posttreatment records showed that the treatment objectives were fulfilled . The multidisciplinary approach allowed the fulfillment of the patient’s chief complaint and the achievement of optimal results. His profile was significantly improved especially at the level of his lips and cheeks, and his smile esthetics were dramatically enhanced. Dark buccal corridors were greatly reduced. Dental midlines were aligned with the facial midline, and ideal overbite and overjet were achieved. A stable therapeutic Class II was attained with coincident dental midlines as well as an esthetic premolar crown mounted on the implant.
A posttreatment panoramic radiograph displayed proper root parallelism, and did not reveal any significant sign of root or bone resorption. The implant showed positive signs of good osseointegration.
Lateral cephalometric analysis showed large skeletal changes with a significant improvement of ANB (from -7° to 3°) and Wits appraisal (from -10 mm to -1 mm) owing to the advancement of the maxilla following Le Fort I (SNA: from 71° to 81°). The mandibular angle slightly increased (MP/SN: from 34° to 36°) since the vertical position of the maxilla was not altered by the surgeon. The position of the maxillary incisors was maintained (U1-SN: from 103° to 102°), but his mandibular incisors were slightly proclined owing to the alignment and leveling (IMPA: from 85° to 91°).
Local lateral cephalometric superimpositions showed a proclination of the mandibular incisors, whereas the maxillary incisors slightly intruded. The maxillary molars moved distally and slightly intruded. As for the general superimpositions , the maxilla significantly moved forward which resulted in the forward movement of the lips and the slight lifting of the nose tip. The mandibular angle did not experience any significant change.
The patient did not report any TMJ discomfort during and after orthodontic treatment, and was ultimately satisfied with his occlusion and facial esthetics.