A 62-year-old female presented to our emergency department with paraplegia of the lower limbs and sphincter disturbance. Her past medical history included arterial hypertension, atrial fibrillation (AF) complicating a severe mitral valve stenosis for which she is on 2mg per day of acenocoumarol for 10 years with no drug history, family history, or psychosocial history. Her other daily medications were: Aldactone 50mg/day, Carvedilol 6.25mg/day and Furosemide 40mg/day. The patient experienced one week before her presentation a non-traumatic low back pain for which she auto medicates herself with Ketoprofen 100mg b.i.d for two consecutive days. She next developed neurological signs consisting of numbness making it difficult to walk and tingling sensation of both lower limbs. In two days, she was uncapable of walking, could not feel her limbs and complained about constipation and acute urinary retention, which brought her to our emergency room.
On presentation the patient's vital signs were within normal limits, with an arterial pression of 150 mmHg/80 mmHg, a heart pulse of 95 beats per minute, an oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. On clinical examination, the patient was alert and oriented to time and space, with irregular heartbeats and a diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis on auscultation. The neurological exam has shown paraplegia with muscular strength of the right and left lower limbs to be 1/5 which are hypotonic, anesthesia more accentuated on the left side, abolished deep tendon reflexes with a T10 clinical lesion level classified A on American spinal cord injury (ASIA) impairment scale. Blood examinations did not reveal any particular findings and INR was under the therapeutic range for her AF. Significant results are shown on .
An urgent cervical and thoracolumbar spinal MRI was performed revealing a spontaneous posterior epidural hematoma extended from T10 to T12 with an important spinal compression at this level. T2-weighted images didn't show spinal suffering signs (: A-C). As the patient was on acenoucomarol, a probabilistic single dose of 25 IU/kg of Prothrombin complex concentrates and 10 mg of vitamin K were given as soon as the diagnosis was made. The patient was then assessed by a neurosurgeon and brought timely to the operating room where she underwent a decompressive laminectomy of T10-T12 made by a professor of neurosurgery with the aid of a junior trainee with 4 years of surgical specialty training. No neurological improvement was noticed after surgery and MRI repeated 2 days after has shown a complete resolution of the SSEH and no spinal cord abnormalities (: D).
The patient was discharged a week later and addressed to the physical medicine and rehabilitation department for an adapted rehabilitation program with a urodynamic assessment. After 3 months of rehabilitation, we found an improvement in motor strength becoming 3/5 in both lower limbs with mostly unchanged sensitive and vesico-sphincter levels; ASIA impairment scale C. The patient still benefiting from a home rehabilitation program.