A 22-year-old Indian woman born to normal parents with no siblings reported to our hospital for management of malaligned teeth. She was unusually short in stature with mild intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial features. Her school performance was poor and she reportedly had hearing problems since childhood. Her hair was fine, sparse and fragile with slight receding hairline. Also seen were thick eyebrows, protruding ears, a pear-shaped nose with broad nasal bridge and columella. Her lateral profile was concave with a retruded maxilla and a prognathic mandible. On intraoral examination mild crowding was seen in relation to maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth. Oral hygiene was poor. Molar relationship was Angle’s Class III bilaterally.
She also had short limbs with brachydactyly of fingers and toes. Her wrist and interphalangeal joints were hyperextensible. A complete skeletal survey was carried out which demonstrated multiple bony exostoses in relation to bilateral ulna, right humerus, bilateral femoral, right tibia, right iliac and left pubic bone (Figure ). There were no spine abnormalities. On hand-wrist radiographs, her bone age was estimated to be 19 years. Epiphyseal fusion had been completed so no cone-shaped epiphyses were seen. Her blood biochemistry was within normal limits. Her thyroid profile was normal. An echocardiogram revealed no cardiac abnormalities. However, ultrasonography of her abdomen and pelvis revealed infantile atrophic uterus and atrophic left ovary which had led to primary amenorrhea. Karyotyping demonstrated a normal female karyotype. Based on all these features a diagnosis of TRPS II was established.
An orthopantomogram carried out during the skeletal survey revealed a chance finding of a well-defined multilocular radiolucency in her right hemi-mandible extending from the midline to the angle region involving almost the entire height of bone (Figure ). The lesion was seen extending interdentally but without any tooth displacement or root reabsorption. The inferior alveolar nerve canal was not traceable. On clinical examination, there was no paresthesia of her lower lip. Third molars were still in root formation stage. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed mild buccolingual expansion of the right half of her mandible. A well-demarcated, multilocular lytic lesion was seen with no cortical perforation. No air-fluid levels or enhancing component was seen (Figure ). A small amount of blood-tinged cystic fluid was aspirated from the lesion.
With a provisional diagnosis of a cystic mass, the lesion was explored under general anaesthesia via an intraoral approach. After creating a bony window beneath the tooth roots, an empty bone cavity with small amount of serosanguineous fluid was found without any epithelial lining. With features fitting with a diagnosis of traumatic bone cyst, bleeding was induced within the bone cavity and closure was done without extraction of any tooth. The radiolucency healed completely with good bone formation after 1 year of follow-up (Figure ). There was no discolouration or loss of vitality of any tooth in her right hemi-mandible on follow-up.