An 80-year-old right-hand dominant retired male was referred for ongoing treatment of bilateral hand contractures and palmar fibromatosis. 6 months before presentation to us, he had undergone surgery consisting of subtotal palmar fasciectomy, carpal tunnel release, and full-thickness skin grafting. Unfortunately, he developed worsening recurrent contractures shortly after his surgery, and it progressed in severity to worse than pre-operative levels.
His medical history was notable for Type II diabetes mellitus. The patient was unfortunately diagnosed with metastatic papillary thyroid cancer several months after presentation to us. He subsequently underwent total thyroidectomy with the neck and lymph node dissection, followed by radiation and chemotherapy after an evaluation revealed pulmonary, bone, cervical lymph node, and dermal metastases. His current medications include albuterol, allopurinol, citalopram, lenvatinib, metformin, pantoprazole, budesonide/formoterol, and levothyroxine.
Physical examination revealed flexion contractures of 38, 46, 77, and 87° at the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints and 58, 81, 85, and 78° at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints (index-small fingers, respectively). He was essentially able to make a full composite fist. At the time of presentation, the patient was significantly disabled and desirous of intervention. Treatment options were discussed including revision surgery, needle aponeurotomy with or without the use of digit widget application, and clostridial collagenase. The patient chose and underwent needle fasciotomy, digit widget application of the left index through small fingers. illustrates the degree of contractures at the time of digit widget application. The patient experienced notable improvement of the contractures with the widget. At 4-week post-surgery, the widget was removed. The PIP contractures significantly improved, and though improved, he still had evidence of MCP contractures . Unfortunately, over the next 2 months, the contractures slowly recurred, with his small finger most significantly involved.
We discussed options at that time and given his current health status and the disappointing outcome from prior surgery; he was understandably reluctant to undergo further surgery. The patient underwent Xiaflex injection of the left small finger. He returned 4 days after the injection for planned release. Physical examination at the time of release revealed an appropriate amount of bruising and swelling. He was able to demonstrate finger flexion. The cord appeared to have responded favorably to the injection as it was quite soft at the injection site. The finger was anesthetized through a digital block before attempted cord release. Despite the lack of an obvious give of the cord, an appreciable release of the contracture was noted. After allowing him to flex and extend the digit, we had concern for the motion of the finger distal to the joint worrisome for iatrogenic fracture of the proximal phalanx as a result of the manipulation. X-rays were obtained at that time, which confirmed the fracture and apex volar angulation at the base of the proximal phalanx . The fracture appeared amenable to non-operative treatment. No further manipulation was performed, and the patient was placed into a protective splint for immobilization and advised to avoid any strenuous activity.
The patient returned 1 week later. He had no pain and minimal tenderness at the fracture site, with mild swelling. The skin remained intact. There had been no change in the position of the finger. X-rays showed acceptable alignment . The patient returned 1 month later. X-rays again showed maintained alignment and signs of consolidation at the fracture site . The patient is currently 4- month post-fracture, and no further intervention has been pursued to date. He is currently undergoing chemotherapy given his metastatic disease.