A 62-year-old man presented to a nearby clinic with a chief complaint of abdominal fullness and abdominal pain. His medical history was not significant. He was on no medication. He was not allergic to any drug or food. Laboratory tests showed increased peripheral white blood cell count (17,900/µL) and eosinophil count (12,100/µL), measured by an automated hematology analyzer, Sysmex XN 2000 (Sysmex corporation, Hyogo, Japan). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed massive ascites and no other abnormalities .
He was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. His height was 173 cm, his weight was 105 kg, and his body mass index was 35 kg/m2. He had gained 15 kg in the last month. Physical examination showed abdominal distention and no abdominal tenderness. The white blood cell count was 19,400/µL, eosinophil count was 13,300/µL, and C-reactive protein was 0.70 mg/dL. The other data were normal: carcinoembryonic antigen 3 ng/mL, carbohydrate 19–9 6 U/mL, and serum IgE 112 IU/mL. His allergen-specific IgE tests were unremarkable. The interferon-gamma release assay was negative. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed massive ascites that had low and high signal intensities on T1-weighted and T2-weighted images, respectively. Abdominal paracentesis was performed, and the ascitic fluid was stained with Fluoocell WDF (Sysmex corporation, Hyogo, Japan), then analyzed by flow cytometry with the Sysmex XN 2000 . The total number of nucleated cells in the ascites was 11,420/µL, and 69% of them were eosinophils. Its cytology also revealed the most nucleated cells had both of bilobed nuclei and cytoplasmic granules, with no evidence of malignancy (Additional file : Figure S1). Ascitic fluid culture was negative. Upper and lower GI endoscopies were performed on the suspicion of EGIDs. There was a Type II-like lesion in the descending colon that showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma on pathological examination of a biopsy specimen . There were no other abnormal findings in the GI tract. The patient underwent exploratory laparoscopy to find the cause of the ascites, and massive brownish cloudy ascites with reddening or thickening of the mesentery and omentum was seen. The tumor was not exposed to the colonic serosa. There were no enlarged lymph nodes, no abnormal adhesions, and no metastases . Pathology of the mesentery and omentum showed infiltration of inflammatory cells, mainly eosinophils, with no malignancy (Additional file : Figure S2). Based on these findings, eosinophilic peritonitis associated with colon cancer was suspected.
After administration of systemic steroid therapy (prednisolone (PSL) 60 mg/day, 1 mg/kg/day), his blood eosinophil count and weight decreased immediately. The dose of PSL was then decreased biweekly. One and a half months after steroid administration, abdominal CT confirmed disappearance of ascites . Laparoscopic left hemicolectomy with regional lymph node dissection (D3) was performed. At laparoscopy, the inflammation of the mesentery and omentum was seen to be relieved, and there was no ascites . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. According to the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification 8th Edition, the pathological diagnosis was tubular adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated, pT3 (SS), int, ly1, v1, PN1, EX0, pN0, sM0, pStage IIA. The pathological specimen also showed eosinophilic infiltration to various lesions, especially omentum, mesentery, and the submucosal layer of the descending colon. He was given adjuvant oral chemotherapy (uracil-tegafur with leucovorin) for six months because there was concern that the pathological ly1 and v1 could increase the risk for recurrence of the cancer .
After the operation, the dose of PSL was again decreased monthly. He finally stopped taking PSL four months after it was started, and he remains asymptomatic without recurrent ascites at the present time .