A 67-year-old right-handed man with a history of hypertension visited the Memory Clinic at Samsung Medical Center for rapidly progressive dementia, visual disturbance, and akinetic mutism, which started six months prior to his first visit. On neurologic examination, he showed bilateral bradykinesia, parkinsonian gait, and postural instability. On neuropsychological tests, his Mini-Mental State Examination score was 21 (6 years of formal education). He showed poor performance on language (confrontational naming, comprehension, and repetition tests), visuospatial, memory, and frontal/executive function.
CSF analysis showed that white blood cell count, red blood cell count, protein and glucose levels were all normal. However, 14–3-3 protein was weakly positive, total tau was highly elevated (1081.9 pg/ml, normal range 116–370 pg/ml), and phosphorylated tau was mildly elevated (87.0 pg/ml, normal range 35.84–66.26 pg/ml). Amyloid-ß was within the normal range (910.0 pg/ml, normal range 562–1018 pg/ml). Pathogenic prion protein (PrPSc) was found using a RT-QuIC assay; however, the PRNP mutation was not found. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed cortical diffusion restrictions in the left temporo-parieto-occipital regions . Based on his clinical symptoms and laboratory tests, the patient was diagnosed with probable sCJD.
The patient further underwent molecular PET imaging using ligands that bind to amyloid (18F-florbetaben) and PHF tau (18F-Flortaucipir and 18F-THK5351). 18F-florbetaben PET revealed amyloid negative. 18F-Flortaucipir PET showed focal uptake only in the left occipital white matter region. However, 18F-THK5351 PET showed diffuse high uptake on the left temporo-parieto-occipital regions, which largely overlapped with the diffusion restricted areas . To quantitatively measure tau uptake, we determined the voxel-wise ROI of diffusion restricted regions by hand-drawing using MRIcro . We calculated the standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) of each THK5351, flortaucipir, and florbetaben uptake in diffusion restricted and unrestricted voxels. Then, to analyze whether the diffusion restricted area showed higher tau uptake, we parcellated the whole cerebral cortex into 84 regions based on an AAL template. We manually classified each parcellated region as a diffusion restricted area when more than 50% of the region showed diffusion restriction or as a diffusion non-restricted area when less than 50% of the region showed diffusion restriction. We then compared the regional SUVR of THK5351, flortaucipir, and florbetaben between diffusion restricted and non-restricted areas. We found that the mean THK5351 SUVR of diffusion restricted voxels was 2.17 whereas the mean THK5351 SUVR of diffusion non-restricted voxels was 1.79. The mean flortaucipir SUVR of diffusion restricted voxels was 1.16 whereas the mean flortaucipir SUVR of diffusion non-restricted voxels was 1.20. The mean forbetaben SUVR of diffusion restricted voxels was 1.07 whereas the mean florbetaben SUVR of diffusion non-restricted voxels was 1.16. Quantitative analyses showed that THK5351 standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) in diffusion restricted areas was higher compared to diffusion non-restricted areas, while flortaucipir SUVR and florbetaben SUVR did not show any difference (Additional file ).
The patient died 13 months after his first visit and underwent brain autopsy. The time interval between imaging scans and autopsy was approximately 13 months (399 days for MRI, 396 days for florbetaben PET, 388 days for flortaucipir PET, and 378 days for THK5351 PET). Neuropathological analysis was performed at Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Chuncheon, Korea. Autopsies were performed according to the standard protocols of National Neuropathology Reference and Diagnostic Laboratories for Dementia (NRD) supported by Korea National Institute of Health [, ]. Neuropathological diagnostic analysis was performed on sections, including the frontal, occipital, and basal ganglia of the right and left hemisphere. For each immunohistochemical stain, the degree of pathology was graded as none, mild (< 10%), moderate (10–30%), or severe (> 30%).
A post-mortem study confirmed the diagnosis of CJD, as we found neuronal loss and micro-vacuolar degeneration on H&E and immunoreactive for PrPsc (3F4 and 1C5 antibody) . There was no evidence of neuritic plaques or NFT in the bilateral frontal, occipital cortices, and basal ganglia. However, we found mild diffuse amyloid plaques and mild neuropil threads. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) stain showed the following results: moderate reactivity in the bilateral frontal and left occipital cortices; mild reactivity in the right occipital cortex and left basal ganglia; and non-reactivity in the right basal ganglia . MAO-B stain showed severe reactivity in the left frontal and bilateral occipital cortices and moderate reactivity in the right frontal cortex and bilateral basal ganglia .