Abdominal computed tomography for regular monitoring of uterine fibrosis in a 49-year-old woman found a hypodense lesion 7 cm in diameter with a clear boundary near the gallbladder . No obvious change in size and internal density of uterine fibrosis had been observed during these 5 years . She had no previous history of alcohol or drug abuse. Ultrasound revealed a well-defined, non-calcified tumor between the gallbladder and liver . Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a hypointense tumor that compressed the gallbladder and liver on precontrast T1 mapping . T2-weighted images revealed hyperintense tumor with delayed enhancement on arterial phase and portal venous phase followed by a delayed washout on the hepatocyte phase. Clinical evaluation and laboratory results were nonspecific, and serum tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen were within their normal ranges. The findings were consistent with a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) or another benign tumor originating from the liver or gallbladder. Accordingly, we planned firstly laparoscopic partial hepatectomy concomitant with gallbladder resection. Lymphadenectomy among the hepatoduodenal ligament were also planned under the situations where malignant tumor was suspected intraoperatively. Under the laparoscopic view, a soft tumor had expansively progressed behind the gallbladder, with dorsal compression of the liver . The tumor was easily separated from Laennec’s capsule of the liver at the gallbladder neck and body without adhesion, which indicates the tumor is benign. Therefore, operative policy changed to tumor enucleation with cholecystectomy. Frozen sections including the surgical margin of the cystic duct were negative for tumor cells. As the tumor was moderately attached to the liver at the fundus of the gallbladder, the liver parenchyma was partially resected en bloc to ensure that the surgical margins were free of tumor tissue.
The resected specimen included soft and white tumor tissue with clear boundaries that was located between the liver and gallbladder . Pathological examination following Hematoxylin and Eosin and immunohistochemical staining of tumor specimens was consistent with SFT. The specimens included spindle-shaped tumor cells with elongated nuclei , present in both tangled and patterned arrangements in the subserosal layer of the gallbladder . The tumor tissue had a storiform pattern with alternating hypocellular and hypercellular areas with some showing myxoid degeneration. The tumor cells were positive for CD34, CD99 and B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-2 and negative for S100 and alpha smooth muscle antigen (αSMA) staining , and few cells were positive for the cell proliferation marker Ki-67/MIB-1. The tumor cells were negative for SMA, keratin, cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), CD117, epithelial membrane antigen, and desmin. The pathological diagnosis was SFT originating from the cystic plate.
The postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged on postoperative day 9. Chemotherapy was not considered necessary, and postoperative follow up at 18 months found the patient well without any sign of recurrence. Periodical check-up for uterine fibrosis by gynecologist is also continued.