A 40 year-old man was admitted for headache, bilateral temporal visual field defect, and limited abduction in both eyes.
Five years before the present admission, the patient started to experience discontinuous and aggravating headache. Owing to symptomatic deterioration, the patient was admitted to the neurology department of a local hospital. Because the patient also had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis, he was suspected of having tuberculosis meningitis and treated with anti-tuberculosis drugs at the local hospital. However, the symptom did not alleviate. Upon presentation to our hospital, the patient underwent a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that showed the presence of a clival lesion measuring 2.6 × 1 cm2 with isointense signal on T1-weighted (T1WI) and T2-weighted (T2WI) imaging; accordingly, he was diagnosed with meningioma. The lesion was homogenously enhanced on contrast MRI with a dural tail sign . Because there was no cranial nerve function defect, the patients chose to undergo Gamma Knife Surgery at a dose of 11 Gy at the 45% isodose line, and regular follow-up was planned.
The patient had suffered from pulmonary tuberculosis 11 years ago and accepted standard anti-tuberculosis treatment for 1 year.
No other particular personal and family history was reported.
This patient showed right abducens paralysis, hoarse voice, bitemporal hemianopsia, and slight swallowing difficulty. No other positive signs were found.
Lumbar puncture was performed and we found that the number of karyocytes (mainly mononuclear cells) and protein levels in cerebrospinal fluid had risen .
After pathological results showed IgG4-RD, further systemic evaluation was performed to find other lesions associated with IgG4-RD. The serum IgG level was 17.20 g/L (reference range: 8.00-15.50 g/L), and the serum level of IgG4 was 1.90 g/L (reference range: 0.035-1.500 g/L). Tuberculosis associated gamma interferon release assay showed positive results with TB-IGRA (T-N) at 414.21 pg/mL.
After admission, routine laboratory testing and preoperative preparation were carried out. A repeat brain MRI scan showed that the lesion became larger, measured 3.8 cm × 2.9 cm × 2.9 cm, and compressed the adjacent brain stem . Further, small pneumatoceles in the upper lobe of the right lung were detected by thorax computed tomography (CT). Moreover, the examination of visual field confirmed binocular hemianopia . No other positive results were found.