We report the case of a 66-year-old Japanese man. He developed a subarachnoid hemorrhage at the age of 56 (10 years ago). After the subarachnoid hemorrhage, he experienced cognitive decline and generalized epileptic seizures. He received levetiracetam 1000 mg/day, carbamazepine 400 mg/day, and VPA 400 mg/day to control generalized epileptic seizures. Prior to referral to the hospital, the patient was wheelchair-bound and required assistance with bathing and toileting; however, he could communicate briefly. He had no history of alcohol use or smoking.
On April 19, he was referred to our hospital for medication adjustment due to the sudden onset of agitation and violent behavior. On admission, his vital signs were normal (temperature 36.5 °C, heart rate pulse 60 bpm, blood pressure 138/95 mmHg). In addition to the above drugs, he was periodically taking antihypertensive drugs (telmisartan 60 mg/day, enalapril 5 mg/day, cilnidipine 10 mg/day), and psychotropic drugs (quetiapine 125 mg/day, tiapride 100 mg/day, ramelteon 8 mg/day), which have been added 6 months prior to our referral. The patient’s psychiatric symptoms included intermittent episodes of irritability and agitation. He experienced sudden somnolence, but there were no abnormal neurological findings such as involuntary movements or seizure. Levetiracetam had been administered at the dose of 1000 mg/day for a long time before the onset of agitation and violent behavior; therefore, we denied increased irritability as a drug side effect. Although there were no epileptic waves evident on the electroencephalogram, we suspected epileptic seizure with interictal psychiatric symptoms and increased the dose of VPA from 400 to 800 mg/day on May 7 to control irritability and agitation. There were no changes in the other prescribed medications. After the dose was increased, there was still no improvement in the patient's irritability and violent behavior; therefore, the dose of VPA was increased further to 1200 mg/day on May 14. As liver enzyme elevations (aspartate aminotransferase: 47 U/I, alanine aminotransferase: 108 U/I) were observed with an increased dose, the dose of VPA was reduced to 800 mg on May 21, and his liver enzyme levels improved (aspartate aminotransferase: 28 U/I; alanine aminotransferase: 66 U/I). He presented with complaints of nausea and mild headache on May 22. The patient had no complaints of spontaneous and objective abdominal symptoms. Simple abdominal radiography showed gas and stool retention in the intestinal tract; however, intestinal obstruction was negative . A brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed no evidence of cerebral hemorrhage or other new lesions.
The patient had a sudden decrease in level of consciousness and blood pressure (temperature 36.1 °C, heart rate pulse 79 bpm, blood pressure 54/38 mmHg) on May 23, with poor physical findings, including abdominal findings and normal head CT, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram findings. Blood tests showed an inflammatory reaction (white blood cell: 6.3 × 103/µL, neutrophil: 91.6%, C-reactive protein: 4.97 mg/dL) and elevated amylase (1926 U/I). Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed diffuse pancreatic enlargement (arrow on axial plane in Fig. ) and inflammation extending beyond the subrenal pole (arrow on coronal plane in Fig. ). There was no contrast failure zone, suggesting contrast CT grade 2 acute pancreatitis.
The patient had undergone cholecystectomy for cholecystitis at the age of 61 (5 years ago) and was not hyperlipidemic. We discontinued VPA and initiated treatment with a high-volume infusion since we suspected drug-induced acute pancreatitis. The inflammatory response and elevated amylase enzyme levels improved, and the acute pancreatitis resolved after the treatment. We diagnosed VPA as the suspected drug based on three items of the World Health Organization–Uppsala Monitoring Centre Causality Rating Scale (e.g., event or laboratory test abnormality, with reasonable time relationship to drug intake and unlikely to be attributed to disease or other drugs, response to withdrawal clinically reasonable) . He had somnolence after discontinuation of VPA on May 31. An electroencephalogram showed right frontal rhythmic delta waves with findings suggestive of epileptic seizures (arrow in Fig. ). Therefore, we made a definitive diagnosis of epileptic seizures with psychiatric symptoms. We increased the dose of carbamazepine from 400 to 800 mg for epileptic seizure control. After increasing the dose of carbamazepine, his agitation and violent behavior decreased, and he was discharged from our hospital on August 18, and admitted to a facility (blood data and disease course summary are shown in Table and Fig. ). At the 6-month follow-up, psychiatric symptoms were stable and there was no recurrence of pancreatitis.