In a metal factory, a 47-year-old male was operating a hydraulic ironworker machine to punch holes into thin steel plates (25 × 10 × 6 mm). He wore protective goggles and a shield to guard against metal fragments. Suddenly, a fragment escaped the protective shield. Simultaneously, a powerful shock wave and pain hit the patient’s chest. The pain subsided quickly, so he continued working. After some time, he began to feel nauseous and dizzy but recovered swiftly. Concerned, he walked to the local primary care facility one kilometer away.
Upon arrival, his blood pressure was 117/88 mmHg, pulse rate 66/min, and oxygen saturation 98%. A tiny 3-mm wound was noticed approximately midway between his left clavicle and left areola, within the cardiac box. The patient was breathing and moving without any discomfort. A chest X-ray revealed a slim foreign body projecting over the cardiac silhouette . A non-gated computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed an approximately 30 mm long piece of metal within the heart.
The patient was transferred to Helsinki University Hospital, a quaternary center with cardiac surgery service. During the transfer, he remained completely stable, in sinus rhythm, and required no analgesia or any other medication.
A transthoracic echocardiography revealed a 5-mm layer of pericardial fluid. An electrocardiogram (ECG) -gated CT scan defined more details. The fragment was 30 mm long, 4 mm thick and it was located within the infundibular interventricular septum (IVS), with its cranial tip close to the intraluminal surface of the septum in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT). The fragment was completely confined within the myocardium. Based on these landmarks provided by CT, we decided that the simplest and thus safest approach was to remove the fragment through a short RVOT incision.
After informed consent, removal of the metal fragment through a sternotomy was agreed on. Perioperative transesophageal echocardiography confirmed an increased amount of pericardial fluid (a 10-mm layer), normal ventricular function and no sign of intercavitary shunts. The location of the fragment was less clearly visible in the TEE images; thus, preoperative CT guided the surgical approach. Pericardiotomy yielded 300 ml of bloody fluid; no active bleeding was detected. After heparinization and aorto-bicaval cannulation, cardio-pulmonary bypass was initiated, the ascending aorta clamped, and antegrade cardioplegia administered. Small entry wounds in the pericardial sac and the epicardium of the RVOT were detected. The RVOT was opened through a 4-cm ventriculotomy. No metal fragments were visible in the lumen. A small entry tear was observed in the muscle of the IVS as expected based on preoperative imaging. A 1 cm long superficial incision was made in the IVS to expand the entry tear and to expose the tip of the metal fragment in the septal muscle . The fragment was easily slid out. The septal defect, the RVOT incision, and the epicardial entry wound were closed with sutures. Drains were left in the left pleural cavity, pericardium, and mediastinum. The patient was weaned off bypass, the sternotomy closed, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Postoperatively, a partial right bundle branch block was observed. No arrhythmias were detected. On echocardiography on postoperative day 5, the IVS was intact, the myocardial function normal, and no pathological pericardial effusion visible. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 6.