A 51-year-old Korean man was diagnosed as having acute myeloid leukemia (acute myelomonocytic leukemia, M4) with normal karyotype (46,XY). An initial complete blood count (CBC) showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 65.29×109/L, neutrophils 22 %, monocytes 67 %, hemoglobin 8.7 g/dL, and platelet count 18×109/L. He received induction chemotherapy of cytarabine (100 mg/m2 body surface area on days 1 to 7) and idarubicin (12 mg/m2 body surface area on days 1 to 3).
On day 3 of therapy, when his WBC count reached its nadir, and his absolute neutrophil count was 277/mL, filgrastim was immediately started. He had no signs of infection, including fever, coughing, or diarrhea.
On day 13 of chemotherapy, he developed a neutropenic fever and complained of right pleuritic chest pain with productive coughing and sticky sputum. A chest X-ray showed lobar infiltration of the lower lobe of his right lung. Antibiotics were subsequently changed from prophylactic ciprofloxacin to meropenem and vancomycin.
On day 17 of chemotherapy, his neutropenic fever persisted, and a chest X-ray showed increased infiltration of his right lung field with pleural effusion. Laboratory data were as follows: WBC count of 0.31 (103/mm3), neutrophils 51.2 %, lymphocytes 32.2 %, absolute neutrophil count of 150, hemoglobin 7.3 g/dL, platelet count 34 (103/mm3), C-reactive protein 27.1 mg/dL (normal range 0 to 0.5), and procalcitonin 1.74 ng/mL (normal range 0 to 0.5). We performed pleural puncture and pleural fluid examinations. Analysis of his right-side pleural fluid indicated an exudative type. His pleural fluid had a WBC count of 670 (42 % neutrophils), total protein 4.75 g/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1183 IU/L. The results of pleural galactomannan and acid-fast bacilli tests were negative, but the pleural fluid culture grew Enterococcus faecium that was resistant to vancomycin.
His antibiotic regimen was switched to meropenem and linezolid, and the prophylactic antifungal agent (oral fluconazole) was changed to caspofungin, an empiric therapy, due to the prolonged neutropenia.
On day 19 of the therapy, his WBC count recovered to an absolute neutrophil count of 3360. A bone marrow biopsy was performed to confirm response to induction chemotherapy, and biopsy results indicated complete remission.
Nevertheless, his fever persisted, a chest X-ray showed no change in lung consolidation, and he complained of a cough that became more severe after swallowing.
An esophagram was subsequently performed and revealed an approximately 2 cm filling of a fistula at the mid-esophagus and the right bronchus intermedius .
Further evaluations with a chest computed tomography (CT) as well as esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy were recommended. Chest CT imaging showed extensive necrotizing pneumonia of his right lung and bilateral pleural effusion predominantly on the right side. In addition, a small, linear, walled air collection was noted just medial to the bronchus intermedius tracking towards his esophagus, a finding suspicious for a bronchoesophageal fistula .
Flexible bronchoscopy showed mucosal hyperemia in his right upper bronchus and brownish extensive tissue necrosis in the middle lobe of his right lung . Subsequent biopsy and culture were performed.
Esophagoscopy revealed a large linear defect of his esophageal wall 30 cm from the upper incision that perhaps connected with the bronchus .
A bronchoscopic biopsy showed broad and pleomorphic hyphae with necrotic debris. The hyphae appeared non-septate. Branches arose haphazardly, often at right angles. These findings suggested pulmonary mucormycosis . Lung tissue was cultured; unfortunately, the specimen was inadequate.
The antifungal agent was changed from caspofungin to liposomal amphotericin B (®AmBisome) at a starting dose of 5 mg/kg daily. A wide excision of his lung and perhaps of his esophagus was planned, as continued consolidation chemotherapy was required to treat the acute myeloid leukemia. However, he suddenly died due to massive hemoptysis. A timeline for our patient is given in Table .