A 30-year-old female admitted to an outside facility with urticaria, fevers, palpitations and tremors after recently being diagnosed with hyperthyroidism secondary to Graves’ disease. She had been having symptoms of anxiety, palpitations, weight loss and diarrhea for several months and was initiated on PTU and propranolol two weeks prior to admission. Her laboratory values on admission included a T3 resin uptake of 51%, T4 of 18.2 mcg/dL, free T4 of 5.46 ng/dL and a TSH of 0.01 U/mL. She presented an urticarial rash, palpitations and tremors, which were suggestive of thyroid storm with an associated allergic reaction to PTU. The PTU was discontinued, methimazole was initiated, and an increase in the dose of propranolol was made in an attempt to obtain symptomatic management. Despite the transition to methimazole, symptoms worsened and the patient developed angioedema of the face and progressive dyspnea. The methimazole was discontinued and the allergic reaction was addressed with dexamethasone, diphenhydramine and famotidine. The patient was then transferred to our institution for further management of her condition.
At the time of transfer, she was noted to have a diffuse urticarial rash over her face and extremities and was dyspneic at rest. A saturated solution of potassium iodide was started to help suppress further secretion of the thyroid hormone. The patient was not considered as a candidate for radioactive iodine because of concern for potential exacerbation of her condition and was subsequently scheduled for emergent thyroidectomy.
The patient had decadron and propranolol continued until the day of surgery. An esmolol infusion was used during surgery and titrated to the patient’s blood pressure. The patient received isoflurane, propofol, and a remifentanyl infusion during the procedure and remained hemodyanamically stable throughout the process. Total thyroidectomy was performed utilizing an endotracheal tube capable of nerve integrity monitoring to better enable preservation of the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Estimated blood loss was 50 ml. The parathyroid glands were adherent to the gland with three preserved and one requiring re-implantation. The patient was uneventfully extubated at the end of the case and recovered in the medical intensive care unit without complication. She experienced transient postoperative hypocalcemia (that resolved within two weeks after surgery). The patient was subsequently discharged on the second postoperative day with a dexamethasone taper, calcium, vitamin D and levothyroxine.