We report the case of a 67-year-old male diagnosed with left-side hemiplegia with spastic dystonia resulting from an intracranial hemorrhage . In 2004, the patient was initially admitted for facial paralysis and gait disturbance resulting from the initial episode of intracerebral hemorrhage in the right basal ganglia. The patient received conservative treatment and reported experiencing mild gait disturbance despite claiming no spasticity. Subsequently in 2012, a second episode of intracerebral hemorrhage occurred in the right thalamus, resulting in sensory loss upon placing his foot on the ground . Despite undergoing traditional treatments, his dystonic movements persisted in both the left upper and lower limbs, with no significant improvement. He received botulinum toxin injections in specific muscles, such as the left shoulder flexor, elbow flexor, hip flexor, hip extensor, and ankle plantar flexor (onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox®, Allergan, Irvine, CA, USA) injection ranging from 50 to 100 units for each muscle, with a maximum dose of 300 units, distributed across two to four injection sites). He also received oral medications, namely Pregabalin (75 mg bid), Trihexyphenidyl (2 mg bid), Clonazepam (0.5 mg bid), and Baclofen (10 mg qid). In October 2022, the patient was eventually admitted undergoing ITB bolus injection trial and further evaluation for managing the symptoms.
Initial assessments included the modified Barthel Score (MBI) and Functional Independence Measure (FIM) to measure the level of independence in activities of daily living. Jebsen Hand Function Test (JHFT) was conducted to evaluate fine and gross motor hand function. Berg Balance Scale (BBS), a clinical test of a person’s static and dynamic balance abilities, was also administered. The severity of dystonia movements and their impact on daily life were evaluated using the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scales (BFM-DRS). The results of these assessments, as presented in , indicated notable deficiencies in ambulation and stair climbing in activities of daily living. JHFT showed delayed fine and gross motor function on the left side. BBS indicated a lack of dynamic balance. BFM-DRS revealed dystonic movements in the left arm and leg, with evident walking disability.
In terms of spasticity, the left upper and lower extremities exhibited MAS scores ranging from 1 to 2. Specifically, the knee flexor and extensor muscles were assigned a MAS score of 2 . The results of pre-trial temporospatial gait parameters on the left side during gait analysis are detailed as follows: cadence of 88.1 steps/min, walking speed of 0.39 m/s, step length of 0.28 m, step time of 0.79 s, step width of 0.14 m, stride length of 0.54 m, and stride time of 1.36 s . Based on kinematic analysis from the gait analysis illustrated in , no dissociated movement was observed between the pelvis and lower limbs in the pelvic area. In the hip region, there was reduced hip flexion observed at the initial heel contact on both sides, with more definite findings on the left side. Furthermore, a decrease in maximal hip flexion was noted during the swing phase, particularly on the left side. In the knee joint, there was knee hyperextension during the stance phase, accompanied by decreased knee flexion in the swing phase on the left side. The ankle area exhibited a fixed contracture at the neutral ankle angle, and there was a lack of ankle plantar flexion and dorsiflexion motion throughout the entire phase on the left side. These clinical observations suggested an involuntary, persistent tonic contraction preceding muscle stretch, indicative of spastic dystonia. Additionally, the patient displayed stiff knee gait pattern, which is recognized as one of the abnormal gait patterns.
Typically, the trial to assess the impact of ITB bolus injection at the L2 spinal level involves incremental doses administered over four consecutive days, ranging from 12.5 mcg to 75 mcg. No administration occurs on Day 0. The sequence comprises 12.5 mcg on Day 1, followed by 25 mcg on Day 2, 50 mcg on Day 3, and 75 mcg on Day 4 .
The therapeutic impact of ITB on spastic dystonia was assessed through clinical evaluations, encompassing the MAS score and gait analysis. Kinematic changes during gait analysis were recorded for various parameters, including pelvic tilt, hip flexion/extension, knee flexion/extension, ankle dorsi/plantar, pelvic obliquity, hip abduction/adduction, knee varus, foot progress, pelvic rotation, hip rotation, knee rotation, and foot rotation . Serial assessments of the MAS score demonstrated a gradual reduction in symptoms associated with spastic dystonia with increasing doses of baclofen, suggesting a positive dose–response relationship . Gait parameters, including walking velocity, and secondary temporospatial factors like cadence, step length, step time, stride length, and stride time, exhibited enhancements as well . Moreover, kinematic analysis revealed significant improvement . In the stance phase on the left side, there was a reduction in knee hyperextension, an increase in maximal dorsi flexion, and heightened peak hip extension. There was also a significant augmentation in maximal knee flexion observed during the mid-swing phase on the left side. These changes suggest enhanced gait stability and coordination. Follow-up evaluations, which included MBI, FIM, JHFT, BBS, and BFM-DRS demonstrated enhancements in overall activities of daily living, functional recovery in the left upper limb including the hand, improved dynamic balance, and a reduction in dystonic movements after the ITB injection trial . Observing positive effects in the ITB injection trial, the decision was made to proceed with ITB pump implantation. On December 13th, 2022, the patient underwent ITB pump implantation at the T3 spinal level during a neurosurgical hospitalization. After implantation, the patient had regular outpatient visits, and the baclofen dosage was adjusted based on symptom improvement and side effects. Spastic dystonia in the left upper and lower limbs improved, leading to a gradual increase in baclofen dosage from 50 mcg/day to 85 mcg/day. However, later, the patient complained of weakness in the right upper and lower limbs, resulting in a reduction to 75 mcg/day. As rehabilitation therapy was implemented concurrently, the dosage was gradually increased, and the patient currently maintains 105 mcg/day without experiencing weakness. Five months post-ITB pump implantation, the patient’s spasticity, the level of independence in activities of daily living, hand function and dynamic balance were assessed during a follow-up outpatient clinic visit to confirm the treatment effectiveness. In the follow-up assessment, the MAS score for the left upper and lower extremities remained at 1, the MBI total score was 90, and the BBS total score was 32. A comparison with , ; , and revealed that the overall improvements were consistently maintained compared to the pre-ITB trial.