A 32-year-old male, previously fit and healthy, presented with epigastric pain and was found to have an abdominal mass on abdominal ultrasound. He was referred to the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University for further investigation and treatment in October 2010. There were no signs of neurofibromatosis type 1(NF-1). Physical examination revealed a firm, ill-defined, fixed mass in the upper abdomen. Laboratory findings, including leukocyte and platelet counts, hemoglobin, serum creatinine, liver function, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 19–9, were all within normal limits.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen showed a heterogeneous tissue retroperitoneal mass, approximately 16 cm in diameter . Following contrast, heterogeneous enhancement of the mass was noted. Adjacent vessels, such as the common hepatic artery, the portal vein and the inferior vena cava, were compressed. There was no evidence of associated lymphadenopathy or distant metastases. Biopsy of the tumor suggested a soft tissue sarcoma composed of pleomorphic spindle cells.
All imaging studies and serology examinations indicated that surgery was feasible. At surgery, a huge, soft, whitish, solid and cystic tumor was found, which occupied the entire abdomen. The tumor appeared to involve the distal stomach, the diaphragm, the hepatoduodenal ligament, the gastrohepatic ligament, the left lobe of the liver and the celiac trunk. It was also compressing the walls of the abdominal aorta and the inferior vena cava. Massive varicose veins were noted in the abdominal cavity. Part of the left lobe of the liver was resected due to tumor infiltration. A distal gastrectomy with a Billroth II anastomosis was simultaneously performed due to tumor involvement of the stomach. In addition, we suspected that the common bile duct had also been invaded by tumor, which was not evident on preoperative imaging, and we therefore performed a resection of the common bile duct, a cholecystectomy and T-tube drainage. Intraoperative histological examination of a frozen section suggested the presence of a soft tissue sarcoma.
On gross examination, the tumor measured 16 × 15.5 × 8.2 cm. The cut surface appeared firm and yellowish in the peripheral portion with foci of hemorrhage and excessive necrosis in the center. The margins appeared macroscopically clear.
On further histopathological examination, the neoplastic tissue displayed interlacing fascicles of spindle cells with wavy, elongated hyperchromatic nuclei. There was pronounced pleomorphism, an increased mitotic index (>50 mitoses per 10 high-power fields) and hypercellularity. Rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation was evidenced by foci of scattered, round cells with a prominent eosinophilic cytoplasm and atypical nuclei, which were identified as rhabdomyoblasts . Microscopically, the margins were confirmed to be clear of residual tumor.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive staining of the rhabdomyoblastic cells for desmin and vimentin. Nerve sheath differentiation of the spindle cells was confirmed by S-100 protein positivity. Tumor tissue was negative for smooth muscle actin, HMB-45, CD34 and CD117. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of a MTT was confirmed.
According to the Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) grading system , the tumor was classified as grade 3 (a total score of 7: 3 for malignant triton tumor, 3 for >50 mitoses per 10 high-power fields and 1 for <50% tumor necrosis). The surgical margins were estimated as wide . As no macroscopic or microscopic tumor remained, surgical resection was judged complete.
Following surgery, the patient made a good recovery and was discharged two weeks later. However, during his first follow-up assessment one month after surgery, CT imaging revealed multiple lesions in the liver, which were considered a recurrence of the tumor. Clinical deterioration occurred rapidly, and no subsequent treatment was undertaken. The patient died two and a half months after the operation.