A-sixty eight-year old Caucasian lady of British Jewish descent presents with the long term sequelae of deep XR treatment administered at the age of six months to the right side of her face. Information regarding the childhood treatment is limited to family testimony as the hospital has closed and the original notes are no longer available. We have no other details regarding dose and frequency of the irradiation. Subsequent health developments and interventions are well documented in the case notes within both the General Practice setting and the hospital departments she has visited since. Relatives, one of whom I interviewed, have told the lady that during the London Blitz, she was treated for an extensive mole on her face and neck that was present at birth, and that being a frail child, she was not expected to live.
As a child, right facial asymmetry became progressively more apparent due to arrested development of the skull bones and teeth. At the age of 47, following complaints of unsteadiness and headaches, a CT scan of the brain demonstrated right-sided cerebellar atrophy with an arachnoid cyst communicating with an enlarged fourth ventricle, and the presence of multiple skull-based meningiomata of the right petrous temporal bone. Within two years, oesophagitis and prepyloric erosions were identified at gastroscopy.
During a four year period from the age of 53, she was diagnosed as having neurofibromata of the left jaw and right cheek; sialadenitis of the left parotid resulting in the gland's excision (as seen in Figure ) and subsequent Frey's syndrome; bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, worse in the right ear; and an early right cataract.
From the age of 60, there were further developments, some more painful and sinister than had occurred previously - right sided trigeminal neuralgia; multiple basal cell carcinomata affecting the right temple (scarring from their excision seen in Figure ); sarcoma of the left neck recurring two years after excision; a right sided cerebello-pontine angle tumour; and a possible bronchogenic tumour pushing against the oesophagus. The latter two neoplasms have been assessed as inoperable and slow-growing on CT appearance, and the lady has elected not to have further investigation, biopsy or treatment.
As an adult, this lady worked in a leading West End department store until retirement at the normal age. As would be expected, there have been a succession of age related problems, including hypertension, hallux valgus, lumbar spine degeneration, lymphoedema and recurrent varicose veins. At present, she remains a cheerful retired lady, troubled by unsteadiness and gradually worsening headaches, She is kept busy with numerous hospital appointments to attend. She also cares for an older step-sister who suffers from dementia.