A 39-year-old Japanese woman (body mass index of 18kg/m2) with a past medical history of hypertension was referred to our hospital because of hypertension and hypokalemia. She had a history of a Cesarean section at 30 years old. A 19mm right adrenal tumor was found on abdominal computed tomography . Bilateral adrenal vein catheterization was performed to obtain plasma samples from both her adrenal veins and infrarenal inferior vena cava. The basal aldosterone levels in her right and left adrenal vein were found to be 51,900pg/mL and 1,200pg/mL, respectively. Thirty minutes after stimulation with adrenocorticotropic hormone, these levels rose to 113,000pg/mL and 1,5100pg/mL, respectively. The aldosterone-to-cortisol ratio was 340 times higher in her right adrenal vein than in her left adrenal vein. These findings demonstrated that her right adrenal gland was the source of excess aldosterone secretion.
Our patient was informed about the details of the surgical procedure and our efforts to reduce the number of incisions needed - ideally, to a single incision - when removing her adrenal gland. A SPLA was attempted.
Our patient was placed in the left semilateral position. A 2.5cm incision was made on the umbilicus, and a multichannel port (SILS™ port; Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) was inserted . The pneumoperitoneal pressure was maintained at 10mmHg. Three 5mm cannulas were inserted through the SILS™ port. The primary tools used in the operation were a 5mm flexible laparoscope (Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan), a roticulated laparoscopic dissector (Covidien) and a tissue sealing device (ENSEAL®; Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH, USA). Her right liver lobe was evaluated using a percutaneous instrument (MiniLap; Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA), providing good visualization of the operative field surrounding the right adrenal gland . The overall procedure was similar to the procedure performed in a conventional laparoscopic anterior adrenalectomy using a four-port technique. Only her right central adrenal vein was clipped and the small adrenal vessels were divided using an ENSEAL®. Her adrenal gland was extracted via a retrieval bag by removing one 5mm cannula and upsizing to a 12mm cannula. The skin was closed with absorbable sutures. No drains were inserted.
SPLA was successfully completed without the need for any skin incisions or additional ports. The operating time was 76 minutes, and her blood loss was 5mL. Oral intake was resumed on the first postoperative day, and the length of her hospital stay was three days. Pathological examination confirmed a cortical adenoma of the adrenal gland. No surgical site infections or incisional hernias were noted during outpatient follow-up. Our patient has had an excellent cosmetic result on postoperative follow-up.