A 52-year-old Caucasian woman from Mississippi with a history of sebaceous carcinoma of the left lower eyelid, breast cancer of the right breast (ER+/PR+/HER2+), and papillary thyroid cancer treated by total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine ablation (49.5 mCi) was referred to our clinic for follow-up evaluation. Sebaceous gland carcinoma of the eye was diagnosed when the patient was 43-years-old and surgically treated at a hospital in Pennsylvania. She was then diagnosed with multifocal ductal carcinoma in situ of the right breast in 2004 (T2N0M0), for which testing showed to be ER/PR+ as well as HER2+.
Following simple unilateral mastectomy, she initially underwent eight cycles of chemotherapy and tamoxifen treatment, but stopped taking tamoxifen secondary to fears of developing endometrial cancer in 2006. At that time, her hormone levels were checked revealing a low estradiol level (13.9 pg/ml) and an appropriately elevated follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (63 mIU/ml), indicative of menopause.
A mammogram from 2008 was unremarkable for recurrent cancer and she denied any vaginal bleeding. In 2005, a papillary thyroid carcinoma (size: 0.6 cm) was diagnosed after she had been found to have a thyroid nodule on routine ultrasound for which a right lobectomy was initially performed, but later followed by a total thyroidectomy in light of her multiple prior cancers.
She subsequently received ablative therapy with 49.5 mCi of 131Iodine in 2006. Since that time, she has remained asymptomatic and is taking daily calcium tablets as well as 150 mcg of thyroxine. Serum thyroglobulin levels had been undetectable (<0.1 ng/ml) while thyroglobulin antibodies were measured at 12 IU/ml (normal, <4.0), and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) at 0.006 mcU/ml (0.23 to 4.0 mcU/ml). Sonographic examinations of her neck had been non-suspicious for recurrent cancer. Given her postmenopausal and iatrogenically-induced hyperthyroid state, she underwent a bone mineral density study that revealed osteopenia at the spine and the femur (T-score was minus 1.1). Her 25-hydroxy vitamin D level was normal at 41 ng/ml.
The patient's family history was positive for breast cancer in her mother and maternal aunt. One of the patient's paternal first degree cousins suffered from an inoperable brain tumor, and a male and a female paternal second degree cousin had breast cancer. However, her family history was negative for colon cancer, endometrial or ovarian cancers, thyroid cancer, or any other cancers.
The patient recollected that her husband, who died of colon cancer, had been gainfully employed welding and cutting pipe that was previously used in the oil field industry. She further remembered being proximate to the pipe on multiple occasions, when she was helping her husband cut and weld sections, with resultant fume inhalation. After his death, she was unable to sell the pipe because it was determined to be too radioactive from its prior use in the oil field to be sold on the open market. The determination of radioactivity was made using a Geiger counter; however, the type of radiation was not determined.
Based on her personal and family history of multiple cancers, the patient underwent genetic testing for Cowden syndrome (PTEN gene testing for mutations in exons 1 to 9 was negative), screening colonoscopy (negative) to exclude Muir-Torre syndrome, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) or a variant of HNPCC, and immunohistochemistry (IHC)/microsatellite instability (MSI) testing on her breast cancer specimen for HNPCC (IHC: normal pattern for hMLH1, hMSH2, hMSH6, hPMS2; MSI: BAT25, BAT26, BAT40, BAT34c mononucleotide repeats, D17s250, D5s346, D18s55, D10s197, MycL, ACTC dinucleotide). We could not rule out a PTEN promoter mutation, because this was not tested. Given a Manchester score of 5-7 for BRCA2 with a less than 5% chance of finding a BRCA2 mutation, mutation analysis in BRCA1 or BRCA2 was not pursued.