The patient was a 65-year-old woman who had undergone surgery at 19 years of age for appendicitis. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Starting 3 years prior to the current presentation, the patient had gradually developed a gait disturbance, for which she consulted a local orthopedic surgery department, and upon diagnosis of knee osteoarthrosis received conservative therapy. At approximately 1 week before admissions, she had begun to experience loss of appetite and vomiting, and consulted a local physician. On suspicion of gastrointestinal disease, a thorough examination of the gastrointestinal tract was performed, but no organic disease was identified. Although the loss of appetite and vomiting resolved spontaneously, the gait disturbance gradually worsened, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed ventricular enlargement. The patient was thus referred to our department for suspected iNPH related to the gait disturbance.
Her height of 148.3 cm, weight of 54.4 kg, and body mass index of 24.8 were all within standard ranges. There was no medical history that could have led to secondary hydrocephalus. There were no abnormalities in vital signs with body temperature 36 °C, blood pressure 110/63 mm/Hg, and heart rate 83 beats per minute. Although the patient’s consciousness was clear, 15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), and there was no muscle weakness, she walked with her legs apart in short quick steps, and required a walking aid. While muscle tonus was normal, the patient complained of mild pain when extending the knee. As to higher order brain functions, mini mental state examination (MMSE) results were 24/30, and the frontal assessment battery (FAB) results were 9/18. Blood test findings at the time of admission were within normal range apart from mild hypoalbuminemia (total protein 4.6 g/dL, albumin 2.7 g/dL, total cholesterol 147 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 100 mg/dL), and elevated thyroid free T3 (TSH 4.333 μIU/mL, free T3 3.78 pg/mL, free T4 1.16 ng/dL). There were no blood-sugar or electrolyte (Na 140 mmol/L, Cl 106 mmol/, K 4.1 mmol/L, serum glucose 73 mg/dL) abnormalities. Head MRI revealed enlargement of all cerebral ventricles, with an Evan’s index of 0.4, and the Sylvian fissure appeared wide open consistent with iNPH. However, the specific feature of narrowing of the sulci at the high convexity area was not obvious . Single-photon emission computed tomography revealed reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF) surrounding the Sylvian fissure, with relatively increased CBF in the convexity, which was consistent with the pattern for iNPH . Findings for the sulci at the high convexity area were inconsistent with typical iNPH, however, and we thus reconsidered the possibility of other diseases that may have caused the gait disturbance.
Detailed tests were ultimately performed after hospital admission including a spinal tap. Following admission, the patient gradually became less active, and tended to stay in bed. Re-examination revealed blood sugar levels of 40 mg/dL and systolic blood pressure of 90 mm/Hg. On suspicion of impaired anterior pituitary function, scans were performed of the pituitary in the diencephalon, and baseline pituitary hormone levels were verified. The spinal tap results were negative. On MRI, pituitary gland was normal measuring 12 mm in maximum diameter with no enlargement or deviation of stalk, and there were no neoplastic lesions, inflammatory lesions in the pituitary area of the diencephalon, or changes suggesting that surgery had been performed in all sequences including contrast-enhanced dynamic images . Table presents baseline hormone levels, and Table the results of the anterior pituitary gland hormone loading test using corticotrophin releasing hormone, thyrotropin releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone releasing hormone, and growth hormone releasing hormone. Pituitary hormone results included ACTH <1.0 pg/ml (normal range: 7.2–63.3), and cortisol levels <1.0 μ/dL (normal range: 4.0–18.3), indicating pituitary adrenal insufficiency. There were no decreases in other hormone levels, with relatively mild elevations of growth hormone, prolactin and free T3 levels. We checked carefully again the medical history of the patient, but there were no recent history of exogenous glucocorticoid treatment. An additional pituitary stimulation test was performed, in which ACTH and cortisol responses only were found to have disappeared, and isolated ACTH deficiency was thus diagnosed . After initiation of hydrocortisone supplements, her gait quickly improved. While observing the clinical symptoms, hydrocortisone (Cortril ®) was adjusted to a daily dose of 15 mg, and after instructing the patient as to how to respond on sick days, she was discharged to return home. At approximately 6 months after discharge, although the ventricular enlargement on MRI was same as before, the patient scored 27/30 points on the MMSE and 15/18 points on the FAB.