The patient was a 69-year-old man with no history of urinary abnormalities or renal dysfunction. When he was 68, he underwent his first health checkup in several years and was found to have occult blood in his urine, proteinuria, and renal dysfunction. Urinalysis at the first examination showed urine protein of 0.49 g/gCr, urine red blood cells of 30–49/high-power field, and pathological granular casts, for which we decided to perform further studies including a renal biopsy. The patient had a history of untreated dyslipidemia. His family history was unremarkable. The patient was not taking any regular medication at the time of the first examination. Physical findings at the first examination were unremarkable. His blood pressure was normal (112/66 mmHg). There was no edema, lymph node involvement, splenomegaly, purpura, or bone pain. Table shows the results of urinary and blood analyses on admission for the purposes of the renal biopsy (dipstick test for occult blood 2+, urine protein 2+, and urine protein-to-creatinine ratio 0.30 g/g on a spot measurement). The number of dysmorphic red blood cells was 20–29 per high-power field. There were no abnormalities in complete blood count or the blood coagulation system. Serum urea nitrogen was 14.9 mg/dL, serum creatinine was 1.19 mg/dL, and estimated glomerular filtration rate by creatinine was 47.6 mL/min/1.73 m2. Serum cystatin C level was 1.73 mg/L and estimated glomerular filtration rate by cystatin was 37.1 mL/min/1.73 m2. Immunoglobulin levels were normal. Autoantibodies were negative. Serum and urine monoclonal immunoglobulin (immunofixation electrophoresis) were positive. The serum levels of the IgG κ and λ chains were 31.40 mg/dL and 33.60 mg/dL, respectively. The κ/λ ratio was 0.935. Serum cryoglobulin was negative.
With light microscopy, 54 glomeruli were observed, and two glomeruli showed global sclerosis. The remaining glomeruli were enlarged and showed lobular accentuation. In addition to mesangial cell proliferation, all glomeruli showed prominent endocapillary hypercellularity . Neutrophils and eosinophils showed marked infiltration. There was no hyaline thrombus, crescent formation, and double contour of the capillary walls. Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy was mild. Direct fast scarlet staining was negative. Immunofluorescence was positive for C3 (1+) and C1q (2+) along the glomerular capillaries. However immunoglobulin G (IgG) was negative. The clone we used to originally test for IgG was produced by Medical & Biological Laboratories Co., Ltd. (Lot No. 104AG; Aich, Japan). All immunoglobulins were negative . Electron microscopy revealed marked endocapillary hypercellularity. There was infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes, occluding glomerular capillary lumens. In the subendothelial space, there were many tubular structures in parallel arrays. With higher magnification, the microtubules had a hollow core and the diameter was approximately 40 nm . Most of the deposits contained microtubular structures.
Based on the characteristic electron microscopy findings, ITG was suspected; however, negative staining for immunoglobulins was an unusual finding for ITG. IgG detection by paraffin-immunofluorescence following pronase pretreatment was strongly positive within the capillary spaces of a glomerulus . Immunofluorescence examination of frozen sections using a different clone of anti-IgG antibody (55,144; MP Biomedicals, Tokyo, Japan) showed positive staining in capillary walls. Immunofluorescence for C4d was positive along glomerular capillaries . Collectively, the patient was diagnosed with ITG with false-negative IgG staining.
Additional laboratory data revealed that serum and urine were positive for monoclonal immunoglobulins. In a bone marrow biopsy specimen, the proportion of plasma cells was 1.6%, excluding plasma cell myeloma. Chromosomal aberrations were not found. 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography demonstrated no significant uptake.