A 70-year-old woman from Sale, with no history of previous hydatid disease, was admitted to our cardiology department for dyspnea NYHA class IV evolving in a febrile context for 2 days. Its hemodynamic profile showed a tachycardia at 120 bpm with a systemic blood pressure at the lower limit 95/55 mmHg. The clinical examination found the signs of right heart failure. Echocardiography revealed a pericardial effusion of great abundance in pre-tamponade with an intramural honeycomb pattern in the right ventricular wall.
The honeycomb pattern as a specific image usually found in hydatid disease prompted the investigation of hydatid serology which was explored by the ELISA technique with the ELISA DRG Diagnostic kit. The test came back positive up to 31.90 OD.
The diagnosis of isolated cardiac hydatidosis involvement was established, and CT scan assessment showed a massive pericardial effusion with hydatid cyst compressing the right ventricle and mild bilateral pleural effusion with no other organ involvement.
Surgery as indicated was realized through a median sternotomy with off-pump . First, we proceeded to the aspiration of a pericardial liquid with whitish rock water appearance and to pericystectomy to remove the false membrane and cystic formations.
We proceeded after that to an off-pump treatment of the right ventricle cysts: we first used aspiration with a 10-G lumbar puncture needle connected directly to the aspirator, and then we removed the cystic membranes, the residual cavity was cleaned with gauze saturated with hypertonic sodium chloride and povidone-iodine solution, and was left open.
Part of the piece was sent to the parasitology laboratory. Examination under an optical microscope (× 400) had revealed rare hooks of Echinococcus granulosus . The whitish rock water appearance of the pericardial liquid confirms the theory of intrapericardial cyst rupture. The patient was put on medical treatment with albendazole 10 mg/kg/day for 3 months with a favorable clinical course.