The patient was a 45-year-old right-handed native man with deafness. The patient presented with a mild headache seven years before being referred to our institution. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a non-enhanced, homogeneous lesion with a 25 mm diameter in the left frontal lobe (pars triangularis) . The tumor was suspected to be a low-grade glioma and was regularly followed up. The patient remained asymptomatic. When the tumor grew to a 45 mm diameter, the patient was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment. MRI indicated that the lesion was confined to the pars triangularis and pars opercularis and that the posterior part was in contact with the precentral gyrus . Contrast-enhanced agents were not used due to the patient’s allergies to them. The patient was neurologically asymptomatic, and his physical examination results were normal. The mini-mental state examination score was 26. The patient was employed as an officer; his activities of daily living were independent. The patient could not answer questions about the town or state in which he resided. In addition, the patient obtained three points for calculating serial 7 s. Although the patient was prelingually deaf, he was able to speak at a sufficiently audible level through childhood training. The patient primarily communicated using sign language and writing.
The tumor was located in the left frontal lobe; we decided to perform an awake craniotomy to preserve verbal function. A few days before the awake craniotomy, we presented the patient with an intraoperative task, including number counting, picture naming, reading Japanese characters, bending, and stretching the right elbow. A nurse with sign language skills confirmed that the patient could vocally complete these tasks. On the day of the awake craniotomy, the patient was placed in the right lateral position with his head fixed with a Mayfield pin holder after induction of general anesthesia. We performed a left frontotemporal craniotomy under general anesthesia. The patient was awakened after the brain surface was exposed, wherein bipolar stimulation (NIM Eclipse, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was performed for cortical mapping. Brain function mapping was performed using tasks such as number counting, picture naming, and reading Japanese characters. The nurse with sign language skills presented tasks and asked questions in sign language that the patient vocally answered. We ensured that the patient’s comfort and pain were adequately controlled by frequent communication using sign language during intraoperative mapping and tumor removal because the patient had difficulty expressing his discomfort; the patient’s face was hidden behind the drapes. illustrates the patient’s position and the layout of the operating room. No speech arrest, verbal comprehension difficulties, or motor deficits were observed with electrical stimulation of the cortical and subcortical areas where the tumor was located . Gross total tumor resection was achieved, and the patient exhibited no apparent complications .
After tumor removal, the patient we re-intubated the patient during dural closure, bone flap fixation, and skin suturing. Postoperative MRI revealed no apparent residual tumors . Pathological examination revealed a World Health Organization grade II oligodendroglioma with an isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 ( IDH1) mutation and 1p 19q codeletion. The patient’s neuropsychological status remained unchanged, and he was discharged on postoperative day 9. After one year of follow-up, no significant change or recurrence was observed on imaging.