A 53-year-old man was referred to Shiga University of Medical Science hospital, Shiga, Japan, complaining of bloody stool. The patient was diagnosed as having a 3 cm in length, type 2 K-ras wild type rectal cancer, 2 cm from the anal verge (Figure a) that invaded to the dentate line (Figure b) on screening colonoscopy. Computed tomography (CT) revealed rectal wall thickening and a regional lymph node metastasis in the mesorectum (Figure a). Advanced stage, low-lying rectal cancer was diagnosed. We usually perform abdominoperineal resection (APR) for advanced rectal cancer located in the anal canal as in this case. However, the patient was not willing to undergo APR.
Previously, Canda et al. reported that neoadjuvant CRT may adversely affect anorectal function
. It has also been reported that Cmab and Pmab-containing chemotherapy enables early tumor shrinkage
. For these reasons, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with mFOLFOX6 and Pmab was performed every 2 weeks with the patient’s written, informed consent. The patient received a total of four cycles of chemotherapy over 2 months.
Repeated colonoscopy after chemotherapy showed an excellent response with only injected mucosal scar in the area of the previously identified rectal cancer (Figure c). The results of the biopsies were negative for cancer cells. Additionally, CT scan demonstrated no rectal wall thickening and no mesorectal lymph node metastasis (Figure b). The patient underwent total ISR with a handsewn coloanal anastomosis, total mesorectal and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection, and temporary loop ileostomy 3 weeks after completion of NAC. No residual carcinoma was found (Figure ), 12 non-involved lymph nodes were identified, and all margins were negative for cancer on histologic examination.
5-FU-based adjuvant chemotherapy after neoadjuvant CRT followed by surgery is the standard treatment for clinical stage III rectal cancer
. For this reason, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur-uracil (UFT) and leucovorin administration for 3 months after surgery. Three months after surgery, the patient is alive without evidence of recurrence of cancer.