A 26-year-old woman (gravid 4, para 1) at 37 weeks of pregnancy with rapid enlargement in left anterior chest wall during pregnancy was admitted to our breast surgery unit. She first noticed a peanut size palpable accessory breast lesion at 10 weeks of pregnancy and during pregnancy the mass gradually increased along with pain. A similar symptom occurred in her last pregnancy 5 years ago, but the mass in left anterior chest wall was limited in the peanut size during the whole gestation period. A delayed surgical intervention was suggested. But the lump gradually regressed and disappeared after delivery.
On breast examination, two breasts looked symmetric with a couple accessory breasts below. The left accessory breast was obviously bigger than the right one that only had a light areola around a small nipple. An elastic, mobile well-circumscribed mass measuring approximately 15 cm × 15 cm was palpated on physical examination of the left accessory breast. Moreover, it was edematous and congestive with an increase in local temperature . The breast ultrasound further demonstrated the mass was a relatively homogeneous solid with short stripe blood flow signal. A single live fetus of 37 weeks gestation was observed by abdominal ultrasound scan. So mammography and dynamic contrast-enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging(MRI) were not performed. The patient also refused the core needle biopsy.
Due to progressive enlargement of the lump, diabrosis with bleeding occurred on the third day after admission. Since the fetus had been mature in the 37th week of gestation, we decided to perform the excision of the mass and accessory breasts after caesarean section. After a 2850 g male neonate was delivered, the right accessory breast and the mass with left accessory breast were removed. The pathological result came out with a giant tubular adenoma of 15 cm × 15 cm × 12 cm, the resected specimen appeared as a solid white elastic mass with a smooth surface. The cut surface was red-grayish. No hemorrhage or necrosis was present . Microscopically, the lesion consisted of tightly packed homogenous glandular structures which were supported by a single layer of myoepithelial cells with sparse intervening stroma . Milk overflowed from the left chest wall incision three days after operation and cured two days after the administration of bromocriptine. The postoperative course was uneventful and she discharged in good condition in two weeks.