On March 18, 2011, a healthy 59-year-old male was diagnosed with left knee osteoarthritis by arthroscopy; no abnormalities of the synovium were detected at this time. On June 27, 2011, the patient underwent left knee arthroplasty for severe osteoarthritis with necrosis and bone edema in the medial femoral condyle and tibial plateau. A hemipatellectomy was undertaken along with transection of the femur and tibia which, because of density of bone, required the use of three saw blades (Brasseler USA, blade number KM71-563) using a Conmed Linvatec motor. Total knee replacement was undertaken using an 83 mm tibial tray with a 75 mm femur (Biomet), a large patella and a 12 mm spacer. Four liters of saline were used to flush the joint during the procedure. A pre-operative varus deformity of the knee was corrected with an absolute neutral position after insertion of the implant.
Because of persistent swelling, decreased range of motion, and joint pain following months of intensive physical therapy with icing and treatment with non-steroidal anti- inflammatory agents, on March 22, 2012 the patient underwent revision arthroplasty with partial synovectomy (discolored, brown-tan portion removed) and exchange of the spacer from 12mm to 14mm. A radiograph of the knee prior to the procedure did not reveal the metal-line sign. Aspiration of the joint produced clear yellow fluid that yielded no growth on culture. Inspection revealed pristine prosthetic implants and the absence of loose fragments of bone or glue. The joint exhibited full range of motion without tendency toward subluxation, and the patella tracked down the midline with good stability in extension and without lift off in flexion. After irrigation of the joint with nine liters of saline with antibiotic solution, the wound was closed. On pathologic examination, the synovium exhibited marked chronic inflammation and hyperplasia with extensive finely granular foreign material resembling metallic debris . Laboratory analysis of synovial tissue for iron, chromium, and cobalt demonstrated the presence of each metal at the following levels: iron (150 micrograms/gram), chromium (17 micrograms/gram), and cobalt (14 micrograms/gram). Although reference ranges for these metals in synovium are not established, normal tissue levels of chromium and cobalt should be undetectable; iron would be detectable in tissue with hemorrhage, but the synovium did not show evidence of significant hemorrhage.
In June of 2013, the patient was found to have the following blood metal results: serum iron, 141 micrograms/deciliter (reference range, 40 – 155); plasma chromium, 2.6 micrograms/deciliter (reference range, 0.1 – 2.1); and plasma cobalt, 1.7 micrograms/deciliter (reference range, 0 – 0.9). To determine the likely origin of the synovial metals, we investigated the composition of the prostheses, cutting block, and saw blades .