A 40-year-old woman was referred to our tertiary level pneumology unit for an irritating chronic cough sometimes accompanied by mild hemoptysis (up to 20 mL fresh blood/d).
These symptoms had been present for the last six months; no clear triggers or aggravating factors were identified.
She was a nonsmoker, had no previous pulmonary diseases and had no significant occupational exposure. The patient had a six-year history of moderate UC managed mainly by dietary advice and cycles of mesalazine.
Six months prior to admission in our hospital, she had been evaluated for digestive complaints: Cramping periumbilical pain, loose bowel movements and rectorhagia; colonoscopy was performed, and pathological data confirmed an UC flare up that prompted mesalazine treatment (Eudragit coated tablets 6 g daily, same formula that the patient previously used). The digestive complaints subsided, but respiratory symptoms (dry cough that aggravated during the night, sometimes with mild hemoptysis) seemed to develop two weeks following admission to the gastroenterology department. An infectious etiology was presumed by her general practitioner, although the chest radiographs and sputum cultures were negative; symptomatology persisted under two courses of broad spectrum antibiotics (amoxicillin/clavulanate 2 g daily, 10 d, clarithromycin 500 mg daily, 7 d). After approximately one month the patient was referred to a secondary pneumology unit-atopic reaction (to an unidentified agent) and cough variant asthma were considered and patient received antihistamine (levocetirizine 5 mg daily, 14 d) and inhaled beta 2 mimetic and corticoid treatment (beclometasone/formoterol 100/6 μg every 12 h, ongoing). As no significant clinical improvement was noted after three months, the patient was referred to our tertiary pneumology unit for further evaluation.
Physical examination was unremarkable. Lung function tests were within the normal range.
The patient had mild eosinophilia (780 elements/mmc, 10.3%); no other significant hematological or biochemical anomalies were found.
Computed tomography of the chest demonstrated irregular circumferential thickening of the subglottic region and upper trachea, a diffusely enlarged thyroid and sparse tracheal nodules ; the distal airways, lung parenchyma and mediastinal structures were normal.
Flexible bronchoscopy showed viscous tracheal secretions and edematous, friable, nodular mucosa from the larynx to main bronchi; no clear hemorrhagic spots were identified; serial biopsies were performed (tracheal, carina and main bronchi). Bronchial fluid bacteriology tests were negative; cytology showed a neutrophilic/eosinophilic inflammatory profile. The biopsy specimens showed deep mucosal ulcerations with granulation tissue, abundant inflammatory infiltrate containing numerous eosinophils, epithelial healing with squamous metaplasia and regenerative atypia .