A 49-year-old male with a history of severe hypertension was admitted due to chest and upper back pain. His CTA showed an extensive aortic arch aneurysm involving the left common carotid artery (LCCA) and descending aorta. The aneurysm’s maximum diameter was 67.8 mm, and the left subclavian artery was 27 mm in diameter . Given that the aneurysm involved the aortic arch, LCCA and descending aorta, a novel single-stage hybrid surgery was performed. The surgery consisted of two steps: treatment of the aortic arch through median sternotomy and thoracic endovascular artery repair (TEVAR).
After general anesthesia, the patient’s back surface cooling began. A median sternotomy was performed. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted through cannulations of the right femoral artery, the innominate artery, and the superior and inferior vena cava. Circulatory arrest was initiated when the rectal temperature reached 28 °C. After a transverse incision of the aortic arch wall between the orifice of imonimate artery and distal to left common carotid artery orifice, antegrade selective cerebral perfusion was started via innominate artery and LCCA cannulations. The proximal end of left subclavian artery was ligated. After the intraoperative assesment, a 30 mm stent-graft (Microport Medical Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) was inserted into the descending aorta. The proximal stent-free vascular graft was then retracted back into the aortic arch. Running 4–0 Prolene sutures were made between the prosthesis and normal tissue of the aortic arch distal to the LCCA ostium , which attached the vascular graft with the aortic arch. The incision of the aortic arch was then closed with 4–0 Prolene sutures. This completed the aortic arch repair . Then CPB was gradually resumed and rewarming was started. An 8 mm prosthetic vascular graft was placed from the ascending aorta to the left axillary artery to reconstruct the left subclavian artery. Afterwards, a guidewire and a 6-French short sheath were introduced through the right femoral artery. The covered stent-graft (Valiant Captivia VAM3232 C200TE Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, Minneasota, USA) was advanced into the previously inserted stent-graft, which fully excluded the descending aneurysm. The rest of surgery was completed routinely. The durations for circulatory arres, cross-clamping, CPB time and TEVAR were 24, 36, 110, and 22 mins, respectively.
The postoperative course was uneventful without neurologic deficits. CTA showed there were no endoleaks and no stent-graft displacement on day 14 postoperatively . No blood transfusion was required during hospitalization.