A 30-year-old woman, gravida 0, with a 12-years history of primary infertility due to stage IV endometriosis admitted to Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Shahid Sadughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran. Primary diagnostic laparoscopy revealed bilateral tubal obstruction and severe pelvic adhesions. Despite adhesionolysis, she could not conceive. She also experienced 2 failed in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-ET) attempts. Second-look laparoscopy revealed bilateral endometrioma and dense pelvic adhesions. The patient underwent to laparoscopically lysis of adhesions and bilateral cystectomy. In order to prepare for IVF procedure, the patient treated by a long gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist (GnRH-a) (Decapeptyl CR, 3.75 mg; Ferring, Malmo, Sweden) and human menopausal gonadotropin (Merional, IBSA, Lugano, Switzerland). In this case oocyte retrieval and in vitro fertilization was performed but embryo transfer was cancelled due to total fertilization failure.
Two months after ovarian puncture and discharge, the patient readmitted to hospital presenting with fever 39oC, acute lower abdominal pain, WBC and count of 13600. Transvaginal ultrasound showed complex right ovarian mass measuring 5x5 cm, with hyperechoic area.
After that, optimal therapy consists of broad-spectrum antibiotics (i.e. ampicillin, gentamicin and metronidazole) was started. Because the patient experienced no clinical improvement, laparotomy was done and bad swelling pus (30 ml) detected, when the right ovarian puncture performed. Material culture showed no detectable bacterial growth. After relative symptomatic improvement, the patient was discharge from the hospital with oral antibiotics administration. The patient presented to hospital within eight months with fever and lower abdominal pain. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed an echogenic fluid collection 3×3cm in the cul-de-sac. The patient did not improve by intravenous antibiotic therapy. The existence of pelvic tuberculosis was suspected by tuberculin skin test (PPD), so laparoscopic biopsy was taken and diagnosis of tuberculosis was confirmed according pathology finding.
The patient was administered by a 6-months course treatment for TB, and received antituberclusis regimen containing isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. The patient discharge after clinical improvement.