The patient is a 54-year-old female who presented in September 2014 with headache, visual disturbance and right-sided facial weakness. There were no associated fevers or weight loss. Her past medical history included MG diagnosed in 1998 when she presented with ptosis and dysarthria. A thymoma was diagnosed and resected in 2003 but she subsequently developed pulmonary metastasis in 2011 and was treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy including adriamycin, cisplatin and cyclophosphamide. Her past history also included hypertension, dyslipidaemia and a previous history of smoking. Of relevance, our patient contracted primary varicella zoster at the age of three months and had three episodes of herpes zoster (shingles) in her fifth decade. Medications on admission were: mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 1 g PO BD, pyridostigmine 90 mg PO BD, prednisolone 12 mg PO OD, monthly intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg for MG, atorvastatin 40 mg PO nocte, telmisartan 20 mg PO OD, multivitamin, calcium and cholecalciferol 1000 IU PO OD.
Blood tests on admission are shown in Table . Of note there was a normal leukocyte count of 7.9 × 109 with low lymphocytes 0.7 × 109/L and monocytes 0.1 × 109/L. A CT brain showed an irregular contrast enhancing lesion within the left frontal lobe with moderate associated vasogenic odema. A subsequent MRI confirmed the solitary solid/cystic rim-enhancing lesion in the left posterior frontal lobe with moderate vasogenic odema resulting in a 3.5 cm midline shift . In the setting of known metastatic thymoma this was thought to be most consistent with an intracranial metastasis. The patient underwent stereotactic left frontal craniotomy and excisional biopsy which showed toxoplasmosis on the basis of histopathology and polymerase chain reaction.
The patient commenced induction therapy for toxoplasmosis with sulfadiazine 1 g PO QID, pyrimethamine 75 mg PO OD and calcium folinate 15 mg OD according to local guidelines . Her prednisone was increased to 25 mg PO OD and nystatin 1 ml PO QID was prescribed for oral candidiasis. She was discharged with a plan for 6 weeks induction course of anti-toxoplasma treatment and outpatient appointments with Neurology, Infectious Diseases and Neurosurgery. At review 3 weeks post-discharge, she complained of nausea, thought to be secondary to the sulfadiazine. Her medications were reduced to sulfadiazine 500 mg PO QID and pyrimethamine 50 mg PO OD.
Four weeks after initial presentation she underwent an MRI brain for post-neurosurgical follow-up. This revealed multiple new miliary lesions in the cerebral hemispheres bilaterally, which were predominantly cortical but with involvement of central grey structures including the right lentiform nucleus and thalamus . These lesions were not present on the initial MRI and were thought to represent disseminated toxoplasma. The patient was recommenced on sulfadiazine 1 g PO QID and pyrimethamine was maintained on 50 mg PO OD. Immunological review followed.
Further immunological investigations included flow cytometric evaluation of lymphocyte subsets which showed a CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia and complete absence of B-cells (see Table ). Serum immunoglobulin levels showed normal IgG levels (consistent with replacement IVIG), low IgM and undetectable IgE and IgD. Although complicated by immunosuppression with MMF and treatment with IVIG, it was concluded that the lack of B-cells, serum immunoglobulins suggestive of an underlying hypogammaglobulinemia, and T-cell immunodeficiency as demonstrated by toxoplasma infection were all consistent with a diagnosis of TWI/Good’s Syndrome. The patient received a total of 12 weeks at induction level therapy for cerebral toxoplasmosis with sulfadiazine 1 g PO QID and pyrimethamine 50 mg PO OD. Following this the treatment was reduced to maintenance phase with sulfadiazine 1 g PO BD and pyrimethamine 25 mg OD.
In February 2014, four and a half months after the initial presentation and 4 weeks after the second reduction in medications, the patient presented with acute onset nausea, headache and loss of consciousness. A CT of the brain showed a new ring-enhancing lesion in the right temporal lobe. An MRI of the brain confirmed the ring enhancing lesion in the right temporal lobe and the diffuse miliary nodules present in the previous MRI . These signs were considered to be consistent with persistent and progressive cerebral toxoplasmosis. She was recommenced on the induction dose of sulfadiazine 1 g PO QID and pyrimethamine 75 mg in addition to treatment intensification with atovaquone 750 mg PO BD. A cryptococcal antigen was negative as was HIV antigen/antibody screening. A CT of the chest showed stable anterior mediastinal and right sided pleural disease extending to the thoracic vertebrae exit foramen at the 9/10 level, with no evidence of new metastases .
Two weeks following discharge a decision was made to withhold the MMF in order to promote cell-mediated immunity to the toxoplasma. Lymphocyte subsets repeated on multiple occasions consistently showed a complete absence of B-cells with fluctuating levels of CD4+ T-cells with a range 280–1100 × 109/L. At the time of writing the patient remains stable on induction-dose sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine together with atovaquone therapy for toxoplasmosis, with MMF being withheld. The measureable cerebral lesions have reduced in size on MRI assessment and the miliary lesions have resolved. Her MG is stable and there have been no signs of progression of her metastatic thymoma. She is receiving localised radiotherapy to prevent nerve root and/or spinal cord compression at the thoracic 9/10 level, and continues to attend regular Neurology, Infectious Disease and Immunology outpatient clinics.