A 64-year-old female presented with stabbing pain, itching, and a rash on her right anterior shoulder. Moreover, she complained of motor weakness in the right upper extremity on the third hospital day.
The patient reported that, 5 d prior, a rash had emerged on her right shoulder and was accompanied by stabbing pain. Her skin symptoms and pain became worse over time, and she was hospitalized through the emergency department. Her initial visual analog scale pain score was 6/10.
The patient had a medical history of asthma.
On initial physical examination, there were multiple erythematous grouped vesicles in the right C4-5 and T1 dermatome regions . Hypesthesia was noted in the right C5 dermatome. There were no findings of muscle weakness at initial evaluation.
However, on the third hospital day, the patient complained of monoparesis in the right upper extremity as follows: Shoulder flexor 2-/5, shoulder extensor 3/5, shoulder abductor 2-/5, elbow flexor 2/5, elbow extensor 4/5, wrist flexor 5/5, wrist extensor 4/5, and finger flexor 5/5. There was no limitation of passive range of motion in the right upper extremity, and the muscle stretch reflex was normal in the right biceps and triceps.
Laboratory assessment indicated that the C-reactive protein level was 1.59 mg/dL (normal range: 0-0.5 mg/dL), and polymerase chain reaction for VZV was positive. White blood cell, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and serum electrolyte levels were all within normal range.
Computed tomography of the brain revealed no evidence of abnormalities in the brain parenchyma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed cervical kyphosis and spondylosis with spur formation at C4-C6 . Mild intervertebral disc herniation at C4-C5 without evidence of nerve root compression was also noted on MRI .
On the 12th hospital day, electrodiagnostic study was performed to determine the cause of monoparesis in the right upper extremity. On needle electromyography, abnormal spontaneous activity (ASA) was observed in the right deltoid, teres major, and infraspinatus muscles, which are innervated by the C5 root. The right flexor carpi radialis, biceps, brachialis, and C5/6 paraspinalis muscles showed increased insertional activity. Long duration polyphasic motor units were found in the right deltoid, and the motor unit action potential recruitment pattern was reduced in the right biceps, deltoid, brachialis, and infraspinatus .
The motor nerve conduction study indicated that latent onset of right axillary compound muscle action potential (CMAP) was delayed to 5.2 msec compared to 3.6 msec of the left axillary nerve, and amplitude of the right axillary CMAP was slightly decreased to 4.9 mV compared to 6.4 mV of the left axillary nerve. Sensory nerve conduction study showed normal values, except for delayed conduction velocity in bilateral median sensory nerve action potentials around the wrists, which is sub-clinically compatible with carpal tunnel syndrome . F-waves in the bilateral upper extremities were normal. These electrodiagnostic findings revealed right cervical radiculopathy, mainly from the C5/6 roots. Based on the laboratory, radiologic, and electrodiagnostic findings, the patient was diagnosed with herpes zoster radiculopathy of the right C5/6 roots.