The patient, a 12-year-old boy, the only child of healthy unrelated parents, was referred to the department of developmental behavior of Shanghai Children’s Medical Center due to delayed development and growth. He was born with a cesarean section at term with a birth weight of 2.2 kg but without been told had intrauterine growth retardation during pregnancy period. The boy was purple after birth and improved after stimulation, but had feeding difficulties, so the boy was subsequent admission to the neonatal intensive care unit for weight management. Feeding difficulties and developmental delay were observed in infancy. He only sat at 10 months, walked at 18 months and spoke his first sentences at 2 years old. Growth delay persisted (current weight is 31.5 kg [P3–10], height 146.8 cm [P10–25], body mass index 14.62 kg/m2 [P3–5], and occipitofrontal circumference 52 cm [− 0.14SD] according to Chinese domestic data. Mild clinodactyly of both hands and abnormal facial features including wide-spaced eyes, prominent nasal bridge continuing to forehead, abnormal teething and micrognathia were noticed . There was no history of seizures. Brain magnetic resonance image (MRI), EEG, X-ray of chest and spine, echocardiography and abdominal ultrasound were normal. Molecular karyotyping was normal.
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the ethics committee of Shanghai Children’s Medical Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine. Written informed consent permit to pusblish was obtained from the proband’s parents.
Whole exome capture was performed with Agilent SureSelect V6 enrichment capture kit (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Woburn, MA, U.S.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The captured library was then sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 System (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, U.S.). Raw sequencing data was process as previously described . All detected variants were analyzed on the TGex (Translational Genomics Expert) platform featuring with the VarElect scoring system . An insertion variant c.4029_4030insAA leading to frameshift mutation (p.Glu1344Lysfs*49) on NSD2 was detected and thought to have high probability as a candidate mutation.
The primers for amplification of the NSD2 gene (NM_ 133,330.2) were designed using UCSC Exon Primer online software and synthesized. The primer sequences for the truncating variant to be confirmed were forward5’-agtttgtctgcccgtcctgt-3′ and reverse 5′-TGAGGATGGCTCAGTGGTG-3′.
The target fragments were amplified from the patients as well as his parents using polymerase chain reaction (Takara Biotechnology, Co., Ltd., Dalian, China). The PCR products were sequenced using an ABI3730XL sequencer (Applied Biosystems; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, U.S.) with the forward and reverse primers. The sequence data were analyzed using Mutation Surveyor® software Version 4.0.4 (SoftGenetics, LLC). The truncating variant has been confirmed as de novo variants in the proband.