A 17-day-old term male newborn was admitted to our Department due to palpable left abdominal mass, feeding difficulties and poor weight gain. Pregnancy and perinatal history were unremarkable. At admission, physical examination showed severe global growth restriction, including weight (2,480 g; <0.4th centile, -2.9 SD), length (47 cm; <0.4th centile, -2.9 SD) and OFC (33 cm; <0.4th centile, -2.6 SD) , prominent abdomen with visible venous reticulum and a palpable mass within the left abdominal side. No other abnormalities were observed. Abdominal US documented a solid mass in the left kidney measuring 7.5 × 6.5 cm, with hypoechoic areas of necrosis without infiltration of the vascular pedicle. Abdominal CT better defined the neoformation, which was located in the left renal lodge and characterized by inhomogeneous enhancement and absence of lymph node enlargement or infiltration . Chest CT excluded secondary pleuropulmonary lesions . Heart US showed normal findings. Blood tests detected leukocytosis with lymphocytosis (total white blood cells 24,930/mL; lymphocytes 15,170/mL), increased levels of lactic dehydrogenase (374 U/L, n.v. 50–250), hypercalcemia (14.36 mg/dL; n.v. for term babies 8–11 mg/dL), in addition to mild elevation of serum phosphorus and magnesium levels (5.39 mg/dL and 2.45 mg/dL, n.v. 2.5–4.5 and 1.5–2.2, respectively). Therefore, intravenous administration of furosemide was started. Serum AFP, beta-HCG and NSE levels, as well as urinary catecholamines, were within normal range. During the first week of the hospital stay, our patient presented severe arterial hypertension (mean blood pressure value 88 mmHg, > 99th centile) , associated with secondary hyperaldosteronism due to hyperreninemia (280 ng/L; n.v. 2.99–35.64 ng/L). However, no abnormalities of plasmatic sodium, potassium and acid-base equilibrium (ABE) were detected. In addition, urine analysis excluded microhematuria. At 26 days of life, the patient underwent left nephrectomy. Subsequent histological examination disclosed a neoformation characterized by oval and spindle-shaped cells arranged in bundles, with necrosis and mitotic activity of 10/10 per high-power field; molecular analysis revealed the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion. Therefore, based on such findings, the cellular CMN diagnosis was made, and no chemotherapy was added. The postoperative evolution was characterized by an immediate rebound hypocalcemia and hypotension which required intravenous calcium correction, inotropes and eventually, blood transfusions and albumin administration. He was discharged 16 days after nephrectomy, showing regular feeding and adequate growth. Aged 4 years, our patient is presently included in a multidisciplinary follow-up. He shows normal anthropometric parameters and neuromotor development, kidney function profile, no recurrences nor other abnormalities.