A 44 years old medically free male began to complain of a right nasal swelling three years ago. It has fluctuated in size in the previous three years. Recently, it started to slowly increase in size with associated mild pain and nasal obstruction. The patient denied any history of medical disease, history of trauma or surgery.
On examination: There was a right nasolabial mass, 3 × 4 cm, round fluctuating, no discharge, or overlying skin change .
There was mild tenderness on palpation. The endoscopic examination showed a mass obstructing most of the right nasal aperture .
CT scan done showed a right inferior nasal alar region space-occupying lesion, measuring 3.2 × 2.2 × 2.5cm, which exhibits isodense to hypodense texture. There was no enhancement or bone destruction. It was causing a mass effect upon the maxilla, causing scalloping .
A final diagnosis of unilateral nasolabial cysts was given based on the clinical and CT scan finding. So, no further workup. The cyst excised by the sublabial approach .
They were starting by upper gingivolabial sulcus incision below the piriform apertures. A round, smooth, extraosseous cystic swelling superficial to the anterior wall of maxilla. The cysts were excised entirely with no attachment to the underlying bone and were firmly adherent to the floor of the nasal cavity in the mucocutaneous junction region. Part of the skin and mucosa removed in the right nasal cavity as it was part of the cyst wall. Dead space was packed by iodinated gauze and removed from the nose after 24 h. The wound closed by 3–0 Vicryl. The histopathological examination showed respiratory epithelium (ciliated pseudostratified columnar) with goblet cells compatible with nasolabial cysts. Postoperatively, the patient had mild facial edema with numbness over the right upper lip and teeth. He was seen after two weeks to remove stitches and intranasal cavity wound healed well. Edema had subsided by then, while the patient still reported numbness in the right upper lip and teeth. Two months after surgery, he has seen with an improvement of the previously reported numbness and fourteen months follow up showed no recurrence of the mass .
There was no indication for radiological examination as there were no complications or recurrence of the lesion.