A 52-year-old postmenopausal woman, a Nun by profession, presented with complaints of alternating diarrhea and constipation, and abdominal distension of several days duration. Her medical history was significant for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and psoriasis. Physical examination revealed a palpable abdominal mass extending from the pelvis to above the umbilicus. It was firm in consistency and very suspicious for malignancy. Subsequent evaluation for serum tumor markers revealed an elevated CA125 (1017, reference range < 35). Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a large solid midline mass in the pelvis and lower abdomen, extending to above the umbilicus and measuring up to 19 cm. It had multiple areas of low attenuation within it. In addition, several hyperdense lesions were noted in the liver, measuring approximately 1–2 cm in diameter. A third lesion was present in the posterior part of the pelvis, was solid appearing, and possibly involving the right ovary. It measured 10 cm and was noted to be pressing on the inferior vena cava and the right lower ureter causing mild hydronephrosis.
She underwent a segmental resection of the ileum, along with a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salphingo-ophorectomy, and intraoperative needle biopsies of the liver masses. Histological examination revealed a large carcinoid in the ileum with metastasis to regional lymph nodes. The tumor was present as nests and sheets of uniform cells with focal gland formation . Cells contained modest amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and monotonous appearing nuclei with vesicular nucleoli . Focal areas of mucosal ulceration, as well as extensive perineural and vascular invasion were present. Metastatic deposits of carcinoid tumor were also found in both ovaries and in the liver.
A 24-hour urine specimen revealed predictably high levels of 5-HIAA (5 Hydroxy Indole Acetic acid) at 45.2 (reference range 0.5–9 mg/24 hours). The patient was followed regularly with 24-hour urine 5-HIAA levels and CT scans of abdomen and chest. Two years post diagnosis; mild progression of her liver disease was noted. The patient was initiated on subcutaneous octreotide (Sandostatin) at a dose of 50 mg/m2 twice daily.
She remained stable for three and one half years, when she discovered a lump in her left breast. Clinical examination revealed a firm mobile mass in the breast suspicious for tumor. Mammograms were significant for an irregular, marginated mass of 2.2 × 2.0 cm in the upper inner quadrant of the left breast. An ultrasound confirmed these findings, revealing a hypoechoic, irregularly marginated mass highly suspicious for malignancy. The patient underwent lumpectomy of the breast mass for a definitive diagnosis. The gross specimen had a tan grey firm nodule of 2.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm with smooth borders within otherwise unremarkable fatty tissue. Histological examination revealed a 2.5 cm nodule containing infiltrating cords and nests of cells morphologically similar to her original ileal carcinoid tumor. The larger nests demonstrated an acinar pattern with rosette formation. The cells contained round to oval nuclei with a fine reticular chromatin pattern . Necrosis was absent and mitoses were rare. Focally margins were positive for tumor. A partial mastectomy was performed to remove residual tumor. The patient received adjuvant radiation therapy to the affected breast. She has had no recurrences and has had stable liver disease (metastatic carcinoid) for 5 years following her breast surgery.