A 56-year-old Japanese woman had visited a local clinic, complaining of a two-month history of a painless cutaneous fistula in her anterior neck with pus discharge. She was diagnosed with a pyogenic granuloma by her previous doctor. The pus discharge temporarily subsided after antibiotic treatment, but the cutaneous fistula persisted. She was then referred to our department for further advice. On physical examination, a non-tender reddish lesion with a fistula and granulation was seen on her anterior cervical skin. Our patient reported that she had suffered from the sensation of a foreign body in her throat after eating fish approximately one year prior to the present onset, but the symptom had spontaneously improved after a few days. Taking her anamnesis into account, a fish bone foreign body was suspected.
Endoscopic examinations of her laryngopharynx and esophagus showed no abnormality. However, computed tomography (CT) revealed a bone-density needle-shaped foreign body sticking out anteroinferior from the esophageal wall, penetrating through the superior pole of her left thyroid lobe, and extending nearly to the anterior cervical skin . The foreign body was surrounded by a low density area, suggesting abscess formation . The results of a blood examination were unremarkable, with normal thyroid and parathyroid functions.
Our patient underwent the removal of the foreign body combined with left hemithyroidectomy under general anesthesia 20 days after her initial visit to our department. A horizontal cervical incision with the spindle-shaped excision of the orifice of the fistula was made, and the skin flap was elevated. Considerable cicatricial adhesion was seen around the fistula. The fistula passed through the infrahyoid muscles and was connected to her left thyroid gland. The tip of the fish bone was exposed by cutting her infrahyoid muscles open. As seen in the preoperative imaging, the fish bone penetrated through her thyroid gland, reaching the esophageal wall. The fish bone, fistula, left thyroid lobe and an abscess were totally removed with preservation of her recurrent laryngeal nerve. The injured esophageal mucosa was sutured and closed. Figure shows the removed fish bone, measuring 28mm in length.
Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. No esophageal leakage was observed during an esophagography, and she was allowed oral food intake seven days after the surgery. She was discharged nine days after surgery, and no evidence of recurrence was seen over the postoperative follow-up period of 42 weeks.