A 69 year-old Caucasian male Army veteran was referred to a chiropractor at a Veterans Affairs Medical Center. He presented with left shoulder pain in the setting of a full thickness supraspinatus tear. A thorough history of his neck was gathered as it related to the left shoulder pain. His cervical spine was “stiff” most mornings, which abated with movement and activity. The patient had limited cervical range of motion in all planes and noted episodic neck pain secondary to injuries he sustained from multiple fragment wounds to left side of his neck in 1969.
A review of the final field hospital narrative at the time of initial trauma revealed the multiple frag wounds to the neck, shoulder and scrotum. These injuries subsequently resulted in a trachea-esophageal cutaneous fistula with left cervico-mediastinal abscess and cervical VO. During hospitalization, cervical plain films were reported on which described “prominent demineralization of the bones of the cervical spine with decrease in disk spaces C2 through C6. More demineralization anteriorly with apparent destruction of the anterior aspect of vertebral bodies with resultant reversal of normal lordotic curve. Neural foramina appear intact.” There was no mention of zygapophyseal joint fusion in the original radiographic reports following injury. He was hospitalized for 17 months following the gunshot wound with multiple surgeries to debride the region and reconstruct the left cervical musculature as well as antibiotic therapy. Cervical plain films at time of discharge described “bony healing and fusion of the mid-cervical spine with fusion of 2nd through 5th cervical bodes and calcification of the anterior ligament, C5-C6, C6-C7”. Again there was no remark of zygapophyseal joint fusion after treatment for the initial injuries and subsequent infection.
In office, he endorsed occasional axial neck pain and occipital headache that occurred 1 time per week. Neck Disability Index (NDI) score was 2 out of 50 (4%) . Pertinent details from the review of systems revealed type 2 diabetes mellitus, carpal tunnel syndrome, hypothyroidism, and irritable bowel syndrome. His medications included tramadol and butalbital, both taken as needed. He used a Thera Cane for self-management of myofascial pain. Despite this history, the patient worked full time from his 20s and was planning to retire at the age of 70.
Physical exam findings revealed a man of anticipated age who was oriented to person, place and time. He weighed 82 kg (181.2 lbs) and measured 177 cm (70 in.). Neurologic examination of the upper and lower extremity dermatomes revealed no deficits. Romberg test was negative and failed to elicit body sway or sense of loss of balance. Biceps, triceps and brachioradialis deep tendon reflexes were 2+ when elicited bilaterally. The plantar response was down going and symmetric. Finger to nose movements were without dysmetria or tremor. Cervical rotation was found to be severely limited in both directions. Global restriction of the cervical spine was noted when assessing joint play, with no isolated segmental motion.
Radiographs of the cervical spine on file demonstrate osseous ankylosis from C2/C3 to C7/T1 with obliteration of the intervertebral discs and accompanying endplates from C2/C3 to C5/C6. The C6/C7 and C7/T1 intervertebral discs and accompanying endplates are visualized, though the levels are ankylosed. The facet joints from C2-C6 are ankylosed as well. There is a mild kyphotic alignment of the cervical spine. Metallic fragments are seen in the soft tissues of the neck and upper thorax consistent with the stated history. Provided the history of osteomyelitis secondary to the treatment of the wound and multiple surgeries, the most likely diagnosis is post-infectious ankylosis from C2-T1. The initial field narrative did describe spondylodiscitis with observation of fusion of multiple segments of the cervical spine upon discharge 17 months later. No clear infection of the facet joint was described at the time. Traditional spondylodiscitis is observed to be contained to the anterior column of the spine, primarily the vertebral endplate and adjacent intervertebral disc. However, it has been reported, when infection involves a vertebral body, that it may extend into the pedicles and articular processes which may result in adjacent septic facet arthritis .
No manual care to the cervical spine occurred following the evaluation as the patient had no complaint in addition to the NDI score of 4%. There was no indication for additional imaging or further work-up regarding the cervical spine. The patient reported complete functional independence in all activities of daily living with reasonable expectation of associated stiffness and limited cervical range of motion. Following the evaluation, the extent of care included education to the patient. Further work-up for the left shoulder and referral to physical therapy resolved left shoulder pain.