A 37-year-old female presented with pain and swelling in the left knee for 2 years. The patient experienced an increased intensity of pain and noticed an increase in the size of the tumor for the past 3 months.
On examination, the patient had a 3 × 4 cm firm, non-tender, and well-defined swelling on the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia. Her knee movements were full and were associated with pain in the terminal range of flexion. She had no distal neurovascular deficit.
The knee radiograph and computer tomography (CT) showed an eccentric lytic epihyseo-metaphyseal lesion with well-defined margins confined to the proximal tibia (, ). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed locally aggressive lesion extending into tibialis anterior, lateral soft tissue, and fibular head which was hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2-weighted images suggestive of locally aggressive giant cell tumor .
Tru-cut biopsy showed an infiltrative tumor with nests of the spindle to epithelioid cells in a myxoid stroma. Some cells showed prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles. There was a low mitotic activity with mild pleomorphism. The cells were positive for CD31 and FLI1. Whole-body CT was done to exclude multifocal lesions and metastasis. A diagnosis of unifocal epithelioid hemangioendothelioma was made.
The case was discussed in the Institute’s Tumor Board. A decision of wide local excision and reconstruction of the joint with CMP was made. Using the pre-operative radiographs CT and MRI, measurement of tumor size was made and a CMP was ordered accordingly.
Under spinal anesthesia, with the patient in the supine position, parts were prepped and draped. Through an incision including the tru-cut biopsy site, the tumor was exposed. The margins of the tumor were carefully dissected out. About 4 cm below the bony margin, the proximal tibia cut was made. A fibular cut is made below the fibular head. The tumor along with a cuff of normal soft tissue was removed. Histopathological examination demonstrated endothelial hyperplasia and formation of vascular tubules with delicate reticulin fibers . The wound was irrigated with hydrogen peroxide. Proximally the incision was extended to expose the knee joint. An appropriate distal femur cut was made and the CMP was applied .
Ankle pump exercises were started immediately. Continuous passive mobilization and knee bending exercises were advised after suture removal. Weight-bearing walking was advised after 4 weeks.
The patient had no neurovascular deficit. At 3-years follow-up, there is no sign of recurrence . The range of knee movements is 0 to 90°. There is no sign of loosening of the prosthesis.