A 68-year-old man was referred to our hospital for a fever of unknown origin. His medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension. The presence of bilateral auricularis and nasal root inflammation, along with auricular perichondritis that was positive for anti-type II collagen antibodies, led to a diagnosis of RP. Because he was refractory to prednisolone (PSL) glucocorticoid therapy at a dose of 30 mg/day, adalimumab was initiated in combination with oral glucocorticoids after a chest computed tomography (CT) scan indicated that he had no signs of tuberculosis or NTM. Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) release assays (T-SPOT. TB, Oxford Immunotec Ltd., Massachusetts, US) and anti-Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) antibody assays (Capilia MAC, TAUNS laboratories, Inc., Shizuoka, Japan) indicated also negative results. After starting adalimumab treatment (40 mg), his clinical manifestations rapidly improved; therefore, adalimumab was administered 3 times approximately every 2 weeks. The clinical manifestations of RP resolved; moreover, while the PSL dose was gradually tapered to 10 mg/day, treatment with tacrolimus (1 mg/day) was introduced.
The patient subsequently exhibited an intermittent high fever and productive cough 16 months after the RP diagnosis. Laboratory tests showed a normal white blood cell count (8,100/mm3) and procalcitonin concentration (0.099 ng/mL), and increased C-reactive protein levels (13.81 mg/dL, normal range < 0.3 mg/dL). The results of all other laboratory tests including liver enzymes, creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen were within normal ranges. A chest CT scan showed granular shadows and multiple nodules in both lung fields with mediastinal lymphadenopathy . Mycobacterium intracellulare was isolated from 2 sputum samples; based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a pulmonary infection with this NTM. The minimum inhibitory concentrations of the isolated strain for clarithromycin (CAM), rifampicin (RIF), and ethambutol (EMB) were 0.5, 32.0, and 8.0 μg/mL, respectively. Tacrolimus treatment was discontinued. Treatments with CAM, RIF, and EMB at 800, 450, and 750 mg/day, respectively were initiated. The size of the pulmonary nodules and mediastinal lymphadenopathy increased 1 month after the initiation of antimycobacterial therapy. The high fever and general fatigue worsened despite 4 months of treatment; paravertebral and subcutaneous abscesses also developed and the size of the mediastinal lymphadenopathy increased.
Because biopsy of the mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a subcutaneous abscess of the right posterior thigh indicated infection by M. intracellulare, the diagnosis of disseminated MAC infection was confirmed. After 5 months of antimycobacterial therapy with CAM, RIF, and EMB, we changed the medication from RIF to rifabutin at 300 mg/day, increased the dose of CAM from 800 to 1,000 mg/day, and added streptomycin at 0.75 g, 3 times per week; however, the abscesses continued to enlarge. Tests for anti-human T-cell leukemia virus-1 antibodies, anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies, and antibodies to IFN-γ all yielded negative results. Although we slowly decreased the dose of PSL to 5 mg/day, the mediastinal lymph nodes enlarged even further and abscesses were formed. The mediastinal lymphadenopathy and paravertebral and subcutaneous abscesses also enlarged more and other subcutaneous abscesses developed, although microscopic examination and culture results of sputum and subcutaneous abscess samples indicated negative results 9 months after induction of antimycobacterial therapy. We considered this a paradoxical reaction similar to that noted in previous reports in patients with tuberculosis who discontinued biological agent therapy; therefore, we increased the PSL dosage to 10 mg/day. After this increase, his symptoms gradually improved and the lymph nodes and abscesses began to decrease in size. Due to the deterioration of RP symptoms, the PSL dosage was increased to 30 mg/day and mizoribine was added as a treatment; however, the MAC infection lesions continued to decrease in size. The clinical course, culture results, treatment regimens, and CT scan images are shown serially in Figure .