A 34-year-old single Iranian woman arrived at the emergency department complaining of the sudden onset of sharp abdominal pain from the previous day with no history of recent trauma.
The epigastric region was identified as the origin of the abdominal pain that radiated backward. Importantly, this pain was consistent in its location, unaffected by body position, and exhibited no variation in intensity following meals.
It is important to highlight that the patient initially sought medical attention at another healthcare facility. The ultrasound examination disclosed a proximal aortic aneurysm. Afterwards, a computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm and a left gastric artery pseudoaneurysm or aneurysm at increased risk. Due to the limited available facilities, the patient was subsequently admitted to our hospital .
She suffered from nausea without vomiting. Hematochezia, melena, anorexia, or fever were not present. Her past medical history was unremarkable. He was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic. Physical examination revealed 120/75 mmHg blood pressure, a temperature of 37 °C, and heart and respiratory rates of 110 beats and 13 breaths per minute, respectively.
Examining the patient's abdomen is not possible due to the possibility of aneurysms.
The complete blood count (CBC) reported white cell and platelet counts of 20.23 × 103/L and 404 × 103/L, respectively. Hemoglobin was 11 g/L at admission. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 51 mg/dL. The patient was stable. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria . We conducted an emergent hybrid procedure.
The patient was urgently taken to the catheterization laboratory for endovascular intervention. In light of the challenging anatomical position of the aneurysm, traditional methods like inserting a stent graft or coiling the proximal normal artery were deemed impractical. Coiling the aneurysm sac alone was also ruled out due to the rupture. Given the success of this approach in elective cases previously, we decided to manage with a similar treatment strategy.
During the procedure, a deflated balloon was inflated to a fixed size of 7 * 40 mm as proximal control after being attached to a catheter that was inserted into the splenic artery right before the aneurysm over a guidewire. A distal interlock coil was used to attain distal occlusion .
To verify occlusion of the major splenic artery and patency of the collateral arteries, selective splenic, celiac, and superior mesenteric arteries, angiograms were used as post-embolization tests. The patient underwent surgery in the hybrid operating room. Then, in laparotomy, the distal part was ligated and proximal part according to the inflated balloon, eliminating the need for extensive dissection inside the hematoma for proximal control and endangering the patient's life due to bleeding during surgery. The aneurysm was ligated and removed .
The abdomen was flushed with warm, normal saline and subsequently closed upon achieving hemostasis. The patient, who remained stable, was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). During her ICU stay, the patient's hemodynamic parameters remained steady. Under continuous monitoring by her obstetrician and vascular surgeon, she was extubated on the second day after surgery and discharged from the hospital on the fifth postoperative day.
A simple closure of the primary splenic artery trunk does not result in major difficulties because of the spleen's strong collateral circulation. In our patient with involvement of the proximal part, we decided for an aneurysm resection without splenectomy. This approach aims to retain the spleen, a vital component of the immune system.