We present the case of a 22 year old Para 0+2 female undergraduate from the Urhobo tribe in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria who was seen at the gynecological clinic with a two week history of colicky lower abdominal pain which became generalized a day prior to presentation. There was no history of dizziness or fainting spells. There were no gastrointestinal symptoms. She bled per vaginam two weeks prior to presentation for four days which she claimed to be her menses. There was no history of chronic cough or weight loss. She did not have any purulent vaginal discharge prior to bleeding per vagina.
She had a previous left cornual resection for a ruptured ectopic pregnancy five years ago in this hospital. There was also a history of having been managed for sepsis following the termination of an eight week pregnancy four months prior to presentation.
Examination revealed that she was in painful distress and had mild pallor. Chest was clinically clear. Her pulse rate was 100 beats per minute while the blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg. Abdomen examination revealed a full, soft abdomen with tenderness in the suprapubic region, right and left iliac fossae, left renal angle and periumbilical area. Vaginal examination showed a normal lower genital tract, uterus was normal sized, anteverted, no pelvic masses were felt, pouch of Douglas was empty and there was marked cervical excitation tenderness. Differential diagnoses were those of left pyelonephritis, pelvic inflammatory disease and slow leaking ectopic pregnancy. Complete blood count and urinalysis was normal. Hemoglobin was 10.6 gm/dl. Serum beta human chorionic gonadotrophin was 3,500 mIU/mL. Screening for chlamydia and gonorrhoea were negative. Pelvic ultrasound scan revealed the presence of a left adnexal complex mass with associated free pelvic fluid and increased blood flow activity. The uterus shows a normal outline with slightly thickened endometrial plate and no intrauterine cyesis. Conclusion was left ectopic pregnancy. She was placed on a nil per os regimen and intravenous fluid was commenced. Two units of whole blood were grouped and cross-matched.
A left salpingo-oophorectomy with pelvic adhesiolysis was done. Repeat Pfannenstiel incision through previous scar was made to enter the abdominal cavity. Findings at surgery were hemoperitoneum of 600 mls, left tubo-ovarian mass adherent to the pelvic floor (left chronic ectopic involving the tubal stump and the ovary with vesico-utero-ovarian adhesions), omento-uterine adhesions, cornual adhesions and stump, slightly bulky uterus, normal looking right ovary and a beaded right fallopian tube.
The haemoperitoneum was sucked and adhesiolysis performed to free the omentum from behind the uterus. The left tubo-ovarian mass was lifted out and bluntly freed from the pelvic floor to define a near anatomy. A left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed and haemostasis was secured. Abdominal wall was closed with subcuticular dexon to skin. She was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
She was counseled on the use of contraception and the combined oral contraceptive was offered her. The possibility of repeat ectopic pregnancy was explained and she was counseled on safe sex. She was seen again two weeks later and was found to be stable.
Histology report revealed a left tubal ectopic pregnancy and a left ovarian corpus luteum cyst. There was no evidence of genital tuberculosis.