A 40-year-old man was admitted to a regional hospital due to suspected meningitis. He presented with seizures and impaired consciousness, so was transferred to our university hospital.
On arriving, he had a disturbance of consciousness without fever. Although a brain computed tomography scan did not reveal remarkable changes, including hydrocephalus, the patient had high CSFP of >50 cmH2O. A microscopic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed Cryptococcus neoformans. Amphotericin B 300 mg/day and flucytosine 5000 mg/day were given for fungal meningitis. Intermittent lumbar punctures were scheduled to control the raised CSFP.
After the admission the patient's consciousness gradually declined to the critical level so as to obstruct airways with high fever. Cerebrospinal fluid pressure still reached above 50 cmH2O and lumbar puncture drainage did not improve his consciousness, so we carried out respiratory management with tracheal intubation. We also considered encephalitis and brain swelling due to the progression of C. neoformans. The patient's body temperature was reduced to normothermia with a surface cooling device against his fever elevation, which might worsen cerebral injuries from infection, then started neurological monitoring with BIS on day 2. Several hours after inducing normothermia, his blood pressure suddenly increased (208/119 mmHg) and his light reflex disappeared, so we started a barbiturate (thiamylal 750 μg/kg/h) for the purpose of reducing CSFP, and decreased his temperature to 34°C with continuous administration of neuromuscular blockade (NMB). After the intervention, blood pressure became normal and stabilized, and light reflex was regained. A brain computed tomography scan taken at the time revealed no remarkable changes.
However, several hours after inducing mild hypothermia of 34°C, BIS values suddenly decreased to zero, meaning an isoelectric electroencephalogram, which had occurred approximately 15 minutes before blood pressure elevated and light reflex was lost. We carried out an urgent lumbar puncture and repeated CSF drainage as the CSFP was still >50 cmH2O. After CSF drainage at a volume of 124 mL, BIS values gradually recovered. However, blood pressure profoundly dropped, which might have been due to a rapid decrease in CSFP, so that we stopped the drainage. After regaining blood pressure, we reduced the target temperature further to 33°C for the purpose of reducing CSFP .
On day 3, we inserted a spinal drain tube for controlling CSFP and preventing the risk of brain herniation during intermittent lumbar punctures. While the continuous CSF drainage was set at 10 cm H2O, BIS values and blood pressures returned to normal range. After a very gradual rewarming at 1°C/day and discontinuing treatment with the barbiturate, the patient was stable and extubated on day 8. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain on day 9 depicted T2 high-intensities at the bilateral basal ganglia, which might be due to the cryptococcomas. However, with good response to treatment, we removed the spinal drainage tube on day 27 and 90 days after admission he could walk around and was clinically asymptomatic.