A 51-year-old Caucasian man with a 20-year history of sarcoidosis was admitted to our hospital with a 1-month history of daily fevers, malaise, and progressive dyspnea. He had been taking prednisone 20mg daily for the past 10 years, and took levofloxacin 750mg daily for 1 week before admission without improvement. He had never smoked cigarettes and had always lived in central Pennsylvania without recent travel history. No sick family members were reported and he had no unusual animal exposures. On examination, he was febrile, tachycardic, hypotensive, and diaphoretic. A lung examination showed fine scattered inspiratory crackles. There was no lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.Compared to normal values documented 1 month prior, admission laboratory investigations showed a platelet count of 19u/L (normal 150 to 350u/L), hematocrit of 31.5%, white blood cell count of 3.1K/uL (normal 4 to 10.4K/uL), and absolute lymphocyte count of 0.37K/uL (normal 1.0 to 3.4K/uL). The rest of his laboratory tests were within normal limits. Sputum Gram stain and bacterial blood cultures were negative. A noncontrast-computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest showed multiple pulmonary nodules and calcified hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Figure ). An initial radiology report advised that fungal infection, such as histoplasmosis, should be included in the differential diagnosis; however, when his medical history of sarcoidosis was revealed, the report was changed to suggest that the imaging findings were due only to sarcoidosis.
Due to his pancytopenia, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, showing yeast-like macrophage inclusions (Figure ). His urine antigen for Histoplasma was positive. Histoplasma capsulatum grew from admission fungal blood cultures after 6 days and bone marrow fungal cultures became positive after 11 days. He received liposomal amphotericin for 1 week at a daily dose of 5mg/kg, and clinically improved with resolution of fever in 48 hours. He was then changed to oral itraconazole and continued on this medication as an out-patient. A human immunodeficiency virus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was negative. He was eventually switched to fluconazole 800mg daily due to intolerance of side effects from itraconazole.