We present the case of a single 41-year-old female teacher and sports therapist suffering from a schizophreniform syndrome. In her third decade, she developed recurrent reactive depressive episodes. In her fourth decade, she developed a sexualized delusional system, which chronified. During this time, she suffered from repeated episodes with hallucinations.
The patient suffered reactive depressive episodes at 22, 28, and 32 years of age. At age 32, she experienced delusions for the first time. At age 35, she experienced her first schizophreniform episode with delusions, hallucinations, and promiscuity. During this episode, her mood was hypomanic. Since that time, she has suffered from a complex system of chronic delusions and olfactory hallucinations. At 40 and 41 years of age, she developed exacerbations with hallucinations. During these episodes, she suffered from formal thought disorder (long, incoherent train of thought) and auditory hallucinations. During the auditory hallucinations, she heard the voices of her neighbors ask her to have sexual intercourse and masturbate, the voice of a man who talked about the sexual lives of her friends, and a computer voice that told her which clothes to wear and that she was a “porn queen.” She also had cenesthopathic experiences in which she felt that she was being irradiated, her breasts were tense, and her intestines were pulsating, and felt that she was being externally controlled. In the latter case, she thought that she was being irradiated by the neighbors, her thoughts were being tracked, and she could feel the bodily sensations of her neighbors. These symptoms disappeared after she received neuroleptic treatment.
However, simultaneously at age 35, she developed a complex system of chronic delusions in which she attributed sexual body parts to everyday gestures. In this sexualized delusional system, the nostrils represented the buttocks, the mouth was the vagina, the tongue was the penis, and the ears were a combination of the bottom and the genitals. If a person scratched at their nose, our patient identified this gesture as proof that the person would like to have or that they had anal intercourse. The precise area of the nose that the person scratched was attributed to different positions of sexual intercourse. She had similar convictions if a person touched the mouth, tongue, or ears. Wrinkles at different locations in the face were assigned specific meanings with respect to sexual preferences . The patient was absolutely convinced of her interpretations. She also believed that she had the ability to smell whether people had had sexual intercourse and that other people could smell whether she had had sex. In addition, she had olfactory hallucinations in which she smelled urine, feces, and vaginal secretions in different situations. She took care not to wear provocative clothes to avoid attracting the sexual attention of men. All these symptoms persisted under treatment with neuroleptic medication.
The patient reported no history of in utero or birth complications, febrile convulsions, inflammatory brain diseases, or cerebral contusions. Her childhood development was normal, and there was no evidence of any neurodevelopmental disorder, such as attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder or autism. There was also no evidence of a personality disorder. Her somatic history was unremarkable, except that she had been diagnosed with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. She also had no history of alcohol or drug abuse. There were no psychotic or neurological disorders in her family history, although her father did have a washing obsession, while her mother abused alcohol and her sister was diagnosed with recurrent depression.
A neurological examination of the patient was normal. Serum analysis showed increased antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (35–55 IU/mL over the course of the disease and before steroid treatment; normal range <34 IU/mL). Levels of anti-thyroglobulin and antithyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies were unremarkable. Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were in the upper range; triiodothyronine and thyroxine levels were normal. Screening for rheumatoid factors, antinuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, as well as infectious diseases, such as Borrelia, lues, and HIV, showed no relevant abnormalities. In the cerebrospinal fluid analyses, we detected mild blood–brain barrier impairment and increased age-dependent albumin quotient (7.5; age-dependent reference <6.7 × 10−3). The white cell count (2/μL) and IgG index (0.43) were normal. No cerebrospinal fluid-specific oligoclonal bands were found. Antibodies against neuronal cell surface antigens [NMDAR, AMPA-R, GABA-B-R, and VGKC-complex (LGI1, Caspr2)] were negative in the cerebrospinal fluid. No antibodies against intracellular onconeural or synaptic antigens (Yo, Hu, CV2/CRMP5, Ri, Ma1/2, SOX1, GAD, and amphiphysin) were found in the serum. The cMRI showed a few right-accentuated hippocampus cysts in the cortical region. No white matter lesions were found. Mild temporolateral atrophy was identified. Repeated EEGs showed intermittent rhythmic delta activity . The neuropsychological test of attentional performance (TAP) revealed severe deficits in alertness and working memory .
The symptoms met the ICD-10 criteria for paranoid hallucinatory schizophrenia (F20.0). Because the patient had Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and increased antithyroid peroxidase antibodies, we also considered SREAT.
Different neuroleptics (amisulpride, aripiprazole, clozapine, flupentixol, olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone) were used to successfully treat our patient’s acoustic and cenesthopathic experiences and loss of ego boundaries. However, average doses were not tolerated by the patient, and the neuroleptics were not able to treat the chronic delusional system and olfactory hallucinations. The same was true for additional treatment with lithium and valproic acid. The patient’s hypothyroidism was successfully treated with 100 µg thyroxine daily. Because of treatment resistance and organic abnormalities due to potential SREAT, we started treatment with 500 mg methylprednisolone administered intravenously once per day for five consecutive days. Methylprednisolone treatment was continued with 100 mg administered orally each day, which was then gradually tapered over nearly 3 months. Treatment with amisulpride (400 mg), lithium (450 mg), pipamperone (20 mg), thyroxine (100 µg), selenium (0.1 mg), and cholecalciferol (0.025 mg) was continued.
Following the high-dose methylprednisolone treatment, the patient experienced full remission of all psychotic symptoms, including the delusional system and olfactory hallucinations. After realizing that the former system was a delusion, our patient developed depression. She felt sad and embarrassed about her previous misinterpretations and the “wasted years” of the disease. TAP at that time showed deterioration (t1, Figure ).
Approximately 3 weeks later, her mood normalized. A TAP was performed again 2 months after starting high-dose methylprednisolone treatment and showed that the patient’s alertness, divided attention, and working memory had all improved. However, the cMRI and EEG results were unchanged. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid showed that it normalized after steroid treatment; the blood–brain barrier dysfunction was no longer detected. Levels of antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were no longer elevated. Because of the positive response to the immunosuppressive treatment, we diagnosed SREAT encoded as an organic schizophreniform syndrome (ICD-10: F06.2). Six months later, the patient was still free of delusions, hallucinations, and loss of ego boundaries. Amisulpride treatment was reduced to 50 mg, pipamperone was stopped, and lithium, thyroxine, selenium, and cholecalciferol treatment remained unchanged. However, a TAP showed decreased results for divided attention and working memory . Antithyroid peroxidase antibody titers were still normal.