In November 2010 a 3-month-old female baby with CHED was referred to our attention for surgical evaluation. The young patient presented with cloudy corneas and important horizontal nystagmus. There were no signs of inflammation, photophobia, or epiphora and intraocular pressure (IOP, rebound tonometer) was 10 mmHg in the right eye (RE) and 11 mmHg in the left eye (LE). Corneal diameters were 11.5 mm (horizontal) and 11 mm (vertical) in both eyes, and corneal thickness was 680 mm in the RE and 660 mm in the LE. After discussing the condition with her parents and with the referring physician, we decided to perform Descemet-Stripping Automated Endothelial Keratoplasty (DSAEK) first, being ready to convert to PK intraoperatively in case of failure. Since at that time no report of successful DSAEK in newborns with CHED was available in literature , we decided not to remove the recipient endothelial-Descemet complex before implanting the donor lamella.
The LE was operated on first, and the donor lamella was successfully implanted under air. In the postoperative the recipient cornea cleared up over 2 weeks, the baby began staring at her mother while breastfeeding, and nystagmus decreased. The RE was treated after a 4-week delay, following the same surgical protocol.
Four months after surgery, nystagmus had reduced. Both corneas were transparent, with the donor lamella centered in the LE and slightly decentered temporally in the RE. The baby showed a massive improvement in her interaction with the environment, staring at lights and following the parents’ movements.
One year after surgery the corneal transparency and the position of the grafts had not changed. The baby walked into the visiting room displaying that she was able to orient well in the space. The parents confirmed that her motor and verbal development were normal and that she was able to play and interact with objects and people nearby.
Later on we made the decision to observe the corneal transparency with the slit lamp yearly, and to avoid any more detailed examinations that would have required general anesthesia, unless necessary. Despite the persisting nystagmus, the corneal reflexes remained centred on the pupil. We started measuring visual acuity at 4, finding 0.7 LogMAR uncorrected in both eyes with the employed child chart.
At the age of six the best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.6 LogMAR in both eyes, with + 2.0 D cyl @ 105° in the RE and + 2.0 D cyl @ 60° in the LE. The IOP was 12 mmHg and 14 mmHg respectively. The eyes were aligned, although with poor stereopsis. The horizontal nystagmus was still present. The child started elementary school with no relevant vision problems. In 2019 at the age of 8, BCVA raised to 0.4 LogMAR in both eyes with the same cylinder correction. The COVID-19 pandemic paused the annual examinations.
The most recent visit of this patient occurred in October 2022, twelve years after surgery. Both corneas were clear and transparent. The RE lamella was slightly decentred temporally , while the LE lamella was centred . The anterior optical coherence tomography (OCT) well delineated the position of the donor lamella . The Corneal tomography showed no irregularity . The corneal endothelium was unexpectedly healthy. Cell count was 2383 cells/mm2 in the RE , and was 2547 cells/mm2 in the LE , comparing favourably with the 2900 cells/mm2 originally reported by the Eye Bank in both donor lamellae. BCVA was 0.4 LogMAR with − 0.75 D sf + 2.75 D cyl @ 105° in the RE and 0.4 LogMAR with + 1.50 D sf + 2.50 D cyl @ 60° in the LE. The IOP was 14 mmHg in both eyes. The eyes were aligned, the nystagmus was still present, however it was reduced as compared with that recorded before surgery. The visual function has allowed normal psychological and educational development with the girl attending the middle school without significant cognitive or motorial defects.