A retroperitoneal mass on the left side was found in a 65-year-old-man who was then referred to the Urology Department. He had been receiving methylprednisolone and cyclosporine as treatment for rheumatoid arthritis with vasculitis in the Rheumatology Department of the same hospital. He complained of exertional dyspnea and was hospitalized on suspicion of atypical pneumonia. Blood tested positive for both β-D-glucan and aspergillus antigen. A diffuse nodular shadow across both lungs was seen on chest computed tomography (CT) and a diagnosis of pulmonary aspergilloma was made. Treatment with voriconazole (200 mg twice a daily) was initiated.
On subsequent CT 8 months thereafter, the nodular shadow in the lungs appeared smaller, but a mass in the left retroperitoneum was now seen. Consequently, he was referred to the Urology Department. His past medical history included rheumatoid arthritis with vasculitis, steroid-induced diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and compression fracture of the lumbar vertebrae. He had been receiving methylprednisolone and cyclosporine treatment for 8 years. In addition, he received bezafibrate and his diabetes was controlled with hypodermic insulin and oral sitagliptin. He had no notable family history. The patient’s physical findings were normal, except for chest and joint symptoms related to rheumatoid arthritis with vasculitis.
Blood test results on admission were as follows: white blood cells, 11830/μL; C-reactive protein, 2.16 mg/dL; glucose, 250 mg/dL; total-cholesterol, 230 mg/dL; triglyceride, 642 mg/dL. There was no apparent liver or kidney dysfunction. The aspergillus antigen level was 0.7 (positive, > 0.5) and the β-D glucan level was 240 pg/ml (> 11.0). The frequent occurrence of a diffuse nodular shadow across both lungs on a simple CT image of the chest was noted. Thus, intravenous voriconazole was commenced. On subsequent CT 3 weeks later, a reduction in the pulmonary nodular shadow and improvement of the previous pneumonia was identified . The voriconazole dose was altered for oral application (200 mg/day). He was then referred to the Urology Department once more because a 35-mm mass was found in the retroperitoneal cavity on CT .
The tumor did not exhibit any internal contrast uptake and a film-like layer of contrast was seen around the border on abdominal contrast-enhanced CT. As a result, we believed that the tumor was not a renal angiomyolipoma; however, it was considered possible that it was a lipoma, liposarcoma, or teratoma. We recognized the mixed heterogeneous nature of the high-low signal on abdominal magnetic resonance imaging in both the T2 and T1-weighted images, with signal strength decreasing on the T1 fat suppression images. As liposarcoma could not be ruled out, a left retroperitoneal tumor resection was performed .
We performed a lumbar incision under the left 12th rib with the patient in the jackknife posture during surgery. The mass did not adhere to the surrounding tissues, so there was a small amount of blood loss.
Histological examination identified the contents of tumor as adipose tissue and necrotic debris that were encapsulated by fibrous connective tissue, with a large number of fungal hyphae in the tumor. A blood vessel cavity that passed through the necrotic tissue was identified as the origin . Because the origin showed a Y-shaped divergence with the form of the constituent part, the histopathological diagnosis was aspergilloma. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 10 days after surgery. Thereafter, he continued antifungal therapy and no recurrence was seen on follow-up CT. In the tenth month after the operation, he developed pancytopenia, thought to be related to bone marrow suppression, with Cytomegalovirus infection. He suffered respiratory failure and succumbed.