An 82-year-old woman presented with a mass in the anorectum that measured > 5 cm and involved the anal sphincter. Endoscopic biopsy revealed moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Although the tumor had metastasized to the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, no distant metastases were observed . The patient was diagnosed with SCCA, cT3N3M0, and cStage IIIB according to the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition of the TNM classification. After stoma construction, CRT with MMC (10 mg/m2 on days 1 and 29), capecitabine (825 mg/m2 twice a day on each RT treatment day), and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) were administered to the primary tumor and pelvic and inguinal lymph nodes (total dose of 59.4 Gy in 33 fractions). CRT was completed without any major adverse events. Because of the advanced stage, the effect of the treatment was verified as early as 6 weeks after CRT, and the primary lesion and lymph nodes demonstrated CR . Tumor assessment was carried out according to RECIST criteria version 1.1.
Three months after CRT, CT revealed para-aortic lymph node recurrence, whereas CR was maintained in the primary lesion . Owing to the advanced age of the patient and concerns regarding side effects, 50%-dose DCF chemotherapy (docetaxel 40 mg/m2, day 1; CDDP 40 mg/m2, day 1; and 5-FU 400 mg/m2, days 1–5; every 3 weeks) was initiated. Treatment was stopped at the fifth course, because febrile neutropenia was observed during the fourth and fifth courses. DCF chemotherapy resulted in CR of the para-aortic lymph node metastases . Following DCF chemotherapy, physical examination comprising digital rectal examination, CT, and colonoscopy was performed every 6 months. Stoma closure was not performed because the patient wanted to avoid anal dysfunction. At the follow-up 25 months later, para-aortic lymph node recurrence was observed . Because no other recurrences were observed, IMRT (total dose of 60 Gy in 30 fractions for para-aortic lymph node recurrence) was initiated, ultimately achieving CR .
Nine months after IMRT, local recurrence of the primary lesion of the anus was observed . The recurrent tumor was located in the region that underwent initial radiotherapy and was exposed to high doses of radiation. Therefore, we performed an abdominoperineal resection, and the postoperative course was uneventful. The patient achieved progression-free survival (PFS) for 1 year and 7 months after surgery, and to date, the patient has survived for 5 years and 10 months after the initial round of CRT.