The patient was a 4-year-old boy with prenatally diagnosed omphalocele. He had been born by emergency Cesarean section due to premature rupture of membranes at 37 weeks and 5 days of gestation, with a birth weight of 2500 g. A giant omphalocele (hernia orifice diameter 4 × 3 cm) with whole-liver prolapse was observed . The hepatic vein was close to the hernia gate, and there was a concern that the ring of an XS size Alex Wound Retractor would compress the hepatic vein if it was used to create the silo. Then, silo construction using a Gore-Tex sheet according to the Allen-Wrenn method was performed on the day of birth. The oral side of the silo was detached during step-by-step reduction, and the herniated organs were exposed . It was difficult to close the muscle layers around the orifice, so direct closure of the skin with relaxing incisions was emergently performed . Impairment of the abdominal wall circulation was observed temporarily, and the patient was discharged at 73 days after birth.
A huge ventral hernia remained , and abdominal wall repair was attempted at 4 years of age when the patient weighed 12.1 kg. It was speculated that a history of relaxing incision may be a risk factor for the impairment of blood flow in the abdominal skin in abdominal wall repair using the CST. The policy was to preserve the feeding vessels of the abdominal wall skin as much as possible. Also, we afraid severe liver injury at the release of firm adhesion between the parietal peritoneum and the liver surface. Hence, the anterior CST was selected. A sufficient incision of the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle with minimum lysis in the abdominal cavity allowed the large hernia to be more safely repaired. An 8Fr urethral catheter was inserted, and the intravesical pressure was monitored continuously with a pressure transducer during the perioperative period to detect elevated intra-abdominal pressure indirectly [, ]. Muscle relaxants were adjusted to control the abdominal wall tension for adequate blood flow preservation.
A midline incision was made along the previous surgical wound from the xiphoid process to the lower abdomen. Lysis of adhesions between the liver surface and subcutaneous scar tissue was performed, taking care not to damage the liver. Subsequently, the outer edge of the external oblique muscle was exposed by dissecting the subcutaneous scar tissue and the anterior sheath of the rectus abdominis muscle. At this time, special care was taken to ensure preservation of the superior and inferior epigastric arteries and the perforator from the anterior sheath of the rectus abdominis muscle. The extent of the muscle layer defect was 12 × 10 cm. After exposing the lateral border of the rectus abdominis muscle, the area of its attachment to the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle was dissected. Following relaxing incisions in the rectus sheath and pulling the right and left rectus muscles together at the midline, the intravesical pressure increased from 5 to 18 mmHg. Since it was below 20 mmHg, considered the acceptable upper limit , abdominal closure was completed. The intravesical bladder pressure increased to 20 mmHg on postoperative day (POD) 1, and the dose of muscle relaxants was increased. Thereafter the pressure decreased over time and was maintained at < 12 mmHg on POD 4. The administration of muscle relaxants was terminated, and extubation from the trachea was performed on POD 5. No complications were observed, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 23.
At 4 years after the surgery, neither ventral hernia recurrence nor adhesive bowel obstruction was observed .