A 77-year old man was evaluated in our hospital because of severe respiratory distress and cough. He was an active smoker (about 1 pack year). There was a slight fine crackle on auscultation on the right lower lobe. Nasopharyngeal swab was done for him and it was positive for COVID-19 with cycle threshold (Ct) number 18. He was treated by assisted oxygenation, hydroxychloroquine and antibiotics.
His symptoms mildly decreased and recovered from the acute illness .Patient was not dependent on nasal oxygen and due to the time of peak of the SARS-CoV-2 infection and large number of critically ill patients in need of hospitalization; we decided to discharge our patient by symptomatic and conservative outpatient therapy at home, including famotidine, aspirin, atorvastatin. but he was admitted to the hospital again because of progressive orthopnea and desaturate on exercise. On clinical examination, he was suffering and dyspneic. His laboratory findings were: White blood cells (( WBC:7900/mm3) ;Hb:14/5 g/dl;platelets:165000/mm3; Lactic acid dehydrogenase ((LDH:754 unit/liter). CT scan was done and revealed bilateral and diffuse patchy ground glass opacity and lower lung bronchiectasis . Because of lack of recovery from disease, progressive orthopnea and desaturate on exercise, The clinician with the patient‘s consent, decided to perform lung biopsy to clarify if any other added histopathology. Patient underwent throracotomy and wedge biopsy for about 3 months from the onset of first symptoms. Tissue specimen was fixed in 10% formalin for 48 h and then hematoxylin and eosin stain was performed. Sections were analyzed and revealed dilated lung alveolae lined by hyperplastic type II pneumocytes with enlarged and mild atypical nuclei and granular and clear cytoplasm. Intraalveolar hemorrahge, foamy macrophages, cellular or proteinaceous exudate. Desquamation of epithelial cells, hyaline membrane formation and intra alveolar thickening were also seen. Interstitial fibroblastic proliferation and fibrin deposition were evident .
Patient outcome: his symptoms moderately improved but not completely, and he is still suffering from exercise dyspnea.