A 63-year-old woman, gravida 3 para 1, presented with complaints of abnormal genital bleeding. A G1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma was identified by an endometrial biopsy. She was then referred to our hospital for the treatment of endometrial cancer. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a 2-cm tumor in the uterine cavity and multiple myoma nodules in the uterine corpus . No other lesions, either distant metastasis or nodal metastasis, were observed on an enhanced computed tomography examination.
During the first step of surgery, a 10-mm trocar was inserted in the umbilicus region and a pneumoperitoneum was established. Two 5-mm trocars were then positioned along bilateral lines between the anterior superior iliac spine and the umbilicus. Another 5-mm trocar was then placed between these two 5-mm trocars . A total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were laparoscopically performed with these trocars and a vaginal pipe. The surgical specimen was placed into a plastic bag within the abdomen. Because the specimen was too large to be extracted from the abdominal cavity via the vagina, we decided to make a zigzag incision in the umbilicus to remove the entire uterus intact. After making a zigzag skin incision in the umbilicus, the fascial opening was incised along this line, and the diameter of the opening could then be stretched to 6 cm . Specimen removal was possible through the umbilical zigzag incision without cutting the specimen into smaller pieces . The size of the uterus was 8.0 × 7.0 × 12.0 cm in diameter .
A histopathological examination revealed an International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IA, G1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma located in the uterine fundus measuring 2.5 × 2.0 × 0.5 cm without myometrial invasion. The multiple nodules seen in the uterine corpus were benign leiomyomas. No intra- or early postoperative complications occurred. The postoperative hospital stay was 5 days, which is the conventional stay after a total laparoscopic hysterectomy in our hospital. Three months after surgery, the umbilical incision was inconspicuous, along with the inward movement of the umbilicus .