A 79-year-old female with severe COPD, prior surgical aortic (19 mm Carpentier-Edwards®) and mitral valve replacement (25 mm Hancock®), persistent atrial fibrillation, Group II pulmonary hypertension; presented with progressively worsening heart failure symptoms secondary to severe bioprosthetic mitral valve stenosis and moderate-severe mitral regurgitation. Physical examination revealed normal systemic blood pressure (116/62 mmHg), normal heart rate (85 b.p.m.). She was a thin, elderly female with moderate increased work of breathing, regular heart rate with 4/6 holosystolic murmur best heart over the apex. The patient had prominent jugular venous distention. Lung exam revealed diminished breath sounds at the bases of the lungs with crackles in the upper lung fields, and she had 2+ pitting oedema bilaterally in her lower extremities. Transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated preserved ejection fraction, normal functioning aortic valve, and dysfunctional mitral prosthesis with severe stenosis (mean gradient 13 mmHg) and moderate-severe regurgitation . The interatrial septum was thickened and scarred due to prior surgical intervention. After evaluation by the multi-disciplinary heart team, she was deemed to be at elevated surgical risk (STS score-risk of mortality 10.5%, risk of morbidity or mortality 30%). Therefore, decision was made to proceed with transcatheter transseptal MVIV implantation using 23 mm Edwards SAPIEN S3 valve (Edwards, Irvine, CA, USA).
Under transoesophageal echocardiographic guidance; transseptal puncture was performed using 8-Fr SL-1 sheath (Swartz™ Braided transseptal introducer catheters, St. Jude Medical) and NRG® transseptal radiofrequency needle (Baylis Medical) in the inferior–posterior aspect of the fossa ovalis. Using an Agilis NxT Steerable sheath (Abbott, St Paul, MN, USA) positioned in the left atrium, a J wire was successfully advanced across the mitral prosthesis and then exchanged for Safari2™ extra small curve wire (Boston Scientific) placed in the left ventricular apex. Balloon dilation of the interatrial septum was subsequently performed using 14 mm × 4 cm Z-Med II™ balloon (B BRAUN Interventional Systems) . The right femoral venous sheath was then upsized to 14-Fr e-sheath® over the Safari wire. A 23 mm SAPIEN S3 THV was advanced into inferior vena cava (IVC) but despite multiple attempts, the THV could not be advanced across the atrial septum into the degenerated bioprosthetic mitral valve (Video ). From the left femoral venous sheath, a Wholey wire (Medtronic Inc.) supported by multipurpose catheter was used to cross the same interatrial septal puncture and placed in the left upper pulmonary vein. The wire was then exchanged for an Amplatz Super Stiff™ Guidewire (Boston Scientific) and left in place to serve as a ‘buddy wire’ to stretch the interatrial septum and support the advancement of the THV across the septum . The THV crossed the septum easily and was advanced across the mitral prosthesis (Video , ). The buddy wire was then replaced by a temporary pacing wire which was placed in the right ventricle followed by successful MVIV implantation under rapid ventricular pacing with excellent results (Video , ). Post-operative echocardiogram showed normal functioning of the mitral prosthetic valve with the mean gradient of 3 mmHg and no significant regurgitation. The patient was discharged home after 2 days and continues to do well with marked improvement in her symptoms at 6 months follow-up.