A 27-year old woman, gravida 1, para 0, in her 23rd gestational week consulted at the outpatient unit of the University Clinic of Nephrology in Skopje, Macedonia, for the first time, because of slowly progressive proteinuria.
Her father was diagnosed with Alport syndrome with renal biopsy, had chronic kidney failure, was on a hemodialysis and died at the age of 57. Her uncle also had Alport syndrome confirmed by biopsy and was on hemodialysis. The patient and her two sisters were diagnosed with Alport and renal biopsy was not done because of their positive family history. They were followed since their childhood for erythrocyturia and different levels of proteinuria, but with normal serum creatinine and no hypertension. Her older sister, who has only erythrocyturia and no proteinuria, had a successful pregnancy with a term birth of a child with slightly lower birthweight. Her younger sister has erythrocyturia and proteinuria above 4 g/d. Unfortunately, genetic analysis is not available in the country and was not done in our patient.
Proteinuria was first registered in our patient 5 years before her first pregnancy, at her age of 22 and was in the range of 0.4 – 0.8 g/d.
When the patient consulted in the Department of Nephrology in the 23rd gw, she had higher serum creatinine for pregnancy, 89 micromol/l, and in the urine, there were 20-25 erythrocytes in the sediment - 17% of which were dysmorphic. Her renal ultrasound revealed an ectopically placed right kidney and hypertrophy of her left kidney. She was started on Aspirin 100 mg from the onset of the pregnancy. The 24-hour proteinuria was 0.6 g/dU and progressed over time, and hypoalbuminemia worsened. Her D-dimers in the 23rd gw were slightly increased and low-molecular-weight heparin was started at a dose of 40 g.
In 26 the gw, intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) was registered and the fetus was bio-metrically equal to 23 rd gestational week. There was already an increased resistance index (RI) at the umbilical artery up to 0.71 and a verified notch in the left uterine artery. In the 29th gw, the fetus was bio-metrically equal to 25th gw, with a notch in the right umbilical artery. Blood pressure was within normal.
She was admitted to the gynaecological ward in her 29th gw for proteinuria which increased from 3.8 g/day up to 20 g/day and the serum creatinine increased to 120- 150 micromoles/l. Her albumin was 29-22 g/l and uric acid was 332 micromoles/l. Blood pressures increased up to 140/80 mm Hg and she was started on Methyldopa 500 mg and continued with 250 mg. She was started on a small dose of corticosteroids in order to stimulate lung maturation.
She was delivered in the 30th gestational week due to obstetrical indications with a cesarian section and delivered a baby with a birth weight of 880 g. The baby died within 7 days and autopsy showed that respiratory distress was the cause of death.
After delivery, proteinuria decreased to 2 g/d within 2 months and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) was started. Because of a persistent cough, she was switched to an angiotensin-receptor blocker (ARB), Losartan 25 mg/d and her proteinuria decreased to 0.8 g/d. Her blood pressure remained normal and serum creatinine was 70-83 micromol/l at the follow-up two years after delivery.
After two years of her first pregnancy, the patient became pregnant again, with a baseline proteinuria of 2 g/dU and serum creatinine 89 micromol/l. Her second pregnancy was uneventful, with regular monthly checkups, her blood pressure was in normal range and her proteinuria increased from 2 g/d up to 3.5 g/d by the 39th gestational week. Her serum albumin was 29 g/l at the 39th gestational week and creatinine rose to 81 g/l. She delivered a healthy baby by cesarian section in her 39th gestational week. Six months after the second delivery, her renal function remained normal and her proteinuria was 2/d.