A 66-year-old man from Shandong Province, China, was admitted to our hospital on January 4, 2019, with the complaint of nasal congestion, epistaxis, and hearing impairment. He had a history of smoking for more than 50 years and drinking for more than 40 years. He had a left thoracic trauma and limb fracture in July 2018. MRI was performed and showed a large mass in the right posterior nasopharynx and right nasal cavity, invading the cavernous sinus. Retropharyngeal lymph nodes on the right side were also detected. A PET/CT scan was performed to exclude metastasis. Nasal endoscopy was performed, and a biopsy of the nasopharyngeal neoplasm confirmed basaloid squamous cell carcinoma . Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with basaloid squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx (T4N1M0, stage IVA by the American Joint Committee on Cancer, 8th edition). He received two cycles of induction chemotherapy with docetaxel (75 mg/m2 on day 1) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2 on day 1). Thereafter, he went to another hospital and received radiotherapy combined with concurrent chemotherapy.
After experiencing migraines for one month, the patient was re-admitted to our hospital on September 11, 2019. A PET/CT scan revealed multiple fluorodeoxyglucose uptake and foci in the left parietal lobe, bilateral upper arm, left adrenal gland, mesentery, right ilium, and sacrum. We performed a biopsy of the right upper arm lesion . The biopsy was positive for basaloid squamous cell carcinoma. Given his multiple metastases, the patient received palliative chemotherapy consisting of gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8).
On September 29, 2019, the patient suddenly had dysfunction of his right body and fell down when going to the toilet. A CT scan was performed and showed multiple lesions in the brain. MRI was then performed and revealed dural metastasis and multiple intracranial metastatic lesions throughout both cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, including the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and occipital lobe . Whole-brain intensity-modulated radiotherapy was initiated with a total dose of 40 Gy in 20 fractions. Meanwhile, to exclude primary lung malignancy, a biopsy of a lung lesion was performed, which showed that the pathology was consistent with results of the right upper arm and nasopharynx biopsy ; the metastatic lung lesions revealed progressive disease. Given the patient’s brain edema and rapid disease progression, he was treated with bevacizumab (5 mg/kg on day 1), anlotinib (10 mg on days 1–14), and toripalimab (240 mg on day 1) during radiotherapy. Later, the patient felt the pain near the sacrum and received palliative intensity-modulated radiotherapy to this site. Despite these comprehensive therapies, the disease continued to progress. On October 30, 2019, the patient died as a result of multiple organ failures.