A 58-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital in 2020 (Civitavecchia, Italy). The patient had been suffering from diabetes since 2009. The patient was being treated with semaglutide, 0.25 mg sc. For the previous 3 years, her clinical history was complicated with P-DPN, symmetrically affecting feet and legs with “stocking distribution,” characterized by tingling, numbness, burning pain, hypoesthesia, allodynia, and severe sharp pain with a Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) of 9 and Douleur Neuropathique en 4 (DN4) of 7. No motor deficits or abnormal deep tendon reflexes were detected. Neither dysvitaminosis nor autoimmune/rheumatological disorders were present in anamnesis, and both were excluded by specific blood tests. The impact of severe pain on her quality of life was considerable. The patient failed conservative therapeutic options and medications of the first and second line for the treatment of P-DPN. The patient was elected to the all-in-one SCS implantation technique to reduce the risk of infection in the FAST modality. Preoperative tests, dorso-lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and lower-limb somatosensory evoked potentials were normal. Electromyography (EMG) detected no signs of radiculopathy, and electroneurography (ENG) showed a reduction of sensory conduction velocity (SCV) of the SN (35 m/s) bilaterally with normal amplitude. Before surgery, the HRUS of peripheral nerve CSA was performed by an examiner with more than 10 years of experience in nerve ultrasonography using a linear probe (18 MHz; Samsung RS80A Ultrasound Machine). The cross-sectional area was assessed by tracing the inner margin of the hyperechoic epineurium stroma, with the transducer perpendicular to the nerve. Cervical roots and upper limb nerve CSA measurements were C7 = 0.10 cm2, C6 = 0.095 cm2, ulnar nerve (UN) = 0.063 cm2 at forearm, median nerve (MN) = 0.089 cm2 at forearm, and superficial radial nerve (SRN) = 0.023 cm2 at forearm. Further, lower limb measurements were: (1) EPN (3 cm proximal to the base of the fibular head; left leg = 0.36 cm2; right leg = 0.38 cm2); (2) PTN (in the retromalleolar region, 3 cm proximal to the apex of the tibial malleolar process; right and left legs (2 measurements per side) = 0.19 cm2); and (3) SN (3 cm proximal to the retromalleolar region next to the small saphenous vein = 0.06 cm2). The patient was assessed before and after surgery using NRS, Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF36), Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), and Pain Interference Score (PIS).
After obtaining written consent, SCS implantation was performed under local anesthesia and intravenous light sedation. An octopolar lead (SC-2218-50 Linear Boston Scientific Neuromodulation Corporation, Valencia, CA 91355, USA) was introduced into the posterior epidural space through the L1 - L2 interlaminar space under fluoroscopic guidance. The lead was positioned with the tip at T9 at the level of the dorsal columns after adequately covering (more than 80%) with paresthesias in the painful area. The FAST stimulation was set with the following parameters: A frequency of 90 Hz and pulse width of 210 ms, cycled on/off 1/1. The lead was then fixed by the anchor to the thoracolumbar fascia and then tunneled to the left upper buttock pocket to connect to the implantable pulse generator (WaveWriter ALPHA PRIME 16, Boston Scientific Neuromodulation Corporation, Valencia, CA 91355, USA). After 2 days, the patient was discharged with an NRS of 1. No complications occurred.