A 32-year-old male experienced blunt trauma due to a traffic accident riding a motorcycle stuck by a truck. Then, he was admitted to our emergency department by an ambulance. At the time of arrival at our emergency department, he was conscious without any motor deficits. Clinical examination revealed severe hypoxia with SpO2 70% at 10 L/min O2, tachypnea at 42 breaths/min, and tachycardia at 154 beats/min with severe hypotension, 54/24. Breathing sounds were decreased, and flail chest and severe subcutaneous emphysema of the entire upper body were observed at the initial evaluation, as revealed by chest computed tomography (CT), brain CT, and a focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) performed as early as possible. There were no intracranial hemorrhages or definitive abdominal organ injuries. Simple chest radiography and chest CT showed large bilateral hemothorax with atelectasis and severe contusions in both lungs . His blood pH, PaO2, and PaCO2 were 7.30, 84.3 mmHg (oxygen saturation, 96%), and 47.8 mmHg on a reservoir mask at 10 L/min oxygen, respectively. We diagnosed spinous process fractures at C6 and C7 (abbreviated injury scale (AIS); 2 pts), right lateral rib fractures at 1–11, left lateral rib fractures at 1–3, 5, and 7, bilateral lung contusions, bilateral hemothorax (AIS; 5 pts), a right clavicle fracture (AIS; 2 pts), and a left scapula fracture (AIS; 2 pts). The injury severity score was 33 and the probability of survival was 0.72.
At admission, we performed intubation and thoracic drainage for hemothorax. Then, we took the patient to an operating room to achieve surgical hemostasis of the bilateral hemothorax by clamshell thoracotomy for massive bleeding from chest drainage tube. We identified pleural lacerations, so we initiated the control of active bleeding there. Severe respiratory failure due to lung contusions persisted at the time of the patient’s admission to the ICU . He gradually gained increased invasiveness by mechanical ventilation, so chest x-ray showed decreasing lung roentgen lucent; the PaO2/FiO2 ratio (PFR) was 112 mmHg with a positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 20 cm H2O, and after thoracotomy, at an inspiration pressure of 33 cm H2O, arterial blood gas analysis showed that the pH, PaO2, and PaCO2 were 7.41, 73.1 mmHg (oxygen saturation, 96%), and 45.5 mmHg, respectively. Therefore, we decided to establish veno-venous (VV)-ECMO (CAPIOX SP-200 TERUMO Cardiovascular Systems, Tokyo, Japan) and performed cannulation via the right jugular vein (18-Fr cannula for inflow, Toyobo, Tokyo, Japan) and the right femoral vein (24-Fr cannula for outflow, Toyobo, Tokyo, Japan). We set the mechanical ventilation at a lower pressure. After we established VV-ECMO (1800 rpm; pump flow, 4 L/min; O2 flow, 2 L/min) with standard heparin for ECMO, the bronchial bleeding and bleeding from the bilateral lung contusions increased. Therefore, we needed to check and aspirate the bleeding by endotracheal bronchoscopy . However, the bleeding was very severe because full heparinization (activated coagulation time (ACT) range, 180–200 s) for ECMO was used. A chest x-ray and CT scan showed increased severity of the lung contusions and hemorrhages, indicating acute respiratory disorder syndrome . Therefore, we decided to continue ECMO without heparin due to the severe bleeding while being careful of blood coagulation without other substitute anticoagulation drugs.
After conversion, the ACT normalized , and the bleeding from the chest drains decreased gradually instead of D-dimer increased gradually . Then, we could control the bleeding from the lung contusions and bronchus , and both the lung hematomas and oxygenation recovered . During this period of VV-ECMO, some treatments could be performed without any issues related circuit thrombosis and oxygenation failure. We performed tracheostomy on day 9 following ventilation with a PEEP of 20 cm H2O and an inspiratory pressure of 30 cm H2O because he needed ventilation support after removing VV-ECMO because of severe chest trauma and ARDS when we checked normalized coagulation after canceling anticoagulation before ECMO weaning. Subsequently, ECMO weaning was initiated because all of his underlying diseases were removed and improvement of lung function (FiO2 < 0.35, PEEP < 10 cmH2O, PFR ≥ 250) on his spontaneous breathing after the extracorporeal blood flow was stepwise reduced to 1.5 L/min., then Gas flow is tapered mostly in parallel to the blood flow and finally shut off for 30–60 min without dyspnea or tachypnea, and VV-ECMO was stopped on day 10 . There were no ECMO-related complications during the course of treatment. We removed the chest drains on day 11 (left) and day 12 (right). Mechanical ventilation weaning was initiated on day 12, and he was discharged from the ICU on day 15 .