A 63-year-old Japanese man with type 2 diabetes mellitus who self-discontinued treatment and had a 20-pack-year smoking history was admitted to the emergency room owing to sudden chest and back pain, dizziness, and nausea. Although initial chest radiography and CT scans showed no anomalies, an electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. Subsequent coronary angiography (CAG) exposed three-vessel coronary artery disease, specifically myocardial infarction owing to right coronary artery occlusion. To address hemodynamic instability, such as systolic blood pressure failing to 50 mmHg, intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) and a temporary pacemaker were employed in addition to vasopressor administration. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed only on the right coronary artery, which was considered to be the culprit lesion. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with 100 mg of aspirin and 3.75 mg of prasugrel hydrochloride per day was initiated, and heparin was administered at a rate of 15,000 units per day for IABP, with checking the coagulation function every 8 hours.
At 12 hours following PCI, the patient encountered left anterior chest pain, leading to reduced systolic blood pressure to 60 mmHg and hemoglobin levels to 70 g/L. Intubation was performed for pain relief after fluid and blood transfusions raised his blood pressure. The patient had a prothrombin activity rate of 89% and an activated partial thromboplastin time of 90.5 seconds. Contrast-enhanced CT scans after hemodynamic stabilization revealed a sizable extrapleural hematoma with 15 sites of contrast extravasation, that were suspected to be numerous intercostal bleeding . While transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was planned, it was initially challenging owing to the position of the IABP balloon and the target intercostal artery. After IABP removal, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was introduced. A contrast leakage was noted in the left 6th to 11th intercostal arteries, leading to successful embolization . Following TAE, an IABP was reinserted, and heparin was administered, maintaining clotting time. Hemodynamic stability was restored after blood transfusion.
However, 2 days later, blood pressure dropped, and anemia worsened. The patient had a prothrombin activity rate of 83% and an activated partial thromboplastin time of 48.4 seconds. Then, CT scans showed hematoma re-enlargement, multiple contrast extravasation sites, and lung atelectasis . An emergency thoracotomy was performed owing to persistent bleeding. The large hematoma was excised, with no active arterial hemorrhage observed. Various chest wall areas exhibited bleeding, managed through ablation and hemostasis. The procedure lasted 81 min, with 2616 mL blood loss. VA-ECMO ceased on postoperative day (POD) 1. POD2 saw IABP removal, POD3 extubation, and POD4 chest drain removal. On POD37, after extended rehabilitation, the patient was discharged. A month later, coronary artery bypass grafting addressed the remaining lesions, including left main coronary artery lesion.