A 41-year-old woman was hospitalized because of 1 week history of worsening tachypnea and post-exercising chest congestion, and 2 days of severe pain in back. The patient had a medical history of hyperthyroidism diagnosed more than 10 years ago, as well as a medical history of right breast fibroma diagnosed 3 years ago, for which she received a minimally invasive surgical operation, and her post-operative condition had been stable. Two weeks ago, she visited a dentist for gingivitis, which was successfully controlled with antibiotics and drainage therapies.
Her primary diagnosis of admission to hospital is valvular disease. And at initial presentation, the patient had a body temperature of 36.6 °C, blood pressure of 132/82 mmHg, and pulse of 75 beats per min. Upon physical examination, diastolic murmurs were heard along the left sternal border, loudest in the third or fourth left intercostal space. Laboratory tests revealed a normocytic normochromic anemia, with haemoglobin at 95 g/L. Serum rheumatoid factor (RF) was elevated (207.0 IU/mL) when admission. Low serum albumin level (29.1–32.9 g/L), low serum iron (5.4–6.1 µmol/L) and low serum cholinesterase level (3855–4029 U/L) were detected throughout the hospitalization.
Blood cultures were sampled after admission (aerobic and anaerobic bottles; two sets of cultures). In the meantime, ceftizoxime sodium of 3 g twice per day for 7 days as empiric antibiotic therapy was administrated to the patient until the operation. The two aerobic blood cultures became positive for Gram-negative bacilli after an incubation period of 74–80 h in the Biomerieux BacT/Alert 3D blood culturing system. The chest X-ray plain film showed cardiac image enlargement, obviously in left atrium, right ventricle and left ventricle, together with bilateral pulmonary congestion . Echocardiography examination showed mitral valve prolapse and multiple vegetations, and the largest one was about 14 mm. In addition, severe mitral regurgitation, and tricuspid valve prolapse, together with moderate regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension were also observed, indicating infectious endocarditis . At the same period, the computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed and showed mild ischemia at bilateral basal ganglia .
With the results of blood cultures and image examinations, the diagnosis of “infectious endocarditis, mitral insufficiency and tricuspid insufficiency” was made. And then, the patient received MVR, TVP and vegetation removal operation under general anesthesia on day 7 of admission. In order to control postoperative infection, meropenem of 1 g every 8 h were administrated to the patient for 10 days according to the susceptibility testing, and the increasing CRP level and elevated total white blood cell began to decrease to normal after 5 days of antibiotic treatments. And then the antibiotic administration was changed to ceftizoxime sodium of 3 g twice per day for 5 days until the abrupt cerebral hemorrhage occurred on the 15th day after operation. The coagulation test and the platelet aggregation function test were normal on admission. Warfarin of 3 mg per day was taken for anticoagulation treatment since day 2 after operation, and the international normalized ratios (INRs) were 1.6–2.76. Notably, the platelet showed increase since day 7 (405–622 × 109/L) after operation together with the high platelet aggregation function (52.4%). Infectious markers and coagulative function indicators before and after the operation were listed in Table . Blood cultures kept negative since the antibiotic treatments. After aforementioned treatment, the patient did not have a fever, cough, dyspnea or chest pain, under a stable condition, except complaining about slight dizziness and headache infrequently.
On the early morning of day 23 of admission, 15 days after operation, a sudden loss of consciousness together with bilateral mydriasis occurred. At that time, the patient had a high blood pressure of 180/90 mmHg, heart rate of 69 beats per min, and breathing rate of 15 times per minute. Antihypertensive therapy, temporary pacemaker and tracheotomy auxiliary ventilation were used for symptomatic supportive therapy, and the patient’s condition tended to be stable. An urgent computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed large high intensity areas at right frontal lobe, parietal lobe and temporal lobe that indicated spontaneous cerebral hemorrhage and broken into bilateral ventricles combined with hernia, together with subarachnoid hemorrhage . An urgent large craniectomy hematoma operation was performed on the day, and then the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for observation. During the surgery, a neoplasm (1.1 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.7 cm) was found in the right temporal lobe, and pathologically diagnosed as an intravascular thrombus. After the urgent large craniectomy hematoma operation, the patient fell into a stupor. Necessary nursing and treatment were kept, but the patient remained in a coma. During the long-term mechanical ventilation of intensive care unit, the patient obtained the lung infection of Acinetobacter baumannii. After the infection was controlled, the patient was transferred to the neurology department for continued nutrition support therapy. Eventually, the patient was discharged after 2 months of treatment.