A 51-year-old woman with an 11-year history of secondary infertility was referred to the IVF program. During her first marriage, she gave birth to a baby girl in 1998 and a baby boy in 2001, and had abortions in 2005 and 2008, respectively. She remarried in 2012 and had a salpingography in 2015, which showed that bilateral fallopian tubes were patency. She had no history of abdomino/pelvic surgery or dilation and curettage.
In this treatment cycle, antagonist protocol and recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (rFSH) stimulation starting from day 3 of the menstrual cycle were used for ovulation induction. Follicular development was monitored by plasma estradiol (E2) and transvaginal ultrasonography (TVUSG). On the 13th day of the cycle, with follicles over 18mm and estradiol levels of 1052 ng/mL, 8000 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was administered. Eight oocytes were retrieved by transvaginal sonographic aspiration 36 hours after hCG. On day 3 of culture, three embryos of the 4- to 8-cell stages were transferred. The procedure was done atraumatically and clearly demonstrated ustrasonographically. The embryos were transferred in a total of 25 μL of culture medium and the patient received luteal support. Ten days after the transfer of the embryos, the serum β-hCG values are 114.2 U/L. Serial monitoring of serum β-hCG values are shown in .
The patient’s vital signs were unstable at the emergency room: blood pressure, 76/55mmHg; pulse rate, 77 beats/min. Despite the increase in β-hCG values during the hospital follow-up, 29 days after the embryo transfer, the β-hCG levels were 2408 U/L and the serum progesterone (P4) level was 13.30 ng/mL. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed no gestational sac in the uterine cavity but 2 gestational sacs with 2 yolk sacs at the left adnexa, the endometrial thickness was 9.5mm, and an unilateral twin ectopic pregnancy was diagnosed . The presence of approximately 9×8mm hypoechoic nodules between the anterior uterine wall muscles suggests the possibility of uterine fibroids . Operative findings showed that there was a 4-cm ectopic mass with active bleeding in the ampulla of the left fallopian tube. She underwent bilateral salpingectomy, and the postoperative course was uncomplicated. Gross pathologic and histologic assessments confirmed the 2 distinct pregnancies at the same tube. The twins were dichorionic and diamniotic . The patient had an uneventful recovery. The levels of β-hCG had returned to below 50 U/L at the 3rd postoperative week .