A 19-year old female was referred to the Department of Internal Medicine for workup of anemia. She complained of having fever (up to 38 °C), night sweats, dyspnea, dry cough, and fatigue. Symptoms had been present for 4 weeks and had not improved after a course of antibiotics prescribed by her family physician. On physical examination, a palpable painless mass was noticed in her right abdomen, with enlarged inguinal lymph nodes as well as a palpable lump in the right breast with ipsilateral axillary lymphadenopathy. Abdominal ultrasound (US) examination revealed a multiloculated cystic mass with solid areas measuring 35 × 30 cm in her pelvis. The US examination also showed an enlarged spleen with enlarged para-aortal lymph nodes. Subsequently, a thoracic, abdominal and pelvic multi-slice computed tomography scan (MSCT) was performed and showed a well circumscribed, solid nodule, 4 cm in diameter, in the upper outer quadrant of right breast with enlarged ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes, along with generalized abdominal lymphadenopathy, an enlarged spleen with diffuse multiple nodal masses and a complex right pelvic tumor mass with amorphous calcification similar to tooth formation. Based on the MSCT scan, a tentative diagnosis of an immature teratoma was made. The patient proceeded to surgery for a unilateral right salpingo-oophorectomy, lymphadenectomy, splenectomy, omentectomy and right breast lumpectomy. Intraoperative peritoneal washing revealed a poorly differentiated malignant tumor on cytology.
On macroscopic examination, the right ovary was replaced by a cystic mass with a glistening surface, measuring 17 cm in diameter . On incision, the cyst was partly filled with fatty material and hair. The wall of the cyst was thickened with solid, grayish nodules. The spleen was diffusely infiltrated with grayish nodes as well, measuring up to 4.5 cm in diameter . There was a lobulated, well circumscribed solid, grayish nodule identified on lumpectomy of the breast. On histological examination, the cavity of the cyst was lined by skin with dermal appendages as well as respiratory type of epithelium, smooth muscle, mature adipose and bone tissue. This morphology was in agreement with a diagnosis of mature cystic teratoma of the ovary. Solid nodules within cyst walls were tumor tissue, with a diffuse growth pattern, composed of large polymorphic cells with vesicular nuclei, a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and one or more prominent nucleoli. Some cells had eccentrically positioned nuclei with a cytoplasmic halo resembling plasmablasts. The tumor tissue from the right breast and spleen had the same histological appearance. An extensive immunohistochemical evaluation was performed. Tumor cells were negative for panCK, AFP, PLAP, CD117, D2-40, CD30, MyoD1, HMB45, desmin and CD99, but positive for LCA, EMA and vimentin. Therefore, a diagnosis of NHL was made. Subsequent immunohistochemistry showed tumor cells to be CD79a, PAX5, MUM-1, CD38, CD138 positive and CD20, CD10, Bcl-6, ALK, cyclin D1, CD56 negative. Ki-67 was high, around 80% and EBER in situ hybridization was negative . According to the morphological and immunohistochemical findings a diagnosis of PBL was made. Based on the clinical findings, the patient was staged, Ann-Arbour IV PBL. Laboratory data showed anemia, normal platelet and leucocyte counts with elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and C-reactive protein (CRP). Serum alpha-1-fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotropin were normal while carbohydrate antigen 125 was increased. Urine analysis and renal function were within normal limits. Serum immunoglobulin levels were within normal limits, without evidence of monoclonal gammopathy and serology was negative for HIV, HBV and HCV. The patient was transferred to the Hematology ward and treated with dose-adjusted etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin (DA-EPOCH) as well as intra-thecal EPOCH with each cycle [, ]. After 4 cycles of chemotherapy, the patient subjectively felt better however evaluation with positron emission tomography and computed tomography scans (PET-CT) showed high activity of disease. An autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation was planned and 1 cycle of salvage chemotherapy was given according to DHAP protocol (cisplatin, cytarabine and dexamethasone). Unfortunately, her underlying disease continued to progress and 4 cycles of alternating modified CODOX-M and IVAC chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, high-dosemethotrexate/ifosfamide, etoposide, and high-dosecytarabine) were given. Autologous stem cell transplantation could no longer be performed due to patient’s clinical deterioration. After the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, PET-CT scan was performed again, and revealed profound disease progression. The patient also had developed treatment complications, such as secondary anemia, thrombocytopenia, sepsis, enterocolitis, ileus, pleural effusions and ascites. Due to the worsening of the patient’s physical condition, her goals of care were changed and only supportive therapy was given. The patient died of multiple organ failure approximately 11 months after initial diagnosis (Additional file ).