A 79-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with symptoms of dysphagia and body weight loss of 10 kg for the past 3 months. His height was 158.0 cm and weight was 53.6 kg. His body mass index (BMI) was 21.5 upon admission. He was bent over due to osteoporosis and had undergone distal gastrectomy due to submucosal tumor (SMT) 40 years ago. According to his operative note, distal gastrectomy by open surgery was performed without lymph node dissection. After the retroperitoneal attachments behind the duodenum were dissected (Kocher maneuver), Billroth I reconstruction was performed. The resected mass was microscopically determined to be aberrant pancreas.
He was admitted to our hospital for dysphagia, and upper gastrointestinal examination revealed the presence of postoperative stomach in the thoracic cavity via delayed barium passage . Endoscopic examination showed that esophagitis and tumor in the upper digestive tract were absent . Enhanced computed tomography (eCT) revealed a large hiatal hernia involving the entire stomach, sliding through the hiatal orifice into the mediastinum, and that the stomach was expanded with food remaining inside . The stomach in the posterior mediastinum compressed the heart; however, the patient had no symptoms of cardiac failure, and the heart function was normal on echocardiography. Preoperative eCT also showed that the right and left gastric arteries and the gastroepiploic arteries were preserved, indicating that the distal gastrectomy had been performed without lymph node dissection. He was diagnosed with hiatal hernia clinically, and the symptom of dysphagia was relatively severe; therefore, elective surgical repair of the hiatal hernia was performed. A total of five ports were placed in the abdomen, and a Nathanson liver retractor to retract the left liver lobe was inserted by blunt force . A laparoscopic approach revealed a slight adhesion of the greater omentum just under the postoperative scar. Moreover, there was a little adhesion with the liver, spleen, and diaphragm in the abdominal cavity despite gastrectomy. The esophageal hiatus was dilated to 7 cm in diameter. The hiatal hernia was found to contain the entire postoperative stomach . The adhesion in the hernial sac of the mediastinum was stronger than that in the abdominal cavity, and safely exposing the stomach from the hernial sac was difficult. Therefore, we converted the laparoscopic surgery to open surgery, and an upper midline abdominal incision was added . After the dissection of the peritoneal hernial sac from the posterior mediastinum and manual repositioning of the herniated content , cruroplasty through interrupted sutures using non-absorbable 2-0 suture and Toupet fundoplication without short gastric artery division were performed. The operation time was 238 min, and intraoperative blood loss was 380 mL. Upper gastrointestinal examination on day 2 after the repair of the hiatal hernia showed that the stomach was located in the abdomen, with no obstruction or barium reflux through the gastroesophageal junction . Oral intake was started on the ninth postoperative day due to paralytic ileus after surgery. On day 15, after the repair of the hiatal hernia, he was discharged from the hospital without any symptoms of dysphagia. No dysphagia or recurrence of the hernia has been observed for 12 months after the surgery.