A 24 year old female presented in outdoor patient department with complaints of pain in the left knee of 1 month’s duration. Pain was insidious in onset and increased gradually over a period of 1 month. There was no swelling over the knee joint. There was no history of any significant trauma, fever, cough and night sweats. On clinical examination there was localized tenderness over the tibia just below the joint line. There was no evidence of joint effusion. Passive and active range of motion was within normal limits. There was no evidence of synovial hypertrophy. McMurray’s and Drawer test were negative. An X-ray [&] of the knee joints (AP and lateral) showed a lytic lesion in the centre of the right tibia in the epiphysis just below the joint line measuring 2*1.5 cm. It was well defined lesion with well defined border and narrow zone of transition. Other bones being normal.
MR imaging was suggestive ofbrodie’s abscess . Differential diagnosis-brodie’s abscess, tuberculosis, Giant Cell Tumor, Chondroblastoma, Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis, Metastases, Aneurysmal bone cyst, Osseous Lipoma, Osteomyelitis, Subchondral Cyst.
Fine needle aspiration cytology was inconclusive. Total leukocyte count was 9400/cmm with 60% of neutrophils and 35% of lymphocyte. ESR was 25 mm by Wintrobe’s method. Since MRI was suggestive of Brodie’s abscess, so needle biopsy or true cut biopsy was not done.
Treatment: Since aspiration cytology was inconclusive and MR was suggestive of brodie’s abscess so our treatment was to drain the abscess cavity and fill the cavity with bone graft substitutes. Intra-operatively there was thick sclerotic wall but there was no pus formation. There was soft tissue accumulation which had a yellowish tinge and cavity was found. Tissue was sent for histopathology and culture sensitivity. The cavity was filled with bone graft substitutes. Routine antibiotics were given post-operatively with Gram positive and Gram negative coverage.
Histopathology [&]: Report was suggestive of malakoplakia and there was no growth on culture. Histopathology shows sheets of histiocytes and plasma cells in the bone. CD markers study showed positive for CD 68 and negative for CD 138, CD 38 and light chains (kappa and lambda) . Michaelis and Gutman bodies were not seen. Our case was in stage 1 of malakoplakia also called as ‘early prediagnostic’ phase in which there is infiltration with plasma cells and macrophages with absent michaelis and gutman bodies .