A 44-year-old African American woman with a past medical history significant for childhood asthma and type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to our institution with dyspnea. One month prior to presentation, she complained of shortness of breath that was presumed to be due to an asthma exacerbation and was treated with an empiric, 2-week course of prednisone. She noted that her breathing improved while on prednisone, but she returned to our emergency department with worsening dyspnea once prednisone was tapered off. Her review of systems revealed night sweats for 2 months and an unintentional weight loss of 15 pounds.
Her vital signs and results of her physical examination were normal. Laboratory testing revealed normal complete blood count, chemistry panel, calcium, and vitamin D values. A chest radiograph revealed a masslike opacity in the left lower lobe, which was followed with a chest CT scan that revealed a large, 6.7 × 5.4 × 9.9-cm left lower lobe mass and hilar lymphadenopathy . Given the patient’s ongoing constitutional symptoms, there was significant concern for a pulmonary malignancy; the mass was felt to be too distal for transbronchial biopsies via bronchoscopy, and a computed tomography-guided biopsy of the lung mass was performed, which revealed multifocal non-necrotizing granulomas with multinucleated giant cells without evidence of malignancy or active infection. Although the biopsy was consistent with sarcoidosis, this finding could represent a sarcoid-like reaction secondary to an occult malignancy. Subsequently, a repeat biopsy of the mass was successfully attempted via transbronchial biopsy via bronchoscopy, and a mediastinoscopy was performed to obtain sufficient tissue for a definitive diagnosis. The lung mass biopsy was again consistent with granulomatous inflammation without evidence of malignancy or active infection, and the lymph node biopsy (station 4R) revealed active granulomatous inflammation .
Following these two procedures, we were confident in our diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Given her debilitating symptoms, she was started on treatment with prednisone 60 mg daily with appropriate prophylaxis. Within 1 month of treatment, she began to experience improvement of her dyspnea; however, her glucose control deteriorated to a point where she required insulin to manage her diabetes. A repeat CT scan after 3 months of high-dose prednisone revealed a significant decrease in the size of the lung mass, which measured 4.7 × 3.1 × 5.8 cm , and lymphadenopathy . Although we considered starting a steroid-sparing agent, we continued her on a prednisone taper, given her robust clinical and radiographic response.