A 50 year-old woman with no significant medical history (parity 2-0-0-2, both normal spontaneous vaginal deliveries) presented with mild but persistent abdominal pain for over 3 months. She underwent abdominal total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingectomy for uterine leiomyoma at a local secondary hospital in January 2019. Pathological examination revealed benign leiomyoma. The post-operative Regular follow-up was not significant. However, she experienced persistent lower abdominal pain in the past 3 months but did not suffer from weight loss or any other respiratory symptoms such as hemoptysis, purulent sputum, or exertional dyspnea. Ultrasound at a local clinic revealed a heterogeneous solid mass measuring 4 cm in diameter in the central pelvis. She was referred to the International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital for further work.
Routine laboratory tests showed that the values for biochemical variables, including tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein, cancer antigen 19‑9, and cancer antigen 125, were within the normal ranges. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed solid pelvic masses in the central and bilateral pelvis, and enlargement of multiple lymph nodes around the iliac chain and aorta. On chest CT, there were multiple well-circumscribed nodules in the bilateral pulmonary arteries, with the largest nodule 1.5 cm in diameter . An original pathology slide review and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT were done. According to the original slide review, it was a benign leiomyoma with a mitotic count of < 5/10 high-power fields (HPF), little cytological atypia, and no tumor cell necrosis, but with cellular abundance. Abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the bi-adnexal mass with the suspicion of para-aortic, aorto-caval, precaval, external iliac, and bilateral inguinal lymph node metastases was found on PET-CT . Multiple nodules in both lungs without abnormal FDG uptake were considered metastatic cancers. An additional chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed metastatic lung cancer. Considering the patient’s history of gynecologic surgery, pelvic malignancy of unknown origin was suspected. In December 2020, laparoscopic extensive debulking surgery, including bilateral oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection to the level of the left renal vein, and right inguinal lymph node dissection, was performed. Grossly, there were masses 5 cm in size on the left-side stump of the vagina and along the right pelvic infundibular ligament to the level of the renal vein, measuring 10 × 4 cm . All lymph nodes stated above, including the para-aortic, aorto-caval, precaval, and pelvic lymph nodes, were enlarged to approximately 0.5–3 cm in size. The right inguinal lymph nodes were palpable, enlarged to 3 cm in size, and dissected .
Pathology of the pelvic masses also revealed benign leiomyoma with mitosis < 5/10 HPF, little cytological atypia, and no tumor necrosis, but with cellular abundance and a few singular kernels . Metastases to the meso-ovarium, bilateral pelvic infundibular ligaments, pelvic lymph nodes, para-aortic lymph nodes, and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were confirmed in the final pathology report. Metastatic lesions were also reported to have a histology similar to that of the original mass with a mitotic count < 2/10 HPF, little cytological atypism, and no necrosis. On immunohistochemical staining, cells were all positive for estrogen/progesterone receptors, p53, SMA+, HMB45-, Ki67(5%), CD31, and ERG. Clinicopathologically, BML was selected as the final diagnosis after discussion with our pathologists. The patient was discharged from the hospital on post-operative day 7 without any early post-operative complications. No specific treatments were administered. Her current general condition was satisfactory without any postoperative complications. However, long-term follow-up is required to assess disease recurrence and distant metastasis.