In December 2010, a previously healthy 45-year-old male with no significant family medical record was presented with a history of epigastric pain accompanied by a persistent non-productive cough. A subsequent esophagogastroduodenoscopy identified a malignant lesion of the gastric antrum. Additional imaging examinations (abdominal ultrasound and chest X-ray) did not reveal any distant metastases. The patient's management at this point as well as during all its later stages was determined by a multidisciplinary tumor board (MTB).
In February 2011, the patient underwent an R0 subtotal gastrectomy followed by Billroth II gastrojejunostomy with a side-to-side jejuno-jejuneal (Braun) anastomosis.
The subsequent histopathological examination revealed a sharply demarcated, exulcerated, moderately differentiated, clear cell intestinal-type invasive gastric AC . The 10 mm thick tumor, measuring 5 × 6 cm, infiltrated the serosal surface, and extensive lymphovascular invasion was also noted. The adjacent gastric mucosa showed signs of Helicobacter pylori gastritis with moderate intestinal metaplasia. All of the 18 dissected lymph nodes were negative for carcinoma. Based on this information and by taking into account the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM staging classification for gastric cancer, the described tumor fulfilled the criteria of a stage IIb carcinoma (pT4aN0M0).
From March to July 2011, the surgery was followed by postoperative chemoradiation with capecitabine, the total irradiation dose was 45 Gy delivered in 25 fractions over 5 weeks. In August 2012, two liver metastases with 5 cm and 1 cm diameters were discovered in the right liver lobe during follow-up imaging. From October 2012 until March 2013, first-line systemic chemotherapy was administered. The patient received 1 cycle of ECX (epirubicin, cisplatin, capecitabine); due to side effects, capecitabine was substituted with fluorouracil after the first cycle. A computed tomography (CT) scan after 3 cycles showed a partial response (PR) which was sustained on regular follow-ups post therapy.
11 months after cessation of treatment, a CT scan identified enlargement of the existing liver lesions (progressive disease). From March until May 2014, the patient received 3 cycles of TOF regimen (paclitaxel, oxaliplatin, fluorouracil) as second-line systemic therapy. This chemotherapy was stopped due to side effects (febrile neutropenia and stomatitis). In May 2014, a surveillance CT scan revealed only an insignificant shrinkage of the liver metastases (stable disease), and the MTB suggested a right hepatectomy .
Due to a FLR of only 25%, an immediate resection was not feasible. Therefore, superselective DEBDOX-TACE was performed under the control of cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) in July and August 2014 with a 4-week interval as a bridging therapy before the planned portal vein embolization (PVE) which was performed one week after the last DEBDOX-TACE. Tandem 100 microspheres (Tandem®, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) loaded with 75 mg of doxorubicin were injected through a 2,4F microcatheter (Progreat®, Terumo Europe N.V, Belgium).
Transhepatic ipsilateral right PVE using 250–1000 particles (Embozene, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and 6–10 mm embolization coils (Interlock-18 Fibered, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was performed. Initially, smaller particles were infused to treat smaller distal branches followed by a stepwise increase in microsphere caliber size until near-complete stasis was achieved. Afterwards, embolization coils were placed centrally to prevent recanalization .
Total functional liver volume (TFLV) and FLR volume were measured before and 4 weeks after PVE to assess FLR, TFLV, and the FLR/TFLV ratio using CT imaging. In October 2014, the control CT scan after DEBDOX-TACE and PVE demonstrated stabilization of the ipsilateral disease burden and sufficient interval contralateral liver hypertrophy (with an FLR of 41%) which enabled a successful R0 right liver lobe resection . The histological examination of the resected liver metastases revealed similar histologic features as in the primary tumor .
Following magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in January 2015 which detected 2 small metastases in the remaining liver, the patient received 3 cycles of third-line systemic therapy containing FOLFIRI (folinic acid, fluorouracil, and irinotecan) between January and May 2015. The response evaluation CT revealed growth of one of the metastases ; and in July 2015, superselective Y-90 SIRT (SIR-Spheres®; Sirtex Medical, North Sydney, NSW, Australia) with an activity of 522 MBq was performed under CBCT control . Complete response in the target lesion was sustained . In December 2015, 3 new metastases were detected on control MR imaging. The patient was once again treated with superselective Y-90 SIRT (215 MBq + 241 MBq) under CBCT control, and a complete response lasting until June 2016 was achieved. In July 2016, the CT showed new metastases, and the last Y-90 SIRT (459 MBq) procedure was performed.
In December 2016, yet another liver disease progression was detected. This time despite the MTB's recommendation, another treatment with SIRT was not approved by the insurance company. Therefore, liver-directed therapy with DEBDOX-TACE was performed using Tandem 100 microspheres (Tandem®, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) loaded with 75 mg of doxorubicin in February 2017. In March 2017, the patient started receiving a fourth-line systemic therapy consisting of 3 cycles of Paclitaxel and Ramucirumab followed by a Ramucirumab maintenance therapy until a disease progression consisting of new liver metastases, ascites, and pleural effusions was noticed in November 2017.
In May 2018, 6 months after starting hospice care in December 2017, the patient died. His OS was 88 months, the last 69 months while having metastatic disease.