A 45-year-old male received PRK using a MEL 90 excimer laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany) under the control of the triple-A algorithm to correct myopia and myopic astigmatism in both eyes. Uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) was 20/50 for each eye prior to the procedure. The astigmatism intensity was −0.75 for the right eye and −1.25 for the left eye, and a plano refraction was targeted under the auto-calculation system . The PRK procedure started with a 20% alcohol treatment for 30 seconds using a standard ablation program with the optical zone set to 6.5 mm. After surgery, a bandage soft contact lens was attached and eye drops containing a disinfectant and antiinflammatory agents were regularly administered. Antiinflammatory agents, a painkiller, Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF)-1, and other agents to stimulate wound healing were also given orally, and the patient was followed up every postoperative day for 1 week, then at 10 days and 20 days.
To determine if an autologous platelet tissue graft may be beneficial for the promotion of wound healing after PRK, we used Gravitational Platelet Separation System with disposable separation tubes (GPSIII: BioMet Biologics) for preparation of PRP . The PRP derived from the patient was administered to the right eye as eye drops every 2 or 3 hours for 1 week, then every 2–3 hours during the daytime for an additional week. The left eye was administered the same combination of eye drops excluding the PRP for one week after surgery. The patient felt pain immediately after PRK in both eyes, but within 2 hours pain was only felt in the untreated left eye up to two postoperative days. Consistently, palpebral fissure height was reduced in both eyes after PRK; however, recovery was seen after 4 days in the PRP-treated right eye, which was 3 days earlier than in the left eye . Pericorneal injection on the bulbar conjunctiva with superficial keratitis (SPK) was seen in both eyes at postoperative day 1, but was much less in the treated right eye compared to the untreated left eye from all four angles (front, lower, upper, exterior; Fig. ).
Sodium fluorescein was used to evaluate corneal abrasion in both eyes at postoperative day 1 . The stained region in the treated right eye overlapped with the pupil area, whereas the abrasion in the left eye covered a much larger area . At day 2, the stained area in the treated right eye was drastically diminished and became undetectable by day 3, while the left eye showed staining of several SPK spots until day 5. The presence of pericorneal injection followed a similar pattern as the corneal staining by sodium fluorescein.
Myopic correction occurred as expected. Uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) was postoperatively monitored starting at day 3 for 25 days . After 25 days, UDVA improved to 20/13 (1.5) in both eyes, but a difference between the PRK-treated versus untreated eye was evident in the time required for correction . For the treated right eye, the UDVA improved to 20/17 (1.2) within one week, while the left eye required 20 days. The expected UDVA (20/13; 1.5) was achieved in the treated right eye at day 16, and for the left eye at day 20. Thus, all indications suggest that PRP treatment was beneficial to the patient by promoting recovery and corneal wound healing after PRK.