In 2006 a 40-year-old woman, whose medical history was unremarkable, except for sideropenic anaemia, was incidentally diagnosed an ASD at transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). The exam showed an ostium secundum ASD (2.1 × 1.7 cm in diameters) with severe left to right shunt (Qp/Qs = 2.1/1); moderate right atrium enlargement and increased pulmonary pressures (PAPs 35 mmHg) were documented. There was a good sized posterior atrial rim (15 mm), but only a 3.5 mm anterior aortic rim. The indications for closure in adults are echocardiographic finding of right ventricular volume overloading and/or catheterization findings of Qp:Qs greater than 1.5:1.0. Additional reasons are to prevent heart failure, prevent functional deterioration, improve myocardial function, and prevent paradoxical embolism. Therefore, after stretching balloon sizing, the patient underwent successful percutaneous ASD closure with a 34-mm Amplatzer Septal Occluder , under intracardiac echo-guidance. Her clinical course was uneventful and adequate device positioning was confirmed by TTEs performed yearly, until April 2017.
In March 2018, 12 years after device implantation, the patient was evaluated for her annual TTE, fully healthy and asymptomatic. Her labs and physical examination were unremarkable. Her lungs were clear, she had no peripheral oedema and a soft mid-systolic murmur was detectable at the upper left sternal border with wide and fixed splitting of the second heart sound. At TTE, a displacement of the left disk to the right atrium at the retro-aortic rim was detected , causing severe left to right shunt (Qp/Qs = 1.7/1). This finding was confirmed by transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) . The patient was therefore referred to urgent surgery. The next day open surgery confirmed device dislodgement secondary to partial erosion of the aortic rim. Removal of the device and correction of the ASD with an autologous pericardial patch was then successfully performed. No shunt was evident thereafter at TOE .