A 62-year-old male presented to the hospital with a 1-week history of headache and an episode of transitory paresthesia in the left upper limb followed by a 2-min lapse in awareness and a claw-like left hand position highly suggestive of an atypical absence seizure. He had no history of fever, malignancy, diabetes mellitus, or corticosteroid use. Laboratory results revealed a normal white blood cell count and a moderately elevated C-reactive protein (63.6 mg/L–normal levels are below 10 mg/L–). The patient was alert and presented neither neurological deficits nor signs of meningeal irritation. An urgent brain computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated an expansive process in the right parietal lobe . For better characterization a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed, revealing a cystic cortico-subcortical lesion . Gadolinium injection demonstrated an irregular rim enhancement of the lesion that spread to the subarachnoid space. Restricted diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and diminished apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) along with high lipids and low N-acetylaspartate levels in MR spectroscopy led to the diagnosis of a brain abscess. Therefore, the patient was immediately placed on triple empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy (vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and metronidazole). The workup to identify the infection source included a thoracoabdominal CT scan, transthoracic cardiac ultrasound, and fundoscopy. All of these were unremarkable, but direct visualization of the oral cavity showed very poor oral health.
On day 3, the patient underwent craniotomy with neurophysiological monitoring given the proximity of the lesion to the motor cortex. After opening the dura mater, a swollen brain was found . A catheter was first used to drain purulent fluid and reduce brain swelling. Then, the adjacent cortex was opened to wash the cavity with saline, antibiotics (vancomycin, and gentamicin), and hydrogen peroxide. Several tissue samples from the cavity were also taken for pathological study, which revealed acute inflammatory changes but no malignant cells. The blood cultures were negative. Likewise, Gram staining of the abscess fluid exhibited no organisms, and routine aerobic/anaerobic cultures revealed no bacterial growth. Therefore, abscess samples were sent to another hospital for the amplification of bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) with polymerase chain reaction. When Pm was demonstrated as the causative agent of the infection, vancomycin was discontinued.
The patient was also assessed by maxillofacial surgeons who detected severe periodontitis with infected mandibular cysts. This condition was considered the primary source of brain infection, and 1 week after craniotomy the patient underwent extraction of the lower teeth and curettage of mandibular cysts. Unfortunately, the material of the extracted teeth was not sent for microbiological studies. The patient was discharged in excellent conditions after 3 weeks of intravenous antibiotics, followed by 1 week of oral metronidazole and moxifloxacine. Oral antibiotics were maintained for 5 additional weeks. Follow-up MRIs demonstrated favorable progress without any radiological suspicion of recurrence .