A 29-year-old female patient, gravida 1, para 1, with no significant pathological history, had presented herself in consultation complaining of a left cervical swelling that had been evolving for 11 months in a context of general state conservation. The mass was increased in size rapidly after the end of the breastfeeding period (three months). The clinical examination at admission found normal vital signs, and Body mass index of 26.3 kg/m2. Family history was unremarkable for cancer. The patient was used a combined oral contraceptive for menstrual regulation.
The cervical examination showed a postero-lateral mass of the left neck measuring 6 cm in diameter, painless, of firm consistency, unilobed, soft, adherent to the superficial and deep plane. There was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy or inflammatory signs of the adjacent skin.
A cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, revealing a mass of the left posterior cervical soft parts, at the expense of the trapezium muscle, tissue, oval, of regular contours, well-defined, measuring 41 × 68 × 81 mm, enhanced after injection of Gadolinium, with multiple homolateral supraclavicular and lateral cervical lymph nodes . The monotest, in the absence of an IRD tuberculin skin intradermoreaction, was negative.
A biopsy of the mass with Tru-cut® was performed, concluding a desmoid tumor. Abdominopelvic and thoracic computed tomography, indicated for staging, showed the absence of other progressive lesions elsewhere.
In view of these clinical, radiological and pathological findings, a large resection of the tumor was indicated. The patient was installed in the supine position. Access to the posterior neck area was via a direct surgical approach (Fusiform incision). The mass was found to originate from the trapezius muscle without local infiltration of surrounding structures. A sharp dissection over the mass of the tumor away from the muscle was not possible. Complete excision of the mass was accomplished involving the fascia and trapezius muscle . A close suction drain was placed. The safety margins are macroscopically healthy with a resection at 1.5 cm macroscopic distance from the palpable area of the tumor. The post-operative outcomes were simple without any complications and the drain was removed on the second postoperative day. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 5, and the functional result was considered satisfactory without any impairment noted.
The pathology examination of the surgical specimen showed proliferation of spindle-shaped cells arranged in long fascicles in a collagenous stroma. This proliferation infiltrates the striated muscle, with negative excision margins. An immunohistochemistry staining was performed, demonstrating cytoplasmic labeling with anti AML antibody, and nuclear labeling of tumor cells with anti-beta-catenin antibody. This pathological and immunohistochemical aspect highlights the diagnosis of a desmoid tumor .
The case was analyzed by a multidisciplinary committee, and it was decided to follow the patient without any adjuvant treatment given its long-term side-effects and the safety margins are healthy. After a three month, the clinical and radiological follow-up examinations were unremarkable. The outcome was favorable without local or distant tumor recurrence.