A 56-year-old woman complaining of blurred vision in her left eye for 2 weeks visited our clinic. At the first presentation, the best corrected visual acuity was 20/30 in the left eye. She didn’t have any underlying systemic disease. A fundus examination showed a solitary, irregular-shaped, approximately 10 optic disc-sized yellowish to white mass located within the inferonasal and extending to the optic nerve head. Hard exudates around the mass lesion and exudative retinal detachment were identified.
Multiple bevacizumab injections were performed at another clinic to treat suspected Coat’s disease. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed an irregular margin of a hyperreflective retinal mass invading the retinal tissue. A small amount of subfoveal fluid and diffuse photoreceptor damage suggesting repetitive retinal detachment were found in OCT scans. A highly vascularized retinal mass and intratumoral vascular leakage were noted in the fluorescein angiography (FA) . In addition, early disc leakage, capillary telangiectasia at the detached retina, and a nonperfusion area at the peripheral retina were found in the late-phase FA. In the indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), a ring-shaped hypocyanescent halo around the mass due to hard exudates was observed . A definite direct connection to the other orbital tissues was not observed. A homogeneous discoid mass showing medium to high internal reflectivity without calcification was examined by B-scan ultrasonography . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an approximate 1.7-cm-lesion with intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted images and high signal intensity on T1-weighted images in the left eyeball .
No primary tumorous condition or distant metastasis was found during the systemic work-up. A vasoproliferative tumor was suspected, so off-label intravitreal bevacizumab injections were given, which were transiently effective only for suppression of exudation and did not reduce the mass lesion. Vitrectomy combined with retinal excisional biopsy and silicone oil tamponade was performed to provide an accurate histological diagnosis and reattachment of the retinal detachment. The histopathological analysis examination finally confirmed the intraocular mass as a GCT. The tumor was composed of large polygonal cells with abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and round nuclei . To differentiate the primary tumor from other possibilities, such as vasoproliferative tumors and choroidal melanomas, we performed additional immunostaining. In the immunohistochemical studies, the tumor was positive for S100 and CD68 but focal positive for neurofilament and negative for ERG and HMB-45 . The percentage of Ki-67 was 5%, which excluded the possibility of malignant primary tumors .
We tried to remove the tumor as much as possible, but a part of the tumor was left behind to minimize the damage of the normal retina and choroidal tissues. There was no local recurrence or metastasis up to the last visit 6 months after surgery. However, high intraocular pressure was uncontrolled after surgery under the silicone oil tamponade and recurrent subretinal fluid originated from the remained tumor. The visual acuity of the left eye worsened into no light perception.