A 72-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with intermittent severe pain in the left middle one-third of the tongue for 8 months, triggered by tongue movements and chewing of food, lasting from a few to dozens of minutes at a time, and was treated effectively with carbamazepine. Swallowing did not cause any pain. There was no pain at the face, base of the tongue, throat, or tonsils, and no other neurological symptoms. Four months prior, the patient underwent an MRI exam and was diagnosed with left-sided GPN; he was treated with glossopharyngeal nerve MVD at another hospital. The patient's symptoms did not improve after surgery. The day after the surgery, the pain recurred to the preoperative condition and gradually aggravated. On the third post-operative day, there was clear fluid outflow from the nose, suggesting cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea. In addition, the patient developed reduced hearing in the left ear. The symptoms of the clear fluid outflow from the nose disappeared 10 days after the surgery.
Following admission to our hospital, the patient had a second MRI exam . The patient underwent a second surgery for cerebellopontine angle exploration (CPA). The previous craniotomy was reopened in the lateral position, and the dura was cut open. While exploring the trigeminal nerve area, we observed a small blood vessel close to the REZ with a Teflon sponge adhering to it (placed during the first operation) . The vessel was displaced without compressing the trigeminal nerve. The blood vessel was small; therefore, it was not considered to be the responsible vessel. The superior pole of the trigeminal nerve was then examined. After cutting arachnoid adhesions, the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) was found to be significantly suppressing the REZ area of the trigeminal nerve. Following the placement of a Teflon sponge between the vessel and nerve to make a total separation, we continued to explore the trigeminal nerve near Meckel's cave. We saw that the SCA was turned forward and downward, oppressing the trigeminal nerve , which was separated completely by the Teflon sponge. Finally, the space between the glossopharyngeal nerve and the facial acoustic nerve was explored; the glossopharyngeal nerve anatomy was unclear, and there was no apparent vascular compression. Therefore, no further dissections were performed. The dura mater was sutured in a watertight pattern, and the wound was closed in layers. Postoperatively, the patient's pain resolved completely. No new neurological deficits or surgery-related complications were observed.