We describe a 61-year-old Arab man who retired from teaching 2 years ago. He did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. His past medical history included two surgical operations: a hydatid cyst of the liver operated on 6 years ago in a surgery department and a right ureteral lithiasis operated on in our urology department 4 years ago (at that time, he had only been explored by an intravenous pyelogram). He had been under alpha blocker for benign prostatic hyperplasia for 6 months. He was admitted for a suspicious renal cyst, incidentally found on renal and vesicoprostatic ultrasound. He had no complaints. His physical examination was unremarkable. His temperature was 37.2 °C, his blood pressure was 134/82 mmHg, and his pulse rate was regular at 74 beats per minute. On laboratory values, white blood cell count was 7.9 × 103/mL, red blood cell count 4.1 × 106/mL, hemoglobin 14.2 g/dL, platelets 396 × 103/mL, creatinine 1.04 mg/dL, sodium 138 mEq/L, potassium 4.1 mEq/L, and C-reactive protein 1 mg/L. Urines examination showed no leukocyturia or bacteriuria.
Renal and vesicoprostatic ultrasound found a non-vascularized cystic formation with a thickened and irregular wall on his left kidney.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 38 mm left renal mid-pole lesion, isodense to the renal parenchyma. Dynamic CT showed an early intense and peripheral enhancement and nonenhanced central zone even in the delayed phase . The renal artery and vein appeared normal. No metastases were demonstrated. We also recovered a CT realized 6 years ago in the surgery department, which illustrated the same lesion but 10 mm smaller . For further characterization of the cyst, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. It revealed a lesion with thickened and irregular wall (from 3 to 10 mm) isointense on T1-weighted images and hypointense on T2- weighted images with intense enhancement. The central zone was hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2 with no enhancement . Radiological findings concluded a Bosniak IV cyst. As this cyst type is considered clearly malignant, our patient was accordingly scheduled for surgery. A partial nephrectomy was considered technically difficult for this lesion, so he underwent an open left radical nephrectomy. His postoperative course was uneventful.
On gross examination, cut sections divulged a well-defined medio-renal hemorrhagic and brownish mass measuring 3 × 2.5 cm. Histological examination of the mass showed a mesenchymal proliferation arising from the wall of a large vessel and developing within its lumen. It was composed of hyalinized papillary and anastomosing channel-like structures that were lined by flat to plump endothelial cells with no atypia or mitotic activity . An immunohistochemical study revealed diffuse staining of tumors cells for CD-31 and negativity for HMB-45 and cytokeratin . The diagnosis of IPEH was retained. He was asymptomatic and no recurrence of the tumor has been detected during 9 years of regular clinical and radiological follow-up. Additional file presents a timeline of the case.