A 54-year-old Caucasian male presented to our institution with progressive shortness of breath, fatigue, and refractory hypoxia on home oxygen. His medical history was significant for hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and coronary artery disease requiring percutaneous coronary intervention to the left circumflex coronary artery. Fifteen months prior to admission, he was diagnosed with a jejunal low-grade neuroendocrine tumour with metastases to the liver. At that time, the patient received monthly treatment of octreotide and chemoembolization for the liver lesions. Five months prior to admission due to persistence of symptoms and liver lesions, he was treated with 5-fluorouracil and temozolomide via a right internal jugular catheter. The patient reported dyspnoea since that time.
On admission, the patient’s oxygen saturation was 78% on room air in an upright position, which did not improve in a supine position. Oxygen saturation slightly improved to 86% with an inspired oxygen concentration of 100%. A physical exam revealed a Grade 3/6 holosystolic murmur best heard at the left lower sternal border. An arterial blood gas analysis was significant for marked hypoxaemia with oxygen tension of 43 mmHg. Chest radiography was within normal limits. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without any ischaemia changes. A chest computed tomography angiography was negative for pulmonary embolism or any evidence of intrathoracic disease. A 2D transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) had severe dilation of the right chambers, severe tricuspid valve regurgitation with an estimated right ventricular pressure of 35 mmHg. Right-to-left shunt was seen with injection of agitated saline. A transoesophageal echocardiogram was then performed that showed an aneurysmal inter-atrial septum with a PFO and marked R-L shunt evident by colour and with the injection of agitated saline . In addition, the tricuspid valve was thickened and tethered with restricted motion of the anterior leaflet. There was colour Doppler evidence of severe tricuspid regurgitation with an anteriorly directed jet across the PFO leading to a marked R-L shunt . The mitral valve structure was normal with mild regurgitation. The pulmonic valve was not well visualized; however, there was mild–moderate pulmonic stenosis with Doppler analysis.
Right and left heart catheterization were performed on Day 8 of the presentation (in December 2016), to measure shunt fraction and left atrial oxygen saturation . An R-L cardiac shunt was confirmed by a Qp:Qs (ratio of pulmonary blood flow to systemic blood flow) of <1 and absence of improvement in oxygenation despite increasing oxygen supplementation. Coronary angiography showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease and patent stent in the left circumflex coronary artery. Given these findings, the patient was referred for PFO closure and tricuspid valve replacement. Subsequently, he underwent tricuspid valve replacement with a 31 mm St Jude Epic ® bioprosthesis and pulmonic valve replacement with a 27 mm St Jude Epic® bioprosthesis (intra-operative assessment of the pulmonic valve showed a thickened and retracted valve) with patch augmentation of the right ventricular outflow tract. Bioprosthetic valves were placed for the ease of surgical planning and anticoagulation management for future treatment of the patient’s underlying disease. The PFO was surgically closed with several interrupted sutures. The patient had a prolonged hospitalization in an intensive care unit and developed a post-operative Klebsiella infection from the central line. Staphylococcus aureus was also found in his sputum and this was appropriately treated. At the time of discharge, the patient had an oxygen saturation of 95% on room air.
A TTE performed at 2 months and 12 months post-operative showed normal functioning tricuspid and pulmonic valve bioprostheses. An agitated saline study was negative for intracardiac shunt . The patient had no further hypoxic events and was asymptomatic 22 months after surgery.