A 69-year-old man with a history of hypertension, bilateral thalamic hemorrhage, and decreased kidney function was admitted to our hospital because of congestive heart failure with extracellular volume overload. Volume control with drugs, such as diuretics, was unsuccessful and he was started on hemodialysis. Thereafter, he received various antibiotics for bacterial infections, including pneumoniae and urinary-tract and catheter-related infections. Simultaneously, he had continuous watery and sometimes bloody diarrhea, the etiology of which was considered to be CDAD due to a positive stool test for CD toxins. Despite treatment with metronidazole and vancomycin, the severity of the diarrhea was not ameliorated. Abdominal X-ray and computed tomography did not reveal any causal factors, and laboratory tests showed only slight elevations in the white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level. We suspected involvement of uncontrollable CDAD or other type of infection (such as mycosis, tuberculosis, or cytomegalovirus infection) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Colonoscopy showed multiple segmental ulcers in the ascending, transverse, and sigmoid colon, but not the rectum, which suggested infectious colitis or ischemic colitis . A biopsy specimen showed loss of glands, fibrosis, congestion, and edema, suggesting ischemia, with no findings of infection . Given these results and the fact that the patient was on dialysis and had severe arteriosclerosis, we provisionally diagnosed ischemic colitis caused by arteriosclerosis and hemodialysis. We stopped or adjusted enteral nutrition, avoided low blood pressure, and withdrew antibiotics; however, his diarrhea persisted. It was impractical to perform a second colonoscopy, as his performance status was severely worsened. Finally, he died of cardiac arrest 193 days after admission. The autopsy showed longitudinal and annular ulcers in the sigmoid colon. An autopsy specimen of the ulcers showed inflammatory polyposis, cryptitis with crypt abscess formation, and focally severe lymphocyte infiltration near the muscularis mucosa; these findings are fully compatible with UC . We retrospectively suspected that the cause of the intractable diarrhea was UC, which had been masked by the clinical course and findings of CDAD and ischemic colitis.