A 54 year-old male with a history of orthotropic heart transplant in 2001 for non-ischemic cardiomyopathy presented to the hospital after experiencing intermittent palpitations with associated lightheadedness of one hour duration. He denied any chest pain or shortness of breath, orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. At baseline, he described activities consistent with New York Heart Association Class 2. He had recently completed a 4 day course of Prednisone for a gout flare-up. Additional medical history was notable for benign prostatic hyperplasia and hyperlipidemia. Medications included Atorvastatin, Cyclosporine, Finasteride, Levothyroxine, Mirtazapine, Mycophenolate, Omeprazole, Prednisone, Quetiapine, Ranitidine, Tamsulosin, Zolpidem. He had allergies to Azithromycin. He denied tobacco or illicit drug use and alcohol consumption.
On arrival, he was afebrile, heart rate was 54 bpm, blood pressure was 184/89 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 98% on ambient air. His physical examination was unremarkable and he appeared clinically euvolemic. Cardiac biomarkers revealed a CK of 59 U/L and a troponin of 0.11NG/ML(normal < 0.04NG/ML). B type natriuretic peptide was 371 PG/ML(normal 0-100PG/ML). Routine laboratory studies demonstrated normal sodium, magnesium, serum creatinine, and a potassium of 3.3 mmol/L(normal 3.5–5.1 mmol/L). His hemoglobin and hematocrit were normal. An electrocardiogram revealed a normal sinus rhythm with T wave inversions in the anterior and lateral leads which were unchanged compared to prior ECG . He had no evidence of arrhythmias on cardiac monitoring. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed left ventricular ejection fraction of 55–65%, left posterior wall of 1.3 cm and interventricular septal wall 1.2 cm, thickened trabeculated apex, with severely dilated left atrium and mildly hypertrophied right ventricle . He underwent a nuclear stress test that revealed mild inferior wall thinning and normal wall motion . A cardiac MRI was performed to further evaluate apical hypertrophy based on his echocardiogram findings. This revealed prominent apical hypertrophy of the left ventricle with near obliteration of the apical cavity . His cardiac biomarkers trended down to normal and he had no evidence of arrhythmias on continuous cardiac monitoring so he was discharged from the hospital with close follow up with his heart transplant team.