A 41-year-old male without significant medical, family, and psychosocial history presented to our service 1 day after suffering a work-related projectile injury with severely decreased vision in the left eye. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 OD and counting fingers OS. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 3 mmHg OS. Marked conjunctival hemorrhage, hyphema, mydriatic pupil, anterior lens dislocation, iridodialysis, and vitreous prolapse and hemorrhage were noted OS . B-scan showed dense vitreous hemorrhage without retinal detachment . Anterior OCT (Visante OCT™, Carl Zeiss, Germany) revealed a shallow anterior chamber, anteriorly dislocated lens, and a supraciliary effusion OS . The right eye was unremarkable on examination.
A 10-day course of topical and systemic steroids could not resolve the hypotony. Thus, lensectomy and 23-gauge vitrectomy with 6 mm infusion cannula were performed using the Resight wide-angle viewing system. Hypotony maculopathy was detected after removing the dense vitreous hemorrhage . A cyclitic membrane was identified, then peeled completely. Scleral indentation was attempted to examine the status of the ciliary body, but the depression distorted the visualization. An intraocular endoscope was therefore used via the original 23 g valved trocar for evaluation, and found a cyclodialysis cleft extending from the 10 to 2 o’clock positions. Only localized traction and some whitish fibrous material on the ciliary processes were seen. The fibrous tissue was dissected and only intraocular gas endotamponade (20% SF6) was performed to reposition the ciliary body without using cryopexy. Left IOP was restored to 13 mmHg 3 days after the surgery.
One month after the surgery, the patient’s IOP remained at 12 mmHg and OCT showed no obvious hypotony maculopathy , which was completely resolved after 2 months . After that, a sutured posterior chamber intraocular lens (PCIOL) was arranged. Anterior OCT confirmed cleft closure and proper positioning of the sutured PCIOL . His IOP remained 12 mmHg after 18 months, and BCVA improved to 20/200.