A male child, aged 7 years and 8 months, was admitted to the hospital on April 22, 2021 due to “recurrent headache for more than 9 months” without other complaints of discomfort. About 4 days before admission, the child had a paroxysmal headache, and head CT suggested a high-density shadow in the right sylvian fissure (Possibly meningioma? AVM?) He was transferred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Cranial nerve and nervous system examination showed no abnormalities. DSA indicated that there was a wide-necked aneurysm at the bifurcation of the M1 segment of the right middle cerebral artery, about 1.16*1.58*1.32 cm in size. The inflow path of the aneurysm was in the front of M1 bifurcation, and one outflow artery branch was seen to originate from the aneurysm, and another small artery attached to the aneurysm was suspected to be another outflow artery, as shown in . Hunt-Hess grade I.
After discussion by various experts in our ward, the cerebrovascular reconstruction plan was decided, the IMA-RA-MCA bypass and aneurysm trapping were preliminarily proposed after the aneurysm's outflow arteries were adequately explored, STA bypass would be performed when necessary. A preoperative CTA, color ultrasound of the radial artery, and Allen test were completed to evaluate whether the IMA and radial artery were suitable for bypass grafting. The relevant preoperative examination and operation diagram is shown in .
Excluding other surgical contraindication, the extended pterional approach with zygomatic osteotomy was performed, the skull base bone of the inferior temporal fossa was fully bitten to better explore and obtain IMA. The right IMA was explored and exposed with the aid of intraoperative neuronavigation and doppler, the diameter of the IMA was about 2.0 mm, then it was separated and exposed with a length of about 1.5 cm.
The M1 segment of the right MCA, the aneurysm, anterior cerebral artery, and internal carotid artery were exposed . The exploration showed that two branches of the MCA emanated from the aneurysm, one of which was larger and emitted two branching arteries, confirming the preoperative conjecture (comparing with ). During the intracranial operation, the other group of surgeons explored the radial artery of the left forearm. The diameter of the radial artery was about 2.0 mm and the blood flow was patent, 10 cm was cut for use after measuring the distance, rinsing the radial artery lumen with heparin-saline to prevent vasospasm.
The right STA-MCA end-to-side bypass was performed for the smaller outflow path ( The white arrow). The recipient artery was blocked for 25 min during the STA-MCA bypass. The end-to-side bypass of the radial artery and the larger outflow path was performed continuously ( The yellow arrow). The recipient artery was blocked for 22 min during the RA-M2 bypass. The lateral skull base bone of the inferior temporal fossa was fully bitten when we exposed IMA as mentioned above, RAG exits the right sylvian fissure and follows the surface of the temporal lobe toward the inferior temporal fossa, and the inferior temporal fossa enters to meet IMA through the dura and the skull window of the bottom of the temporal lobe . Then the IMA-RA end-to-side bypass was performed ( The yellow arrow), the recipient artery was blocked for 35 min during IMA-RA bypass. The distal part of the IMA was clipped after bypass artery blood flow was evaluated by intraoperative doppler.
Finally, the proximal M1 segment of the aneurysm was separated and exposed again, the outflow path and inflow path of the aneurysm were trapped, respectively. Intraoperative fluorescence angiography showed that the bypass vessels were patent and the aneurysm blood supply disappeared . The aneurysm's blood was continuously blocked for 1 h, and there was no change of motor evoked potential, somatosensory evoked potential or other monitoring indicators in intraoperative electrophysiological monitoring.
During the operation, blood pressure was strictly controlled at the normal level, and 10-0 prolene vascular sutures were used for anastomosis. After bypass, the dura, lateral pterygoid muscle, and temporalis muscle were rested and sutured. The skull flap was properly clipped to avoid excessive compression of bypass arteries and was rested and fixed with the zygoma. Intraoperative images are shown in .
The patient was routinely given intensive care, blood pressure control, and anticoagulant medication as planned after bypass surgery. The postoperative anticoagulant regimen was to take aspirin 50 mg/qd the first day after surgery and take it 6 months postoperatively regularly. Sodium valproate and nimodipine were routinely given to prevent epilepsy and cerebral vasospasm, too. CT before discharge showed no obvious bleeding or infarction. CTA and CTP showed improved blood perfusion in the right MCA supplying area, the distal trunk and branches of the MCA were also well-developed, as shown in . MRI indicated a small cerebral infarction in the external capsule area, but the child had no obvious neurological dysfunction.
The child complained of no neurological dysfunction and the daily life was the same as before in follow-up 6 months after the operation. He only had slight discomfort of his left fingers, and often subconsciously gripped the left finger to relieve the symptoms, but there was no paleness of extremities, numbness, or other symptoms, mRS = 1. DSA was re-examined 6 months after the operation, the IMA-RA-M2 bypass were patent and RAG diameter slightly increased than before, and the rest were roughly the same as the DSA 3 months before.