A 55-year-old male complained of posterior neck pain with pain and tingling sensation in the left arm that had not responded to conservative treatment over the previous 3 months. He had no definite history associated with a bleeding tendency. The neurological examination was within the normal limit without pathologic reflex. Preoperative radiographs and sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed disc space narrowing, posterior osteophyte, and disc herniation at C5–6 . The patient underwent ACDF with plating at C5–6, and a normal tracheal shadow was observed on immediate postoperative radiographs . The patient’s radiculopathy symptoms improved significantly after surgery, and he was discharged on postoperative day 3.
However, the patient visited the outpatient clinic 4 days after discharge (postoperative day 7) complaining of sudden-onset left-deviated neck swelling. The patient did not show any sign of respiratory difficulty (i.e., low O2 saturation and severe dyspnea). Follow-up radiographs showed increased anterior soft tissue swelling as well as a right-side-deviated trachea . The neck-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed anterior and right lateral displacement of the airway including the trachea that was compressed by a large retropharyngeal hematoma . To prevent airway obstruction, we performed an emergent endotracheal intubation, and intubation was maintained for 2 days until the patient underwent hematoma evacuation with ligation of a small vessel located along the carotid sheath for control of the bleeding focus. The hemovac drain showed 10 cc at postoperative day 1, and 3 cc at postoperative day 2 with bloody aspect and no sign of infection. Two days after hematoma evacuation surgery, the hemovac drain was removed because the aspect of drain was bloody without infection signs. However, the patient complained of hoarseness with a foul breath odor after the removal of hemovac drain. Laryngoscopy showed granulation tissues in the trachea, likely due to tracheal ischemic mucosal damage caused by a forceful endotracheal intubation in which the trachea was severely deviated and compressed from large retropharyngeal hematoma . The patient received antibiotics (amoxicillin/clavulanate 3.6 g bis in die [B.I.D]) intravenously and systemic corticosteroids (prednisolone 30 mg B.I.D) orally for 1 week according to the instructions from an otolaryngologist. The patient’s symptoms improved, and he was discharged after 1 week.
One month after hematoma evacuation surgery, the patient revisited the outpatient clinic complaining of dyspnea on exertion. However, follow-up radiographs and neck-enhanced CT scans showed no definite recurrence of retropharyngeal as well as normalization of previous anterior soft tissue swelling and tracheal deviation . Laryngoscopy, performed to further evaluate the patient’s dyspnea, showed tracheal stenosis and stricture . The patient’s dyspnea symptoms did not improve after 2 months of conservative treatment. Therefore, the patient underwent bronchoscopic dilatation without stent insertion, and he is doing well without recurrence of re-stenotic symptoms from 2-year follow-up in outpatient clinic.