A 26-year-old male patient, engineer as a profession, from north Africa, with no pathological history (In particular, there are not genetic or psychosocial family history, neither drug history), suffered from an atypical psychosis (anxiety, depression, demoralization, decreased energy, decreased concentration, decreased interest in previously pleasurable activities, insomnia, with an irritable mode) for over four months (he had no past or family history of psychopathy). He was treated by a psychiatrist with neuroleptic (Haldol) and anxiolytic (Bromazepam), but without improvement. Then, he was admitted for a state of agitation, requiring injectable neuroleptic and anxiolytic therapy.
On clinical examination, he presented with mania and delusional syndrome, polyuric-polydipsic syndrome and elevated blood pressure. The biological analysis found severe hypokalemia (1.9 mmol/L). Nicardipine in the self-syringe pusher, with injectable and oral potassium supplementation have been initially introduced.
Faced with this atypical psychosis and these associated signs, an etiological exploration was realized: Brain CT scan, natremia, calcemia, thyroid function test and dosage of urinary methoxylated derivatives were normal. Dosage of activity aldosterone/renin was elevated (161 pmol/mU (normal value < 64)), then an abdominal CT scan was performed and showed a right adrenal cortical adenoma (14 ∗ 11 mm) (/).
After a multidisciplinary meeting, the patient was six weeks on anti-aldosterone (spironolactone at a progressive dose of up to 200 mg/day) for preoperative preparation, with normalization of blood pressure and kalemia. Then, a Laparoscopic resection of adenoma was performed by an experienced professor of visceral surgery with the aid of an assistant professor in the same speciality.
The anatomopathological study that revealed an adrenal cortical adenoma without signs of malignancy .
Postoperative evolution was good without complications. Spironolactone was immediately stopped with a good control of blood pressure and kalemia. Six months ago, all psychotropic drugs were stopped, and the outcome was favorable; the patient did not present depression, anxiety or a state of agitation, and he was very satisfied of his improvement and he has embarked on his previous job as an engineer.
The patient has an appointment every six months to check for psychiatric symptoms, blood pressure and kalemia.