A 71-year-old man presented with convulsive symptoms. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 3-cm isodense mass in the right parasagittal region. T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed prominent enhancement with dural tail sign after gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acid acid administration, suggestive of meningioma [ and ]. Cerebral angiography showed tumor staining from the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) posterior internal frontal artery (PIFA), with an arteriovenous shunt. Simultaneous congestion findings suggested impaired drainage to the SSS [ and ]. Bilateral external carotid angiography showed shunt blood flow from the bilateral MMAs, superficial temporal artery (STA), and occipital artery (OA) to the SSS colocated with the tumor invasion site [ and ]. No occlusion of the SSS was detected at the site of tumor invasion, and the SSS was perfused progressively without cortical venous reflux, so the dAVF was Cognard type I.
After the initial diagnosis, the seizures were controlled and the neurological findings detected no abnormalities. The patient did not wish to receive treatment and was discharged for follow-up. Four years after the first diagnosis, he was hospitalized with status epilepticus causing intractable convulsive aggravation, so deep sedation/ventilator control was established for 5 days with propofol and midazolam. On admission, CT showed small subcortical hemorrhage in the left frontal lobe . Subsequent to the period of sedation, the patient continued to have prolonged impaired consciousness, Glasgow Coma Scale E1V1M4, severe right paralysis, and aphasia. MR imaging showed that the tumor had increased to 4 cm in size compared to 4 years ago [ and ]. Carotid angiography showed a pial shunt from the ACA PIFA to the SSS and slight tumor staining . The findings of stagnant perfusion from the ACA were improved compared to the initial carotid angiography taken 4 years before . The SSS at the site of tumor infiltration was mildly stenotic but not occluded. The stenosis of the posterior third of the SSS and the development of dAVF seemed to have caused retrograde blood flow anteriorly in the SSS, indicating left frontal cortical venous regurgitation [ and ]. External carotid angiography showed an increased shunt from the bilateral STAs, OAs, and MMAs to the SSS similar to the tumor invasion [ and ]. The presence of retrograde venous sinus reflux and cortical venous reflux changed classification of the dAVF to Cognard type II a + b. Subcortical hemorrhage in the left frontal lobe was thought to be hemorrhage associated with increased left frontal cortical venous pressure.
We hypothesized that the impaired cerebral venous drainage due to stenosis of the outflow tract of the SSS dAVF was the cause of the prolonged disturbance of consciousness. To reduce the shunt blood flow, ligation of bilateral STAs and embolization of the bilateral MMAs and OAs with platinum coils were performed. Post embolization angiography showed a significant decrease in shunt blood flow from the MMAs, OAs, and STAs. However, the tumor staining and pial shunt from the ACA, and the left frontal lobe cortical venous reflux persisted . Ten days after the embolization, tumor removal and shunt dissection were performed . After coagulation and dissection of the feeding vessels from the ACA to the tumor, the shunting vein to the SSS was coagulated and dissected. The tumor was detached from the dural attachment, but the part that infiltrated into the SSS was not removed. The dural attachment was thoroughly coagulated but partially remained, resulting in Simpson Grade IV removal.
Postoperative MR imaging showed partial removal of the tumor except for the part inside the SSS [ and ]. Postoperative carotid angiography showed disappearance of tumor staining and shunt blood flow from the ACA, and disappearance of shunt blood flow from the bilateral OAs, STAs, and MMAs to the lesion . The SSS showed anterograde blood flow and no cortical venous reflux in the left frontal lobe. The postoperative pathological findings were transitional meningioma. The patient’s condition slowly improved after the surgery, and right neglect disappeared. The right hemiparesis improved to manual muscle testing grade 2/5, and he was transferred to the rehabilitation center on postoperative day 12.