A 43-year-old man from China presented at the hospital with a history of coughing and sputum production for the past two months.
Two months prior to admission to our hospital, the patient visited a local hospital due to an irritative cough with a small amount of white, foamy sputum that lasted for two wk. The patient did not exhibit any obvious indications of accompanying symptoms such as blood in the sputum, fever, night sweats, weight loss, hoarseness, dyspnea, or discomforts. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a soft tissue mass, approximately 57 mm x 51 mm in size, in the left lower lobe that was suspected to be a fungal infection or tumor. Electronic bronchoscopy showed that the basal branch mucosa of the left lower lobe was swollen and hypertrophic, and the surface was not smooth. No active bleeding or new organisms were found. Bronchial mucosal biopsy revealed chronic inflammatory changes. Acid-fast stains of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, as well as bacterial and fungal cultures, were negative. Since the specific cause of the symptoms could not be clarified, the patient was treated with empirical anti-infection medication, specifically cephalosporins, in the local hospital for two wk. However, the patient's cough symptoms did not improve significantly. As a result, the patient was admitted to our thoracic medicine department as an outpatient for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient did not report any prior history of surgeries, trauma, severe infections, or significant medical conditions. Additionally, the patient denied any previous infection with coronavirus disease 2019.
The patient reported no significant family history of related illnesses. However, it was observed that the patient had been working as a house improvement worker and had a prolonged history of occupational dust exposure.
On physical examination, the patient's height was 176 cm, weight 70 kg, body temperature 36.2 °C, heart rate 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure 132/87 mmHg. The superficial lymph nodes in the supraclavicular and neck regions were non-palpable, and the chest wall was symmetrical with no deformities. The patient's breathing was regular, and apart from decreased breath sounds in the lower left lung, no other significant abnormalities were noted.
The laboratory test results were as follows: White blood cell count was 9.54 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage was 52%, hemoglobin was 151 g/L, hematocrit was 47.1%, fasting blood glucose was 5.5 mmol/L, total protein level was 81 g/L, and globulin level was 37 g/L. Additionally, twelve tumor markers including AFP, CEA, NSE, CA125, CA15-3, CA242, CA19-9, PSA, f-PSA, FER, β-HCG, and HGH were measured by protein biochip detection in the serum and found to be within the normal range. Pulmonary function test results showed forced vital capacity of 5.18 L (110% predicted) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 3.79 L (98% predicted). Other results of routine laboratory examinations were within normal limits, including urine and stool routine, liver and kidney function, and electrolytes. The patient's infectious disease screening, which included hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and human immunodeficiencyvirus tests, also showed no abnormalities.
The contrast-enhanced chest CT taken at our hospital revealed a 6 cm mass in the left lower lobe, primarily located in the lateral segment (S9) and posterior segment (S10). The mass showed slight enhancement and obstructed the bronchi of the affected lung segments, with the pulmonary vasculature faintly visible within it . Bronchoscopy revealed narrowed lumens of the left lower lobe's lateral and posterior segmental bronchi, along with congested and swollen mucosa, without any detection of new organisms in the lumen . Magnetic resonance imaging of the head and CT scans of the neck and abdomen showed no abnormalities. The bone scan also had negative results.