A 59-year-old woman with a past medical history of hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-ophrectomy for uterine leiomyosarcoma (American Joint Commission on Cancer Staging; AJCC T1c N0 M0; diagnosed at an outside institution) seven years prior presented to our institution for her regular periodic computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen, chest and pelvis at 6-month intervals as tumor follow-up investigations. These CT scans revealed several coalescing rim-enhancing nodules (altogether measuring 6.0 cm) in the upper and middle poles of her left kidney and a solitary rim-enhancing nodule (measuring 1.5 cm) in her right middle lobe of lung, which were absent on her previous CT scans six months earlier. The clinical impression was metastasis from her previous uterine leiomyosarcoma. No additional nodules were identified in the brain, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, liver, spleen, pancreas, bladder and bones on subsequent staging magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, abdomen, chest and pelvis, and positron emission tomography (PET) scan. The patient did not have any stigmata or family history of TSC, and had no history of melanoma. General physical examination was unremarkable. Her hemogram, urine and blood biochemical analyses were within normal ranges.
A left radical nephrectomy and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical wedge resection of the right middle lobe solitary nodule were performed. Grossly, her resected left kidney revealed a sharply demarcated and lobulated firm gray-tan nodular tumor (7.5 × 6.2 × 5.4 cm) occupying the upper and middle poles, and showed focally hemorrhagic areas on cut surface . The interface between tumor and uninvolved kidney was sharp . A 3.0 cm tan tumor thrombus protruded from the renal vein resection margin, whilst the renal artery and ureter resection margins were grossly free of tumor. The tumor grossly infiltrated into the renal sinus and extended broadly to, but not through, both the anterior and posterior renal capsules. Gross infiltration of tumor into the perinephric adipose tissue was absent. Her wedge-resected right middle lobe of lung revealed a sharply demarcated firm gray-tan nodule (2.3 × 2.2 × 2.0 cm) with focally hemorrhagic overlying pleura. The cut surface of the tumor was focally hemorrhagic. The tumor extends to, but not through the overlying pleura, and was at least 0.5 cm from the nearest stapled resection margin.
Histologically, the renal tumor was biphasic and composed mainly of medium to large epithelioid cells and focal areas of spindle/elongated cells around numerous small blood vessels . The medium to large epithelioid neoplastic cells were arranged in solid nests or cords, and had well-defined cytoplasmic borders with abundant cytoplasm that varied from eosinophilic and granular to clear . The nuclei of the epithelioid cells were mainly round, centrally located, and vesicular, with moderate-to-severe pleomorphism and hyperchromatism . Extensive cellular atypia, including bizarre multinucleated giant cells with large nuclei and nucleoli, was present . Conspicuous nucleoli and mitoses were frequently present . Mitotic count for the renal tumor was high (60 per 50 HPFs). There was microscopic evidence of tumor invasion of the renal sinus and the renal vein, and extensive neoplastic cell invasion of smaller veins. The adrenal gland was unremarkable and was not invaded by tumor, and the non-neoplastic kidney revealed mild nephrosclerosis.
Microscopic examination of the pulmonary tumor (not shown) exhibited the same morphological features as the renal tumor described above . The interface between tumor and uninvolved lung was sharp, and several foci of hemorrhage and necrosis were present. Mitotic count for the pulmonary tumor was high (45 per 50 HPFs). The non-neoplastic lung tissue was unremarkable (not shown). Based on her history of status post hysterectomy for uterine leiomyosarcoma (diagnosed at an outside institution) seven years prior and the biphasic histologic appearance of spindle and epithelioid cells (with clear cell areas) with prominent perivascular distribution of neoplastic cells in both the renal and pulmonary tumors, a diagnosis of malignant uterine PEComa with renal and pulmonary metastases was considered. The pathology report, original hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) slides, and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded blocks of the prior uterine tumor were requested from the outside institution. The original H&E slides and new H&E slides re-cut from the paraffin blocks were evaluated, and sections from all three lesions (uterine, renal and pulmonary) were concurrently subjected to immunohistochemical analysis. The pathology report from the outside institution indicated that the prior uterine tumor diagnosed as uterine leiomyosarcoma measured 6.0 cm in its greatest dimension, with a pathologic TMN staging of pT1c N0 M0. Microscopic examination of the previous uterine tumor (not shown) exhibited the same morphological features as both the pulmonary (not shown) and renal tumors described above.
Immunohistochemically, both the epithelioid and spindle neoplastic cells of the renal tumor were strong and diffusely (>80% of the neoplastic cells) positive for desmin (cytoplasmic and membranous) {Ventana, Tucson, Ariz} [Figure ], HMB-45 (cytoplasmic) {Ventana} [Figure ], Melan-A/MART-1 (cytoplasmic) {BioCare Medical, Walnut Creek, CA}, smooth muscle actin (cytoplasmic and membranous) {Dako, Carpinteria, CA}, muscle-specific actin/all muscle actin/HHF-35 (cytoplasmic and membranous) {Dako} [not shown]. The estrogen receptor (ER) {Ventana} [Figure ] and progesterone receptor (PR) {Ventana} [Figure ] immunostains showed strong nuclear reactivity in 60–80% and 30–50% of tumor cells, respectively. The renal tumor cells were strong and diffusely (>80% of the neoplastic cells) positive for BCL-2 (cytoplasmic and membranous) {Ventana} [Figure ], CD99 (membranous) {Ventana} [Figure ], and cyclin D1 (nuclear) {Ventana} [not shown]. A proliferative index of 70% was noted with Ki67 immunostaining (nuclear) {Ventana} [Figure ]. The tumor cells showed focal (<20% of the neoplastic cells), but strong, immunoreactivity for c-kit/CD117 (membranous) {Ventana}, vimentin (cytoplasmic and membranous) {Ventana}, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) {cytoplasmic and membranous} [Ventana], and CD10 (membranous) {Ventana} [not shown]. The renal neoplastic cells failed to stain with antibodies against renal cell carcinoma marker (RCC) {Ventana} [Figure ], S-100 protein (Ventana), chromogranin (Ventana), cytokeratins (AE1/AE3, 8/18, 7/20) {Ventana}, CD34 (Ventana), and myogenin (Ventana) {not shown}. The immunoprofile of the pulmonary (not shown) and uterine (not shown) tumors were identical to that of the renal tumor described above . For all the three tumors in general, staining for the melanocytic markers (HMB-45 and Melan-A) were more intense in the epithelioid cells compared to the spindle cells. Staining for the myoid markers (desmin, smooth muscle actin, and muscle-specific actin) were variable in the cytoplasm and more prominent adjacent to the cytoplasmic membrane, and more intense in the spindle cells compared to the epithelioid cells. Positive controls were used for all markers as follows: HMB-45 and Melan-A – melanoma; RCC – renal cell carcinoma; S100 – schwannoma; desmin, smooth muscle actin, muscle-specific actin, and myogenin – GI smooth muscle; CD117 – GI mast cells and Cajal cells; cytokeratins – GI epithelial tissue; vimentin – GI mesenchymal tissue; and CD34 – tonsillar endothelial tissue. Slides stained omitting the primary antibody were used as negative controls.
On the basis of the above histopathological and immunohistochemical features, a definitive diagnosis of malignant uterine PEComa with late renal and pulmonary metastases was rendered. The patient elected not to have any adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Five follow-up CT scans of the brain, abdomen, chest and pelvis, and PET scans performed at 3-month intervals after surgery revealed no nodules. She is alive with no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis after 15 months of follow-up, and scheduled to have regular periodic CT scans of the abdomen, chest and pelvis at 3-month intervals as her tumor follow-up plan.