The patient was a 43-year-old man with CD for 13 years and was administered infliximab and azathioprine. The patient presented with recurring moderate-to-severe lower abdominal pain associated with belching, nausea, subjective fever, and sweats. Computed tomography (CT) as depicted in to showed irregular skip mural thickening of ileal loops with remarkable narrowing but no evidence of complete intestinal obstruction. They have also noted mild smudging of related fat planes and vascular engorgement. Furthermore, while there was no evidence of intraperitoneal free fluid, abscess, or fistula formation, there was mild bilateral sacroiliitis.
On colonoscopy, as shown in and , there was mild inflammation of the ascending colon and the cecum. Also noted were stenotic fibrostrictures of the ileum. Laboratory tests were performed, and significant results were as follows: Leukocyte count, 17.14 × 109/L; neutrophil count, 15.07 × 199/L; hemoglobin, 13.4 g/dL; C-reactive protein (CRP) 44.36 mg/L; albumin 31.8 g/L; total bilirubin, 7.1 mmol/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 24.9 U/L; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)-ratio, 0.95%; international normalized ratio (INR), 1.13; APTT 25.1 seconds; prothrombin time (PT), 13.3 seconds.
Due to the patient's history and holistic clinical picture, it was decided to perform an ileocecal resection and Kono-S anastomosis. A midline incision was created to start the procedure. The bowel was run with the diseased segments and ileal strictures identified. The stricture was found 7.5 cm at from the diseased segment. With margins of resection identified, the mesentery was divided using a tissue-sealing device. Division was done as close to the intestinal wall as possible, to preserve neovascularization of the mesentery. The resection points and the antimesenteric walls were marked before dividing the bowel transversely. A gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) stapler was placed perpendicular to the mesentery, 90° opposite to a conventional anastomosis. The bowel stumps were sewn together using absorbable sutures to create a “supporting column.” Next both sides of the supporting column were cut longitudinally on the antimesenteric wall, 1 cm from the support column. The longitudinal incisions were then sutured transversely using absorbable sutures completing the anastomosis. The steps of Kono-S-anastomosis is simplified in to .
The operative time was approximately 4 hours. Postoperative pathologic examination as shown in and revealed two ulcers, the larger ulcer measured 35 mm × 25 mm × 5 mm and the smaller one measured at 25 mm × 20 mm × 4 mm. The mucosa was edematous, with multiple ulcers, underlying fibrosis, and patchy chronic active inflammation. Six mesenteric lymph nodes were noted and there was no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on day 6 and prescribed infliximab and azathioprine. Colonoscopy was done 12 months post-Kono-S anastomosis and showed no evidence of stenosis.