A 14-year-old Caucasian girl presented to her local dentist with pain and edema in the left side of her jaw, with a maximum mouth opening of 31mm. Histology and a clinical examination resulted in a diagnosis of osteomyelitis and she was treated with antibiotics. She then underwent surgical decortication at a hospital department of dental surgery. Histology based on a biopsy showed new bone formation and chronic inflammation, and she was diagnosed with sclerotic osteomyelitis. There was no clinical improvement after the decortication, and over the next few years she experienced pain in the left side of her jaw and increasing edema, and the size of the left side of her jaw bone increased.
Our patient was admitted to our Department of Medicine at the age of 16 years. Her symptoms included pain in the left side of her jaw that scored a 4 on a visual analogue scale of 1 to 10. There was a visible difference in the two halves of our patient’s face, with increased soft tissue and edema on her left side. She had menarche at 13 years of age and regular menses. There was no change of pain during her menstrual cycle. Our patient had normal plasma C-reactive protein (<10mg/L), plasma calcium ion (1.23mmol/L) and plasma parathyroid hormone (1–84) (29ng/L), but low plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D (vitamin D; 23nmol/L; reference range >50nmol/L) and high plasma alkaline phosphatase (122U/L; reference range 35 to 105U/L). Her weight was 58.3kg, height 168.6cm and body mass index 20kg/m2. Her bone mineral density was measured and found to be normal (T-score of spine +0.1 and hip −0.3).
A diagnosis of bone disease was made based on bone scintigraphy , single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showing hot spots in the affected side of the jaw, and the above biochemistry. This led to a re-analysis of the bone biopsy by two specialists. The biopsy did not allow an assessment of any increased activity by osteoclasts and osteoblasts. Bone remodeling was disorganized, with persistence of woven bone and most likely diagnostic of non-infectious osteomyelitis.
Our patient was initially treated with vitamin D until the deficit had corrected. This had no effect on the disease. Thereafter, at age 17, she was treated with a single 5mg dose of intravenous zoledronic acid (Aclasta) that was repeated after 12 months. After 24 months of treatment, the left-side soft tissue and facial edema of our patient remained unchanged. However, her bone pain was significantly reduced six months after the first zoledronic acid treatment and had disappeared 24 months after treatment. The maximal opening of her mouth was unchanged after six months of treatment, but had increased from 31mm to 63mm after 24 months of treatment. Biochemistry at 24 months showed normalized plasma alkaline phosphatase (73U/L; reference range 35 to 105U/L) and unchanged C-reactive protein (<10mg/L; within the reference range). SPECT at 24 months of treatment showed less activity in the affected hot spot on the left side of her jaw (right-left ratio 1:16.4 at baseline and 1:4.4 after 24 months of treatment, Figure ). Control markers of bone turnover were suppressed: plasma CTX, 0.04μg/L (reference range: 0.11 to 0.74μg/L) and plasma osteocalcin, 2.4μg/L (reference range: 10.4 to 45.6μg/L). Bone alkaline phosphatase, was within the normal range at 11.6μg/L (reference range: 4.7 to 27.0μg/L).