A 26-year-old, gravid 2, para 1 woman at 11 4/7 weeks of gestation was admitted to a local hospital because of fever and chest pain with breathing difficulty that had persisted for 1 day. Blood tests showed 8.24 × 10e9/L white blood cells and 148.7 mmol/L C-reactive protein. An ultrasound revealed left pleural effusion and a single live foetus in the uterus. A prophylactic antibiotic was initiated with ampicillin and azithromycin. Then, thoracic drainage was performed. Adenosine deaminase levels from the hydrothorax were found to be elevated to 58.20 U/L, and a blood T-SPOT was positive. An acid-fast TB bacillus stain obtained from the hydrothorax was positive, suggesting tuberculous pleurisy.
The TB regimen for tuberculous pleurisy is as below.
A first-line anti-TB drug regimen was initiated (INH at 0.3 g/day, RIF at 0.45 g/day, and PZA at 0.5 g/tid) for 10 days. Her chest pain was relieved. However, the patient had nausea with a fever of 38.1 °C, and her alanine transaminase (ALT) level reached 58 IU/L. The anti-TB treatment was stopped for 3 days due to possible hepatic toxicity. She was transferred to another municipal hospital. Her highest body temperature reached 40.4 °C, and the attending physician reinitiated the same anti-TB drugs for another 6 days. The jaundice of the patient became increasingly more apparent and her ALT level increased to 1325 IU/L. Total bilirubin was 44.8 µmol/L, and the prothrombin time (PT) was 39 s. All anti-TB drugs were discontinued.
The patient was transferred to our hospital. The patient was vomiting, she presented with jaundice, dark urine, and fatigue with normal vital signs at admission. The obstetrical examination showed an enlarged uterus without uterine activity or bleeding. Her laboratory work-up showed progressive hepatic failure . In addition to some typical causes of hepatotoxicity, several pregnancy-related causes were excluded, such as acute fatty liver due to pregnancy, HELLP syndrome, and infection. The patient was denied contact with a known tuberculous patient and prohibited from consuming Chinese herbal medicines or alcohol. The patient married at 20 years old and had given birth to a healthy girl the previous year. Her personal and family medical history was unremarkable. According to the ultrasound scan, the liver bile ducts and hepatic vessels were normal. A multidisciplinary team of hepatologists, surgeons, physicians and obstetricians took care of the patient. An artificial liver support system (ALSS) was applied four times in combination with liver protection therapy for 10 days, but the patient’s clinical condition continued to decline. Her GCS score was 1 + 1 + 4 and her MELD score was 24. She was added to the super-urgent liver transplantation list. After graft allocation, an orthotopic LT was performed at 17 3/7 weeks of gestation. The operation time was 6 h 15 min, and the volume of blood loss was approximately 1000 mL with transfusions of 6 U of red blood cells. In our hospital, the second line anti-TB treatment before and after LT is initially amikacin at 0.4 g/day, levofloxacin at 0.4 g/day, and meropenem at 1 g q8 h by intravenous administration with the consent of the patient and her family members who were informed about the possible adverse drug effects on the foetus.
After LT, she received basiliximab and a methylprednisolone taper to induce immunosuppression; Mycophenolate sodium enteric-coated tablets, corticosteroids, tacrolimus for initial immunosuppression maintenance. The patient was extubated 18 h after surgery. On post-op day 5, a lung CT showed left pleural thickening and right pleural effusion . On post-op day 6, no obvious improvements in her laboratory tests were evident, a liver angiography showed that the blood vessels were functioning but with delayed right hepatic perfusion . Thus, low-molecular-weight heparin was used to anti-coagulate the blood. By post-op day 20, the patient’s allograft function had gradually improved. Then, the anti-TB regimen was changed to linezolid (LZD) at 0.6 g/day, levofloxacin at 500 mg/day, and pyridoxine at 100 mg/tid orally according to the recommendation of a TB expert. We modified the LZD according to blood concentrations. The histopathological examination showed submassive necrosis and cholestasis of the liver, which confirmed the diagnosis . The foetus was managed by daily monitoring of the foetal heart rate. On post-op day 29, foetal sonography revealed mild bilateral ventricle widening, with the left side approximately 1.0 cm wide and the right side approximately 1.1 cm wide. The patient and her family decided to discontinue the pregnancy, providing ethical informed consent. Labour was induced via double balloon dilation for 12 h. On post-op day 30, the aborted foetus was vaginally delivered with spontaneous expulsion of the placenta, and the foetus had a normal appearance and weighed 280 g. A mother with active pulmonary TB can transmit the infection to her foetus, but the placental pathology of this patient was negative. The ultrasound scan indicated a possible incomplete abortion. On post-op day 37, we performed uterine curettage. The patient was then discharged. She has continued her anti-TB treatment and immunosuppression drugs as an outpatient. At the 3-month post-op follow-up, a routine chest CT revealed some ground-glass opacity nodules that turned out to be pulmonary aspergillosis, which responded to voriconazole (0.2 g/q12h for 14days). At the 8 months follow-up, the patient showed good general condition without TB relapse or liver damage.