A 2-year-old male child presented to emergency department by his parents' car with hyperleukocytosis (leukocyte count was 320 x 109/L). Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The patient was admitted to pediatric intensive care unit due to his elevated leukocyte count and managed with hydration and allopurinol as tumor lysis precaution. The next day, the patient was started on chemotherapy. He received one dose of intravenous vincristine (1.5 mg/m2) and daunorubicin (25 mg/m2) on day 1, and started on dexamethasone. The patient's leukocyte count dropped to 5.2 x 109/L on day 3 of chemotherapy.
The next day (day 4 of chemotherapy), the patient developed abnormal movements, altered mental status, limb weakness and mutism. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain (MRI) showed multifocal infarctions involving left pons and inferomedial aspect of both cerebellar hemispheres causing mild tonsillar herniation (A and B) with restricted diffusion (C and D) and mild hydrocephalus but no leptomeningeal enhancement or leukemic infiltrates. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was normal and internal carotid and vertebrobasilar arteries were unremarkable for stenosis or obstruction, circle of Willis with no stenosis or aneurysmal dilatation (E). The patient was intubated, sedated and managed conservatively with dexamethasone. Asparaginase was not started due to the recent stroke. No anticoagulation was used due to high bleeding risk secondary to thrombocytopenia and to avoid hemorrhagic transformation of his stroke. Cytologic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid showed no blasts. Family history was negative for thrombophilia. Thrombophilia work up was negative including protein C, protein S, lupus anticoagulant, beta 2 glycoprotein and anticardiolipin antibodies. Prothrombin gene mutation and factor V Leiden gene mutations were both normal. Disease evaluation on day 8 of induction chemotherapy revealed no leukemic blasts in his peripheral blood. Flow cytometry analysis revealed negative minimal residual disease. Hyperviscosity secondary to hyperleukocytosis was considered to be the most likely explanation for his arterial stroke.
Five weeks later, the patient had significant improvement in overall neurologic status. BM evaluation showed no blasts and flow cytometry analysis for minimal residual disease was negative. Repeat brain MRI at 8 weeks from the insult showed interval resolution of previous infarcts . The patient is currently 6 months throughout treatment receiving maintenance chemotherapy and is compliant.