A white Caucasian 76-year-old woman visited our tertiary referral center with the complaint of decreased vision in both eyes. Clinically bilateral corneal guttae were evident with corneal bullae on her right eye (OD). She was diagnosed as having bilateral FECD subjectively worse on her OD and a DMEK was advised. Her preoperative visual acuity was 20/40 OD and left eye (OS).
After staining the donor endothelium with trypan blue 0.06% for 30 seconds, an 8.0-mm graft was dissected using the forceps’ technique according to Melles immediately prior to surgery.
After standard cataract extraction with a 2.75-mm limbal tunnel incision and two 1-mm incisions at 10 and 2 o’clock, viscoelastic was removed by extensive irrigation/aspiration. The descemetorhexis was performed under air using a price hook (Moria S.A. plc, 92160 Antony, France) and the diseased tissue removed with a stromal scraper.
A standard no-touch technique was applied to keep iatrogenic endothelial trauma to a minimum. The stained DMEK graft was inserted into the anterior chamber using a custom-made glass injector, oriented and adhered onto the recipient’s stroma using air pressurization.
Postoperatively the graft was attached, no further intervention was needed, and no immunological reactions were noted. A standard postoperative regimen was followed (moxifloxacin eye drops four times a day for 2 weeks and prednisolone eye drops four times a day with slow tapering). Her postoperative visual acuity was 20/50 with significant subjective improvement (uncorrected with persistent stromal haze).
After 18 months she returned with decreased vision and an allograft rejection. During the acute episode a pronounced, conjunctival injection, corneal edema, and neovascularizations were prominent. Superficial and deep neovascularizations beyond the 8.0-mm-descemetothexis were observed. The cornea itself had signs of a non-functioning graft with increased corneal thickness, extensive edema, and endothelial cell attenuation on specular microscopy. In addition, a stromal haze and retrocorneal membranous structures were visualized on slit-lamp microscopy .
Although local steroids were intensified, the retrocorneal membranes persisted and the graft eventually failed completely. The retrocorneal structures were thin, mesh-like, and whitish in color. A penetrating keratoplasty was advised and the removed tissue sent for histopathological evaluation. On morphological examination, the retrocorneal membranes had an undulating character with an adjacent bare DM with no to very scarce endothelial remnants.
The histopathological report stated an endothelial insufficiency secondary to a retrocorneal fibrous membrane and deep neovascularizations secondary to an allograft rejection .
From the posterior stroma a thin membrane of connective tissue/corneal stroma had grown on the back of the lamellar graft. This membrane continued to the right so that more than 50% of the graft was covered, eventually leading to endothelial decompensation. On histological examination, it was an “ordinary retrocorneal membrane,” as is often observed after penetrating keratoplasty. After DMEK, however, such a membrane has not previously been described histologically .