A 5-month-old male baby was reportedly found prone and not breathing by the parents, who immediately rushed the child to the hospital.
On arrival, the infant was pronounced dead as a result of acute lung failure and cardiopulmonary arrest.
No previous disease to report in anamnesis.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation had not been attempted.
Post-mortem examination: Four days after death, the autopsy took place. The baby measured 60 cm in length and weighed 8 kg. No gross external abnormalities were detected. Internally, all major organs were normally placed and well developed. The Letulle technique was used, removing bodily contents en masse. Gross examination of the respiratory tract proceeded along posterior median axis, exposing edematous mucosal linings coated with whitish stringy material . The lungs were purplish in colour. After en bloc fixation, they appeared dense and congested.
Histological examination: Thoracic and abdominal organs were sampled for routine processing and haematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining. Sections of lung tissue showed marked congestion of alveolar septal capillaries, which were also engorged with white blood cells, and widespread loss of airspace was conspicuous due to parenchymal collapse. In macrophages, there was copious cytoplasmic retention of amorphous material. The same substance, admixed with white blood cells, resided in alveolar spaces and bronchial openings. All other organs were histologically intact. Ultimately, sections of lung were subjected to IHC staining, targeting CD15, CD68, and alpha-lactalbumin. Intense CD15 positivity of alveolar content and septal capillaries was observed, whereas strong CD68 positivity was visible throughout lung parenchyma. Marked alpha-lactalbumin positivity of the intra-alveolar substance was also evident, and cytoplasmic staining of macrophages was especially prominent .
Total-body PMCT was subsequently performed. In the lungs, a hypodense material of indeterminate nature occupied the main airways bilaterally, from oropharynx to subsegmental bronchi; and ground-glass parenchymal changes were noted in areas .