A 22 year-old female with end stage lung disease secondary to CF underwent bilateral orthotopic lung transplant (BOLT) five months prior to enrollment in our study. The patient’s pre-transplant history was notable for airway colonization with mucoid Pseudomonas and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and Aspergillus in addition to severe chronic sinusitis. Her post-transplant history was remarkable for multidrug resistant pseudomonal infection of her surgical incision, C. tropicalis bloodstream infection, and mild acute cellular rejection (ACR stage A1Bx) although none of these were active issues at the time of presentation.
Six weeks prior to presentation to the emergency department (ED), the patient began having persistent low-grade fevers of 99-101 °F. She was treated for a possible urinary tract infection with a course of ciprofloxacin due to an abnormal urinalysis but urine culture only grew mixed flora without a predominant pathogen. She continued to have low grade fevers and was treated with a course of levofloxacin for nonspecific pulmonary complaints but without clear evidence of infection on chest CT. The patient returned to clinic two weeks prior to enrollment with continued low grade fevers and was started on tobramycin nasal washes for mild sinus symptoms. The trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole she used for Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis was changed to pentamidine due to concerns about drug-induced fever. She was scheduled for outpatient bronchoscopy to monitor for infection and rejection as a possible cause of her persistent fevers.
At the time of bronchoscopy, her fevers had completely resolved and she reported feeling well without new symptoms. The patient underwent the scheduled bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and biopsies. Approximately 12 h later, the patient began having fevers and chills at home, which led her to come to the ED. She demonstrated a temperature of 103.1 °F, heart rate of 124 beats/minute, white blood cell count of 13.8 × 109 cells/uL (Ref 3.2–9.8 × 109 cells/uL) and lactate of 4.2 mmol/L (Ref 0.5–2.2 mmol/L). All other vital signs and laboratory analysis were within normal limits . Two sets of blood cultures and urine culture showed no growth. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) quantitative PCR testing were negative. Cultures from the bronchoscopy performed one day prior to presentation grew rare mucoid Pseudomonas, rare MRSA, and Aspergillus. Respiratory viral pathogen PCR panel did not demonstrate viral pathogens on either routine clinical testing or supplemental study testing. Pathology did not show evidence of acute cellular rejection or infection. The patient was started on broad spectrum antibiotics with vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam at the time of enrollment. All of her presenting signs and symptoms, vital signs and laboratory testing were within normal limits within 24 h of admission. Biopsy from BAL and chest imaging did not reveal evidence of invasive infection. CT chest revealed ground glass opacities in the region where the BAL and biopsies were performed, interpreted by treating clinicians to be procedure related. The clinical team discharged the patient with two weeks of IV doxycycline, three weeks of IV piperacillin/tazobactam, and three months of voriconazole to cover bacterial and fungal elements noted on BAL, although no clear sources of infection were discovered.
At the time of her initial evaluation in the ED, the patient was identified for enrollment in a research study on host-based biomarkers for sepsis: The Austere environments Consortium for Enhanced Sepsis Outcomes (ACESO). As part of study-related activities, we obtained a blood sample for RNA analysis.
Metagenomic sequencing was performed on RNA isolated from peripheral blood collected at the time of this visit, which was five months after lung transplant. Blood samples were stabilized in two independent PAXgene Blood RNA tubes yielding Replicates 1 and 2, respectively; replicates were sequenced on different sequencing runs. EDGE Bioinformatics Software version 1.5 (P. E .) was used to classify the composition of microbes in the subject’s peripheral blood sample. All EDGE parameters for taxonomy tools were set to default as described (Philipson, 2017). Reads that were classified by BWA-mem mapping to RefSeq were used to calculate a sepsis indicating quantifier (SIQ) score as previously described . All non-human reads were assigned a taxonomic classification by three separate algorithms and five separate databases . Stenotrophomonas maltophilia was the dominant microbe detected by all tools screening against bacterial databases for Replicate 2. Results were reproduced in Replicate 1 except the MetaPh1An algorithm did not detect the pathogen in Replicate 1, which was due to different sequencing depths for the independent runs. When detected, the top hit for all tools agreed at the strain level for S. maltophilia strain D457. The SIQ score was calculated using classification results from the BWA-mem algorithm to ascertain the significance of each microbe as an etiological agent of bacteremia versus a false positive result. S. maltophilia taxonomy assignments resulted in the highest SIQ score for both replicates . Additionally, the pattern of SIQ scores indicates S. maltophilia was the singular dominant microbe in the patient’s blood samples.