An 86-year-old woman was transferred to the emergency and critical care center of Tokyo Metropolitan Bokutoh Hospital from a nearby general hospital with vital signs indicative of shock. She had been diagnosed with urinary tract infection. She had a medical history of chronic heart failure with pulmonary hypertension and was on home oxygen therapy for chronic respiratory failure.
On initial physical examination at arrival to our facility, she was conscious and oriented with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15 and a body temperature of 36.0 °C. On receiving a 0.3γ dose of noradrenaline, her blood pressure, pulse rate, and respiratory rate were maintained at 91/63 mmHg, 90 beats/min, and 24 breaths/min, respectively. Her oxygen saturation was 100% while receiving 10 L/min oxygen through a face mask. On physical examination, her left abdominal and left lumbar areas were tender. Her initial arterial blood gas analysis while on 10 L/min oxygen revealed a pH of 7.441, PaCO2 of 44.6 Â mmHg, PaO2 of 275.5 Â mmHg, HCO3− of 29.9 mmol/L, SaO2 of 93.1%, and lactate of 1.3 mmol/L.
The patient’s urine was negative for nitrite, white blood cells, and bacteria. Serum white blood cell count was 11,900/mm3, platelet count was 17.8 mm3, total bilirubin was 0.46 mg/dl, creatinine was 1.94 mg/dl, and C-reactive protein was 6.92 mg/dL. An unenhanced abdominal computed tomography scan revealed left hydronephrosis, adipose tissue opacity around the left kidney, and deviation of the left ureter to the sciatic foramen . She was diagnosed with obstructive pyelonephritis associated with septic shock due to a ureterosciatic hernia. She was admitted to our intensive care unit for further treatment with resuscitative fluids, vasopressors, and antibiotics. As the patient was hemodynamically unstable, placement of a ureteral stent was attempted for relieving the herniation-associated structural obstruction. On a retrograde ureteral catheter insertion, the ureteral incarceration reduced, and we were able to place a double-J ureteral stent in situ .
Initially, she required 0.35γ of noradrenaline and resuscitative extracellular fluids to maintain hemodynamic status. However, the day after the stent placement, she gradually recovered from septic shock and was tapered off vasopressors by day 4. Both blood and urine cultures revealed Escherichia coli with good antimicrobial sensitivity.
She continued to receive antibiotic treatment and underwent rehabilitation, with the goal of discharge and continued outpatient care. Unfortunately, she experienced exacerbation of respiratory failure and died on the 32nd day of hospitalization.