A 10-year-old girl from the Liangshan Prefecture in Sichuan Province, Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China, presented to Department of Cardiovascular Surgery of our hospital complaining of cardiac murmurs for 6 years.
The patient was diagnosed with DORV and advised to undergo surgical treatment 6 years ago. However, she did not have the surgery because of economic reasons. Her situation progressively worsened, and she was eventually admitted to our center.
The patient had a disease-free personal and family history.
The physical examination revealed delayed growth (height, 119 cm; weight, 19 kg), a blood pressure of 94/65 mmHg, a pulse rate of 98 beats per min, and a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min. Her baseline oxygen saturation was maintained at about 80%.
Blood tests showed an Hb level of 24.8 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) of 75%, mean corpuscular volume of 93.3 fL, mean corpuscular Hb of 31 pg, mean corpuscular Hb concentration of 33.2 g/dL, and a platelet count of 108 × 109 cells/L. The blood coagulation test was also abnormal, with a prothrombin time of 16.7 s, active partial thrombin time of 61.8 s, and an international normalized ratio of 1.51. Other blood tests showed no significant abnormalities.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a DORV, a ventricular septal defect (VSD) with a bidirectional shunt at the ventricular level, an atrial septal defect (ASD) with a right-to-left shunt at the atrial level, severe pulmonary valve stenosis, right ventricular hypertrophy, and transposition of the great arteries, but with normal left ventricular functions (ejection fraction, 66%) . Chest radiography demonstrated an abnormal cardiac morphology , while chest computed tomography showed a DORV with a VSD, an ASD, subvalvular pulmonary artery stenosis, and transposition of the great arteries . Right cardiac catheterization was performed after admission. Angiography showed normal distal pulmonary artery development, and multiple aorta pulmonary collateral arteries, two of which were successfully occluded during the procedure. The mean pulmonary artery pressure was measured as 13 mmHg.