A 37-year-old Iranian balochi male was shot with a firearm in the upper part of his right pelvis. He underwent primary closure on the same day and a suprapubic cystostomy was placed which was removed 3 weeks later. Ten months later, he developed urinary retention. He underwent retrograde urethrography and antegrade cystography, which showed a stricture measuring 5 cm in length. There was also a history of progressive pain in his right hip joint accompanied by low grade fever which started 2 months after the initial injury. A hip X-ray showed evidence of complicated septic arthritis . There was also accumulation of contrast around the right femoral head and the presence of a fistulous tract between the posterior urethra and his right hip . An axial computed tomography (CT) scan of his pelvis following retrograde urethrography confirmed a fistulous tract with destruction of the acetabular cavity and femoral head . Laboratory tests showed active urinary sediment and positive synovial fluid culture . For this, he underwent delayed reconstructive surgery for the urethral stricture using a bladder epithelial graft and urethral fistula via a transperineal approach. The patient was placed in an exaggerated lithotomy position. An inverted Y incision was made in the bulbospongiosus muscle and the muscle displaced laterally. The urethra was released and the edges of the fistula were freshened by passing a curette, followed by a gracilis muscle flap which was placed between the urethra and fistulous tract. The stricture was located by placing a Van Buren sound and semicircular sound in the anterior and posterior urethra via the cystotomy tract, respectively. The stricture length was approximately 5 cm. Stricturectomy was performed and the edges were sutured to a graft from a bladder mucosa. An intraluminal catheter was placed to serve as a stent and a suprapubic cystotomy was done to divert the urine.
The intraluminal catheter was removed 3 weeks after surgery while the suprapubic cystostomy was clamped and the patient was instructed to void. An antegrade urethrography was performed which showed a widely patent urethra with no evidence of contrast extravasation . After 1 week of normal voiding, the suprapubic catheter was removed. At the same time, the patient was under treatment with antibiotics for his septic arthritis. Four months later (14 months after the initial injury), he underwent non-cemented total hip arthroplasty. The patient was discharged on an antibiotic regimen and followed with post void imaging for 18 months. He was instructed to return for follow-up if he developed difficulty voiding or any reduction in urinary caliber. The patient was not symptomatic during routine follow-up. To our best knowledge, this kind of fistula following a gunshot injury has not been reported previously.