A 38-year-old woman with no medical history presented with progressive hemiparesis on the right side and total aphasia following a sudden headache. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed acute ischemic infarcts in the territory of the left anterior choroidal artery (AChA) . Digital subtraction angiography showed severe stenosis of the left supraclinoid ICA, restricting blood flow beyond the lesion . Cone-beam computed tomography revealed an intimal flap at the lesion site . The lesion extended to the proximal middle cerebral artery, including the ostium of the AChA, which was angiographically opacified . Based on her clinical course and angiographic findings, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic intracranial ICA dissection. As cerebral hypoperfusion due to severe stenosis was prominent and the infarcted lesion was small relative to the clinical symptoms, we decided to perform endovascular revascularization therapy under local anesthesia.
We planned to perform percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) using a balloon dilatation catheter, with or without stent placement, depending on the PTA results. The patient received oral antiplatelet drugs with loading doses (aspirin 200 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg), together with intravenous heparin during the procedure to maintain the activated coagulation time in the range of 250–300 s. An 8-Fr occlusion balloon-guiding catheter (Cello; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was navigated to the left cervical ICA using a transfemoral approach. After a Gateway Monorail 2.5 × 12 mm (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was introduced into the lesion, the balloon was inflated by increasing the pressure to 6 atm for approximately 60 s , which resulted in a complete resolution of the stenosis. The AChA, which was nearly occluded preoperatively, was unexpectedly recanalized after the procedure. Since the dissected lesion was not recoiled for more than 15 min , the procedure was ended without stent placement.
The patient’s ischemic symptoms improved dramatically soon after the procedure; however, her consciousness level suddenly declined 4 h later. An emergency computed tomography revealed a parenchymal hemorrhage in the left basal ganglia without any evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage [ and ], indicating that the hemorrhagic complication was not due to a perforation or rupture of the dissected ICA. We decided to perform surgical evacuation of the hematomas by craniotomy. Intraoperative findings revealed that the AChA, which was running deep in the hematoma cavity, was surrounded by a fibrin cap, indicating that the AChA was a hemorrhagic source. Pathological examination of the resected AChA revealed a disrupted internal elastic lamina, suggesting that the dissection of the ICA extended to the AChA [ and ]. The patient had persistent hemiparesis and motor aphasia postoperatively and was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital (modified Rankin Scale 4).