A 35-year-old man was admitted to the hospital in May 2019 with chief complaints of fatigue and cough for 15 days, and dyspnea for 5 days. The patient had developed a bout of cold 15 days back followed by general malaise and fatigue, and had felt better after self-medication. 5 days ago, he developed dyspnea with no obvious cause, accompanied by chest tightness, and could not lie supine at night. Dyspnea was mainly in the supine position, and was relieved in sitting and standing position; in addition, there was significant reduction in activity tolerance. He had a history of hyperhidrosis for more than 10 years, which had aggravated in the last 4 years.
4 years ago, he was found to have hyperglycemia and high blood pressure, both of which were not well controlled. His father died because of bone cancer at the age of 30 (details are unknown). On physical examination, he was conscious and well oriented with a blood pressure of 147/102 mmHg, and heart rate of 122 beats per minute. No rales were heard in bilateral lungs. The heart rhythm was regular and no abnormal murmur was heard in the precordium. Mild edema was found in lower extremities.
At admission his BNP level was 350.50 pg/mL. Blood gas analysis showed type I respiratory failure. His 24-h urinary VMA level was 331.5 µmol/L (reference range, 0–60.6 µmol/L). Serum levels of aldosterone, cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone (16:00), metanephrine and norepinephrine were normal, while adrenocorticotropic hormone (8:00) was high slightly. . Chest CT showed bilateral pleural effusion . Pathological examination of pleural effusion showed many atypical epithelioid cells, most of which were scattered while a few were arranged in clusters. Based on the characteristics of the cells, mesothelial hyperplasia or mesothelioma could not be excluded. CA125 level in pleural effusion was more than 600 U/mL and the CA125 level in blood was 401.03 U/mL (0–35 lU/mL). Renal ureteral ultrasound revealed a pelvic hypo-echoic mass . Enhanced CT of abdomen and pelvic cavity showed a mass in the posterior wall area of the bladder (size: 4.2 × 2.1 × 6.4 cm) consistent with a malignant tumor. Multiple enlarged retroperitoneal nodules (larger ones were approximately 59 × 34 mm in dimensions) were also detected, which were considered as metastasis . Enhanced CT of adrenal gland showed no abnormality. ECT suggested multiple bone metastases throughout the body .
After colon cleansing, the patient underwent transrectal ultrasound-guided pelvic mass puncture. Pathological examination of the puncture specimen showed small nest-like cell masses in the fibrous connective tissue, with moderate volume, abundant pink staining or dichromatic cytoplasm, slightly enlarged nucleus and rare nuclear mitoses . Immunohistochemical results showed CgA(+), SYN(+), S-100(+), GATA-3 (+), Ki-67 (approximately 10% +), and Inhibin-A (+). SMA, CD117, DOG, HMB45, TTF-1, CAM5.2, MELANA, AE1/AE3, WT1, D2-40, P63, and Calretinin were all negative. The findings were consistent with extra-adrenal paraganglioma .
After treatment with oxygen inhalation, anti-infection, diuresis, vasodilation, blood pressure control, and blood glucose control, pleural effusion was absorbed and the symptoms of heart failure showed significant improvement. He was advised chemotherapy using cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine. However, the patient refused chemotherapy and died six months after leaving the hospital.