A 21-year-old woman was admitted to the gynecology ward of Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital (MRRH) with primary amenorrhea, failure to conceive and painful coitus. All these had affected her marriage of three years to a point of divorce. On evaluation she was found to have a normal female genotype with well-developed secondary sexual characteristics. Pelvic examination revealed a vaginal dimple with no palpable uterus . An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed presence of both ovaries with a streak like or rudimentary uterus. The rest of the pelvic organs were normal. A preoperative diagnosis of vaginal agenesis due to MRKH syndrome was made. A decision to do surgery of creating a new vagina by using a modification of the McIndoe procedure was decided. Counseling of the patient about the surgical procedure with emphasis on the expectations was done. We explained to the patient that the procedure would improve her sexual life but would have no effect on her ability to conceive which she accepted and consented to the operation. Bowel preparation using soap enema plus overnight fasting was done prior to the operation. After induction of anesthesia, the patient was put in lithotomy position. The vulva was cleaned with antiseptic solution then draped. A urethral catheter of size 16 was inserted into the bladder. A transverse incision was made on the vaginal dimple to open into the rectovesical space. Bunt dissection was continued until a length of about 9 cm and 3 cm in width was achieved. A methylene blue dye was introduced into the bladder to make sure that there was no accidental bladder injury and a finger was also introduced into the rectum to ensure that there was no rectal injury.
Two full thickness hair free folds of skin measuring 12 by 6 cm in length and width were harvested from each lateral side of the abdominal wall starting from the anterior superior iliac spines. We used the lateral side instead of the skin over the inguinal ligament as done in the McIndoe method because our patient was too skinny for us to get adequate length and width of skin in this area. The folds were prepared by first immersing them in normal saline then the subcutaneous fat from each of the folds was removed using a sharp scissor. The assistant closed the sites from which the grafts were harvested using nylon 2/0 sutures interrupted vertical matrix as the lead surgeon prepared the grafts.
Unlike in the McIndoe method were the skin flaps are folded on a vaginal mold/form, here we used the cylinder of a 60 ml bladder syringe to act as a stent for the grafts in place of the vaginal form due to lack of the foam rubber to make a vaginal form . The tip of the syringe was cut off before it was inserted. The skin grafts were folded on the cylinder of the syringe with the epidermal sides lying on the cylinder using interrupted vicryl 3/0 sutures. The excess lengths of the grafts were trimmed off.
The graft with its cylinder was then carefully inserted into the newly created rectovesical space after achieving hemostasis. In order to secure the graft in place, the cylinder of the syringe was fixed to the labia majora on either side using a nylon 2/0 suture unlike in the McIndoe method where the labia are sutured in the midline. The cylinder stent was maintained for 10 days to keep the neo-vagina patent. The urethral catheter was also kept in for the same duration to ease the patient’s voiding and to also rest the bladder and urethra to guard against pressure necrosis that could be caused by the prolonged pressure on the urethra by the cylinder hence causing a fistula. A low residue diet was prescribed for the patient to prevent constipation and hard stools. She was also put on oral antibiotics and analgesia to prevent post surgical infection and pain for about 5 days. We used antibiotics, which were readily available in the hospital (Ceftriaxone and metronidazole). The labial stitches anchoring the cylinder stent were removed on the 10th postoperative day on the ward. She was examined and there was no any postoperative complication like infection, graft rejection or bleeding . A methylene blue test was done before the Foley catheter was removed to ensure that there was no fistula formed as a result of pressure necrosis by the cylinder on the urethra. After removal of the cylinder stent she was taught self-serial dilatation using a condom rolled on to a candle to prevent stricture of the neovagina. She was advised to do this self-dilatation for at least 3 months.
She was discharged with a patent neovagina and the skin donor sites had healed after removal of the skin sutures. She has been followed up every 2 months for the last 8 months after operation and on examination the neovagina is patent and she has resumed sexual intercourse, which has really improved her marital life.