A 31-year-old transgender man presented to the emergency department after an episode of central chest pain described as a constricting band radiating to his left arm, shoulder, and neck, associated with dyspnoea and paraesthesia of the hands. This came on at rest at 7 p.m. and self-terminated after 10 min but recurred intermittently. This acutely worsened at 3 a.m. the following morning. Emergency services were called at ∼4 a.m. and an ambulance brought him in to the hospital.
This transgender man (natal sex female) transitioned 4 years ago and had been on intramuscular Sustanon (testosterone esters) 125 mg every 3 weeks. Previous testosterone measurements were maintained within the male reference range. He had no other significant past medical history of note, including hypertension, dyslipidaemia, or diabetes. The patient never smoked, denied alcohol excess, and illicit substance misuse. There was no family history of heart disease.
His vital signs were unremarkable. Cardiovascular examination demonstrated normal heart sounds and non-elevated jugular venous pressure. Respiratory and abdominal examinations were normal. The patient was euvolaemic and his body mass index was 21.3 kg/m2.
The first pre-hospital 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) at 4:41 a.m. showed sinus rhythm with mild ST elevation inferiorly (leads II, III, and aVF) with ST depression laterally (leads I, aVL, and V5–V6) . A repeat 12-lead ECG at 6:48 a.m. in the emergency department demonstrated mild ST elevation in lead aVL, infero-posterior ST depression, and T-wave inversion . At the time, the tertiary cardiac referral centre for primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) based in a different hospital was contacted and had advised that an urgent transfer was not indicated because of the delayed presentation and pain-free status. PR, QRS, and QTc intervals and axis were within normal limits. Further ECGs in the subsequent hours and following day showed development of inferior Q-waves . Chest X-ray did not reveal any abnormality, and results of laboratory tests are shown in .
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a non-dilated left ventricle with mild left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) with hypokinesis of the basal to mid infero-septal and infero-lateral segments (ejection fraction 48%) (see , and ). The right ventricle was non-dilated with evidence of systolic dysfunction. The atria were not dilated, and there were no significant valvular abnormalities, shunts, or intracavity thrombus.
The working diagnosis was a delayed presentation inferior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (MI) vs. an inferior non–ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI). Initial treatments included dual-antiplatelet therapy loading with aspirin and ticagrelor and subcutaneous fondaparinux, in accordance with local acute coronary syndrome guidance.
Subsequent urgent inpatient coronary angiography confirmed a critical focal lesion in the mid right coronary artery (RCA) (, , ) and long tubular left main stem (LMS) plaque disease, with disease in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) and proximal circumflex (Cx) (see , and ). A pressure wire study showed fractional flow reserve values of 0.80 in the LMS-LAD and 0.82 in the LMS-Cx. Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed to the mid RCA with two drug-eluting stents with an excellent result . Medical management of residual LMS/LAD/Cx disease was recommended with a plan to consider surveillance for LMS disease via computed tomography coronary angiography.
He was discharged on Day 6, with medications including aspirin 75 mg once daily (lifelong), ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily (for 12 months), atorvastatin 80 mg once daily, ramipril 1.25 mg once daily, bisoprolol 2.5 mg twice daily, and glyceryl trinitrate spray sublingual as required. Follow-up was arranged in the post-MI LVSD pharmacist-led clinic and with cardiac rehabilitation. Testosterone therapy was continued for ongoing gender affirmation, as there is no guidance and insufficient evidence to support the discontinuation of gender-affirming hormone therapy or to switch to a transdermal formulation of this therapy. This patient moved to another country prior to follow-up, and therefore, these results cannot be provided.