The case involved a 56-year-old Caucasian man who was diagnosed with Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia at the age of 35 and previously treated with fludarabine and cyclophosphomide chemotherapy and plasma exchange. His past medical history also included mild psoriasis and being overweight (BMI 30). He did not have any regular medication. He provided a history of drinking 300 g of alcohol a week and had been a lifelong smoker of 10 cigarettes per day. Following a 10-year monitoring period when he was asymptomatic, his paraprotein levels increased significantly, and he had widespread lymphadenopathy on cross-sectional imaging. His bone marrow biopsy showed 20–30 % infiltration with low-grade lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and MYD88 disease with CXCR4 wild type.
He subsequently participated in phase 3 BeiGene randomised clinical trial comparing zanubrutinib with ibrutinib for relapsing WM, and he was randomised to the zanubrutinib arm. He took zanubrutinib 160 mg twice daily continuously in addition to aciclovir and co-trimoxazole as prophylaxis for opportunistic infections. His blood profile was monitored every 4 weeks, as shown in Fig. . After 28 months of treatment, he had an asymptomatic increase in transaminases and total bilirubin (TB), but he continued to take the drug. Following 8 weeks, he developed pale stools, dark urine, pruritis and jaundice and was admitted to the emergency department. He had no clinical signs of liver failure on examination, and his admission blood profile showed markedly elevated transaminases: ALT 2474 (upper limit of normal (ULN): 45 IU/L), AST 1257 (ULN: 35 IU/L), ALP 114 (ULN: 130 IU/L), TB 141 (ULN: 21 umol/L), PT 14 (ULN: 12 s). He was not exposed to any new medication or herbal remedies in the 6 months prior to the onset of his symptoms. Zanubrutinib was withheld as a suspected cause of liver injury, and a full liver screen was undertaken. His liver ultrasound showed a non-dilated biliary tree and a normal outline of the liver with echo-bright texture in keeping with fatty changes. His serological liver screen was negative, excluding other possible causes of liver injury; results are summarised in Table .
The liver injury was hepatocellular with an R-value of 63.2, and the updated RUCAM causality assessment score for zanubrutinib was 7, indicating “probable drug-induced liver injury” . He undertook a liver biopsy, which showed patchy necrosis, cholestasis and moderate to severe lobular and portal inflammation suggestive of a DILI without any evidence of alcohol-related liver disease, as shown in Figs. and . Due to his underlying lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, portal lymphoid infiltration was further characterised by immunohistochemistry, and the features were in line with a reactive lymphoid infiltrate, with no evidence of light chain restriction, as shown in Fig. .
Patient’s liver enzymes improved following drug cessation, and he was discharged after a 9-day long admission. His liver profile normalised 28 days after discharge , and his Zanubrutinib had been stopped permanently. He was started on bendamustine and rituximab due to the rise in his paraprotein levels, and his liver enzymes remained within normal range.