A 73-year-old Caucasian man with a history of smoking and alcohol abuse presented to the Emergency Department (ED) complaining of the abrupt onset of diplopia and mild slurred speech upon awakening at 8 a.m. He initially thought the symptoms were due to fatigue. Approximately 4 hours after his initial symptoms, he noted minimal right-sided weakness and came to the ED. On admission, the patient was awake and alert but was slightly confused and not oriented to place. Physical examination revealed mild dysarthria, a partial left 3rd cranial nerve palsy with mild abduction of the left eye and a 4 mm pupil that was minimally reactive, with a briskly reactive 2.5 mm pupil on the right. He had a mild right central 7th nerve palsy as well as mild right upper extremity weakness with a pronator drift. Sensory exam was intact to pin prick and touch. Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the head was obtained urgently and showed no hemorrhage or acute ischemic changes. An urgent computed tomography angiogram (CTA) was performed that demonstrated a tortuous tip of the basilar artery with "possible aneurysm vs. clot". A second incidental 5 mm aneurysm was seen in the Middle Cerebral Artery. As the patient was clinically stable, and it was unclear if there was a clot in an underlying basilar aneurysm, he was admitted to the neurological intensive care unit (ICU) for observation. He was placed on aspirin (325 mg) at that time.
Over the next 8 hours, the patient became progressively obtunded and developed a 2/5 quadriparesis, a complete left 3rd cranial nerve palsy, and complete right ophthalmoplegia. At approximately 14 hours after the onset of symptoms, he was urgently intubated for airway control, decreasing mental status and loss of gag reflex. He was brought to the endovascular suite for angiography and possible IA tPA for a progressive basilar thrombosis despite the known aneurysm. A near occlusion was found at the basilar tip after the origins of the superior cerebellar arteries, which was associated with a large, complex calcified basilar tip aneurysm, and which was likely a nidus for clot formation. From a position just proximal to the occlusion, 10 mg of tPA was infused in a pulsatile fashion over 30 minutes. Angiography showed improved flow through the distal basilar artery, with no change in the appearance of the calcified dilation of the basilar tip or extravasation of dye . The patient was sent to the ICU. Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) the following morning showed multiple tiny diffusion bright lesions in the cerebellum, thalamus and midbrain. This was consistent with an aborted basilar artery occlusion with evidence of ischemia throughout the entire basilar artery vascular territory . On examination the following afternoon, the patient had near complete resolution of symptoms, and was discharged to rehabilitation 9 days later with a mild right 6th cranial nerve palsy. He was discharged on Warfarin with an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2.0 as the ischemic changes seen on MRI were minimal, suggesting a low risk of hemorrhagic conversion. No dye extravasation was seen from the aneurysm. It was felt that he was at high risk for recurrent thrombosis. The plan was for non-emergency endovascular coiling of the basilar tip aneurysm 2 months after discharge; however, the patient was lost to follow-up and did not return to the vascular clinic.