A 75-year-old Chinese woman presented with a six-month change in bowel habits for unknown reasons. The symptoms included that the feces appeared thin and dry, and occasionally the feces seemed black, with abdominal pain. However, the patient reported no diarrhea, mucous bloody stool, chills, fever, chest distress, palpitation, or tenesmus. Properly treated at the local hospital, the patient felt somewhat relieved, but she had not received other examination. And we researchers failed to know the details of the treatment. In the First Hospital Affiliated of Guangxi Medical University, colonoscopy showed that rectal mucosal prolapse was examined with characteristics awaiting to be identified, which was pathologically considered as moderate chronic inflammation in rectal mucosa with polypoid hyperplasia, but with no cancer cells detected. The patient was admitted to the hospital for rectal mass. Since the onset of the disease, the patient had low spirits, sleep deprivation, loss of appetite, abnormal feces as mentioned above, weight loss (5 kg less than before), but no abnormalities were observed in the urine. The computed tomography (CT)-scan of pelvic cavity revealed that rectal cancer, together with sigmoid colon adenocarcinoma, invaded the lower part of the right-side ureter, and ureterectasis was also observed on the right .
The patient was further tests after hospitalization. The physical examination showed T: 37.7℃, P: 94 beats/min, R: 20/min, BP: 169/79 mmHg and without superficial lymphadenopathy. The laboratory test results showed hemoglobin 91.30 g/L, albumin 32.7 g/L and creatinine 95 μmol/L. Besides, her blood electrolyte values, tumor marker routine test, vaginal secretion routine test, coagulation function test, fasting plasma glucose test, urine routine test and stool routine test were within normal limits. Chest X-ray showed no abnormality. After the examination, the exploratory laparotomy was performed with the patient’s consent. The laparotomy disclosed that the right ovary enlarged by the size of 5.0 cm × 3.0 cm, And adhered to the right fallopian tube and the pelvic wall. The tumor was seen to invade the ileum that was approximately 30.0 cm away from the ileocecal region, the intestine seromuscular layer in the mid-rectum, the right-side mesentery, and the site that was 10.0 cm below the lower ureter on the same side. The whole pelvic wall thickened and hardened. The uterus contracted, and no obvious abnormalities were seen in the appearance of the left adnexa. Also laparotomy showed no observable nodules in the liver, spleen, kidneys, mesenteric root of small intestine, greater omentum, or abdominal wall. In the operation, the patient underwent the excision of part of the small intestine, adnexa on both sides, and the uterus. The removed tissues were then pathologically examined–fixed by 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded by paraffin, serially sectioned into 4 μm thick, and treated with hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining.
The gross examination of the uterus and the adnexa: Frozen section procedure was carried out for the right ovary in the operation. The right ovary enlarged, with the size measuring 5.0 cm × 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm. The ovary surface appeared smooth, and the section seemed grey/white, solid, and the texture was moderately soft. No abnormalities were detected in the right adnexa. The uterus measured 7.0 cm × 6.0 cm × 3.0 cm. The perimetrium looked smooth, and two grey-white nodules (0.60 cm – 1.0 cm in diameter) were observed in the serous membranes on the posterior surface of the uterus, with undistinguishable border. The uterus section appeared grey/white, solid and the texture was moderately soft. The endometrium was rather thin, with the thickness of muscularis ranging between 1.5 cm and 1.8 cm. No abnormalities were seen in the section of the uterine wall. Also size and morphology of the left adnexa showed no abnormalities . The microscopic examination of the uterus and the adnexa: It was observed that the right ovary structure was damaged, in which the tumor cells diffused and infiltrated other parts. The tumor cells, in the oval shape, seemed medium-sized or larger than the average size. There was less cytoplasm, and strong nuclear staining. The nucleus appeared circular shape, with nucleolus and nuclear division easily visible . The IHC results of the tumor tissues in the right ovary: The positive expression was detected in CD20, CD79α, PAX-5, CD 43, Bcl-6, and MUM-1. The positivity rate of P53 and Ki-67 was 20% and over 80% respectively. In contrast, negative expression was observed in CD10, Bcl-2, CD21, CD2, CD3, CD5, CD7, CD30, CD117, CD56, MP0, ER, PR, inhibin, and EBERs in situ hybridization .
The gross examination of the small intestine: A lump, which measured approximately 1.50 cm × 1.50 cm × 1.0 cm, could be observed on the intestinal wall that was 7.0 cm away from the incisal margin at one end of the intestinal canal (approximately 15.0 cm long). The lump had somewhat indistinguishable border, spreading from the serous membrane, muscular layer of the intestinal wall to the intestinal wall. Also intestinal mucosa on which the lump was located seemed undamaged . The microscopic examination of the small intestine: The diffusion and infiltration of the tumor cells were examined on the entire small intestine wall, but the epithelial tissues of the mucosa were complete on the intestine wall (see red arrows). The tumor cells were medium in size, and oval in shape. The nuclear staining seemed dark, and in the staining the nuclei was noticeable and the nuclear division was obviously seen . The IHC results of the lump on the intestine wall: The positive IHC results could be seen in CD20, CD79α, PAX-5, CD43, Bcl-6, and MUM-1; P53 had positivity rate of 15%, while Ki-67 had relatively higher positivity rate (> 80%, +). However, negative results were shown in CD10, Bcl-2, CD21, CD2, CD3, CD5, CD7, CD30, CD117, CD56, MP0, ER, PR, inhibin, and EBERs in situ hybridization .
In this case, the tumor mainly invaded the entire right ovary tissues, serous membranes on the posterior surface of the uterus, and the small intestine wall. Concluding from the pathological examination results of the uterus, adnexa and small intestine, we researchers determined that the tumor in this case was aggressive malignant B-cell lymphoma. Based on the Hans classification and IHC results (CD10, BCL-6, and MUM-1), the final pathological diagnosis of the case was DLBCL (germinal center B-cell-like subtype). The After the surgery, the patient underwent CT reexamination of the whole abdomen, chest and pelvic cavity. The CT scan showed a small amount of ascites and pulmonary inflammation. The patient’s pulmonary infection improved after expectant treatment. Furthermore, the laboratory test results showed no abnormalities.