A 31-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room a year ago with sudden chest pain for 3 h. He had a problematic smoking past. Acute myocardial infarction of inferior and posterior wall was revealed by the electrocardiogram. Blood tests showed cardiovascular troponin increased to 0.12 ng/ml and myoglobin reached 259 ng/ml. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) indicated mild regurgitation of the mitral valve and aortic valve and no abnormality was discovered in MAIVF. The patient was diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction. Emergency coronary angiography was performed 2 h after being hospitalized and revealed that the posterior descending branch was blocked. The patient received PTCA as an emergency, and the symptoms were relieved after the procedure (Video. 1–2). Before discharge, TTE revealed no abnormalities in MAIVF.
The patient returned to our hospital a year later for a routine reexamination, and no complaint of special discomfort was mentioned. TTE demonstrated a pseudoaneurysm between the aortic root and the left atrium, with a range of 34 × 19 mm , and contrast-enhanced CT further verified a pseudoaneurysm at the root of the ascending aorta . Due to the risk of rupture of the pseudoaneurysm, the patient underwent surgery. During operation, the patient was monitored by TEE. The three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography (3D-TEE) discovered a small orifice of pseudoaneurysm with a diameter of 3 mm. The orifice was located between the left coronary valve, non-coronary valve and anterior mitral valve . The range of pseudoaneurysm measured by TEE was approximately 40 × 30 mm. Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed the blood flow into the pseudoaneurysm during systole and the blood flow back into the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) during diastole . During the operation, a pseudoaneurysm was observed beneath the left atrium on the right side of the aortic root, with a range of 40 × 30 mm . An irregular orifice with a maximum diameter of approximately 5 mm was observed below the junction between the left coronary artery valve and the non-coronary artery valve. After repairing the orifice of pseudoaneurysm, intraoperative TEE revealed that the orifice was closed and the arterial blood flow signals disappeared at the origin.