A 2-year-old female from Palestine, part of a twin for a non-consanguineous couple, presented to the hospital with a history of recurrent episodes of convulsions. The first episode occurred at 13 months old and began with a staring gaze, followed by right-sided tonic-clonic convulsions that progressed to involve her entire body; the convulsion lasted for 1 min, followed by a post-ictal period that persisted for 15 min. Initial responsiveness to Tegretol was noted, but the convulsions recurred at the age of 16 months, affecting her left side. Subsequent attacks at 20 and 24 months old displayed right-sided convulsions with mouth deviation to the right side and started to cause drooling from the mouth. Additionally, the mother noticed that her baby started to lose her previously acquired developmental milestones; she couldn’t walk or sit without support and had upper and lower limb weakness with limited social interaction. However, there was no history of head trauma, fever, vomiting, headache, or ear discharge. There was no significant family history of autoimmune disease, early stroke, or ischaemic heart disease.
The physical examination revealed central and peripheral hypotonia, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes bilaterally, and a positive Babinski sign bilaterally. Laboratory investigations included a complete metabolic panel, a complete blood count, arterial blood gases, blood cultures, a thrombophilia genetic study, and a hypercoagulability workup showed normal results. Moreover, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (C-ANCA), anticardiolipin IgG, antinuclear antibody (ANA), homocysteine, plasma amino acids, urine organic acids, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amino acids all resulted in negative results. The echocardiogram, electrocardiogram (ECG), and chest X-ray were unremarkable. Electroencephalogram (EEG), lumbar puncture with CSF analysis, ophthalmic exam, and hearing examination showed no abnormalities.
The brain computed tomography (CT) was nonspecific. Brain MRI, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) revealed complete occlusion of the terminal supraclinoid portions of both internal carotid arteries (ICA), marked obliteration of anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries, and diffuse bilateral collateral formation. Meningeal hyperintensity and areas of cortical encephalomalacia suggested chronic ischaemic insults, consistent with MMD (Suzuki stage 4). MRA and MRV indicated multiple vascular narrowing, some with a beaded appearance .
Endovascular evaluation by cerebral catheterization was done for a definitive diagnosis and possible revascularization. Under general anaesthesia, cerebral catheterization revealed supraclinoid stenosis of the ICA with collaterals from the ipsilateral ophthalmic artery (puffy smoke). Moyamoya vessels were noted in the posterior circulation and bilateral vertebral arteries . The patient was discharged on carbamazepin and Aspirin for outpatient follow-up. Revascularization surgery was planned.