A 32-year-old, 70 kg, 155 cm female presented with a one-month history of fever, which she treated like a common cold. Her fever did not improve. Further examination showed elevated blood and urinary noradrenaline levels. We additionally noted increased uptake of iodine-123-metaiodobenzylguanidine in the left adrenal glands, leading to the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
On admission, she presented with a headache and general malaise. Her blood pressure (BP) was 126/76 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 113 beats/min, and body temperature (BT) was 38.5 °C. Chest radiography results were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed no left ventricular hypertrophy. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 70-mm left adrenal gland mass. Laboratory tests revealed a high inflammatory state with the following results: a white blood cell count of 12,400/μl; C-reactive protein (CRP) levels at 27.9 mg/dL; anemia, coagulopathy, and malnutrition, with hemoglobin at 8.9 g/dl; a prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) of 1.49; and albumin levels at 2.1 g/dL. For catecholamines, there was a significant increase in serum noradrenaline (2.5 ng/ml [normal range 0.15–0.57]). Serum adrenaline (< 0.01 ng/mL) and dopamine levels (0.04 ng/mL) were almost normal. In addition, serum IL-6 (78.8 pg/mL [normal range < 4]) was elevated, while IL-1β (10 pg/mL) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α; 1.17 pg/mL) levels were normal, which led us to diagnose an IL-6-producing pheochromocytoma. Laparoscopic left adrenal tumor resection was subsequently scheduled .
After admission, oral loxoprofen administration was started to control systemic inflammation. We also initiated oral doxazosin, a common preoperative treatment for pheochromocytoma. The surgery was scheduled to take place after approximately 2 months to allow for incremental increases of the doxazosin dose. However, her persistently high inflammatory markers, anemia, malnutrition, and coagulopathy, led us to prepone her surgery. The dosage of doxazosin peaked at 12 mg. We did not reach 16 mg, as initially planned, because there were only 17 days before surgery. Anemia due to continued systemic inflammation was also prominent, and two units of packed red blood cells were administered daily starting 5 days before surgery .
Her BP was 111/68 mmHg on the day of surgery, HR was 95 beats/min, without arrhythmias, and BT was 37.0 °C. General anesthesia was performed, and an erector spinae plane block was used for perioperative analgesia. Epidural anesthesia was not performed because of coagulopathy. In addition to the standard monitors, an arterial catheter was placed in the radial artery. General anesthesia was induced with target-controlled infusion (TCI) of an effect-site propofol concentration set at 4.0 μg/ml, remifentanil 0.4 μg/kg/min, and rocuronium 50 mg. There were no hemodynamic fluctuations after tracheal intubation. Her BP surged to 146/79 mmHg when she was placed in a head-down position to insert the central venous catheter into the right internal jugular vein. Consequently, phentolamine (2 mg) was immediately administered. Flurbiprofen (50 mg) was administered before the start of surgery. After the start of pneumoperitoneum, the infusion rate of remifentanil was increased to 1.0–1.7 μg/kg/min, with 1 mg of phentolamine administered as appropriate. Meanwhile, her systolic BP was kept around 140 mmHg. During direct tumor manipulation, an increase in BP of 150/70 mmHg and tachycardia of 115 beats/min were observed, which required a bolus infusion of phentolamine (2 mg) for a total of 12 mg. Beta-blocker administration and continuous infusion of phentolamine were not necessary to control hemodynamic fluctuations. After tumor removal, the surgery was completed with a continuous infusion of noradrenaline 0.05–0.1 μg/kg/min. During the operation, the patient’s BT rose to 38.2 °C without a warmer and quickly dropped to 37 °C postoperatively. The duration of surgery and anesthesia time were 232 min and 361 min, respectively, with a volume of infusion of 2,200 mL, a blood loss of 50 mL, and a urine output of 1,450 mL .
Postoperatively, she was transferred to the intensive care unit, and a continuous infusion of 0.05 μg/kg/min noradrenaline was administered. This was eventually discontinued, and the patient moved to the general ward the next day. On postoperative day (POD) 1, chest radiography was normal without any findings of vascular hyperpermeability. Laboratory tests showed improved inflammatory markers. Further, her noradrenaline and IL-6 levels decreased, which normalized by POD7 . The patient was discharged with an uneventful postoperative course on POD8.