A 26-year-old, 73-kg primigravida woman presented at 28th week of gestation being referred from a rural clinic to our university referral hospital, complaining of worsening respiratory distress with primary suspicion of pulmonary embolism.
Significant lower extremity edema and severe orthopnea with pulmonary rales were appreciated at the physical examination.
The echocardiographic investigations showed bicuspid aortic valve (BAV), thickened and calcified leaflets, pressure gradient of aortic valve of 88/53 mm Hg (peak/mean), severe AS with aortic valve area (AVA) of 0.75 cm2, ejection fraction (EF) of 30%, concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), and up to moderate functional mitral regurgitation (MR).
After discussion and consultation with the cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons, and obstetricians, medical treatment for patient's CHF and watchful waiting till maturation of the fetus was planned. The patient was admitted at intensive care unit (ICU), and anti-CHF therapy was started with inotrope and furosemide, with meticulous monitoring of cardiovascular status, and fetus surveillance.
During ICU admission, patient's symptoms were relieved dramatically and elective cesarean section (CS) was planned for the delivery of the fetus at 30th week of gestation. As the patient did not offer consent for simultaneous CS and valve replacement, decision was taken to proceed to cesarean section under general anesthesia with attendance of the cardiac surgical team to intervene if required.
During general anesthesia, hemodynamic parameters were planned to be sustained close to the baseline with balance of vasoactive and anesthetic agents; and emergency institution of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was possible if hemodynamic deteriorates or cardiac arrest happened.
Immediately after general anesthesia, the consultant obstetrician proceeded to deliver the baby by lower segment CS (LSCS). Delivery of a healthy female infant with the weight of 2750 g was achieved in 3 minutes. APGAR score at 1st and 5th minutes was 8 and 9, respectively. To facilitate uterine muscle contraction, uterine massage, and infusion of oxytocin (10 units/hour) along with intramuscular injection of prostaglandin (250 µg) were applied.
The patient's recovery was uneventful and she was successfully extubated at operating room, then transferred to ICU for hemodynamic monitoring. Two weeks later, along with worsening of patient's symptoms of CHF, she finally consented to aortic valve replacement (AVR).
After establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass, AVR with mechanical St Jude No. 21 combined with septal myectomy was performed. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed peak and mean gradients of 25 and 16 mmHg, respectively, trace MR, and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45%. The patient was discharged to home on her 5th day of valve replacement with acceptable condition. Clinical and echocardiographic assessment during one-year follow-up period was satisfactory.