An eight-year-old African boy, previously well, was referred to our unit on account of nephrotic syndrome. He had presented to our emergency department a day before with ascites, facial swelling and reduced urinary output in the preceding two weeks. After two days of hospitalization, he became deeply jaundiced with worsening of the generalized oedema. A day later, he had three brief episodes of generalized clonic seizures over a two-hour period and became increasingly drowsy. The seizures were aborted with diazepam and he remained seizure-free after a short course of phenobarbitone. A physical examination did not support a diagnosis of meningitis and other aspects of a neurological examination were normal. He had ascites and non-tender hepatomegaly; his spleen was not palpable. A review of his history did not reveal chronic or recent use of orthodox or non-orthodox medicines. In addition, there was no previous or current history of similar illness in his four siblings and close contacts. Both his parents were Africans, of the Igbo ethnic group from southeast Nigeria, but were not known to be blood relatives.
In the second week of hospitalization, our patient developed tremors of his hands while at rest and when reaching for objects. He became clumsy when performing chores involving the use of his hands. Subsequently, he was observed to be stiff globally, with his trunk arched forward and fisting of the hands (left more than right). His gait was noticed to be shuffling with a tendency to fall forward when trying to walk. At the same time, his face retained a wry smile and his speech became slurred and dysarthric. He frequently complained of generalized body pain and derived some relief when his clenched fist was helped open. He was also noticed to be emotionally labile; he cried inconsolably when asking for food. He was reviewed by a paediatric neurologist who pointed out the possible presence of Kayser-Fleischer (KF) rings on both eyes. A slit-lamp examination by an ophthalmologist promptly revealed the presence of both KF rings and sunflower cataracts.
Initial investigations showed proteinuria of grade 1+ and a spot urine protein to creatinine ratio of 1. Table shows the results for his liver function test during hospitalization. His serum electrolytes, urea and creatinine were within the normal reference range. An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed ascites and hepatomegaly with increased liver parenchymal echoes but no dilated intra- or extrahepatic ducts. However, his gall bladder was enlarged with a thickened wall and sludge within. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses were negative. A serum sample for caeruloplasmin level was returned as having 5mg/dL of caeruloplasmin, using an immunoturbidimetric method (reference range: 25 to 45mg/dL).
Using the scoring system proposed by the 8th International Meeting of Wilson Disease and Menkes Disease , our patient achieved a score of 6 (compatible neuropsychiatric features = 2; K-F rings = 2 and caeruloplasmin level of 5mg/dL =2) and a diagnosis of WD was made.
His diet was restricted to high calorie, low protein and low copper meals. Vitamins, including vitamin K, and lactulose and neomycin were commenced. Control of the generalized oedema was achieved with furosemide and spironolactone. Long-term zinc and pyridoxine therapy was started. The use of trihexyphenidyl helped achieved some control of the spasticity and rigidity, sufficient to allow resumption of basic activities such as walking and holding objects. His liver dysfunction also improved, with near resolution of the international normalized ratio (from 12 to 4).