A 19-year-old male white Cuban patient was brought to medical consultation by his mother, complaining of progressive rigidity of head and arms, resting tremor of hands, severe speech problems, and severe swallowing difficulties,that started around 4 months before. His mother also referred aggressiveness and sleep problems. Regarding personal history, the mother referred that the patient had appropriate neurologic development until 5 years old, then began to present progressive gait alterations with transitory extension postures of lower limbs, which first appeared with walking, then with motion intention, until becoming permanent. Several months later, he started presenting dystonic postures described as irreducible extension of head, lower limbs, and wrists, combined with inexpressive face. In the last year, functionality had been seriously affected, to the point of complete reliance for basic and instrumental daily activities. From that moment on, he has been confined to a wheelchair and bed. The patient had been never properly diagnosed because his family lived in a poor village in the mountains, and through the years his clinical state remained relatively constant, until about 4 months before, when he started to show worsening symptoms and her mother decided to take him to the provincial hospital, from where his case was referred to our service.
On examination, he showed incoherence in the interview, with dysarthria, low-tone voice, behavioral instability, and hetero-aggressiveness. He only tolerates liquid food, showing dysphagia to solids. Cognitive examinations showed average results, without progressive intellectual decline. Direct psychological interview/exploration showed impulsive behavior, impatience, decreased perception of reality, fear of social contacts, plane moral control, and moderate anxiety. When evaluating praxis through neuropsychological tests, the patient was capable of completing simple orders but could not achieve those with greater complexity, related to memory and motor control.
On neurological examination, the patient showed inexpressive but symmetric face, with limited upper ocular movements, with tongue contracted in dystonic posture. When the patient tried to move, he mobilized his four extremities, showing dystonic posture in extension of the limbs and head. Both muscular and tendinous reflexes appeared diminished. Sole reflexes were normal. Neuroconductive and electromyographic investigations showed no alterations. A diagnosis of generalized dystonia was considered due to the alterations of the neurologic development, and secondary causes were therefore studied.
Routine laboratory evaluation including ceruloplasmin, ferritin, iron, copper, lipid profile, and antinuclear antibodies were within normal ranges. Peripheral blood film did not reveal acanthocytes. Doppler sonography of brain parenchyma was normal, and fundus examination was unremarkable, without Kayser–Fleischer ring on slit-lamp test. Unfortunately, analysis to detect PANK2 gene mutation could not be done in our country. Both lactic acid (6.6 mg/dl, normal range 4.5–19.8 mg/dl) and serum cooper (100 µg/dl, normal range 80–156 µg/dl) were within normal limits.
Cerebral MRI showed bilateral low-density globus pallidus with soft central high-intensity zones in T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences. The observations were also present in ferromagnetic susceptibility sequences, matching with the “eye of the tiger” sign, compatible with iron deposits and globus pallidus damage .
Wilson’s disease, neuroacanthocytosis, and the juvenile form of Huntington disease were ruled out. In addition, despite the lack of genetic tests, all subtypes of NBIA listed in Table were also considered.
Diagnosis of severe type 1 NBIA, based on neurological symptoms/signs as well as MRI findings, was made. Both symptomatic treatment and physiotherapy were started, with cabergoline (1 mg) one tablet each 5 days, trihexyphenidyl (5 mg) one tablet each 8 hours, baclofen (10 mg) one tablet each 8 hours, and intramuscular botulinum neurotoxin (100 U/4 ml) 25 U in the latissimus dorsi, trapezius, sternocleidomastoid, and brachial triceps muscles, bilaterally, each 3 months. Besides, the patient underwent two daily home sessions of passive stretching, weight bearing, and muscle massaging performed by his mentors supervised by local healthcare givers. In addition, a healthy diet based on fruit and vegetable formulae strengthened with meat was prescribed. At 3 months reevaluation, the patient showed great improvement of motor function with decreased dystonic symptoms, although language, cognition, and functional independence showed no improvement.