A 79-year-old man with combined FVIII and FXI deficiency presented with dyspnea and was admitted to the cardiac care unit for heart failure treatment in 2021. The lower leg edema was observed, and a systolic murmur was audible on the aortic and neoaortic area. X-ray revealed lung consolidation and bilateral pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed low-flow low-gradient AS with a decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% and mean aortic pressure gradient of 21 mmHg . Blood examination revealed decreased platelet counts (69 000/μL), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) (100 s), and normal fibrinogen value (359 mg/dL) and prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (0.85). FVIII and FXI activity (FVIII:C and FXI:C, respectively) values were markedly decreased (42.0% and 1.3%, respectively). The patient had multiple comorbidities: diabetes (hemoglobin A1c of 7.6%), diabetic end-stage renal disease treated with hemodialysis since 2017, liver cirrhosis with Child–Pugh score of A caused by hepatitis C virus, and hepatectomy-treated hepatic cancer in 2013. The patient received hemodialysis without anticoagulation three times per week and was always supplemented with 1500 IU of a third-generation recombinant FVIII concentrate (Advate®, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) after hemodialysis. Coronary angiography revealed significant triple-vessel disease . Cardiac computed tomography (CT) revealed tricuspid aortic valve with calcium scoring of 2689 Agatston unit and traced AVA of 0.58 cm2 . The patient’s predicted risk of mortality for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) with surgical aortic valve replacement of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons and EUROSCORE II were high at 22% and 19%, respectively. Considering the high surgical risk, the authors’ heart team developed a two-stage treatment strategy: the first with off-pump CABG, and second with transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI). TAVI was planned if an AS symptom was significant after CABG.
A perioperative hemostatic protocol by the heart team was intended to replenish a third-generation recombinant FVIII concentrate (Advate®, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) . The target preoperative and perioperative FVIII:C values were set at 80–100% and 60–80%, respectively, whereas the target perioperative FXI:C value was set at 30–45%.
Under general anesthesia, the saphenous vein (SV) was endoscopically harvested using the Vasoview Hemopro 2 device (Getinge, Gothenburg, Sweden). After the median sternotomy, the bilateral internal thoracic arteries (ITA) were harvested using a skeletonized technique. First, the in situ left ITA was individually anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery. Then, the in situ right ITA was extended by the SV in an end-side fashion anastomosis. The SV was sequentially anastomosed to the posterolateral and posterodescending arteries with the elevation of the left ventricular (LV) apex. The patient’s hemodynamics was stable during off-pump CABG despite having low-flow low-gradient AS. The activated clotting time, APTT, fibrinogen, platelet, FVIII:C, FXI:C, and clot viscoelasticity by TEGR6 s (Haemonetics Corporation, Boston, MA, USA) were measured to evaluate the hemostatic capability . Continuous FFP transfusion was performed during the surgery, resulting in the total transfusion volume of 1440 mL and the FXI:C value of 44% at the end of surgery. Advate® was continuously infused between heparin and protamine administration at the scheduled infusion rate, resulting in the FVIII:C value of 67% at the end of the surgery. Platelet concentrate transfusion of 600 mL was performed after protamine administration. TEGR6 s revealed quantitative and qualitative deficiency of coagulation factors and platelets before median sternotomy, and canceled heparin effect and sufficient platelet and fibrinogen function after protamine administration. The absence of bleeding tendency was observed during the surgery. The total transfusion volume of red blood cell concentrate was 1400 mL to maintain a blood hemoglobin concentration >9.0 g/dL. The intraoperative blood loss was 500 mL. The patient was extubated 5 h after the surgery, and hemodialysis treatment without anticoagulation was resumed on POD 2. Advate® of 2000 IU and FFP of 480 mL were administered every day until POD 7. Cardiac CT performed 14 days postoperatively revealed excellent patent grafts . The patient did not receive the antiplatelet drug after surgery. After discharge, the patient received same treatment of Advate® before surgery. Twenty months postoperatively, TTE revealed LVEF of 65% and mean transaortic pressure gradient of 31 mmHg continues leads a normal life without any heart failure symptoms 21 months postoperatively.