A 79-year-old man presented with dyspnea and hypoxemia. He had rheumatoid arthritis and received immunosuppressants for several years. Before admission, he had a cough and fever for 3 days. Arterial blood oxygen saturation measured by pulseoxymeter (SpO2) was 94% with standard oxygen therapy, and a chest radiograph showed bilateral ground glass opacity. Because oxygenation became increasingly worse, he was transferred to the intensive care unit. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (BiPAP Vision; Fuji-Respironics, Tokyo, Japan) was started immediately. We performed bronchoalveolar lavage, and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia was confirmed by laboratory testing. Intravenous administration of a combination of trimethoprim (15 mg/kg) and sulfamethoxazole (75 mg/kg) plus methylprednisolone was started.
Because the patient received long-term steroid therapy, we initially planned to avoid tracheal intubation for preventing ventilator-associated complications. Oxygenation was maintained with a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 8 cmH2O and a fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) of 0.45 in the first 3 days. On day 4, SpO2 was frequently below 88%, and hypoxemia was refractory to elevation of FIO2 (0.6 to 0.8). We started bedside online monitoring of the distribution of regional ventilation using electrical impedance tomography (EIT; PulmoVista 500, Draegerwerk, Luebeck, Germany) to titrate ventilation pressure. After PEEP was increased from 8 to 10 cmH2O, dynamic imaging of EIT showed no improvement in the distribution of ventilation, and PaO2/FIO2 progressively decreased to less than 150 mmHg . The patient was intubated and ventilated with a PEEP of 8 cmH2O. A plateau pressure was initially set at 21 cmH2O, but decreased to 18 cmH2O to adjust for a tidal volume of 6 to 7 ml/kg (predicted body weight) as a lung protective setting and to obtain uniform distribution on EIT. However, the dorsal region was still poorly ventilated and oxygenation was not improved. Therefore, we decided to perform prone positioning with the same ventilation settings.
The tidal images of ventilation distribution (TID) before, during, and after prone positioning are presented in Fig. . After prone positioning was started, PaO2/FIO2 increased to 296 mmHg without any hemodynamic changes. Interestingly, TID clearly showed the distribution of ventilation was initially not shifted to the dorsal region, but to the ventral region (white area in TID, prone). Because dynamic images of EIT and SpO2 showed no further change, we terminated prone positioning after 4 h. After prone positioning was terminated, the ventral shift disappeared and homogeneous distribution was obtained with the same ventilation settings and no adverse effects from prone positioning were found. No serious deterioration of gas exchange was observed after the prone positioning. Oxygenation was stabilized with a PEEP of 11 cmH2O in the next 2 days. On day 7, PEEP was incrementally decreased to 7 cmH2O and the patient was successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation . The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on day 11 and the hospital on day 58.
We performed offline analysis of the saved impedance data using software (EIT diag; Draegerwerk) for further analysis using different parameters, center of ventilation (COV) and global inhomogeneity index (GI) , and by quantifying the results of online monitoring. COV (presented as CG in Fig. ) describes the distribution of tidal ventilation along the gravitational axis. When the location of the center of ventilation is expressed as a percentage of the dorsal-to-ventral thorax diameter, a value of 50% represents equal distribution between the ventral and dorsal regions. GI is quantified as the standard deviation of the proportion of total tidal impedance variation. A smaller GI index delineates more homogeneous distribution in tidal ventilation. Figure shows the results of the analysis. Lung volume, represented by end-expiratory lung impedance (EELI), did not change when a plateau pressure was decreased (top, left to mid-left), and was significantly increased over time after prone positioning was started (top, mid-left to mid-right). TID showed a more homogeneous and normal distribution before prone positioning, and ventral shift of ventilation was clearly detected during prone position (mid-right). Interestingly, dEELI (change in EELI at different time point) images showed that the dorsal lung volume was significantly increased (colored blue) despite the same ventilator settings, as a result of prone positioning. Distribution of ventilation in each region of interest (ventral, md-ventral, mid-dorsal, and dorsal) was shown as a percentage of total ventilation in TID (on the right side of each graph). Ventilation distribution initially decreased from 36 to 25% in the mid-dorsal region and increased in the ventral region to the same extent (20 to 29%). Additionally, ventral shift of COV was observed from 53 to 59% in the right lung. After prone positioning, distribution of ventilation in the mid-ventral and ventral regions decreased from 63 to 41%, and the values were maintained in the supine position until the next day.