A 34-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of “34 + 1 weeks of pregnancy and 3 days of periumbilical pain.” Three days before the treatment, there was no obvious cause for periumbilical pain with periumbilical redness, with a range of about 3 cm. On the second day, the redness expanded to 5 cm , and the pain was not relieved. So she went to the outpatient department of our hospital for color Doppler ultrasound examination. The results showed that there was a mixed mass under the abdominal wall around the umbilicus, with a range of about 18.4 × 43.1 cm, and umbilical inflammation with inflammatory mass in the middle and lower abdominal wall was considered . For further treatment, the outpatient department was admitted with “gestational women with periumbilical abscess; fetal growth restriction in utero.” Two years ago, the patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy after being given anti-infective symptomatic treatment in Fujian Provincial Hospital for perforation of appendix for 1 month, and there was no other operation or major trauma history; Deny the history of hepatitis and other infectious diseases.
The physical examination of the patient was crenerally normal at the time of admission. The abdomen is slightly swollen, and the scar healed by laparoscopic puncture operation can be seen. The skin around the umbilicus is red, swollen, tender, and fluctuating, and the local skin temperature is slightly higher. There is no obvious abnormality in the rest. Relevant examinations were completed after admission: blood routine: white blood cells 13.47 × 109/L; blood biochemistry, coagulation function and related tumor markers were not abnormal. The results of abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that the uterus was enlarged, a fetus was visible in the uterine cavity; and the fetal vital signs were stable .
We performed puncture and drainage of periumbilical giant abscess under the guidance of color Doppler ultrasound on the day of admission . The procedure went smoothly. After the operation, the patient self-reported abdominal pain was significantly relieved. Fetal heart monitoring indicates fetal heart rate monitoring without stimulation, through this examination to observe the changes of fetal heart rate during fetal movement, in order to understand the fetal reserve capacity reaction type, with a heart rate of 150 beats/min. After the operation, the patients were given symptomatic and supportive treatment such as “Ceftriaxone sodium + Ornidazole” anti-infection and fluid rehydration were given, and the condition did not progress during the period.
At 14:00 on the second day, the patient complained of worsening abdominal pain, and yellow drainage was visible in the abdominal negative pressure drainage tube, which was similar to intestinal contents. Yellow drainage was seen in the negative pressure drainage tube of the abdominal cavity, which was similar to intestinal contents. The possibility of pregnancy complicated with intestinal leakage was considered. Therefore, fasting and gastrointestinal decompression were given. Blood routine examination showed that white blood cells was 10.32 × 109/L, and there was no obvious inflammatory reaction such as fever. After evaluating the fetal lungs maturity (we took a small amount of amniotic fluid and measured that the ratio of lecithin to sphingomyelin in the amniotic fluid. The result showed that it was >2, indicating that the fetal lung was mature), in order to ensure the safety of the fetus and the parturient, it was decided to terminate the pregnancy. In order to reduce the chance of wound infection, we usually prefer vaginal delivery, and closely check the vital signs of pregnant women and babies during delivery. At the same time, prepare for cesarean section if vaginal delivery fails. In addition, the adverse effects of drugs on the fetus should be reduced as much as possible. At 18:50, we induced labor through intrauterine water sac, and at 11:18 the next day, we successfully delivered a baby girl via vagina. Fetal position left anterior occipital, Apgar score 10 points, weight 2115 g, length 45 cm, appearance without deformity .
At 14:13 on the third day, the second operation was performed and an exploratory laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia. During the operation, a part of the ileum about 20 cm away from the ileocecus was seen to adhere to the right abdominal wall, and the intestinal tube showed inflammatory edema changes, about 10 cm in length. After incising the adhesion, we could see a sinus tract with a diameter of about 3 cm in the bowel and abdominal wall tissue. We performed abdominal abscess excision and drainage combined with partial small bowel resection and terminal ileostomy. During the operation, the purulent tissue of abdominal wall, including the posterior sheath of rectus abdominis in the lower abdomen, with an area of about 20 × 15 cm, was removed, at the same time, the perforated intestinal tube was removed, and the terminal ileostomy was performed at the middle and outer 1-third of the line connecting the right anterior superior iliac spine and the umbilical cord . Postoperative pathological examination revealed acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, vasodilation and congestion, focal abscess formation, inflammatory exudation, and necrosis were found in the full thickness of the bowel; the lymph nodes around the bowel showed reactive hyperplasia . Regular dressing changes, pain relief, anti-inflammatory and other symptomatic treatments were given after operation. On the 14th day after operation, the results of the full-abdominal CT reexamination showed postoperative changes . On the 26th day of admission, the patient was in stable condition, recovered well after the operation, and was discharged from the hospital .