A 57-year-old man with a 20-pack-year smoking history presented to the hospital in March 2013 with a persistent cough for 2 months and a palpable right cervical mass for 4 days. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 9 × 11 mm nodule in the lower lobe of the left lung and multiple enlarged lymph nodes . The serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were 21.86 μg/L . A cervical lymph node biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma. The biopsy sample was genotyped negative for EGFR and KRAS mutations using an amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method and negative for ALK rearrangement by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). At that time, ROS1 rearrangement was not detected because of the lack of a detection method and no targeted drug available in clinical practice. The patient’s clinical stage was determined as cT1aN3M0 (stage IIIB). Accordingly, he received first-line chemotherapy with six cycles of pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2), achieving a partial response . Maintenance therapy consisted of nine cycles of pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) every month . Assessment of CEA levels and a lung CT scan were performed every 2–3 months during the follow-up period. In March 2016, the patient showed a marked increase in serum CEA levels from 1.78 μg/L to 10.21 μg/L, and a CT scan showed pulmonary disease progression with an enlarged 31 × 15 mm nodule . The patient was treated with four cycles of pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2) at a local hospital. At last, the pemetrexed-based regimen for this patient resulted in a PFS of 42 months.
The patient was referred to our hospital because of disease progression. Following admission, a positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan revealed a 32 × 17 mm nodule in the left lower lobe with intense uptake of 18F–fluorodeoxyglucose and multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes . To understand the histological and molecular evolution of cancer tissues, a secondary biopsy was performed by endobronchial ultrasonography with a guide sheath (EBUS-GS), which confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemical staining. Target-capture sequencing on an Illumina platform was performed in a laboratory certified by the College of American Pathologists using a next-generation sequencing (NGS) method across a 123 gene panel. Tumor samples showed activating mutations in EZR-ROS1, as well as the concomitant alterations NQO1(P187S), TYMS (− 6 bp non-frame shift deletion), UGT1A1(G71R), XRCC1(Q339R), CYP2D6(P34S), DPYD (I543V), and MTHFR (A222V). The tumor was therefore identified as ROS1-driven lung cancer, and the patient was immediately started on second-line therapy with crizotinib (250 mg/twice daily), which targets ROS1 rearrangements. Within 3 months of crizotinib treatment, the patient had achieved excellent radiological partial remission according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 (RECISTv1.1). In April 2017, serum CEA levels were increased, and a lung CT scan showed an enlarged nodule . The PFS on crizotinib was determined as 6 months. Lorlatinib, a third-generation macrocyclic ALK/ROS1-TKI (100 mg/once daily), was used as third-line therapy after obtaining consent from the patient. After 3 months, the patient achieved a favorable response , which was maintained at the time of publication.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.