A 4-year-old girl presented with symptomatic central hypothyroidism and short stature. Initial examination was unremarkable, including normal visual field assessment on confrontation testing.
Assessment of pituitary functioning confirmed central hypothyroidism, but also identified cortisol and growth hormone deficiency. Subsequent gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain identified a solid/cystic suprasellar lesion, measuring 3 × 1.9 × 2.3 cm . The superior, solid aspect demonstrated increased T1 signal, while high FLAIR signal and peripheral contrast enhancement were noted in the more cystic, inferior component. The optic chiasm was splayed over the lesion. The ventricular system was normal.
The patient underwent a transsphenoidal near total resection of the mass, which was identified within a thick capsule, atypical for an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma. Opening the lesion revealed a necrotic, cream-like material which was removed internally by suction and curettage. The residual cyst wall was unable to be completely dissected from surrounding structures.
The patient recovered well post-operatively, developing only transient diabetes insipidus which resolved within days. She had no neurological deficits following resection and post-operative visual field testing was comparable to presentation. The patient subsequently commenced levothyroxine and hydrocortisone therapy, while growth hormone replacement was planned to commence once clinical and radiological stability were confirmed.
Post-operative MRI scans showed residual enhancing cyst wall but no measurable solid component . To date, the patient remains clinically and radiologically stable with no evidence of disease progression, 11 months following surgery.
Histopathological analysis of the lesion demonstrated stratified squamous epithelium accompanied by superficial goblet cells and ciliated cells. Underlying tissue stroma comprised loose connective tissue and blood vessels. No wet keratin was identified. The epithelial cells demonstrated physiological, membranous beta-catenin staining, thereby lacking evidence for Wnt pathway activation. Suprabasal epithelial cells stained positive for CK7 and superficial epithelial cells demonstrated strong CAM5.2 positivity. CK20 staining was negative. The morphological appearances were therefore consistent with a diagnosis of papillary craniopharyngioma . Biological re-affirmation was sought using next-generation sequencing analysis of the lesion, which confirmed a BRAF V600E mutation (BRAFc.1799T>A p. (Val600Glu)) thereby validating the histopathological diagnosis.