This is a case of a 9-year-old male who has been diagnosed with sJIA since the age of 6 years by a paediatric rheumatologist, with diagnostic criteria based on his previous symptoms which have been high-grade fever, arthralgia, and lymphadenopathy. He was put on low-dose oral prednisolone (5 mg) and subcutaneous methotrexate, which later became unavailable in the country for the past 2 months. Since the time of diagnosis, the patient’s condition has been stable and did not develop any severe flares that require hospitalization. He has no family history of a similar condition.
The patient attended the emergency room with fever, vomiting, and bleeding from his nose for 1 week, which was of a small amount, and high frequency, and resolved after receiving fresh frozen plasma. However, there was no bleeding from other sites. In addition, there was loss of appetite, without abdominal pain or passing of black stool.
A review of systematic complaints was unremarkable. His past surgical history included just undergoing a lymph node biopsy for diagnostic purposes.
On examination, he looked sick, and pale, with yellowish discolouration of sclera but he was vitally stable except for the fever, as shown in . The liver was palpable 2 cm below the costal margin, the abdomen was distended with shifting dullness, and he had a scrotal swelling. Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 15\15. No remarkable signs were found upon testing the patient’s cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, and central nervous systems.
Laboratory investigation showed pancytopenia, prolonged international normalization ratio (INR), elevated liver enzymes, high serum ferritin, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) as shown in . Viral screening and blood culture tests were negative. In addition, Immunologic studies were negative for anti-liver kidney microsomal antibody (ALKMA). Therefore, according to the patient’s laboratory results and clinical presentation, his case was diagnosed as MAS .
Subsequently, the patient was admitted to the paediatric department and received meropenem, ciprofloxacin and vancomycin, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), liver support (vitamins K, E, and D), lactulose syrup, albumin, blood transfusion, and methylprednisolone (20 mg/kg/day). The later medicine was prescribed for three days, then an additional two doses were given upon a rheumatologist’s consultation.
After 5 days, the patient was referred to the paediatrics specialist centre due to the unavailability of ICU in the hospital of admission and further follow-up was recommended.
The Patient was admitted to the ICU in the hospital where he was transferred and then was discharged after several days on the following medicines (calvive syrup, colchicine tabs, prednisolone tabs, lactulose syrup, meropenem, vancomycin, liver support vitamin E A K D, ciclosporin) with a stable health condition and normal vital signs.