The patient was a 60-year-old female who came to the hospital with chief complaints of fever and right dorsal pain. She had no particular past medical history. She had continuous fever lasting for 1 week and had visited a nearby clinic. Because the laboratory findings revealed the elevation of inflammation markers, she was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Her vital signs showed a body temperature of 37.2 °C and heart rate of 119 beats/min. On physical examination, she complained of abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen with no signs of peritoneal irritation, and right costovertebral angle tenderness was also detected. Laboratory data were remarkable with elevation of inflammatory markers (white blood cell count, 12,900/mm3; C-reactive protein, 23.3 mg/ml) and elevation of hepatic bile duct enzymes. Computed tomography (CT) revealed free air with abscess formation surrounding the second portion of the duodenum . We diagnosed as duodenal perforation with abdominal abscess and decided to perform immediate exploratory laparotomy. During surgery, the perforation site was found to be at the dorsal side of the descending limb of the duodenum. The abscess was formed due to the perforation of a duodenal diverticulum into the retroperitoneum. However, the inflammation surrounding the perforation was too severe, and it was difficult to perform primary closure or dissection of the diverticulum ; therefore, we finished the surgery by placing four intraperitoneal tubes as shown in Fig. . The total operation time was 105 min, and the blood loss was 136 ml. Since postoperative day (POD) 1, the leakage of pancreatic juice and bile was continuing (amylase and total bilirubin in the drainage fluid, 105,410 IU/l and 27.4 mg/dl, respectively), and the elevation of inflammation markers appeared to be uncontrollable. In order to manage the leakage of pancreatic juice and bile, we decided to perform endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography on POD 2, and we inserted endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) and nasopancreatic drainage (ENPD) tubes. After endoscopic drainage, the amount of drainage decreased, and the drainage fluid became more serous. On POD 6, we began irrigation through the drainage tube in order to continuously wash out the abscess. The contrast radiography on POD 20 revealed a fistula between the abscess and the duodenal diverticulum which gradually decreased in size . We removed the ENPD tube on POD 34 and the ENBD tube on POD 41. We started oral ingestion on POD 42, and the patient was discharged on POD 57. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed 2 months postoperatively revealed the duodenal diverticulum containing food debris .