A 69-year-old male with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) presented with a chief complaint of nausea and gait disorder. The patient’s eldest daughter also had SLE. He had no smoking history, no drinking, no travel history, no outdoor activities, and no sexual activity.
The patient’s present medical history was as follows. The patient became aware of dyspnea and edema of the lower extremities during exercise; thus, he consulted a family doctor. The examination revealed hypertension, proteinuria, and hematuria. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral pleural effusion. Because of an increase in antinuclear antibodies (Anti-ds-DNA antibody 218.5) and a decline in complement (C3 51 and C4 12.3), a connective tissue disease was suspected, and the patient was referred to our Department of Rheumatic Collagen Disease. After 2 months, he was hospitalized for examination and diagnosed with SLE because of (i) renal lesions, (ii) leukopenia, (iii) positive anti-ds-DNA antibody, and (iv) positive antinuclear antibody. Based on the renal biopsy results 2 months later, he was diagnosed with lupus nephritis Class IV. Accordingly, steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg) and tacrolimus (2 mg/day) were initiated intravenously. As SLE and lupus nephritis improved, the patient received prednisolone (25 mg/day) + tacrolimus (2 mg/day) + azathioprine (100 mg/day) orally and was discharged after 6 months. He returned for follow-up as an outpatient.
After 1 year, the patient visited a family doctor for nausea and dizziness. A brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a multilocular cystic lesion with edema. Thus, he was referred to our department for neurosurgery.
On day 1 of admission, the initial brain CT in the axial plane shows the low-density area in the right parietal lobe . Moreover, we suspected a cerebral abscess because a multilocular cystic lesion, which was imaged in a ring shape, was observed on the enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging axial image . On day 10 of admission, the cranial brain abscess was excreted by burr hole surgery used by stereotactic techniques, and intravenous meropenem (MEPM; 1 g TID) + vancomycin (0.5 g BID) was started postoperatively. Of note, Gram-positive bacilli, suspected to be actinomycetes, were detected in the puncture fluid collected intraoperatively. Since the culture specimen was positive for Kinyoun staining, Gram-positive bacilli were found to belong to the Nocardia genus [ On day 15 of admission, vancomycin was discontinued because it was later determined as N. thailandica based on the 16S rRNA sequence and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry [MALDI-TOFMS; and ]. The change to an ST combination was considered, but the patient had an allergic function. Hence, intravenous MEPM (1 g TID) was continued. On day 20 of admission, a blood test revealed improved inflammatory response, but renal function had deteriorated, resulting in decreased MEPM (1 g BID).
The patient remained hospitalized for 30 days without further deterioration of renal function; however, consciousness disorder appeared because of deteriorating central nervous system lupus. Consequently, oral administration became difficult; thus, we switched to ceftriaxone (CTRX; 2 g BID) intravenously. A brain CT revealed that the brain abscess had decreased gradually. The treatment of the abscess and SLE was progressing smoothly. However, on day 77 of admission, the patient developed a catheter-associated urinary tract infection and catheter-associated bloodstream infection due to Corynebacterium striatum and extended spectrum β-lactamase Escherichia coli. Gradually, the patient’s condition worsened and he died 86 days after admission. After death, a pathological autopsy was performed with the approval of the patient’s family. We established the formation of microabscesses in the lungs, mitral valve, liver, and kidneys; however, no Gram-positive bacilli suspected of being Nocardia were detected in the brain or other organs. Since filamentous fungi, suspected of Aspergillus, and yeast-like fungi, suspected of Candida, were detected in the abscesses and blood vessels, the cause of death was established as aspergillosis and disseminated candidiasis due to bacterial replacement caused by the prolonged administration of antibiotics .