A 76-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of a nodule in the right upper lobe. The patient had no respiratory symptoms. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed a 2.3 × 1.6 cm nodule, and the patient was diagnosed with pulmonary adenocarcinoma (cT1bN0M0, stage IA, according to the TNM classification of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), 7th edition; cT1cN0M0, stage 1A3, according to the UICC, 8th edition). The patient had no smoking history. Her comorbidities consisted of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. The right upper lobectomy was performed in November 2015, and the pathological stage was pT1bN2M0, stage IIIA. Genomic analysis revealed the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation L858R in exon 21. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) tumor proportion score (TPS) of < 1%. The patient was under watchful observation without adjuvant chemotherapy. Multiple mediastinal and right hilar lymph node metastases were found in February 2018. Radiation therapy alone was selected because the recurrence of the disease was limited to the local region and the patient was 79 years old at the time of recurrence. Radiation therapy amounting to a total dose of 60.0 Gy, distributed in 30 fractions, was performed over a period of 6 weeks. The 3D radiotherapy-planning technique was used. In the first 4 weeks, 40.0 Gy was distributed in 20 fractions using opposing anterior-posterior fields . In the subsequent 2 weeks, an additional 20.0 Gy was distributed in 10 fractions using 10 beams for covering multiple mediastinal lymph node metastases but sparing the spinal cord and hilum of the left lung. The planning target volume included multiple mediastinal and right hilar lymph nodes, with a 10 mm margin to account for microscopic disease, internal moving, and setup errors. The percentage volume of lung receiving a dose of more than 20 Gy (V20) was 29.3%. Static radiotherapy was delivered using a 10 MV X-ray and five fractions per week. A chest CT scan performed 6 weeks after the irradiation therapy showed reduction of the lymph node metastases. However, left hilar and right supraclavicular lymph node metastases and multiple pulmonary metastases were newly observed outside of the irradiation field . EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment was planned as a start. Interestingly, a follow-up chest CT scan performed 12 weeks after the completion of irradiation therapy showed complete disappearance of the multiple pulmonary metastases associated with radiation pneumonitis . However, there was no change in the size of the left hilar and the right supraclavicular lymph node metastases, which was confirmed by 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT . The patient was therefore under watchful observation, without receiving EGFR-TKI treatment. A follow up CT scan performed 6 months after the completion of irradiation therapy showed a slight increase in the size of the lymph node metastases, but no reappearance of multiple pulmonary metastases nodules . The levels of serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) dropped from 154.5 ng/mL to 30.9 ng/mL after the irradiation therapy and further decreased to 6.8 ng/mL by 3 months post irradiation therapy. The levels, however, increased again to 19.7 ng/mL at 6 months after completion of the irradiation therapy . No cytotoxic chemotherapy or EGFR-TKI was given during the period. The number of CD8+ lymphocytes was 190/μL at 3 months and 356/μL at 4 months after irradiation.