A 42-year-old man with history of von Willebrand disease type 1 was prescribed desmopressin after a recent nasal septoplasty in the setting of epistaxis post-surgery. Within days of discharge, patient presented to the hospital with a seizure. His sodium at the time of presentation was 122 mEq/L which was corrected to 132 mEq/L within a period of 24 hours. After transfer to our institution, ODS was confirmed on MRI which showed T2 hyperintense lesion at the central pons as well as T1 hypointensities at the bilateral lentiform nuclei . Hospital course was complicated by a seizure, locked-in syndrome for approximately 3 weeks, dysphagia, dysarthria and difficulty with bilateral hand coordination. He was eventually discharged to rehabilitation with some improvement of these symptoms but did not return to his baseline.
Approximately 11 months after his first admission, he was re-admitted for worsening dysphagia, dysarthria and bilateral hand discoordination. The severity of the dysphagia progressed to the point where he required a PEG placement for sustenance. The patient could not speak and required a cellular device in order to communicate. In addition to inability to swallow, he could not use his hands to write, hold a cup, type on a keyboard or write. Patient also showed bradykinesia, dystonia of bilateral hands and rigidity.
Due to these aforementioned neurological symptoms, the patient was initiated on carbidopa-levodopa 25/100 mg one tablet three times daily, subsequently increased to 1.5 tablets three times daily, without improvement. Due to worsening depression in the setting of his deteriorating health, patient attempted suicide by ingesting 20–30 tablets of carbidopa-levodopa. Despite the overdose, the patient did not subjectively notice any improvement in his neurological symptoms.
A neurological evaluation performed 1.5 years after the initial diagnosis of ODS showed mild cranial masking with facial dystonia and a risus sardonicus (Video ). He was severely dysarthric and almost completely unintelligible. Evaluation also revealed mild square wave jerks and mild dystonic flexion posturing of the left metacarpophalangeal joints. No resting, postural or kinetic tremor was noted. Finger tapping was moderately impaired bilaterally with breakdown in the amplitude and cadence. There was mild bradykinesia of overall movements, moderately bradykinetic finger movements, and moderate bilateral cogwheeling. He had no difficulty sitting up from the chair with arms crossed and demonstrated ability to walk with good stride length but with reduced left arm swing. Pull test was negative.
In the following months, amantadine 100 mg twice daily was added. The patient showed minimal benefit and was started on trihexyphenidyl 2 mg thrice daily as well as pramipexole 0.5 mg thrice daily (later titrated to 1 mg thrice daily). He showed gradual response on this regimen with improvement in his pseudobulbar palsy and facial masking. When the dose of pramipexole was increased to 1 mg three times daily there was a dramatic improvement in speech and movements. He was able to speak clearly in long sentences though the volume of speech was observed to be reduced. Facial masking and voluntary movements were markedly improved (Video ).
Despite the aforementioned improvement, he developed compulsive shopping behavior and sexual disinhibition three months after starting on pramipexole, leading to the discontinuation of pramipexole. Neurological examination after the discontinuation of pramipexole revealed worsening of dysarthria and parkinsonian symptoms. For treatment of these compulsive behavior, he was initially started on valproic acid and eventually transitioned to lamotrigine for mood stabilization with good effect. Transdermal rotigotine (2 mg daily) was added without significant benefit. Due to the lack of efficacy with prior regimen, pramipexole was re-introduced and he responded again to modest dose (1.5 mg daily) (Video ).