A 48-year-old male police officer was referred to a chiropractic clinic by a general practitioner for the evaluation of acute low back pain (LBP) of two weeks duration. The patient reported that the LBP had come on after spending a 12-h night shift driving a patrol car. The LBP was described as diffuse and the patient reported sharp pain radiating down the left lateral thigh to the knee. The average pain intensity was rated as 6/10 on a visual analogue scale (VAS), but had progressed to 8/10 VAS at the time of presentation. The symptoms were aggravated by sitting, sleeping on the left side, and inactivity; while standing provided the most relief. The pain was worse in the morning, and improved only marginally during the day. Self-care with heat packs and over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (6 × 200 mg ibuprofen tablets per day) provided only a 2-point reduction on the VAS. The patient denied the presence of any paraesthesia (e.g. pins or needles), saddle anaesthesia, loss or changes in bladder or bowel control, fever, or nocturnal pain. The patient reported an approximately 20 kg reduction in body weight over the past 10 months, which he attributed to dietary changes and uptake of a substantial exercise regimen.
The patient also complained of left-sided headaches in the suboccipital and temporal regions of three weeks duration. The headaches were accompanied by occasional dizziness (clarified to be a feeling of unease) that were aggravated by sustained awkward neck postures. He had a family history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and migraines. His grandmother had passed away from bowel cancer. The patient was currently being treated for haemochromotosis, for which he had been managed successfully for 8 years. The rest of the systems review was unremarkable.
The physical examination revealed a marked antalgic posture to the right with limited active lumbar range of motion (ROM) in left lateral flexion and flexion (finger-to-floor reach was noted to be 2 cm above the knees). Coughing, sneezing, and Valsalva manoeuvre reproduced the LBP, but not the leg pain. Straight leg raise was positive for leg and back pain at 40° on the left and negative at 70° on the right. Bragard’s test was positive on the left, while slump test and well leg raise were negative. Deep tendon reflexes were normal (2+) in both upper and lower limbs, except for the patella reflex on the left which was slightly diminished (1+). There was no decreased sensation to pin prick or vibration sense in either the upper or lower limbs; however, sensation to light touch was slightly decreased in the left L4 dermatome. Motor and cranial nerve exams were unremarkable. Blood pressure was 152/92 mmHg and the resting heart rate was 75 bpm (measured in the sitting position).
The left temporal headache and dizziness (uneasiness) could be reproduced by combined flexion and 25° of rotation of the head to the right. The same manoeuvre on the contralateral side was pain free at 50° of rotation. There was marked tenderness to palpation over the left C2/3 zygapophysial joint and the lumbar spinous processes.
On the basis of the clinical presentation, history, and findings of the physical examination, a working diagnosis of posterolateral L3/4 intervertebral disc herniation affecting the left L4 nerve root was made, and a trial of conservative management was suggested to the patient. The patient also received a concurrent working diagnosis of cervicogenic headache. In addition, the patient was recommended to seek further evaluation of his blood pressure.
Conservative management consisted of cryotherapy (ice packs), high-velocity, low-amplitude spinal manipulation to the lumbar region, isometric stretching, and neurodynamic mobilisation techniques (neural flossing). This passive care was complemented by ergonomic advice and a prescribed back extension exercise program. The patient received a total of 6 treatments over a 4-week period. After this treatment regimen the patient reported the LBP to be 1-2/10 VAS, with no pain radiating down the left leg, and that he was able to perform all activities of daily living. Neurodynamic tension tests (e.g. straight leg raise and Bragard’s test) were negative. Lumbar spine ROM was improved (finger-to-floor reach 34 cm below the knees during flexion) and pain free.
The patient was discharged with a 4-week core muscle strengthening program and asked to return for a follow-up consultation after its completion, or earlier if symptoms returned. The patient returned asymptomatic after 4 weeks, and was able to satisfactorily perform the functional core strength tests.
Two months after the last follow-up of the first episode of LBP, the patient presented to the chiropractic clinic with a new episode of acute LBP with pain radiating down the left leg. Similar to the first episode, the patient reported that the LBP had come on after an 8-h shift of driving a patrol car. However, this time the leg pain was radiating down the anterior aspect of the left thigh to the knee. He was taking prescription pain killers as directed by his general practitioner (1–2 tablets of 5 mg oxycodone [Endone, Aspen Pharamceuticals] per 6 h). However, the medication provided minimal relief and the pain was unrelenting, worse at night, and interfering with his sleep. Bladder and bowel function was normal. The physical examination mirrored the initial presentation but for two findings: (1) light touch was decreased in the left L3 and L4 dermatomes, and (2) slump test produced left anterior thigh pain radiating down to the left knee and lateral leg to the foot.
Because the patient now presented with indications of the possible involvement of multiple lumbar nerve roots, severe pain waking him up at night, and not responding to strong prescription pain medication, he was referred for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for an evaluation of possible compression of neurological structures at the L2 to L4 vertebral levels.
The MRI revealed a substantial heterogeneous space-occupying lesion with an intramedullary orientation within the filum terminale at the L2/3 vertebral level (see Fig. ). The lesion measured approximately 2.5 cm × 1.2 cm in the craniocaudal and anterior-posterior dimensions, respectively. It appeared predominantly cystic on T2-weighted sequences and contained several fine internal septations. On post-contrast imaging, there was a heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion (predominantly peripheral), with a non-enhancing central aspect indicating a possible haemorrhagic or calcific component. The remainder of the spinal cord and conus medullaris appeared normal. Because the observed lesion most likely represented a myxoapapillary ependymoma, the patient was promptly referred for a neurosurgical consultation.
The patient was scheduled for surgery the day after the neurosurgical consultation. A gross total resection was achieved and radiological adjunctive therapy was not pursued. Although the patient reported resolution of the neurological symptoms immediately after the surgery, low-grade LBP (3/10 VAS), described as a dull ache, still persisted for several weeks post-surgery. The patient received standard, post-surgical rehabilitation with a hospital-based physiotherapist for 6 months post-surgery. In long-term follow-ups at 6 and 12 months post-surgery, the patient reported no pain (0/10 VAS), with only a vague sensation of persistent numbness in the left anterior leg.