We report a 13-year-old girl, with a family history of mixed connective tissue disease in the mother, who was diagnosed with CRMO in 2018 after presenting with right foot episodic pain and limping. MRI of the temporomandibular joints obtained due to jaw pain, showed abnormal marrow signal within the mandible with several well-defined lesions bilaterally . Nuclear medicine scan showed low-level FDG uptake in the right elbow and both feet. Bone biopsy of a mandibular lesion revealed sterile chronic osteomyelitis, specifically delicate fibrosis of the bone marrow with scattered clusters of plump plasma cells, positive for CD138. While receiving twice per day naproxen, she experienced an uncomplicated course with effective analgesia. CRMO was under clinical remission with no pain or swelling in the jaws or feet. An elevated but slowly decreasing erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) trend persisted until November 2021 when it increased from 20 to 30 (normal: 0–10 mm/h). One month prior, she developed truncal and forehead lesions that fully responded to topical tacrolimus . Skin biopsy showed an acute ulcer with dense neutrophilic infiltrate and negative infectious studies, compatible with pyoderma gangrenosum. By December 2021, she developed right otalgia and acute otitis media unresponsive to serial courses of antibiotics, persistent ear discharge, leading to right ear tympanostomy tube placement and left sphenoidotomy. She then developed similar left ear features with gradually progressive hearing loss. Sinusitis ensued without lower respiratory tract symptoms or hematuria. Her ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgeon prescribed empiric, short courses of prednisone, yielding temporary relief of her marked otalgia and sinus pain. Prednisone withdrawal led to severe otalgia and headache requiring hospitalization. Her head computed tomography (CT) scan indicated left sphenoid sinusitis, bilateral mastoiditis, and middle ear effusions (See Fig. for comparison of CT findings in 2018 and 2022). Chest imaging (radiographs, high resolution CT) and urinalysis were normal. Immunologic studies yielded negative studies for lupus normal complete blood picture, complete metabolic panel, C-reactive protein, and immunoglobulins (A, M and G), with a steadily rising ESR. However, C-ANCA (cytoplasmic-ANCA) was positive with elevated proteinase 3 (PR3) (513 AU/mL) [normal: 0–19 AU/mL]. Sinus biopsy indicated mild chronic inflammation without necrosis, granuloma or vasculitis, a finding potentially confounded by pre-treatment with prednisone. Extensive infectious workup including acid fast bacillus staining, fungal and anerobic cultures was negative. Her clinical features align with limited GPA, acquired during pre-existing CRMO. She received rituximab and oral steroids to induce remission of vasculitis. The patient independently held naproxen in the absence of bone pain. After initial improvement in ear pain, headache, discharge and hearing loss, these symptoms recurred about 6 months after the initial treatment. She was treated with oral steroids and a second round of rituximab and was started on azathioprine. Her disease is currently under adequate control, and she continues to follow up in the pediatric rheumatology clinic. She has not had whole exome sequencing, or any genetic testing performed as it was not considered to be cost effective at that time given the other financial burdens on the family. Of note, there is no family history of consanguinity. (See Fig. for a timeline of the disease course and treatments given).