A 60-year-old woman with end-stage liver disease due to primary biliary cholangitis was admitted to our hospital to undergo LDLT. The patient was diagnosed with primary biliary cholangitis by liver biopsy at 50 years of age and started on treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid 900 mg/day. Two years before transplantation, she suffered from rupture of esophageal varices and underwent endoscopic variceal ligation. After treatment of esophageal varices, she developed massive ascites refractory to diuretics with furosemide, spironolactone, and trichlormethiazide. Prior to transplantation, she had chronic kidney disease of unknown cause but without a history of diabetes, thromboembolic diseases, or cardiovascular diseases including hypertension, arrhythmia, coronary artery disease, and aortic aneurysm/dissection. Preoperative hemoglobin was 8.8 g/dL, platelet count was 75,000/μL, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.1, and serum creatinine was 1.26 mg/dL. Child-Pugh score was 8 and Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score was 11. She underwent LDLT and splenectomy using a left lobe graft of her ABO-compatible husband. The resected liver and spleen weights were 1,000 and 420 g, respectively. The actual graft weight was 456 g, which accounted for 45.7% of the standard liver volume of the recipient. The operation time was 705 min. Intraoperative blood loss was 1,750 mL, and 4 units of red blood cells and 5 units of fresh frozen plasm were transfused. Postoperatively, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and steroids were used as initial immunosuppression therapy. Continuous intravenous prostaglandin E1 and nafamostat mesilate were administered for 5 and 2 days after transplantation, respectively. Antithrombin III (AT-III) concentrate was administered in order to maintain the AT-III level over 70%. On postoperative day (POD) 5, enhanced CT revealed splenic vein thrombosis , for which anticoagulation therapy with intravenous heparin was started with a target APTT of 40–60 s. Follow-up enhanced CT on POD 11 showed hemorrhage in the right renal cyst, but no evidence of renal infarction. On POD 16, warfarin was started to maintain PT-INR between 1.5 and 2.5, and intravenous heparin was discontinued once PT-INR had become therapeutic . However, enhanced CT on POD 20 incidentally demonstrated right renal infarction . She denied any abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting. Her urinalysis showed no proteinuria or hematuria, and renal function was unchanged. The serum levels of AST, LDH, and CPK were not elevated, and PT-INR, APTT, and AT-III were 1.2, 44 s, and 79%, respectively. Echocardiography showed no vegetation. Doppler ultrasound on POD 27 demonstrated a normal flow pattern of the renal artery. She remained asymptomatic with no serious complications and was discharged on POD 36. Renal scintigraphy on POD 50 demonstrated normal flow and function of kidneys. Warfarin was continued for 4 months and then discontinued. However, at 11 months after transplantation, she developed recurrent splenic vein thrombosis and then warfarin was resumed, which was continued for another 12 months and the thrombus resolved, and it was then discontinued thereafter. As of 36 months after transplant, she remains well without recurrence of splenic vein thrombosis or renal infarction.