A 71-year-old male with a history of atrial fibrillation and degenerative mitral valve disease with severe mitral regurgitation (MR) presented for mitral valve repair and MAZE procedure.
His preoperative echo revealed bi-leaflet mitral valve prolapse with severe regurgitation. His left atrium was severely dilated (80 ml/m2 volume index) but his right and left ventricular function were normal. His pre-operative cath showed right coronary dominance with no evidence of pulmonary hypertension or obstructive cornornary artery disease (CAD).
A standard biatrial MAZE IV procedure was performed.
Repair of the mitral valve was perfomed through a left atriotomy after fully developing Wattersons groove. The repair included a quadrangular resection of a flail P2 segment, sliding plasty and a 38 mm posterior annuloplasty band. After removal of the cross clamp, during partial bypass, an expanding double density along the wall of the left atrium was noted on TEE with a jet originating at the posterior annulus flowing into the LAtD. . Bypass was resumed and the left atrium was re-opened. The annuloplasty band was removed and the posterior leaflet was taken off the annulus allowing the visualization of a 4 mm defect at the LV-LA annular junction below the P3 leaflet. This communication was closed with a single pledgeted mattress suture and the posterior leaflet repair was re-aproximated to the annulus. A new 36 mm annuloplasty band was placed and the left atrium was reclosed.
Separation from bypass was complicated by severe biventricular dysfunction requiring significant inotropic support and placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). TEE on chest closure was notable for a non-expanding dissection pocket with hematoma formation. There was trace residual mitral regurgitation.
On post operative day 2 (POD2), a right sided Impella was deployed for cardiogenic shock secondary to right ventricular failure. TEE demonstrated no flow into the LAtD and an intact mitral repair.
The patient’s hemodynamics improved over the following 4 days allowing removal of the Impella and IABP. He was discharged home on POD 17. Transthoracic echo at 1 month, 3 months demonstrated resolution of the LAtD . A follow up echo at 4 years showed complete resolution of the LAtD with an intact mitral repair, trace mitral regurgitation, and a mean gradient across the repair of 3 mm Hg.