A 47-year-old male was admitted to our emergency department with dry cough, shortness of breath, and stenocardia. The symptoms had started 14 days before primary admission. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests of nasal and pharyngeal swabs and sputum were positive for SARS-CoV-2-RNA N-gene 1, and negative for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Influenza-A and Influenza-B. Antibody titres (Anti-SARS-CoV-2-IgG and Anti-SARS-CoV-2-IgA) were positive and SARS-CoV-2-RNA N-gene 1 (PCR) was negative 5 days after primary admission.
The patient had no previously known pulmonary or thoracic diseases. Due to a traumatic motorcycle accident, the patient had undergone splenectomy years before. The patient was under treatment with Dovato® 50/300 mg (GSK®, Dolutegravir/Lamivudine) human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, HIV-1-RNA testing (PCR) showed a level of < 40 copies/mL. The patient was treated for COVID-19 pneumonia with supportive measures and discharged with lowering CRP levels as well as normalized leucocytes and interleukine-6 levels after 7 days.
Four days later, 11 days after his initial presentation, the patient was admitted to the emergency department with pronounced dyspnoea after coughing. The clinical and radiographic examination revealed a right-sided tension pneumothorax. To relieve the tension pneumothorax, a small caliber chest tube (20 Charrière = French, Buelau) was inserted through a mini open thoracotomy in the 5th right intercostal space. After an almost complete regression of the pneumothorax the chest tube was removed after 8 days and the patient was discharged after 9 days (20 days after primary admission) in stable condition.
For a period of 3 months after discharge, the patient complained of fatigue with mild joint pain and dyspnoea. After 3 months, the patient reported no residuals of the infection or the tension pneumothorax. During the course of a year, he had regular check-ups including a pulmonary function test, blood tests, X-rays, and computed tomography (CT) scans that are outlined in detail in the following.
The clinical examination 12 months after first admission revealed no persisting symptoms. The surgical wound fully healed without irritation. The soft tissue showed a satisfying aesthetic result, the scar being clean and dry.
After 12 months, the 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36) revealed no limitations in physical functioning (average 100), no role limitations due to physical health (average 100) or due to emotional problems (average 100), no signs of fatigue (average 90), no loss of emotional well-being (average 96) or social functioning (average 100), no indication of pain (average 100) and a good state of general health (average 100) .
The Quality of live survey (EQ-5D-5L) also showed no limitation in mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain, and anxiety/depression.
Unfortunately, patient-reported quality of life was not assessed at the time of acute diagnosis.
Figure presents the timeline of the events.