This professional female soccer player (32 years old, Northern European ethnicity, white) reported episodes of sharp pain in the Achilles tendon for about 2 years. During sudden change of direction and sprinting, she described sudden sharp pain in the midportion of the Achilles tendon; a symptom that initially rapidly settled within minutes, and she could continue to train and play. However, over time, her pain episodes increased in frequency and intensity. After a couple of days of rest, her pain would settle and she was able to return to full training. Eventually, she had to cease training and match play. Clinical examination showed a minimal thickening of the Achilles tendon midportion, with some tenderness localized to the medial and superficial side of the Achilles tendon, suggesting a diagnosis of midportion tendinopathy. Although treatment with eccentric training was trialed, these exercises caused more irritation in the affected region. As the condition failed to settle and the athlete could not properly train and play at desired level, she presented for an assessment at our clinic.
She was a non-smoker, did not abuse alcohol, was on no medication, and had no allergies. During initial clinical examination, blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg and resting pulse 60 bpm. Clinical findings were similar as found previously, with minor thickening in the Achilles midportion and tenderness localized to the medial and superficial side. Ultrasound examination showed a normal Achilles tendon measuring 5 mm in the midportion and with normal blood flow. Dynamic ultrasound scanning identified the plantaris tendon proximally. Following the plantaris distally to the region with localized tenderness, a wide and thick plantaris tendon was located on the superficial side of the Achilles midportion .
The suspected diagnosis was plantaris tendon-related pain, and the patient was surgically treated with local removal of the plantaris tendon performed under local anesthesia (5 ml Xylocaine + adrenaline) . The procedure took about 30 minutes. During surgery, the thick and wide plantaris tendon was found to be located on the superficial side of the Achilles tendon midportion . Between the tendons, there was a richly vascularized fatty layer that was scraped loose and removed .
After surgery, there was rest with elevated foot overnight, and pain cure using paracetamol 500 mg, 2 tablets every 6 hours during the first 24 hours, if needed. There was a relatively quick (4–6 weeks) rehabilitation, with immediate weight bearing and range of motion (ROM) exercises, gradual increase in loading according to a specific program, and a return to running activities after 4 weeks. At follow-up at 8 weeks, the patient was in full training, and had not experienced any further episodes of sharp pain during change of direction and sprinting.