A 67-year-old man presented to the dermatology clinic of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine with a 5-week history of erythema and clustered blisters accompanied by great pain in the right face. He had a severe toothache in the upper right jaw, visited the stomatologist in a local hospital 4 weeks prior and was diagnosed with acute periodontitis and HZ. He was prescribed intravenous ceftizoxime 1 g/d and metronidazole 0.5 g/d, as well as oral acetaminophen for 2 weeks. However, the rashes on his face worsened, and he was subsequently referred to the dermatology clinic in the local hospital. A 10-day regimen of oral valacyclovir 1 g twice a day was initiated. However, the patient’s intense pain was not relieved and four teeth of his upper right jaw exfoliated in succession 10 days before he visited our clinic.
The patient had a 30-year on-and-off history of toothache. He saw the stomatologist and took painkillers at the very beginning. Then, he took metamizole sodium and phenylbutazone tablets every time the toothache attacked, and he hardly went to the hospital to receive standardized treatment, even when he lost several molar teeth many years earlier. The patient also had a history of hypertension and infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) for years. He had no previous history of tumors, local radiotherapy or other therapy with antiangiogenic agents or antiresorptive drugs such as bisphosphonates and denosumab.
Extraoral examination revealed pigmentation and scars on the right half of the face . On intraoral examination, it was found that there was a complete loss of crowns from teeth 11 to 17 and 35; there was also some tooth decay, gingival recession, and exposure of the alveolar process in the first quadrant of the maxillary arch extending from teeth 11 to 14 . Residual roots of teeth 14, 36 and 48 were also observed.
Laboratory tests yielded the following results: normal coagulation function, blood glucose, routine urine tests, routine stool tests, electrocardiography and chest radiography. The screening result for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody was negative. Quantitative analysis of HBV DNA yielded a value of 4.18 × 105 IU/mL. Routine blood examination revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 10.84 × 109/L. CRP was 20.8 mg/L. ALT and serum creatinine were slightly elevated at 54 U/L and 138 µmol/L, respectively. Color ultrasonography showed multiple hepatic cysts and renal cysts. Panoramic radiography was conducted 10 days after tooth exfoliation and revealed decreased bone density and poor alveolar socket healing in his right maxilla. Decayed teeth, residual roots of teeth and periapical cysts were found . Computed tomography examination revealed empty tooth sockets on the right side of the maxilla .
Biopsy was conducted from a piece of alveolar process and adjacent mucous membrane. Hyperplasia of the squamous epithelium with no atypia was observed in the oral mucosa. Fibrinoid necrosis of some vascular walls, lumen occlusion, and infiltration of histiocytes and neutrophils were found beneath the mucosa . There were also some fragments of nonvital lamellar bone, which were devoid of osteoblasts and osteocytes and were surrounded by numerous neutrophils and bacterial aggregates . Thus, the diagnosis of alveolar osteonecrosis following facial HZ was confirmed.
The patient was then transferred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery in Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital for resection of the osteonecrotic tissue. Extensive malodorous osteonecrosis was observed in the right maxilla during debridement . The pathological findings of postoperative tissue were similar to those of previous biopsies . Bacterial aggregates could be seen inside the marrow cavity by Periodic Acid-Schiff staining .
A necrotic bone tissue sample was taken for bacterial culture under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Prevotella denticola, Streptococcus intermedius, Actinomycetes oris, and Actinomyces viscosus were then confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Moreover, NGS was conducted from a piece of alveolar process and adjacent mucous membrane. Following DNA extraction, DNA libraries were constructed and sequenced by the MGISEQ-2000 platform . High-quality sequencing data were generated by removing low-quality reads, followed by computational subtraction of human host sequences mapped to the human reference genome (hg19) using Burrows‒Wheeler Alignment . The remaining data obtained by removal of low-complexity reads were classified by simultaneous alignment to the Pathogens Metagenomics Database (PMDB), consisting of bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites. Finally, Prevotella, Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, Veillonella, Actinomyces, Candida, VZV, HBV, human gammaherpesvirus 4 and Torque teno virus (TTV) were detected by NGS. Thus, the coexistence of bacterial and viral infection was confirmed.
During the perioperative period, a 7-day regimen of antiviral treatment (oral valacyclovir 1 g twice a day) and antibiotic therapy (intravenous cefathiamidine 2 g twice a day for 3 days and oral cefuroxime 0.25 g twice a day for 4 days successively) were administered. Granulation tissue formation was observed on the surface of the alveolar wound three weeks after debridement . At a follow-up 9 months later, no further tooth exfoliation was found.