Our patient was a 10-year-old Caucasian boy with abdominal pain and distention for 1 month before admission. He had no previous medical issues. Further examination showed tenderness in the lower quadrant of the abdomen with a palpable mass. We performed computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, which identified an intraperitoneal mass in the hypogastrium, extending from the liver bottom edge and mesogastrium to the retrovesical space. A complete resection of the lesion was performed, and the histological results indicated DSRCT with the following immunohistochemical profile: positive for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), EMA (Epithelial Membrane Antigen), Can5.2, 35bH11, CEA (Carcinoembryonic Antigen), desmin, WT1 (Wilms Tumor 1), synaptophysin, and enolase and negative for 34BE12, 1A4, CD99, and chromogranin. At that point, the patient was referred to our clinic for treatment.
Staging CT examinations of the chest showed a pulmonary nodule (7 mm) in the right lower lobe, and an abdominal CT showed that the tumor had spread into the abdominal cavity and liver nodules in segments V, VII, and VIII. According to the modified peritoneal cancer index, the patient’s cancer was classified as stage IV.
Treatment was started with the following chemotherapeutic regimen: vincristine (1.5 mg/m2 D1) + adriamycin (60 mg/m2 D1) + cyclophosphamide (1500 mg/m2 D1), alternating with ifosfamide (3 g/m2 D1–D3) + carboplatin (450 mg/m2 D1) + etoposide (150 mg/m2 D1–D3). After three cycles, a new abdominal CT scan showed stable disease, and the regimen was replaced by an alternative protocol with irinotecan (50 mg/m2 D1–D5) + vincristine (1.5 mg/m2 D1 and D7), resulting in an excellent partial response according to RECIST version 1.1 (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors). After the 13th cycle, total abdominal radiotherapy was performed with a total dose of 2100 cGy, and subsequent irradiation of the areas with prior evidence of disease was performed, resulting in a total dose of 4440 cGy. A boost in the initial tumor bed (pelvis) and margin resulted in a total dose of 4980 cGy.
After initiation of treatment, the first reassessment (after four cycles) showed a 36.7% reduction compared with the initial image, without the appearance of new lesions. In the second and third reevaluations (after 10 and 16 cycles, respectively), reductions of 47.7% and 87.7%, respectively, were observed. At the last CT evaluation, a reduction of 96.9% of the tumor in relation to the original image was observed, without the appearance of new lesions, resulting in a notable partial response .
After 21 cycles, maintenance chemotherapy was initiated with oral cyclophosphamide (25 mg/m2/day) and vinorelbine (D1, D8, and D15; 25 mg/m2/week). Fifteen cycles of maintenance chemotherapy were conducted, and a positron emission tomography/CT evaluation after the treatment showed no anomalous hypermetabolism. During the treatment, the patient had episodes of grade 2 diarrhea, which were treated with loperamide without any severe adverse events.
After 46 months from the diagnosis, the patient was admitted to our hospital with an acute obstructed abdomen. After imaging examinations and a laparotomy, tumor recurrence was diagnosed. The patient died at 50 months after diagnosis.