A 34-year-old man suffered a stab wound by lumber ejected from the machine during the moulding process, then penetrated through his left nasolabial fold. At that moment, the patient wore safety eyeglasses without a full-face shield. Then the lumber was shortened by his colleague and the remaining 30 cm lumber was left embedded on the man's face. The man was brought into our ER by ambulance and was administered as trauma patient. The patient complained about the pain in his left cheek, moderate bleeding was identified from the site of penetration. Loss of consciousness, impaired vision, nausea, and vomiting were denied. On his arrival at the ER, the patient was alert and cooperative (Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score 15). The patient has no history of allergies or past illness. Patient's vital signs were within normal limits. On neurological examination, a decreased blink reflex on his left eye was found, but signs of basilar skull fracture (e.g. raccoon eyes, rhinorrhea, and otorrhea) and muscle weakness or sensory impairment in all 4 limbs were not found (Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale 5/5) .
Non-enchanced head CT (NECT) showed a low-attenuation area. It described a wooden foreign object penetrated the cerebellum. The length of the object was 152.1 mm embedded in situ (, , ).
The surgical process was conducted by a collaboration of head and neck surgeon, neurosurgeon, and anesthesiologist. Prior to the surgery, 2 grams of ceftriaxone were administered as prophylactic antibiotics. The patient was positioned in a park-bench position. A C-shaped incision was made over the retrosigmoid area. After the muscles were uncovered, initial burr hole was made and then it was enlarged using bone rongeur forceps superiorly and laterally until it reached the sinus border. Dura mater was incised linearly and the bulging brain was identified. Corticotomy was performed to reduce brain’s buldging and to minimize difficulties so the neurosurgeon could evaluate the condition of the facial nerve and vestibulocochlear nerve. Bone defects were palpated on the petrous bone at the cerebellopontin angle. The extraction of the wooden foreign object was performed from the site of entrance wound, then followed by debridement process and exploration of its surrounding area. Once the object was clearly removed, bleeding was controlled using electrocautery. After repeated irrigation with normal saline, the bone defect was closed with the muscle patches and glued by Beriplast®. Drains were placed on the cisterna and on the entrance wound in the left nasolabial fold. Watertight dural closure was performed, then followed by adequate scalp closure. The total length of the foreign wooden body is 49.4 × 4 cm, the measurement of in-situ part was 19 × 2.6 cm, while the measurement of ex-situ part was 30.7 × 4 cm .
Patient was observed in the ICU for 24 hours. Ceftriaxone (1 g q12 h) was administered for 6 days after the surgery completed. Patient was not showing any clinical signs of infections (e.g. fever, persistent headache, altered state of consciousness, seizure, nausea and vomiting, and motor or sensory impairments). Patient’s laboratory results were showing a slight increased WBC (18,060 normal parameter: 4,000–11,000). The patient postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged after 6 days with GCS 15 and clean-healthy postoperative wound. On his neurological examination, patient complained a slight tingling sensation on his left face, lagophthalmos on his left eyelid, and mild difficulty to chew by his left side of mouth. Facial nerve palsy and paresthesia of the trigeminal nerve were found (A & B). Co-amoxiclav 500 mg three times a day orally was given after patient discharge from hospital for 5 days. Followed up 10 days after the surgery, patient did not show any symptoms of infection. However, facial nerve palsy and paresthesia of the trigeminal nerve remained consistent. The patient was referred to a physiatrist for physiotherapy and received short wave diathermy (ENRAF NONIUS Curapuls 970 in continuous mode, frequency generator 27.12 MHz, pulse repetition frequency 50 Hz, for 10 minutes) and Galvanization (ENRAF NONIUS Curapuls 591 in continuous mode, frequency 50 Hz). The therapy was carried out for 6 sessions in 12 days.
The tingling sensation on patient’s left face was completely reduced and minimal improvement of facial nerve motor function was noted. Thirty days after the surgery, an enhanced head CT was performed and a cystic mass in the left cerebellum lobe was found. It measured 20 × 28 mm with blood density lesions and visible ring enhancement . These features suggested a brain abscess, particularly in the left lobe of the cerebellum. Responding to these features, third generation of cephalosporin (Cefixime 200 miligrams q12 h) and Metronidazole (500 miligrams q8h) were given to the patient for six weeks. Followed up three months after the surgery, patient didn’t complain any symptoms, including cerebellar abscess symptoms, such as nystagmus, ataxia, vomiting, and dysmetria. His laboratory finding was within normal limits and signs of infection were not found (White Blood Cell Counts 6,700 normal parameter : 4,000–11,000, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate 5 normal parameter : 0–15, Quantitative C-Reactive Protein 0.25 normal parameter : < 10). Later on, enhanced head CT was repeated and revealed that abscess’ size, shape, and location were consistent compared to previous enhanced head CT’s result .