A 37-year-old Bangladeshi male sustained a fall during work. He fell off an 8–10 m high scaffold on his left foot and then on his left side. Subsequently, a heavy object fell on his left foot. He was complaining of severe pain in the left foot and inability to bear weight on it. He was brought by the ambulance to the emergency department. On arrival, the patient was conscious, oriented with Glasgow Coma Scale 15/15. Physical examination showed severe tenderness over the left foot with deformity. Neurovascular status of the foot was intact. There was moderate-to-severe swelling with soft compartments of the left foot. He was cleared by the trauma team and investigation showed isolated left foot comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fracture along with Lisfranc fracture with dislocation of the tarsometatarsal joints. X-ray of the left foot is shown in . 1day after presentation to the emergency department, the patient under went open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the left foot Lisfranc fracture and dislocation with cortical screws for the first to fourth metatarsal and 2 mm K-wire for the fifth metatarsal. A below the knee back slab was then applied and the patient was admitted to the orthopedics ward. The post-operative course of the patient was unremarkable except for swelling over the left foot. However, on the 4thpost-operative day, the patient developed clear skin blisters over the posterior aspect of the calcaneus. The skin condition of the patient deteriorated to skin necrosis as shown in . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the left foot was carried out in preparation for ORIF of the calcaneus. Cut sections of the CT scan demonstrating a fragment of the calcaneus pressing over the posterior soft tissue are shown along with other cuts in . The patient then underwent ORIF utilizing an extended lateral approach. Using a 3.5 mm K-wire inserted posteriorly, the posterior fragment and the articular surface were reduced under fluoroscopy supervision. A medium calcaneal plate was then applied and held in place with screws locking and non-locking. A back slab was applied and the patient was discharged 2days after the operation. Outpatient follow-up 4months postoperatively shows healing skin over the posterior aspect of the calcaneus . At 1-year post-operative visit, the patient is back to complete daily activities with mild pain while running. Radiographs of the calcaneus and the Lisfranc fractures showed good fixation and healing ( and ).