A 26-year-old male patient who had been diagnosed with neurogenic bladder outlet obstruction and bladder stones was referred to our department for treatment. The patient was the youngest of three brothers aged 26, 28, and 30 years. Although the parents were normal, all three boys were homozygotes for frontometaphyseal dysplasia. The patient was unable to void spontaneously; therefore, for the previous 5 years, he carried a permanent urethral catheter with a stopcock mechanism to allow him to empty his bladder when he had a voiding sensation. The oldest brother was still able to empty his bladder by intermittent catheterization, and the middle brother was able to void voluntarily with low flow.
The patient claimed "normal" voiding until the age of 16 years, although he never experienced a truly "normal" urination. Because of renal colic at that age, he had an ultrasound scan in which bilateral moderate hydronephrosis and thickening of the bladder walls were observed. However, no further investigation or treatment of these symptoms was performed. Five years ago, the patient was urgently admitted because of urinary retention. Severe bilateral ureterohydronephrosis appeared on the ultrasound scan. A Foley catheter was inserted, and he then drained urine through the catheter.
Upon admission, the patient brought results of a recent urodynamic investigation that included results from urethral profilometry and voiding cystometry. Voiding cystometry during filling revealed normal sensation, capacity, and compliance of the bladder and the absence of detrusor overactivity. Although he had a strong voiding sensation with 500 mL, there was no increase in detrusor pressure suggesting urination, and the patient was unable to void and thus undergo a uroflowmetry test. The conclusion of the urodynamic investigation was a hypoactive bladder along with urethral obstruction.
The patient had the typical appearance and bone radiographic findings of Gorlin-Cohen syndrome. Characteristic features were present, including sclerotic supraorbital ridges, skull hyperostosis, micrognathia with prominent mandibular antegonial notch, scoliosis, and elongation of the metacarpals and phalanges.
Laboratory investigations were normal, and an ultrasound scan revealed some degree of residual ureterohydronephrosis and multiple stones in the bladder. Three-dimensional computed tomography of a retrograde cystourethrogram revealed dilatation of the prostatic urethra, a hypertrophic verumontanum, bladder neck stenosis, bladder distension with wall thickening, and vesicoureteral reflux with moderate ureterohydronephrosis . Finally, cystourethroscopy revealed a normal penile and membranous urethra, but a dilated prostatic urethra with longitudinal mucosal folds between a hypertrophic verumontanum and bladder neck, which probably represented the least common type (type 2) of urethral valves and severe bladder neck contracture .
After patient consent was obtained, acknowledging that he was highly likely to experience postoperative retrograde ejaculation, he underwent urethral valve excision and bladder neck incision. Because of the difficulty of removing the bladder stones endoscopically, he also underwent an open cystolithotomy during the same operation. A total of 28 stones were removed from his bladder. The catheter was removed on the fifth postoperative day, and the patient was able to void and empty his bladder without residual urine. One year later, the patient continues to report normal micturition. The urodynamic investigation revealed normal pressure flow study results with Qmax of 19 mL/s and Pdet in peak flow of 33 cmH2O. The patient voided 205 mL without a residual volume . Ultrasound examination of the patient revealed mild residual hydronephrosis without bladder stones.