A 54-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of ENKL for > 4 years.
About 4 years ago, the patient visited our hospital for recurrent gingival bleeding accompanied by night sweats and a recent weight loss of > 10 kg. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed multiple lymphadenopathies in the bilateral neck and supraclavicular area (especially in the right neck), strip-shaped soft tissue density shadow in the right nasal cavity, and significantly increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism . Biopsy of the right nasal septum mucosa was performed postoperatively, and the pathology showed ENKL. Immunohistochemistry showed CD3 +, CD4 +, CD56 +, granzyme B +, CD8 -, CD20 -, Pax5 -, and Ki-67 + (about 80%). Molecular in situ hybridization demonstrated positivity for EBER .
The patient had no history of past illness.
No personal or family history was available.
There were multiple lymphadenectasis in the bilateral neck especially in the right neck. No palpable enlargement of the liver or spleen was noted.
The liver function, renal function, routine blood tests, myocardial enzymes, and coagulation function were normal. Bone marrow puncture was not performed.
On March 3, 2018, PET/CT showed multiple lymphadenopathies in the bilateral neck and supraclavicular area (especially in the right neck), strip-shaped soft tissue density shadow in the right nasal cavity, and significantly increased FDG metabolism and a high standard uptake value (SUV) with a Deauville score of 7.6 .
On June 6, 2017, PET/CT showed that the original lesions in the right nasal cavity, bilateral neck, and supraclavicular area had subsided and become inactive compared to the scan on March 3, 2017. However, there was new large, curved wall thickening of the gastric body, multiple nodules of the spleen, multiple lymphadenopathies around the stomach, mediastinum and left hilum, and increased FDG metabolism .
On November 9, 2021, PET/CT showed that right mediastinal paratracheal, right main bronchial, and subcarinal lymph nodes and ileocecal small nodules subsided and became inactive, and the metabolism of left lower lobe nodules was decreased significantly (SUVmax decreased from 10.2 to 3.8) .