A right-handed 18 year-old female patient, working as a part-time waitress in the hotel industry, presented with locked interphalangeal joint (IPJ) of the right thumb for 6 months. She enjoyed good past medical health and had no background of ligamentous or joint diseases. She first noticed clicking sensation in her right thumb since childhood for more than 10 years and did not remember the exact onset. She denied significant trauma or injury to the right hand otherwise. She did not seek medical advice and enjoyed the clicking sensation without functional deficit. However, she noticed the right thumb IPJ became locked suddenly after the usual clicking one day without trauma, and since then she could not actively or passively extend the IPJ. She thought the situation would gradually improve and delayed medical consultation until 6 months later when she noticed that the locked thumb remained the same.
On physical examination, there was a nodular thickening over the volar metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) of the right thumb, which was non-tender on palpation. The IPJ was locked at 55 degrees of flexion, with no further passive extension possible even with the MCPJ placed in flexion . Extensor pollicis longus action was palpable and was still in function.
In view of the delayed presentation with prolonged period of locked thumb, she was directly scheduled to have open surgical release of the right trigger thumb. The operation was performed under local anaesthesia using 1 % lignocaine. A transverse incision was made over the volar MCPJ skin crease. Digital neurovascular bundles were protected with retractors. The A1 pulley was divided longitudinally with the flexor pollicis longus tendon freed and slinged out to confirm complete release. The A1 pulley was noted to be normal looking without thickening. However, whitish fusiform abnormal hard thickening of the flexor pollicis longus tendon was noted underneath and immediately proximal to the A1 pulley . Full passive range of motion of the thumb IPJ and MCPJ was attained intra-operatively without clicking. Active movement by the patient intra-operatively also confirmed no residual triggering motion but there was an extension lag of 20 degrees due to attenuation of extensor mechanism. Total operative time was 12 min.
Post-operatively she was referred to the physiotherapists and occupational therapists for further rehabilitation. Stitches were removed on post-operative day 14 as usual. There were no complications from the surgery including infection, wound complication, neurovascular injury or recurrent triggering symptoms.
She was given a course of rehabilitation therapy including scar massage, mobilization and strengthening exercise. At post-operative 2 weeks there was still an extension lag of 20 degrees, limited by wound pain at numeric pain rating scale of 4 out of 10, which subsided later at post-operative 5 weeks (, ). Her power grip improved from 16 kg at post-operative 3 weeks to 24 kg at post-operative 6 weeks, whereas the pinch grip improved from 2 kg (120 % of contralateral hand) at post-operative 3 weeks to 5.5 kg (122 % of contralateral hand) at post-operative 6 weeks. There was no limitation in her activities of daily living and work.