A 47-year-old Asian woman presented to the Department of Radiation Oncology, Yamagata University Hospital, with a chief issue of massive atypical genital bleeding.
Our patient was diagnosed as having idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) at three years of age; however, splenectomy, steroid therapy, and γ-globulin therapy failed to improve her condition. She had severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <10,000 cells/mm3) at the time of radiotherapy. Because of her history of ITP, surgical intervention for endometriosis was ruled out.
Our patient had been experiencing atypical genital bleeding for 10 years. She was diagnosed as having bilateral ovarian chocolate cysts at the age of 40. Although hormonal therapies (luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) analog and contraceptive pills) were administered, they were not effective, and medicinal treatments were suspended without controlling the symptoms. Our patient experienced massive genital bleeding requiring daily transfusions of four to six units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) before radiotherapy .
Bilateral ovaries (endometriotic cysts) were included as radiotherapy targets to obtain radiation-induced menopause. The uterine myoma and normal endometrium were also included as targets as they may have been the origins of genital bleeding. Radiotherapy of 20Gy in 10 fractions with 10MV photons was delivered to the targets, which was sufficient for inducing menopause. To correct residual genital bleeding as per our patient's wishes, another 10Gy radiation in five fractions was provided to the normal endometrium.
Figure shows the time course and blood volumes of the atypical genital bleeding. The first day of radiotherapy was set as day 1, and the amount of bleeding per day was assessed as often as possible. Because it is very difficult to measure a precise volume of blood loss, a numerical rating scale (NRS) from 0 (no bleeding) to 10 (excessive bleeding) was used along with self-assessment. Decreased bleeding occurred by day 14, and complete arrest of bleeding was achieved by day 46. Following treatment, no genital bleeding has been reported, and no blood transfusion has been performed for two years after radiotherapy.
Figure shows the changes in serum hormone levels. Before radiotherapy, her serum estradiol (E2) level was 161pg/mL (normal range; follicular phase: 19 to 226, menopause: <39), serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level was 12.2mIU/mL (normal range; follicular phase: 4 to 12, menopause: 39 to 176), and serum luteinizing hormone (LH) level was 11.7mIU/mL (normal range; follicular phase: 1.1 to 8.1, menopause: 11 to 68.6). The serum E2 level rapidly decreased after the start of radiotherapy and reached the post-menopausal level two months later. At four months after radiotherapy, the serum FSH level increased to 69.7mIU/mL (post-menopausal level) and the serum LH level increased to 29.2mIU/mL (post-menopausal level). These serum hormone levels suggested that radiation-induced menopause was successfully obtained two months after the start of radiotherapy.