A 23-year-old female presented with an extensive right knee history, including allograft ACL reconstruction 9 years before presentation, with subsequent graft failure and revision ACL reconstruction with bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft 7 years prior. On initial presentation, the patient complained of pain and crepitation anteriorly in her knee. Her pain was worse with stairs and worse after sitting for prolonged periods. The patient also endorsed catching, but stated that no frank locking of her knee had occurred. Clinical examination revealed Lachman of 1A and no pivot shift. Marked tenderness to palpation was present over the medial patellar facet and trochlear groove. Patellar grind test was positive and loading of the patella recreated her primary complaint of anterior knee pain as well as produced marked patellofemoral crepitus. Magnetic resonance imaging showed full-thickness cartilage loss covering the majority of the medial patellar facet, with full-thickness cartilage loss along the medial aspect of the trochlea .
A two-stage reconstruction of her cartilage was planned. Initially, the patient underwent arthroscopic chondroplasty of the patellofemoral compartment and Carticel® (Aastrom Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI) biopsy was obtained. Arthroscopy revealed a near full-thickness (Grade III) chondral defect of the medial patellar facet measured 15 mm × 10 mm. Evaluation of the trochlea showed a 20 mm × 10 mm area of Grade III and IV cartilage loss. The lateral trochlea was intact. A second Grade IV defect of the medial trochlea was noted that measured 8 mm × 15 mm. This was separated from the other defect by a thin rim of Grade II chondrosis. The medial and lateral femoral condyles and tibial plateau showed largely intact chondral surfaces with just some Grade I softening . The patient was allowed to bear weight as tolerated and to initiate motion exercises when able. Running, jumping, and return to sports were limited for 6 weeks. At 6-week post-surgery, the patient denied noticeable improvement in her symptoms.
Subsequent open ACI implantation (second generation with Type I/III bilayer collagen membrane [Bio-Gide®, Getistlich Pharma North America Inc., Princeton, NJ]) was performed. At the time of implantation, the defect of her medial patella facet measured 20 mm × 22 mm while the medial trochlea measured 27 mm × 18 mm. Both defects were combined creating a single lesion .
Postoperatively, the patient was made toe-touch weight bearing for 4 weeks followed by weight bearing as tolerated in a locked knee brace until the 6-week mark. Motion was initiated on postoperative day 1 with the initiation of continuous passive motion machine. This was started at 30° and advanced as tolerated to a goal of 90° by 4 weeks. At 6-week postoperative, she no longer had any crepitation and was able to range her knee 0°-110° flexion/extension. At the 1-year visit, she reported doing extremely well with no crepitus on examination and range of motion back to her baseline of 0-130°. She was able to return to coaching both volleyball and softball at a local high school. Her pre- and post-operative patient-reported outcomes at 12 and 36 months demonstrated considerable improvement .