A 55-year-old female patient presented with a right breast lump by palpation without pain and nipple discharge. A medical history confirmed that the patient was implanted with two 200 ml round textured prostheses in the subpectoral plane through axillary incisions in 2004. There were no obvious adverse reactions such as infection and seroma after the breast augmentation surgery. No breast lump was detected before breast augmentation, and the family history of breast cancer was denied.
Physical examination showed that bilateral breasts were symmetrical, with no nipple deviation and depression, no nipple bleeding or discharge, and no orange peel sign or dimple sign. In addition, the prosthesis could be reached in both breasts. A lump of about 3 cm could be reached under the right nipple with hard texture, unclear boundary, low mobility, and no obvious adhesion to the skin. There was no obvious mass in the left breast or enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral axilla.
The breast ultrasound on August 21, 2020 , showed a lobulated and spiculated hypoechoic solid neoplasm of 28.8*24.5*13.9 mm in the inner lower quadrant of the right breast adjacent to the nipple. The neoplasm was measured about 4.8 mm away from the body surface. According to the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS), the tumor was classified as grade 5, which meant a malignant possibility. In addition, no obvious abnormality was found in bilateral axillary lymph and the bilateral prosthesis capsule was intact.
The MRI on August 24, 2020 , confirmed the existence of phyllodes lump and thickening and increase of blood vessels, suspected as a malignant tumor with a grade of 4C of BI-RADS. At the same time, several early enhanced small nodules, which were suspected as the satellite lesions of the tumor, were found in the superior external area of the lump. Moreover, chronic inflammation-like changes were reported in the surrounding tissues of the prosthesis under the pectoralis major.
On September 2, 2020, considering the patients’ aesthetic requirements, we attempted to remove the lump completely with a negative incisal margin. Unfortunately, the intraoperative pathological examination indicated the breast MAME and posterior margin of the nipple showed cancer involvement. Therefore, we had to excise the nipple–areola complex and perform the skin-sparing modified radical mastectomy. Although there was no established uniform recommendation for the time interval of replacing implants, most plastic surgeons recommend routine replacement no more than 15 years after initial placement . At the same time, considering the possibility of subsequent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for breast cancer, the prosthesis was removed, and immediate breast reconstruction with expander implantation was performed. As intraoperative pathological examination demonstrated that no cancer metastasis was found in four sentinel lymph nodes, therefore, the patient did not undergo axillary lymph node dissection. The pathological results are shown in , . Immunohistochemistry shows the following tumor cells: ER (−), PR (+, about 5%, weak to moderate intensity), HER2 (1+), GATA-3 (+), AR (+, 40%, moderate intensity), E-cadherin (+), EMA (+), GCDFP-15 (−), CD-117 (focal +), Syn (−), SOX10, CK5/6, p63, S-100 and SMM-HC (myoepithelial +), and Ki67 (Li: about 30%). Because of a bidirectional differentiation of glandular and myoepithelium, it was diagnosed as AME; at the same time, due to obvious cell atypia, pathological mitosis, infiltration at the tumor edge, etc., it was diagnosed as MAME.
The patient recovered well after the operation with no complications and was discharged on September 10, 2020. Since November 11, 2020, she has received three cycles of chemotherapy in another hospital with the AC*4 regimen (anthracycline combined with cyclophosphamide) and then gave up on her own. There was no recurrence or metastasis in nearly 2 years of follow-up after the operation. This study was reported in agreement with the principles of the CARE guidelines .