This study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the local institutional review board guidelines (number: 54306316.4.0000.5514).
The patient, a 66-year-old Brazilian male sought the Coloproctology Division at USF, Bragança Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil due to a complaint of an anal lump for 3 years, and fistula with absolute hyperemia and decreased caliber of the stool accompanied by increased constipation with occasional rectum bleeding. The colonoscopy showed the presence of intense perianal rash with xeroderma, peeling skin, warty lesions and a severe stenosis of the anal orifice . Also, no changes in the rectal mucosa and absence of polyps in the colon were observed.
Perianal surgical biopsies were performed with segments of skin resection and subcutaneous tissue at areas where there was a lack of skin irregularity and hardened consistency. Large biopsies fragments of four quadrants were removed. Post-treatment biopsies were performed using the same technique. Perianal biopsy showed the atypical Paget cells suggesting PPD or balloon cells melanoma . For the differential diagnosis, Melan-A, CDX-2, cytokeratin 20 (CK20), cytokeratin 7 (CK7), p63, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) immunostaining markers panel was analyzed. Positive staining only for cytokeratin 20 and CDX-2 markers was observed. No PPD diagnosis secondary to a colorectal origin was confirmed. The anal orifice stenosis was treated by sphincterotomy.
Local excision is considered the first-line therapy in PPD cases and most of them requiring also an abdominoperineal amputation of the rectum with a permanent colostomy. The patient refused that option. Then, since there was no dermis invasion and no associated colorectal carcinoma, the PPD treatment choice was Imiquimod 5% cream for 12 months. Every 4 months a new colonoscopy revealed skin condition improvement and perianal biopsy showed no residual PPD (data not shown).
After the first Imiquimod treatment cycle, two more surgical biopsies were performed and a new Imiquimod cycle was prescribed. After 3 months a third biopsy revealed no sign of lesion. The patient is currently being closely followed every 3 months. The patient remains without signs of recurrence to date. If no lesion is observed, the follow-up may include biopsy from the old perianal lesion once a year and colonoscopy once every 2 years.
It is interestingly to note that patient has presented pain and irritation of the perianal skin during the period of Imiquimod application and the inflammatory process completely improved after the first 45 days with remaining residual local pruritus.