A 13-year-old male patient with DMD presented with a primary complaint of stress when eating school lunches, because he was unable to bite through the fried chikuwa (baked tubes of reconstituted fish).
At 3 years of age, he had been unable to climb stairs or run and fell over easily. At 4 years, a right bicep muscle biopsy led to a diagnosis of DMD. By 8 years, walking had become difficult, and he started using an electric wheelchair. At the age of 10 years, he became aware of the masticatory disturbance, and his principal food at home had become rice porridge, with bite-size side dishes precut for him.
At the initial examination, the patient utilized an electric wheelchair, which was operated with a button wheelchair joystick control. Although he required full care during meals, he showed no swallowing or respiratory function disorders.
None of his 28 teeth were missing; his oral hygiene status was favorable, and caries and periodontal disease were absent. The dental arch width of the mandible exceeded that of the maxilla, and he had bilateral open bite, with no occlusal contact other than for the first and second molars . The maximum mouth opening distance was 60 mm, including an open bite distance of 4 mm in the incisor region, and jaw noise and pain were absent.
The patient's mother was instructed regarding the necessity for careful oral hygiene to maintain his oral status after OS provision. Firstly, tooth models were prepared for the maxilla and mandible. For esthetic reasons, Splint-a (Yamahachi Dental Manufacturing Co., Ltd., Aichi, Japan), a vacuum-formed thermoplastic splint (1.5-mm thick), was prepared by pressing into models using a Sta-Vac (Buffalo Dental Manufacturing Co., Inc., New York, USA; Figure ).
After discussion with the patient, a maxillary OS was fabricated to cause minimal discomfort to the tongue. A jaw position was selected with an occlusal relationship in which the patient felt that the teeth of both jaws were in contact and had maximum stability. Bite checking was performed, and maxillary and mandibular models were mounted on an articulator, such that the OS did not cover the existing occlusal contacts or cause changes in the original jaw relationship and occlusal vertical dimension . Self-curing resin and abrasion-resistant artificial teeth (Endura; Shofu Co., Ltd., Kyoto, Japan) were added. Adjustments were made to ensure occlusal contact with the incisal edges of the opposing lower anterior teeth and the buccal cusps of the lower molars , as well as to achieve group function on the working side during lateral excursion.
The effects of the OS on mastication were investigated based on the occlusal force and masticatory performance. Occlusal force was measured using an occlusal force meter (Nagano Keiki Co., Ltd., Nagano, Japan). The sensor was placed on the occlusal surface of the first maxillary molar on the habitual side, and measurements were made with the patient clenching his teeth three times, separated by 20-s relaxation intervals. The highest of the three measurements was used in the analysis.
Masticatory performance was determined using Masticatory Performance Evaluating Gum XYLITOL (Lotte Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan), and the mastication of peanuts. The masticatory performance test with gum required the patient to chew the gum for 2 min on his habitual side; the masticatory performance, number of mastication strokes, and masseter and digastric muscle activities were then assessed. The masticatory performance was determined via a color change in the gum after mastication and judged to be higher when the color was closer to red, with reference to a color scale.
Muscle activity was recorded by surface electromyogram, using an electrical stimulator with an attached Holter electromyograph ME3000 (Thought Technology, Ltd., Montreal, Canada). The triode disposable electrodes, at 2-cm spacing, were placed on the habitual side in the anteroposterior central region for the masseter muscle, and along the anterior belly muscle path for the digastric muscle. The surface-electromyographic signals were differentially amplified as follows: sensitivity, gain accuracy of ±0.5%; frequency, 2048 Hz; and input impedance, at least 1 MΩ. Full-wave rectification was performed, and the data were input into a personal computer with 14-bit AD conversion, and filter-treated with a better/worse filter (3 dB at 500 Hz). The amplitude was then obtained as the actual value using the BioGraph Infiniti software (Thought Technology, Ltd., Montreal, Canada).
The number of mastication strokes was calculated from the amplitudes of the masseter muscle. The patient voluntarily clenched his teeth and maintained a maximum mouth opening three times for 5 s, with 20-s relaxation intervals. The maximum amplitude of each time was measured, and the mean values were taken to be the amplitudes of maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) of the masseter and digastric muscles. The mean amplitude while masticating the gum was then obtained and normalized for the ratio of the mean amplitude of MVC (%MVC) for each muscle.
The masticatory performance test with peanuts involved a comparison of the time required (from the initiation of mastication) for the swallowing of five peanuts, with and without the OS; a shorter duration indicated a greater masticatory performance.
After the patient had used the OS for 6 years, the mastication cycles for gum were also compared with and without the OS., Analysis of the mastication cycles was performed using Kinect (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA). A specialized hemispherical reflection marker was fitted to the mentum region of the patient while he was seated in a wheelchair. The Kinect V2 sensor was fixed in position on a tripod, 70 cm in front of the patient and 115 cm above the floor. Using a three-dimensional motion analysis system ICpro-K2 system (Hu-tech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), the track of the marker was obtained by following it for 12 s at 30 frames/s. Finally, after stabilization, five consecutive strokes with and without the OS were compared.,
At the initial examination, when the patient was 13 years old, the occlusal force was 16.4 kg, and the gum color was pale pink following the masticatory performance test. The number of mastication strokes was 124, and the masseter muscle activity was 77.9% MVC (the digastric muscle activity was not measured). Using Biteye (GC Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), the number of occlusal contact points was 11, and the occlusal contact area was 8.6 mm2.
The OS was fitted 2 months after the initial examination. Initially, the patient complained of an unpleasant oral sensation while using the OS, but 5 months later at the age of 14, he routinely used the OS when eating. Changes in his occlusion were observed during this period, with the number of occlusal contact points and occlusal contact area having increased to 60 and 28.6 mm2, respectively . After 6 months of routine OS use, at the age of 14.5 years, the patient no longer felt stressed when eating school lunches.
At the age of 16 years, the patient could eat not only chikuwa during school lunches, but also side dishes, without needing them to be cut to size. Mastication was easier, even on the non-habitual side. Subsequently, the left molar region of the OS was damaged, and the left maxillary canine and premolar artificial teeth were lost, requiring repairs. The patient then found it more difficult to eat without the OS, whereas with the OS he had no problems with any foods other than mochi (pounded sticky rice), which is highly adhesive. However, the patient then stopped visiting our department for treatment and was lost to follow-up.
At the age of 20 years, after routinely using the OS for 6 years, the patient experienced a decrease in respiratory function during sleep and required hospitalization for mechanical ventilation. The effects of the OS over the preceding 6 years were re-examined by making comparisons with assessments conducted at the age of 14.5 years. The findings were as follows: the occlusal force remained below 18 kg; the gum color became dark pink; the number of mastication strokes increased from 152 to 169; masseter muscle activity decreased from 50.6 to 33.4% MVC; digastric muscle activity increased from 13.5 to 18.0% MVC; the absence of the OS increased the time to swallowing, during the masticatory performance test with peanuts, from 7.5 to 50 s; and the use of the OS during the mastication performance test with gum increased both the vertical diameter and the width of the mastication cycle in the direction of the working side .