A 54-year-old man underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in our hospital because of intermittent upper abdominal pain for 6 years with a history of Helicobacter pylori infection and eradicating H. pylori treatment. The patient had no family history of gastric cancer. The C13 breath test was negative. EGD revealed an elevated lesion with the size of 7 mm at the great curvature of the gastric body, and no other abnormal lesion was detected in the stomach after a meticulous examination. White light endoscopy (WLE) showed that the elevated lesion was smooth and reddish, covered with normal mucosa, and looked like a polyp . The endoscopic narrow-band image (NBI) showed that the elevated lesion presented as cyan change . Indigo carmine dyeing showed a clear demarcation line and a slightly irregular surface pattern . Magnifying endoscopy with NBI (ME-NBI) showed broadened intervening parts (intercrypt regions), an elongated pit, and a dense microvascular network with focal irregularity . The widening of the crypt implies that there is some kind of tissue underneath the crypt, such as a tumor, lymphoma, and inflammatory growth that leads to the widening of the crypt. ME-NBI only displayed a dense microvascular network with focal irregularity that is not typical microvascular pattern of early gastric cancer. It is difficult to determine the nature of the lesion under endoscopy; therefore, we performed biopsy, and the examination of biopsy specimens revealed that the lesion was SRCC. We considered the lesion to be early intramucosal gastric cancer. Endoscopic therapy was performed. The lesion was completely resected with endoscopic submucosal dissection. The resected specimen was cut into slices, each at 2 mm width. The red lines represent lesion areas in each slice. Oral is the oral margin of the specimen. Anal is the anal margin of the specimen . Pathohistology showed that the lesion was pure SRCC (pT1a, 0-IIa type, no venous or lymphatic invasions, and negative for horizontal and vertical margins). The basement of the lesion was occupied by dense fundus glands, and the cancer cells grew into the lumen and formed an elevated lesion with the characteristics of a gastric phenotype. There were positive Periodic acid-schiff (PAS) staining , negative for mucin mucin 2 (MUC-2) , diffusely positive for mucin (MUC)-5AC , the Ki-67 level of 30% , and positive P53 staining . The further cadherin 1 (CDH1) germline mutation test for the patient was negative. Additional surgical resection is not needed, and no recurrence was observed in the 48-month follow-up.