A 62-year-old Japanese woman with schizophrenia complained of low back pain, gait disorder, dysuria, and fecal incontinence. She had a history of schizophrenia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. She had no previous history of fractures. She first visited an emergency department because of her low back pain that had occurred 4 months earlier and suddenly worsened. However, her low back pain was treated conservatively, because a duty doctor found no significant findings on plain X-ray of her lumbar spine . At the same time, she also complained of dysuria, and a urologist diagnosed neurogenic bladder and cystitis. One month later, she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital for exacerbation of schizophrenia. At the hospital, she had a urethral catheter inserted because of difficulty urinating on her own. She spent 3 months in bed until her schizophrenic symptoms improved.
She was referred to our orthopedic department because a gait disorder was discovered after her mental condition improved and she was permitted to walk. At the first visit to our department, she could not walk and had loss of sensation from the buttocks to both posterior thighs and around the anus and perineum. Manual muscle testing of her lower limbs showed mild weakness of about 4 in bilateral flexor hallucis longus and gastrocnemius, and bilateral Achilles tendon reflexes were lost. Her anal sphincter was unable to contract, and urinary retention continued after removal of the urethral catheter.
Her plain X-ray on admission to the orthopedic department showed a transverse fracture of the third sacral vertebra with displacement, which was not observed in the first X-ray of her lumbar spine on admission to the emergency department . An H-shaped sacral fracture (Rommens classification: type IVb) consisting of a transverse fracture with displacement of the third sacral vertebra and vertical fractures of the bilateral sacral wings was seen on computed tomography (CT) . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed severe stenosis of the spinal canal at the site of the transverse fracture . The patient was then diagnosed as having bladder and rectal dysfunction due to a displaced sacral fracture with instability, and she was treated surgically.
First to third sacral laminectomy was performed, along with alar–iliac fixation using percutaneous pedicle screws and sacral alar–iliac screws . Autogenous bone grafting using bone tissue from the sacrum removed by laminectomy was also performed to allow lumbosacral fixation. The bilateral distal sacral nerve roots (S3, S4, S5) were completely severed at the second to third sacral levels , but the second sacral nerve roots on both sides were not compressed at the site from the bifurcation to the sacral foramen. After the operation, the bladder and rectal dysfunction remained, but the low back pain was alleviated. Two weeks after the operation, she could walk with a walker and was discharged. Three months after the operation, bone fusion of the fracture was observed, and no significant adverse events had occurred .