A 67-year-old female patient with chagasic megaesophagus and megacolon, without myocardiopathy was submitted to a Heller myotomy for achalasia in 2000 and endoscopic dilatation in 2015. Patient was admitted to the Nutrology Ward in May 2016 with protein-calorie malnutrition associated with achalasia and using enteral nutrition. In July 2016, the patient underwent a Serra-Doria surgery. In the third postoperative day she presented an important abdominal distension. She was submitted to a new surgical intervention, and then a terminal ileum perforation was detected, leading the surgeon to perform an enterectomy with side-to-side anastomosis.
The next day after the surgery (4th postoperative day) the patient presented a decreased level of consciousness (Glasgow coma scale = 8), hypotension and hypoxemia. She was submitted to orotracheal intubation and transferred to intensive care unit (ICU). On ICU admission the patient was sedated and hydrated. The body temperature was 38.5 °C, arterial blood pressure = 104 × 55 mmHg, the heart rate was 101 beats per minute and respiratory rate = 14 breaths per minute. The cardiac auscultation was normal, and respiratory auscultation was compromised with adventitious sounds such as rales and crackles especially in the left pulmonary base. A distended abdomen was observed.
Laboratory findings revealed hemoglobin at 8.9 g/dL and hematocrit of 28%. The white blood cells were increased (20,300/mm3), with the left shift until myelocytes (7%) with presence of anisocytosis and neutrophils with abundant toxic granulation. The platelets count was 203,000/mm3, urea = 64 mg/dL, creatinine = 0.96 mg/dL, sodium = 160 mmol/L and potassium = 4.2 mmol/L. The C reactive protein was 19.39 mg/dL. At admission, the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) for the patient was 33 (death risk of 75%). Blood samples were collected and empiric antibiotic treatment was initiated with cefepime and metronidazole focused for intra-abdominal infection. The patient showed a gradual worsening level of consciousness and septic shock with refractory hemodynamic instability unresponsive to fluid or drugs resuscitation. The patient died three days after ICU admission.