The patient was a 20-year-old right handed, healthy man presented to our emergency department due to acute diplopia since 2 days before admission following a powerful sneeze. He had always been well except for a history of slight unsteadiness since a month before admission. Additionally, he reported a daily dull, non-incapacitating generalized pain aggravated by coughing or sneezing. On examination, the patient was alert and conscious with normal verbal communication. Examination of the head and neck revealed inward deviation of both eyes and the inability to move outwards. Noting taken, no papilledema was observed on fundoscopic examination. No other abnormal neurologic signs were observed.
The patient had been under brain and cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which revealed a descent of the cerebellar tonsils and part of the brainstem in the foramen magnum (10 mm), which was not accompanied by cervical syringomyelia . Subsequently, the patient had been under posterior fossa decompression with suboccipital craniotomy and duraplasty which resulted to complete resolution of the chirai. The surgery was followed by partial remission of the diplopia. However, the unsteadiness had gradually worsened in a way that the patient got severely ataxic over 6 months. The neurological examination was characterized by slurred speech, gait ataxia without a tilt, bilateral dysmetria at the index-nose and heel to shin test. The cranial examination revealed right 6th nerve palsy which was the remainder of the recent diplopia , nystagmus in all gaze direction, more evident on the right side. Other neurologic examination was remarkable.
In a more précised history, the family history was negative for any neurological disorder and the patient did not make biographies of any problem except for ataxia. Consequently, the patient underwent a complete screening for acquired ataxia including vitamin B1 deficiency due to alcohol abuse, autoimmune and paraneoplastic ataxia, ataxia associated with celiac disease, demyelinating disorder and autoimmune thyroiditis, nutritional deficiency and infections which were all unrevealing. Again the patient had been under brain MRI which showed a significant bilateral cerebellar hemispheres atrophy.
According to the new findings, the inherited atatxia was strongly suggested aside the underlying chari malformation. At this time the patient had been under genetic test. Ataxia repeat expansion panel test was checked which revealed a pathogenic (full penetrance) CAG repeats (64 repeats) in the ATX3 gene. Eventually the patient was diagnosed with SCA-3 (Machado-Joseph-Disease).