A 68-year-old woman with no psychiatric history was referred by her dermatologist for a psychiatric consultation. The patient complained of burning, itching, and generalized pain in the region of her head and face. She described persistent and spreading abnormal tactile sensations. In addition, the patient complained of the rise in incidence of these persistent mobile skin vesicles. She had strong conviction that the vesicles were infested by some tiny pathogens (vermin). The patient was so disturbed by these complaints that her quality of life had progressively deteriorated. She spent much of her time trying to get rid of the vesicles and kill the pathogens, using mechanical force and chemical self-cleaning (disinfectants, alcohol, creams, soap). The patient’s symptoms had persisted for the past 2 years. She consulted several general practitioners, dermatologists, and microbiologists but avoided psychiatrists. Despite seeing several doctors and dermatologists who performed two biopsies and a lymphoscintigraphy exam, she was never given an accurate diagnosis. No medical or microbiological evidence was found for this.
On psychiatric evaluation, the patient described a history of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms, lasting for 3–4 years, following the death of her mother (who died from primary skin carcinoma of her face). Although the patient exhibited few current symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder, she did express having some nightmares and more frequently, diurnal ‘flashbacks’ in which her own face was superimposed with that of her mother’s degraded face. These ‘flashbacks’ can be also interpreted as visual illusions or hallucinations. The patient did not show any signs consistent with a chronic mood disorder or other psychosis. However, she clearly expressed her fear of having the same fate as her mother at the same age, and the fear of having a disfigured face.
We decided to start the patient on aripiprazole (5 mg/day). Although there have been no controlled clinical trials, there is significant evidence for effectiveness of second-generation antipsychotics in the treatment of this syndrome, eg, risperidone,– aripiprazole, and blonanserin in the treatment of delusional infestation. We chose aripiprazole because of its mechanism of action and its good clinical tolerance profile. Indeed, aripiprazole has a unique pharmacological effect on the dopamine neurotransmission system (partial agonist at dopamine D2 and D3 receptors).
An fMRI was performed before and after the treatment period. Scanning was performed on a 3T Siemens Verio MRI scanner (Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany). Functional images were acquired using a single-shot echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence sensitive to blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) contrast (repetition time [TR] =3 seconds; echo time [TE] =30 ms; flip angle =90°; 50 contiguous slices; 2.5 mm thickness; 2.5×2.5 mm in-plane resolution; field of view [FOV] =240 mm). The patient performed a visual mental imagery task with a block paradigm, which included 13 rest condition blocks (lasting 12 seconds) and four different mental imagery conditions (lasting 15 seconds, each repeated three times): 1) imagery of her own hand, 2) her own face, 3) her husband’s face, and 4) her mother’s face.
We obtained written informed consent from the patient prior to performing any procedures. Moreover, written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal.