A 73-year-old woman developed ptosis and external ophthalmoplegia of the right eye. Magnetic resonance angiography showed a giant right cavernous ICA aneurysm and endovascular treatment with flow diversion was planned. The patient was started on aspirin and clopidogrel one month before treatment.
Under general anesthesia and after general heparinization, a 6-Fr guiding sheath (Fubuki Dilator Kit, 80 cm; Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) was placed from the right femoral artery into the right cervical ICA. The aneurysm originated from the C4 portion of the right ICA, and the diameter of the dome was 27.6 × 25.1 mm [ and ]. Both the distal and proximal parent arteries were incorporated into the aneurysm wall and were flattened and obstructed due to the mass effect. The distance between the inflow and outflow was 13 mm.
Using a 5-Fr Navien, 115 cm (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) as an intermediate catheter, we attempted to guide a Phenom 27 (Medtronic) and Chikai 14, 200 cm (Asahi Intecc) into the distal parent artery using the standard technique. However, although the guidewire could be guided to the origin of the distal parent artery, it could not be guided further distally [ and ]. Therefore, the Phenom 27 was exchanged for a Leonis Mova Selective, 150 cm [ and ], and by bending the tip appropriately and keeping it directed toward the orifice of the distal parent artery [ and ], the guidewire could be guided to the M2 portion of the middle cerebral artery [ and ].
The Leonis Mova was exchanged for a Phenom 27 using a Chikai 14, 300 cm (Asahi Intecc). During this procedure, the tip of the Phenom 27 was stuck at the orifice of the distal parent artery due to the “ledge effect” and could not be guided . A Chikai 10, 200 cm (Asahi Intecc) was inserted in parallel with the Chikai 14 to resolve the snagging, and the Phenom 27 was guided distally . A 4.5 × 35 mm Pipeline Embolization Device Flex with Shield Technology (Medtronic) was deployed from the C2 to C4 segment, and a similar 4.5 × 25 mm stent was overlapped along the neck . Angioplasty was performed with a 7 × 7 mm Shouryu 2 HR (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan). Cone-beam computed tomography confirmed good apposition of the stent to the parent artery wall. Angiography showed an eclipse sign with an O’Kelly–Marotta Grading Scale score of A3. Blood flow in the distal ICA improved in comparison with before treatment.
The postoperative course was good, and the patient’s ptosis began to improve on postoperative day 3. She was discharged on postoperative day 12.