A 17-year-old nulliparous unmarried girl was carried into the admission room at Mbarara regional referral hospital’s gynaecology ward. The chief complaints were: collapse, mass protruding per vagina that followed Valsalva (defecation), and persistent lower abdominal pain but without vaginal bleeding. She had secretly induced abortion at 18 weeks amenorrhea with misoprostol at a rural clinic. Products of conception were not expelled within 4 days prompting her to seek surgical uterine evacuation at a different clinic located ~ 40 km away. The third day after surgical evacuation, she collapsed at home and was brought to our facility. The pregnancy was unplanned. Contraception had been desired but was not readily available.
On examination, she was agitated, severely pale, and cold (temperature 35.8 °C), in a state of shock with a feeble radial pulse at 143 beats/minute, and nonrecordable low blood pressure. The abdomen was soft and non-tender with no palpable masses. On vaginal inspection, a fleshy mass with gangrenous patches measuring about 8 cm by 5 cm was protruding in the introitus. The raw surface was not actively bleeding but foul-smelling pus oozed out of the necrotic patches of the inverted uterine fundus. On digital vaginal examination, the cervical lip was not felt around the mass, on bimanual palpation, the uterine fundus was absent at its expected periumbilical position and cupping was felt. A clinical diagnosis of subacute uterine inversion with hemorrhagic shock was made.
We called for immediate assistance, informed anaesthesiology staff, and blood bank personnel. Simultaneously, two large-bore intravenous lines plus crystalloid infusion and blood transfusion were initiated. Three units of whole blood were transfused. The antibiotics given were intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole while the analgesic was an injection of diclofenac. The pre-transfusion complete blood count showed severe anaemia with a haemoglobin concentration of 4.5 g/dl, and 12,600 leucocytes per microliter with 89% neutrophilia; other parameters were within normal ranges.
She was then transferred urgently to the operation theatre for examination under anaesthesia, and the repositioning of the uterus. Nonsurgical correction using Johnson’s and O Sullivan’s methods were attempted with no success. We proceeded and performed a laparotomy. Intraabdominal, the classic flowerpot appearance was seen as the cupping of the uterus, along with tubes, ovaries, round, and ovarian ligaments. Both tubes were found congested and thickened. We attempted Huntington’s procedure to correct inversion in vain. The pouch of Douglas was markedly oedematous and friable. Anterior incision (Ocejo incision) was made at the anterior surface of the uterus after reflecting bladder peritoneum, transected the constriction ring. The inverted uterus was then manually reduced. The fundus was necrotic and a total abdominal hysterectomy performed. The postoperative period was uneventful, Table .