A 60-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypertension was admitted to the hospital with complaints of atrophic right kidney with hydronephrosis and intermittent postprandial bloating. A physical examination revealed left lower quadrant abdominal tenderness and no costovertebral angle tenderness. A laboratory examination revealed increased serum levels of creatinine. No other abnormal findings were observed in urine analysis and autoimmune disease tests. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed wall thickening of the descending part of the duodenum and left hydronephrosis with atrophic renal parenchyma . Since the patient was allergic to procaine and iodine, contrast-enhanced CT could not be performed. Consequently, EGD and small bowel endoscopy were performed, and these tests revealed circumferential stenosis at the junction of the descending and inferior duodenum . Biopsies from EGD and small bowel endoscope were obtained, and histopathological examination only revealed duodenitis. Based on these findings, the underlying cause of the duodenal wall thickening remained unclear since no specific findings. To identify the underlying reason, EUS-FNA of the thickened duodenal wall was successfully performed with a 22 G needle (Cook Medical, USA). EUS of the duodenal lesion showed a thickened duodenal wall (thickness: 15 mm, Fig. A, B). On-site evaluation for a poorly carcinoma is made because of increased cellularity and markedly atypical clusters. Further immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the cancer cells were positive for CK-Pan, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), and partly positive Ki-67 . Based on immunohistochemical stating, we suspected that poorly differentiated carcinoma was spread from the urinary system. Due to obstruction of the urinary tract and the duodenum, the patient received a ureteric stent and gastrointestinal bypass surgery. Biopsy specimens were also obtained from the procedure. The final pathological diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma was made based on P63-positive and GATA3-positive , which was consistent with the initial diagnosis of EUS-FNA.