A 19-year-old Japanese woman underwent root canal treatment on tooth #47 by a general practitioner in 2005, but dull pain persisted after. Tooth #48, which was horizontally embedded, was extracted in August 2010, but the pain continued. In August 2015, she presented at the Department of Oral Surgery of another hospital with a purulent discharge from the pocket of tooth #47. Intraoral radiography showed insufficient root canal filling in the distal root and a foreign body, suspected to be extruded gutta-percha, outside the apex of the mesial root of tooth #47, accompanied by bone absorption around both roots . Two months later, she underwent extraction of tooth #47, removal of the foreign body, and curettage of the periapical lesion, resulting in the disappearance of the pain. However, she noted expansion of the right posterior mandibular bone in March 2016 and was thus referred in May 2016 to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. Her health and nutritional status were good in spite of a low body mass index (17.0). Both a blood test and a chest X-ray showed normal findings. She had neither lymphadenopathy nor paralysis of the mental/lingual nerve. The right inferior border of the mandibular bone slightly bulged. The socket of tooth #47 was epithelialized, and tooth #46 was vital, with a pocket depth of 3 mm. There was no sinus tract. Panoramic radiography revealed new bone formation at the equivalent sites of teeth #48 and #47 and a radiolucent region around the distal root of tooth #46 . Computed tomography showed continuous absorption from the alveolar bone of the distal root of tooth #46 to the lingual cortical bone at the equivalent of tooth #47 and six granulated hard tissues . On magnetic resonance imaging, the right lower molar region was of low intensity on an enhanced T1-weighted image and high intensity on an enhanced T2-weighted image . This same region was enhanced heterogeneously by gadolinium, as was the soft tissue located between interior to the mandibular angle and anterior to the submandibular gland . She was diagnosed clinically as having osteomyelitis of the right mandible.
Surgical debridement under general anesthesia was performed. Via the submandibular region, an incision was made in the thickened periosteum at the inferior border of the mandible, after which the lingual periosteum was separated from the mandible . Tooth #46 was then extracted to achieve complete primary closure, and the gingiva incised to enucleate the soft tissue including some of the hard tissues accompanying the periapical lesion of tooth #46 . There was no sequestrum and the intraoral wound was closed primarily. Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, with no exacerbation of the inflammation for more than 20 months.
On histopathologic examination, a large epithelioid cell granuloma with central caseating necrosis was observed in the dense fibrous tissue . The granuloma contained Langhans multinucleated giant cells. Acid-fast bacilli were not detected by either Ziehl–Neelsen staining or immunohistochemical staining using anti-BCG and anti-TB1 antibodies. Grocott staining revealed a slight presence of fungi. The pathological diagnosis was epithelioid cell granuloma including caseating necrosis.