A 67-year-old male of South Asian background with history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes presented with a 4-month history of systemic upset, 7 kg weight loss, lethargy, and migratory joint pains. He was referred to our service having developed leg swelling and shortness of breath with associated significant proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine ratio 1042 mg/mmol). On examination, there was pitting peripheral edema to the mid shins without rash, embolic phenomena, or cardiac murmur. There was reduced air entry in the lungs bi-basally, blood pressure was 145/89 and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. His serum creatinine was 140 μmol/L, and he was hypoalbuminemic (17 g/L) and hypercholersterolemic (9.3 mmol/L), consistent with the nephrotic syndrome. Further investigation demonstrated hypocomplementemia (C3 0.59 g/L, C4 < 0.02 g/L) and raised IgG4 subclass levels (5.29 g/L) . Ultrasound showed cortical irregularity of both kidneys and a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) demonstrated multiple avid lymph nodes in addition to uptake in the spleen, pancreas, and prostate .
The differential diagnosis for nephrotic syndrome with low (consumed) complement includes immune-complex related glomerulonephritides [such as an infection-related glomerulonephritis (GN), membranoproliferative GN, lupus nephritis, and Sjögren’s syndrome-associated GNs], cholesterol embolization, and glomerular disease in the setting of IgG4-RD. The patient underwent diagnostic kidney biopsy to differentiate between these potential causes. Glomeruli were unremarkable on light microscopy with no glomerular immunoglobulin staining . Electron microscopy demonstrated complete foot process effacement without the presence of electron dense deposits, consistent with MCD . In addition, there was a plasma-cell-rich interstitial infiltrate with strong positive staining for IgG4 (52 IgG+ plasma cells/high power field and 60% IgG4/IgG ratio), fulfilling Raissan’s diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RKD . A unifying diagnosis of MCD in the setting of IgG4-RKD was made.
The patient was treated with oral prednisolone at 60 mg daily alongside conservative measures for the nephrotic syndrome (angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition, furosemide, atorvastatin, and heparin). There was no significant glomerular response, and on day 17 he presented to hospital with an enlarging erythematous, macular rash on his thigh, which was extremely tender to palpation. He was systemically unwell with fever and a clinical diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis was made. Despite intravenous antibiotics and multiple surgical debridements, he became increasingly septic requiring ventilatory and renal support within intensive care. Immunosuppression was reduced, and intravenous immunoglobulin was given owing to new-onset hypogammaglobulinemia. Despite this, he developed bacteremia (Enterobacter cloacae and Enterococcus faecium) and fungemia (Candida albicans) with resultant mitral valve endocarditis. His disease course culminated in acute bowel ischemia and a decision was made at this point to provide palliative care. The patient died 52 days after initial presentation.