A 57-year-old female presented with a 6-month history of intermittent epigastric dull pain and dyspepsia. No gastrointestinal hemorrhage, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, excessive alcohol ingestion, or chronic liver disease was reported. A positive fecal occult blood test was reported 3 months prior to admission. Hemoglobin and hematocrit were 10.1 g/dL and 28%, respectively, with an otherwise normal full blood picture. Subsequent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a friable mass which extended from the distal antrum to the pyloric ring. Routine biopsy showed the presence of intestinal type adenocarcinoma. Abdominal computerized tomography showed a tumor mass originating from the anterior wall of the antrum with a suspicion of lymph node metastasis. Subtotal gastrectomy was performed after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Grossly, a large irregular plaque-like lesion, sized 5.6 × 4.8 × 1.0 cm, was noted at the anterior wall of the distal antrum and pylorus ring near the lesser curvature . Postoperatively, the diagnosis of DL was made via histopathologic examination. At microscopy, numerous abnormally large-caliber tortuous arteries were identified in the submucosa with increased submucosal fibrosis, resulting in formation of an elevated plaque . The intestinal type adenocarcinoma was mostly confined to the mucosa , with focal submucosal and muscular propria involvement. Results of the serial section performed in the cancer and non-tumor areas of the specimen are shown in Fig. . The intima of the arteriolar wall exhibited focal thickening with ordinary elastic lamina . Two regional metastatic lymph nodes were reportedly found in the specimen. No lymphovascular invasion was identified. No Helicobacter pylori were seen in the regional non-neoplastic gastric mucosa. The regional non-neoplastic gastric mucosa revealed chronic gastritis with increased lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrations. Focal intestinal metaplasia was noted. At the cancerous area, immunohistochemistry studies revealed diffusely positive for CEA and an increased proliferative index in Ki-67 study . The patient was discharged 1 week later, and she was alive 17 months following surgery with regular follow-up.