An 81-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a 5-month history of dysphagia. His medical history included diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory examination revealed elevated blood levels of hemoglobin A1c (7.2%) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (9.6 ng/ml). A barium esophagogram revealed an ulcerative mass measuring 85 mm in length between the lower thoracic esophagus and abdominal esophagus . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed an ulcerated mass involving the entire esophageal circumference in the lower thoracic esophagus, extending up to the esophagogastric junction (33 to 40 cm from the incisors) . Histopathological examination of an endoscopic biopsy specimen showed proliferation of atypical cells with glandular structures, based on which the tumor was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma . Computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening from the lower thoracic esophagus to the abdominal esophagus, but no evidence of lymph node or distant metastasis . Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) in the lower thoracic esophagus, with a standardized uptake value of 8.8 . Thus, the patient was diagnosed as having esophagogastric junctional cancer (Siewert type I, T3N0M0, stage IIA: TNM-UICC 7th) and treated by thoracoscopic esophagectomy in the prone position, with three-field lymph node dissection and gastric tube reconstruction via a posterior mediastinal approach. The resected specimen revealed an ulcerated mass measuring 10.0 × 7.5 cm in size . Histopathological examination of the specimen revealed two distinct components, namely, an adenocarcinoma component and a neuroendocrine carcinoma component, with no zone of transition between the two . The neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) component, with small round tumor cells with a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, was seen at the center of the tumor, while the tumor periphery was composed of the well-differentiated adenocarcinoma component. The tumor fulfilled the diagnostic criterion of MANEC of each of the two components comprising at least 30% of the tumor area. Immunohistochemically, the neuroendocrine component showed positive staining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CEA, and the Ki-67 was more than 70% . The adenocarcinoma component showed positive staining for CEA. Neither component showed positive staining for KIT (CD117), which is a stem cell marker . The neuroendocrine component involved all layers of the gastrointestinal wall, with lymphovascular invasion. There was no lymph node metastasis. Therefore, the final pathological diagnosis was MANEC of the esophagogastric junction (T3N0M0, stage IIA). The patient was discharged from the hospital 32 days after the surgery, without any complications. Because the patient was elderly, a decision was taken against postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Six months after the surgery, the patient presented with liver metastasis. Thereafter, the tumor became even more aggressive, and the patient died 8 months after the surgery.