A 47-year-old ex-smoker male with a normal body mass index (BMI) of 20, had peptic ulcer disease, treated with triple therapy in 2016. The patient presented to the emergency department with a 1-day history of severe epigastric pain, dizziness, and multiple episodes of melaena. On initial physical examination, the patient was hypotensive with blood pressure of 92/62 mmHg, pulse 60 bpm, temperature of 37 degrees Celsius, oxygen saturation of 100 % on room air. The initial examination was significant for a mildly distended abdomen with tenderness in the epigastric region and no signs of guarding or rigidity. A digital rectal examination confirmed the presence of melaena.
Initial laboratory investigations were as follows: Haemoglobin of 7.3 g/dL, pH 7.32, lactate 1.98 mmol/L, white cell count 13 × 109/L, platelets 74 × 109/L, international normalised ratio of 1.54. The liver function test and biochemistry results were unremarkable. The patient was resuscitated with intravenous fluid and packed red blood cells (PRBCs) in the emergency department. An urgent gastroenterology consultation was initiated in addition to intensive care unit (ICU) assessment. He was immediately started on omeprazole infusion. The patient remained hypotensive; noradrenaline infusion was started by the ICU team, and he was shifted to the ICU. An urgent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed in the ICU which showed grade II distal esophagitis, gastric erythema, first part of duodenum ulcer with clean base and no stigmata of recent bleeding. However, there was retrograde fresh blood coming beyond the duodenojejunal junction. Despite continuous resuscitation, the haemoglobin dropped to 5.8g/dL, and the patient was hemodynamically unstable. An urgent abdominal CTA revealed a well circumscribed, highly vascular, distal ileum mass with an exophytic component .
Upon reassessment, a new finding of generalised abdominal rigidity was discovered. Emergent exploratory laparotomy was performed via midline incision. The intraoperative findings revealed a jejunal exophytic mass about 4X3X3 cm and around 120 cm from the duodenojejunal junction with minimal serous fluid intraperitoneally . Damage control was performed with only resection of a jejunal mass due to the hemodynamic instability of the patient, and presence of high dose of inotropic and vasopressor supports with the intent for a second look after resuscitation and stabilisation. The patient remained intubated and closely observed in the ICU. After 48 h, the inotrope had been discontinued, and the haemoglobin level had stabilised. He was taken to the operating theatre for a second look, during which 10 cm of small bowel loops were resected from jejunal edges along with the mesentery with side-to-side anastomosis, placement of Malecot drainage catheter, and closure of the abdomen. The patient was then observed in the ICU for 3 days, after which he was transferred to a general surgical ward in a stable condition. During his hospital stay, the patient developed a wound infection, which was managed with ceftriaxone (2 g IV) with twice-daily wound cleansing and dressing change. He also developed a partial bowel obstruction, secondary to an ileus. The obstruction was treated conservatively with a nasogastric tube and a trial of Gastrografin.
The initial histopathology findings of the jejunal specimen were consistent with grade 1 GIST. Grossly, the specimen consisted of a brown segment of small bowel, measuring 7 cm in length and 3 cm in diameter. The mass, measuring 4 × 3.5 × 3.5 cm, was attached to an intact serosal surface. Microscopically, sections revealed an encapsulated lesion composed of bland-looking spindle and epithelioid cells with vesicular, round to ovoid nuclei (A and B). Inflammatory cells with mitotic figures were noted (0–1/HPF). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated strongly positive CD117 and DOG-1 immunostaining reactions (C and D). The second histopathology from the second look revealed an active inflammation, congestion, and reactive changes with congested mesenteric fat. The histopathology was negative for malignancy with a single negative lymph node.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 19 and was given a referral to the national cancer centre for further assessment and management.