We report the case of a 52-year-old man with primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) for twelve years, with one episode of deep vein thrombosis, migraine, and persistent high titers of IgG anti-cardiolipin and aβ2GPI antibodies.
Three weeks before admission to hospital, the patient presented an episode of acute bacterial prostatitis treated by ciprofloxacin for 2 weeks.
On the day of admission, he presented deterioration of his general condition, with weight loss, splinter hemorrhages, leg ulcers, and livedo reticularis.
Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed ST-segment depression in the lateral territory. Echocardiography showed left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction between 30 and 35% but no regional wall motion abnormalities.
Laboratory results showed elevated cardiac troponin at 16.3 μg/L, thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 76 × 103/mm3, no schizocytes, elevated C-reactive protein of 94 mg/L, prothrombin time within the therapeutic range (INR: 4.35), microscopic hematuria without renal failure, and high aPL titers (aCL IgG: 76.7 GPL, IgM: 17.4 MPL, aβ2GPI IgG: 83.2 SGU, and IgM: 30.8 SMU).
Therapy for catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome was immediately initiated, comprising three 1 g pulses of methylprednisolone followed by prednisone 80 mg/day and unfractionated heparin (UFH) targeting serum UFH level between 0.3 and 0.7 IU/mL.
Despite treatment, platelet count decreased to 16 × 103/mm3 on day 3. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was unlikely because of negative ELISA test for heparin-PF4 antibodies.
On day 4, the patient developed acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. Doppler ultrasound did not reveal any signs of deep vein thrombosis. CT scan did not visualize any pulmonary opacities and lung perfusion scintigraphy showed diffuse defects but no arguments in favor of pulmonary embolism. He was admitted to our medical intensive care unit with severe hypoxemia requiring high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy with a gas flow of 60 liters per minute and a FiO2 of 1.0 to achieve a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 81.
On day 5, he developed right flank pain and another CT scan showed massive right adrenal hemorrhage . He also developed acute renal failure with serum creatinine increased to 246 μmol/L. Laboratory results showed increasing aPL titers with aCL IgG: 147.7 GPL, IgM: 81.4 MPL, aβ2GPI IgG: 124.8 SGU, and IgM: 148.2 SMU.
In view of the patient's worsening general condition associated with an inflammatory syndrome, systemic antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam and amikacin was initiated. Unfractionated heparin (UFH) was continued despite the bleeding and daily plasma exchange (PE) was started on day 6. The patient's general condition rapidly improved following initiation of plasma exchange with successful weaning of oxygen and normalization of platelet count, troponin, and serum creatinine within four days . Six days after initiation of PE, laboratory results showed a decline in aPL titers (aCL IgG: 95.8 GPL, IgM: 21.1 MPL, aβ2GPI IgG: 110.1 SGU, and IgM: 50 SMU).
On day 11, the patient was discharged from the intensive care unit to the medical ward, where plasma exchange was gradually performed less frequently.