A 57-year-old Caucasian woman with a four-year history of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) complained of several weeks of dry mouth, polydipsia and episodes of confusion. Her serum calcium was 14.4 mg/dL when tested at the office of her primary care physician (PCP) and sent to the emergency department (ED) where her exam was remarkable only for dry mucous membranes. Initial labs were notable for Ca 14.4 mg/dL, albumin 5.0 g/dL, PTH 7 pg/mL, and Cr at 1.94. CBC was notable for mild pancytopenia with WBC 3.5 (th/cmm) with normal differential, Hgb 11.7 g/dL, Hct 34.2 (%), and PLT 145,000 (th/cmm). She received a bolus of normal saline and was subsequently admitted to inpatient service. Initially, the patient’s hypercalcemia was attributed to milk-alkali syndrome and her calcium supplements were discontinued. The patient was managed only with IV hydration. The patient’s serum calcium trended down to 10 mg/dL at the time of discharge.
There was a concern for a neoplastic process, particularly myeloma, given her history of MGUS. The patient underwent bone marrow biopsy at the time of discharge, which was remarkable for non-necrotizing granulomas with no findings suggestive of plasma cell dyscrasia or other neoplasms. Two weeks later, the patient’s repeat calcium was 12.7 mg/dL despite adequate fluid intake. The patient was admitted for further evaluation of hypercalcemia and bone marrow granulomas. An extensive hypercalcemia workup was unrevealing. Malignant and infectious etiologies of granulomatous disease in this patient were investigated. Results from repeat SPEP, UPEP, and serum free light chains were unchanged from baseline values. PTHrp was undetectable. PET scan showed no FDG avid lesions. Infectious workup for granulomas was negative. The patient’s hypercalcemia was attributed to the granulomas given exclusion of other potential causes. As a result, a workup for sarcoidosis was pursued, which was notable for elevated ACE 126 and urinary calcium of 256 mg/24 h . Chest X-ray and chest CT revealed no intrathoracic lymphadenopathy or pulmonary parenchymal findings . There was no evidence of sarcoidosis in any other organ.
The patient underwent a rapid prednisone taper over 9 days. After discontinuation of prednisone, she developed hypercalcemia again. She was then treated with a slow prednisone taper for four months with normalization of serum calcium levels. A follow-up bone marrow biopsy 5 months later (1 month after 4-month course of slow prednisone taper) showed partial resolution of granulomas without malignancies. At her follow-up PCP visit, two years after her initial presentation, the patient was overall asymptomatic with normal serum calcium, ACE, and CBC.