Eleven years ago, a 46-year-old white man presented with painless jaundice. He showed no other symptoms and had no risk factors such as high alcohol consumption or tobacco smoking. With a bodyweight of 73 kg and a height of 175 cm his body mass index (BMI) was 24.49 kg/m2 at the time of presentation. His mother had colorectal cancer otherwise there was no family history.
An endosonography showed an intraluminal polypoid tumor with disintegration of all wall layers at the bifurcation of his bile duct system. The finding was confirmed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Biopsies were taken with the pathologic results coming back inconclusive.
Computed tomography showed an intrahepatic cholestasis and two hypodense lesions in segment VIII of his liver. It showed no signs of metastasis or other unknown pathologies. The analysis of serum tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was negative and cancer antigen (CA) 19-9 was found to be elevated at 75 kU/l (<37 kU/l).
He was treated with right liver lobectomy with resection of the bile duct directly distal of his pancreatic head, resection of the bile duct of his left liver lobe up to the first intersection, and with a regional lymphadenectomy. The reconstruction was performed by biliodigestive anastomosis with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. A bile duct drain was inserted in the dorsal bile duct of his left lobe and closed on day 10 after contrast imaging of the anastomosis. Postoperatively, he recovered well. On the planned day of discharge he developed an aphasia leading to further diagnostics, which showed a transitoric ischemic attack of his left-brain hemisphere. He was transferred to neurology and fully recovered.
A gross examination showed a right hemihepatectomy with a 4×2×2 cm polypoid tumor in his right hepatic bile duct extending into the bile duct junction (mainly intraductal growth type). The liver parenchyma was non-cirrhotic and prominent portal tracts were seen. Resection margins were free of tumor.
Histologic examination revealed an intraductal tumor with tubular and papillary and solid growth pattern. There was a stromal invasion into the ductus hepaticus dexter. In the portal tracts intraductal tumor growth without stromal invasion was found . According to TNM classification the tumor staging was pT1 pN0 (0/4) M0 R0, G2.
The same patient presented 2 years ago at the age of 55 with a mass of 1.8×2.4 cm at the papilla of Vater. The mass was detected via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) during a regular cancer follow-up. In the meantime he had developed an arterial hypertension that was well controlled with ramipril 5 mg once daily. On admission he reported no weight loss, no fever, no sweating, and no signs of icterus or pruritus. His clinical examination was without any pathological finding.
Contrast sonography showed a hypertrophia of his left liver lobe with status post-right hemihepatectomy and no pathological findings. Computed tomography showed a dilatation of the residual common bile duct and normal size pancreatic duct and a contrast enhancement next to the papilla of Vater leading to the suspicion of an intraductal tumor. There were no signs of metastasis .
On macroscopic examination, an ERCP supported the suspicion of an adenocarcinoma in his distal residual common bile duct. The pathology of the biopsy came back positive for an adenocarcinoma. An analysis of serum tumor markers (CA 19-9, CA 72-4, CA 125, and CEA) showed no elevation.
He was treated with a pylorus-preserving resection of his pancreas head and his duodenum. Postoperatively, he recovered well. Oral nutrition with low amounts of fluids were started on day 1 and escalated up to solid food on day 5. He was discharged on day 14. A 6 French pancreatic drain that was placed intraoperatively was removed on day 30 during an ambulatory visit.
In addition, he received adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 at day 1, 8, and 15 every 4 weeks) as monotherapy. Chemotherapy was planned for 6 months but discontinued after 3 months due to head aches and weight loss. As of April 2016, there are no signs of tumor recurrence during follow-up.
A pancreatoduodenectomy was performed and on macroscopic exploration there was a 1×1×1 cm tumor at the ampullary region involving his common bile duct. Histologic examination revealed a tubular and papillary growth pattern . The tumor was similar to the tumor described in his case of pCCA. On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells expressed cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CA 19-9. The resection margins were free and the tumor was staged as pT2 pN0 (0/14) R0, G2.
Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples of both cases as described before . Isolated DNA (<0.5 to 97.6 ng/μl) was amplified with an in-house specified, customized Ion AmpliSeq Primer Pool. The panel comprises amplicons of 12 different genes. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products were ligated to adapters and enriched for target regions using the Ion AmpliSeq Panel™ Library kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Life Technologies). The generated libraries were equimolar pooled for amplicon sequencing to a concentration of 20 nM of each sample to counterbalance differences in sample quality. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq benchtop sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Results were visualized in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) and manually analyzed. A 5 % cutoff for variant calls was used and results were only interpreted if the coverage was >100. Both tumors were analyzed as described and the results are shown in Table . An identical activating mutation of the PIK3CA gene exon 20 was found in both tumors.