A retired 87-year-old ex-army officer and policewoman attended the clinic for follow-up after starting generic latanoprost 50-μg/ml eye drops 3 months earlier. The patient had been monitored regularly for 3 years as a glaucoma suspect and at her last appointment had been diagnosed with normal-tension glaucoma. At that time, her best-corrected vision was 6/24 in the right eye and 6/18 in the left eye. Her decreased vision was explained by the presence of significant nuclear sclerotic cataract bilaterally. Her intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in both eyes. The central corneal thickness reading was 555 μm in the right eye and 559 μm in the left eye. The right eye had a cup disc ratio of 0.65 with an inferior hemorrhage and the left eye had a cup disc ratio of 0.8 with superior and temporal thinning. The patient recorded a normal visual field on Humphrey visual field testing (SITA Fast 24-2). The patient was presented with the options of starting latanoprost eye drops or undergoing micropulse diode laser trabeculoplasty and chose eye drops.
At the follow-up appointment, the patient informed us that she had stopped using the drops a month earlier when she developed a blistering rash around both eyes and on her hands. She reported that the pain was so severe initially that she had been unable to sleep. The patient sought advice from her general practitioner, who suggested that she stop using the drops. Thereafter, her rash and pain improved significantly but traces of the erythematous rash remained on her face, neck [Figures and ] and hands [Figures and ]. The lesions were still slightly tender on palpation. The patient's general health was excellent for her age and she was not taking any prescribed medications. She was independently mobile with no walking aids and was completely self-caring. She was well presented at clinic and was accompanied by her son. There was no history of allergy to medication and she was on no other treatment at the time.
Given the painful blistering rash, the patient declined further eye drops and did not want to undergo micropulse diode laser trabeculoplasty. There was no concern regarding the patient's competency. The patient's son, who was also present at the consultation, agreed with her decision. We respected her wishes and informed her fully regarding the possible impact of her choice. The patient was offered further follow-up with the department but did not attend the appointments. The authors subsequently contacted the patient via telephone. She informed us that the cutaneous lesions resolved following cessation of the offending latanoprost eye drops and that she remains very well.