In November 2018, a 68-year-old man was admitted to our center with chief complaints of a significant increase in CA199 (>1,000.00 U/ml) without any other discomfort. Four months prior, he had been clinically diagnosed with GBC due to an elevated CA199 (>1000.00 U/ml) and gallbladder occupancy found in his physical examination. He underwent radical surgery at a local hospital. His postoperative pathology confirmed the diagnosis of GBC, and suggested a stage of pT3N1M0, stage IIIB according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network staging criteria . After surgery, the serum CA199 level decreased to 80 U/ml . The patient did not undergo any postoperative adjuvant therapy. He had been generally fit, except for a 10-year history of hypertension and used propranolol for high blood pressure, which was well controlled. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status on admission was 1. In December 2018, a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET-CT) at our hospital revealed multiple masses in the liver, extensive lymph nodes enlargement involving the anterior abdominal aorta, lesser omentum, and anterior supra-diaphragmatic, all with high FDG accumulation; and multiple nodules in the lung were considered inflammatory nodules . Detection of tumor markers showed that CA199 was >1,000.00 U/ml and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 21.63 ng/ml . A pathological consultation was performed in our hospital, and pathological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was established. He was diagnosed with gallbladder adenocarcinoma with liver, supra-diaphragmatic, and abdominal lymph node metastases (cT3N2M1, stage IVB).
In December 2018, the patient received gemcitabine-cisplatin chemotherapy and experienced tolerable toxicities of reversible grade 2 anemia and grade 2 pruritic rash on the trunk and limbs. After two cycles of chemotherapy, his tumor shrank remarkably, and an objective response of partial response (PR) was assessed. Therefore, he continued to receive chemotherapy, and the tumor response was maintained after three additional cycles of chemotherapy. The tumor markers CA199 and CEA dropped to 53.94 U/ml and 1.96 ng/ml, respectively. In June 2019, based on the results of a phase 2 clinical trial, his chemotherapy regimen was switched to nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine-cisplatin regimen and experienced recurrent mouth ulcers in addition to hair loss plus slight leukopenia. The oral ulcers ameliorated with salt water gargling and the leukopenia was alleviated by an injection of colony-stimulating factor. After three cycles of the triple-drug chemotherapy, a CT scan showed disappearance of the tumor lesions, and PET-CT demonstrated no lesions in the liver and upper abdominal lymph nodes; the anterior group of lymph nodes in the diaphragm was smaller than before, and no increase in glucose metabolism was observed . Moreover, CA199 dropped to the normal range of 8.65 U/ml and CEA was 2.74 ng/ml . The patient achieved a CR to therapy. Then, he received 10 months of capecitabine monotherapy maintenance treatment.
In June 2020, his CA199 was abnormally elevated to 115 U/ml, while no other hematological abnormalities were observed, and no lesions were detected by PET-CT . Due to the adverse events of nausea and vomiting while on capecitabine, his maintenance regimen was converted to S-1 in July 2020, and he began to experience progressively worse epigastric pain and signs of epigastric tenderness after 4 months, with an increase in CA199 and CEA to 733.40 U/ml and 7.52 ng/ml, respectively. Subsequently, PET-CT, conducted in December 2020, showed multi-metastatic lesions in both lungs and liver, along with tumor metastases in the right parasternal, parietal trunk, and para-aortic lymph nodes . The patient received triple-drug regimen of nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine-cisplatin again. After two cycles of chemotherapy, an enhanced CT revealed significant downsizing of the tumor lesion with an evaluation of a PR efficacy . The CA199 and CEA levels also gradually decreased . Currently, the patient is still receiving regular triple-drug chemotherapy and his disease is well controlled. We further conducted immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of post-operative pathological specimens revealing the presence of a limited amount of programmed death 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, compared to Forkhead box P3 (FoxP3)+ regulatory T cells (Tregs), the number of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes and CD4+ T helper lymphocytes was higher in the tumor microenvironment .