A 60-year-old Iranian female patient attended our emergency department with complaints of heavy vaginal bleeding during last 8 months. In her medical history, she had three vaginal deliveries, diabetes mellitus, depression, and osteopetrosis. Her menopause started at 50 years of age. She did not report any history of sexually transmitted infection or receiving hormonal medications. Her medications included metformin (500 mg twice a day), sertraline (50 mg daily), vitamin D (1000 mg daily), and calcium (500 mg daily). She had undergone surgery twice over the last 10 years, due to fracture of lower extremities. Her family history was unremarkable.
She was admitted to our hospital. Hemoglobin level was 6 g/dl at the time of admission. The other hematologic and biochemistry tests revealed no significant problems. On pelvic examination, which was performed under anesthesia, we found a remarkably enlarged uterus and a 10-cm soft hemorrhagic mass originating from posterior part of cervix and protruded into vagina. Excisional biopsy was performed. Abdominopelvic computerized tomography (CT) scans revealed a large uterus, a 15-cm pelvic mass in posterior wall of uterus , and enlarged pelvic lymph nodes. Chest CT scan and whole-body bone scan were normal. Pathology reported the cervical mass as a high-grade sarcoma in favor of pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma.
After a multidisciplinary meeting, the patient was treated with multiagent neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We prescribed intravenous vincristine (2 mg), actinomycin-D (1 g), and cyclophosphamide (1200 mg) (VAC) every 3 weeks for six cycles. Delayed radical hysterectomy, bilateral salpingoophorectomy (BSO), and pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) were performed due to large bulky tumor and partial response to initial chemotherapy. Her postoperative condition was appropriate, and she was discharged 3 days after surgery. Following discharge, external pelvic irradiation (total dose of 5040 cGy in 28 fractions) was performed in 6 weeks. No complications, such as radiation cystitis or proctitis, occurred. She signed an informed consent form and gave us permission to report her disease. She was followed up every 3 months and was free of disease 18 months after treatment .