A 23-year-old woman, without any history of medical illness until her seventh month of gestation, complained of right lower limb numbness and weakness, which was treated conservatively. One-week postpartum of normal vaginal delivery, the patient started to suffer from progressive bilateral lower limb weakness associated with numbness. Furthermore, the patient reported an on/off electrical sensation going down both her lower limbs. The patient sought medical attention: she was managed conservatively with analgesia, and she underwent a 13-week physiotherapy course. Despite the analgesia and physiotherapy, the patient's weakness started to worsen gradually. In addition, the patient totally lost control of her sphincters 1 month prior to the hospital presentation. The patient was investigated in another hospital and was found to have a spinal tumor in the thoracic region.
A neurological assessment revealed a bedbound patient with bilateral lower limb sensation loss associated with the bilateral loss of power, except for flickering movement in the toes. Furthermore, there was an exaggerated knee flex bilaterally, myoclonus, and hypertonia. The anal tone was absent, with an associated decrease in perianal anal sensation.
The spine MRI on sagittal view exhibited a right-sided T6-T7 well-defined intradural extramedullary lesion, which was hyperdense on T2W . On coronal view, right intervertebral foramina extension causing spinal cord compression and left cord displacement was found . Axial spine MRI displayed avid enhancement with a dural attachment measuring 1.4 cm × 1.5 cm × 3 cm in maximum anterior-posterior (AP), transection (TS), and craniocaudal (CC) dimensions, respectively .
A midline incision was performed at the T5–T7 levels, and the subcutaneous layer was dissected. The spinous process was identified, and the paraspinal muscles were pealed-off to expose the facet more on the right side. Homeostasis was maintained.
Furthermore, a laminectomy of T6 and T7 levels was performed, and epidural fat and ligamentum flavum were removed .
The extradural lesion and the foraminal part were identified and resected . The dura was opened, a gush of cerebro-spinal-fluid (CSF) was observed, and the cord was pushed to the left side. The intradural component was resected carefully away from the cord, and the spinal cord was relaxed. Dura was repaired with Tacoseal and was closed in a watertight closure. Another layer of Tacoseal was applied. Tisseel was then applied. In the end, the Valsalva maneuver was performed, and there was no evidence of leak. The tumor sample was sent for histopathology.
Informed written consent was obtained from the patient.
Histologic examination (using hematoxylin and eosin) revealed a meningothelial neoplasm with whorls, interlacing bundles of meningothelial cells, and extensive psammomatous calcifications .
The intervening meningothelial cells display frequent intranuclear pseudo-inclusions and some nuclear holes . There is no evidence of atypical features, including increased mitotic figures, hypercellularity, prominent nuclei, areas of small cell changes with high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, sheeting, and foci of spontaneous necrosis. There is no normal spinal parenchymal tissue, and no tumor invasion is identified.
Immunohistochemical stains with an appropriate control are performed, showing diffuse reactivity for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and progesterone receptor . The proliferative index using Ki-67 is low and estimated at 2%–3% .
The overall pathologic findings are that of psammomatous meningioma, CNS WHO grade 1.
After the surgery, the patient was started on physiotherapy and showed mild improvement in caudal anesthesia. During the hospital stay, the patient maintained her level of consciousness, oral diet was tolerated, and she had good bowel motion. She is currently being followed up in the clinic [out patient department, (OPD)] every 3 months.