A 41-year-old Hispanic male with a history of American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Stage D chronic systolic heart failure secondary to prior anabolic steroid use, status post HeartMate 3 LVAD placement three years prior to presentation, on warfarin, presented to the emergency department (ED) due to concern for midsternal chest wall swelling that developed spontaneously two days prior. The patient denied any trauma to the chest, fever, chills, or rash. The patient reported a small amount of pain to the area with palpation only, and no active drainage. Initial vital signs were significant for a mean arterial pressure of 62 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 98% on room air, and oral temperature of 37.2 degrees Celsius (98.9° Fahrenheit). Physical examination revealed a 2 centimeter (cm) × 2 cm, elevated, mildly tender, midsternal collection without overlying erythema or crepitus. Laboratory results found a white blood cell count of 8.94 thousand per microliter (K/uL) (reference range: 3.8–10.5 K/uL), hemoglobin of 7.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (13–17 g/dL), platelet count of 279 (K/uL) (150–400 K/uL), and an international normalized ratio of 2.53 (0.88–1.16). Serum electrolytes were within normal limits.
A point-of-care ultrasound was performed to further evaluate the fluid collection. The POCUS revealed a complex, mixed echogenic, collection that extended deep to chest wall and appeared contiguous with the driveline wire .
Swirling of complex material was evident with compression. Use of color flow Doppler demonstrated an avascular heterogeneous structure, concerning for a deep space infection with driveline involvement .
After POCUS was performed, a CT of the chest with intravenous contrast was ordered, and blood cultures were drawn due to concern for acute infection. The patient was given 2000 milligrams (mg) of cefepime and 1000 mg of vancomycin for antibiotic coverage. Computed tomography of the chest revealed a fluid-attenuating midline chest-wall lesion extending to the anterior sternal border measuring 2 cm × 1.9 cm × 3.4 cm with mild peripheral enhancement suggestive of a chest wall abscess.
While in the ED the patient developed a fever of 38.3° Celsius and became tachycardic. He was admitted to the cardiothoracic surgery service for definitive management. On admission, the fluid collection opened spontaneously and drained purulent material. A culture was sent and grew Staphylococcus epidermidis, and the first set of blood cultures grew Streptococcus mitis/oralis. The patient went to the operating room (OR) for irrigation and debridement of the sternal wound, removal of sternal wires except the inferior-most wire, and application of a wound vacuum-assisted closure device. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram did not reveal valvular vegetations, and a wound culture obtained during debridement grew rare Propionibacterium acnes. The patient returned to the OR later in his hospital stay for further wound exploration and debridement. He was discharged on hospital day 17 on long-term antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone 2000 mg via a peripherally inserted central catheter line.