A 29-year-old man was admitted to our hospital in August 2018, complaining of worsening generalized weakness and dyspnea.
The patient could hardly walk without oxygen mask, presenting with cyanosis and clubbing fingers for 16 mo, and progressive dyspnea for 1 mo.
The patient denied any history of pulmonary and cardiac disorders, and alcohol abuse. When he was 10 years old, his height was 125 cm (-2.5 SD compared to age and sex matched boys). Further investigation found multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (low thyroxin and thyroid-stimulating hormone, low cortisol and adrenocorticotropin hormone at 8 am, and low IGF-1 levels). Hypopituitarism was diagnosed based on laboratory findings. Magnetic resonance imaging showed aplasia of the pituitary gland, interrupted pituitary stalk, and ectopic posterior bright spot . A diagnosis of pituitary stalk interruption syndrome was made. Levothyroxine 50 μg per day and hydrocortisone 20 mg per day were started. His poor compliance made him take these medicines occasionally. To achieve ideal height, his recombinant human GH (rhGH) treatment was started at the age of 14 years, and lasted for 5 years. At the age of 23 years, he was diagnosed with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. It gradually deteriorated to cirrhosis in the following 6 years.
The patient was 187 cm in height, 105 kg in weight, and 117 cm in waist circumference. His BMI was 30 kg/m2. Oxygen saturation was 78% on room air, and could increase to 92% with oxygen mask. His blood pressure was 128/79 mmHg and resting heart rate was 66 bpm with a regular rhythm. Physical examination revealed acanthosis nigricans, barrel chest with clear bilateral respiratory sounds, cyanotic lips, and clubbed fingers . Hepatomegaly was palpable 4 cm beneath the xiphoid and 8 cm beneath the right costal margin. Splenomegaly was also palpable. Gynecomastia (Tanner stage IV) and prepubertal testicular size of 3 mL could be observed.
Laboratory results indicated multiple pituitary hormones deficiency. Pulmonary function test showed decreased infiltration of oxygen from pulmonary alveoli into the blood. Common causes for cirrhosis, especially hepatitis B virus infection, were ruled out by serological evaluation . Activated partial thromboplastin time and international normalized ratio were within normal range, but prothrombin time was 14.9 s (normal range: 11-13 s).
Gastric varices were observed by gastroscopy . Abdominal ultrasound showed cirrhosis and hypersplenotrophy without ascites . There was no evidence of an intracardiac shunt on echocardiography, and the ejection fraction was 52%. Transthoracic contrast echocardiography revealed opacification of the left chambers of the heart by micro-bubbles five heartbeats after the appearance of microbubbles in the right atrium, suggesting intrapulmonary shunting . 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin perfusion lung scan demonstrated intrapulmonary arterio-venous right-to-left shunting with a shunt rate of 64.4% .