A 25-year-old woman with a history of congenital hypoplastic kidneys and ESRD on HD was admitted to the emergency department with sudden onset of chest pain and dyspnoea during HD. Chronic kidney disease was recognized and treated from the age of 8 years old. The patient had been on HD since the age of 19 and was at the time of admission undergoing supplementary investigations aiming for renal transplantation. The patient had a non-supportive childhood, persistent adherence issues that worsened in adolescence, and intermittent cannabis abuse. However, she managed to attend to weekly, but not to all scheduled HD except in periods of heavy cannabis abuse. Six months earlier, she underwent subtotal parathyroidectomy due to tertiary hyperparathyroidism with sustained elevation of parathyroid hormone (PTH) between 134 and 191 pmol/L (reference range 1.7–9.2 pmol/L). During surgery, a total of 4777 mg hyperplastic parathyroid tissue was removed. Multiple efforts were continuously applied to treat the CKD-MBD including treatment with cholecalciferol for vitamin D deficiency, both calcium-free and calcium-containing phosphate binders for hyperphosphataemia, alfacalcidol for hypocalcaemia, and cinacalcet for secondary hyperparathyroidism. Success was, however, limited in part since patient adherence to both medical treatments and dietary restrictions was low despite numerous efforts to improve patient’s self-care. In the aftermath of parathyroidectomy, the PTH level was well controlled; however, patient adherence did not improve and phosphate was persistently elevated.
A holosystolic murmur and crackling heard sound was heard on auscultation.
Acute coronary syndrome was excluded with normal electrocardiogram without dynamic rise and fall in high-sensitive troponin TNI 8 (<10 ng/L). The patient further complained of recurrent dyspnoea NYHA class 3 (New York Heart Association Classification), in particular during dialysis and on physical exertion. Oedema and left-sided pleural effusion was discovered by chest X-ray. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed progressive critical AS in a tricuspid valve with indexed aortic valve area of 0.4 cm2/m2 and a mean gradient of 58 mmHg (peak gradient 80 mmHg) in comparison to a normal TTE performed ∼2 years earlier. The mitral valve was moderately stenotic with a mean gradient of 6–8 mmHg but with severe annular calcifications. The LV had become hypertrophic (IVSd 1.5 cm, LVPWd 1.8 cm) with preserved ejection fraction (LVEF 60%) . Infectious endocarditis was excluded with positron emission tomography/computerized tomography without positive fluro-deoxy-D-glucose uptake in relation to valves and absence of bacteraemia and vegetations on transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE). The patient underwent computed tomography coronary angiography that excluded coronary calcifications and stenosis. Aortic valve calcium Agatston score was 4850.
A multidisciplinary discussion was undertaken involving cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and cardiothoracic anaesthesiologists and ended up recommending the patient dual mechanical valve replacement. There were concerns in relation to surgery due to a low body mass index of 13 kg/m2 and regarding compliance with future anticoagulation in relation to mechanical valves. At a high volume thoracic centre, a mechanical Master prosthesis 19 mm was inserted in aortic position and a mechanical ATS 27 mm was inserted in mitral position. The postoperative period was complicated with localized pericardial haematoma compromising the right ventricle resulting in acute surgical evacuation.
The patient was treated with parenteral vancomycin and empirical cefuroxime for 6 weeks because of recurrent infections of unknown origin without positive blood cultures. Repeated blood culture tests and TEE did not confirm endocarditis. The patient was discharged without signs of active infection and with normal haemodynamics for usual HD and clinical follow-up with TTE after 1 and 6 months. At evaluation after 1 month, the patient denied shortness of breath or any complaints. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed functioning mechanical valves. The nutritional status of the patient was poor and there had been difficulties in relation to international ratio (INR) regulation, so the patient received additional fragmin.