The case was a 28-yr-old man affected by mild mental retardation who was working as a car repairman and married to a non-consanguineous healthy woman. He had normal eye structures and vision. They visited for genetic counseling before pregnancy.
His brother, a 17-yr-old boy, was affected by severe mental retardation and anophthalmia. Their parents were healthy with non-consanguineous marriage . Both brothers had a normal karyotype.
For identification of the possible genetic cause whole exome sequencing (WES), was applied. DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood.
The results were subsequently analyzed with a Burrows-Wheeler aligner (10), Genome Analysis Toolkit (11), and ANNOVAR (12). Population databases (such as ExAC browser, gnomAD, and Kaviar VARiants) and local database used for filtering. The mean coverage was 100X.
Sanger sequencing was performed on the patient's brothers (both affected and healthy) and also his parents. Additionally, the patient's father's semen sample was assessed by Sanger sequencing to consider germline mosaicism occurrence. Regarding the patient's wife's pregnancy, prenatal diagnosis was completed in both pregnancies via chorionic villus sampling.
Results of WES revealed a novel heterozygous frameshift deletion mutation in the SOX2 (NM_003106:exon1:c.58_80del:p.G20fs) in both affected brothers. To confirm the found variant, Sanger sequencing was performed. Peripheral blood samples from parents and healthy siblings were taken. Sanger sequencing confirmed the mutation in the heterozygous state in both affected brothers with the mild and severe phenotype . However, this mutation was not found in their parents, indicating germline mosaicism. Based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines, the identified mutation is classified as a pathogenic mutation. Also, the patient's wife and his healthy brother did not have the identified mutation. Results of Sanger sequencing on the patient's father's semen did not show the mutation.
After genetic counseling and pedigree drawing , based on the results of their tests, autosomal dominant inheritance of this mutation and 50% recurrence risk was explained to the older brother's wife. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis and Prenatal diagnosis were offered for pregnancies. The family decided to do PND in each pregnancy. In the first pregnancy, PND was carried out and the results revealed that the fetus was a heterozygote for the identified mutation in the exon 1: c.58_80del in the SOX2 gene, therefore, was affected. As a result, the mother decided to terminate her pregnancy. In the next pregnancy, PND results again showed heterozygote mutation. Still, the mother decided to keep the fetus despite awareness of the fetus's involvement with severe hydrocephaly detected on fetal ultrasound in the 18 wk of pregnancy. The result of the pregnancy was a girl with anophthalmus and hydrocephaly. Both orbital cavities were severely hypoplastic with abundant glial tissue. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a significant dilation of the lateral and third ventricles and hypoplastic corpus callosum.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran (Code: IR.HUMS.REC.1398.458). Oral consent was obtained from parents.