A 29-year-old Chinese woman presented at 38 weeks’ gestation with GDM and was admitted to hospital awaiting delivery. Her blood test showed mild thrombocytopenia (PLT 73 × 109/L). Her fibrinogen level (0.667 g/L) was decreased, while her anti-thrombin III (ATIII; 108.2%) and D-dimer (6.68 mg/L; normal range, 0–0.55 mg/L) levels were elevated. An evaluation of our patient according to International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) criteria suggested overt disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with a score of 5. After an intravenous injection of fibrinogen, her fibrinogen level reached 1.9 g/L and she delivered a normal baby girl weighing 3000 g. The Apgar score was 10–10 at 21:46 on the same day. One hour after her delivery, her blood pressure (BP) reached 180/110 mmHg.
Her physical examination results were as follows: temperature 36.8 °C, pulse 92 beats/minute, respiration 20 breaths/minute, and BP 180/110 mmHg; she was mentally healthy and moderately nourished. Her thoracic respiration was regular, and her chest expansion was symmetrical. Vesicular breathing sounds were normal and no moist rales were heard. Her heart rate was approximately 92 beats/minute with regular rhythm. There was no capillary pulsation and water hammer pulse, and no edema on either lower limb. Pathological reflexes were negative.
The laboratory findings were as follows: lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 654.0 u/L, PLT 71 × 109/L, fibrinogen 0.719 g/L, and urine protein (+). She was transfused with 400 mL of fresh frozen plasma, five units of blood coagulation factor, and 4 g of fibrinogen. She was then transferred to the maternity intensive care unit where magnesium sulfate seizure prophylaxis continued for 24 hours after the procedure. She was given the magnesium sulfate in small doses of 1–2 g to keep her magnesium level in the low therapeutic range. Her BP was steady and her coagulation function was improving but she needed continuous oxygen therapy to maintain oxygenation.
A chest X-ray showed evidence of lung edema. She had a history of a persistent cough and exertional asthma 4 weeks before she was admitted to hospital. She ignored these symptoms and consequently received no therapeutic intervention. There was no history of cardiovascular disease, family disease, or psychosocial disease.
Six days after hospitalization, her blood PLT count reached 96 × 109/L, her fibrinogen level was increased to 1.784 g/L, and D-dimer was also elevated (9.51 mg/L). Her prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), and ATIII were all normal. However, she constantly needed oxygen inhalation at 33% oxygen concentration to maintain oxygenation and her hypoxemia was difficult to control. Laboratory investigations revealed elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), (24.4 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 (> 1000 U/mL), and CA72-4 > 300 U/ml. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination showed normal dimension of the atrium and ventricle, but decreased left ventricular function. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 55%. Moderate tricuspid regurgitation with a peak velocity of approximately 3.56 m/s was recorded. The estimated pressure of the pulmonary artery from the tricuspid regurgitation was approximately 56 mmHg. Arterial and venous Doppler ultrasonography was performed on both legs and the results were normal. PET-CT showed malignant carcinoma of the head of the pancreas with lymph node involvement, bone metastases, peritoneal metastasis, bilateral lung cancer lymphangitis, and left adrenal metastasis. She died 2 weeks after the diagnosis before the scheduled initiation of chemotherapy.