A 56-year-old woman with a history of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection diagnosed with chronic kidney disease (CKD) of unknown aetiology at the age of 27 years, was submitted to a deceased-donor kidney transplant in 1984, and maintained under immunosuppression with prednisone and azathioprine. Post-transplant period was complicated with new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT), and noninvasive cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed in 2004 – surgically removed and without evidence of relapse. The remaining transplant period was unremarkable with a serum creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL in December 2011.
Patient presented in 2012 to the emergency department due to fever of unknown origin. She also complained of a painless, smooth, and adherent to the deep muscle relentlessly growing mass on her right front thorax. Physical exploration was otherwise unremarkable – no other masses, palpable lymph nodes, or splenomegaly were found. Normal leucocyte count and haemoglobin levels were found, as were lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) and bilirubin levels. EBV serology was positive for IgG but negative for IgM. Both ultrasound and computerized tomography (CT) scan ( and ) revealed a highly vascularized heterogeneous mass (8×9 cm), with a necrotic centre. All other imaging studies – bone scintigraphy, mammography, and mammary ultrasonography –revealed only small residual nodules on the thorax, without evidence of brain, abdominal or pelvic masses. Immunophenotyping of both peripheral blood and bone marrow was unremarkable. Blood cultures were positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, successfully treated with cephazolin.
Histology of the biopsied lesion revealed a malignant undifferentiated large cell neoplasm. No lymphoid tissue was identified. The immunohistochemical study was positive for vimentin, CD68, CD99, and CD4, and negative for all other tumour markers , consistent with the diagnosis of HS .
A positron emission tomography (PET) scan, later performed, revealed a large axillary mass, as well as multiple thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic nodules (C). Evidence of disseminated disease precluded treatment with systemic chemotherapy. Due to failure to prevent the mass growth, thalidomide was added to etoposide after 1 month. Patient eventually died 3 months after the diagnosis.