A 51-year-old male, who had received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (nine courses of oxaliplatin/5-fluorouracil/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6)) for locally advanced lower rectal cancer, underwent abdominal perineal resection with lateral lymph node dissection. He had no remarkable medical or medication history, except for diabetes. He had no family history of FAP. His postoperative recovery was uneventful, with the exception of intrapelvic fluid collection which was drained percutaneously. Histological examination of the tumor revealed a well- to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (stage II (pT3N0M0) according to the 7th TNM classification of the International Union Against Cancer) . He was scheduled for regular cancer surveillance after surgery with three monthly serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) measurements and six monthly contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) evaluations of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis. Six months postoperatively, CT revealed a solitary mass (lesion 1) in the pelvic mesentery, 20 mm in size . Serum CEA and CA19-9 levels were normal. Recurrence of rectal cancer was suspected, but could not be confirmed, and thus, close follow-up was chosen. Another CT, performed 3 months later, showed that the mass had grown to be 35 × 30 mm in size (lesion 1), with two new masses measuring 20 × 15 mm (lesion 2) and 15 × 10 mm (lesion 3) forming at the mesentery of the small bowel . Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on T2-weighted images revealed that the central part of the tumor was hypointense and the peripheral part was hyperintense, which was gradually enhanced with gadolinium contrast MRI . Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in all tumors (max standardized uptake value: SUV = 3.31 (lesion 1), 2.55 (lesion 2), and 2.22 (lesion 3)) . From these imaging findings, we excluded the possibilities of other intra-abdominal tumors (gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), malignant lymphoma, etc.). Considering the patient’s medical history, and multiple occurrences of masses, the most probable diagnosis was recurrence of rectal cancer, with a differential diagnosis of desmoid tumors. Upon evaluation at our multidisciplinary team meeting, three tumors were localized and no other distant metastasis was observed, curative resection was chosen for therapeutic diagnosis.
Intraoperatively, three tumors were located at the mesentery of the small bowel. The first tumor (lesion 1) was located near the terminal ileum, the second (lesion 2) approximately 100 cm proximal to the first lesion, and the third (lesion 3) was near the second tumor . The most distal tumor was first removed with segmental bowel resection and a specimen was submitted for intraoperative sectioning, which suggested the possibility of desmoid tumors. Since the tumors were growing very rapidly, the remaining two mesenteric tumors were also resected in a similar manner. Macroscopically, the tumors were hard but elastic, with clear borders, measuring 40 × 40 × 30 mm (lesion 1), 40 × 30 × 20 mm (lesion 2), and 30 × 25 × 20 mm (lesion 3). Histological examination revealed the proliferation of spindle-shaped cells and collagenous stroma. No nuclear atypia was observed. The resection margins were negative. Immunohistological examination showed that the nuclei of cells were focally positive for β-catenin . There was also moderate intratumoral hemorrhage, with no invasion into the adjacent small bowel. The final diagnosis was multiple desmoid tumors, also referred to as desmoid-type fibromatosis. After operation, the patient has not received postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy and remains well 1 year after his last operation without any signs of recurrence of desmoid tumors or rectal cancer.