A 21-year-old, right-handed Indian female presented to the Emergency Department of Smt. Sucheta Kriplani Hospital, New Delhi, India.
She had had an index presentation of periodic left hemicranial headache about once a month for the past 2 years. The patient was accompanied by her mother. The history was given by the patient herself. Her headache was severe in intensity (7/10 according to the Numeric Pain Rating Scale ), throbbing in character, usually lasting 1–2 h and often associated with nausea and vomiting. It was aggravated by loud noises and flashing lights. The symptoms were relieved by taking self-prescribed NSAIDs. The patient was conscious during these episodes and did not give any history suggestive of aura preceding any of these episodes of headache. She did not seek any medical help. One day before admission, the patient's headache became excessively severe (9/10 according to the Numeric Pain Rating Scale ), continuous and unresponsive to analgesics. Two hours into the episode, she noticed sudden-onset clumsiness of her right hand soon followed by dragging of her right foot while walking. Within the next hour, she developed right facial drooping and slurring of speech, after which her mother called the emergency services. The patient was admitted for medical services.
This episode was not preceded by fever, arthritis, head trauma, syncope, or seizure. She did not have hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, or any respiratory ailment and was not a consumer of tobacco or alcohol, or any known stimulants. She was not on any medication including oral contraceptive pills. There was no family history of migraine, stroke, or seizures.
On examination, the patient was afebrile and without pallor, icterus, cyanosis, rash, or abnormal skin pigmentation. On further examination, no lymph nodes were palpable, bilateral carotid pulses were palpable, no cervical bruit was heard, and the cardiopulmonary, abdominal, and musculoskeletal examinations were noncontributory. The neurological examination revealed upper motor neuron type right facial nerve palsy with slurred speech but preserved comprehension. Motor examination showed mild hemiparesis of upper motor neuron type. The patient was admitted and investigated.
The detailed laboratory investigations revealed a normal hemogram, blood sugar, lipid profile, kidney function and liver function tests, and electrolytes profile, as shown in Table . She was nonreactive to HIV, and a detailed workup for thrombophilia was negative. Her blood profile for autoimmune markers was nonreactive. The chest X-ray, ECG, 2D echo, and transesophageal echocardiography (specifically for the presence of patent foramen ovale), done subsequently, were unremarkable. A diagnostic lumbar puncture performed to rule out subarachnoid hemorrhage and cerebral angiitis did not reveal any abnormalities . A detailed neuroimaging evaluation was done consisting of conventional and post-gadolinium sequences on a 1.5-T MR scanner and post-contrast angiography with volume reconstruction (arch vessels, neck, and cerebral vessels) on multidetector CT was obtained. The American Academy of Neurology updated their guidelines in July 2010, recommending diffusion-weighted imaging as the superior method (level A) for the most accurate stroke diagnosis . Diffusion-weighted imaging at a b value of 0 and 1,000 ms demonstrated restricted diffusion in the left capsuloganglionic region with low signal on the corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map, suggestive of an acute infarct. The radiological findings correlated with the clinical findings of right-sided hemiplegia. The other imaging did not reveal evidence of thrombosis of the circle of Willis, dural venous sinus thrombosis, arteriovenous malformations, carotid dissection, or any visible white or gray matter abnormalities.
The patient could not undergo thrombolysis as she presented outside the window period but her headache resolved with intravenous analgesics. There was rapid recovery to 5/5 motor power within 24 h of admission; however, the facial palsy persisted. She was discharged on 75 mg of aspirin daily along with weekly outpatient follow-ups. She was advised to keep a log of her medical history and to keep her medical advisory band on at all times.