A 60-year-old normotensive, non-diabetic Bangladeshi male underwent an elective CAG with the indication of unstable angina. He had a history of Inferior ST elevation myocardial infarction (MI), thrombolysed with Streptokinase 1 month earlier at a state tertiary care institute.
Physical examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed pathological Q and T inversions in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF) indicative of a prior inferior MI. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 50% with inferior wall hypokinesia. All blood investigations were normal including renal parameters. He was on aspirin, clopidogrel, bisoprolol, nitroglycerine, trimetazidine and atorvastatin.
He was given a pre-procedural antiplatelet load of 600 mg clopidogrel and CAG was done via right radial approach using 5 FR radial TIG catheter (Terumo). Angiographic procedure was uncomplicated and revealed a dominant RCA and diffuse mid RCA disease with maximum 90% stenosis . Left anterior descending (LAD) artery and 2nd obtuse marginal (OM2) artery had mild and moderate disease respectively.
Following CAG, he was selected for angioplasty of the RCA. The RCA was easily cannulated with a soft tipped 6-French JR 3.5 guiding catheter (USA). After the selection of the guiding catheter in the RCA, a 0.014 in. Asahi Sion Blue PTCA guide wire (Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd., Japan) was advanced to cross the lesion. Pre-dilatation was done by 2.5 × 15 mm Sapphire balloon at an inflation pressure of 12 atmospheres (ATM) for 10 s. Stenting was done by 2.75 × 38 mm novolimus-eluting DESyne stent (Elixir medical corporation, Sunyvale, CA) at 16 ATM for 20 s, with restoration of thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) III flow. At this point we observed an Ellis type II perforation in the ostial RCA, as evidenced by subtle contrast . The next contrast injection given very gently showed that the perforation had extended into the right coronary sinus of Valsalva, as evidenced by contrast dye beyond the RCA ostium and retrograde stasis limited to the sinus of Valsalva . There was no rupture of the balloon. Despite coronary perforation, the patient remained haemodynamically stable, reported no chest discomfort and electrocardiogram showed no sign of new ischemia. Urgent cath lab TTE showed no pericardial effusion or aortic regurgitation (AR). Serum cardiac enzymes and troponin I were within normal range.
An attempt to seal the perforation in the ostial RCA was made with a 3.0 × 23 mm bare metal stent (BMS) (Genius Magic Eurocor GmbH stent (Germany) (Cobalt chromium coronary stent system), which was deployed in proximal overlap of the previous stent, to obtain adequate coverage of the RCA ostium . Despite this, as the dissection persisted, another 3.0 × 12 mm BMS (Avantgarde stent Cobalt chromium coronary stent system) was deployed, covering the ostium of RCA, but with no satisfactory result .
Ultimately, a 3.0 × 19 mm PTFE-covered stent (Graftmaster RX Coronary Stent Graft System, Abbott Vascular, USA) was deployed in proximal overlap to include complete coverage of the ostial RCA, which was considered the entry point of the aortic dissection. The next control injection demonstrated satisfactory sealing of the coronary perforation with only minimal contrast staining limited to the right sinus of Valsalva. The RCA presented a good angiographic result with TIMI Grade III flow . A final cine run taken 30 min later showed a faintly opacified coronary sinus and no further extension into the aortic root.
As the patient experienced no chest pain or ischaemia, the procedure was concluded and he was monitored in the coronary care unit (CCU), where he remained haemodynamically stable throughout. Follow up TTE done daily showed no signs of pericardial effusion, AR or further progression of the dissection. He had an uneventful post-catheterisation period and was discharged 2 days later on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) of aspirin and prasugrel, in addition to anti-ischaemic medications. The patient was asymptomatic at 2-week and subsequent follow up at 2 months, and TTE showed no pericardial effusion.