A 29-year-old male Gustilo Anderson type IIIB open tibial segmental fracture to the right leg with exposed large bone segment of tibia shaft following a high-velocity road traffic accident . Radiographs of the right leg showed segmental fracture of the tibia AO type 42C2 and fracture of the fibula 42A3 . Emergency right leg wound debridement was done by the Senior Orthopedic Surgeon. Loose bone fragments without soft-tissue attachments were excised – a large segment of bone of about 17.2 cm length had to be removed . To serve as a guide for leg length, fibula titanium elastic nailing was done by closed technique inserted from distal to proximal. Uniplanar uniaxial external fixator was applied to stabilize the tibia .
Four days after initial debridement, latissimus dorsi free flap cover for the soft-tissue defect was done by plastic surgical team which unfortunately got infected. The flap had to be debrided on post-operative day 6 and split skin grafting was done to cover defect. Once the split skin graft healed , at around 2 months post-injury, Ilizarov ring fixation and proximal tibia corticotomy were done. Bone transport was started after a week and was transported for 4 months until the transported fragment reached the distal fragment . As is common in all large bone transport, there was invagination of soft tissues at the docked site . The invaginated soft tissues were excised and bone grafting was done at the docked site with realignment of Ilizarov frame. An additional foot frame was connected to improve stability of the bone. The patient was mobilized full weight-bearing with walker support and was on regular follow-up. Bone regenerate gradually consolidated and docking site also healed well . Ilizarov fixator and TENS fibula nail was removed and patellar tendon bearing cast was applied, which was retained for 1 month and then removed . The series of events enumerated in . There was 1.5 cm shortening and equinus contracture of 10° present with excellent bone results and good functional results using the Association for the Study and Application of Methods of Ilizarov Scoring System . The patient was walking well without support and has returned back to work .