A 59-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of fatigue, loss of appetite, and tremor of the upper limbs. After being diagnosed with alcoholism at our hospital 15 years prior, and irregular visits for treatment, he had had periods of intermittent sobriety, but these had stopped, and he had been drinking approximately 120 g/day of alcohol (mainly shochu) every day for 3 years. The patient's last drink was 2 days before admission to the hospital. The day before admission, he was unable to drink because of malaise. He had obesity, hyperlipidemia, and liver dysfunction. He had previously been a fisherman and had lived with his wife. He had been laid off because of his alcoholism and his family life deteriorated, leading to divorce. He then lived on welfare. His parents had previously died, and none of his three older brothers could be contacted. He had no dependents.
Upon admission, the patient was 174 cm tall and weighed 74 kg (down from 80 kg 1 year earlier). His skin was damp with cold sweat. His temperature was 35.3°C, blood pressure was 157/108 mmHg, pulse rate was 93 beats/min, and saturation of percutaneous oxygen was 96% (room air). His conscious state was assessed as E4/4, V4/5, M6/6 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. He was able to greet people and briefly respond, but showed disorientation. He did not show excitement or agitation but claimed to be tormented by anxiety and nightmares. He had no hallucinations or agitation. His bilateral upper limbs showed fine tremor. There were no abnormal neurological findings, such as ataxia or abnormal tendon reflexes.
On the basis of the above elements, he was diagnosed with mild alcohol withdrawal delirium associated with alcohol withdrawal. From the day of admission (Day 1), he was given intravenous fluids, including glutathione, flavin adenine dinucleotide sodium and vitamin B complex for 1 week. As a result, his consciousness improved, and he no longer had tremors in the upper limbs.
However, on Day 16, he complained of a sore throat when swallowing. An oral cavity and throat examination using penlight illumination revealed throat inflammation and swelling. His cervical echocardiography showed no abnormal findings, but auscultation of his bilateral chest recorded discontinuous sound. He was diagnosed with acute pharyngitis and prescribed 500 mg/day of levofloxacin and 600 mg/day of acetaminophen. On Day 20, his sore throat worsened. Polymerase chain reaction tests using a throat swab were negative for influenza A, influenza B, COVID-19, and tuberculosis. We decided that the patient had more than acute pharyngitis. Our hospital is a psychiatric hospital primarily responsible for alcoholism treatment and does not have an otolaryngology department. Therefore, we consulted a neighboring ear and nose clinic (Clinic “A”). The doctor of Clinic “A” identified a mass in the patient's pharynx via endoscopy and decided that the patient was at risk of airway obstruction and needed close examination. Therefore, he was referred to the otolaryngology department of General Hospital “B” on Day 29 of his hospitalization.
Imaging examination at Hospital “B” exposed important abnormalities. His endoscopy results showed a mass in his pharynx . His neck magnetic resonance imaging results showed a 2 × 2 × 2-cm nodule above the left glottis (red oval in Figure ), and his 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) results showed FDG accumulation with a standardized uptake value of 18.4 at that site . These findings were suggestive of malignancy. In the regional lymph nodes, we observed FDG accumulation in the bilateral superior internal deep cervical and submandibular lymph nodes . This finding was suggestive of lymph node metastasis.
On the basis of the imaging and pathology results detailed above, the patient was diagnosed with Stage 4 A (T2 N2c M0) hypopharyngeal cancer. The psychiatrists and otolaryngologists of Hospital “B” discussed not only the patient's physical condition but also his mental and psychosocial state. The otolaryngologists were particularly concerned about the extent of the patient's alcoholism and decision-making capacity. They were also concerned that delirium tremens could lead to accidents during the perioperative period. General Hospital “B” has internal medicine, surgery, and otorhinolaryngology departments, but does not have a psychiatric department. We explained that the patient had previously been sober for extended periods of time, and his prospects of recovery from alcohol dependence were good. We also explained that the patient was no longer in a critical period of delirium tremens. In addition, the patient's Hasegawa Dementia Scale-Revised (HDS-R) and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were determined; his HDS-R score was 27/30, and his MMSE score was 28/30. On the basis of these test results and the patient's daily life, we concluded that the patient did not have dementia. Furthermore, the patient had no symptoms suggestive of mood disorders and psychosis. On the basis of these results, the patient was considered to have decision-making capacity. With regard to financial issues, we assisted the patient in applying for state support to help him with follow-up after his cancer treatment. We worked with the patient on the decision-making process. The patient was given careful information by the otolaryngologist regarding the recommended surgical treatment and postoperative radiotherapy. However, the patient was very anxious and could not immediately make a decision about his treatment plan. Therefore, the psychiatrist, caseworkers, and nurses attended to his concerns and helped to calm him. His worst fear was that the highly invasive surgery would damage his speech functions, reduce his ability to communicate, and make him feel alone. His second worst fear was the pain associated with radiotherapy. However, he understood that the inconvenience of living after lymphadenectomy would be alleviated by rehabilitation.
He was therefore reassured and decided to undergo surgery. Finally, we decided on a treatment strategy of endoscopic laryngopharyngeal surgery (ELPS) combined with lymphadenectomy. To reduce invasiveness, the surgery was divided into two sessions, ELPS and lymphadenectomy.
On Day 86, the patient underwent ELPS. Postoperatively, he still had a sore throat and decreased appetite; therefore, we increased the dose of acetaminophen to 1800 mg/day. In addition, we administered 200 mg of tramadol. Because hard food made his sore throat worse, we offered soft food and nutritional drinks. He gradually regained his vitality, and his weight recovered to 76 kg. We decided to introduce a home nursing service and prescribe day care to support his discharge and improve his postoperative quality of life. Lymphadenectomy was carried out on Day 114. His postoperative recovery was good. He is now in our hospital undergoing rehabilitation and preparing for discharge.