A 65-year-old male was admitted to Pablo Tobón Uribe Hospital in Medellin, Colombia, approximately 12 hours after receiving multiple penetrating wounds from a shotgun in the upper left limb, thorax, and abdomen. He reported a prior history of left anterior thoracotomy due to stab wounds and several abdominal surgeries due to gunshots. On evaluation, he was hemodynamically stable with normal sinus rhythm and normal blood pressure, no dyspnea, or abdominal pain. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) did not show hemopericardium or intra-abdominal fluid, normal hemoglobin, and leukocytes.
Multidetector computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen was performed to identify the trajectory of the pellets and to rule out associated wounds. A hematoma appeared around the aorta without injury to the blood vessel wall with an intramyocardial pellet without pericardial effusion. Echocardiogram showed fragments in the tricuspid valve ring without perforation . Abdominal CT showed three pellets: one located in the abdominal wall of the upper left quadrant, one in the area of the transverse colon, and the third in the area of the descending colon. It was not possible to determine whether the location was endoluminal, since no free liquid was observed in the abdomen . The patient remained hemodynamically stable, with no abdominal pain and no sign of cardiac tamponade. Nonsurgical treatment with critical care transfer, thoracic CT scan, and abdomen control were decided to determine changes in the mediastinum and heart. Additionally, oral and rectal contrast was performed to locate intra-abdominal bullets more accurately. Chest tomography scan shows hematoma around the aorta without changes in size and no pericardial effusion or pleural effusion . Abdominal CT scan showed fragments of the bullet in the transverse and descending endoluminal colon with no extravasation of the contrast medium or intra-abdominal fluid. In addition, bullet migration noticed in the descending colon during initial CT scan is now located in the rectal ampulla .
During the first 24 and 48 hours upon admittance to the hospital, the patient remains asymptomatic, and the oral procedure is started at 48 hours without abdominal pain or other symptoms. On the seventh day of hospitalization, he remains asymptomatic, CT scan of the thorax and abdomen shows no complications, and follow-up examinations like arterial gases and normal white cell count are taken as grounds to discharge the patient. Serial clinical examinations of the patient were performed by the same team, and we did not perform another echocardiography. The patient shows no associated complications in the follow-up carried out 30 days later and one year after the occurrence of the trauma.