A 2 year old female child presented to us with complaints of pain and swelling over left hip region along with inability to bear weight on her left lower limb following a fall from height one week back. Pain was acute in onset, continuous, severe in the beginning but later it was moderate and localized over the anterior aspect of left hip. It was aggravated by limb movement and relieved by rest. There was no radiation of pain. Pain was accompanied by diffuse swelling of the whole left hip region predominantly over the anterior aspect. On examination the swelling was diffuse, soft, localized to upper part of thigh, non-translucent, non-illuminant, non-fluctuant, non-pulsatile and not fixed to the bone. There was deep tenderness over the scarpa's triangle. Local temperature was slightly raised. Straight leg raising test was negative. Bitrochanteric compression test was positive, and there was supratrochanteric shortening of 1.5 cm on the left side. The limb was in flexion, abduction and external rotation. There was no deformity at the knee. There was painful restriction of all movements of the left hip joint.
Routine blood investigations were within normal limits. Plain radiographs of the left hip anteroposterior and lateral views were done. It showed complete separation of proximal femoral epiphysis of the head of the femur [Type I B fracture] and its gross displacement in the medial compartment of proximal thigh region. For further management Magnetic Resonance Imaging [MRI] of the left hip was done. It showed complete traumatic separation of proximal femur epiphysis and its gross displacement in the medial compartment of the thigh. The epiphysis was still viable. The patient was planned for surgery. In supine position the hip joint was opened by anterolateral [Watson Jones] approach. The epiphysis was located with blunt dissection and fluoroscopy. It was replaced back in the acetabulum and transfixed with the help of a k wire. Hip spica was applied. Regular follow up was done every two weeks. It showed migration of the k-wire in the pelvis and premature gradual fusion of the epiphysis with the neck. The k-wire was removed after 10 weeks and full weight bearing was allowed. MRI was again done and it showed a viable epiphysis. After three months there was complete fusion of the epiphysis but there was painless full range of movement of the hip joint. The patient was able to bear weight completely but long term result is awaited.