A 71-year-old Japanese man had undergone laparoscopic right living-donor kidney transplantation for end-stage renal disease due to chronic nephritis at the age of 65 years. His immunosuppression regimen included combination therapy with tacrolimus 1 mg/day, mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg/day, and prednisolone 4 mg/day. Renal graft function remained stable without any episodes of rejection.
Six years after transplantation, he presented to our hospital complaining of abdominal pain. A colonoscopy revealed a near-circumferential mass at the rectosigmoid colon. The tumor proved to be adenocarcinoma (tub) by biopsy. The descending colon on the oral side of the tumor showed reddening and edematous changes circumferentially . The colitic region was observed through the normal mucous membrane from 8 to 30 cm on the oral side of the tumor. The most oral side of the reddening and edematous change was located at sigmoid-descending colon junction. Histological examination by biopsy revealed that the colonic mucosa of the colitic region showed only moderate colitis. There was no evidence of cytomegalovirus colitis. He had a previous history of hypertension but no cigarette smoking or drinking. His family history showed no remarkable findings.
On admission, his abdomen was flat and soft, and abdominal pain disappeared during fasting. No special signs were noted except for a healed surgery scar on his right abdominal wall. Laboratory tests showed no anemia, serum creatinine was 1.1 μmol/L, liver function was normal, and serum tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9) were within normal range. A barium enema examination showed a tumor measuring 45 mm in diameter at the rectosigmoid colon. No other colorectal lesions were observed . A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a circumferential mass with irregular surface and contrast effect and wall thickening at the rectosigmoid colon. The transplanted kidney was located in the right pelvic cavity . No evidence of lymph node or distant metastasis was apparent. Conservative therapy of fasting and laxatives without a decompression tube improved his symptoms. Patient continued to take immunosuppressants during the fasting period. After 5 weeks of conservative therapy, a colonoscopy revealed the same findings as the previous test. Considering the long-term use of immunosuppressants and the persistence of the obstructive colitis, we decided to perform a two-stage operation and performed a laparoscopic Hartmann’s operation first. The patient took the immunosuppressant on the day of surgery and resumed taking it from the first day after the operation.
After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in the lithotomy position. Complete exploration of the abdominal cavity suggested that there was no liver or peritoneal carcinomatosis. The tumor was identified at the rectosigmoid colon location, and the transplanted kidney was also located in the right lower abdomen . To avoid the transplanted kidney, we inserted the right lower quadrant port more towards the midline than usual . Considering the effect of abdominal pressure on the transplanted kidney, the pneumoperitoneum pressure was set at 10 mmHg. The resections performed achieved complete tumor removal with tumor-free margins and tumor-specific mesorectal excision. We cut the superior rectal artery, preserved the left colic artery, and harvested the D3 lymph nodes. The distal rectum was transected intracorporeally and then a 6-cm left supraumbilical incision was made to remove the proximal colon. We dissected the proximal sigmoid colon and removed the tumor. Then, we confirmed the difference between normal mucosa and colitic region. Finally, a sigmoid colostomy was performed. The operation was completed successfully with an operating time of 206 min and blood loss of 60 mL. The specimen was a circumferential tumor measuring 90 × 40 mm. The mucosa except for the tumor in the specimen was normal . Histopathology revealed a well-to-moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with invasion through the muscularis propria into pericolorectal tissues. The resection margins were free, and there were no lymph node metastases, indicating a tumor stage of pT3N0M0.
Postoperative course was uneventful. The patient needed time to learn the stoma application and discharged 30 days after surgery. At 3 months after the surgery, obstructive colitis still remained. At 6 months after the surgery, his obstructive colitis had improved , and we performed a laparoscopic colorectal anastomosis as the second stage.
After induction of general anesthesia, the colostomy was returned to the abdominal cavity. GelPort® (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA) with three ports (12 mm, 5 mm, 5 mm) was attached where the colostomy was, and operation was started laparoscopically. There was a little adhesion in the abdominal cavity and the stump of the rectum was easily found. An anastomosis was performed using an autosuture device. The operating time was 80 min and blood loss was 5 mL.
The patient discharged hospital 4 days after second surgery with no postoperative complications. During 1 year of follow-up, no allograft rejection, complications, or recurrence was observed.