Our patient was a 77-year-old Caucasian man who, 3 years and 11 months before his death, exhibited subacute polyneuropathy that included large fibers with autonomic changes. The clinical presentation of the patient’s polyneuropathy did not allow us to differentiate a paraneoplastic pathology from an atypical presentation of diabetic neuropathy. A first episode of focal epileptic crises occurred 13 months after the polyneuropathy event. Two years before the patient’s death, an electroencephalogram showed epileptic discharges in the right temporal cortex . After that, his autonomic seizures became more frequent, and ictal pilomotor erection was a common observation.
Two years before the patient’s death, a diagnosis of probable dementia was made. The presence of rapidly progressive dementia, delusions, and autonomic seizures with pilomotor erection suggested a preliminary diagnosis of limbic encephalopathy. At that time, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis including the following was performed: herpes simplex virus (repeated three times with negative results), varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1/2, JC virus, Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Tropheryma whippleii (detected but not confirmed in a second sample), Treponema pallidum, and Cryptococcus neoformans. All results of these tests were negative. No growth of any bacteria or fungi was detected. The patient’s protein electrophoresis result was also normal. His 14-3-3 protein test result was negative. The patient had a slightly reduced amyloid-β42 level (543 pg/ml). However, his tau protein level was normal (210 pg/ml). His CSF was also analyzed using an established radioimmunoassay in a reference laboratory. Intracellular antibodies (Hu, Ri, Yo, and Ma2) and surface antibodies (VGKCs KV1.1, KV1.2, and KV1.6) were assessed. Negative results were obtained for the intracellular antibodies. According to the relative values provided by the reference laboratory, the results of the VGKC-Ab test were positive.
Twenty-three months before the patient’s death, cerebral imaging by 2-deoxy-2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-d-glucose integrated with computed tomography-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT) was performed according to the following acquisition protocol. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) (±5.3 MBq/kg) was injected intravenously under euglycemic (6-hour fast, capillary blood glucose <140 mg/dl) and standardized resting (eyes open, reduced ambient noise) conditions. After 1 hour of uptake time, images were acquired by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) using a Biograph Duo lutetium oxyorthosilicate PET/CT scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions, Knoxville, TN, USA), followed by dedicated brain PET-CT image acquisition (10-minute acquisition). Next, three-dimensional iterative reconstruction was used for the brain PET images (iterations = 6/subsets = 16/full width at half maximum = 2 mm/matrix = 256). Finally, computed tomographic images were used for attenuation correction of PET data. The cerebral FDG-PET performed 23 months before the patient’s death showed low FDG uptake in the frontal and temporal lobes, especially in the right hemisphere, with relative preservation of the posterior cingulum .
Six months before the patient’s death, he presented with normal-pressure hydrocephalus. A ventricular peritoneum derivation (VPD) was inserted. A small improvement in walking was observed, but it lasted no more than 2 weeks after the VPD implant. Three months before the patient’s death, a second repeat cerebral FDG-PET scan using the same acquisition protocol as before showed diffusely low cerebral glycolytic activity with a marked increment in the severity of the metabolic deficit in the frontal and temporal lobes, as well as hypometabolism involving the parietal lobes and posterior cingulum . Three months before the patient’s death, a biopsy done in the right axillary lymph node indicated a metastatic cholangiocarcinoma. The most common type of hilar extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is classified into four stages according to the Bismuth classification . In our patient, this classification was considered stage IV. Two months before his death, a contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan showed brain metastases in the right parietal cortex .
A postmortem examination showed a cholangiocarcinoma with multiple metastases that included the lungs and lymph nodes. All other organs were studied during the autopsy, and the only primary neoplasia found was the cholangiocarcinoma; the other sites were metastatic, all exhibiting the same morphological aspects as the cholangiocarcinoma. The brain weighed 1300 g, and a catheter was well positioned in the lateral ventricle. There was mild cortical atrophy, ex vacuo dilation of the ventricles, and mild focal thickening of the cerebellar leptomeninges, which were infiltrated by the carcinoma, described as neoplastic epithelial cells . The morphological aspects were similar to the cholangiocarcinoma seen in the liver, histopathologically confirming the brain metastasis. There were no other changes in the cerebral cortex and white matter, except some thickened, hyalinized microvessels in the deep white matter with adjacent gliosis and calcification of vessel walls in the basal ganglia. Axonal peripheral neuropathy associated with microangiopathy, possibly related to diabetes, was also seen.