We report the case of a 17-month-old female toddler who presented to the University of Florida pediatric ophthalmology clinic by way of second opinion for macular scars and poor vision. The patient was born at an outside facility at 37 weeks gestation via uncomplicated vaginal delivery at 4 pounds and 7 ounces. Prenatal course was significant for chlamydia infection in mother in the first trimester, which was successfully treated with unknown antibiotics. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) was noted on prenatal ultrasound. Despite IUGR at birth, no systemic or genetic workup was initiated during stay at outside hospital. The mother first noted abnormal eye movements around 3 months of age, at which time she also began to notice the child did not respond well to visual stimuli. Mother reports being assured that these findings were normal, which contributed to delayed presentation to an ophthalmologist. The mother also noted a few seizure-like episodes with generalized limb jerking. Family was eventually referred to retinal specialist in their area and were reportedly informed that the patient had retina scarring and no intervention would be helpful at this stage. Family presented to our pediatric ophthalmology clinic at the University of Florida-Gainesville for a second opinion. The child was examined under anesthesia and found to have borderline microcornea (horizontal corneal diameter 10 mm), myopic astigmatism, with extensive multifocal chorioretinal pigmented scars involving the macula and peripheral retina with fibrous vitreous strands that spread between lesions in the right eye and an extensive large macular scar extending between the arcades to the periphery in the left eye (, top). The scars appeared congenital in nature with no signs of activity seen clinically and on fluorescein angiography (, bottom) and thus our top differential diagnoses included Toxoplasmosis, Other (syphilis, varicella-zoster, parvovirus B19), Rubella, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Herpes infections (TORCH) and congenital hamartoma of the retinal pigment epithelium. TORCH studies returned negative with the exception of Toxoplasma IgG (immunoglobulin G) positivity >400.0 IU/mL (range: 7.1 IU/mL or less—not detected; 7.2-8.7 IU/mL—indeterminate; 8.8 IU/mL or greater—detected). On further discussion, mother admitted exposure to outside cats, but denied changing litter boxes and did not believe she consumed raw meat during pregnancy. The patient was referred to pediatric genetics, neurology, and infectious disease services. Neurology examination revealed jerk nystagmus, an increased right Achilles tendon reflex, and microcephaly (<1% head circumference). Other etiologies considered were other intrauterine infections: cytomegalovirus (CMV), rubella, Zika virus, as well as lymphocytic choriomeningitis, though exposure history did not align with the latter 2 entities. No further laboratory testing initiated by these services for various infectious etiologies yielded any positive results. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed scattered supratentorial white matter calcifications and electroencephalogram revealed no seizure-like activity during monitoring . The patient is yet to undergo other ancillary testing and services as well, including audiology testing, repeat serial IgG Toxoplasma titers on patient, serum testing and fundus examination on mother and siblings, as well as low vision therapy for the patient. There are socioeconomic and access to care issues that are contributory to the uncompleted studies and therapy in this patient’s case. The decision was made not to treat the Toxoplasma infection, given it was not active at the time of evaluation. Recommendation from other services was for ophthalmology to monitor and initiate traditional triple therapy if reactivation should occur.