An African-American female in her fifties with past medical history of hypertension presented to our outpatient clinic with complaints of “blurred vision” for two weeks. Her symptoms were associated with facial discomfort and a generalized headache. She denied fever, problems with speech or swallowing, weakness or numbness, abnormal gait, etc. She also denied any preceding infections or vaccinations. On physical examination upon her initial presentation, there was demonstratable swelling of the left upper eyelid. Her extraocular movements revealed defects with the abduction and adduction of the right eye (the right eye failed to move in the horizontal plane), and the left eye would not adduct (move inwards), although the outward movement (abduction) was normal. The left upper eyelid drooped (ptosis), and the left eye failed to lift/elevate completely when looking upwards, a pseudo 1 and ½ syndrome. A positive Cogan lid twitch was noticed. Her vision in both eyes, a detailed fundoscopic, and a complete neurological examination were normal. Our patient was counseled for the ice pack test, but she refused it. Investigative studies to rule out emergent central etiologies with computed tomography (CT) orbits, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) of the brain, along with blood work, were unremarkable. Subsequent blood work results revealed positive results of the anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies (AChR-Ab), while anti-MUSK (antibodies to muscle-specific tyrosine kinase), and GQ1b antibodies levels were negative, as shown in Table . Rheumatoid factors, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, and anti-thyroid antibody were negative. The thyroid profile was within the normal range.
Diagnosis of ocular myasthenia gravis was made in accordance with positive AChR-Ab. Therefore, we proceeded to assess her response to pyridostigmine, and after receiving a couple of 60 mg pyridostigmine tablets, our patient experienced improvement subjectively and objectively (as demonstrated in the Additional file : Video). A chest CT failed to reveal a thymoma. Our patient was started on pyridostigmine 30 mg thrice a day with a gradual escalation to 120 mg four times a day, along with 10 mg of prednisone, with which our patient demonstrated a significant improvement over the next several weeks. Six months later, with prednisone having been tapered off, our patient started experiencing diplopia (double vision), significant fatigue and dyspnea, for which she was admitted and treated for the myasthenic crisis with plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg). After recovering from the myasthenic crisis, efgartigimod infusions were instituted, which helped our patient restore normal life.