We report the case of a 72-year-old Caucasian male, referred to our department for further investigation of recent-onset effort angina. He was a non-smoker, hypertensive and dyslipidemic patient under treatment with ACE inhibitor and statin. No parental history of cardiovascular disease was reported to us.
On admission he was free of symptoms at rest and he had a relatively normal clinical examination. He also had a normal chest X-ray, and laboratory tests yielded no unusual findings besides alter lipoprotein levels (predominantly low HDL).
The patient was subjected to SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging before and after Bruce protocol graded exercise stress test. During the second stage of exercise stress test the patient reported mild chest discomfort and he gradually developed down-sloping ST depression of approximately 1.5 mm at the inferior leads. Exercise was halted at 6:02 due to patient’s fatigue.
SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging revealed an exercise-induced significant inferio-lateral perfusion defect.
The patient was then subjected to coronary angiography (CA), which yielded total occlusion of right coronary artery proximally. The distal part of the artery was well perfused by a wide network of anastomotic branches interconnected to the proximal part of RCA. A lesion in the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) was also noted. The lesion compromised the 50% of the arterial lumen diameter. The ejection fraction was normal. The patient was put on aspirin, beta-blocker and calcium channel antagonist and he was discharged 24 hours later. On regular follow-up he was in good condition and did not report any symptoms.
Eight months later and while still on optimal anti-aginal treatment the patient reported relapse of effort angina. He was admitted to our department and he was re-subjected to a CA. The severity of the LAD lesion was subsequently worsened , while the anatomy of RCA was unchanged . However on the second attempt to visualize the RCA from the left anterior oblique view, the vessel dissected distally to the total occlusion ( and ). Hopefully, the patient remained symptom-free, and hemodynamically stable. Moreover, since the dissection occurred distal to a totally occluded artery, any percutaneous intervention in the dissected lesion was technically impossible. Therefore, the patient was admitted in the intensive care unit and was discharged after 48 hours monitoring. He was referred to the cardiothoracic surgery department for further management of the LAD stenosis which was considered as the symptom-related lesion.