A 67-year-old male was present to our department with involuntary movement of the neck that suddenly turned back to the left and returned to normal in approximately 30 s. The episodes occurred about once or twice a day, and he remained conscious during the episodes. Afterward, the patient suddenly started laughing, repeated simple tasks, and did not know how to turn off the lights. On examination, he was disoriented to time and place and occasionally unable to follow directions. He could not make conversation. No muscle spasms were seen in his face or extremities. He had no fever, and his vital signs were stable. Laboratory values found hyponatremia (131 mEq/L). Plasma osmolarity was 273 mOsm/kg, urine osmolarity was 404 mOsm/kg, and urine sodium was 81 mEq/L. Hepatic, renal, thyroid, and adrenal functions were normal. Serum antidiuretic hormone (ADH) was 3.7 pg/ml, indicating the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). Antinuclear antibodies and antithyroid antibodies were negative. Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, Hu, Yo, Ri, CV2, amphiphysin, Ma1, and Ma2 antibodies were all negative. Anti-VGKC complex antibodies was 358.0 pM (cutoff ≥ 400 pM). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a normal range of cell counts (1/μL) and protein (33 mg/dL). Adenosine deaminase was not elevated. Herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus DNA were negative. CSF bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. Electroencephalography showed transient theta bursts at the right frontal lobe. Enhanced chest and abdominal computed tomography scans and Gallium scintigraphy showed no malignant lesions. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated hyperintensities in the medial temporal lobe and basal forebrain on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) without gadolinium enhancement .
At the time of admission, tonic–clonic seizure was observed. Intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (1000 mg for 3 days) with levetiracetam was administered, and the patient’s disorientation was improved. After a second course of methylprednisolone therapy, his consciousness became clear. After recovery, his scores of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) were 27/30 and 14/18, respectively. Although the VGKC complex antibody titer was below the reference level, autoimmune encephalitis was strongly suspected, and the patient was discharged while taking 55 mg/day of oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and 2000 mg/day of levetiracetam. prednisolone was reduced by 5 mg every 8 weeks (up to 30 mg), by 5 mg every 3 months (up to 10 mg), and then carefully reduced by 1 mg thereafter. The patient’s compliance was good, and no neurological symptoms or epileptic seizures were observed during follow-up.
Three years later, under 4 mg of prednisolone, he began to have incoherent speech. Although he was disoriented in time, he was able to follow verbal instructions without apraxia. Seizures were not observed. Enhanced chest and abdominal CT scans did not detect any malignancy. Brain MRI revealed hyperintensity on the left medial temporal lobe on FLAIR without enhancement . The serum sodium level was 131 mEq/L. CSF analysis revealed mild pleocytosis (9/μl) with normal protein levels (34 mg/dL). After two courses of intravenous methylprednisolone therapy, the patient became alert. After recovery, his MMSE and FAB scores were 26/30 and 13/18, respectively. Since the anti-LGI1 and CASPR-2 antibody assays were available on a commercial basis at that time, a CSF sample stored at the time of the first attack was measured and found to be LGI1 positive and CASPR-2 negative. As the clinical findings were consistent, the diagnosis of anti-LGI1 encephalitis was made. He is currently taking prednisolone 15 mg/day without relapse.