A 50-year-old male presented with history of huge swelling at the midline of the back of the head, progressively increasing in size over the past decade. The patient had no other complaints except for the cosmetic deformity due to swelling. On examination, the lesion was 10 cm in diameter, centering at external occipital protuberance. The swelling was firm to hard in consistency, nontender and immobile. Overlying skin was shiny with visible dilated vessels and was freely mobile. There was no bruit heard over the swelling. Neurological examination was unremarkable. Fundoscopy revealed no papilledema. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed an intra-diploic tumor expanding both inner and outer tables, centered over torcula, with a characteristic sunburst pattern with striations radiating from the center. The underlying brain was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed an extra-axial lesion which was iso-intense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hyper-intense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), enhancing brilliantly on contrast administration [Figures – and , ]. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) was not performed.
With a presumptive diagnosis of intra-osseous cavernous hemangioma, meningioma or metastases, patient underwent surgery in prone position. Whole of the bony mass lesion was exposed by linear skin incision and both outer/inner tables were noted to be thin and papery. After delineating the normal calvarial bone all around the tumor, four burr holes were made over there, encircling the bony tumor using cutting burr of the high-speed pneumatic drill. Further, all four burr holes were connected using high-speed pneumatic craniotome and en bloc tumor was gradually lifted up after peeling of dura from the inner table with a penfield dissector. Multiple venous drainage communications were sealed using gelfoam and there was no injury to major venous sinuses. Estimated blood loss was 750 ml and all cut surfaces of vault were sealed with bone wax to avoid inadvertent air embolism. Tumor, with a rim of normal bone, was excised completely and sent for histopathology which showed large thin-walled vascular channels with small thin walled and angulated capillary sized blood filled vessels, suggestive of a cavernous hemangioma of occipital bone [Figure and ]. Postoperatively, patient made an eventless recovery and follow-up radiology depicts total excision of hemangioma [Figure and ]. We have planned cranioplasty at follow-up of 1 year.