A 71-year-old female with extensive UC on infliximab presented with abdominal pain and more than 10 daily bloody bowel movements. She was initially diagnosed with UC 3 years prior; however, she declined treatment at that time due to concern about medication side effects. She was admitted 4 months ago with extensive pancolitis, and during that admission, she was started on infliximab and discharged on prednisone 40 mg with a planned taper. Prednisone was tapered down by 10 mg every 2 weeks until 20 mg, then tapered by 5 mg every 2 weeks until completion. She had received 4 infusions of infliximab as an outpatient. At the time of the current presentation, she had completed her last infusion 11 days prior and had been off prednisone for 1 month.
On admission, she was tachycardic but otherwise hemodynamically stable. Labs were notable for: White blood count 12 × 10(3) mcL, hemoglobin 11 g/dL, albumin 3.7 g/dl, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 56 mg/L. Her infliximab level was undetectable with an antibody level of 86.8 U/mL (upper limit of normal < 50 U/mL). Infectious studies including stool culture, Shiga toxin, Campylobacter, and C difficile were negative. Abdominal X-ray performed did not show toxic megacolon or signs of perforation. She was started on hydrocortisone 100 mg IV every 8 hours with improvement in her CRP from 56 to 40 mg/L. Rescue therapy options including accelerated infliximab, vedolizumab, and JAK inhibitors were considered. Accelerated infliximab was not selected given the undetectable infliximab level and high antibody level, which seemed unlikely to be overcome. JAK inhibitors were contraindicated due to a history of prior silent myocardial infarction and venous thromboembolism. Vedolizumab was chosen for a more favorable safety profile and was administered on hospital day (HD) 1. Flexible sigmoidoscopy on HD1 showed Mayo 3 colitis with negative biopsies for cytomegalovirus (CMV). Hyperbaric medicine was consulted; however, the patient declined this therapy.
On HD5, CRP downtrended to 9 mg/L and she was clinically improving with fewer bowel movements and minimal hematochezia, so she was transitioned from IV to oral steroids (prednisone 40 mg daily).
Unfortunately, after switching to oral steroids she developed increased abdominal pain, stool frequency, and blood in her stools. Her CRP increased rapidly from 9 to 48 mg/L, prompting re-initiation of IV steroids on HD6. Given her inability to tolerate switching from IV to oral steroids and concern that her UC flare may be medically refractory; colorectal surgery was consulted. Given the reliance on IV steroids and concern regarding the need for colectomy, hyperbaric medicine was reengaged.
She completed 5, 90-minute hyperbaric treatments at 2.0 ATA (HD 7–11) with significant and prompt reduction in both CRP and stool frequency . CRP decreased from 28 to 6.3 mg/L. Stool frequency improved from 7 to 8/day to 4/day and bleeding stopped. After 3 hyperbaric treatments, she had significant clinical improvement with a downtrending CRP and was successfully transitioned from IV to oral steroids (prednisone 60 mg daily) on HD9. She was discharged on oral prednisone (60 mg daily with prolonged taper) with close outpatient follow-up and outpatient vedolizumab infusions. Follow-up post discharge showed sustained improvement; at 5 months she remained clinically in remission off steroids with 1–2 non-bloody bowel movements per day and a CRP of 4.1 mg/L.