A 42-year-old gentleman presented to our department with difficulty to lift his right shoulder completely, after being initially treated for massive head injury and right scapular fracture post road traffic accident elsewhere past four months. His spouse noticed an un-resolving swelling in the left wrist associated with pain affecting his activity of daily living, in spite being recouped from head injury and was stressed for the same.
On examination, he had non-tender bony prominence over the right scapula, passive shoulder abduction with forward flexion was restricted to 90°, nil neurovascular deficit, left wrist depicted to have swelling, diffuse tenderness over the carpal bones with severe restriction of movements’, and intact distal neurovascular status. Although he had delayed coherence, his pre-operative DASH and PRWE score was, respectively, 95/100 and 99/100 (poor) at the initial presentation.
Standard roentgenogram of the shoulder revealed, a huge intra-communicating (toward clavicular and infrascapular territory) heterotrophic ossified mass at supra scapular region for a united scapular fracture; wrist depicted Mayfields Type IV perilunate dislocation with classical lunotriquetral disruption; and spilled tea cup sign in the conventional views .
The patient underwent heterotrophic mass excision through a bra strap approach for the right shoulder. A combined dorsal (between third and fourth extensor compartment) and volar approach was utilized for the left wrist, intraoperatively, the lunate was found to be dislocated from the fossa with volar lunotriquetral ligament severed with its intact dorsal counterpart. Palmaris longus tendon graft was harvested utilizing the volar access, perilunate dislocation was reduced, graft was incorporated from triquetrum to lunate, suture tied after pilot hole drilled lateral to medial through and through, stabilized by a K wire through triquetro-capitate and capitolunate junction, confirmed by C arm, dorsal capsule tightly closed, and joint immobilized in below elbow slab .
Immediate post-operative X-rays showed satisfactory reduction, sutures removed after 2 weeks, K wire and slab removed after 4 weeks, aggressive wrist physiotherapy initiated. The patient was regularly followed up and he regained near-normal full range of motions at the wrist by the term of 5 months and neither revealed recurrence of the dislocation nor early signs of avascular necrosis or osteoarthritis . At 6 months his DASH and PRWE scores are 8.3/100 and 20/100, respectively, and further follow-up was unable as patient went to his workplace abroad.