We report the case of a 35-year-old female. Her chief complaints were vision disorder in both eyes, disturbance of the visual field, and a request for ophthalmological examination.
After being diagnosed with a giant cell tumor at age 13, the patient noticed a decline in visual acuity in both eyes and visual field defects. At that age, her corrected visual acuity was 0.1 in her right eye and 0.5 in her left eye. A CT scan at that time revealed a large tumor from the sphenoid sinus to the ethmoid sinus, and the state of the intracranial optic nerves was unclear . At age 14, tumor removal was performed at the Kyoto Prefectural Medical College of Otolaryngology, and partial resection of the tumor was performed 1 month later at the same hospital's neurosurgery department together with radiation therapy (3,168 rad). Three months later, a sphenoid invasion resection was performed in addition to radiation therapy (1,408 rad) during reoperation at the hospital's otorhinology unit. At that time, a CT scan image showed that most of the tumor had been removed, but some remained within the sphenoid sinus . At age 16, an additional resection was performed at the same otorhinology unit, with later follow-up observations. At age 23, MRI oblique T1-weighted imaging showed the remnants of a giant cell tumor in her sphenoid sinus . After that, no particularly significant change in the condition of the tumor was observed.
When the patient was 24 years of age, we were asked to perform an ophthalmological examination. Upon examination, her visual acuity was 0.02 (0.03 × S − 1.50 = C − 2.00 A × 110°) in her right eye and 0.2 (0.3 × S − 0.75 = C − 1.25 A × 90°) in her left eye. Intraocular pressure was 11 and 13 mm Hg in her right and left eye, respectively. In regard to eye position, esotropia was present, measuring 30 prism dpt at near vision and 35 prism dpt at distant vision. A slight abduction failure was observed in her left eye. Moreover, ocular protrusion of 8 mm in her right eye and 8.5 mm in her left eye (base 98 mm) was observed. No abnormalities of the anterior ocular segment and ocular media were observed, yet the fundus showed marked optic atrophy in both eyes . There was no depression of the optic discs, and a state of bilateral atrophy was presented. Goldmann visual field perimetry revealed that arcuate peripheral vision remained only on the nasal side of the right eye. Absolute scotomas were observed in 4 locations near the center of the left eye, with relative scotomas within a 20-degree range around it . Since that time, ophthalmological examinations, including visual field testing, have been performed; however, no obvious changes have been observed.