We describe a case of prolonged critical avalanche burial of nearly 23 h with severe hypothermia (initial core temperature 23.1 °C), first-degree frostbite of the left hand and both feet and third- to fourth-degree frostbite of the right hand.
In January 2023, a 53-year-old male (height 180 cm, weight 76 kg, body mass index 23.4 kg/m2, ASA classification I ) set off alone on a ski tour in the Italian Alps during an avalanche risk level of three. He was buried by an avalanche at around 12 p.m. during ascent at approximately 2300 m above sea level. His family called the emergency services at approximately 6 p.m. Immediately, the alerted mountain rescue service began to collect information to determine the possible routes the victim might have been on and the areas that need to be searched. Several search and rescue (SAR) flights were performed during the night, including the use of an international mobile subscriber identify (IMSI) catcher. All night flights failed to locate the victim because of missing information about the site of the accident.
At the break of the next day, multiple avalanche sites were identified and thoroughly searched using a helicopter-mounted avalanche transceiver. After approximately 23 h of the presumed burial, a signal could be detected, and surprisingly, a moving hand was identified on the surface of the avalanche.
On arrival of the rescue team at the burial site the victim was critically buried in a supine position with the head at a depth of approximately one meter. The right ungloved hand reached the outside through an air canal and was free of snow . The rescuers identified a large air pocket in front of the mouth and nose that was connected to the outside and a patent airway. The victim was adequately dressed for the ambient conditions with cap, windbreaker, and gloves, except on the right hand. The ambient temperature was − 8 °C.
The body was extricated within a few minutes at 10.45 a.m. The patient had no major bleeding, was reactive to verbal stimuli, was agitated with myosis and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 11 (Eye 4, Verbal 2, Motor 5) and was spontaneously breathing (respiratory rate 6/min). Haemodynamic parameters were unstable with bradycardia 40–50 beats/min and a weak central but no peripheral pulse. The first core body temperature measured epitympanically with a thermistor-based probe (TTS-400 ICU Medical Temp Sensor Tympanic by Smiths Medical) was 23.1 °C.
The patient was gently extricated, immobilised on a vacuum mattress and wrapped in an active self-warming blanket (Mölnlycke® BARRIER® EasyWarm®). For the 25 min helicopter transport to the nearest level I trauma centre of Bolzano with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) capabilities, a mechanical chest compression device (Schiller Easy Pulse®) was attached but never activated.
On admission at midday the patient was still somnolent with GCS 11 (Eye 4, Verbal 2, Motor 5), core body temperature measured in the bladder 26.4 °C, sinus tachycardia (114/min), normal blood pressure and tachypnoea (20/min). Noninvasive SpO2 was not measurable because of cold extremities. With external forced warm air rewarming (Bair Hugger™), normothermia (36 °C) was reached in four hours. During rewarming, the patient was not moved to avoid life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Before rewarming, all hands and feet were pale and cold to the touch. These signs of frostbite vanished on the left hand and both lower legs after rewarming. The right hand showed third- to fourth-degree frostbite on the entire second finger, the distal and middle phalanx and distal part of the proximal phalanx of the fifth finger and the areas distal to the proximal interphalangeal joints of the third and fourth fingers. Additionally, there was third-degree frostbite on the distal phalanx and second-degree frostbite on the proximal phalanx of the thumb . In the total body computed tomography (CT) scan after rewarming, there were no signs of traumatic injury. For the treatment of rhabdomyolysis (CK > 22,000 U/l), continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) with CytoSorb® (Aferetica) was performed for 24 h.
Frostbite treatment was started approximately 5 h after admission according to the local protocol with ibuprofen 6 mg/kg every 12 h, dexamethasone 0.1 mg/kg daily and iloprost (0.5 ng/kg/min increasing to 1.0 ng/kg/min) for five days. We established a continuous right-sided axillary block (Contiplex® S Ultra 360 18G) for sympathicolysis with ropivacaine 0.2% 4 ml/h for 4 days. The patient received enoxaparine 6000 IE/day for thromboprophylaxis. After exclusion of contraindications and any compartment syndrome, catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT) with alteplase via a retrograde cannula (Arrow R 22G) inserted in the right brachial artery was started approximately 4 h after rewarming with a bolus of 3 mg and continuous infusion of 1 mg/h for 6 h. A broad-spectrum antibiotic (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 2.2 g × 3/d for 5 days) and antitetanic vaccine were administered.
On day 2, the frostbite lesions on the right hand seemed to improve, but 48 h after thrombolysis, haemorrhagic blisters appeared. Debridement of high tense blisters with risk of uncontrolled rupture was performed.
Also day 2, the patient suffered from diffuse musculoskeletal pain, and signs of compartment syndrome on the left shoulder appeared, probably caused by compression of the backpack straps during burial. No surgical treatment was needed.
On day 7, a triple phase bone scan with single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT/CT) imaging was performed to assess the ischaemic but viable bone regions and to allow an estimation of tissue loss. Immediately after administration of the 16 mCi of 99 m-Techentium methylene diphosphonate (99mTc MDP), perfusion and blood pool images revealed reduced uptake of the tracer in the distal parts of the second to fifth fingers of the right hand. The delayed phase images obtained 3 h after injection of the radiopharmaceutical revealed relatively increased tracer uptake of soft tissue from second to fifth finger and in the distal parts of the thumb.
On day 10, the patient was discharged with multimodal analgesia with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids, pregabalin and palmitoiletanolamide due to persistent nociceptive and neuropathic pain (mixed pain) in the right hand, left shoulder and right lower leg. Movement of the right hand was limited because of stiffness and pain. For posttraumatic stress disorder, the patient received preventive psychologic support and a tranquilizer.
After ten months, the patient reported a full functional recovery of all fingers of the right hand except for nail dystrophia but complained of hypoaesthesia and hypersensitivity to ambient temperatures below 14 °C. He continues treatment of neuropathic pain with pregabalin and resumed sports activity (cycling and hiking).