A 62-year-old man underwent radical cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer. As retroperitoneal invasion was suspected during surgery, urinary diversion was converted to ureterocutaneostomy. The pathological diagnosis of the resected bladder tumor was high-grade urothelial carcinoma with the plasmacytoid variant, pT4aN0M0. Based on pathological examination results, three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine/cisplatin) were administered. Twenty months after the adjuvant chemotherapy, peritoneal dissemination was observed. Therefore, salvage chemotherapy (gemcitabine/carboplatin) was instituted, and it was ongoing.
In the outpatient clinic, a 7Fr single-J stent inserted into the right side of the kidney was changed every month by the physician in charge without any imaging guidance, and no complications had been encountered. However, at postoperative 31 months, the patient visited the outpatient clinic as the length of the single-J stent from the cutaneoustomy was longer than usual. The single-j stent was exchanged without an imaging guidance, as usual, by a different clinician. Given the restriction to stent movement during the adjustment of the depth of the single-J stent, the precise reason was diagnosed using radiography, and the stent was found to be knotted in the right renal pelvis . First, we attempted to gently retrieve the knotted stent; however, this was not possible because the width of the knotted stent was greater than that of the upper ureter. Next, under imaging guidance, we used a (0.038 inches) guide-wire to erect the single-J stent; however, the guide-wire did not pass through the knotted single-J stent. As the patient had only one functional kidney, to avoid additional complications, a retrograde approach was ruled out. The distal of knotting stent was migrated into the ureter, which caused the Society of Fetal Urology grade 2 hydronephrosis. Thus, first, ultrasound-guided percutaneous puncture was performed and the track was dilated with metal dilators. The renal pelvic was carefully observed with a nephroscope, then the tract was additionally dilated with the metal dilators. After a safety guide-wire was placed, flexible cystoscope was inserted through (along with) another guide-wire. Finally, the end of the stent was grabbed with a foreign body forceps and removed . A new single-J stent was inserted, after which no complications have occurred. As shown in Figure , the knotted end of the stent was tight.