A 10-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was referred for the investigation
of weight loss (1.2 kg over a 6 month period). Lip smacking and nausea were also
reported. Before this presentation no significant medical issues were reported,
vaccinations were up to date and the cat was housed mainly indoors, with some time
spent outside. On physical examination, the cat was bright and alert, well hydrated
and had an adequate body condition score (4/9); its body weight was 4.88 kg. Cardiac
auscultation revealed tachycardia (heart rate 190 beats per min), with a regular
rhythm; no cardiac murmurs were detected. Pulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
(respiratory rate 26 breaths per minute), and rectal temperature was 39.0ºC. No
abnormalities were found on abdominal palpation.
The cat was admitted for initial investigations. The haematological results were
entirely within normal limits . Serum biochemistry, metabolites and electrolyte analysis
revealed moderate elevation in creatinine kinase (893 U/l; reference interval [RI]
10–290 U/l), mild hyperglycaemia (7.6 mmol/l; RI 4.2–6.6 mmol/l) and mild
hyperlactaemia (3.61 mmol/l; RI 0.6–2.5 mmol/l); all other values were within normal
limits . Serum
folate and cobalamin concentrations were within their respective RIs, as was total
thyroxine . The
cat was also found to be negative for feline immunodeficiency virus and feline
leukaemia virus (FIV/FeLV Witness Test Kit; Zoetis).
An abdominal ultrasound was performed under intravenous (IV) sedation with
butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg Torbugesic; Zoetis) and acepromazine (5 µg/kg, ACP; Novartis)
by a board-certified radiologist using a Logiq E R7 ultrasound scanner. A
well-circumscribed 18 mm diameter mass was detected in the stomach at the level of
the pyloric sphincter. The mass had heterogeneous echogenicity with a focal
hypoechoic area and loss of distinction in the local gastric wall layering. The mass
protruded into the gastric lumen . No lymph adenopahty was noted and the adjacent pancreas was
free of pathology. No other lesions were noted in the remainder of the intestinal
tract, there was no free fluid in the abdominal cavity and the remainder of the
abdominal viscera was unremarkable. Thoracic radiographs were obtained to screen for
pulmonary metastasis or concurrent abnormalities, but no pathology was seen.
Fine-needle aspirates were taken of the mass via ultrasonic guidance. Cytological
analysis found that the nucleated cells in the samples consisted predominantly of
degenerate neutrophils, in a higher concentration than would be expected from
peripheral blood. These cells often contained intracytoplasmic bacterial cocci, with
free cocci also noted in small numbers in the background– evidence of septic
neutrophilic infiltration of the mass. Occasional small, round cells were also
reported, arranged in tightly cohesive clusters, likely gastric epithelial cells.
There was minimal anisokaryosis or anisocytosis, so malignant transformation was not
evident in these cytological samples but could not be eliminated.
The cat underwent surgical excision of the mass the following day. Dexmedetomidine (2
µg/kg Dexdomitor; Vetoquinol) and buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg Vetergesic; Ceva) were
selected for the premedication protocol and induction was with 3 ml propofol (6
mg/kg PropoFlo; Zoetis). An epidural using methadone (0.1 mg/kg Physeptone;
Martindale Pharma) and bupivacaine (1 mg/kg Marcain 0.25%; AstraZeneca) was
administered. Isoflurane was used for maintenance and the volatile agent and oxygen
were supplied by a mini circle breathing system. The general anaesthetic was
unremarkable. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg IV Augmentin; GlaxoSmithKline)
was chosen for perioperative antibiosis, initially administered 30 mins prior to the
first incision, followed by repeated doses every 90 mins for the duration of the
procedure.
A celiotomy was performed from the xiphoid process to caudal to the umbilicus.
Exploration of the abdomen was unremarkable except for the known gastric mass and
mild associated lymphadenopathy. The blood vessels on the lesser and greater
curvature of the stomach were divided using electrosurgery and Enseal (Ethicon).
Bowel clamps were placed on the proximal stomach, descending duodenum and at the
margins of the area for resection. The mass and excess gastric mucosa were resected
with 5 cm macroscopic margins, being cautious to ensure the major duodenal papilla
was not involved. The gastric mucosa and submucosa were closed with 4-0 PDS suture
material in a simple continuous pattern until reaching the duodenal opening, and the
serosa and muscularis layers were closed in a continuous Cushing pattern. 4-0 PDS
was used to place a modified horizontal mattress suture at the junction between the
incision closure and the duodenum. Anastomosis was performed with 4-0 PDS in a
simple continuous pattern either side of a mesenteric suture. The lymph node
adjacent to the mass on the lesser curvature was excised and preserved for
histopathology. The lesser omentum was re-attached with simple interrupted 4-0 PDS
sutures. The abdomen was lavaged with 500 ml Hartmann’s crystalloid fluid, which was
removed with suction. The anastomosis site was omentalised and the abdominal wall
and skin were closed routinely. A nasogastric tube was placed for nutritional
support. The margins of the gastric mass were marked with India ink and impression
smears made from the incised surface of the mass.
A 75 mm × 35 mm × 25 mm section of tissue, including the pyloric mass, was fixed (10%
formal saline), as was a specimen of orad mucosa and a local lymph node;
representative portions were processed and submitted for histological
examination.
Each section of the pyloric mass was lined with histologically unremarkable pyloric
(and focally duodenal) mucosa . The neoplastic mass was unencapsulated and poorly demarcated,
forming a multilobular, densely cellular structure, which caused focally marked
expansion of the gastric wall. The neoplastic cells were spindle-shaped with sparse
palely eosinophilic faintly fibrillar cytoplasm arranged in bundles, whorls and
dense streams .
The cells had indistinct cell borders, with oval-to-elongated blunt-ended nuclei
containing stippled to dispersed chromatin and multiple small nucleoli. Nine mitoses
were observed per 10 high power (× 400) fields. In the centre of the mass was
prominent necrosis with accumulations of haemorrhage and proteinaceous fluid.
Multifocally the neoplastic cells infiltrated deeply into the muscularis and
subserosal layers . The lymphatic vessels in these areas were widely patent and multifocally
neoplastic cells were densely clustered around the vessels. Necrosis effaced the
luminal mucosal epithelium and there was accumulated serocellular crusting of the
denuded surface.
The excised lymph node showed peripheral germinal follicles with numerous medullary
small lymphocytes with expected polarity. The fundic mucosal samples had intact tall
columnar epithelium with rare intraepithelial lymphocytes (fewer than 1 per × 400
field). The superficial lamina propria contained occasional small lymphocytes and
plasma cells and there were mild lymphoid vessel dilation and focal discrete
lymphoid aggregates in the deep lamina propria. The muscularis and subserosal layers
were unremarkable.
There was no evidence of neoplastic cells in either the submitted lymph node or orad
gastric mucosa samples, nor in sections from the excision edges of the pyloric
specimen, confirming completeness of the excision.
The histological features of the pyloric mass were consistent with a neoplastic
proliferation of spindle cells, considered most likely to be of smooth muscle
origin. The high level of mitotic activity of the cells, the abundant central
necrosis and infiltration of the mass into surrounding tissue suggested malignancy
and the initial diagnosis of gastric leiomyosarcoma was made, with consideration of
a gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) as a differential diagnosis.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on the tissue sections, and the neoplastic cells
showed strong cytoplasmic labelling with anti-smooth muscle actin (SMA) antibody
. There was
also variable pale labelling with vimentin antibody (indicating mesenchymal cells).
The cells did not label with S100 or CD117 antibodies , which, if present, would have
suggested a GIST; therefore, the immunohistochemistry was strongly supportive of the
histopathological diagnosis of gastric leiomyosarcoma.
Postoperatively, the cat was supported with multimodal analgesia (methadone [0.3
mg/kg IV Comfortan; Dechra] and ketamine [3 µg/kg/h Narketan; Vetoquinol] on a
constant rate infusion [CRI]), fluid therapy (4 ml/kg/h Hartmann’s; Vetivex),
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg IV Augmentin; GlaxoSmithKline), omeprazole (1
mg/kg IV; Star Pharmaceuticals) and metoclopramide (1 mg/kg/h CRI; Hameln). There
was good postoperative clinical improvement, but signs of continued nausea were
noted, so maropitant (1 mg/kg Cerenia; Zoetis) and mirtazapine (2 mg PO; Summit)
were also introduced. The cat was discharged 6 days postoperatively with oral
formulations of omeprazole, metoclopramide and cisapride. A feeding plan was devised
to ensure that full resting energy requirements were met.
At the 7 day follow-up check, oral medications were stopped as there had been no
further vomiting or nausea, and at the 3 month check-up the owners reported that the
cat had a good appetite and no vomiting had been seen. A follow-up abdominal
ultrasound scan was performed, which found no evidence of mass regrowth. A nodule
(7.6 mm × 5.0 mm) was detected in the pancreas adjacent to the duodenum–a novel
finding since the previous scan. There was good integrity in the duodenal-gastric
anastomosis and the rest of the abdomen was unremarkable. As the cat was clinically
well, it was decided to monitor this nodule with a repeat scan 3 months later (6
months postoperatively); this scan showed no evidence of change or growth in the
pancreatic lesion nor any change in the associated duodenum . There was also no gastric mass
regrowth or change to the stomach at this time, and the rest of the abdominal
viscera were unremarkable.