A two-year-old male donkey (144 kg bodyweight) presented with a history of recurrent syncope. This symptom appeared up to 16 times per day during a half-year period of clinical surveillance. The animal was kept in a straw-padded box stall and fed hay ad libitum.
The clinical examination revealed an inconstantly reoccurring bradycardia. The neurological and orthopedic examination revealed no abnormalities. Hematology and blood biochemistry including troponin I, calcium, potassium, and magnesium were within normal limits.
Telemetric long-term electrocardiography (TeleVet 100 (Engel Engineering Services GmbH, Heusenstamm, Germany); modified base–apex ECG) revealed intermittent episodes without atrioventricular conduction and long periods with normal sinus rhythm. The episodes of PAVB were initiated spontaneously or by mild tachycardia. In one-third of the PAVB episodes, a ventricular escape beat was observed at the end of an episode. After single episodes of PAVB, atrial tachycardia was detected in the ECG for 20–40 s. The PAVB episodes lasting longer than 25 s correlated with dull mentation and staggering, while episodes lasting longer than 35 s were typically associated with collapse (confirmed by telemetric ECG and observation). Interestingly, no idioventricular rhythm was observed during any of the PAVB episodes. The described bradycardia occurred multiple times per day with variable duration (up to 16 events per day with a duration between 40 and 55 s). Additionally, frequent single or double second-degree AVB of Mobitz type II was visible.
The echocardiography (Vivid™ S70, GE Healthcare GmbH, Solingen, Germany), including 2D, color flow, M-mode, and tissue Doppler imaging showed only mild pulmonary valve regurgitation, so the ultrasound could not reveal a cause for the bradycardia.
The diagnosis of an idiopathic PAVB was made. Therefore, the implantation of a permanent cardiac pacemaker was indicated to prevent syncope. The pacemaker (St. Jude Medical™, Endurity™ Core, Abbott Laboratories, Inc., Saint Paul, MN, USA) and the bipolar, steroid-eluting, active fixation electrode (St. Jude Medical™, Tendril™ STS, 65 cm) were implanted under general anesthesia in dorsal recumbency after surgical preparation of the implantation site.