A 29-year-old woman was referred to our Department of Ophthalmology with impaired visual acuity, photopsia and a central scotoma at her right eye (RE) for 2 weeks. Neither operation nor laser surgery was done before, and no additional ocular or systemic diseases were known. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.3 (RE, −8.50 sph) and 1.0 at the left eye (LE, −6.50 sph). Intraocular pressure was normal. Funduscopy of RE showed ‘vitreoretinal glitter’ (Glitzerbeete) at the inferior part of the retina and multiple yellowish dots at the posterior pole without other signs of inflammation , being hyperfluorescent (early phase) with a diffuse leak (late phase) in FA . SD-OCT showed a slightly elevated retinal pigment epithelial layer . Blood chemistry and count (except decreased basophil granulocytes) as well as immunoglobulins (IgM and IgG) for Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum (TPHA) were normal. Starting with an anti-inflammatory therapy (prednisolone acetate eye drops) in our policlinic resulted in a discrete improvement of BCVA (0.5 RE) after already 4 days until 0.8 BCVA after 2 months. As paracentral scotoma occurred at that point of follow-up, further FA revealed a classic CNV. ICGA showed a hypofluorescent signal . Because of this CNV, an intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF, bevacizumab, 1 mg/0.05 ml) was administered, stabilizing BCVA at 0.8-1.0 in the following months. Local antiglaucomatous drops were added as intraocular pressure increased (30 mm Hg). Three months after the first anti-VEGF injection, the patient was referred again because of spreading of central scotoma (RE: BCVA 0.8). FA revealed a new activity of the classic CNV. Now a systemic anti-inflammatory therapy with prednisone (120 mg) and azathioprine (2 mg/kg body weight/day) was started. Two more intravitreal injections of bevacizumab (1 mg/0.05 ml, BCVA at injection 2: 0.5; BCVA at injection 3: 0.8; RE) were administered. Under this therapy, BCVA was stabilized at 0.8 (RE) for 5 months. Afterwards BCVA decreased again (0.2) with recurrence of CNV and increased spreading in the central part of the fovea. On the patient's demand, no further intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF was done, but local and systemic therapy were continued. BCVA stabilized at 0.5 under azathioprine and tapered prednisone medication without CNV activity in SD-OCT.