A previously healthy 78 years old gentleman presented to our emergency department with worsening shortness of breath of two days duration with reduced effort tolerance and palpitation. He denied chest pain, fever or weight loss. His initial blood pressure was 90/60mmHg with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute. Clinical examination revealed a raised jugular venous pressure and a muffled heart sound. Respiratory examination was unremarkable.
Electrocardiogram showed right bundle branch block [Figure ]. A bedside echocardiogram showed global pericardial effusion with evidence of tamponade [Figure ]. An emergency bedside pericardiocentesis was performed and the pericardial fluid was sent for analysis. Biochemical analysis of the pericardial fluid to serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ratio was 6.9. Pericardial fluid cytology revealed atypical lymphoid cells and hence a contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of thorax, abdomen and pelvis (TAP) was done in active search for malignancy. It showed homogeneously enhancing soft tissue masses in anterior pericardial fat with the most dominant mass encasing the right coronary artery. It was also associated with mediastinal lymphadenopathy and right pulmonary embolism.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a mass sized 35 × 61 mm arising from right atrioventricular (AV) groove suggesting the likelihood of a malignant tumour . Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan showed metabolically active cardiac mass, likely cardiac lymphoma with widespread lymph node involvement on both sides of diaphragm. In addition, there was peritoneal and bone involvement. A computed tomography (CT) guided biopsy of the mass was performed and the histopathological evaluation of the mass was consistent with diffuse large B cell lymphoma. He developed paroxysmal atrial flutter during his hospital stay.
A total of 1 L of haemoserous pericardial fluid was drained over a course of three days via an indwelling pericardial catheter. A repeated transthoracic echocardiography performed four weeks post pericardiocentesis showed a mild pericardial effusion of size 1.27 cm. The patient was referred to a hematology center for further treatment.
The patient was commenced on dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide while in the hematology center. The patient and family were not keen for intensive chemotherapy and they opted for palliative care. He was discharged with a short course of oral corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide and low molecular weight heparin. He was referred to hospice care.