A previously mildly symptomatic 79 year old Caucasian Greek female farmer, with a chronic iatrogenic diaphragmatic eventration 19 years after a Nissen fundoplication and a history of kyphoskoliosis, was transferred to the Emergency Department after a falling on the ground while riding a running donkey. She was a 158 cm height and 67 kgr weight non smoker and non drinker female. She had a history of three uncomplicated pregnancies 45–50 years ago and she didn't use any medications. The patient complained for chest pain in both hemithoraces and shortness of breath. Upon arrival she had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15, 76 beats/min, B.P 140/70 mm/Hg, 24 breaths/min and arterial oxymetry saturation of 97%. Arterial blood gas values were: SO2 97%; p O2 88; p CO2 43; p H 7.38. Clinical examination disclosed a flailing part on the left chest wall with bruising and reduced breath sounds on auscultation as well as a resonant percussion note. Chest X-ray was diagnostic for diaphragmatic elevation, and double rib fractures of the 5th, 6th, 7th left ribs. Spiral CT scan with intravenous contrast material revealed the presence of the eventration with a question of a possible overlooked diaphragmatic rupture, and it confirmed that bowel loops and/or stomach were present in the left hemithorax. We decided to manage this patient conservatively. 18 hours later her clinical condition gradually deteriorated, and she complained of difficulty in breathing. A repeat chest x-ray and spiral CT scan offered no new diagnostic information. Arterial blood gas values were: SO2 89%; p O2 67; p CO2 55; p H 7.31. The patient was intubated and transferred to the ICU. While on respiratory support, she progressively deteriorated demanding a 90% FiO2 to manage the restrictive pattern due to flail chest and bilateral pulmonary contusion along with the previous two clinical entities. (kyphoskoliosis and diaphragmatic eventration).
The decision for operative management was taken plannning to stabilize the thoracic wall and reduce the abdominal content back into the peritoneal cavity. We thought that if we allowed left lung to expand as well as explore the diaphragm for a possible misdiagnosed rupture and stabilize the flailing thoracic wall, we could offer better chance for survival. A left posterolateral thoracotomy through 5th bed rib under double lumen anesthesia was performed. At thoracotomy the diaphragm was intact but weak and floppy, and this confirmed the diagnosis of late iatrogenic eventration. We stabilized the thoracic wall with heavy figure of eight sutures, reducing the abdominal content back into the peritoneal cavity and performing a diaphragmatic plication Postoperatively the patient gradually improved. Arterial blood gases were essentially normal with gradually lowering of the inspired oxygen content and she was extubated three days later. The patient stayed in the hospital for 15 days after which she was discharged in a good general condition. CT scan on discharge disclosed a good operative result. .