A 26-year-old man with no history of lung diseases or other disorders was admitted to the local hospital due to cough and fatigue for 3 days, hemoptysis, dyspnea, fever, chest pain, and wheezing for a day. The patient was admitted to our emergency department. A blood routine examination showed that the white blood cell count was 7.06 × 109/L, and the percentage of neutrophils was 69.9%. The liver function showed alanine aminotransferase at 150 U/L and aspartate transferase at 84 U/L, and the kidney function-related creatinine level was 197 mmol/L, and the uric acid level was 607 mmol/L. The coagulation function D-dimer level was 3730 ng/mL. Blood gas analysis (without oxygen) revealed the following: pH 7.32, PCO2 43 mmHg, PO2 37 mmHg, BE −3.9 mmol/L, HCO3 22.21 mmol/L, Lac 4.8 mmol/L, SO2 65%, Na+ 132 mmol/L, K+ 3.8 mmol/L, and Glu tendency of 7.1 mmol/L. The Chest computer tomography (CT) scan displayed a double lung infection . A physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.5°C, and vital signs were within normal range. Lucid, poor spirit, and wet rales could be heard in both lungs. After 2 h, the patient was transferred to the Respiratory Intensive Care Unit (RICU).
According to the examination, the patient was diagnosed with severe pneumonia and abnormal liver function. While being kept on a non-invasive ventilator, 1,000 mg of imipenem was given intravenously every 8 h, 600 mg of linezolid was given intravenously every 6 h, and reduced glutathione, polyene phosphatidylcholine, and carlo sulfonyl sodium were used. After transferring the patient to RICU post 2 h, the hemoptysis level increased to almost 100 ml, and blood gas analysis indicated respiratory failure. Thus, the patient received endotracheal intubation. Then, tracheoscopy was performed and active hemorrhage was observed in the right upper lobe opening. The lavage fluid was collected and cultured. The right upper lobe bronchus was blocked by a bronchoscope balloon, pituitrin, carlo sulfonyl sodium, and hemagglutinin to stop the bleeding.
Typically, the bleeding could be controlled, but it was counterproductive. The blood was drained from the stomach tube, the urine turned to a soy sauce color, and blood pressure dropped. Considering the patient had gastrointestinal bleeding and hemolysis, emergency blood transfusion measures were initiated, and vasoactive drugs were administered. To date, 1,000 ml of blood was aspirated under a bronchoscope, 300 ml from a gastric tube, and 150 ml was drained by the urinary tube, and the patient went into hemorrhagic shock. In addition, antishock treatment and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) were considered.
These measures stabilized the patient’s blood pressure at 80–95/50–55 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation was stabilized at 80%–90%. Indubitably, the patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, leading to multiple organ failures before the initiation of ECMO therapy and eventually leading to death. At 6.3 h after death, the blood cultures suggested the presence of Aeromonas hydrophila/Aeromonas caviae . At 33 h, irrigation fluid culture also signaled the presence of A. hydrophila/A. caviae after the patient’s death. This is the first case of Aeromonas infection that we have encountered and also a rare case of multiple organ failure reported in the literature.