A 68-year-old male with dilated cardiomyopathy underwent heart transplantation in the year 2000. He had a history of Type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidaemia, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and complete atrioventricular block after transplantation following pacemaker implantation, and was treated with antiplatelet (aspirin 81 mg/day), dipeptidyl peptidase four inhibitor (sitagliptin 25 mg/day), strong statin (atorvastatin 10 mg/day), and beta-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg/day) therapies. Cardiovascular risk factors such as low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (1.63 mmol/L, with normal value: 1.81–3.59 mmol/L), haemoglobin A1c (6.1%, with normal value: 4.6–6.2%), and blood pressure (110/70 mmHg) were desirable for the primary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. He received immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine (30 mg/day) and mycophenolate mofetil (1000 mg/day), and surveillance of myocardial biopsy showed no histological evidence of rejection, and the cytomegalovirus antigen test was negative until 21 years after transplantation. Routine coronary angiography (CAG) showed no significant stenosis in 2020 .
In December 2021, he presented to a local hospital with a 1-month history of chest pain at rest in midnight. Coronary angiography showed intermediate stenosis of the proximal and mid left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right posterolateral artery (PL), which were new findings since the last CAG in 2020. A development of CAV was suspected, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
Since his chest pain was atypical for stable atherosclerotic coronary disease, we performed transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), CAG, intracoronary acetylcholine provocation testing, and fractional flow reserve (FFR) evaluation. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 43% that was not significantly different from the previous one . Coronary angiography confirmed the findings seen 3 months earlier . Intracoronary acetylcholine provocation testing demonstrated severe stenosis from the left main trunk (LMT) to the proximal LAD and subtotal occlusion of the mid LAD after injection of 100 μg acetylcholine into the left coronary artery, and subtotal occlusion of the PL after injection of 20 μg acetylcholine into the right coronary artery (, , and , ). These stenoses were rapidly dilated after 200 μg of intracoronary nitroglycerine administration, but the intermediate stenoses remained (, , and , ). The usual chest pain was not reproduced during the provocation test. It was difficult to ascertain whether signs and symptoms of myocardial ischaemia were present, possibly due to heart denervation and a pacemaker rhythm . An FFR of 0.67 was measured in the LAD, driven mainly by the proximal segment (step-up from 0.74 to 1.00), and there was only a slight step-up in the mid segment (from 0.69 to 0.74). The PL lesion was deferred revascularization with an FFR of 0.87. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with a development of CAV and concomitant coronary vasospasm. We started nifedipine (40 mg/day) for coronary vasospasm in addition to making a change from mycophenolate mofetil to everolimus (0.75 mg/day) and decided to perform percutaneous coronary intervention for the proximal LAD lesion, which showed a large step-up of an FFR.
Because the rapid progression of stenosis in the proximal LAD was observed, near-infrared spectroscopy and intravascular ultrasound (NIRS–IVUS) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) evaluation were performed to determine whether the aetiology of CAV was atherosclerotic or otherwise. The NIRS–IVUS (Dualpro™, Infraredx, Bedford, MA, USA) and OCT (Dragonfly Optis™, Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) imaging catheters were advanced distal to the proximal segment of the LAD and then pulled backed. Intravascular ultrasound revealed a large isoechoic plaque without calcification from the proximal LAD to the LMT; NIRS exhibited a low maximum lipid core burden index in a 4-mm segment (maxLCBI4 mm; 78) within the lesion, suggesting that the plaque contained few lipidic materials . Optical coherence tomography showed homogeneous, signal-rich tissue, but predominantly with a signal intensity lower than the surrounding or deeper layers of intimal tissue, as well as a clearly layered structure and no calcification in the same segment . The minimum lumen area of the lesions in the LMT and proximal LAD were 3.99 and 2.23 mm2, respectively. Percutaneous coronary intervention with a drug-eluting stent (XIENCE Skypoint 3.5/18 mm, Abbott Vascular) was performed . After adjusting the dosage of immunosuppressive agents (cyclosporine to 40 mg/day and everolimus to 1 mg/day), the patient was discharged 17 days later without any symptoms. Follow-up CAG at 4 months showed no progression of CAV.