A 72-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with one-month history of a palpable mass with burning sensation in her left breast. Mammography revealed a nodular increased density of the upper inner quadrant of the left breast considered to be suspicious of malignancy, Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System category 5 (BI-RADS-5).
Ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic mass with irregular and poorly defined margins measuring 23 mm × 14 mm. The ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes were normal. After a diagnosis of malignancy on core needle biopsy, the patient underwent simple mastectomy of the left breast and sentinel lymph node biopsy.
On gross examination, two neighboring foci were found measuring together 28 mm × 17 mm. There were ill-defined whitish lesions with soft red-brown areas inside. No nipple and periareolar lesion were seen. Histologically, both tumor foci were identical, and similar features were observed in the 6 sections examined. The tumor showed high cellularity arranged in sheet of discohesive cells with large cytoplasm and marked nuclear atypia. The tumour cells showed 15 mitosis per high power microscopic field. The lesion included numerous osteoclast-like giant cells containing many small uniform nuclei and hemosiderin-laden macrophages. The stroma was loose, highly vascular with hemorrhagic areas and foci of chronic inflammatory infiltration. Some carcinomas in situ foci were also identified at the periphery of the infiltrating tumour .
One of the three sentinel lymph nodes analyzed using routine intraoperative One-Step Nucleic Acid Amplification (OSNA) assay showed metastasis (17,000 copies/uL). Subsequently, ipsilateral axillary dissection was performed and no additional metastases were found in 14 additional lymph nodes resected.
The immunohistochemical study (see Additional file : Table S1) demonstrated the epithelial nature of the neoplasia, since the tumour cells expressed both cytokeratins AE1/AE3 and CK19 that were positive. Due to the discohesive nature of the cells, immunostaining for E-cadherin was performed and demonstrated complete absence of expression in both, the in situ and the invasive components. On the contrary, giant cells were negative for cytokeratin expression but were strong positive for the histiocytic marker CD68. With these features, the diagnosis was of invasive pleomorphic lobular carcinoma (histological grade 3) with OGCs .
Biomarker analysis demonstrated that the carcinoma was estrogen receptor (ER) positive (strong positivity in 90% of tumor cells); progesterone receptor (PR) negative (complete absence of expression); and demonstrated lack of overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HERCEPTEST 1+). The Ki67 cellular proliferation index was 18%. The analysis of immune related markers demonstrated that, after counting at least 10HPF, the tumors has a mean of 34 CD3+ lymphocytes per 1HPF, 22 CD8+ lymphocytes per 1HPF, 2 CD4+ lymphocytes per 1HPF, and 1 CD20+ lymphocyte per 1HPF. Only occasional tumor cells (less than 1%) were PDL-1 + .
The tumor was subjected to molecular analysis by targeted next generation sequencing. DNA was extracted from a punch focused on the area with greater tumour cell density by using QIAamp® DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (QIAGEN). Quantification (447 ng/μl) and qualification (DIN = 4.6) of the DNA was performed using a Tape Station 2200 (Agilent) and the Genomic DNA kit. We used an in-house panel based on hybrid capture for sequence enrichment including the 34 genes frequently mutated in breast cancer (AKT1, ARID1A, ARID1B, BRCA1, BRCA2, CASP8, CCND1, CDH1, ERBB2, ESR1, FGFR1, GATA3, GRB7, GSDMB, MAP2K4, KRAS, MAP3K1, MLL3, MYC, NCOR1, NF1, PGAP, PIK3CA3, PNMT, PTEN, RB1, SF3B1, STARD3, TBX3, TCAP, TP53, VGLL1, ZNF217, ZNF703) and regions in chromosome 8 (targeting amplification of FGFR1 and MYC), chromosome 11 (targeting amplification of CCND1), chromosome 17 (targeting amplification of ERBB2) and chromosome 20 (targeting amplification of ZNF217). With this technique, we identified a deleterious mutation (C.del866C) in CDH1 (the gene coding for E-cadherin protein) .
The patient was enrolled in a trial that studies giving tamoxifen with or without combination chemotherapy in postmenopausal women who have undergone surgery for breast cancer. The patient was randomized on the arm for receiving only hormone treatment. The patient remains well without evidence of recurrence or metastases two years after surgery.