A 32-year-old female patient presented with pain in her left flank of 1 wk.
The patient presented with pain in her left flank of 1 wk, the nature of the pain was undescribed, and was obvious at night, persistent, severe, was worse when breathing and changing position, and was slightly relieved when her position was maintained. Pain was accompanied by chest tightness and decreased appetite. No fever, chills, cough with sputum, dyspnea, or aches in other parts of the body were observed. Nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, abnormal urine and bowel movements, palpitations, precordial pain, back pain, and left upper limb pain were absent. In addition, no rash was noted. From disease onset, her diet, sleep, and spirit were poor, and no significant weight reduction was observed. Self-administration of analgesic drugs (details unknown) before presentation were ineffective.
She was usually in good health.
The patient reported a family history of malignancy.
Physical examination showed that she was conscious, had poor mental status, was helped into position, and supported by others. Pain was associated with breathing and trunk movement. Occasional palpable tenderness in the left flank and mild tension in the left back muscles and left flank muscles were observed with no obvious tenderness. The patient showed no obvious deformity in the thoracolumbar segment of the spine, limited movement of the thoracic spine, interspinous tenderness at T 7-10, suspicious positive percussion pain, and a positive thoracic crush test. Examination of the cardiopulmonary tract, abdomen, and other areas showed no obvious positive signs.
Laboratory tests showed the following: leukocytes were 10.62 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage was 76.80%, lymphocyte percentage was 17.80%, eosinophil percentage was 0.30%, neutrophil absolute value was 8.16 × 109/L, platelets were 381 × 109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 37.35 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 44 mm/h, aspartate aminotransferase was 11.6 U/L, globulin was 42.0 g/L, the leukoglobulin ratio was 1.0, prealbumin was 138.7 mg/L, glucose was 6.42 mmol/L, urine ketone body 3+, urine occult blood+-, urine protein+, urine specific gravity was 1.033, urine leukocytes 32.50/μL, urine leukocytes in the high power field were 5.8/HP, liver and kidney function, blood lipids and blood glucose were not significantly abnormal. The patient underwent a tissue biopsy for bacterial culture and pathology smear. The bacterial culture of the lesion was negative, and the pathology showed trabecular bone degeneration and necrosis, and the fibrous tissue of the intertrabecular granulation tissue revealed hyperplasia with inflammatory cell infiltration, and a few cytoplasmic transparent round cells were found. Symptomatic analgesic treatment was administered, but as the specific causative agent could not be identified, the patient attended Shandong Chest Hospital for inpatient treatment. After admission, re-examination of laboratory tests showed a Mycobacterium tuberculosis IgG antibody positive reaction, activated partial thromboplastin time of 50.6 s, albumin 37.9 g/L, creatine kinase 22 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 116 U/L, triglycerides 1.76 mmol/L, magnesium 0.74 mmol/L, anion gap 6.8 mmol/L, and angiotensin-converting enzyme 5 U/L. Plasma D-dimer, routine blood tests, tiger red plate agglutination test, brucellosis test tube agglutination test, Brucella antibody IgG, Aspergillus galactomannan antigen, liver and kidney function, blood glucose, immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM), complement C3, complement C4, Mycobacterium tuberculosis IgM antibody, eight items before surgery, and the T-SPOT were also performed. There were no obvious abnormalities in the TB test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, rheumatoid factor, anti-O, (1,3)-β-D-glucan, gram-negative lipopolysaccharide, and routine urine and bowel movements.
Therefore, a local needle biopsy of the lesion was performed again for relevant examination and culture. The results showed that no fungal or bacterial growth was found in the lesion tissue culture, and no mycobacteria were detected, and the DNA of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was also negative. The pathological evidence showed that the biopsy tissue (thoracic vertebrae) contained cartilage, bone and fibrous tissue with minimal inflammation.
Therefore, genetic sequencing was performed and showed that Pseudomonas fluorescens had the largest number of total fragments, a small number of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, and no mycobacteria, fungi, viruses, parasites, mycoplasma/chlamydia, and drug resistance genes were detected.
Imaging studies showed that the T7-9 vertebrae were slightly flattened, and the T8 vertebra was predominant, with reduced smooth margins. The T7-9 vertebral body and adnexal bones showed patchy long T2 long T1 signals, STIR hyperintensity, and the corresponding vertebral space was slightly narrowed. Multiple bone destruction of the T7 vertebral body and T8 vertebral body, bilateral vertebral arches, left transverse process, and left rib cage with swelling of the surrounding soft tissues were thought to be caused by infectious lesions, and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) or needle biopsy was recommended to rule out neoplastic lesions. Mild inflammation of the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, with signs of bilateral pleural effusion were also seen.