A 67-year-old woman with a history of rhinitis and coblation of the nasal turbinates presented to the emergency department for recurrent epistaxis and pain after a traumatic COVID-19 nasal swab test (see for timeline).
On fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy, a dark polypoid lesion was visualized between the middle and inferior left turbinates. Biopsy was performed and final pathology reported a heavily pigmented malignant melanoma involving the nasal mucosa, positive for S100 protein. Maxillofacial CT scan without contrast showed an abnormal soft tissue density in the left nasal cavity extending into the proximal upper left maxillary sinus and obstructing the left ostiomeatal complex. On metastatic workup, PET/CT revealed an FDG-avid right middle lobe lung nodule. The patient underwent bronchoscopy with fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the nodule. Pathology reported typical carcinoid, a finding managed separately and irrelevant to this discussion. After negative metastatic workup, the patient underwent mapping biopsies and nasal/sinus endoscopic tumor debulking. During resection, the tumor was found to extend along the nasal floor from the inferior meatus to the level of the inferior nasal septum, with pigmented mucosal changes involving the lateral aspect of the nasal vestibule, the superior aspect of the nasal septum extending onto the skull base, and the area of attachment of the middle turbinate. Pathology of the fragmented resection specimen confirmed SNMM. PD-L1 immunohistochemistry returned as high expression, intensity 3+, and tumor proportion score (TPS) ≥ 50%. The consensus recommendation at the multidisciplinary tumor board was to initiate ImT (nivolumab) and RT, to be followed by ImT (nivolumab) alone. The patient received nivolumab monotherapy (480 mg on a q4 week schedule) with concurrent intensity modulated (IM) RT to a total dose of 60 Gy in 20 fractions targeting the left nasal cavity. The patient tolerated ImT/RT well and went on to receive three cycles of adjuvant nivolumab as scheduled. However, nasal endoscopy and interval MRI identified local disease progression. Anti-CTLA-4 (Ipilimumab) was added to the ImT regimen with a plan for four cycles. After Cycle 1, the patient developed elevated liver enzymes (AST 289 U/L, ALT 301 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase 156 U/L), attributed to ImT-induced autoimmune hepatitis. ImT was discontinued and the patient was treated with intravenous solumedrol 150 mg followed by an extended course of prednisone (total duration, 30 days). Interval PET/CT showed no evidence of metastatic disease and the patient was followed closely in the clinic with radiographic surveillance. A repeat maxillofacial CT showed an increase in the size of the nodular enhancing soft tissue mass in the left posterior nasal cavity, and CT abdomen with contrast revealed a new 3.3-cm hypoenhancing liver lesion in segment 5, consistent with metastasis. CT biopsy of the liver lesion confirmed metastatic malignant melanoma. PET/CT showed rapid progression of numerous metastatic lesions within liver segments 2, 5, and 8, with the segment 5 lesion growing from 3 to 10 cm over 2 months. PET/CT also identified new FDG-avid lesions in thoracic, lumbar, and sacral vertebrae (T9, T12, L3, and S1) highly suspicious for spinal metastases.
After progression through two courses of ImT, the patient was presented again at tumor board and recommended to restart ImT with Opdualag (dual anti-PD-1 nivolumab combined with anti-LAG-3 relatlimab), and was referred to radiation oncology for concurrent stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SBRT) of the dominant hepatic lesion. The patient received the first cycle of Opdualag with a concomitant course of SBRT, delivering 50 Gy in five fractions to the segment 5 liver tumor. SBRT was performed on a hybrid magnetic resonance/linear accelerator (MR/Linac) platform using MR-guided online adaptive radiotherapy (MRgOART) .
After the second cycle of Opdualag, the patient developed severe keratoconjunctivitis with corneal ulcerations. The patient had a history of ImT-induced hepatitis, and systemic therapy was discontinued out of concern for another severe ImT-related adverse event (irAE). Interval PET/CT 3 months after SBRT showed a CMR with no suspicious hypermetabolic activity within the surgical cavity and complete resolution of all FDG-avid lesions in the liver (including unirradiated ones) and axial spine where hypermetabolism had previously been identified .
CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis 3 months after SBRT demonstrated a decrease in the size of all liver lesions, with the segment 5 lesion measuring 2 cm in maximum diameter down from 10 cm. Six months after SBRT, the patient’s treatment response persisted despite discontinuation of all therapy for 4 months.