A 15- month old girl referred to to our otolaryngology department of Shafa Hospital of Kerman University of medical sciences, Kerman, Iran with a history of 6 months bilateral otitis media with effusion and no response to medical treatment was received. She had completed three courses of antibiotics for recurrent bilateral otitis media with effusion (OME).
Otomicroscopic examination revealed not any supportive or bloody discharge from both ears. On examination, the child was not in respiratory distress and the facial nerve was intact. Her hematologic testing revealed white blood count 12.8 x109/uL, Hb 12.7 (g/dl), platelet count 479 x109/uL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 11mm. Tympanometry of both ears was B Type with normal ear canal volume (ECV) that was suggestive for OME .
In addition, the auditory brainstem response (ABR) of the patient showed bilateral mild hearing loss that was in consistent with OME. The High Resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of temporal revealed bilateral effusion of middle ear without destruction of cortical temporal bone and inner ear appeared normal with probable OME diagnosis, the myringotomy and ventilation tube insertion was planned for her; but because of the lack of any effusion from ear in myringotomy operation, biopsy was taken from the right mastoid by post auricular incision under general anesthesia for definite diagnosis. Histopathological examination showed multifocal mononuclear cells infiltrates as histiocytes, a few lymphocytes, fibroblasts and scattered eosinophils. Immunohistochemically (IHC) staining was highly positive for S100 and weakly positive for CD1a. It means that Langerhans histiocytosis is confirmed . In further work up for her, no hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy, exophthalmos and mediastinal mass on physical exam and abdominal sonography were observed on this child. However, in spiral brain CT scan, a faint lytic lesion in left frontal bone without sclerotic margin was seen .
The case who referred to the pediatric hemato-oncologist for therapy and treatment received intravenous vinblastine, MTX and lekuverin with standard dose and during 2 years’ follow-up, had no evidence of any recurrence or metastasis. The audiometry of patient became a type after chemotherapy.