A 3-year-old Caucasian girl presented to the emergency room of a community hospital complaining of abdominal pain. After 3 hours, an abdominal X-ray showed a coin lithium battery (CR 2025) located in the fundus of her stomach ; she was transferred to a referral pediatric hospital. After 6 hours, she developed massive hematemesis and severe hypovolemic shock. The indicated computed tomography (CT) scan was not done due to her severe hemodynamic instability, and the surgeon decided to perform esophagogastroscopy to directly diagnose and treat. She was then referred to the operating room. Urgent endoscopy was unsuccessful because of the large amount of blood and clots in her esophagus and in her stomach, which prevented the localization both of the bleeding site and of the coin battery. Consequently, an emergency laparotomy was attempted (8 hours after the presentation of symptoms), and the coin battery was manually identified in the gastric fundus. The surgeon then performed a gastrotomy to directly visualize the area of interest, remove the coin battery, and treat the presumable bleeding site. Despite removal of the coin battery from her stomach, and suturing of the burned area, the child still had hematemesis and hypovolemic shock. A Sengstaken–Blakemore tube was placed in order to stop further misunderstood esophageal bleeding sources along the transit area of the foreign body. She was then referred to our tertiary referral center, and directly to the operating room. Clinical conditions at admission were critical, multiple blood transfusions and high-dose vasopressors could not maintain her blood pressure. Endoscopy showed a massive bleeding localized in the medium esophagus . The Sengstaken tube was removed. To treat the massive esophageal hemorrhage, a 20 mm endoscopic dilation balloon (CRE PRO; Boston Scientific, EU) was inflated directly over the bleeding site. The partial reduction of the bleeding allowed an attempt at angiography, although there was a high clinical suspicion of AEF. Percutaneous cannulation of her left common femoral artery was attempted, followed by insertion of a 0.35 Bentson wire, advancement of a 5 Fr sheath, and insertion of a marker pigtail catheter. An aortogram was obtained in a left anterior oblique projection, and revealed extravasation of contrast, confirming the suspicion of an aortic rupture just above the diaphragmatic plane . The Bentson wire was retrieved, and an Amplatz Super Stiff™ wire (Boston Scientific, USA) was introduced. An 11 Fr sheath was then advanced over the wire and placed in her common femoral artery. Considering the life-threatening condition, an endovascular stent was released to stop the massive blood flow. A covered balloon-expandable stainless steel stent of 16 × 61 mm (Advanta™ V12; Atrium Medical Corporation, USA) was placed across the rupture in the thoracic aorta , and dilated up to 12 atm, which corresponds to a nominal pressure to avoid aortic wall injury. After the deflation of both balloons (endoscopic and angiographic), hemodynamic stability was achieved. A hemostatic endoscopic powder (Hemospray®; Cook Medical, Ireland) was sprayed directly on the residual bleeding sites, achieving complete hemostasis. During the entire procedure, our patient was given 2 units of packed red blood cells (estimated blood volume 1520 ml) . The final angiogram revealed a resolution of the aortic leak, with a good expansion of the stent. She maintained hemodynamic stability, had palpable pedal pulse postoperatively, and was admitted to the intensive care unit, where her hematocrit level and hemodynamics remained stable. A CT angiography confirmed the correct placement of the aortic stent, and no evidence of leakage of contrast dye injected in the esophagus.
After 72 hours, the orotracheal tube was removed, and she started to breathe spontaneously again. After 1 week we endoscopically placed a nasoduodenal tube to start enteral feeding. Every 7 days, esophagogastroduodenoscopies (EGDs) were performed to follow the complete mucosal healing, and after 1 month, she started eating again, and was discharged home.
The 1-year endoscopic examination showed only complete re-epithelialization on the previous esophageal bleeding site . A 3-year follow-up was uneventful.
Four consecutive CT scans (one every 12 months) showed the correct position of the angiographic stent and no other pathologic signs.
Our patient is being followed-up by our cardiology team.