A 46-year-old Chinese woman had end-stage renal disease secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis and was treated with regular hemodialysis since May 2013. During follow-up through a local hospital, the patient presented with normal serum total calcium levels, hyperphosphatemia and elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH). She was diagnosed with secondary hyperparathyroidism in August 2015. A vitamin D analog (calcitriol and caltrate) and lanthanum carbonate were recommended, but the treatment was ineffective. In October 2017, she was referred to our hospital because she constantly experienced generalized itching over the prior 1 year. Her blood test results were as follows: serum PTH 1672 pg/mL (normal 10–65); serum phosphate, 2.03 mmol/L (normal 0.87–1.45); serum calcium, 2.68 mmol/L (normal 2.03–2.54); and serum alkaline phosphatase 112 U/L (normal 40–150). A cervical contrast-enhanced computer tomography (CT) scan showed four enhanced nodules consistent with orthotopic parathyroid glands . Ultrasonography also revealed four hypoechoic nodules at the posterior of the thyroid and normal echogenicity in the thyroid. No evidence was indicated that there were ectopic parathyroid glands. Parathyroidectomy with right forearm autotransplantation (from the right inferior parathyroid gland) was performed where the surgeon claimed to remove four hyperplastic parathyroid glands intact without any spillage. The final pathology report showed parathyroid nodular hyperplasia without evidence of malignancy . On the first postoperative day, tests showed PTH of 74.4 pg/mL, serum calcium of 2.11 mmol/L, and serum phosphate of 1.71 mmol/L, with gradual alleviation of the itching.
Fifteen months after the surgery, her test revealed that serum calcium and PTH levels were 2.54 mmol/L and 154 pg/mL, respectively. During this time, she presented without itching and bone pain. However, five years after surgery, she presented with back pain and gradually elevated PTH and calcium levels. On admission, PTH, serum calcium and phosphate were 3356 pg/mL, 3.22 mmol/L and 1.39 mmol/L, respectively. 99mTc-sestamibi (99mTc-MIBI) single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) revealed accumulation at the inferior pole of the left thyroid gland, consistent with the findings of contrast-enhanced CT and ultrasonography . A right nodule with tracer accumulation was located subcutaneously in the anterior neck, which was also identified by CT . Neck exploration was performed in December 2022, and the right subcutaneous nodule (1.0 × 1.0 cm) and left inferior nodule (2.5 × 2.5 cm) with irregular margins and calcareous composition were identified and removed. On the first day after the operation, tests showed PTH of 63.5 pg/mL, serum calcium of 1.91 mmol/L, and serum phosphate of 1.30 mmol/L, with gradual alleviation of the back pain. Microscopic pathology analysis noted that the left inferior nodule consisted of dense growth of chief cells with nuclear pleomorphism and an increased mitotic count and a fibrous capsule covering the nodule. ERG staining revealed venous infiltration in some areas, and the Ki-67 proliferation index exceeded 5%, suggesting parathyroid carcinoma . The subcutaneous nodule exhibited nodular proliferation of chief cells .
According to the clinical presentation and pathology, parathyromatosis and parathyroid carcinoma were confirmed. During 8 months of follow-up, her back pain improved. Her PTH and calcium levels fluctuated between 190 and 320 pg/mL and 2.23–2.48 mmol/L, respectively, under regular hemodialysis.