An 80-year-old man with type II diabetes and known atrial fibrillation for which he was on warfarin presented with confusion, aphasia, and right-sided hemiplegia 1.5 h after last seen normal. His level of anticoagulation was subtherapeutic with an international normalized ratio of 1.27. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 21 with symmetric pupil reactivity and no gaze deviation. Computed tomography (CT) perfusion imaging suggested a large posterior cerebral artery (PCA) distribution, salvageable penumbra . CT angiography (CTA) revealed left internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion extending from the carotid bulb up to the terminus with a luminal defect suspicious for a thrombus . 4D CTA reconstructions revealed delayed filling of the left anterior cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery (MCA) through the anterior communicating artery (ACOM), but there was no filling of the ICA terminus [Figure and ]. The PCA was not visible on CTA, possibly due to the presence of a fetal PCA and a second embolus into the PCA. The patient was not considered a candidate for tissue plasminogen activator because of concurrent anticoagulation.
Secondary to severe neurologic dysfunction and inability to cooperate, the patient was emergently intubated and brought to the interventional suite for possible intraarterial thrombectomy. Catheter angiography confirmed cross-flow across the ACOM with an ICA-terminus occlusion. Additionally, the posterior circulation revealed no left P1 segment, confirming a fetal PCA. Left carotid angiography revealed left ICA dissection just distal to the origin of the ICA (flame-shaped ICA stump) and the external carotid artery filling the ophthalmic artery but not the clinoidal segment of the ICA. This suggested the presence of a dissection in the left ICA with an embolus in the ophthalmic, communicating, and terminal segments of the ICA [Figure -].
Direct aspiration with the 5 Max Aspiration catheter (Penumbra Inc., Alameda, California, USA) resulted in recanalization of the entire ICA with persistent fetal PCA occlusion . A 4 × 15 mm Solitaire stentriever (ev3-Covidien, Irvine, California, USA) was then deployed in the left PCA up to the P2 segments, and thrombectomy was performed. The vessel recanalized with residual occlusion beyond the P3 segment . Immediately after PCA thrombectomy, transient left pupillary mydriasis was observed. Further recanalization was abandoned, and a CT head scan was obtained immediately, which revealed no acute changes of concern.
During the 8 h after the thrombectomy procedure, the patient developed a progressive left mydriatic pupil, which ultimately became fixed at 7 mm in diameter to light stimulation . A repeat head CT scan did not show any significant effacement of the basal cisterns . By 16 h postthrombectomy, the patient had developed complete oculomotor palsy with ptosis, a fixed mydriatic pupil, and eye deviation laterally and downwards, suggestive of an isolated third nerve palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed infarction of the distal PCA territory with sparing of the midbrain and multiple embolic infarcts of the MCA territory [Figure and ]. The oculomotor palsy remained, with resolution of the anisocoria. The patient failed to improve significantly; and, in line with preevent wishes, the family elected to withdraw care 10 days after the procedure and the patient expired.