A 14-year old female patient from Bangladesh presented with serum total bilirubin levels around 250 μmol/L and conjugated bilirubin (measured as direct bilirubin using the Diazo method) of around 10 μmol/L, indicating a predominantly unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. According to her parents’ description, her weight at birth was around 2000 g and 4 days after birth, her skin turned yellow. Clinical assessment revealed an unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia of 220 μmol/L without signs of erythrocyte hemolysis (major cause: ABO or Rh incompatibility). After undergoing phototherapy for 4 h a day for 4 consecutive days the serum total bilirubin levels were reduced to 153 μmol/L. The parents were advised to keep their daughter in the sunlight, but after a few months her serum total bilirubin increased again to over 300 μmol/L. From this point onward, the patient did not receive treatment and no clinical data is available because the family lives in the country side and has limited access to medical care. Between the age of 14 and 17 years her serum total bilirubin levels have been monitored and where stable around 200–250 μmol/L. Liver damage markers in serum were low (ALT) and a hemolytic cause of the hyperbilirubinemia was excluded with normal hemoglobin and reticulocyte levels . These serum bilirubin levels without any treatment are in line with those seen in Crigler-Najjar syndrome (CNs) type II, indicating a partial deficiency of UGT1A1. However, inducing the residual UGT1A1 activity by administrating phenobarbital (30 mg/day) did not result in a significant change in total bilirubin . The coding region and intron-exon boundaries of the UGT1A1 gene of the patient and parents was sequenced to determine what caused UGT1A1 deficiency and the absence of a response to phenobarbital.
Sanger sequencing was used to determine the nucleotide sequence of amplified fragments of UGT1A1 gene and promoter region as previously described [, ]. The purified amplicons were sequenced using the internal primers listed in Additional file : Table S1.
The patient was found to have two heterozygous mutations in the UGT1A1 gene . The first is a 3 nucleotides insertion in the HNF-1α binding site in the proximal promoter, which was also found in her mother. The second mutation is a two nucleotides deletion in exon 1 (266_267delGT), which was found in her father. This two nucleotide deletion has not been described in literature before and results in a frameshift with a predicted premature stop codon at position 279_281TAG in exon 1.