A 71-year-old man presented with a 2-month history of gradually progressive paraparesis. In addition, he also had a 10-year history of a fractured Th12 and L1 vertebral body due to a fall. His symptoms had gradually progressed to the point where he had bladder dysfunction and difficulty walking. On magnetic resonance (MR) imaging [-], high signal intensity was present in the lower portion of the spinal cord, and serpentine perimedullary edema was present below the mid-thoracic level as well as minimally enlarged veins around the conus medullaris. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed the previous Th12 and L1 vertebral compression fracture, a venous pouch in the Th12 fractured vertebral body, and dilated perimedullary veins [ and ]. Spinal angiography showed an epidural arteriovenous fistula (AVF) fed by the left Th11 segmental artery with intraosseous fistula tracts directly connecting to the epidural venous pouch, and the right Th12 segmental artery directly shunted to the epidural venous pouch. The shunt flow gathered in the epidural venous pouch and drained with reflux into the perimedullary vein through an intradural vein .
We planned endovascular transarterial embolization to eliminate the fistula. The endovascular procedure was performed after obtaining written informed consent from the patient. Under local anesthesia, DeFrictor flow-directed microcatheters (MEDIVOCO’S HIRATA, Osaka, Japan) were introduced into the right dorsal somatic branch of the Th12 segmental artery as close as possible to the shunt points. The feeding arteries, venous pouch, and proximal portion of the draining veins were embolized with 12.5% heated glue (a mixture of n-butyl cyanoacrylate [NBCA] and lipiodol at a ratio of 1:7). Subsequently, transarterial embolization of the left dorsal somatic branch of the Th11 segmental artery was performed in the same manner. The final angiogram revealed complete obliteration of the fistula .
The patient’s neurological symptoms including paresthesia of the lower extremities, gait disturbance, and urinary sphincter dysfunction improved after the treatment. Three-month follow-up MR imaging revealed disappearance of the spinal cord swelling and the signal voids in the vicinity of the spinal cord. No recurrence was observed 2 years after the treatment .