An 18-month-old Bantu-African Tanzanian boy was presented to our hospital with severe acute malnutrition (kwashiorkor). The patient presented with weight loss of 3 months’ duration and generalized body swelling for the previous 3 weeks. He also had had watery diarrhea and fever for 1 day prior to admission. At admission, the child was afebrile with a pulse rate of 100 beats/min and a respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min. He had severe palmar pallor, puffy face, and pedal edema with peeling of skin in the lower limbs. The child’s weight was 8.2kg, length was 78cm, and mid-upper-arm circumference was 11cm. His weight for length was between a –2 standard deviation (SD) and –3SD z-score according to World Health Organization growth standard charts. He had hepatomegaly of 3cm below the right lower costal margin. The diagnoses of kwashiorkor, acute watery diarrhea, and severe anemia (not in anemic heart failure) were made. His serum albumin was 13g/L, serum creatinine was 30.5μmol/L, serum sodium 129mmol/L, and serum potassium 3.6mmol/L. The complete blood count revealed Hb of 8.5g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 52.5fl, mean corpuscular Hb 16.2pg, and white blood cell count 9.07 × 103/μL. Urinalysis was normal, blood slide had no malaria parasite, and serology screening for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus was normal. The child was treated with special diet Formula 75, low osmolarity oral rehydration solution, pediatric zinc, folic acid, and vitamin A. The child was put on the intravenous antibiotics ampicillin, cloxacillin, and gentamicin for 7 days.
The patient’s diarrhea stopped on his fourth day in the ward, edema of his lower limbs subsided, and he had no fever. On the seventh day postadmission, the boy’s Formula 75 diet was changed to Formula 100. On the ninth day after his admission, he had reduced urine output (24-hour urine output 20ml), no fever, no hematuria, and no skin infection, but he had a reappearance of puffy face. Furosemide injection was given to challenge the kidneys, which brought no improvement. The child was anuric on the tenth day postadmission. A diagnosis of acute anuric kidney injury was made. His serum creatinine was 85.7μmol/L, serum potassium was 4.1mmol/L, and serum sodium was 132mmol/L. Daily input was restricted to 500ml, the child was monitored with serial serum creatinine and electrolytes, and he was anuric for a total of 5 days, after which PD was started. Before PD, his serum creatinine was 256μmol/L, serum potassium was 4.7mmol/L, and sodium was 127mmol/L.
PD was carried out using a suprapubic aspiration catheter as a PD catheter; this was modified by cutting small side holes . The modified catheter was introduced into the peritoneal cavity after making a small incision and dissection of tissues to the rectus sheath under aseptic conditions, and this procedure was performed under local anesthesia using 2% lignocaine. PD fluid was made at bedside using 250ml of 5% dextrose solution, 750ml of 0.9% normal saline, 40ml of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate, 7.5ml of 10% calcium gluconate, 1000 units of heparin and 250mg of ceftriaxone . Dwell time was 30 minutes for the first exchange and 2 hours for subsequent 2 exchanges and 6 hourly thereafter. Dwell volumes were 250ml for the first two dwells, and was reduced to 200ml for subsequent dwells because of leakage. The child was also given ceftriaxone injection 500mg once daily at initiation of PD. Serum creatinine peaked at 384.6μmol/L on day 3 of PD, and serum electrolytes were within normal range. The child was kept on PD for 7 days, and he started to pass urine (20ml) on the 4th day after starting PD, on the 5th day urine output increased to 80ml and on the 6th day the child passed 340ml of urine. The PD catheter was removed on the 7th day after starting PD.
The child’s condition improved after PD, and his serum creatinine level decreased gradually. The child was continued on the Formula 100 diet and was given ferrous sulfate tablets for iron deficiency anemia. An abdominal ultrasound was performed after stopping PD, which revealed normal-sized kidneys with normal cortical medullary differentiation. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after PD was stopped, at which time his serum creatinine was 41. 4μmol/L. The child was seen 2 weeks later in the follow-up clinic and was doing fine, and his serum creatinine was 32.8μmol/L.