A 32-year-old man was found a lump on his parietal scalp. He sought medical treatment after 1 month, during which the lump gradually grew larger. He claimed the mass produced no pain. Clinical examination found that the mass was hard, smooth, and not easily moved under the skin. It measured 6 cm × 5 cm in area.
A CT scan of the skull was performed, revealing a cutaneous mass above the parietal bone with a potential lytic abnormality of the bone window. MRI showed that the lesion had not infiltrated the dura or penetrated the central nervous system (CNS). The images are shown in . We conducted relevant examinations on important parts, including CT scans of the head and chest, MR scans of the head, and Color Ultrasound of the abdomen. No obvious abnormalities were found. Besides, we conducted a physical examination of the patient, and no abnormal skin and lymph node changes were detected in the patient's trunk and limbs.
We designed an 8 cm surgical incision in the parietal center of the scalp. During the procedure, we found that the lump had an abundant blood supply and poorly defined boundaries between the scalp and the lump, but there were no adhesions to the parietal bone. We decompressed the mass into blocks, and a total mass of 5 cm × 4 cm × 4 cm was resected with bleeding of approximately 750 ml. The patient suffered subcutaneous fluid 1 week after the operation. We aspirated 10 ml of blood-colored fluid by puncture. Then the surgical incision was dressed with a pressure bandage. The stitches were removed 10 days after surgery. The incision ruptured 20 days after initial procedure, and we observed xanthogranuloma in the fluid. Then the patient was referred to our plastic surgery department for resection of the granuloma and suturing of the incision. shows the treatment process of the patient's tumor.
The diagnosis of RDD can be made by hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining section and specific immunohistochemical markers. Usually, there can be observed pale histocytes and emperipolesis of plasma cells and lymphocytes. Besides, S100, CD68, CD163 and CD1a are RDD's classic markers in staining. demonstrates pathological sections of the patient's tumor samples. Abundant lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration was detected in the tissue. The cytoplasm was lightly stained, the histiocytes with ovoid nuclei were scattered, and suspiciousemperipolesis. Fibrous tissue in the interstitium was significantly proliferated and collagenized.
The immunohistochemical report showed that CD68 and CD163 in tissue cells, S100 in partial tissue cells, and LCA, CD20, CD79α, CD45RO, CD3, and IgG in partial tissue cells were positive; Igλ was weakly positive; Igκ and IgG4 were negative; EMA, CD38, and CD138 in plasmacytes and VIM and CD34 in capillary walls were positive; CK, GFAP, CD1a, PAS, and antacid staining were negative, The Ki-67 staining result is 3%.