A 9-year-old girl presented with a 5-month history of excessive appetite and weight gain. Patient’s mother noticed 2–3 weeks before admission, an adjustment of patient’s head during specific activities (i.e., watching television). One week before admission, the patient suffered from mild frontal headache, and manifested blurred vision as well as broad-based gait. On the day before admission to hospital, diplopia occurred. Physical and neurological examination was unremarkable except for unstable gait and diplopia in all directions. Initially bilateral papilledema was found; therefore, neuroimaging was performed. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a triventricular hypertensive hydrocephalus due to heterogeneously-enhanced and space-occupying lesion 3.3 × 3 cm in diameter with limited cystic and hemorrhagic components in the pineal region. The tumor was localized; extended temporarily from the roof of the fourth ventricle (filling the cerebral aqueduct) with infiltration of the mesencephalon tectum and separation of the cerebral peduncles. Diffusion restriction and T2-hyperintense signal indicated tumor hypercellularity .
The initial treatment option was to perform an endoscopic third ventriculostomy to treat hydrocephalus and to simultaneously obtain a tumor specimen for histopathological analysis, which revealed a PTPR. A median suboccipital craniotomy was preformed 14 days later; the pineal region was reached through a supracerebellar-infratentorial approach, followed by complete resection of the tumor.
The definitive histopathological analysis revealed tumor tissue composed of papillary formations and cellular tumor with ependymal-like differentiation. Eosinophilic columnar or elongated cells were present in papillary areas around the vessels, while in ependymal-like areas gliovascular rosettes and tubes were noticed. The nuclei of tumor cells were round to oval, while atypical nuclei were only occasionally present. Mitotic activity ranges from 4 to 10/10 HPF, while Ki67 values range up to 8%. Microvascular proliferation was not present. Large foci of necrosis were without pseudopalisades of the surrounding tumor cells. Tumor tissue was diffusely immunopositive for AE1/AE3, CK18, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), S100, and vimentin, but was only sporadically positive for synaptophysin. Nuclear INI1 expression was present in tumor cells. Neu-N was not seen. Neurofilament protein was evaluated with the aim of exclusion of pineocytomas, and it was negative. Chromogranin as marker of pinealoblastoma (PB) was negative. Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostain were negative. Therefore, histological diagnosis of the tumor was PTPR . Marked mitotic activity corresponded to Grade 3. Tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin in serum and cerebrospinal fluid were within the normal range.
Postoperative, vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, convergence deficit, and dilated pupils (Parinaud’s syndrome) were noticed what led to mild gait instability. The patient also had need for cortisol supplementation. Postoperative MRI of brain and total spinal cord found no residual tumor or signs of leptomeningeal dissemination . The patient was evaluated comprehensively (neurosurgical, oncological, and neuroradioterapeutic) and local photon radiotherapy was performed in cumulative dosage of 50.4Gy, applied in 28 fractions 1.8. Further MRI (most recent follow-up 78 months after surgery) found no residual mass or recurrence of disease. So far the patient is well with mild residual Parinaud syndrome and without need for cortisol supplementation.