A 43-year-old Asian man presented to the emergency department in our institution due to generalized weakness in April 2018. One month prior to admission, his family noted that he showed poor oral intake and consistently complained of epigastric discomfort. He was diagnosed as having impaired fasting glucose and hyperlipidemia at the age of 42 on routine medical checkup. Eight months ago, he underwent total thyroidectomy with both central and sentinel lymph node dissection due to papillary thyroid carcinoma and the pathologic stage was diagnosed as T3N1bM0 on the permanent pathologic report. After that, the first radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy was conducted and an iodine [–] whole body scan was planned to determine whether to perform the second RAI that was on the next day of visiting the emergency room, therefore, he had to stop the thyroid medication for 3 weeks to prepare for the examination.
At the time of admission to the emergency room, he was noted to be somnolent and had a decreased level of consciousness. He opened eyes to pain, showed inappropriate verbal response and flexion withdrawal from pain, which suggested that Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 10 out of 15. On physical examination, there was no pretibial edema and his pupils were equal in size and normally reactive to light. His abdomen was slightly distended with decreased bowel sound and his extremities were cold. His blood pressure was 127/96 mmHg, heart rate was 101 beats per a minute, and respiratory rate was 25 breaths per a minute with oxygen saturation 97% on room air. He was in a hypothermic state and his tympanic temperature was approximately 34.0 °C. Chest radiography revealed the findings of gastroparesis and paralytic ileus as presented in Fig. . An electrocardiogram at presentation showed sinus tachycardia with QT prolongation by 537 ms of corrected QT interval .
Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a state of metabolic acidosis: a pH of 7.00, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) of less than 10 mmHg, bicarbonate (HCO3) of less than 10 mmol/L, and base excess of − 34.6. Laboratory findings suggested hyperglycemia with glycosuria and ketoacidosis, which are presented in Table . Considering the history of total thyroidectomy and planned schedule for RAI, a thyroid function test (TFT) was conducted and revealed severe hypothyroidism. He was found to have a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 34.126 uIU/mL (0.55–4.78 uIU/mL) and free thyroxine (T4) of less than 0.01 ng/dL (0.82–1.76 ng/dL) and triiodothyronine (T3) of less than 0.01 ng/mL (0.6–1.81 ng/mL). Even though he did not have any history of diabetes mellitus, we checked his glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) due to hyperglycemia. Finally, the value of HbA1c was 16.5% which met the criteria for a diagnosis of diabetes.
He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for the management of DKA and myxedema coma. He received intravenously administered fluid with electrolytes and an immediately applied insulin pump. For hormonal replacement, liothyronine 5 mcg two times per day and levothyroxine 175 mcg once daily were administered via a nasogastric tube. He instantly responded to the therapy with a favorable clinical improvement. His mental status started to improve several hours after treatment and at the third day of hospitalization he showed a GCS of 15/15; his body temperature increased from 34 °C to 36.5 °C approximately 10 hours after admission. The metabolic acidosis was corrected 6 hours after administration of intravenously administered fluid with insulin pump and hyperglycemia was also improved; the insulin pump was discontinued then and switched to subcutaneous insulin 1 day after hospitalization. Repeated TFT before discharge revealed TSH of 21.798 uIU/mL (0.55–4.78 uIU/mL), free T4 of 1.02 ng/dL (0.82–1.76 ng/dL), and T3 of 1.04 ng/dL (0.6–1.81 ng/mL). The clinical course of this patient was summarized in Table . During the hospitalization, a workup for diabetes mellitus was performed and there was no evidence of pancreas mass or pancreatitis on abdominal computed tomography . Results from investigations for diabetes mellitus showed a fasting c-peptide of 1.08 ng/mL (0.48–3.30 ng/mL), anti-islet cell antibodies (ab) negative, and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) ab of 0.01 U/ml which suggested that a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus would be appropriate.
He was discharged from surgical ICU after 2 days, stayed for a further 8 days on the general ward and was discharged on the 11th hospital day with tolerable status. The dose of thyroid hormone medications was subsequently reduced at our out-patient clinic after he was discharged and an endocrinologist recommend insulin with orally administered hypoglycemic agents.