A 14-year-old Siamese neutered male cat was evaluated for anorexia and a left periorbital mass. The mass had a bony consistency on palpation . The left eye could not be visualized. A complete blood count (CBC) and serum chemistry profile were performed. The results from the CBC did not reveal any abnormality, and the only abnormal value on the biochemical panel was a mildly elevated creatinine level (2.5 mg/dl; reference interval 0.9–1.8 mg/dl). Skull radiographic findings showed a well-defined lesion resembling new compact bone formation without destruction . In thoracic radiographs, there was no evidence of metastatic disease. Computed tomography was not performed owing to financial issues.
A subtotal orbitectomy was indicated. The cat was premedicated intramuscularly with acepromazine (0.03 mg/kg) and methadone (0.2 mg/kg) by subcutaneous injection 15 mins prior to induction. Anesthesia was induced with propofol (4 mg/kg) by intravenous injection and maintained with isoflurane. Methadone was given intramuscularly q6h for 24 h.
The cat was positioned in ventral recumbency. The tumor was removed intact and surrounded by at least a 1 cm margin of normal tissue. It was a circular, well-defined mineral mass measuring 3.2 cm in diameter at the rostral aspect of the left orbit. An osteotomy of frontal bone combined with an osteotomy of maxilla and zygomatic bone were performed using an osteotome and mallet. Bony margins of the orbit were removed en bloc with the eye and structures within the orbit. Craniectomy was not necessary. The tumor did not extend into the oral cavity. The surgical defect was closed by two single-pedicle advancement flaps (dorsum of head and cheek) and apposition of subcutaneous tissues and skin. There were no postsurgical complications.
Histopathologic examination revealed an osteoma. Microscopically, the lump was ovoid and well-delineated from surrounding dermal connective tissue. The lesion was composed of numerous trabeculae consisting of both woven and lamellar bone, osteocytes of normal appearance being present in lacunae within the osseous matrix. Clear surgical margins were seen on all sections examined.
Amoxicillin (Amoxicilin; Medley) 15 mg/kg orally q12h for 10 days; dipyrone 25 mg/kg orally q12h for 3 days; and tramadol (Dorless V; Agener) 2 mg/kg orally q12h for 7 days, were prescribed, and an Elizabethan collar was recommended. One week after surgery, the creatinine level was the same as before treatment. The cat returned to normal appetite and normal activity 15 days after surgery. Six months after surgery, there were no gross signs of recurrence