A 65-year-old female was brought to the emergency department (ED) by emergency medical services (EMS) in respiratory arrest. Per EMS report, the patient had felt nauseous and vomited shortly after lunch. One hour later, she was found sitting in a chair complaining of weakness and then suddenly became unresponsive. Her family began cardiopulmonary resuscitation with chest compressions and called 911. Upon arrival to the ED, she was receiving bag-valve-mask ventilation by EMS. She was found to be apneic with a strong pulse. Her initial vital signs were a temperature of 97.5° Fahrenheit, blood pressure of 163/82 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 61 beats per minute, and 100% oxygen saturation. Her Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was three, and she had sluggishly reactive mydriatic pupils. She had no signs of trauma. Exam was otherwise unremarkable. She was given intravenous naloxone without a response. The patient was immediately intubated.
The initial workup in the ED included laboratory studies and a computed tomography (CT) of the head. As this was being executed, the patient’s family arrived with further history. Reportedly, the patient suffered from bipolar disorder; however, she had no history of suicide attempts and had been acting behaviorally normal prior to this episode. She was not prescribed any medications, but she did take homeopathic supplements and would occasionally pick dandelions found in her neighborhood for consumption. That morning, she had brought home a new plant “with yellow flowers” and boiled the leaves to eat them. This additional history put a toxicological cause of respiratory arrest higher on the differential; however, other etiologies had not been ruled out.
Laboratory results showed a normal pH on venous blood gas of 7.38, (reference range [Ref]: pH 7.35–7.45); normal electrolytes without anion gap; hyperglycemia of 305 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (Ref: 65–99 mg/dL); mild leukocytosis of 12.5 thousand per microliter (k/μL) (Ref: 3.85k/μL–10.85k/μL); and mild anemia of 10.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (Ref: 13.2–17.1 g/dL). The urine drug screen was negative for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cocaine, methadone, methamphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine, and cannabinoids. Lithium, salicylate, digoxin, cyanide, and acetaminophen were not detected in the serum. The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation at 63 beats per minute with a normal axis. Chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) of her head were normal.
Given that most of the findings were unremarkable at this point, a “code stroke” was called for fear of basilar cerebrovascular accident. The consulting neurologist noted that the patient had absent oculocephalic and gag reflexes. She had no dystonia or ankle clonus. CT brain perfusion and CT angiography of the head and neck were obtained and were negative. After alternative causes of coma were ruled out, there was increasing suspicion that the plant ingested earlier in the day could be the cause. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Later that evening, the family brought in the plant ingested by the patient to the ICU. A cell phone app, “Plant Snap,” was used to identify the plant as Nicotiana glauca. A picture of the plant ingested was sent to Poison Control, which confirmed the identity of the plant . Poison Control recommended continuing supportive care. The inpatient team did not pursue confirmatory diagnosis by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, as it was not readily available at the hospital.
She was initially sedated on a midazolam drip, but this was discontinued after only two hours. She was then started on 25–50 microgram per hour of fentanyl for pain control without any other form of sedation. The next morning, she opened her eyes and seemed to attempt to follow commands, but only exhibited fasciculations of her neck and forearms without true movement. She had an absent gag reflex per respiratory therapist evaluation. Later that afternoon, she began to regain her motor function by weakly moving her extremities. By evening, her gag reflex had returned and she was able to lift her legs off the bed. On day three, she was taking spontaneous breaths on the ventilator, scribbling down words to communicate and demonstrating four out of five upper and lower extremity motor strength. She was extubated on day three of mechanical ventilation and was discharged from the hospital the following day with full recovery. She explained that she had been fully cognizant of her surroundings, but was unable to move during the first two days of admission. She also confirmed that she had ingested several Nicotiana glauca leaves after microwaving them.