A 57-year-old, previously healthy man suffered from fevers, chills, and abdominal pain for 5 days. Examination at a local hospital revealed hearing impairment and an increased C-reactive protein level. He was referred to our hospital for the treatment of a persistent fever, headaches, hearing impairment, and dizziness. The medical history was nonspecific, except that he had reared pigs for several years until 2 years previously. At the time of admission, he had a body temperature of 36.9℃, a pulse rate of 68 beats/min, a blood pressure of 140/80 mm Hg, and a respiration rate of 20/min. A physical examination revealed neck stiffness and signs of meningeal irritation. Neither a cardiac murmur nor skin abnormalities were noted. A neurological examination revealed a drowsy mental status and hearing impairment. No other focal neurologic signs were noted.
Routine laboratory tests showed a leukocyte count of 8.3×103/mm3 with 67.4% neutrophils, a platelet count of 100×103/mm3, and a C-reactive protein level of 15.4 mg/dL. Serologic tests for syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. Blood was drawn for culture. An enhanced brain computed-tomography scan showed no abnormal findings. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had a slight turbid color, a high opening pressure (250 mmH2O), an increased leukocyte count (380/mm3: neutrophils, 25%; lymphocytes, 25%; and monocytes, 50%), an increased protein level (86 mg/dL), and a decreased glucose level (CSF glucose, 21 mg/dL; blood glucose, 129 mg/dL). Gram staining, acid-fast bacillus staining, KOH mount, India ink preparation, and tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction of CSF were negative. The blood cultures were also negative.
The CSF culture grew small alpha-hemolytic colonies on blood agar plates. The organisms, which were Gram-positive cocci in chains, were catalase-negative and were identified as S. suis by the VITEK 2 Gram-positive card system (BioMérieux). The strain was sensitive to penicillin, ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, nitrofurantoin, imipenem, teicoplanin, and vancomycin.
Before isolating S. suis, vancomycin and cefotaxime were started for the treatment of bacterial meningitis. A steroid injection was added to help resolve the meningeal inflammation and hearing impairment. The patient's consciousness and meningitis symptoms gradually improved, but the hearing impairment and dizziness did not. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 3 days after admission revealed no abnormalities of the inner ear or brain parenchyma . Audiometry carried out 6 and 14 days after admission revealed bilateral moderate-to-severe sensorineural hearing loss, especially in the high-frequency range. After completion of a 14-day course of antibiotic therapy, his symptoms - with the exception of hearing loss and dizziness - were improved. A follow-up CSF examination showed improved pleocytosis (leukocyte count, 9/mm3).
The patient complained of lower-back pain on the 20th day of admission. A physical examination revealed knocking tenderness in the lumbar area. Lumbar spine MRI revealed spondylodiscitis . The CSF parameters were as follows: leukocyte count, 13/mm3; protein level, 49 mg/dL; and glucose level, 55 mg/dL (blood glucose, 129 mg/dL). Ceftriaxone was given intravenously under the impression of a relapse, but this aggravated the back pain. Follow-up lumbar spine MRI performed 1 week later showed progression of the spondylodiscitis . Staining and culture of a tissue specimen obtained from the lumbar inflammation area revealed only inflammation. Ceftriaxone was changed to ampicillin plus sulbactam, which results in the back pain gradually subsiding. The patient was discharged in a stable condition after completion of a 4-week course of antibiotic therapy. The lower-back pain had completely resolved 1 month after discharge, but his hearing loss persisted.