A 31-year-old, gravada-three, para-two, female with two prior cesarean sections and three live births, at 22-weeks gestation presented to the Emergency Department (ED) via ambulance with a chief complaint of severe dyspnea. The patient had no other past medical history and no prior obstetric complications. She was reported to have had one episode of syncope lasting several seconds, with no head trauma. At the time of presentation, the patient did not have, or report any prior, abdominal pain. However, when obtaining additional history from the patient’s husband, it was reported that the patient had experienced a brief episode of abdominal pain prior to her syncope. There were no other pertinent findings on history of present illness or review of symptoms.
On physical exam, the patient appeared pale and her skin was cool to touch. Her pulse was 72 beats/minute and regular, blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, oxygen saturation was 97% on room air and her oral temperature was 37 C. She had altered mental status with intermittent episodes of drowsiness and restlessness. The remainder of her exam was significant for a gravid uterus slightly above the umbilicus with no significant tenderness elicited on palpation. Vaginal exam was negative for blood in the vault. Despite the patient’s normal blood pressure, her altered mental status combined with her cold and clammy extremities were consistent with compensated shock commonly manifesting with cutaneous and neurologic findings preceding hemodynamic instability.
As part of the patient’s initial management, laboratory studies were drawn. Significant findings included a white blood cell count of 24.4 × 103/mm3. Her initial hemoglobin of 9.8 mg/dL later fell to 7.9 mg/dL. A venous blood gas included a pH of 7.295 and a lactate of 4 mmol/L. Of note, however, was that the majority of these laboratory studies had not yet resulted prior to the patient’s initial management and disposition, and were generally noncontributory to her care in the emergency department.
Due to the patient’s clinical presentation of undifferentiated shock, a point of care ultrasound (POCUS) was immediately done and revealed a significant amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity along with fetal bradycardia. Secondary to these findings, an intra-abdominal bleed was suspected and fluid resuscitation with unmatched uncrossed blood (O-negative) was initiated.
The obstetric service (OB/GYN) was urgently consulted and a repeat bedside ultrasound, performed by the OB/GYN attending, concurred with our findings of intraabdominal hemorrhage but was not diagnostic for uterine pathology or a clear source of the bleeding. It did, however, show that there was no fetal heart beat or movement, concerning for fetal demise. The patient was taken for emergent surgical exploration that showed an acute left uterine wall rupture extending into the parametrium with an invasion of the placenta. Three liters of blood were evacuated from the abdominal cavity, as well as the pre-viable pregnancy. After separating the placenta from the uterus, the uterus was surgically repaired and a surgical drain was left in place. The patient required eight units of packed red blood cells and four units of fresh frozen plasma over the course of her resuscitation. She ultimately had an uneventful medical recovery with discharge on post-operative day five.