A 16-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital from an ophthalmology clinic because of severe hyphema in the left eye and anterior uveitis that had persisted for 11 and 20 days, respectively. He was receiving topical treatment with 0.1% betamethasone, 1% atropine, 1.5% levofloxacin, and 0.5% timolol maleate in the left eye. There was no ocular history of trauma, inflammation, or medication. His family history and medical history for systemic diseases were unremarkable. At presentation, the best corrected visual acuity was 20/15 in the right eye and 20/2000 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 29 mmHg in the left eye. Slit lamp biomicroscopy of the left eye revealed ciliary injection, corneal edema, and severe hyphema filling the anterior chamber . Due to the severe hyphema, details of the iris, the iridocorneal angle, and the fundus were not visible. No abnormalities were found in the right eye. B-mode echo examination of the left eye revealed no obvious abnormality. In order to exclude the possibility that the hyphema was caused by ocular ischemia, carotid ultrasound was performed, but no obstruction was observed. There was no difference in blood pressure between the two arms suggestive of ocular ischemia caused by Takayasu disease.
Routine blood tests revealed no abnormalities in blood cell counts, blood glucose level, C-reactive protein, immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, and IgM), anti-nuclear antibody, or rheumatoid factor. However, anti-VZV IgG and anti-VZV IgM measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were elevated to >2600 mIU/mL (negative: < 50 mIU/mL) and 1: 672 (negative: < 1: 42), respectively. VZV-DNA was not detected in the plasma.
In addition to the laboratory blood tests, we performed an anterior chamber paracentesis of the left eye and extracted DNA from the aqueous humor sample using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). To detect human herpes viruses 1 through 6, multiplex PCR was also performed. VZV-DNA was then detected by multiplex PCR and quantitative real-time PCR revealed 1.61 × 109 copies/mL of VZV-DNA. He had not been vaccinated for VZV and there was history of chickenpox in early childhood. As there were no skin eruptions on his face or body, we diagnosed ZSH and excluded HZO. A detailed examination of the fundus was impossible because of hyphema, so we initiated intravenous administration of acyclovir (500 mg/day) and dexamethasone (6.6 mg/day) based on the possibility of acute retinal necrosis.
The hyphema was gradually absorbed and visibility of the anterior chamber improved, revealing inflammation of the anterior chamber and distortion of the pupil . A subconjunctival injection of dexamethasone (1 mg) was given in the left eye at 4 days after the initial visit in response to persisting ciliary injection and anterior inflammation. At six days after the initial visit, as the hyphema had diminished, allowing the fundus to be observed, and mild peripheral periphlebitis in the fundus was confirmed.
At two weeks after the initial visit, the hyphema had completely resolved and segmental iris atrophy, which is one of the characteristic ocular manifestations of VZV-associated uveitis, was visible . Visual acuity improved to 20/25 and the IOP was 9 mmHg in the left eye. As the periphlebitis also improved, the patient was discharged and the drip was changed to oral famciclovir (1500 mg/day) and prednisolone (30 mg/day). As the anterior inflammation and periphlebitis continued to gradually improve thereafter, oral prednisolone was reduced by 5 mg every week.
At 4 weeks after the initial visit, anti-VZV IgG and anti-VZV IgM had decreased to 2500 mIU/mL and 1: 168, respectively. VZV-DNA in the aqueous humor was reduced to 1.02 × 106 copies/mL. At 2 months after presentation, there was no deterioration in ocular inflammation, so oral famciclovir was reduced to 750 mg/day. At 3 months after presentation, the ciliary injection, anterior inflammation, and periphlebitis had become very mild, and the serum anti-VZV IgG and anti-VZV IgM were further decreased to 1300 mIU/mL and 1: 42, respectively. Treatment was continued with oral famciclovir (750 mg/day) and prednisolone (5 mg/day).
At 4 months after presentation, as the ciliary injection and inflammation of the anterior chamber had worsened and rubeosis iridis emerged , a subtenon injection of triamcinolone (30 mg) was given to the left eye in addition to the topical and oral medications. After discussing the pros and cons of the therapy and receiving written informed consent, the patient received an intravitreal injection of bevacizumab (1.25 mg/0.05 ml).
At 5 months after presentation, visual acuity was 20/25 and the IOP was 10 mmHg in the left eye. The anterior inflammation and periphlebitis had almost completely resolved and the rubeosis iridis had disappeared . Slit lamp ophthalmoscopic examination revealed segmental iris atrophy, a distorted pupil, pigmented keratic precipitates, and posterior synechiae. As the retinal periphlebitis had also improved and VZV-DNA in the aqueous humor was not detected by PCR, the oral famciclovir was stopped. However, 5 mg of prednisone every other day and topical medication with 0.1% betamethasone were continued until 12 months after presentation.
14 months after the initial visit, visual acuity was 20/40 and the IOP was 12 mmHg in the left eye. There was no recurrence of severe inflammation, but a cataract had gradually developed. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) images obtained from the CASIA (Tomey, Nagoya, Japan) revealed thinning of the iris in the left eye . Serum anti-VZV IgG and anti-VZV IgM showed a gradual decrease to 670 mIU/mL and <1: 42, respectively.
In order to compare the genotype of the VZV isolate from the aqueous humor of this patient to the previously reported genotypes of the isolates from vesicle fluid, varicella scabs or throat swab samples, we pursued additional genotypic characterization of the VZV strain using DNA extracted from the aqueous humor at the initial visit (1.61 × 109 copies/mL of VZV-DNA). Attempts to sequence for VZV genotyping using DNA obtained at 4 weeks after presentation (1.02 × 106 copies/mL) were unsuccessful due to the low viral load. First, we analyzed the RFLPs of ORF38 (PstI), ORF54 (BglI), and ORF62 (SmaI) as previously described [, , ]. The strain Ellen [, ] and the strain Kawaguchi were used to represent the American laboratory VZV and the Japanese wild-type VZV, respectively, as controls. Most VZV isolates in Europe and America, including strain Dumas , strain MLS , and strain Ellen, contain a PstI restriction enzyme site in ORF38 (positive for the PstI site: PstI+). In this case, the PCR products of ORF38 (647 bp) lacked this restriction site (negative for the PstI site: PstI−) . The PCR products of ORF54 (497 bp) contained the BglI restriction enzyme site (BglI+) and yielded 2 fragments of 256 and 241 bp . The PCR products of the Oka vaccine (v-Oka) strain have three SmaI restriction enzyme sites in ORF62 and yield a set of 112, 79, 41, and 36 bp fragments (positive for the SmaI site: SmaI+) . In this patient, the PCR products of ORF62 (268 bp) contained two restriction enzyme sites and were cleaved into a set of 153, 79, and 36 bp fragments (negative for the SmaI site: SmaI−) like most wild-type VZV strains . In summary, RFLPs analysis showed that the isolates from the aqueous humor of this patient were negative for the PstI site (PstI−), positive for the BglI site (BglI+), and negative for the SmaI site (SmaI−), which are typical of Japanese wild-type strains such as the parental Oka (p-Oka) strain and strain Kawaguchi .
The R5 variable region between ORF60 and ORF61 has also been shown to vary among different VZV strains. The R5 variable region was amplified by PCR and analyzed by electrophoresis as previously described . This region contains a repeating unit composed of one 88-bp element and one 24-bp element, the copy number of which varied from one to three depending on the VZV strain . The size of the PCR products can be calculated using the following formula, where n represents the number of repeating units:
The PCR products of the R5A type are 359 bp (n = 1), those of the R5B type are 471 bp (n = 2), and those of the R5C type are 583 bp (n = 3). In this patient, R5A (mainly found in Europe and North America) was observed unlike Japanese strains (v-Oka, p-Oka, and Kawaguchi) .
Additionally, the amplicons of ORFs 1, 6, 12, 16, 17, 21, 22, 35, 37, 50, 54, 55, 56, 60, 62, and 66 were sequenced as previously described [, ]. The 27 SNPs of these ORFs were previously proposed for the classification of VZV strains . The informative polymorphic markers on the regions are shown in Fig. . Based on the nomenclature scheme proposed by Breuer et al. , the VZV isolate from the aqueous humor of this patient was grouped among the clade 2 strains, a genotype predominantly present in Japan and surrounding countries [, ]. In addition, we found three SNPs that differed from those of clade 2, in which one SNP (C at position 87841) was unique to clade 1, the dominant clade in Europe and North America.