The patient is an 87-year-old female who presented after falling on a reclining chair lever, resulting in penetrating trauma to the left face . On arrival, the patient was alert and oriented, with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14. No seizures occurred during transit to the hospital. She was found to have full strength and sensation in all four extremities. The right pupil was reactive. Clear rhinorrhea was observed, and pulsatile bleeding from the affected orbit was noted. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed the lever had speared through the left globe, fracturing the left frontal, maxillary, and ethmoid sinuses as well as the inferior, medial, and superior orbital walls. It further extended into the intracranial space resulting in bifrontal contusion and intraparenchymal hemorrhage . Given the severity of the trauma and violation of intracranial structures, the patient was taken to the operating room by the neurosurgical team for urgent foreign body removal and anterior skull base repair in conjunction with the otorhinolaryngology and ophthalmology teams.
Preoperatively, the patient was administered vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and levetiracetam for meningitis and seizure prophylaxis. Pain was controlled with IV fentanyl, and the patient remained within her systolic blood pressure goal of below 160. After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed supine and a bicoronal incision was made. The scalp was raised in a subgaleal plane and the temporoparietal fascia was used to raise a temporally-based pericranial flap. A bifrontal craniotomy was then performed and the foreign body was removed. After thorough irrigation, delicate hemostasis of the frontal lobe was achieved. Surgicel was placed over any areas of contusion or tissue disruption concerning for future bleeding. The left orbital rim was fractured, exposing the frontal sinus and mucosa underneath with a large anterior skull base defect noted at the orbital roof. The frontal sinuses were cranialized, and the mucosa was meticulously removed from the sinus wall. The pericranial flap was mobilized, rotated laterally, and laid over the large defect on the floor of the anterior skull base. Interrupted sutures were used to secure the flap to the dura. A split-thickness bone graft was harvested from the inner table of the frontal bone, placed on top of the defect, and secured with screws. Surgical and a gelatin-human thrombin matrix (Floseal) were used to aid in hemostasis; DuraGen was then applied for a multi-layered closure over the defect repair.
Given the extensive globe damage, the left eye evisceration was performed. Following this, autogenous abdominal fat previously harvested by the neurosurgical team was used to fill the space within the bilateral cranialized frontal sinuses. The craniotomy bone flap was then replaced.
Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the neurological intensive care unit and continued on a 7-day course of vancomycin and ceftriaxone for meningitis prophylaxis. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging and CT scans showed expected postsurgical changes. She was stable for discharge to a rehabilitation center after a hospital stay of 16 days. She was discharged from rehabilitation after 3 weeks. Over a 9-month follow-up period, there was no report of CSF leak or intracranial infection.