A 61-year-old man underwent resection of a part of his tongue due to tongue cancer and was admitted to our hospital for hepatocellular carcinoma with about 5 cm diameter of tumor at the liver segment IV. Computed tomography (CT) showed that the tumor was enhanced during the arterial phase and washed out during the portal phase, and the tumor pressed the right anterior branch to the main branch of Glisson and the middle hepatic vein; hence, the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma was made . The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 21.8%. Child-Pugh score was A. The patient tested negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody. He had a history of excessive consumption of alcohol, and alcoholic liver damage was considered as a possibility. Partial hepatectomy with segments IV + V and cholecystectomy with cystic duct-tube drainage were performed. Intraoperative findings indicated that the anterior branch of bile duct was exposed at the resected area, and some small bile ducts were ligated. On POD 1 following hepatectomy, bile leakage developed from the drain placed in the foramen of Winslow. CT showed fluid collection in the cavity between the liver and fistula to drain. Cholangiography via the endoscopic bile duct enhancement showed no communication between the common bile duct and abdominal cavity. Drip infusion cholangiography (DIC)-CT revealed the bile duct of the peripheral side. We maintained simple drainage to reduce the cavity. On POD 19, this patient had fever and CT revealed that the fluid collection has increased . Percutaneous drainage to the cavity near the liver cut surface was performed. Cholangiography via the c-tube did not show the anterior branch of the bile duct. Fistulogram from the drainage tube at the abdominal cavity showed the bile duct at segments V and VIII . We diagnosed the bile leakage from the isolated bile duct of segments V and VIII. Further management was needed to control the persistent biliary leak of 200–250 mL/day. Liver function was evaluated again. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 27.7%. LHL15 was 0.575. Liver volume of segments V and VIII was 260 mL, and remnant liver volume was 1272 mL, which were calculated using the 3D image analysis system (SYNAPSE VINCENT; Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd.). Functional remnant liver volume (FRLV) was calculated based on the liver volume using gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced MRI for 20 min . FRLV after liver resection of segments V and VIII was 2176 mL. Even if the function becomes extinct by PTPE to segment V and VIII, remnant liver volume was sufficient. We considered that bile leakage could not be cured with either PTPE or bile duct ablation alone, because of the large volume of bile leakage more than 200 mL per day. The therapeutic strategy involved combination therapy of PTPE and bile duct ablation. First, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography drainage (PTCD) tube was inserted to the bile duct of segment V. PTPE with coil embolization was performed to the part of the portal vein of segments V and VIII by puncturing the part of the portal vein of segment V. The liver volume of segments V and VIII was decreased from 260 to 123 mL after PTPE. After the PTPE, bile leakage decreased to about 50 mL/day. We confirmed that cholangiography via the PTCD tube showed the bile duct at segments V and VIII. For bile duct ablation, 1.2 mL pure ethanol was injected from the PTCD tube. Over 1.2 mL of ethanol leaked into the abdominal cavity. After ethanol injection, the PTCD tubes were clamped for 5 min. Then, another bile duct ablation with 2.0 mL of pure ethanol was performed 1 week after of the first procedure. After bile duct ablation, bile leakage has decreased from 50 to 10 mL/day gradually. The patient left the hospital, and he was rehospitalized and reinjected with 2.0 mL of pure ethanol for three times. The drainage tube and bile duct tube were removed on POD 139 . The clinical course is summarized in figure. Complications with combination treatment of PTPE and bile duct ablation were not noted.