The patient was a 65-year-old blind man, living in countryside of Birjand, the center of South Khorasan province located in southeast of Iran. The case-patient mainly lived alone in the past 3 months due to his wife’s death. He had a history of keeping animals including some sheep and goats at home, but his animals were not infected. He had a long history of COPD. But his symptoms had started a week ago. The symptoms had not improved despite antibiotic treatment and therefore, the patient was referred to us at the medical center of the province. He characterized with mild fever, dyspnea, pussy non-bloody sputum, anorexia, and myalgia. In primary examination, he had a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24 per minute, pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, and a temperature of 37.6 °C. In physical examination, he had no skin rash, ulcer, and necrosis in his face and extremities, and also no symptoms of icterus were observed. Lung auscultation revealed a slightly hoarse voice. The patient had no signs of meningeal irritation and chest x-ray was normal.
Initial tests of the patient were as follows: White blood cell = 7.3 × 103/µL, Neutrophils = 85 %, Hemoglobin = 13.2 g/dl, Hematocrit = 42.2 %, Platelet = 137 × 103/µL, ESR = 19, CRP = 2+, Urine analysis = normal.
By physical examination, patient was diagnosed as exacerbation of COPD or pneumonia and received intravenous ceftriaxone and azithromycin. Despite 3 days of treatment, his symptoms did not change and the patient became slightly disoriented. Because of the intermittent sleepiness, lack of signs of meningeal irritation and lack of his next of kin consent, the patient did not undergo lumbar puncture, but blood samples were sent to the laboratory for examination.
The first blood sampling was taken on the 1st day of admission but the results were reported to the ward on the 3rd day. According to laboratory reports, microscopic blood samples revealed presence of gram-positive streptobacilli. Blood culture on blood agar showed growth of creamy coarse grayish texture with irregular borders colonies without hemolysis looking like a jellyfish. In the next stage, by conducting a number of microbial enzymatic and metabolic tests, including motility, gelatin hydrolysis, bacterial sensitivity to penicillin, string of pearls test, sugars fermentation, B. anthracis was strongly suggested. All these routine laboratory procedures took 48 h.
On the 3rd day of hospitalization, the chest x-ray of the patient was repeated, which showed closed right side angles, wide mediastinum, and opacities in lower region of the lung.
With regard to blood culture results and x-rays of the patient, the antibiotic was changed to ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, and penicillin. Moreover, the patient’s blood and lung secretion samples were sent to the National Reference Laboratory to repeat the culture and subsequently to do PCR.
On the 2nd day of anthrax treatment, the patient was complicated with jaundice, elevation of liver enzymes, and a significant drop in hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet despite lack of obvious bleeding and this was complicated with respiratory distress and sepsis. The patient was finally died a week after treatment. Autopsy was not performed because of discontentment of patient’s family. The organism isolated repeatedly from the blood and from the lung secretion, and the results of PCR confirmed respiratory anthrax and the subsequent sepsis.
Reporting this critical finding to public health department, a group of health care workers were assigned to mission visiting the case-patient’s rural house and carrying out a disinfect process there. During the visit, they found an unprocessed sheepskin used as flooring. However, bacteriological analysis of samples taken from the sheepskin did not reveal any trace of B. anthracis. Environmental sampling was not conducted for B. anthracis.