A 52-year-old woman spent two weeks in Guatemala on a two-day jungle hike during which she was bit by insects. Five weeks after her visit to the jungle, she underwent advanced pulsed light (APL) laser hair removal in the neck area. One week after laser treatment, a nonitchy papule that was not associated with any other symptoms appeared in the right submandibular region; the nodule gradually enlarged and developed into a hard, dark red nodule with a soft edge. Over time, the nodule ulcerated and increased to 2 × 1 cm in size after five months .
Initially, bacterial infection was diagnosed by swabbing the ulcer and subjecting the swabs to fungal and bacterial culture, but the culture results were negative. Despite the negative result, the doctor recommended antibacterial treatment, including orally Augmentin 1.0 g (Amoxicillinum + Acidum Clavulanicum) for two weeks. Topical Mupirox 20 mg/g ointment was also applied. There was no improvement, and the patient visited a dermatologist and an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist; these visits were followed by two hospital stays in the departments of infectious diseases and dermatology. A diagnosis of purulent dermatitis was made and topical and general antibiotics were continued (2% Argosulfan cream, 2% Detreomycin ointment), and general were continued (intravenously Taromentin were recommended for 2 weeks). The laboratory results were normal. Eight months after the onset of symptoms, the ulceration had enlarged (10× 5 cm); it had an erythematous base and was covered with fibropurulent exudate and a thick scab on the periphery . The surrounding lymph nodes were not enlarged. The ulcer was swabbed for fungal and bacterial culture, which were both negative. Local and systemic antibiotic therapy consisting of 2% Detreomycin ointment and orally Ciprofloxacinum 0.5 g 2x/day was continued in the hospital setting for 7 days.
Nine months after the onset of symptoms, the patient was hospitalized in the Department of Tropical and Parasitic Diseases at the University Centre for Maritime and Tropical Medicine in Gdynia. Nine months after symptom onset, the ulcer was large (10× 5 cm); it had an erythematous base and was covered with fibropurulent exudate and a thick scab on the periphery .
On the basis of the patient’s travel history and the PCR findings, cutaneous leishmaniasis was diagnosed. Treatment with antimony derivatives intramuscularly (Glucantime 30 ampoules), local cryotherapy and 2% Argosulfan cream was administered. During treatment, there was gradual improvement . After three months of treatment with antimony, the lesions healed but left an unsightly scar .