We present the case of a 31-year-old Persian female patient with a history of a mass in the left side of the neck for more than a year before referral to the clinic. The patient was gravid 2 with two children, living in the city center and working as a high-school teacher. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol or drug use. The patient had no history of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, or constitutional symptoms. History of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia was also negative in this case. Also, the patient had no significant past medical history nor family history of ectopic cervical masses or thyroid gland lesions. The patient was using no medications when referred to our medical center.
On physical examination at admission, the vital signs were normal with blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 85 per minute, and temperature of 37 °C. The primary evaluation of all 12 cranial nerves was normal. On neck examination, a palpable firm mass without tenderness was present in the left lobe of the thyroid. On auscultation of thyroid, no bruit was detected. Thyroid function tests were normal (thyroid stimulating hormone 1.5 mIU/L, free T4 = 1.1 ng/dL, T3 = 150 ng/dL), and the patient was euthyroid at presentation. Also, all other laboratory tests were normal (WBC = 8000/mL, hemoglobin = 12 g/dL, hematocrit = 40%, platelets = 250,000/mL, alanine aminotransferase = 20 units/L, aspartate aminotransferase = 10 units/L, alkaline phosphatase = 60 IU/L, urine analysis = normal, urine culture = no growth).
In US of neck and thyroid, a hypo- to isoechoic nodule with dimensions of 2.98 × 3.45 × 3.88 cm3 with internal striation and cystic areas (less than 50% of mass) was detected in the lower pole of the left lobe of the thyroid gland. The lesion had no micro- or macrocalcification in the examination. There was no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy in the US investigation . Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the lesion was done, and the microscopic examination of prepared slides showed many, varied size lymphoid cells containing some atypical large lymphoid cells with high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio and prominent nucleoli. The cytopathology of the specimen diagnosed tissue suspicious for lymphoproliferative disorder, and excisional biopsy of the mass was recommended. The patient underwent surgical excision of the lesion through total thyroidectomy, and the postoperative pathology examination revealed thymic tissue. Six months after surgery, the patient was referred for reevaluation; all physical examination and laboratory tests were rechecked and found to be normal.
On microscopic assessment of the excised lesion, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections showed an encapsulated mass with thick fibrous capsule and intersecting fibrous bands separating it into lobulated architecture with cellular lobules resembling normal thymic cortex, which were composed of scattered bland thymic epithelial cells in a dense background of small lymphocytes (immature T cells). On immunohistochemistry (IHC) evaluation, the scattered epithelial tumoral cells showed immunoreactivity for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (CK AE1/AE3) and P63. Background lymphoid cells showed diffuse immunoreactivity for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), CD3, CD43, and CD99; however, they were negative for CD20. The Ki-67 proliferation index was very high in lymphoid cells .