A 5-month-old girl, born at term with a birth weight of 3750 g, was presented to our outpatient department with the chief complaint of deviation of both eyes to the left side by the parents. The baby had history of oxygen therapy in neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for neonatal pneumonia for three days after birth, there was no other systemic abnormalities. The exact duration and mode of oxygen inhalation was not known. Except for the deviation of both eyes to the left, there was no other abnormal facial features of the baby. A preliminary torch light examination was done at the time of admission later we examined the child under anesthesia under an operating ophthalmic microscope. The anterior segment of the right eye and fundus were within normal limits . The left eye cornea and lens were transparent, there was a whitish star shaped tissue close to posterior lens capsule . Vitreous cavity was anechoic. Fundoscopy revealed attached retina, a large excavated dysplastic disc with multiple vessels radiating from the disc margin. The peripapillary area showed chorio-retinal pigmentary changes. The macula was dragged to the temporal side. . Fluorescein angiography showed multiple radiating retinal vessels from the disc to periphery. The disc and its surrounding annular area showed hyper fluorescence without leakage . The retinal vessels showed abnormal branching with bulbous terminals and leakage of fluorescein dye at the periphery. The peripheral retina showed 360 degree non perfusion with a defined border between vascular and avascular retina . The B-scan ultrasonography of the left eye revealed disc excavation. MRI brain and orbit showed no obvious abnormality in brain parenchyma, normal right orbit, and right optic nerve with surrounding ring of enhancing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). But in the left eye, the optic nerve head was excavated with scleral defect . The intra-orbital part of optic nerve in left side was tortuous-thickened and this was extending up to the chiasma . The absence of CSF enhancement surrounding the left optic nerve revealed abnormal development of the optic nerve sheath . The child received barrage laser photocoagulation to the edge of optic disc excavation of left eye to prevent retinal detachment due to dysplastic disc. In the follow-up visit after 1 week, laser scar surrounding the disc could be appreciated in fundoscopy. At last follow up after 9 months of laser intervention, the left eye fundus was stable .