A 75-year-old male was referred to our hospital after routine health screening revealed an elevated serum level of PSA (5.85 ng/mL). Multi-parametric MRI demonstrated a 25 cc gland with high signal intensity in T2-weighted images, high signal intensity in DWI, and low signal intensity in apparent diffusion coefficient map images, indicating a PIRADS 5 lesion suggestive of prostate cancer . The patient had a history of rectal cancer, treated with abdominoperineal excision >20 years prior. A transperineal prostate biopsy performed 3 months previously, with a PSA level of 4.5 ng/mL, did not show any malignancy. The patient was referred to our hospital for a re-biopsy based on the elevated PSA level and the PIRADS 5 lesion.
Spinal anesthesia was administered and the patient was placed in the lithotomy position. The scrotum was retracted to expose the perineum . TPUS was performed using an abdominal ultrasound transducer (4C-RS probe, 21700BZY00451000; GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) with a nephrostomy grid (13B1X00150UP0037; GE healthcare). Biopsies were performed using an 18-gauge biopsy needle. A novel strategy was used to facilitate the identification of biopsy needle insertion point, employing a 60° angle of approach in conjunction with the nephrostomy grid. We instilled 5 mL bubbled lidocaine jelly into the urethra to improve the visualization of urethra . Although a urethral catheter is usually inserted, it could interfere with the visualization of the prostate in this case. Therefore, we opted for the lidocaine jelly. Indeed, we could not identify the tumor suspected area by TPUS, however, the ultrasound probe clearly detected the prostate, urethra, and bladder . Then we inverted the MRI and placed the monitor next to the ultrasound machine. This allowed the operators to fuse the ultrasound image with the MRI image, and aided the identification and biopsy of suspected lesions. Finally, using the cognitive MRI-TPUS fusion technique, multiple biopsies were obtained from the suspected lesion in the multiparametric MRI. Systemic prostate biopsies were also performed. The patient was discharged the day after the procedure, and experienced no postoperative complications.
Systemic prostate biopsies (six cores) and cognitive targeted MRI biopsies (two cores) for the left peripheral suspected lesion were performed. The biopsy specimens were analyzed by a genitourinary pathologist (SS). The prostatic biopsy revealed a Gleason score 9 (5 + 4) adenocarcinoma in two specimens (one systemic and one targeted biopsy).