A woman in her 60s with diarrhea and anorexia.
Gastrointestinal symptoms appeared 24 mo after IXE was started for the treatment of psoriasis.
The patient was diagnosed with psoriatic arthritis by her family physician and started on IXE. However, anorexia and diarrhea appeared 20 mo after treatment initiation. After conservative treatment by her family doctor, her symptoms did not improve, and she visited our hospital 24 mo after IXE initiation for a close examination and treatment.
Her medical history included type 1 diabetes at the age of 35 and hypothyroidism at the age of 50 years, each of which was medically managed by her family physician. No family history of IBD was reported; her father had gastric cancer, and her mother had diabetes. The injectable medications used were insulin and IXE for diabetes and psoriasis, respectively.
The patient was conscious but noticeably emaciated, appeared weakened, and walked with a limp. She had a body temperature of 36.0 ℃ and 114/52 mmHg of blood pressure. The skin of the upper extremities was fragile, with epidermal exfoliation of the right forearm. Multiple scars were observed on the upper arm and mild deformities and swelling of the hand joints.
On admission, blood biochemistry tests showed anemia with a hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL and hypoalbuminemia with an albumin level of 2.8 g/dL. She was also dehydrated, with a blood urea nitrogen level of 28.2 mg/dL and creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL and had high inflammation with a C-reactive protein level of 15.3 mg/dL. Leucine-rich alpha-2 glycoprotein level was 44.1 μg/mL and fecal calprotectin level was also high at 7357 mg/kg, suggesting strong intestinal inflammation.
Computed tomography revealed edematous wall thickening of the intestinal tract, continuous from the ascending colon to the rectum.
Colonoscopy revealed multiple round, punched-out ulcers with a longitudinal trend from the cecum to the rectum . The intervening mucosa of the ulcer was nearly normal, and the ulcer did not coincide with the mesenteric attachment. A biopsy of the ulcer showed mucosal erosion, lymphocyte-dominated inflammatory cell infiltration, and regenerative epithelial growth . Submucosal fibroblast and collagen fiber proliferation were also present-a granuloma-like finding similar to that of CD. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed reflux esophagitis and chronic gastritis. The gastric mucosa exhibited scattered erythema and erosions; however, no specific abnormalities were observed in the duodenum. Capsule endoscopy revealed multiple jejunal erosions . The erosions were scattered on the proximal side of the jejunum; each erosion was shallow and < 1 cm in size, and hematin adhesions were visible on the surface. However, stool culture and Clostridioides difficile toxin tests were negative, as were cytomegalovirus antigen and polymerase chain reaction tests and interferon-gamma release assays.