A 37-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for general malaise. Chest radiography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a superior anterior mediastinal tumor that was 4.7 × 3.8 × 2.8 cm in size, with multilocular cysts. CT with contrast enhancement showed mild enhancement of the septum of the lesion . T1-weighted and T2-weighted images revealed isointensity and high intensity, respectively, of the lesion . Calcification or fatty components were not seen. The positron emission tomography standardized uptake value (PET SUVmax) was 4.25, which was relatively low . The following tumor markers were all within normal range: carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, CYFRA 21–1, sialyl Lewis X, and progastrin-releasing peptide. Anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies were not detected. Thymoma, thymic cyst, or teratoma was suspected, and a thymectomy was performed. After the pathological diagnosis, on suspicion of an associated autoimmune disease, autoantibodies were examined and were positive for antinuclear antibodies (speckled type, ×640), rheumatic factor (114; normal range <15 IU/mL), and anti-SSA/Ro antibodies (>240; normal <10 U/mL) and negative for anti-SS-B/La, anti-DNA, anti-RNP, anti-Sm, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, Jo-1, Scl-70, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO-ANCA and PR3-ANCA). She also had a mildly dry mouth and dry eyes. The Schirmer’s (right 2 mm/left 2 mm), chewing gum (2.9 mL/10 min), and Saxon (0.62 g/2 min) tests all showed decreased secretion of the lacrimal and salivary glands. A lip biopsy specimen revealed focal lymphocytic sialadenitis. Based on these findings, Sjögren syndrome was diagnosed. The signs and symptoms of Sjögren syndrome, without aggravation, were not resolved 1 year after the thymectomy, and autoantibody titers did not show remarkable changes.
The resected thymectomy specimen was 9.5 × 5.5 × 2.5 cm in size and weighed 61 g. An ill-defined elastic firm mass, 5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm in size, was found in the thymus with multilocular cysts, many of which were filled with yellowish-green colloid-like material . Histology of the tumor revealed lymphoid tissue with hyperplastic germinal centers and occasional Hassall corpuscles . The cysts were lined by thin layers of thymic epithelium . Outside the tumor in the thymus, there were many small nodules of lymphoid tissue showing similar morphology as the main tumorous lesion. In the small nodules of lymphoid tissue, microscopic cysts lined by thymic epithelium were occasionally found . The lymphocytes were small and mature except for cells in germinal centers. No significant atypia was seen in the lymphoid and epithelial cells. Immunohistochemically, cytokeratin AE1/AE3 highlighted the epithelium of the cysts and Hassall corpuscles . There was no epithelial proliferation in the nodular lymphoid tissue; the findings eliminated the possibility of thymoma. Lymphoid markers revealed organized mixed distribution of CD3+, CD5+, CD20+, and CD79+ cells and did not show monoclonal proliferation of B cells or T cells . Immunostaining of light chains showed that the approximate ratio of kappa to lambda was 3:1, and no significant light chain restriction was seen . Staining of immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgA, and IgM heavy chains did not reveal monoclonal proliferation. Both CD20 + B cells and CD3 + T cells infiltrated the epithelium. No aberrant expression of CD5 and CD43 B cells was observed. Bcl-2 was negative in the germinal center of lymphoid follicles. Polymerase chain reaction and gene analysis from the formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue of the lesion did not show rearrangement of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene. Thymic lymphoid hyperplasia with multilocular thymic cysts was the pathological diagnosis.
The lip biopsy specimen revealed mild atrophy of the minor salivary glands with mild fibrosis and focal lymphoid aggregation . A lymphoepithelial lesion was not seen. The focus score was 1.25 and was graded as 4.