A 56-year-old, developmentally-delayed, male was struck by a motor vehicle. Emergency medical personnel escorted him to a local hospital. There he was found to have bilateral hemopneumothoraces. Bilateral chest tubes were placed. The medical team also intubated and pharmaceutically paralyzed the patient in preparation for transfer to our level-1 regional trauma center. During transfer, hemodynamic instability required aggressive resuscitation involving blood transfusion. Upon arrival at our institution, it was discovered that the patient had multiple injuries. He suffered a mechanically unstable pelvic fracture, multiple rib fractures, and a wrist injury involving a scaphoid fracture. Additionally, radiographic data from the outside hospital demonstrated concern for an intimal flap tear in the descending aorta. Resuscitation efforts in our SICU established hemodynamic instability. Therefore, his aortic injury was managed non-operatively with observation and cardiovascular monitoring. At that point, there was no concern for spinal injury as the total spinal CT scan did not demonstrate bony injury. Unfortunately, retrospective review would show that the upper thoracic spinal segment was only analyzed with axial images. There were no sagittal or coronal reformations. Nonetheless, the patient underwent uneventful pelvic fracture and wrist fracture fixation. During his SICU course, he developed pulmonary complications including pneumonia. This problem further caused bacteremia evidenced by positive blood cultures. Antibiotic treatment was started. A surveillance CT scan was obtained five days after admission to evaluate for changes to the aortic intimal flap. This scan, utilizing its sagittal and coronal reconstructions, demonstrated a T3-T4 subluxation indicative of a DISH hyper-extension-type fracture . The spine team was, therefore, consulted. The nature of this unstable injury mandated surgical intervention. A posterior spinal instrumentation and fusion approach was selected. At the time of posterior spinal surgical exposure, the patient was found to have left T3-T4 facet joint infection. This was associated with hematoma surrounding a T4 transverse process fracture and a left T4 costo-transverse fracture-subluxation. Intra-operative cultures were obtained. Cultures at the time of surgery grew Haemophilus influenzae (HI) and Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). These cultures were consistent with the blood cultures obtained from his episodes of bacteremia related to the lung infection. Intra-operative decision was made to proceed with fixation and fusion secondary to the need for immediate stability of the DISH fracture . Otherwise, the surgery proceeded without complication. Post-operatively, the infectious disease specialist recommended six weeks of culture-directed antibiotics. Three weeks following the surgery, the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility. At that stage, he had no wound problems, symptoms or signs of infection, or spinal implant complications. The most recent follow-up imaging demonstrates well fixed spinal implants and no concern for superficial or deep peri-incisional infection. The patient also remains neurologically intact.