A 64-year-old woman presented to the emergency room for the abrupt onset of headache and bilateral visual disturbance. Patient history was remarkable only for end-stage kidney disease in IgA nephropathy, treated with hemodialysis. Brain Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a large inhomogeneous and hyperdense round sellar mass with suprasellar extension and sporadically parietal calcifications, highly suggestive for PA, and no other brain alterations . Bio-humoral assays demonstrated panhypopituitarism, promptly treated with hydrocortisone, and acute renal failure (creatinine 10.7 ng/mL). Immediately after these examinations, urgent dialysis session was started. However, few hours after the PA symptoms onset, a rapid deterioration of consciousness was observed, followed by right hemiparesis and hemodynamic instability, which required resuscitation maneuvers and patient intubation.
After achieving hemodynamic stability, urgent brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was performed at 12 h from symptoms onset, confirming the presence of a large tumor with endosuprasellar extension, with areas of mild hypointensity in T1-w and marked hyperintensity in T2-w sequences, strongly suggestive for recent intra-tumoral bleeding, compatible with the clinical suspicion of apoplectic pituitary adenoma . Moreover, the MRI showed bilateral anterior-circulation ischemic strokes, mainly extending on the left side, with features typical of acute (6–24 h) onset . On the right side, the ischemic lesion involved the region of the basal ganglia supplied by the perforating vessels of the A1 segment (head of the caudate and anterior portion of the lenticular nucleus) and the proximal arteries deriving from the callosomarginal artery. Conversely, on the left side the ischemic lesion involved all the distal territories supplied by the arteries deriving from the callosomarginal artery . The MR-angiography (MRA) showed the bilateral superior displacement and critical narrowing of the A1 segments of both anterior cerebral arteries (ACAs), and the increase of the internal carotid artery (ICA) A1 angle on both sides, caused by the mass effect exerted by the PA .
The patient underwent emergency endoscopic endonasal adenomectomy immediately after the MRI. A largely hemorrhagic lesion was identified, confirming MRI findings, and it was completely removed with consequent decompression of ACAs. On post-operative MRI, both A1 segments recovered their normal diameter and anatomical position, but no improvement of the ischemic lesions was observed . The histological examination identified a gonadotroph adenoma with large areas of hemorrhagic infarction . The post-operative course was unfavorable. The patient did not recover consciousness and died 18 days later for respiratory complications.