We report the case of a 37-year-old woman, with a history of 5 episodes of hypotension with generalized edema spontaneously reversible in 2 years, admitted for the management of asthenia with edema of the lower limbs reaching the thigh for 4 days with a recent weight gain estimated at 8kg in 2 days. The initial evaluation found patient, hemodynamically unstable with unfound blood pressure and Heart Rate = 157 bpm, cold extremities, an elongated refilling capillary time, respiratory, FR = 34 cpm with SpO2 = 97% on room air, G = 1.17 and T° = 36.7, the patient is oligo-anuric.
The physical examination found a patient in a state of complete anasarca with no signs of right heart failure, cardiac examination is without particularities apart from tachycardia, pleuropulmonary auscultation finds bilateral snoring rales.
Vascular filling with 3 L of 0.9% saline solution is performed without hemodynamic or renal response requiring the introduction of Norepinephrine with a dose of 0.4 μg/kg/min after taking a central venous approach with an initial central venous pressure (CVP) estimated at 1 mmhg.
An electrocardiogram (EKG) was performed and did not show any repolarization disorders, on transthoracic echocardiography there were no signs of acute pulmonary heart, nor any segmental or global kinetic disorders that could explain this picture, the left ventricualr ejection fraction (LVEF) was estimated at 50%, the inferior vena cava was collapsed. The biological assessment performed on admission showed: Hemoglobin at 19.7 g/dl, Hematocrit at 69%, creatinine at 21mg/l, urea at 0.97 and albumin at 16 g/l with a normal infectious work-up and negative proteinuria . The arterial blood gaz on admission showed a non-compensated metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia at 7.37 mmol/l .
Given the absence of criteria for cardiogenic or septic shock and the absence of active bleeding, the history of 5 recurrent episodes of hypotension with generalized edema and the presence of hemoconcentration and low albumin in this young patient, the diagnosis of clarckson's syndrome was evoked.
Massive filling with macromolecules (hydroxyethylamidon) is initiated 9 hours after admission, the patient began to drop down blood pressure, requiring augmentation of norepinephrine with the introduction of dobutamine with no hemodynamic response.
The patient presented a cardiac arrest that have been recovered with a NO FLOW at 0 and a LOW FLOW at 13min, the patient was intubated and then hemodynamically stabilized with epinephrine with a Blood Pressur: 90/50 mmhg. The evolution is marked by the clinic-biological aggravation of the renal function requiring the introduction of a continuous replacement therapy of the Kidney, with the installation of a rhabdomyolysis.
The electrophoresis of the blood proteins found a monoclonal peak of type IgG kappa in favour of our diagnostic hypothesis, the microbiological cultures were negative. Blood gas monitoring always showed an uncompensated metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia.
48h after her admission, the patient started to drop her blood pressure BP = 60/30 mmhg, given the refractory shock state, the implementation of circulatory assistance by a veno-arterial Extra Corporeal Membran Oxygenation (ECMO) is decided but unfortunately the patient presented a non-recovered cardio-respiratory arrest a few moments later.