The 38-year-old male patient was in a car accident in January 2007 and fractured his right radius. The fracture was exposed (Gustilo Type 2). Before presenting at the Codivilla-Putti Hospital in September 2007, his medical records show that, after initial trauma care, he was subjected to immobilization using a cast and that his fracture was reduced and fixated with a plate and screw system (brand unknown) and bone grafts (unknown) in March 2007. Bone grafting was performed because bone loss occurred following the traumatic fracture. His medical records also indicated that in May 2007 he had suffered from a wound dehiscence that was negative for infection (it is not known whether the natient underwent antibiotic therapy). The next month, the plate and screws were removed, and an external fixation system (brand unknown) was placed.
He presented at the Codivilla Hospital complaining of pain and presenting a non-suppurating fistula at the scar site of the previous operations. A radiograph was taken and showed a non-union and bone loss . In November 2007, the patient underwent surgery aimed at completely debriding the site. A cement spacer containing gentamicin and clindamycin (Copal G+C, Heraeus, Hanau, Germany) , alo ng with vancomycin, was placed into the gap . At this point, the surgical site was positive for Staphylococcus aureus. 3 months later, in February 2008, as a fistula developed again, the spacer was replaced with a new one (same source as the previous surgery). The antibiotic therapy was interrupted 2 weeks before spacer replacement for allowing bacteria strain identification. Before spacer replacement, a white blood cell scintigraphy, laboratory tests for inflammation, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C- reactive protein, and complete blood count were performed and radiography was taken. Based on the results of antibiograms, imipenem and vancomycin also were added, and oral antibiotics were also prescribed (ciprofloxacin, 750 mg twice a day). 3 months later, in May 2008, the fistula had disappeared, and the patient’s leukocyte scintigraphy was negative. After 3 more months, in August 2008, the patient underwent reconstruction using a vascularized fibula graft . At the subsequent control appointments, radiographs showed nonunion of the graft . 8 months later, in April 2009, the graft and the osteosynthesis devices that had been concomitantly placed were removed, and a third spacer was positioned.
In July 2009, the patient underwent a final surgery to place autogenous bone from the iliac crest; equine bone paste containing equine DBM (Osteoplant Activagen Mouldable Paste, Bioteck, Vicenza, Italy); equine DBM granules (Osteoplant Activagen, Bioteck); autologous BMC obtained during the surgery using a dedicated system (Marrowstim, Biomet, Warsaw, USA); and autologous PRP previously prepared according to standard protocols by the hospital blood transfusion service. Very briefly, the PRP was prepared from a sample of the patient’s blood, using differential centrifugation to separate PRP from platelet-poor plasma and red blood cells. This process increased the platelet concentration approximately four- to five-fold compared to the initial blood sample. Before the application, platelets were activated with thrombin and calcium gluconate. The equine bone paste is a mixture of equine cancellous bone granules (1-2 mm), equine DBM granules (1-2 mm), equine collagen, equine bone powder (<0.2 mm), and water-based gel. The equine bone components are made non-antigenic through an enzyme-based processing method that leaves bone collagen unaltered . The concentration of the different components is adjusted to make the paste easily moldable. Equine DBM granules are manufactured by applying the same process as that used for equine bone and then subjecting the granules to complete acid demineralization.
On the day of the surgery, the patient underwent general anesthesia, and two operatory fields were prepared, one at the right iliac crest and one at the right radius. After gaining proper access to the iliac crest through a small incision and removing part of the cortical bone, autogenous cancellous chips were collected using a surgical spoon. Approximately 60 cc of bone-marrow aspirate was collected from the same iliac access, inserting a 5-hole biopsy needle in different directions to optimize the collection of mesenchymal cells. The chips (10 cc), equine DBM (2 cc), equine bone paste (5 cc), BMC (6 cc), and PRP (4 cc) were carefully mixed in a bowel . A small amount of calcium gluconate was added to activate the PRP and induce clotting. The mixture was then placed in a pre-cut sterile syringe to shape it, after clotting, as a compact cylinder.
The surgical site at the radius was opened, and the spacer was removed . The two bone extremities were stabilized with a metal fixation plate, and the approximately 7.5-cm-long gap was filled with the mixture, extruded from the pre-cut syringe ( and 8).
At 60 days, radiographs showed that the graft was still undergoing remodeling. However, at 6 months, radiographs showed that the graft had undergone significant remodeling; its radiolucency had increased significantly.