A 75-year-old male presented with shortness of breath. Physical examination showed no abnormal findings. Blood tests showed renal function degeneracy. Ultrasonography for screening of post-renal dysfunction showed a 66 mm mass in the upper portion of the right kidney and IVCTT . MRI showed IVCTT, with a major axis of 90 mm and maximum diameter of 47 mm, extended beyond the hepatic vein (Neves classification level III), causing dilation of the IVC . CT revealed multiple pulmonary nodules, and no obvious lymphadenopathy was observed . Percutaneous needle biopsy for the renal mass demonstrated clear cell renal cell carcinoma with abundant infiltrating immune cells. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with mRCC with IVCTT. His IMDC risk was intermediate, given the anemia and time from diagnosis to systemic therapy.
He received four cycles of Nivo-Ipi followed by four cycles of nivolumab monotherapy. CT and MRI revealed the IVCTT had regressed to the IVC beneath the liver and the dilation of the IVC was resolved . Furthermore, CT showed the lung metastases had diminished, except for one lesion at the bottom of the right lung . Given that his performance status was good and a resection of the IVCTT could be safer since clamping the IVC to avoid intraoperative thrombotic complications was easier and the range of operation was smaller because the IVCTT had regressed, radical nephrectomy with removal of the IVCTT was performed to avoid cardiovascular events due to IVC obstruction and thrombotic complications. The IVCTT was completely removed but resection of the IVC and reconstruction with a vascular graft was needed since the adhesions to the IVC wall were too tight to separate. The resected specimens showed a white tumor with unclear boundaries in the upper portion of the right kidney and infiltration of the tumor into the IVC from the renal vein . However, no viable malignant cells were revealed histopathologically . Although seven cycles of nivolumab monotherapy were continued after the operation, the remaining pulmonary lesion did not change. To judge whether nivolumab monotherapy could be suspended or not, metastasectomy of the pulmonary lesion was performed. Pathological examination showed fibrosis without viable malignant cells , suggesting the patient could achieve CR of mRCC with IVCTT to Nivo-Ipi. Nivolumab monotherapy was discontinued, given the pathological findings and the patient's request. There has been no recurrence for 14 months after the discontinuation.