A 9-day-old female infant (the second baby of twins) was referred from the Pediatrics Department to the Department of Ophthalmology in Osaka Medical College for ophthalmological examination. The obstetric history the mother revealed was that human chorionic gonadotropin administration and the water flow method were used to establish the pregnancy due to tubal occlusion. The children were dichorionic diamniotic twins. The mother was hospitalized with preterm labor at the time of 30 weeks. Family history revealed no systemic abnormal findings or malformations with the first child, and she was delivered by cesarian section at 34 weeks of gestational age and weighed 2,276 g upon presentation. At late pregnancy, she was diagnosed as having severe ventriculomegaly and a cleft lip palate. Other abnormal echo findings in the course of pregnancy had not been reported.
The infant’s face had a complete cleft on the left side that extended from the lip and undermined the alar base (Tessier No. 3); a bony cleft extended from the left orbital roof (Tessier No. 11) and the cleft of the left upper lip (Tessier No. 5). In addition, she had a complete cleft of the right side of the face that extended from the lip to the forehead near the eyebrow. There was an amniotic-like band from the cranial cleft end to the hair line of the forehead (Tessier Nos. 2 and 12) .
The first eye examination revealed severe blepharophimosis in the right eye and a notch in the left lower eyelid ; however, there was no eyelid closure disorder in both eyes. Her right-eye cornea had inferior opacity, pseudopterygium, downward corectopia, and anterior synechia. The cornea of her left eye was clear. Fluorescein staining testing revealed no corneal or conjunctival epithelial disorders in both eyes. The anterior chamber and lens were normal in her left eye. Upon ophthalmoscopic examination, optic-nerve hypoplasia without mydriasis was suspected in her right eye. The corneal diameter was 8 mm in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 11–22 mmHg in her right eye and 8 mmHg in her left eye (Tono-Pen® XL; Reichert Technologies, Depew, NY, USA). B-mode echo without graduation on the scale revealed no difference in axial length between her right and left eyes, and her right eye showed no reaction to light. However, light produced a “dazzle” effect in her left eye. She also had ectrodactyly in the left hand and foot. There were no abnormalities of the blood test and visceral malformation.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed an interhemispheric cyst associated with ventriculomegaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum . A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted at 12 days of age. Computed tomography (CT) scan images revealed no apparent differences of diameter or density between the right and left optic nerve.
We focused on the IOP, especially in the infant’s right eye, because the value was inaccurate due to blepharophimosis which inhibited the tip of the tonometer from touching the cornea correctly in that eye. Furthermore, we could not rule out the possibility of glaucoma in the right eye because the Tono-Pen® XL and Perkins Tonometer® (HAAG-STREIT, Koeniz, Switzerland) always showed that the IOP in the right eye, which had optic-nerve hypoplasia, was higher than that in the left eye. We measured IOP several times under sedation by Tono-Pen® XL and Perkins Tonometer® from 6 to 13 months of age, and IOP was found to be 20–43 mmHg in the right eye (Tono-Pen® XL). In the infant’s left eye, the IOP was 14–23 mmHg (Tono-Pen® XL) and 12–14 mmHg (Perkins Tonometer®). It was difficult to accurately measure the IOP of the right eye by Perkins Tonometer® due to blepharophimosis.
At 15 months of age, the patient underwent a detailed ophthalmological examination under general anesthesia before undergoing plastic surgery. IOP was 11–14 mmHg OD and 5–11 mmHg OS by Tono-Pen® XL and 11–14 mmHg OD and 5–6 mmHg OS by Perkins Tonometer®. The right-eye cornea had opacity (subepithelial to deep stroma) from the inferior to central area with vascularization in the corneal stroma, pseudopterygium, downward corectopia, and anterior synechia . Abnormalities were not observed with fluorescein staining. Fundus examination revealed a tilted disc and a double-ring sign in the right eye, and the disc macula distance/disc diameter (DM/DD) ratio (ie, the ratio of the distance between the center of the optic disc and the fovea centralis to the diameter of the optic disc) was ~4.0 in the right eye . The DM/DD ratio was ~2.8 in the left eye . After a canthotomy was performed, gonioscopy revealed that almost all directions were open except for the peripheral anterior synechia in the right eye . Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed that almost all directions were open except for the peripheral anterior synechia in the right eye . Gonioscopy and ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed that all directions had no abnormalities in the left eye.
At 25 months of age, the patient presented to an emergency department because of vomiting and consciousness disturbance. A CT scan revealed dilatation of the ventricles, and she was diagnosed with shunt malfunction. Although emergency ventricular drainage was performed, the process ultimately led to brain death and the patient was pronounced dead 5 days later.