An 18-year-old female (weight, 53 kg, height, 162 cm, and BMI, 20.2 kg/m2) with a history of Goldenhar syndrome presented for placement of a right mandibular distractor, right retroauricular dilator, and stage I transfer of a prefabricated expanded flap under general anesthesia. The patient had no symptoms of respiratory disease, such as stridor, shortness of breathing, limitation on physical exertion, and no history of recurrent croup. No history of surgery and endotracheal intubation. On physical examination, the patient had right-sided facial asymmetry, microtia, a short mandible, and a nonpalpable temporomandibular joint . Oral examination elucidated a Mallampati grade III score and 3.7 cm interincisal mouth opening. Cranial Computerized tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated right sided mandible hypoplasia .
Standard ASA monitoring devices were applied and an intravenous induction of general anesthesia was proceeded. Given the oropharyngeal location of the operation and the patient’s asymmetric jaw deformity, a video laryngoscope was used to perform a transnasal endotracheal intubation with a 6.5-mm nasal right-angle cuffed endotracheal tube (ETT). A grade 1 Cormack-Lehane view of the glottis was obtained. The ETT smoothly passed through the nasal cavity, but met resistance unexpectantly when attempting to pass through the glottis. We then attempted the procedure with a 6.0-mm nasal right-angle cuffed ETT but again met resistance. Subsequently, the glottis and trachea were evaluated with a fiberoptic bronchoscope with confirmed evidence of subglottic airway stenosis. The patient was successfully intubated orally with a 5-mm cuffed endotracheal tube. However, there was no apparent ventilator leak despite tracheal balloon deflation. On further investigation with repeat fiberoptic bronchoscope evaluation, while the endotracheal tube was in the correct position, tracheal mucosa protruded from the lateral Murphy’s eye of the endotracheal tube . The diameter of the patient’s airway was less than the outer diameter of 5-mm oral ETT with cuff (6.8 mm). Given the finding of unexpected severe airway stenosis and the associated risks with proceeding with the surgery, including airway injury or edema caused by repeated endotracheal intubation attempts, prolonged retention of the ETT after operation, and potential postintubation tracheal stenosis, the operation was cancelled. The ETT was secured while the patient was allowed to fully emerge from general anesthesia prior to extubation. After multiple attempts at intubation, the patient were promptly administered glucocorticoids to prevent and reduce airway edema. During the intubation attempts, the patient was well ventilated with a mask. We removed the ETT once the patient was fully awake. There was no evidence of any airway edema or respiratory compromise during the recovery in the post anesthesia care unit. Considering the potential risk of airway manipulation in general anesthesia, the procedure has been altered, which was allowed it to be performed under local anesthesia at a later date to avoid airway manipulation. Four days later, the patient underwent the placement of right retroauricular dilator, and stage I transfer of a prefabricated expanded flap under local anesthesia. The second portion will occur after further airway assessment and SGS management.
Chest CT provided detailed measurements of the subglottic airway. Through coronal and sagittal measurements on CT and three-dimensional image reconstruction, we found that the whole segment of the trachea and the bilateral bronchi were all narrow . The minimum diameter of the trachea was only 5.4 mm, and the maximum was 8.8 mm; both were much narrower than normal (the airway diameter in normal adults is approximately 15 mm ~ 20 mm) . We recommend the patient go to the respiratory department for tracheoscopy, comprehensive evaluation of the degree and length of airway stenosis and assessment of the patient’s lung function after discharge. These results can be used as a reference for later surgeries to select anesthesia methods and tracheal tube models.