A 25-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) for evaluation of persistent productive cough of yellowish sputum over the last four week and mild exertional dyspnea over the last two years. Her past medical history was unremarkable and she took no regular medications. There was no personal or family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome. She was in no distress on presentation to the ED with a resting hemoglobin oxygen saturation of 97% while breathing room air. Her physical examination was remarkable for absent breath sounds and decreased tactile fremitus on the left middle and lower lung fields. No wheezing or stridor were heard. Laboratory data were within normal limits.
A chest x-ray (CXR) in the ED demonstrated opacification of the left middle and lower lung fields, hyperinflation of the right lung and deviation of the trachea to the left . A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed complete left lung atelectasis due to a mass obstructing the left main bronchus and excessive mediastinal deviation to the left with substantial herniation of the hyperdistended right lung into the left hemithorax . There was no evidence of tracheobronchial narrowing in the right lung or esophageal compression. The mass was well demarcated and of soft-tissue quality, demonstrating homogeneous contrast enhancement, starting 2.8 cm distal to the main carina, measuring 4.4 × 2 × 2.8 cm . Abdominal and head CT scans showed no abnormal findings. The patient subsequently underwent a diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy which revealed a pale hypervascular polypoid mass completely obliterating the left main bronchus which was biopsied using forceps . Histopathological examination of endobronchial biopsies disclosed a carcinoid tumor with a Ki-67 index of approximately 10%.
Following thoracic surgery consultation, an open left pneumonectomy with concurrent complete lymph node assessment and dissection was performed. During surgery, the left lung was found completely atelectatic with adhesions between the pericardium and the left pleura which were dissected. No attempt of repositioning the mediastinum or placement of tissue expanders was performed, due to the absence of airway compression in the right bronchial tree during previous bronchoscopy and CT scan. The patient recovered well after surgery and no complications were noted. Post-operative histopathology disclosed an atypical carcinoid with a Ki-67 labelling index of 10% but no areas of necrosis . There was a radical resection of all tumor with clear operative margins, the periphery of the left main bronchus was infiltrated by tumor, but there was no invasion of the visceral pleura, and no infiltration of resected lymph nodes from lymph node stations 5, 7, 9 and 10 by carcinoid cells.
Pre-operative spirometry was as follows: FEV1: 1.51 lit (44% predicted), FVC: 1.54 lit (39% predicted), FEV1/FVC: 98%. Spirometry and static lung volumes 12 months after surgery were as follows: FEV1: 1.93 lit (58% predicted), FVC: 2.34 lit (61% predicted), FEV1/FVC: 82%, TLC: 3.28 lit (63% predicted), RV/TLC: 118% predicted. Although spirometry appears to be significantly improved after surgery, spirometry before surgery triggered fits of coughing and therefore preoperative values might not be representative.
Postsurgical follow-up has included the following: Initial chest CT scan was carried out 2 months after surgery. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and prolactin levels were within normal limits 1 year after surgery. The following investigations were carried out at 6 months and then every 6 months for the first 5 years: Chest CT scan, abdominal ultrasound, chromogranin A measurement and standard laboratory testing including complete blood count, renal function, liver function, calcium and glucose. Abdominal CT scan and fiberoptic bronchoscopy were carried out 1 year after surgery and then will be carried out annually for the first 5 years. Bronchoscopy would be performed earlier for any symptoms or imaging findings suggestive of local progression. Repeat chest CT scans after surgery showed no changes in mediastinal rotation compared to those prior to surgery, and no signs of tracheobronchial or esophageal compression. Repeat bronchoscopy showed a normal-appearing surgical stump of left main bronchus and no airway compression of the right bronchial tree. The remaining studies listed above have been normal. The chronic mild exertional dyspnea reported by the patient before surgery completely resolved on hospital discharge, 7 days after pneumonectomy. The patient has been asymptomatic for the last 16 months after surgery with excellent performance status.