We encountered a case of thymofibrolipoma for which immunohistochemical and cytogenetic analyses were performed.
A 43-year-old woman had an anterior mediastinal tumor, and chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography was performed at a periodic health check-up for observation of a suspected thymic cyst. During follow-up, the tumor continued to grow slowly, and thoracoscopy-assisted mediastinal tumor resection was performed because a neoplastic lesion could not be ruled out.
Macroscopically, the tumor was a mass-like lesion that had a relatively clear border with the surrounding thymus. The cut surface of the tumor was composed of a yellowish lipomatous component and a uniform whitish fibrous component with elastic stiffness. Microscopically, the whitish fibrous component was mainly composed of fibrous tissue with sparse spindle cells against a background of collagenous fibers. The fibrous tissue was accompanied by strands of thymic tissue, islands of adipocytes and scattered area of calcifications. In the yellowish lipomatous component, mature adipocytes and strands or islands of thymic tissue with small lymphocytes were observed. As a minor component, fibrous tissue was also observed in the lipomatous component. Age-appropriate atrophic thymic tissue was found in the partially resected nontumor area. No neoplastic or hyperplastic lesions were found.
The strands or islands of thymic tissue were composed of CK19(+) thymic epithelial cells and small lymphocytes, which were predominantly immature T lymphocytes showing the following profile: CD20(-), CD3(+), CD99(+), and TdT(+). Hassall bodies were also observed in some thymic tissue. The spindle cells in the fibrous tissue showed SMA and CD34 expression and had lost RB1 and FOXO1A expression. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using a probe specific for chromosome 13q14 (Vysis LSI D13s319/13q34 FISH Probe Kit, Abbott, Abbott Park, IL) detected a single signal in the tumor cells and two signals in the nuclei of normal cells, demonstrating monoallelic deletion of the 13q14 region in the tumor cells. Based on the morphological and immunohistochemical analyses, we diagnosed the tumor as a thymofibrolipoma. The patient was discharged uneventfully. During the 8-month follow-up period, the patient did not show any evidence of recurrence or metastasis.