A 65-year-old asymptomatic Asian male patient underwent chest radiography during a routine health examination, and an abnormal mass was detected. His past medical history was unremarkable. He smoked two packs of cigarettes per day for 45 years and had slightly obstructive impairment on spirometry. He worked as an employee of a company and had no history of asbestos exposure. Computed tomography showed two nodules in the right lung: a 1.5-cm soft-tissue nodule in the right upper lobe and a 0.5-cm soft-tissue nodule in the right lower lobe. After 3 months, the larger nodule had increased to 2.0 cm in diameter , but the smaller nodule was unchanged.
The patient underwent wedge resection of the right upper and lower lobes by a standard three-port thoracoscopy. We used Endo GIATM Reinforced Reload with Tri-Staple Technology for the upper lobe with emphysematous changes; we used conventional cartridges for the lower lobe. There was no air leak during the operation, and the staple line was not reinforced. He had no air leakage, and we removed the chest drain on postoperative day 2. He was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 7. A histological examination of the tumor in the upper lobe of the right lung revealed a cellular nodule of epithelioid and spindle-shaped cells. The tumor cells were arranged in solid sheets or fascicular arrangement and were loosely cohesive. Some of them exhibited rhabdoid features and reticular arrangement in a myxomatous stroma . Mitotic figures were sparsely observed. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), CD34 , and endothelial membrane antigen (EMA) and negative for desmin, erythroblast transformation-specific related gene (ERG), myoglobin, S-100 protein, HMB-45, melan-A, CD117, AE1/AE3, and CAM5.2. Loss of the BAF47/INI1 protein in the tumor cells was also confirmed . The lesion was pathologically diagnosed as epithelioid sarcoma. The surgical margins were negative. The nodule in the right lower lobe was histologically diagnosed as a hamartoma.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography performed on the 40th day after surgery showed no abnormal uptake in the whole body. He had no cutaneous disease. Follow-up chest roentgen at 4 months revealed no evidence of recurrence.