A 57-year-old Japanese man, height 170 cm, weight 75 kg, was carried to our hospital with sudden-onset chest/back pain. His only past medical history was untreated hypertension, and he had had no episode of blood coagulation abnormality. He was not taking any medication, and no significant family history was noted. When he arrived at our hospital, he was alert (Glasgow Coma Scale score 15), and he had no paralysis. Although his circulatory dynamics were almost stable, he was diagnosed with acute type A aortic dissection by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). The aortic dissection extended to the abdominal aorta, left common iliac artery, and brachiocephalic artery; however, the persistence of perioperative malperfusion was not confirmed by CT. Thus, emergency aortic arch replacement surgery was scheduled. Before the surgery, there was no pericardial effusion and no major aortic valve regurgitation detected by transthoracic echocardiography, and the patient’s electrocardiogram revealed no abnormality. The results of arterial blood gas analysis were within the normal ranges, except for an increase in lactate of 4.60 mmol/L. Although the patient had no clinical bleeding tendency, a blood test prior to surgery showed coagulopathy: platelet count (PLT) 117 × 109/L, prothrombin time–international normalized ratio (PT-INR) 1.78, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 69.7 seconds, fibrinogen < 50 mg/dl, and D-dimer 1560 μg/ml.
General anesthesia was induced with midazolam 5 mg, fentanyl 200 μg, and rocuronium 50 mg and maintained with sevoflurane 1.5% or midazolam (during cardiopulmonary bypass [CPB]), intermittent administration of fentanyl (total 600 μg), remifentanil 0.15–0.3 μg/kg/minute, and rocuronium. During the surgery, an electrocardiogram, left radial and left dorsal pedis arterial pressure, pulse oximetry, central venous pressure, regional cerebral oxygen saturation (rSO2) (INVOS 5100C; Medtronic, Boulder, CO, USA), bispectral index, and transesophageal echocardiography were monitored. Left and right rSO2 values before the induction of anesthesia were 74% and 75%, respectively.
A smaller-than-usual dose (8000 IU) of heparin was administered because activated clotting time (ACT) prior to heparin administration was extremely prolonged (> 999 seconds). ACT was assessed by using the HMS Plus system (Medtronic). Then, the left femoral artery, right subclavian artery, left femoral vein, and superior venae cavae were cannulated to establish CPB (MERA exceline CPB circuit; SENKO MEDICAL INSTRUMENT, Tokyo, Japan). There were no clinical signs of coagulopathy during opening of the chest or cannulation.
Following establishment of CPB, the patient was cooled to 25 °C tympanic temperature. Perfusion pressure was maintained at approximately 60 mmHg during CPB. Hemiarch replacement (replacement of the ascending aorta, proximal aortic arch, and right innominate artery) was performed by using the open distal anastomosis technique under circulatory arrest with brain protection by antegrade selective cerebral perfusion. The circulatory arrest time was 49 minutes. Moreover, aortic root replacement (Bentall procedure) was performed after reestablishing CPB via the graft anastomosed to the distal end. During the surgical procedure, the rSO2 value was maintained between 60% and 75%. ACT assessed every 30–60 minutes after the first heparin administration was unchanged, being > 999 seconds; therefore, additional heparin was not administered during surgery. There was no clinical problem during CPB.
After the CPB, 720 ml of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and protamine sulfate 200 mg were administered, then ACT decreased to 159 seconds. Moreover, oozing persisted after first administration of FFP and protamine; thus, 1200 ml of FFP, 800 ml of platelet concentrates (PC), fibrinogen concentrate 3 g, and tranexamic acid 2 g were needed after the CPB for hemostasis, and ACT was 137 seconds at the end of surgery. The bilateral rSO2 gradually decreased from the end of CPB and was approximately 40% at the end of surgery. The CPB time was 492 minutes; the operative time was 667 minutes; the anesthesia time was 739 minutes; the intraoperative urine volume was 1185 ml; and the bleeding volume was approximately 5500 ml. After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with artificial respiration.
A blood test performed soon after the surgery showed the following values: PLT 123 × 109/L, PT-INR 1.52, APTT 38.3 seconds, fibrinogen 124 mg/dl, and D-dimer 116 μg/ml. After arrival in the ICU, bleeding from the drains in the pericardial cavity continued, and red blood cells and FFP were administered. On the first postoperative day (POD 1), dilation of the pupils and loss of light reflex were observed. A head CT indicated diffuse cerebral edema, and a diagnosis of global cerebral infarction was made. Although FFP and PC were administered on an as-needed basis from POD 1 to POD 7, ACT had been prolonged to approximately 150–200 seconds without using heparin. An additional blood coagulation test performed at POD 9 indicated FXII deficiency (8.0%). At this point, global cerebral infarction was confirmed, and a poor prognosis was expected. Therefore, with written informed consent from the family of the patient, additional intervention for FXII deficiency was not performed. The patient died on POD 14.