A 33-year-old, right-handed female presented for continued follow-up due to worsening low back pain despite two previous lumbar surgeries. X-rays, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed evidence of her prior bilateral L5 laminectomy and L5-S1 disc space narrowing [-]. In addition, the MRI with contrast showed a significant fluid collection with midline fascial dehiscence, raising suspicion of possible infection. Blood work revealed elevated inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein), and a CT-guided biopsy of the collection grew Staphylococcus epidermidis. She was recommended to undergo an L5-S1 discectomy/ALIF. Notably, a vascular surgeon was included on the surgical team for assistance with opening, exposure of the L5-S1 disc space, and closure.
An L5-S1 discectomy and ALIF were performed. Of note, the bifurcation of the iliac vein and artery was located lower than expected, resulting in the left iliac vein lying directly over the L5-S1 disc, increasing the difficulty of the exposure. During the exposure of the L5-S1 disc space, the left iliac vein was noted to be bleeding; this was quickly stopped using Fibrillar hemostasis. This was followed by the completion of the L5-S1 discectomy/fusion that included placement of the femoral ring allograft and anterior screw-washer application in the sacrum to secure the graft.
Once the retractors were removed, the iliac vein was noted to be bleeding again, and the vascular surgeon sutured the left iliac vein laceration (i.e., without any compromise). However, physical examination demonstrated a slightly cool left foot, and after the arterial Doppler and pulse oximeter both confirmed weak pulse in the left lower extremity (i.e., likely attributed to arterial retraction injury), the vascular surgeon performed a left iliac artery embolectomy using a Fogarty catheter . This was accomplished by immediately administering IV heparin, followed by the performance of a transverse arteriotomy. A clot was removed from within the left iliac artery , and flow was quickly restored. The repeat Doppler confirmed good restoration of distal flow into the external iliac artery, a good pulse was felt in the common iliac artery, and the patient’s left foot was becoming warmer and pinker.
Following extubation, the patient was evaluated and demonstrated full motor function and sensation in all her toes. Close monitoring with repeated Doppler’s was performed to survey for potential recurrent/residual emboli. On postoperative day (POD) 2, the patient was taken back to the operating room for placement of percutaneous screws at the L5-S1 level. The rest of her stay was uneventful, including the absence of a left lower extremity deep venous thrombosis. Her intraoperative cultures showed no bacterial growth, and she was discharged home on POD 6. Three months later, she was asymptomatic, and imaging revealed solid fusion at the L5-S1 level .