Our patient was a 42-year-old Sri Lankan man from a mountainous region close to Kandy. The usual environmental temperature of the patient's hometown is around 30°C. He was unmarried and lived with his parents. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia for the past six years and was prescribed olanzapine 10 mg daily since then. He did not have a history of diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, stroke, ischemic heart disease, adrenal insufficiency, hypopituitarism or arthritis predisposing him to hypothermia.
He was admitted to our hospital because he was found unresponsive in his room. He had been well the previous night. There was no history of substance ingestion, head trauma or drug overdose. At presentation, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 8/15. He opened his eyes to pain and had no verbal response, but was able to localize pain. His pulse rate was 48 beats/minute and regular and was low in volume. His blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. His muscle tone was reduced, and reflexes in all four limbs were diminished with flexor plantar response. His oral temperature was 32°C. At the time of admission, his electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia with J waves .
His random venous plasma sugar was 130 mg/dL, thyroid-stimulating hormone level was 2.2 mu/L and free thyroxin level was 2.8 u/dL. The patient's blood urea nitrogen was 5.5 mmol/L, Na was 135 mmol/L, K was 4.4 mmol/L and complete blood count was normal. His chest X-ray and contrast computed tomography of the head were also unremarkable.
On the basis of the clinical findings, the patient's body temperature and ECG findings, the diagnosis of hypothermia was made. The patient did not have any risk factors for developing hypothermia except for the use of olanzapine.
He was rewarmed gradually with blankets and warm saline infusion. Olanzapine was discontinued. His level of consciousness, vital signs and cardiac rhythm were monitored. He gradually regained consciousness after 24 hours. After clinical improvement, the patient's body temperature was 38°C and the ECG changes had reversed .