A 58-year-old man with a complete spinal cord injury was referred to our hospital in August 2010 with a chief complaint of a severely inflamed abdominal mass. The spinal cord injury had resulted in the absence of sensation below the waist and chronic neurogenic bladder. The patient also had a history of an intracranial hemorrhage, from 4 years prior to his presentation, which had severely impaired some higher cognitive functions.
For bladder management, the patient had undergone a percutaneous cystostomy with placement of an indwelling catheter, about 35 years before his presentation. This was done due to the patient's difficulty performing clean, intermittent catheterization on a regular basis. The suprapubic cystostomy catheter was changed once a month at another urology clinic.
The physical examination revealed an abdominal mass surrounding a suprapubic cystostomy . The skin around the mass was erythematous, edematous, and a foul-smelling, purulent discharge was present . Blood analysis revealed the following abnormal values: albumin 2.3 g/dl, hemoglobin 8.6 g/dl, elevated white blood cells to 11,200/μl, and C-reactive protein 11.89 mg/dl. Urinalysis revealed leukocytes (< 100/HPF) and hematuria (50-99/HPF). Urine cytologic evaluation was class α and atypical squamous cells were seen on microscopic examination. Enhanced chest and abdominal CT showed a mass (72 mm × 63 mm) surrounding the suprapubic cystostomy and enlarged bilateral inguinal and para-aortic lymph nodes. Chest and anterior mediastinal lesions showed no specific findings. A cystoscopy could not be performed because the patient had a lower-extremity contracture deformity.
After the local inflammation of the abdominal mass was resolved with intravenous antibiotics, a percutaneous biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. The histopathological examination of the biopsy specimens from the tumor suggested SCC . Thus, stage IV (cT4N1M1) epidermal SCC was diagnosed and subsequently treated with palliative external radiation therapy. A dose of 56 Gy was administered over 5 weeks to the pelvic area including the primary tumor and inguinal metastatic lymph nodes. The primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes responded partially to this therapy. The period after radiotherapy was uneventful. The patient has remained asymptomatic during the subsequent 6 months.