A 50-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with a 9-day history of a high fever associated with palpitations and dry cough. He denied a sore throat, cervical pain, dyspnea, and stomachache. He had a 7-year history of Basedow’s disease previously treated with thiamazole, but had discontinued the medication more than one year before the current admission. The patient had chronic mild diarrhea and had lost 20 kg in the preceding 6 months. Additional past medical history included childhood asthma. The only regular medication taken by the patient was the discontinued thiamazole. The patient had smoked 1 pack of cigarettes a day for 30 years, but drank no alcohol. The only sexual contact was with his wife. He denied any sick contacts or recent travel.
On physical examination, the patient appeared anxious and was febrile (temperature, 39.1 °C). His blood pressure was 129/77 mmHg, pulse 131 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 34 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. He was alert and had an exophthalmos. On palpation, the thyroid gland was soft and diffusely enlarged, but non-tender with no skin redness or warmth . His cardiovascular examination revealed tachycardia and the lungs were clear to auscultation. His bowel sounds were hyperactive, but the abdomen was non-tender. Neurological examination yielded completely normal findings and no skin rash was present.
Initial laboratory results showed leukocytosis (11,360 white blood cells (WBC) /μL with neutrophils at 78.6%) and hyperthyroidism with TSH < 0.021 μIU/mL, F-T3 > 30.00 pg/mL, F-T4 at 8.88 ng/mL, and TSH receptor antibody 42.2 IU/L. Other significant laboratory findings were C-reactive protein (CRP) at 5.07 mg/dl, and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) at 5.6%. Test results for HBs antigen, HBs antibody, HCV antibody, and HIV antibody were not remarkable. There were normal findings on the urinalysis and chest X-ray findings. Echocardiography showed normal ejection fraction (64%) and no signs of valve vegetation.
After admission, the patient was initially diagnosed with thyroid storm (due to tachycardia, diarrhea, and thyroid hormone levels) and treatment with thiamazole (30 mg/day), hydrocortisone (200 mg/day), and potassium iodide (100 mg/day) was initiated. Due to the high fever and dry cough, he was also treated with ceftriaxone (CTRX) (2 g/day). Sputum and blood cultures were taken to determine the causative agent. After 80 h post admission, Gram-negative bacteria were cultured in two sets of aerobic blood culture bottles. Blood cultures were processed through the BACTEC FX system (Becton Dickinson, Sparks, Maryland). Gram staining of the cultured bacteria showed a spiral and curved shape, which was morphologically compatible with H. cinaedi . This identification was confirmed via matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOFMS). MALDI-TOFMS analysis was performed, using a MALDI Biotyper system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) as previously described . The pathogen was identified as H. cinaedi with a score of 2.0. The score of ≥2.0 was useful for identification to the species level. The sputum culture yielded no positive findings, including for acid-fast bacteria.
To determine the origin of the infection, we performed a whole-body contrast-enhanced CT scan and found a thyroid nodule in the right lobe . There was no other infection site identified and the size of the spleen was normal. The thyroid gland ultrasound examination showed high speed velocity in the thyroid vessels and a right lobe thyroid nodule that measured approximately 36 × 38 × 28 mm . When the patient was first diagnosed with Basedow’s disease 7 years previously, there was no thyroid cyst present at that time. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy revealed that the thyroid nodule contained a reddish purulent liquid with a total volume of 6 ml . Laboratory examination of the aspirated liquid revealed a total cell count of 40,000/μL with polymorphonuclear leukocytes 14,667/μL, lactate dehydrogenase 16,990 IU/L, protein 3.5 g/dL, pH level of 7.039, and glucose at 31 mg/dl. These findings were compatible with a diagnosis of bacterial abscess. Likely due to CTRX administration upon admission, the Gram staining and culture of the specimens yielded no bacteria including acid-fast bacteria. Hence, we analyzed the liquid via broad-range 16S rRNA gene polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Nucleic acids were extracted from the liquid using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Limburg, Netherlands) as specified by the manufacturer, and fragments of the 16S rRNA gene were PCR-amplified using universal primers. The PCR products were sequenced using an Applied Biosystems 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the primers used for PCR amplification. The amplified 16S rRNA sequence had the highest similarity to that of H. cinaedi [1441/1451 (99.31%) base pair matches in BLAST, and 1436/1438 (99.51%) base pair matches in Ez Taxon]. An additional file showed the result of the sequence in more detail [see Additional file ]. The patient was then diagnosed with H. cinaedi bacteremia and thyroid abscess complicated by uncontrolled Basedow’s disease.
After the determination of the causative pathogen, we changed antibiotics from CTRX to amoxicillin (AMPC) at 1.5 g/day. On admission day 4, the patient’s high fever, tachycardia, and diarrhea were improved. The serum levels of CRP and thyroid hormone were also improving. Blood cultures were drawn again on admission day 10 and were then negative. A laryngeal endoscopy was performed to check for any anatomical abnormalities and the findings were normal. The patient was discharged on admission day 24, and continued taking thiamazole (30 mg/day) and AMPC (1.5 g/day).
On follow-up in the outpatient clinic, the patient received both a thyroid echography and contrast-enhanced CT scan several times to ensure the abscess had not relapsed . The AMPC was taken for 6 months in total. There were no subsequent recurrences of thyrotoxic symptoms or infection. After the inflammation and infection were cleared, esophagography detected no anatomic anomalies such as pyriform sinus fistula. Seven months after diagnosis, the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy for the treatment of Basedow’s disease and to prevent recurrence of a thyroid abscess. The histopathology of the removed thyroid showed it was benign and did not have signs of the thyroid abscess. The patient is now taking levothyroxine for the management of hypothyroidism.