A 31-year-old man presented with symptoms of incomplete ileus (diffuse abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting and abdominal distension). The patient had no relevant past medical history. Abdominal CT scan showed a retroperitoneal mass of 7 × 7 × 5 cm extending along the left side of the aorta, compressing but not completely occluding the left renal vein . There were also lymph nodes with varied diameter around the mass, and regions with necrosis and calcifications. Physical examination, especially of the testes, was normal. The patient's serum α-fetoprotein (α-FP), β human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-hCG) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were normal, but scrotal ultrasonography (SUS) showed a normal right testis, while the left testis was small and contained an 8 mm suspicious hypo-echoic area associated with calcifications.
The patient had extensive resection of the retroperitoneal mass and lymphadenectomy. Histological examination showed a mass with a thin peripheral necrotic zone and associated dystrophic calcifications and persistent fibrous and inflammatory areas. The neoplastic cells had lymphoplasmacytic and eosinophilic infiltration, which varied in intensity, and numerous nuclear mitotic actions . Immunohistochemical analysis of the neoplastic cells showed a positive reaction to placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), showing a metastasis of a pure seminoma .
Histological examination of the testis after radical left orchidectomy showed a well-demarcated nodular scar. Many tubules had a Sertoli cell only pattern and others were completely hyalinized. Increased vascularity was manifested by a collection of small, atrophic, non-arborizing vessels. Testicular atrophy was demonstrated by shrunken tubules with decreased or absent spermatogenesis and thickened peritubular basement membranes peripheral to the scar . Testicular scarring and atrophy are diagnostic evidence of germ cell tumor regression in burned-out seminoma. The patient underwent additional chemotherapy.