A 64-year old, previously healthy, Asian woman presented with a 4-day history of fever, and multiple, between 1 and 3 cm in width, irregularly shaped, tender, red-color, palpable, non-scaly skin plaques over dorsal aspects of knees, elbows, and shins with ankle joint pain and left-sided painless red eye . There was no clinical proximal muscle weakness or racoon eyes. The rest of the examination was normal. Initially, an infectious etiology was suspected. She had high inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 117 mm after 1 hour, C-reactive protein (CRP) 168 mg/dl, white blood cells 12.5 × 103/µL, neutrophils 67%, but a negative septic screen, and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 72 U/L. She was promptly started on intravenous co-amoxiclav and oral ciprofloxacin to cover an infection. On further questioning, she had had a fever with a similar skin rash, involving upper arms and legs, treated in hospital for about a week 12 years ago for which the records were not available. However, she was treated for biopsy-proven erythema nodosum 5 years ago, which settled without any consequences. With this past medical history, Sweet syndrome was suspected, and she was started on oral methylprednisolone 16 mg daily while being on antibiotics. The symptoms improved dramatically in 2 days, and skin biopsy was not performed as the patient refused it with quick symptom resolution. However, diagnostic criteria were fulfilled and were pointing to a diagnosis of Sweet syndrome. The plaques disappeared completely, leaving only skin discoloration by 1 week . Inflammatory markers also improved significantly by 1 week; ESR 60 mm after 1 hour and CRP 8 mg/dl. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone 16 mg daily for 2 weeks, and it was tailed off over 6 weeks. A comprehensive set of investigations including liver biochemistry, serum amylase, blood picture, chest X-ray, and ultrasound (US) abdomen did not find any underlying secondary cause for the recurrent SS and EN in this patient. The patient was followed up 9 months after the current presentation, and she was asymptomatic with an ESR of 20 mm after 1 hour.