In October 2019, a 42-year-old woman with no previous relevant clinical history was admitted to a surgical unit due to the persistence of abdominal heaviness sensation during the last few months. A CT scan was performed, thus revealing a growing pelvic mass of 16 cm, suspected to be a gynecological malignancy. The patient subsequently underwent laparotomic total hysterectomy, and a radical excision of the neoplasm was performed. The first histologic exam, performed in a non-reference center, defined the lesion as a low-grade leiomyosarcoma of the uterus. Shortly thereafter, due to the rarity of the condition, the patient was referred at our cancer center (National Cancer Institute of Milan), where a pathologic review was performed Table .
The pathological report described a spindle cell neoplasm with mild to moderate cytological atypia, focal myxoid areas, and inflammatory infiltrate consisting of lymphocytes and eosinophilic granulocytes. Mitotic activity varied throughout the tumor (till 5–6 mitosis per 10 high power field).
Strong positivity for CD34, CD10 and p16 was detected on immunohistochemistry, with focal actin positivity and negative staining for desmin, caldesmon, BCL1, STAT-6, and B-COR .
Such findings were not compatible with a smooth muscle lesion and were unusual for an endometrial stromal lesion, so that a genomic test searching for chromosomal translocations was performed. While fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH)—testing was negative for translocations of JAZF1, BCOR and YWHAE genes, it showed the presence of an unbalanced PDGFB translocation and COL1A1::PDGFB fusion . A final diagnosis of COL1A1::PDGFB fusion associated uterine fibrosarcoma was thus rendered.
Two months after surgery whole body computed tomography (CT) excluded local recurrence or metastatic disease localization. Given the absence of distance metastases or local recurrence, as well as the low grade of the malignancy, a close follow-up program was selected.
Ten months after surgery, a whole body CT and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans showed disease recurrence to the right pelvic (18 mm) and left emipelvis (7 mm) .
Due to the evidence of recurrent disease, a multidisciplinary discussion was carried out with the gynecologists and abdominal surgeons. Because of the site of disease, radical surgery was considered too demolitive, and a systemic attempt was made. Considering the detection of COL1A1::PDGFB translocation, therapy with Imatinib at the dosage of 400 mg-daily p.o. was started. Unfortunately, due to an allergic reaction (non-itchy maculopapular erythema diffuse approximately over 30% of the skin surface without other associated symptoms), the drug was interrupted after 10 days. Once anti-histaminic and steroidal therapy was administered, the patient shortly recovered from the adverse event. We decided to keep TKI suspended until complete resolution of the adverse event.
Thirty days after imatinib discontinuation, a new CT and a PET scan were performed. Unexpectedly, an initial response to treatment was detected . Given the evidence of radiological response and the previous allergic reaction, it was decided, in agreement with gynecologists and abdominal surgeons, to resume Imatinib with an adequate steroidal and antihistaminic coverage (25 mg of Prednisone and 10 mg of Cetirizine).
A close monitoring program with monthly visits was initially set up so that clinical conditions could be monitored due to the prior allergic reaction. Subsequently, four-monthly program with abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was set up.
In October 2020, a new MRI showed a millimetric disease response in both lesion sites, starting a gradual trend of radiological response.
Two years later, a complete radiological response was achieved at MRI.
Treatment with imatinib is still ongoing with optimal tolerance. A decalage of the prednisone dosage was gradually made till the current dosage o 5 mg/daily. Instead, daily 10 mg of cetirizine therapy is still on. No more relevant adverse effects were reported.