A 70-year-old male first presented at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, in 2014 with refractory facial paralysis (House Brackmann VI) that had affected the right side for 2 months. No change in facial nerve function could be seen after intravenous therapy with cortisone , ceftriaxone and valacyclovir had been carried out externally for 10 days.
The previous medical history included canal wall down tympanoplasty of the right ear in 1966 due to cholesteatoma. Other symptoms, such as change in hearing, vertigo or tinnitus, were negated.
Clinical examination showed normal otoscopic findings after canal wall down tympanoplasty on the right side. The audiogram showed a severe combined hearing loss with a conductive component of 15 dB on the right side (unchanged during the course), while the left side was normal.
Laboratory examination was unremarkable, including the serology for Lyme´s disease and varicella zoster virus. An ultrasound scan of the parotid gland produced normal findings as well. Metabolic disorders such as diabetes were excluded and a routine ophthalmologic examination was also normal.
The facial nerve electromyogram, performed 3 months after the onset of symptoms, showed no signs of degeneration or reinnervation.
An MRI scan was performed, and recurrent cholesteatoma on the right side was suggested. Additionally, the facial nerve demonstrated contrast enhancement and thickening proximal to the geniculate ganglion up to the peripheral nerve endings; neuritis was assumed. No signs of tumors of the cerebellopontine angle or other intracranial tumors could be detected.
As the routine work-up did not show the cause of the FNP, other differentials had to be considered. Due to the suspicion of recurrent cholesteatoma, surgical exploration of the right mastoid was performed and a small cholesteatoma was removed. Surprisingly, the bony facial canal was intact and no contact with the facial nerve could be seen. It was concluded that this finding could not be regarded as the cause of the FNP. Facial nerve decompression was not performed due to the long segment enhancement of the facial nerve.
Recommended follow-up appointments were not kept for 1 year. At his next visit 1 year after onset of symptoms, the patient complained of a new onset of hypesthesia on the right side of the face in the trigeminal supply territory (V2 + 3).
As the patient had swallowing problems, the renewed clinical examination showed an impaired gag reflex. Contrast swallow showed an insufficiency of the upper esophageal sphincter. Due to this finding and the backdrop phenomenon, an affection of the glossopharyngeal nerve was suspected. As transnasal fiberoptic examination showed aspiration the patient received no more oral nutrition from this point on, and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube was placed.
Extensive neurological examinations (gross examination, somatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs), electroencephalography (EEG), Doppler ultrasound, lumbar puncture, autoimmune testing, plasmapheresis) were carried out to exclude further differentials, but still no diagnosis could be found.
MRI was repeated, demonstrating abnormal contrast enhancement of the facial and trigeminal nerve and a diffuse contrast-enhancing lesion inside the right parotid gland . Explorative surgery of the parotid gland was performed and multiple biopsies were taken from the corresponding areas. Histologically, the biopsies showed no signs of malignancy or inflammation.
After discussing options with the patient, the main stem of the facial nerve was resected.
Histologically, the facial nerve was found to be infiltrated by squamous cell carcinoma growing in minute nests and cords very reminiscent of microcystic adnexal carcinoma (MAC) of the skin, but with pure squamoid differentiation . A primary infiltration of the facial nerve with subsequent spreading to the trigeminal and glossopharyngeal nerve via neuroanastomoses was suspected.
An 18-Fluoro-deoxyglucose-Positron-Emission-Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET-CT) showed no new focus, signs of metastases or any other primary tumor.
As surgical treatment was not an option due to the perineural growth of the tumor, radiochemotherapy was recommended at our interdisciplinary tumor conference and was realized (up to a total dose of 66.6 Gy); chemotherapy was also given with CDDP (Cisplatin)).