A 12-year-old Syrian girl was referred to the Damascus University’s Children’s Hospital for recurrent pneumonia and bronchitis. Her mother had noted an absence of tears when crying since birth, diffused pigmentations since birth, especially on the cheeks and genitals, repeated vomiting of both solid and liquid foods, and asthma. The mother also mentioned that the child’s cousin had had similar symptoms.
On physical examination, the child showed fatigue with pigmentation on her lips, hyperpigmentation on the nose and under the right eye, signs of growth failure (weight: 25.5 kg; height: 133 cm), dyspnea with a respiratory rate of 40–45 breaths per minute, substernal intercostal retractions, hyperpigmentation on genitals, digital clubbing, and hyperkeratosis on the palms and soles. Results of the neurological examination were normal, and the patient’s psychomotor development was also normal.
The blood tests results were: Na+, 136 mmol/l; creatinine, 0.6 mg/dl; and urea, 21 mg/dl. Immunoglobulin levels were normal.Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax showed massive dilation of the esophagus and bilateral pulmonary infiltration. Barium swallow test showed massive dilation in the esophagus associated with a tightening in the lower esophageal sphincter (bird beak sign).
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed severe dilation in the esophageal lumen with a contraction in the lower esophageal sphincter that continues to the stomach, which confirmed the diagnosis. The patient’s cortisol and ACTH levels were tested to determine the cause of the cutaneous lesions and the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency .
An opthalmologic consultation was done to determine the cause of tear absence. The patient was found to have visual ability of 10/10 in both eyes, eye dryness was present, and tear break-up time was 2 seconds. Defects in the lower epithelium of the eyes were also present. Schirmer’s test was unavailable. Based on these findings, alacrimia was diagnosed.
The patient was diagnosed with triple A syndrome, which consists of alacrimia, achalasia, and adrenal insufficiency and treated accordingly. For the alacrimia, artificial tears or Viscotears liquid gel drops 5 times a day (Bausch & Lomb, Laval, QB, Canada) were prescribed. For the adrenal insufficiency, hydrocortisone (15–30 mg/m2) was prescribed, and ACTH levels were checked every 6 months. For the achalasia, Heller cardiomyotomy was performed, with a 7-cm longitudinal myotomy.
The medical team contacted the patient after 3 years. Her mother reported the disappearance of the skin lesions, and that the vomiting has stopped (Heller’s operation outcome) and that she is maintaining the child on her medication.