A 52-year-old perimenopausal, multiparous woman with gravida 4, para 4 came to an Emergency Department at Chitwan Medical College Teaching Hospital (CMC-TH) with complaints of something coming out of vagina suddenly after mild heavyweight lifting and pain abdomen for 4 hours. Her last menstrual period was 18 days back and menstrual bleeding was lighter. She was having irregular and longer cycles since last 1.5 year. She had Pap smear done 4 months back. The report was negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy.
No urinary or bowel complaints, chronic cough, constipation, past medical history and family history of malignancy, and any previous cervical surgery. She had all vaginal deliveries. General physical and systemic examination was unremarkable. Abdomen was soft and non-tender on palpation. Pelvic examination revealed a second-degree cervical prolapse with a mass coming out of introitus. Mass was firm to soft in consistency and slightly reducible. Uterus was parous size, mobile, firm, mildly tender, and the fornices were free. Initial differential diagnosis was uterovaginal prolapse and cervical fibroid. Tumors markers such as, cancer antigen 125, cancer antigen 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen were within normal limits. Transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated a multicystic cervical mass of size 9.5 cm × 8.0 cm arising from the posterior lip of cervix that was protruding through the vaginal canal. The differential diagnosis made after transvaginal ultrasonography was nabothian cyst and cervical leiomyoma with multicystic degeneration causing uterine prolapse. The uncertainty of diagnosis still existed after imaging hence; laparoscopic biopsy was performed before definitive surgery to confirm malignancy. Benign lesion (nabothian cyst) was confirmed on biopsy. Thus, excision of the mass was planned. Per operative finding was a polypoid mass arising from the posterior lip of cervix. After excision of mass, prolapse became first degree. The cystic mass was sent for HPE. The patient was informed and counseled about the possibility of requirement of further surgical intervention if the first degree uterine prolapse progresses, and affects her quality of life.
On gross examination the mass was large; measuring 9.5 cm × 8.0 cm. Focal epidermidization with an ulcer was observed on external surface. Cut section showed multiloculated, cystic spaces of varying size filled with mucinous material . On microscopy, the outer cyst wall was lined by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium and the inner cyst wall was lined by single layer of ciliated low columnar epithelium without cellular atypia ( and ). Histopathological diagnosis was a huge cervical nabothian cyst. At postoperative follow up after 1 week, 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months; first-degree cervical prolapse was still persisting along with posterior vaginal wall prolapse (coming up into the introitus). Hence, vaginal hysterectomy with repair to the vaginal wall was performed.