A 10-year-old Arabic boy was referred to the rheumatology clinic with a presumptive diagnosis of JIA. He was previously healthy up to seven years of age when he presented with arthralgia, swollen joints, and a decreased range of motion in his proximal and distal interphalangeal joints. He also had morning stiffness lasting up to one hour that had partially improved with naproxen. These findings progressed over a few months after onset and extended to the hips, knees, and ankles, and he eventually developed severe valgus deformity of his knees. His medical, prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal histories were unremarkable. There was no history of recurrent infections. His family reported normal vision, hearing, speech, and normal school performance. He underwent extensive evaluation in multiple centers without definitive diagnosis. He was started elsewhere on oral methotrexate once weekly and has been on it for over a year without clinical response.
The family history revealed consanguineous parents. His father is Arabic and has two sisters and two brothers who are all healthy. His mother is Arabic and has one healthy sister and six healthy brothers. She had six pregnancies, and the proband is the youngest of his siblings. The first child died in infancy from birth complications, and the second pregnancy ended in miscarriage. The third and fifth pregnancy outcomes were a healthy female and male, currently aged 21 and 16 years, respectively. The fourth pregnancy outcome was a female currently aged 18 years old with a similar arthritic phenotype. The maternal grandmother and paternal grandmother are siblings, and their parents are consanguineous. They have a sister who had six offspring; four of them have debilitating arthropathy of unknown etiology with severe disability.
On physical examination, the proband had normal vital signs. His height was at the 10th percentile, and his weight was at the 75th percentile. His cardiovascular, chest, abdominal, and integumentary examinations were unremarkable. Additionally, his neurological examination was unremarkable, his muscle strength was normal, and his temporomandibular joint was normal. The upper extremity evaluation revealed decreased internal/external rotation range of motion of the shoulders and decreased range of motion with swelling, pain, limitation of the elbows and restriction of pronation and supination of the forearms. The hands and fingers are shown in Fig. a. The lower extremity evaluation revealed a severely restricted range of motion of the hips and restricted range of motion of both knees and ankles with swelling and deformities. His toes were deformed and swollen with restricted range of motion. He had no sacroiliac joint tenderness. He had a lordotic posture and decreased range of motion of the cervical spine. He also had a waddling gait.
The evaluation in our hospital revealed an unremarkable complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) level as well as normal tests for liver and kidney functions. The antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, and HLA-B27 tests were negative. Immunoglobulin IgA, IgM, and IgG levels were normal. Chest radiographs, detailed ophthalmology exams, and cardiology evaluations, including electrocardiography and echocardiography exams, were all normal. The skeletal survey and imaging findings were consistent with PPRD . Genetic testing was performed at GeneDx laboratory, USA . DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood obtained from the proband, mother, father, healthy brother, and an affected sister. The entire exomes of all five family members were captured and sequenced on an Illumina (San Diego, USA) platform. Paired end reads were aligned to the human genome (build GRCh37/hg19), and variants were called, annotated, and filtered using a custom-made pipeline. Segregation analysis was performed to establish a diagnosis in the proband and, possibly, the affected sister. The proband and affected sister carried a novel homozygous frameshift pathogenic variant (c.707delG; p.Ser236Thrfs*5) in the WISP3 gene (NM_003880.3). The parents were heterozygous, while the unaffected brother did not carry this variant. This variant causes a frameshift starting at position 236 and introduces a premature stop codon 5 amino acids downstream. This is then expected to lead to a truncated or absent protein. Bi-allelic loss of function of the WISP3 gene is an established disease mechanism in PPRD (OMIM #208230).
Interestingly, the affected sister was also homozygous for a pathogenic missense variant (c.2230G > T; p.Ala744Ser) in the MEFV gene (NM_000243.2), while the mother, father, and proband were all heterozygous for the same variant. The unaffected brother did not carry this variant. The proband and the affected sister do not have any noticeable clinical phenotype for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF).