A 56-year-old Caucasian Italian woman was admitted to our hospital for abdominal distension and pelvic pain. Ten years earlier she had undergone right radical nephrectomy for a stage-I clear cell carcinoma. Following the operation, the patient had not received any adjuvant chemotherapy, but no metastatic cancer was detected at any step of the follow-up.
Clinical examination revealed no obvious abdominal or pelvic masses, while blood tests showed a significant increase in Ca-125 (1006 U/ml).
A transvaginal ultrasound examination showed ascites in all pelvic quadrants. Both ovaries were small, presenting cystic areas not larger than 3 centimeters . Color-Doppler US showed some vessels with a low resistance index (RI = 0.8).
An abdomino-pelvic multislice CT scan (Sensation 16, Siemens) was performed with acquisitions in the portal phase (70 seconds delay) after I.V. administration of non-ionic iodinate contrast agent (Xenetix 350, Guerbet).
The CT study clarified the extent of the ascites (involving the whole abdomen and pelvis) and revealed the presence of ovarian bilateral masses with regular margins and poor contrast enhancement .
There were no tumor recurrences around the nephrectomy site, nor any intra-abdominal or pelvic lymphadenopathies.
A laparoscopic hysterectomy with double oophorectomy was performed. Macroscopically, it looked like both ovaries had been completely replaced by a solid/cystic yellowish mass with multiple hemorrhagic areas.
On microscopic examination, both masses were populated by polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm and relatively uniform nuclei, some of them exhibiting prominent nucleoli. Tumor cells were arranged in solid sheets and tubular areas, often dilated and containing eosinophilic fluid or blood. In both tubular and solid areas prominent thin-walled blood vessels were recognized . The ascitic fluid was free of malignant cells. Immunohistochemistry of the masses revealed strong and diffuse expression of EMA, cytokeratin, vimentin and CD 10 in tumor clear cells . Immunostainings for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, inhibin, CA 125, PLAP, estrogen and progesterone receptors, calretinin, WT1, hepatocyte paraffin 1 and CD 34 were uniformly negative for tumor cells.
Based on morphologic findings and cancer cell phenotype, the diagnosis was bilateral ovarian metastases from the known renal clear cell carcinoma.
Chemotherapy as an adjuvant treatment was offered, but the patient declined in view of unpleasant collateral effects.
She is currently alive with no evidence of disease 19 months after the diagnosis of relapse.