An 85-year-old male Caucasian with pseudo-exfoliative glaucoma (PEXG), defined as an abnormal accumulation of fibrillo-granular protein (“pseudoexfoliation material”) produced in the eye , was referred to our ophthalmology unit (Azienda USL – IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy) with a raised IOP on maximum topical treatment. Four months earlier, the patient had undergone cataract surgery in another hospital. According to the available medical records, phacoemulsification surgery was uneventful, with the implantation of a single-piece intraocular lens (IOL) in the capsular bag. Preoperatively, the axial length was 23.46 mm, the anterior chamber depth was 3.52 mm, and the patient was not hyperopic.
When we first examined the patient, his visual acuity was 20/20 (Snellen) unaided, and the IOP, measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry (Haag-Streit, Koeniz, Switzerland), was 25 mmHg despite three glaucoma drugs. Anterior segment examination showed a clear cornea, a deep anterior chamber, and a well-centred IOL in the posterior chamber. Typical pigment loss from the pupil margin was present (“moth eaten pupil”). Gonioscopy using a Goldmann three-mirror lens revealed an open angle with no synechiae and Sampaolesi’s line, defined as pigment deposition anterior to Schwalbe’s line, in all quadrants. Dilated fundoscopy showed optic disc cupping and neuroretinal rim thinning.
Thus, GATT was planned using the technique described by Grover et al. . Briefly, a 2.2-mm limbal incision was created at the clear temporal cornea. The surgeon visualised the nasal angle using a Swan–Jacob goniolens with proper orientation of the microscope and the patient’s head. The anterior chamber was filled with a cohesive viscoelastic material (Healon GV® Pro, Johnson & Johnson Vision, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). A 1- to 2-mm goniotomy was performed at the nasal angle using a 20-gauge sclerotome. The distal tip of an illuminated microcatheter (iTRACK, Ellex iScience Inc., Fremont, CA, USA) was inserted into the Schlemm’s canal at the goniotomy site and advanced circumferentially. Once the distal tip of the catheter circumnavigated the canal for 360°, the catheter was retrieved and externalised, creating an ab interno complete trabeculotomy. The viscoelastic material was rinsed, and the anterior chamber was half-filled with a dispersive viscoelastic substance (Eyefill, Bausch & Lomb, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) to tamponade bleeding from the angle. No intraoperative complications were recorded. One day after surgery, the patient presented ocular pain, blurred visual acuity reduced to counting fingers, and an IOP of 55 mmHg, as measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry (Haag-Streit, Koeniz, Switzerland). During slit-lamp examination, peripheral and central anterior chamber (AC) depth were reduced (Van Herick grade 1; Fig. A, B, and C) with a closed angle at gonioscopy (Shaffer grade 0). Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) (SL-OCT; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) revealed anterior displacement of the iris-lens diaphragm with a shallow anterior chamber of 2.43 mm. Posterior-segment B-scan ultrasonography showed no vitreous or choroidal abnormalities. According to the UBM description of Trope et al. , a diagnosis of pseudophakic malignant glaucoma was made.
The patient was initially treated with 250 ml of 20% mannitol intravenous infusion, oral acetazolamide, topical beta-blockers, alpha agonists, and cycloplegics. On the same day, peripheral neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd: YAG) laser iridotomy, central posterior capsulotomy, and hyaloidotomy were performed with no resolution of symptoms and signs.
A single-port 25-gauge pars plana anterior vitrectomy was performed the following day without complications. On postoperative day 1, the IOP was 12 mmHg with no hypotensive medications. One month after surgery, the AC was deep, and the IOP was 10 mmHg without drugs. One year after surgery, the corrected visual acuity was 20/20 (Snellen), the IOP was 12 mmHg without antiglaucoma medications, the AC depth was 4.49 mm as measured at AS-OCT , gonioscopy showed an open angle without irido-trabecular synechiae (Shaffer grade 4), and AS-OCT and UBM showed a normal AC configuration . No further complications were observed during the postoperative period.