A 37-year-old asymptomatic female patient was referred to our hospital with an enlarged cardiac silhouette found on her screening chest X-ray . She had no history of cardiovascular disease. She had a spontaneous abortion 3 years previously, and she is a mother of three children. She has a positive family history of cardiovascular diseases and cancer (lung adenocarcinoma and brain tumour). Physical examination revealed distant heart sounds, a regular rate and rhythm. The echocardiographic examination revealed pericardial effusion and an inhomogeneous mobile mass located in the pericardial sac around the left ventricle . Subsequently, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed an intrapericardial, semilunar-shaped mass with a size of 10 × 4 × 9 cm attached to the pulmonary trunk surrounding the aortic root, left atrium and left ventricle . The tumour had well-demarcated margins and did not invade the blood vessels or myocardium. The caudal part of the tumour was mobile, while its cranial part was fixed to the pulmonary trunk (Additional file ). The MRI scan detected intermediate signal intensity on proton density-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted spectral fat saturation inversion recovery (SPIR) images . Both first-pass perfusion and early and late gadolinium-enhanced (LGE) images showed that the mass was vascularized and showed septated, patchy, inhomogeneous LGE . Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed to see whether the coronary arteries were affected. The coronary CTA proved that coronaries were not invaded by the tumour . We have evaluated the previous screening chest X-rays of the patient that were acquired during the past 10 years. Based on these chest X-rays, we can conclude that the mass had started to form at least 7 years ago . No abnormalities were found by the abdominal ultrasound examination, the results of hormone tests were normal, and a hormone-secreting nature of the tumour was excluded. Open heart surgery was indicated through median sternotomy . The intraoperative findings confirmed the MRI and coronary CTA results. The tumour was intrapericardial, attached to the lateral wall of the pulmonary trunk, 2 cm distal from the commissures of the pulmonary valve. The tumour did not invade any other structures of the heart. Complete resection of the tumour with partial resection of the pulmonary trunk was performed using cardiopulmonary bypass. The pulmonary trunk was reconstructed with a round-shaped bovine pericardial patch . The intra- and postoperative course were uneventful. Histological evaluation of the septated, cystic mass revealed tumour cells forming an irregular pattern, the so-called “patternless pattern” . Immunohistochemically, the cells tested positive for vimentin, CD34, CD99 and STAT6 but negative for keratin (AE1-AE3), CD31 and S100. Thus, the diagnosis of a primary cardiac solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) was established. The tumour was classified as non-malignant because of the lack of increased mitotic activity, an intact capsule and no sign of vascular invasion. Regular and long-term clinical and MRI follow-up were indicated (every 6 months in the first year, later annually) because of the risk of late local recurrence. At the 3-year follow-up, the patient had no symptoms, and MRI did not show recurrence of the tumour . The patient’s clinical history is summarized in a timeline, prepared in accordance with CARE guideline (Additional file ).