A 68-year-old Caucasian woman presented with an ulceration of the anterior surface of her left leg. Thirty years earlier, at exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis, our patient underwent therapy for a similar lesion located on her left forearm, diagnosed as pyoderma gangrenosum. Since then, the rheumatoid arthritis had been quiescent and had not required any therapy, and at admission there were no signs of recurrence. A physical examination showed an ulcerating tumor involving the lower quadrants of her left breast. The breast lump had appeared four years earlier, progressed rapidly within the last month and at diagnosis was clinically staged at T4aN1M0. A histopathology examination showed invasive ductal breast carcinoma, with estrogen receptor expression in 90 percent of the tumor cells, and no expression of progesterone receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2). A biopsy specimen from the edge of the leg ulceration showed pyoderma gangrenosum: an intensive mixed inflammatory infiltrate including mainly neutrophils, with accompanying vessel destruction and necrosis of the epithelium . First-line therapy for pyoderma gangrenosum included a combination of dapsone (100mg/d orally) and prednisone (an increasing dose of 20 to 30mg/d orally), accompanied by a topical application of 2 percent detreomycin ointment and silicon dressing. After four months, due to further progression, cyclosporine administration was introduced at a starting dose of 300mg/d, decreasing to 100mg/d. Therapy was stopped after three months due to nephrotoxicity and microcytic anemia. Subsequent immunosuppressive therapy included sulfasalazin (3g/d orally) accompanied by topical management with potassium permanganate and 5 percent detreomycin ointment. Due to social factors, breast cancer treatment was initiated only five months after the diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum. Since our patient was diagnosed with strongly estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer with no life-threatening symptoms, a typical first-line induction endocrine therapy with aromatase inhibitor - letrozole - at a daily dose of 2.5mg was introduced. By this time, the leg ulceration had reached its largest dimension . A partial response of the breast tumor was accompanied by continuous healing of her leg ulceration and after 12 months, the lesion completely resolved with scarring. As our patient refused mastectomy, a wide tumor excision was performed, however, postoperative radiotherapy was not applied due to a concern of excessive skin toxicity and activation of pyoderma gangrenosum in the irradiated area. After surgery, our patient finished five years of adjuvant letrozole therapy with complete response. Her leg ulceration has not recurred.