A 50-year old man, a former smoker, employed as vehicle body painter 25 years ago, used to work with an acrylic enamel tint – DuPont Refinish Centari Tintings. 17 years later, he began to exhibit urticaria and facial angioedema after work exposure. These symptoms were resolved after treatment with antihistamines. The last 8 years he experienced also cough, breathlessness, wheezing, sneezing, nasal obstruction and excessive production of mucus. The symptoms occurred 15–20 minutes after exposure to acrylic enamel tint at the workplace and persisted usually until the evening, or at times, up to two consecutive days. The use of inhaled adrenergic bronchio-dilatators and steroids relived the symptoms within two hours. In fact, he irregularly used to inhale budesonide in case of clinical deteriorations. He had used an oronasal mask to avoid tint for four years. The subject experienced different respiratory obstructive symptoms such as nasal obstruction and excessive production of mucus, sneezing, as well as dispnoea and chest tightness, if he discontinued the using of the face mask at workplace.
Spirometry showed normal ventilatory function in the non-working days. A significant reduction in forced expiratory volume at first second (FEV1) (50%), functional vital capacity (FVC) (67%) and peak expiratory flow (PEF) (75%) was observed after work exposure. The above mentioned respiratory functional parameters were normalized after the use of inhalant bronchio-dilatators and steroids. Consequently, within two hours the symptoms were resolved. Skin prick tests with common aeroallergens were negative. Blood test and radiological examinations were within normal limits. There was no familial history of atopy.
In addition, three years ago he developed an anaphylactic reaction due to peanut consumption. The patient manifested classical symptoms of anaphylaxis as urticaria, angioedema and dispnoea. He showed a marked clinical improvement only after four hours of treatment in hospital. Some months later, the patient underwent the oral challenge test with peanuts and 20 minutes later, he developed labial itching, as well as orbital and perioral angioedema. Afterwards, he followed a strict peanut elimination diet. All these findings confirm the diagnoses of occupational asthma and rhinitis due to isocyanates and peanut anaphylactic reaction.