A 37-year-old woman was diagnosed with relapsing–remitting MS and treated initially with natalizumab, a humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody that selectively inhibits adhesion molecules, preventing leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells . Subsequently, she was treated with fingolimod, a sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator that prevents the egress of cells from secondary lymphoid tissues . IVGC were administered during exacerbations. Seven years after the initial diagnosis, due to increased MS activity, i.v. ALTZ was administered in two courses: 12 mg/day for five consecutive days, followed 1 year later by another cycle of 12 mg/day for 3 consecutive days.
After about 2 years from the last dose of ALTZ, the patient developed hyperthyroidism with detectable serum TRAb. She was an ex-smoker and had no family history of thyroid disease. Her thyroid scintigraphy scan showed diffusely increased thyroid technetium-99m uptake, and thyroid ultrasound revealed typical features of GD; thus, she was put on methimazole therapy. One year after the onset of GD, she developed progressive moderate-to-severe active TED, and was treated with weekly IVGC: methylprednisolone 4.5 g total cumulative dose .
Despite therapy, her TED remained active. One month after the end of steroid treatment, the patient was referred to our TED Centre for further therapeutic management and presented the following characteristics: CAS 4, proptosis right/left eye 27/26 mm, intermittent diplopia, and lid retraction right/left eye 14/15 mm. Due to frequent fluctuations in thyroid function on methimazole treatment only, she was promptly commenced on the block and replace therapy with methimazole and levothyroxine, achieving good control of her hyperthyroidism. One month later, the CAS increased to 8, and she presented with proptosis 27.5/28 mm, intermittent diplopia, and lid retraction 10/12 mm. She was then treated with 500 mg i.v. RTX, which was well tolerated. After 1month, her TED was inactive, presenting a CAS of 3, proptosis 26/25 mm, constant diplopia, and lid retraction 10/12 mm. Two months after treatment, her CAS dropped to 1, while her proptosis (26/25 mm) and diplopia had remained stable; her lid retraction was slightly improved (9/10 mm). Ten months after RTX treatment, she underwent total thyroidectomy and achieved stable euthyroidism on levothyroxine replacement therapy. After only one dose of RTX treatment, TED remained persistently inactive and stable (CAS 0; proptosis 25/23.5 mm, constant diplopia), with further improvement of lid retraction (7/9 mm) up to 18 months of follow-up. The patient did not develop any infections or other complications secondary to the combination of immunomodulating therapies. summarizes the patient’s clinical evolution.