A 38-year-old female patient without any known personal or familial medical background presented with a 1 month history of fatigue, weakness, loss of weight and fever. Physical examination and CT scan showed mild splenomegaly (data not shown). Initial laboratory evaluation of peripheral blood revealed a white blood cell (WBC) of 3.1 × 109/l (15% were of blasts), red blood cells (RBC) 4.27 × 106/mm3, hemoglobin level of 11.7 g/dl and a platelet count of 156 × 109/l. Biochemistry analyses revealed serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) value was 893.2 U/l (normal value up to 480 U/l); serum aspartate aminotrasferase (AST) level was 42 U/l (normal up to 45 U/l); and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level was 122 U/l (normal up to 45 U/l). Total serum protein was within normal range at 7.1 gm/dl (normal value 6.4–8.3 gm/dl) but serum albumin was 4.2 gm/dl (normal value 3.2–5 gm/dl). Ferritin value was 1349 (13–150 ng/ml). Bone marrow aspiration revealed 95% of blasts. At this point the first cytogenetic and immunophenotypic data were determined; simultaneously she had been diagnosed as having B-ALL based on clinical and pathological data. Treatment with hyper-CVAD for overall 10 months was initiated. The patient did not respond to that treatment and suffered from hematuria, right eye vision deterioration, gastrointestinal bleeding, and fever; she received blood transfusion many times, and her peripheral blood (PB) showed pancytopenia. One month after initiation of hyper-CVAD treatment her PB reached a short amelioration of different cell counts (WBC, plt, RBC) together with severe diarrhea, fatigue and weakness. One week later the patient showed pancytopenia again with diarrhea, severe stomach heart burn and fever. After one month the BM smear showed less than 40% blats cells with hypocellularity and BM suppression. She received cortisone, and two months later BM revealed again / still pancytopenia, suppression and myelofibrosis. After another two months BM regenerated and WBC count was 66 × 109/l (90% were blasts). Nonetheless, the patient succumbed due to unknown causes whilst under treatment. Her cousin agreed with scientific evaluation of her case and the study was approved by the ethical committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, Damascus, Syria.