A 68-year-old man with 21-year history of type 2 diabetes presented with an ulcer on the left heel. Height was 162 cm; body weight was 69 kg; body mass index was 26.3. The patient had been diagnosed with lower extremity atherosclerotic obliterans 7 years earlier. The left lower limb has been numb for 6 years, with intermittent claudication and rest pain for 1 year. The patient reported that his sleep was affected, but his degree of pain was decreased with the intermittent use of analgesic agents. For the left lower limb with claudication, walking distance was 90 m.
The patient was hospitalized on 10 July 2017. Twenty days before hospitalization, irritation and pain developed on the lateral skin of the toes of the left foot, with no obvious inducement. Purulent exudate was observed after skin ulceration, and the patient’s body temperature increased to 39.5 °C. During hospitalization, the five toes of the left foot were black, necrotic, and associated with aggravated rest pain. Although the dose of oral analgesics was increased, the patient’s pain was not relieved, and his sleep was severely affected.
The patient’s appearance on initial evaluation is shown in Fig. a and b. The five toes of the left foot were almost entirely black and necrotic. The skin extending from the bottom of the foot to the 5th metatarsophalangeal joint was red and swollen, with obvious tenderness; skin temperature was normal. The muscles of the left foot had clearly atrophied; the skin was thin, bright, and hypertonic. Incision and drainage (approx. 5.0-cm long) was immediately performed between the 4th and 5th toes. Necrotic tissue, minimal purulent exudation, and limited bleeding were observed.
The diagnostic results on obtained on July 13 are shown.Secretion cultures displayed Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. X-ray film showed in Fig. c and d revealed no obvious destruction in foot bone. The lower limb computed tomographic angiography (CTA) is shown in Fig. e.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the foot obtained on July 14th is shown in Fig. f and g. Subcutaneous inflammatory tissue in the lateral 5th humerus bone was confirmed as an infectious submerged cavity . The first incision performed at the bedside resulted in limited purulent exudation, as well as decreased local tension and reduced foot swelling. However, progressive necrosis of the skin margin was noted .
On July 17, basal therapy consisted in controlling blood sugar with insulin (58 units/day). The initial antimicrobial application of ceftazidime infusion (2 g, twice daily) was replaced by the sensitive drug Sulperazon (Cefoperazone Sodium and Sulbactam Sodium for Injection, Pfizer), according to the bacterial culture result of the secretion, and the application of antibiotics was stopped after July 22. The patient showed improved circulation and blood pressure. Treatment was maintained with protein and iron supplements.
On July 18th, interventional therapy was performed on the lower limb. The balloon was expanded in the superficial femoral artery, anterior tibia artery, iliac artery, and tendon. A thrombus had formed in the lower segment of the superficial femoral artery. The catheter for thrombolysis was left in place until July 20 . Skin temperature in the left foot increased, and swelling extended to the center of the foot. The amount of purulent exudation increased, as did pain and body temperature. The foot was therefore incised and drained, once more. Multiple subcavities were found .
On July 21st, we performed patella truncation and debridement on toes 4 and 5. The procedure was performed in the operating room, with the patient under sciatic nerve block. Results are presented in Fig. . Submerged cavities were filled with povidone-iodine gauze. The amount of nonviable tissue in the submerged cavity gradually decreased. The submerged space became shallow, and the granulation filled. All subsequent treatments were performed in the outpatient department.
From July 25th to September 30th, the left foot plaster was fixed at a functional position and applied intermittently . After October 1st, the plaster was removed. The patient was given diabetic shoes, and walking was guided. The first signs of wound healing were observed on November 19 .