A 34-year-old Chinese woman presented with a painless neck mass that had persisted for over a month. Physical examination on admission revealed a solid nodule with a clear boundary, measuring approximately 4 cm, in the left lobe of the thyroid. The serum levels of thyroglobulin were high (180.3 ng/mL, normal reference range: 3.5–77 ng/mL), as were the levels of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (529.7 IU/mL, normal reference range: 0–115 IU/mL). Other indices of thyroid function were normal. Ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic mass, 4.28 × 2.53 cm in size, in the left lobe of the thyroid gland. The mass showed clear boundaries and a rich blood flow signal . Fine-needle aspiration biopsy revealed that it could be an inflammatory hyperplastic lesion, and a left lobectomy was performed subsequently. During surgery, a solid mass, 5 × 3 cm2 in size, was observed in the middle of the left lobe of the thyroid. The mass had a smooth surface and clear boundaries, and there was no break in the thyroid capsule.
The greatest diameter of the mass was 4.0 cm. Macroscopically, the lesion was a gray-brown nodular mass with a partial envelope and did not infiltrate the surrounding thyroid parenchyma.
Histologically, we found two different lesions. The first lesion showed classic spindle cell proliferation, with spindle cells arranged in fascicles, accompanied by a uniform distribution of mature inflammatory cells such as plasma cells and lymphocytes . These spindle cells did not have any mitotic figures, and the nuclei were slightly pleomorphic . Focally, the stroma contained abundant hyalinized collagen. Some cells were rich in cytoplasm and were translucent, resembling histocytes . The other lesion showed a large number of lymphocyte infiltrates, with lymphoid follicles in the remaining thyroid gland, which was atrophic . There was a clear boundary between the two lesions. Careful observation showed that the trapped residual thyroid follicular cells had no characteristic cytological findings of papillary carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical analysis for thyroglobulin (TG), Galectin-3, CK19, CyclinD1, TTF-1, and EMA was performed to rule out the possibility of spindle cell variants of undifferentiated carcinoma of the thyroid. Of these molecules, only TTF-1 was expressed. Furthermore, CD34, S100, Bcl-2, and STAT-6 expression was negative, ruling out the possibility of a solitary fibrous tumor and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST). Vimentin and ALK-1 were strongly expressed in the spindle cells . Cytokeratin (CK) and SMA were focally expressed , but desmin and EBV expressions were negative. Thorough examination of the thyroid was necessary considering the observed TTF-1 positivity , but no characteristics of a well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma were found. Thus, a diagnosis of IMT was proposed on the basis of immunohistochemical findings and morphology, complicated by Hashimoto’s thyroiditis on the basis of the high serum levels of thyroglobulin and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies and morphology.
The patient did not receive adjuvant therapy. Regular follow-ups with physical examinations, blood tests, and ultrasonography were performed. The patient remained well, without IMT relapse, 10 months after lobectomy.