A 33-year-old woman sought dental assistance and presented multiple unilateral lesions distributed throughout the oral mucosa, retro commissural region, inserted gingiva lateral borders of the tongue on the right side and desquamative gingivitis located in the inserted gingiva. The asymptomatic lesions showed an atrophic leuco-erythroblastic reticular aspect, with an ulcerated surface. Teeth 17, 15, 14 and 48 had extensive amalgam restorations two years prior, in close contact with the injured areas.
During the anamnesis, she reported having been submitted to periodontal therapy. The main complaint motivating her search for professional assistance was halitosis associated with spontaneous gingival bleeding. Periodontal examination was carried out with a periodontal probe (PCPUNC15, Hu-Friedy, Chicago, IL, USA) and the measure of probing depth was registered, as well as the presence of bleeding during the probing step (MÜHLEMANN; SON, 1971) and the plaque index (O’LARY; DRAKE; NAYLOR, 1972). The gingival depth ranged from 1 to 7 mm; however, in the region affected by the gingival desquamation, the depths ranged from 2 to 6 mm. The bleeding index during probing was 91.3%, and the plaque index was 74%. With such results, the patient was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. The patient’s medical history did not reveal any systemic alterations, such as hypertension, diabetes or any autoimmune diseases, nor did she mention the use of any medication. Blood analysis did not reveal any alterations.
A perilesional biopsy was then carried out using hematoxylin-eosin staining. The oral mucosa fragment was covered by focal acantholytic, atrophic and parakeratinized squamous epithelium. The connective tissue showed chronic subepithelial and deep inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly composed of lymphocytes and plasmocytes, with the formation of lymphoid follicles and subepithelial cleft, compatible with oral lichenoid reaction . The histological section of the gingiva also revealed chronically inflamed connective tissue and subepithelial cleft A provisional diagnosis of OLL-DA was initially taken. The patch test reading confirmed allergy to thimerosal, a compound of mercury metal. Therefore, all the metallic restorations were removed in one single appointment. Afterwards, basic periodontal therapy was accomplished in four consecutive weekly appointments, with scaling and root debridement, structured plaque control, dental brushing and interdental cleaning instructions.
The follow-up period ranged from three to six months, during which time the desquamative gingivitis was reduced. However, the leucoplast lesions located on the retro commissural area and tongue were unchanged. A new perilesional biopsy for the direct immunofluorescence test was conducted in order to exclude other diagnostic hypotheses. The results in question showed non-specific focal granular deposits of IgM 2+ (on a scale of 1+ to 3+) in the basement membrane zone of the epidermis . The findings were compatible with Lichenoid Stomatitis. After clinical-pathological correlation, the diagnosis of idiopathic oral lichenoid lesion was finally established. Nine months after the removal of all the amalgam restorations, remission of the desquamative gingivitis and disappearance of reddish-white plaques, as well as the ulcerated surface of the oral mucosa were observed. Nevertheless, the reticular leucoplast and retro commissural region lesions persisted .