A 56-year-old Asian man presented with recurrent right-sided epistaxis. The patient had a history of hypertension and hypothyroidism as well as a surgical history of subtotal resection of a pituitary adenoma by TSA on January 2006. Since then, the tumor size has remained stable on follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
In 2018, the patient visited the hospital complaining of recurrent epistaxis. The patient had intermittently suffered nosebleeds and blood-tinged sputum (which is thought to be posterior nasal drip) after undergoing TSA surgery in 2006, and the symptoms worsened in the latest 1 month; therefore, he decided to visit the hospital. A polypoid mass with an oozing-pattern bleeding in the right sphenoid area was found on navigation-assisted endoscopy, and a biopsy was taken. After endoscopic cauterization, the bleeding seemed to stop . Histology revealed that the tissue obtained from the biopsy was inflamed granulation tissue. Ten months later, intermittent nasal bleeding resumed. Nine months after, the patient was admitted to the emergency department with about 2L of blood loss due to epistaxis. Emergent endoscopy revealed a bleeding focus on the anterior wall of the right sphenoid, and computed tomography (CT) angiography demonstrated a pseudoaneurysm in the right ICA that recovered from rupture in the area of the previous TSA. A graft stent was inserted into the right ICA pseudoaneurysm . Four months later, a large nosebleed recurred, and a graft stent was re-inserted for the recurrent pseudoaneurysm rupture . A CT angiography taken 3 months later demonstrated no evidence of recurrent flow in the treated pseudoaneurysm in the right distal ICA.
Shortly thereafter, the patient returned to the hospital with epistaxis accompanied by fever and sinus tenderness. Peri-stent enhancement on the inferior medial side of the right nasal cavity was noted in a left external carotid artery (ECA) angiogram, and an accordant mass was seen on brain CT . Furthermore, multiple brain abscesses were observed on MRI . CSF culture was negative. However, considering that brain abscess may occur over a long time, methicillin-susceptible staphylococcus aureus (MSSA), which was cultured in both blood and sputum (posterior nasal drip) 5 months ago, was estimated as the causative agent. The patient underwent endoscopic resection about the mass, and was treated with the proper antibiotics . Ciprofloxacin was used in consideration of the patient’s adverse drug reaction, and it was administered orally for 32 days (250 mg 1 T bid). Histology revealed that the resected mass was necrotic mucosal tissue with exudate and blood clots. During the 5-month follow-up period, the operation site was well maintained without further bleeding, and brain MRI showed regressed abscesses .