A 30-year old patient, nulligravida was admitted in March 2005, to the Gynecologic Oncology Unit of the Catholic University of Campobasso, for irregular post-coital vaginal bleeding. Her medical history was unremarkable. Her gynecological history was negative with menarche at the age of 12 years, and regular menses until 6 months before the occurrence of the symptoms.
Gynaecological examination revealed a normal size uterus, and no adnexal masses. A circumscribed, ulcerated lesion (maximum diameter = 2 cm) was documented in the posterior esocervix. Parametria and vagina appeared uninvolved. Colposcopy-guided biopsy and curettage of endocervical canal were performed revealing an invasive squamous cell cervical carcinoma with areas of poor differentiation. Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound examination documented the presence of a normal size uterus showing normal echogenicity with the exception of a vascularized hypoechogenic area (18 × 14 × 11 mm) located in the cervix.
Staging evaluation including chest X-ray, total body CT scan, and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) documented the presence of a tumor mass (maximum diameter = 2 cm) located in the uterine cervix, and no enlarged lymph nodes. Examination under anesthesia revealed an ulcerated lesion of maximum diameter of 2 cm, without vaginal and parametrial involvement. Squamous cell carcinoma antigen levels were negative. The patient was staged as having FIGO stage IB1 cervical cancer.
After extensive counseling of the patient and her family, she opted for a conservative approach. Open laparoscopy was carried out: peritoneal washing and a careful inspection of the adnexae and intra abdominal organs was performed. Systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy was performed up to internal iliac lymph nodes, and they returned as negative at frozen section examination. Several biopsies of the vaginal walls were obtained; these were negative for disease on frozen section. A cold knife conization was performed, and frozen section analysis showed that the lateral and deep margins of the tissue specimen were uninvolved. The biopsy of the endocervical canal also resulted negative at frozen section.
At definitive pathological examination, a nodular lesion of maximum diameter of 2.0 cm (width extension) located in the cone (height = 2 cm, width = 3 cm), was detected. Microscopic examination revealed a tumor composed of nests of large cells with large eosinophilic cytoplasm presenting a ground-glass appearance . Cell membranes were easily recognizable, and tumor nuclei appeared large, presenting prominent nucleoli, and also areas of abundant eosinophil infiltration were present. The tumor showed a stromal invasion of 8 mm out of 1.7 stromal thickness. The lateral and deep margins of the cone were uninvolved for at least 9 mm. All peritoneal biopsies, as well as pelvic lymph nodes (n = 18) were negative. No lymphovascular space involvement was observed. The final diagnosis was FIGO Stage IB1 poorly differentiated carcinoma with > 90% of the tumor represented by neoplastic cells with glassy cell features. A second pathologist, blinded to the first's impression confirmed the diagnosis. Given the rarity of this histological type and its prognostic features, therapeutic options including radical trachelectomy, hysterectomy, or adjuvant treatment were carefully discussed with the patient, who nevertheless decided to undergo only strict follow-up procedures. The patient was then followed with gynecological examination, pap smear, and colposcopy every 3 months for the first 2 years, and every 6 months thereafter, and was also requested to perform chest x-ray and pelvic MRI every year. Currently, after a follow up of 38 months, she has no evidence of disease.
Cervical stenosis was documented after 21 months since surgery, and was easily managed by cannulation of the cervical canal under anesthesia.