For the first time, a 46-year-old Caucasian male was referred to the hospital because of sudden pain, redness and hardening in the lateral side of the left thigh, and subfebrile fever, with no anamnesis of trauma/injury or immunosuppression. Three months after the onset of the first symptoms of osteomyelitis in the left thigh, the patient began to complain of right thigh pain.
Patient’s symptoms started two weeks ago with recurrent episodes of lateral side of left thigh, pain and swelling, which had been worsened the last 24 h.
At the second hospitalization, the patient stated that he had relapsed to pneumonia three months before the onset of the first symptoms of osteomyelitis, but there are no data on the pathological agent and the treatment applied, because patient was treated in other hospital. No evidence of immunosuppression was documented.
Redness and hardening in the lateral side of the left thigh.
During each hospitalization, blood analysis revealed a mild leukocytosis, significant thrombocytosis and moderately elevated C-reactive protein. The blood biochemistries, as well as urine analysis were normal. Increased partial CO2 was observed.
First hospitalization: During the first hospitalization, the patient underwent an X-ray showing the onset of left femoral destruction. A CT scan showed an abscess in the left thigh around the bone .
Second hospitalization: Three months after the first hospitalization symptoms recurred and patient was examined by an orthopaedist. Moreover, similar symptoms were seen in the right femur. Radiographs, MRI and CT scans were performed: Pathologic fracture of the left femoral diaphysis with displacement, osteomyelitis of the left femur, osteomyelitis of the right femur, sequester. The fistulogram showed a contrast flow broadly around the implant, the femoral region .
Third and fourth hospitalizations: An X-ray and MRI were performed during the third and fourth hospitalizations .
A thorough microbiological culture of the surgical materials (each time) from both thighs under anaerobic conditions was used to identify the pathogen Anaerococcus prevotii, sensitive to ampicillin and penicillin. It is believed that this pathogen is the main cause of the whole disease. Based on the history of pneumonia, it can be tentatively stated that it was also caused by this pathogen. The patient was also diagnosed with lung infiltrates and purulent processes on the molars, the same pathogen was extracted from the pus of the lungs. A mixed microflora was found during several hospitalizations, which we associate as a contributing b nosocomial infection.