A 38-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to “headache for 20 days and abnormal psychiatric behavior for 8 days”. 20 days before admission, the patient developed headache without obvious inducement, accompanied by nausea and vomiting. 8 days before admission, she had a temperature of 39.0 °C, and developed psychiatric and behavioral abnormalities, mainly manifesting as incomprehensible speech, yelling, orthocolosis, and binocular gaze, lasting approximately 40 minutes. Her head computed tomography (CT) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination results at a local hospital showed no abnormalities. Gram-positive cocci were revealed on blood culture. After treatment with ceftriaxone and vancomycin, the patient's symptoms did not improve, and she was then transferred to our hospital.
On admission, the patient was unable to speak and execute commands. When stimulated by sound and light, the patient began to yell and shout, expressing intermittent repetitive language, fumbling with her right hand and apathetic facial expression, and was unable to respond to verbal commands. She had no previous psychiatric history prior to the illness except a history of insomnia in the previous week. Physical examination of nervous system showed blurred consciousness, frightened expression, voluntary eye opening, without response to verbal commands, and without cooperation to advanced cognitive function tests. Glasgow score was 9 (eye opening 4, verbal response 1, motor response 4); besides, increased muscle tone of four extremities, voluntary movement of the upper limbs (not the lower limbs), retractions of the lower limbs after stimulation, as well as nuchal rigidity were observed. Physical examinations of heart, lung, and abdomen were unremarkable.
Auxiliary examinations were then performed. Lung CT revealed inflammation in both lungs. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (plain scan + enhanced) showed subtle swelling of the left frontal lobe parenchyma on plain T2WI-FLAIR sequence, slight enhancement of the left frontoparietal leptomeningeal membrane on enhanced T2WI-FLAIR sequence (A–C). Her intracranial pressure was 290 mmH2O. CSF analysis showed normal cell count (red cell 0 × 106/L, nucleated cells 14 × 106/L), protein, glucose, chloride, lactate, and adenosine deaminase. CSF culture and acid-fast staining were all negative. The CSF next generation sequencing (NGS) examination excluded the intracranial infection (Kingmed, Diagnostics Co, Ltd). Anti-NMDAR antibodies were positive in both CSF and serum (titer of 1:10, cell-based assay, Kingmed Diagnostics Co., Ltd, HEK 293T cells were co-transfected with full-length human NR1A and pcDNA3.1-EGFP using Lipofectamine 2000. The cells transfected 36 h, and were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min, blocked in 10% goat serum. Patient sample was serially diluted and incubated with the cells for 1 hour at room temperature. Cells incubated with Alexa Fluor 546-conjugated goat anti-human IgG) (D and E); whereas anti-IgLON5 antibodies were found positive in serum only (titer of 1:30, cell-based assay, Kingmed Diagnostics Co., Ltd, HEK 293T cells were co-transfected with a full-length human IgLON5 and pcDNA3.1-EGFP using Lipofectamine 2000. The cells transfected 36 h, and were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min, blocked in 10% goat serum. Patient sample was serially diluted and incubated with the cells for 1 hour at room temperature. Cells incubated with Alexa Fluor 546-conjugated goat anti-human IgG) (F). Anti-IgLON5 disease associated human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQB1*05:01 haplotype was identified in this patient. Mild sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome was diagnosed after sleep monitoring. In addition, high levels of carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) (5.8ng/ml; normal range: 0–5 ng/ml), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) (40.8U/ml; normal range: 0–35 U/ml) and human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) (79.3 pml/L; normal range: ≤60.5 pml/L) were presented. Other examinations were all unremarkable.
Based on the previous blood culture results obtained from the local hospital, vancomycin and ganciclovir were given for anti-infection and anti-viral treatment, respectively. After being diagnosed as AE with coexisting anti-NMDAR and anti-IgLON5 antibodies, the patient was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone at dose of 1000mg/d, 500mg/d, 250mg/d, and 125mg/d for 3 respectively days, immunoglobulin (0.4/kg/d) for 5 consecutive days, as well as plasmapheresis 2000ml/d for another 5 days. Her symptoms, such as psychiatric and behavioral abnormalities and consciousness disturbance, gradually improved during treatment. No cognitive decline was found after evaluation with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Repeat cranial enhanced MRI suggested that the left frontoparietal leptomeningeal enhancement was alleviated after treatment (A–C).
At discharge, her anti-NMDAR antibodies were negative in both CSF and serum (A and B); whereas anti-IgLON5 antibodies were positive in serum (titer of 1:10) (C). Oral prednisone acetate tablets at dose of 1mg/kg/d, reduced 5 mg per 2 weeks and mycophenolate mofetil 0.75g twice a day were continued. At her 6-month follow-up, the patient's symptoms continued to improve; however, repeat sleep monitoring showed that the total sleep time at night was reduced, sleep efficiency was low, the number of sleep cycles was severely insufficient, the sleep architecture were disorder, and there were involuntary limb movements in the rapid eye movement and non-rapid eye movement stages (D–F). Her serum anti-IgLON5 antibodies were still positive (titer: 1:30).