A 39-year-old Persian man, without any positive family history, was referred to our hospital with a 15-year history of command hallucination, persecutory delusion, social isolation, hostility/excitement, anxiety, depression, and cognitive impairment, which had been treated at a psychiatric clinic with the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Although he had already been admitted to a psychiatric hospital six times during 15 years, his records indicated the progressive course of the disease and his failure to respond to various treatment regimens. No abnormal findings were observed in a physical examination, imaging, and laboratory tests. Finally, he was treated with clozapine with a diagnosis of TRS, which was eventually terminated due to its adverse effects, including restlessness, tachycardia, tremor, sialorrhea, nausea, and disturbed sleep. After discontinuation of clozapine, although he was treated with olanzapine, carbamazepine, fluvoxamine, lorazepam, propranolol, and fluphenazine decanoate injection for 2 years, no significant improvement was made. At the end of the second year of treatment with the above medication regimen, mirtazapine of 15 mg/day was added to the previous regimen and increased to 30 mg/day due to exacerbation of anorexia, insomnia, and anxiety. Despite a relative improvement in anorexia, anxiety, and insomnia, a laboratory test revealed an elevated alanine transaminase (ALT) level compared to the previous test (147 U/L versus 22 U/L; reference range, up to 41 U/L). Given an internal medicine consultation, mirtazapine was discontinued after 2 months, and he started taking UDCA 300 mg capsules twice a day. In the fourth week of treatment, his ALT level was reduced (28 U/L; reference range, up to 41 U/L). Also, his positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms significantly decreased during the eighth week of follow-up and continued with a mild slope throughout the tenth and 12th weeks of the treatment. There was a significant difference between the mean scores of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) before and 12 weeks after the treatment with UDCA (149 versus 65 and 13 versus 26, respectively). Also, UDCA was well tolerated, and our patient did not exhibit any side effects during treatment based on interview and physical examination. Figure presents the 12-week follow-up of our patient according to PANSS and MMSE.