A 30-year-old, unmarried Caucasian male presented with a history of having been sexually assaulted five days earlier in a nearby city by a group of unknown males. Reportedly they kicked and stamped on him and during the assault a glass bottle was forcibly inserted into his rectum and the bottle neck broke.
The patient appeared very agitated and requested that only females be involved in his care. The residents on call for surgery were both female. When the male on call surgical consultant arrived the patient became very agitated and uncooperative.
On examination, there was no evidence of external injury to him. His abdomen was soft and showed a well-healed lower midline incision. He attributed this scar to a laparotomy done for abdominal pain in his childhood. Plain X-Ray of his abdomen showed the broken off upper part of a glass bottle The patient refused a rectal examination on the ward. On examination under anaesthesia, in the lithotomy position, no evidence of perianal trauma was found. A flexible endoscope was inserted and the broken glass bottle was confirmed to be in the sigmoid colon. An endoscopic snare was passed and the broken glass bottle retrieved . Repeat endoscopy did not show any damage to the mucosa. The neck of the glass bottle was found to have a roll of paper inserted within it .
The following morning the patient complained of pain in his abdomen. His abdomen was tender though there was no guarding or rigidity. Due to the possibility of rectal perforation, a CT scan of his abdomen and pelvis was arranged.
Due to the unusual circumstances, the case was discussed with a second surgical consultant within the same department. Surprisingly, he recognised the patient from a previous post at a nearby hospital. The same man had presented under a similar sounding name with an almost identical history. On that previous occasion he had also claimed to have been sexually and physically assault in a car park, during which time a bottle top was reportedly inserted into his rectum. This was removed under general anaesthesia shortly after which he self-discharged, with no follow-up being possible as he had no General Practitioner.
During the current admission, an attempt was made to telephone the person the patient had nominated as his next of kin. However, the number proved to be of someone in a foreign country who denied knowing the patient and informed us that he had received a similar enquiry, about a month ago from another hospital in the UK.
A psychiatric consultation was requested upon which the patient became angry and refused further treatment. However, with the encouragement of a nurse, he later agreed to see the psychiatrists. The psychiatry team did not find any evidence of a formal psychiatric disorder, other than the possibility of Munchausen's syndrome. When asked about the possible earlier presentation at another hospital the patient became very angry and took his own discharge against medical advice.
He had told us that he was not registered with a GP and later it was discovered that the home address he had given at registration was a fictitious one. During his stay he had no visitors and it was not possible to contact any true next of kin, as the names and addresses given were also false.