A 49-year-old man with advanced AIDS (CD4 8 cells µl−1) and overall poor performance status on antiretroviral therapy was admitted in November 2016 with 10 days of nausea with vomiting and reported retching, chest pain, odynophagia and persistent diarrhoea. He had been admitted to the hospital at least five times in the previous 2 years and had a history of azole-resistant oral and esophageal candidiasis. Over the preceding months he was on suppressive therapy with fluconazole as an outpatient. His examination on admission was noteworthy for cachexia and oral thrush. He was started on micafungin 100 mg daily with delayed improvement in his upper gastrointestinal symptoms by day 5. He was awaiting discharge with a planned three-week course of micafungin. However, on day 7, aerobic blood culture collected on admission showed growth and Gram stain was reported as budding yeast. Given his clinical improvement, lack of fever and no new complaints, he was continued on micafungin with further diagnostics ordered. Ophthalmologic exam, echocardiogram, computerized axial tomography imaging of his head, lumbar puncture and cryptococcal antigen were all negative. Upper endoscopy was not done as his symptoms improved. Repeat fungal blood cultures were collected on day 7, which later showed no growth. The budding yeast were not identified as a possible dematiaceous fungus until hospital day 11 . Multiple colonies were seen on the initial growth media, notably black in color by this time; however, complete identification could not be made by morphology alone and the isolate was sent to the Department of Health. Given the patient’s improvement in his presenting symptoms, he was discharged home to complete a final week of micafungin with planned follow up as an outpatient.
The isolate was eventually identified as A. pullulans by ribosomal RNA sequencing, and results were released 1 month after the patient’s admission date. Based on the report from the Department of Health using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute M38-A2 reference method, the isolate of A. pullulans from our patient was tested against amphotericin B, caspofungin, micafungin, posaconazole, fluconazole and voriconazole . There are no interpretation standards for susceptibility to any of these drugs. Since our initial encounter, the patient returned to our facility two times in the span of 5 months with recurrence of his symptoms and progression of his poor performance status. On these admissions, he had repeat blood cultures, but this fungus was not recovered. He also had repeat upper endoscopy and fungal hyphae were seen on biopsy with Periodic acid–Schiff-D stain. Unfortunately, no cultures or additional staining procedures were done to identify them as the thought was that the organisms on biopsy were consistent with a clinical picture of recurrent candida esophagitis. The biopsy specimens was reviewed while writing this report, and a Fontana-Mason stain was performed to determine if these fungal elements reported previously contained melanin in their cell walls. However, the fungal elements were not well visualized on inspection and the stain did not highlight any melanin-containing elements. The procedure was largely inconclusive. The patient ultimately died of respiratory failure on his second readmission, 5 months after our encounter.