A 60-year old Japanese woman was diagnosed with gastric cancer at another hospital. A staging laparoscopic examination was performed at that hospital and peritoneal metastasis was diagnosed. The patient was referred to our hospital to receive IP chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis of gastric cancer.
The upper endoscopy showed scirrhous-type gastric cancer with the biopsy result of moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. A staging laparoscopy was performed also in our institution showing the tumor exposure to serosa of the stomach and the massive peritoneal carcinomatosis involving the greater omentum . Peritoneal disseminated nodules were found in whole intraabdominal space with a peritoneal cancer index (PCI) score of 23 . Intraperitoneal washing fluid cytology was positive for free cancer cells. An IP access port was placed in the subcutaneous space.
The regimen of the intraperitoneal chemotherapy is oral intake of S-1 for 14 days, IP PTX (20 mg/kg) and IV PTX (50 mg/kg) on day 1 and day 8 with 7 days’ rest. This treatment was performed as a clinical study approved by the institutional review board of the University of Tokyo. After our patient received nine courses of chemotherapy in 7 months, a second-look laparoscopy was performed to assess the effect of the intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The disseminated peritoneal nodules had disappeared and the washing cytology results had turned negative.
After confirming the effectiveness of intraperitoneal chemotherapy, a total gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection was performed. Three of 14 harvested lymph nodes were found to have metastasis. The pathological grading of regression was 2.
After gastrectomy, our patient received the same regimen of intraperitoneal chemotherapy. A follow-up CT scan, which was performed 4 years and 3 months after the IP chemotherapy started, revealed bilateral ovary enlargement. In order to reevaluate the conditions of the peritoneal disseminated lesions, a third-look laparoscopic examination was performed after our patient underwent a total of 67 courses of intraperitoneal chemotherapy in 4 years and 6 months, which revealed that the peritoneal carcinomatosis had not recurred. However, bilateral enlarged ovaries were observed, which were considered to be Krukenberg metastasis .
A bilateral adnexectomy was planned but not actually performed because bone scintigraphy revealed multiple bone metastases. The chemotherapy was then changed to the regimen including CPT-11. After the IP chemotherapy was stopped, the peritoneal carcinomatosis recurred. Our patient survived 5 years and 2 months after her diagnosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis of gastric cancer.