A 58-year-old male patient was found incidentally to have a mass in his kidney during a medical check-up without evidence of sickle cell trait. No distinct clinical symptoms were identified. An abdominal ultrasound revealed an oval hypoechoic mass image (24× 22 mm) with clear-cut margin in the upper pole of the right kidney. Computed tomography confirmed a low-density mass (19× 18 × 22 mm) in the upper pole of the right kidney . No metastasis was found. The patient has no familial history of cancer. A right radical laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed. After surgery, he hadn’t taken any ALK inhibitors all along, and he was in good condition 16 months after surgery and showed no evidence of recurrence or metastasis.
Macroscopic examination revealed that there was a 2-cm diameter unique well-circumscribed tumor under the renal capsule. Its cut surface was faint yellow and solid . There was no lymph node identified around the perirenal adipose tissue.
Histopathologically, under the ultra-low power, the tumor was clearly demarcated from the surrounding normal renal tissue . It was composed of predominantly solid nests, but irregular tubular growth pattern was also admixed. In the solid growth area, tumor cells were large and polygonal with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Nuclei were round to oval, prominently enlarged and occasionally bizarre, with prominent nucleoli and amounts of clumped to vesicular chromatin. Cytoplasmic lumina and nuclear pseudoinclusions were evident . Multinucleated and rhomboid cells were focally noted and corresponded to Fuhrman grade 4 . In the tubular growth area, epithelial cells appeared to be smaller. Less cytoplasm and inconspicuous nucleoli were observed . Mitotic figures were scant in two different areas. Thick-walled abnormal blood vessels were obviously seen in the stroma. Numerous lymphocytes, plasma cells and neutrophils were scattered in the stroma. Occasionally, foam cell collections were observed. Desmoplasia was focally present. No mucin deposition and psammoma was observed in the stroma.
Immunohistochemically, tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for PAX8, keratin (AE1/AE3), EMA, CK7, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6, and focal positivity for AMACR and CD10. Staining for SMA, desmin, HMB-45, Melan-A, TFE3, P53, CD34, ERG, CD31, CD117 and S-100 were negative. INI1 was showed diffuse nuclear positivity. Tumor cells also showed diffuse and strong positivity for ALK(Roche, D5F3), which is found to be located in the cytoplasm and cell membrane . ALK staining was performed with a BenchMark XT automated staining instrument.
ALK rearrangement was confirmed by ALK break-apart FISH . 53% of analyzed cells showed either isolated 3′ ALK signals (1R1F, 32%) or break-apart signals (1R1G1F, 21%). But no rearrangement of the TFE3 and TFEB gene was detected by FISH.
Next-generation sequencing was performed with targeted gene capture using ddCAP200 V2 kit(Singlera Genomics, Shanghai Inc., China). This panel covers part or whole exon regions and some intron regions of 216 cancer related genes. A fusion of ALK (donor end: chr2: 29447792) and TPM3 (acceptor start: chr1: 154140265) was detected with frequency 2% . In addition, 4 genetic variants with uncertain significance were found, including BARD1 (c.773 T > C), MSH3 (c.178G > C), FANCA (c.1756G > A) and NF1 (c.4382 T > C) (Additional file : Table S1).