In mid September 2014, a 12-year-old boy presented at the Pediatric Emergency Department of the Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, due to persistent fever, headache and diffuse pruriginous erythematous rash. The child’s mother reported that a few days before the onset of symptoms he went fishing near the family country-house in the province of Pavia (Po valley - Lombardy Region). On preliminary examination, his vital signs and general medical examination were normal. A mildly altered mental status was noted. Neurologic examination was unremarkable except for photophobia, without other signs of meningitis. Biochemical tests showed hemoglobin 12.8 mg/dl, lactate dehydrogenase 251 mU/ml (reference range: 125–220 mU/ml) and C-reactive protein 0.79 mg/dl (reference range: 0.00–0.50 mg/dl). Meningoencephalitis was suspected. The patient was thus hospitalized in the Pediatric Department and empiric antiviral and antibacterial therapies with acyclovir and ceftriaxone were promptly started. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed 180 cells, glucose of 63 mg/dl (reference range: 40–70 mg/dl) and protein of 63 mg/dl (reference range: 20–45 mg/dl). Bacterial blood and CSF cultures were negative. CSF was tested by real-time RT-PCR and PCR for the following neurotropic viruses: Herpes simplex, Enterovirus, Polyomavirus JC, Herpesvirus 6, WNV, Phleboviruses and Flaviviruses. Furthermore, serum and urine were analyzed with WNV real-time RT-PCR and Flavivirus RT-PCR. The molecular investigation of neurotropic virus genome was negative in all the biological samples. Phleboviruses and WNV-IgM and IgG antibodies detection was performed in both serum and CSF samples. WNV-IgM tested positive both in serum and CSF while WNV-IgG were negative: this was confirmative for an acute WNV infection. An electroencephalogram (EEG), performed within 24-h after admission, revealed encephalitic-like bilateral slow waves and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal any abnormality.
The patient’s conditions remained stable and after seven days of hospitalization he was discharged with complete recovery and EEG normalization. At discharge, WNV-IgM and WNV neutralizing antibodies were positive and a WNV-IgG seroconversion was observed. The child was followed-up for 12 months, to monitor the clinical and neurological evolution and evaluate the WNV antibodies kinetics. A complete recovery with no neurological sequelae was observed. Serum WNV-IgM persistence was still evident 12 months after the onset of the disease.