An 84-year-old Caucasian man with a distant past history of Billroth II gastrectomy for peptic ulcer disease and cholecystectomy for cholelithiasis was admitted to hospital for investigation of painless jaundice following referral from his general practitioner (GP).
He had a 1-month history of anorexia, weight loss, malaise, and painless progressive jaundice. An examination revealed normal vital signs, icterus without stigmata of chronic liver disease, and a soft abdomen with no organomegaly. Biochemistry demonstrated: microcytic anemia with hemoglobin of 108 g/L, mean corpuscular volume 72 fL, and ferritin 4557 μg/L; obstructive cholestasis with bilirubin of 164 umol/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 2167 units/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 857 units/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) 225 units/L, and alanine transaminase (ALT) 301 units/L; modestly raised inflammatory markers with white cell count (WCC) of 12.77 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) 80 mg/L; and hypoalbuminemia (24 g/L) with a normal international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.2 and platelet count of 294 × 109/L. Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was raised at 132 kU/L.
His common bile duct, liver parenchyma, pancreas, and portal vein were of normal appearance on abdominal ultrasonography, with a subsequent MRCP showing no dilatation of the biliary tree and no evidence of any intraductal, pancreatic, or hepatic lesions. The MRCP did, however, exhibit dilatation of the afferent duodenal limb being 4.8 cm in maximal width and a single enlarged portal hilar lymph node measuring 13 mm in its short axis. Given the discordant lack of biliary dilatation on imaging, a liver biopsy was performed.
Histopathology demonstrated edematous portal tracts with inflammation within the portal tracts including neutrophils, which were not seen within the lumen of the ductal epithelial cells . Furthermore, lobular bile accumulation was present as was ductular proliferation at the edge of the portal tracts, highlighted by cytokeratin immunoperoxidase . Focal steatosis was present with no distinct zonal pattern but with a tendency to be periportal. A suspicion of cholangitis was raised and treated with appropriate antibiotics, but with no clinical improvement. The histopathology and clinical picture taken together was felt to be most in keeping with acute large bile duct obstruction. A full hepatic biochemical screen investigating for infective and autoimmune causes was unremarkable.
A gastroscopy was subsequently performed to investigate the enteric abnormalities noted on MRCP, revealing a markedly deformed remnant stomach with a mass lesion at the gastroenteric anastomosis suspicious for malignancy . The afferent limb was stenosed and unable to be intubated preventing visualization of the major duodenal papilla. Biopsies of the mass lesion confirmed moderately differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma.
The biliary obstruction was managed by endoscopic wire-guided stent insertion through the obstructing tumor into the afferent duodenal limb with subsequent resolution of jaundice (bilirubin 16 umol/L) and significant improvement in liver enzymes (ALP 424 units/L, GGT 346 units/L, ALT 33 units/L). As our patient was not a candidate for surgical intervention or chemotherapy due to locoregional disease extent and frailty, he was eventually discharged home with palliative support following a period of in-patient rehabilitation.