A 47-year-old male.
Decreased vision in the left eye.
This patient was being followed-up by a local physician for angioid streaks associated with PXE and bilateral DR. The DR had previously been treated with bilateral panretinal photocoagulation. In June 2002, pars plana vitrectomy was performed in his right eye by the previous physician for vitreous hemorrhage due to PDR. In January 2004, vitreous hemorrhage also occurred in the patient’s left eye. This temporarily regressed during follow-up, yet bleeding recurred in May 2004. The patient was subsequently referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at Osaka Medical College to undergo vitrectomy surgery.
The patient had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in 2001. He began taking oral hypoglycemic drugs, and his hemoglobin (Hb)A1c was about 6% during follow-up. He was also taking antihypertensive drugs for treatment of hypertension. The patient had undergone craniotomy for a subdural hematoma in 1999, yet the details were unknown.
None of the patient’s second-degree relatives had a history PXE. His father had diabetes, and his mother had hypertension.
Upon initial ocular examination, the patient’s visual acuity (VA) was 0.04 diopters (D) (1.0 × S-11D = C-0.75D Ax15°)OD and 0.01D (0.02 × S-10.0D)OS, and his intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in both eyes. The anterior eye segments showed no abnormalities. Examination of the optic media showed mild nuclear cataracts bilaterally (Emery-Little classification: grade I nuclear sclerosis). Funduscopy of the right eye showed gray-white lines with rupture of the Bruch’s membrane extending radially from the optic disc . Some streaks extended to near the fovea, but no choroidal neovascularization (CNV) or subretinal hemorrhages involving the fovea were observed. The fundus displayed a peau-d’orange mottled appearance associated with angioid streaks. Vitreous hemorrhage in the patient’s left eye obscured the optic disc and the fundus could not be examined in detail .
Multiple, discrete, symmetrical, small yellow papules were present bilaterally in the axillae and inguinal region. Rice-grain-sized yellowish-white papules were also present in a reticular pattern bilaterally on the neck. Blood-test results were as follows: WBC 9100/μl; hemoglobin (Hb) 10.8 g/dl; Htc 32.3%; Plt 342,000/μl; total protein 6.6 g/dL; GOT 15 units; GPT10 units; LDH 196 units; BUN 37 mg/dL; Cr 2.3 mg/dL; Na 143 mEq/L; K 5.2 mEq/L; Cl 107 mEq; HbA1c 6.3%; total cholesterol 213 mg/dL; and triglycerides 224 mg/dL.
Pars plana vitrectomy for vitreous hemorrhage of the left eye was performed on June 16, 2004. Fibrovascular membrane was observed around the optic disc and superior and inferior vascular arcades; the vitreous humor was adherent at these sites, but posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) was evident in the surrounding area. The fibrovascular membrane was removed with a vitreous cutter and vitreous scissors, and the preretinal hemorrhage was aspirated . The fibrovascular membranes were nearly identical to those without PXE, and there were no unusual findings in this case. Peau d’orange appearance associated with angioid streaks around the optic disc, similar to that in the right fundus, was now observed . Breaks in the Bruch’s membrane extended to near the fovea, but no CNV was observed. Since the patient was young, the lens was preserved, the surrounding vitreous humor was removed, and intraocular photocoagulation was performed to complete the surgery. The postoperative course was good, visibility of the fundus improved, and corrected VA improved to 0.7D by 3-months after surgery. At 36-months postoperative, the fundus remained stable with no occurrence of CNV.