A 70-year-old man was brought to our hospital due to fever and severe respiratory distress. His vital signs on admission were: Glasgow Coma Scale score, 14 (E4V4M6); blood pressure, 93/57 mmHg; heart rate, 138 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; SpO2, 81% (oxygen 10 L/min through a non-rebreathing mask); and body temperature, 38.2°C. Chest computed tomography showed right empyema and bilateral pneumonia . The Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score was 24 and estimated non-operative mortality was 42%.
Initial drainage was carried out on the right-sided empyema, discharging purulent pleural effusion. Emergency endotracheal intubation was undertaken for severe hypoxia, as well as mechanical ventilation. However, adequate oxygenation was not obtained by applying high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP); an air leak from the chest tube was observed, indicating right empyema with BPF. Veno-venous ECMO was initiated due to severe hypoxia with mechanical ventilation (SpO2, 60%; PaO2, 38 mmHg; PEEP, 15 cmH2O; FIO2, 1.0). The ventilation setting during VV-ECMO was: pressure assist-control ventilation; PEEP, 5 cmH2O; inspiratory pressure, 10 cmH2O; FIO2, 0.4; ventilation rate, 10/min.
A bronchial blocker was inserted into the right mid-trunk on day 3 (D3) to prevent pus flowing into the left healthy lung through a fistula, which was considered the cause of inflammation, thereby reducing but not eliminating the air leak. On D4, bronchoscopy was undertaken to identify the fistula site in detail, and forceps were inserted to check the traffic with the thoracic cavity at bronchi B4–10. Given the patient’s poor general condition, an endobronchial Watanabe spigot (EWS) was inserted at B8–10 with fibrin glue and then another bronchial blocker in the right middle trunk to complete the procedure . Given the expected long-term ventilator management, we carried out a tracheostomy on D6. On D7, the patient was weaned off VV-ECMO. The air leak from the right chest tube persisted, a secondary EWS was inserted at B4–6, and the bronchial blocker was removed on D11 . Although the air leak was reduced, the fistula was not completely closed.
Our policy was to administer medical treatment (continuous drainage, antibiotics, nutritional therapy, and rehabilitation) and wait for the patient’s general condition to improve.
The patient underwent a fasting regimen up to D2 due to unstable circulatory dynamics. Once the circulation stabilized, enteral feeding was started from D3. On admission, the patient was undernourished (height, 172 cm; BMI, 19.5; albumin, 1.5 g/dL). The dose was increased to 2,200 kcal from D10, and the patient started oral intake on D35 after ventilator withdrawal. Respiratory rehabilitation was started on D7, and starting on D21, the patient was treated with prone position therapy. Due to the patient’s pain, we could not undertake an extended trial. However, the oxygenation gradually improved and continued until D26 when the patient left the intensive care unit.
Antibiotics were started with meropenem and vancomycin, changed to ampicillin/sulbactam on D11, and ended on D50. Parvimonas micra was detected in blood cultures, and Streptococcus milleri was detected in the purulent pleural fluid culture.
The patient’s respiratory status gradually improved. The patient underwent tracheostomy closure on D95 and was discharged on D181 on foot and by himself without having the EWS removed. .