A 35-year-old gravida 0 white American woman with a 14-year history of unprotected intercourse without conception secondary to PCOS and 8 pack years of smoking presented to an emergency room with a lump in her left abdomen and sharp, left-sided, intermittent pain of 2 months’ duration. She was admitted and a computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her abdomen and pelvis showed an 18×19 cm left retroperitoneal mass . Her body mass index (BMI) at admission was 29.9. She was discharged from the hospital and referred to a regional oncology service for further evaluation.
Two weeks later she underwent an endoscopic ultrasound that revealed the mass was compressing her stomach, pancreas, and esophagus. She had a fine-needle aspiration removing 60 milliliters of thick brown fluid with pathology showing only acute inflammatory cells. Staging CT scans were performed and there was no evidence of distant metastasis. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan displayed hypermetabolic activity at the periphery of the mass. Four weeks after her initial presentation, she underwent an exploratory laparotomy and decompression of the pancreatic mass yielding 2 liters of fluid. An attempt was made to resect the body of the pancreas but significant adhesions were noted and surgery was abandoned. The final pathology report was MCN and low grade dysplasia. A postoperative CT scan 2 weeks after her surgery showed the mass had increased in size to 20.3×15.1 cm with multiple septations. On a follow-up visit with her surgical oncologist her BMI was 29.1. At this point she was transferred to a centralized oncology center for surgical evaluation and management of the pancreatic mass with at least low grade dysplasia. Fourteen weeks after her initial presentation she underwent a Whipple procedure and splenectomy, removal of a retroperitoneal mass yielding 1.5 liters of mucinous material and an omental flap. Ovarian transposition was not performed. An 18 cm multiloculated cystic mass was present at the distal tip of the tail of her pancreas. Her final pathology revealed stage 1B invasive adenocarcinoma arising in the MCN with extensive high grade dysplasia (PTX N0 M0). All 37 lymph nodes were negative with negative venous or lymphatic invasion and the closest margin of 6 cm.
She returned to the regional cancer center and started single-agent gemcitabine 8 weeks postoperation. After four cycles, her post-chemotherapy CT scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease. She was started on concurrent fluorouracil (5FU) and targeted pancreatic radiation therapy 24 weeks after her definitive surgery and finished 25 fractions with minimal side effects and standard shielding. When she started her radiation her BMI was 32.4. Fifteen months after her initial presentation a quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was obtained and returned 5783 mIU/ml. She had not changed sexual partners. An ultrasound revealed an intrauterine pregnancy with no embryonic pole or heartbeat. She had a spontaneous abortion at 6 weeks. There was no note of ovarian morphological abnormality. Her repeat CT scan 1 year later showed no evidence of pancreatic disease and she entered cancer surveillance at that time.
She first presented to our service 50 months after her initial presentation as a 40-year-old gravida 2-0-0-1-0 at 19 weeks’ gestation. She gave a history of an extensive infertility workup in the past prior to her cancer treatment which was consistent with PCOS-induced anovulation. Male factor workup was negative and she had attempted conception with the standard PCOS methods including timed intercourse after attempted medically induced ovulation without success. Weight loss did not result in conception. She did not attempt more invasive assisted reproductive techniques such as in vitro fertilization. Her targeted fetal ultrasound was normal as were serial obstetric scans. Her pregnancy was uneventful and standard prenatal testing was normal. She maintained normoglycemia on orally administered hypoglycemic agents. At 38 weeks, she had labor induced and delivered vaginally a healthy baby with Apgar score of 8/9 and birth weight of 2865 grams. She was discharged with her baby 2 days after her delivery.