A 29-year-old previously healthy male, presented with complaints of mild fever for 5 days, which subsided with paracetamol. After 3 days of asymptomatic period, he started having acute onset severe dull aching diffuse pain in both lower limbs with swelling and difficulty in walking. He also reported oral ulceration and difficulty in swallowing. He was brought to the emergency room on wheelchair and was unable to stand-up on his own. On examination, his vitals were stable. He had oral thrush. Lower limbs were edematous and tender. Neurological examination revealed decreased power grade (2/5) and absent reflexes in both lower limbs. Superficial reflexes were absent including plantar response. His investigations revealed normal complete blood count (Hb – 17.8 g/dL, Total Leucocytes count – 6600/μL, platelet count – 357,000/ μL), and deranged liver function (ALT- 220 IU/L and AST = 549 IU/L). His renal functions were within normal limits. There was marked increased in creatine kinase (11,960 U/L initially and 24,240 U/L after 1 day) and lactate dehydrogenase levels (1747 U/L). A presumptive diagnosis of acute myositis was made with movement restriction due to severe pain. He denied any history of trauma, drug abuse or toxin exposure. A viral panel for CMV, EBV, HCV, HIV, HbsAg and Dengue virus were sent along with blood and urine cultures. The results showed presence of CMV IgM antibodies by ELISA only. Leptospirosis and scrub typhus were also ruled out with relevant test. The diagnosis of acute CMV myositis was made and the patient was treated with oral valganciclovir (900 mg twice daily). The oral prednisolone 60 mg/day which was started on day one with suspicion of acute idiopathic myositis stopped after positive CMV IgM antibody. After 3 days of treatment there was improvement in pain and tenderness dramatically but no improvement in power of lower limbs. Nerve conduction velocity (NCV), electromyography (EMG) and lumbar puncture were done to rule out GBS. NCV was suggestive of demyelinating of sensory and motor nerves and also sensory axonal pattern of involvement with albumino-cytological dissociation in cerebrospinal fluid (protein – 80 mg/dl, WBC - 4 cells/mm3). EMG showed active acute denervation potentials with no motor unit potentials in quadriceps and, neurogenic changes with no definitive myopathic potentials in biceps. Muscle biopsy from left vastus lateralis was suggestive of focal myonecrosis with occasional regenerative fibres and myophagocytosis . Hence, a final diagnosis of acute myositis with GBS was made. Patient was treated with five sessions of alternate day plasmapheresis and showed dramatic improvement in power of lower limbs (Grade 4/5). Creatine kinase had decreased to 1215 U/L. Blood samples for CMV PCR came negative but convalescent phase sampling was positive for IgG CMV antibodies in high titre by ELISA. In view of oral candidiasis human immunodeficiency virus test were done, which was negative. However, his CD4 count was only 127 cell/mm3 raising possibility of associated idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia. We are planning to rule out this by repeating CD4 counts after 3 months. Patient was discharged with advice to continue follow-up in medicine and physical medicine and rehabilitation department.