A 75-year-old woman with a past medical history significant for non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy status post orthotopic heart transplant (OHT), type II diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease stage III, and chronic diarrhoea presented with nausea, vomiting, and an unexplained fall. She underwent OHT 23 years prior to admission. Her post-transplant course was complicated by chronic diarrhoea as well as one episode of graft rejection 4 years post-transplant. She was followed routinely in the transplant clinic with appropriate surveillance. Echocardiogram 2 years prior to admission showed normal function. On admission, her immune suppression regimen was mycophenolic acid 720 mg b.i.d. and prednisone 2.5 mg daily.
Review of systems was notable for unintentional 60 pound weight loss over the last year in addition to her chronic diarrhoea. She had a 36-pack year smoking history but quit prior to transplantation. Physical exam was unremarkable.
On hospital day two, she had multiple episodes of sinus arrest lasting as long as 14 s associated with loss of consciousness and seizure like activity. A pacemaker was placed emergently. Right heart catheterization to evaluate for acute rejection showed normal haemodynamics and cardiac output. Myocardial biopsy showed no evidence of cellular or humoral rejection. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal ventricular function without valvular disease.
Her hospital course was complicated by acute on chronic kidney injury as such left heart catheterization was deferred. Her weight loss, nausea, and diarrhoea prompted evaluation for underlying gastrointestinal malignancy. EGD and colonoscopy did not show any evidence of luminal irregularities. Non-contrast computed tomography scans of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis were unremarkable.
As her hospital course progressed, she complained of worsening headaches, nausea, left arm numbness, and right sided hearing loss. Computed tomography scan of her head revealed a 2.7 cm mass with a ring like enhancing portion in her cerebellum concerning for metastatic disease vs. abscess vs. infarct . An magnetic resonance imaging could not be done to better characterize the lesion given her recent pacemaker placement. Patient underwent posterior fossa craniotomy with resection of the mass. Pathology of the sample had a low proliferation index, Ki67 estimated at 20%. The pattern was thought to be consistent with a lambda restricted B-cell lymphoma with plasmacytic differentiation favouring post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD).
Patient followed up with haematology after resection of her mass. Bone marrow biopsy did not show evidence of marrow involvement. Serum Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) PCR was negative as was CMV PCR and HIV serology. A PET scan only localized disease to the cerebellum. Immune suppression regimen was reduced to mycophenolate 360 mg b.i.d. and prednisone 5 mg. She was started on chemotherapy, DRAG (dexamethasone, rituximab, zidovudine, and ganciclovir) and maintained close follow-up.