We report a case of true trilineage hematopoiesis in an excised area of HO from an enucleated blind painful eye.
A 70-year-old Caucasian man presented with a blind painful right eye to our ophthalmology department to evaluate enucleation bulbi. He had a history of a blunt trauma injury to his right eye that occurred 49 years ago, and he subsequently experienced hyphema, vitreous hemorrhages, and traumatic cataract. Over the past 10 years, he experienced episodes of ocular pain phthisis bulbi associated with trigeminal neuralgia. A slit lamp examination of his right eye showed band keratopathy and seclusion pupillae, with a brunescent traumatic cataract. A funduscopic examination of his right eye was not executable due to media opacity. His left eye was normal without any kind of lesions and had an uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) of 20/20. A right eye ultrasound B-scan examination showed a phthisic eye, with complete retinal detachment, and hyperechogenic tissues with an acoustic shadowing due to calcification projected into the orbital tissue. For that reason, the clinicians decided to perform the enucleation of his right eye. His past medical history was positive for asymptomatic lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma associated with immunoglobulin M (IgM) monoclonal peak diagnosed 12 years before enucleation. At the onset, neither lymphadenopathies nor hepatosplenomegaly were described, and 20% bone marrow infiltration was documented. Our patient was periodically followed up without any treatment with evidence of a slow progressive disease, which did not require treatment up until now. Prior to the enucleation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain was performed to study a possible trigeminal neuralgia and was normal without any cerebral lesions.
The eyeball was removed and marked fibrosis with places of osseous metamorphism was noticed macroscopically. A histopathologic examination revealed diffusive fibrotic and calcified uveo-scleral flaps, with widespread bone metaplasia with hematopoietic marrow, mixed with retinal fragments with atrophic areas alternating with hyperplastic aspects and blood clots .
A further typing showed the presence of intertrabecular infiltration in the metaplastic bone marrow of non-Hodgkin B lymphoma, with small lymphocytes, with similar characteristics to the already known disease. Immunostaining was positive for CD20, CD3, CD10, CD43, CD23, CD138, S100 GFAP, MelanA, and Ki-67 .