Our patient was a 12-year-old Malay girl from Singapore who presented to our clinic with the complaint of hoarseness for a duration of 9 months after a sore throat. Prior to that she was well. Unlike the typical presentation in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, when the child tends to present earlier, at the age of 4 or 5 years old, her onset of hoarseness started only when she was 12 years old. It was progressively worsening. Fortunately, she did not have any associated airway issues. She was able to eat and drink normally and there was no suggestion of recent weight loss. The risk factors for hoarseness such as vocal abuse, talking, and singing loudly were also not present in her case. There was no significant family history of note.
A perceptual evaluation of voice quality using GRBAS (Grade, Roughness, Breathiness, Asthenia, and Strain) was performed. She was given a score of G: 3 R: 3 B: 0 A: 3 S: 1.
Her only complaint was hoarseness. She was otherwise well. There were no signs of airway distress and no feeding issues. Her growth centile was appropriate for her age. There was no family history of similar disease. We performed a flexible nasoendoscopy on her. There was a lesion seen on her right vocal cord as shown in the picture . This lesion was well circumscribed with a smooth mucosal surface. There were no other abnormalities. Her vocal cord movements were normal.
At that time, our working diagnosis for her included vocal cord polyp, granuloma, and recurrent respiratory papilloma.
Our patient was brought to the operating theater where she underwent microlaryngoscopy and bronchoscopy (MLB). Intraoperatively, there was a large broad-based lesion involving the anterior two-thirds of her right true vocal cords and ventricle. The lesion was firm on palpation. Her left vocal cord was normal . A biopsy was taken and sent for histology. Pathological analysis of the lesion revealed chronic inflammation with stromal myxoid degeneration and hyalinization .
In view of the unusual location and presentation of the lesion, we decided to perform a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her neck. The MRI scan showed a 1.5 × 1.6 × 1.7 cm heterogeneous submucosal solid lesion, isointense to hypointense on T1, and hyperintense on T2, with avid enhancement post contrast administration in the ventricular region on the right side .
We proceeded to perform a complete excision of the lesion. We used the monopolar diathermy to define the excision margin. A laryngeal microdebrider was used to remove the lesion with endoscope assistance . The child was monitored overnight in the hospital and was discharged home the following day.
The final pathologic analysis suggested the possible diagnosis of IMT.
Histopathology of the biopsy samples revealed myxoid changes and associated atypical-appearing cells characterized by ovoid to spindle-shaped cells with enlarged vesicular to hyperchromatic nuclei but still with an ample amount of eosinophilic to slightly basophilic-appearing cytoplasm, as well as associated multinucleated cells. These features were suggestive of an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT).
Immunohistochemical staining showed these cells to have weak reactivity for smooth muscle actin and muscle-specific actin but negative for ALK1, desmin, and S100 protein. A low proliferation rate of less than 5 % was seen by Ki67 staining. CD68 was positive in scattered inflammatory cells but not the atypical cells.
Following the excision, our patient was reviewed in the clinic. At 2.5 months post surgery, her voice has improved. There was a small nodule seen on her right vocal cord . Our patient and her family were not keen to have repeat surgery for removal of the nodule in view of the symptom improvements. Four months later, she was reviewed again in the clinic. Her voice continued to improve and the previously seen nodule has disappeared . We postulated that the nodule could have been a result of incorrect vocal usage post surgery and not related to the original IMT. She is currently on regular follow-up and will be returning 6 monthly for review. Her last review was about a year post surgery; there has been no recurrence of the lesion .