This case presents a 20-year-old German female patient diagnosed with a chronic wound infection caused by MFC following a traffic accident in Vietnam (see Fig. for a timeline). The patient was travelling through Vietnam when she was involved in a motorbike accident in February 2019. She was taken to the emergency department of a hospital in Hanoi where she presented with a large wound on the right leg. At the time of admission, she was complaining of severe pain in her back and right foreleg, as well as headache and nausea. The patient reported no other pre-existing medical conditions. Radiograph of the lower leg did not show any signs of fracture, and cranio-encephalic traumatic lesions were excluded in the cranial computed tomography (CT) scan. However, a lumbosacral spine CT scan revealed stable fractures of the thoracic vertebrae (T4 / 5). The patient underwent surgical debridement and suture of the leg wound the next day (see Fig. a for a representative photograph) and was treated with metronidazole and ceftriaxone over four days. She was discharged eight days after admission, transported to Germany and immediately admitted to a local hospital. At that time, her right lower leg was swollen, but lacked signs of surgical site infection. The patient was discharged three days afterwards, and dressing changes were subsequently performed in an outpatient-setting by her general practitioner and in local hospitals. Approximately five weeks after the accident, wound inflammation was observed for the first time, with redness and warmth around the suture site and dehiscent areas of the wound edges. However, no signs of systemic infection such as fever, increased leukocyte count, or C-reactive protein levels were apparent. Three days later, she was re-admitted to a local hospital with the diagnosis of wound infection. Surgeons described purulent exudate and a subcutaneous firm tumor measuring 2 × 4 cm in size with spontaneous drainage . The patient was discharged, and oral antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin / clavulanic acid was continued for two weeks on suspicion of soft tissue infection. In the next follow-up presentation, two new lesions with serous drainage were documented. Of note, several swabs failed to show growth of any pathogenic bacteria on standard microbiological examination. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, showing neither bone involvement, nor a remaining foreign body underlying the chronic infection. The patient was transferred to our university hospital where plastic surgical debridement was performed. On histopathological examination, chronic granulomatous purulent inflammation was documented. The lesion was covered by skin grafting and local flap surgery three days later, while intravenous antibiotic treatment with ampicillin / sulbactam was continued over ten days . However, the wound failed to heal, and persistent infected cutaneous lesions were noted on follow-up outpatient appointments . MFC could then be grown from a biopsy on Columbia agar on culture day two. Species identification via MALDI-TOF and subsequent genotypic identification using a DNA hybridization strip assay (GenoType Mycobacterium CM, Hain Lifescience / Bruker) was performed and Infectious Diseases specialist consultation was initiated. Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC)-determination via broth microdilution revealed susceptibility to amikacin and fluoroquinolones, and intermediate sensitivity to imipenem, while the isolated strain exhibited resistance toward linezolid, doxycycline / minocycline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, clarithromycin, and cefoxitin (based on CLSI-breakpoints, M24-A2 2011). In addition, susceptibility testing for the second line antimycobacterial agents clofazimine, bedaquiline, and delamanid was performed . Though official clinical breakpoints for susceptibility testing of NTM for those agents have not been defined yet [, ], the results pointed towards resistance against delamanid and susceptibility for bedaquiline considering proposed European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) breakpoints for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (version 10.0) and previous studies .
The table lists Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of fourteen distinct antimicrobial substances tested on the clinical MFC isolate. Susceptibility was interpreted using CLSI breakpoints (M24-A2 2011), if available. S = sensitive; R = resistant; I = intermediate.
The patient was transferred to the Infectious Diseases department for further diagnostics and treatment. Due to persistent back pain and mild paresthesia in the peripheral extremities, a whole spine MRI was performed, which showed no sign of disseminated infection. In addition, chest radiograph and abdominal ultrasound did not reveal any abnormal findings and the patient tested negative for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-infection. Based on the American Thoracic Society / Infectious Diseases Society of America (ATS / IDSA) guideline and susceptibility testing results, antibiotic therapy was initiated with amikacin (initially 10–15 mg / kg of body weight once a day, intravenously, subsequently adjusted to serum level), levofloxacin (500 mg once a day, orally), and imipenem / cilastatin (0.5 g / 0.5 g twice a day, intravenously) . Treatment was generally tolerated well, however, nausea occasionally required symptomatic antiemetic therapy. Also, the patient reported to feel dizzy when exposed to sunlight. After five weeks and upon clinical improvement as well as approval of health insurance coverage and written informed consent on off-label use, the treatment was changed to an oral regimen consisting of levofloxacin (500 mg once a day, orally) combined with bedaquiline used at doses that have been recommended for MDR TB (14 days of 400 mg once a day orally, followed by 200 mg three times per week). The patient could be discharged and was followed up as an outpatient in our Infectious Diseases clinic. Continuous clinical improvement was noted . Apart from persisting nausea, the patient did not report any notable treatment-related side-effects. Liver enzymes, renal function and blood count were regularly checked and remained unremarkable. Upon completion of four months of treatment the former wound showed persistent scarring without clinical or radiological signs of infection . Since then, the appearance of the scar has continuously improved and five months after completion of therapy, which is 14 months after the initial traffic accident, there is no evidence of infection .