We report a case of 38-year-old Greek woman who presented to our Emergency Department complaining of abdominal pain during the last week without any other symptoms. Her clinical history was clear and she had not noticed the occurrence of the same symptoms before. A clinical examination revealed only focal tenderness in the left part of her abdomen. Laboratory results were within normal limits. During an ultrasound examination of her abdomen, an anechoic lesion in her upper left abdomen was revealed. In a further investigation with computed tomography (CT), a well-defined hypodense cystic 7.08 × 6.05 cm mass with mild enhancement was noted . Surgical approach was decided after a thorough examination and our patient gave her consent for surgery. A cystic lesion sized 7.08 × 6.05 cm appeared between the layers of small bowel mesentery . The cystic lesion was excised within healthy borders and sent for further pathologic examination . On macroscopic examination, the cyst sized 7.08 × 6.05 cm was unilocular and contained a white, milk-like viscous fluid (chylous), which was drained out by incision. Histopathological investigation showed a thick fibrous wall, pervaded by chronic inflammatory cells (lymphocytes and plasma cells) and lymphoid aggregates. Variously sized vessels could also be observed while immunohistochemically CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule) was positive . CD31 is used primarily to demonstrate the presence of endothelial cells and can help to evaluate the degree of tumor angiogenesis. A definitive inner epithelial lining was not found. On the inner surface, multiple aggregates of foamy macrophages as well as focal foreign-body giant cells were present. The thickness of the wall varied trivially with small parts of mature fat tissue toward the outer surface, indicating the mesentery. The findings were found to be most consistent with a simple lymphatic (chylous) cyst of the mesentery in combination with features of a non-pancreatic pseudocyst. Her postoperative course was uneventful and patient feeding was started on the second postoperative day. She was discharged on the fifth postoperative day while she had a low-grade fever. A 6-month follow-up with abdomen ultrasound and 1-year CT imaging showed no signs of recurrence.