A 35-year-old healthy pregnant lady with a history of 3 previous cesarean sections was scheduled for her 4th cesarean delivery. The operation was performed under spinal anesthesia. Severe adhesion of the urinary bladder to the lower uterine segment was encountered but there was no apparent lower urinary tract injury. Her postoperative period was uneventful and she was discharged home the next day. On the 11th postoperative day she was readmitted to the emergency unit at 11 pm with considerable abdominal distension, shortness of breath and difficulty of micturition with straining to void. Further questioning revealed sudden inability to void 5 days earlier followed by mild hematuria and passing a small amount of urine. On examination she was dyspneic, the abdomen was distended, pulse rate was 100 BPM, blood pressure was 100/60 mm/Hg and afebrile. Immediate resuscitation was started and Foley catheter was inserted which drained 100 ml concentrated urine. Serum creatinine (6.8 mg/dl), blood urea (123 mg/dl) and serum potassium (5.6 meq/l) were high. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound showed marked ascites , normal both kidneys with no hydronephrosis. A trial of diagnostic and therapeutic ascitic fluid drainage was performed by putting a percutaneous 12 French pigtail catheter in the right lower abdomen under ultrasonic guidance . Six and a half liters of clear fluid was drained. Biochemical investigation of the drained fluid showed high urea (145 mg/dl) and creatinine (20 mg/dl). Diagnosis of urinary ascites was confirmed. Later on, there was a dramatic improvement in the general condition of the patient. Next day blood chemistry was repeated and showed normal blood urea and serum creatinine. Through cystoscopy, we detected a perforation at the posterior wall of the bladder , while both ureters were normal. Then a Foley catheter was fixed to completely drain the urine in addition to the peritoneal drain to allow the perforation to heal. The patient was put on intravenous fluid and antibiotics with monitoring of vital signs. Three days later the intraperitoneal drain nearly had no drainage and no more free fluid could be seen on ultrasound scan, therefore the tube was removed. The patient was discharged with Foley catheter in place. Two weeks later voiding cystography was performed which showed no more leak and the Foley catheter was removed. The patient was discharged home with a good health and returned to her daily life.