A 73-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital for 6 months with epigastric pain. Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen, mild upper abdominal tenderness without rebound tenderness, and no obvious mass palpable throughout the abdomen. There was tympanic sound on percussion, negative mobile dullness, no percussion pain in the liver and kidney areas, and no enlarged lymph nodes were palpated in the bilateral supraclavicular areas. Laboratory tests showed no significant increase in tumor markers. Electronic gastroscopy: Huge irregular ulcers with irregular hyperplasia around the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum, surface erosions, and a little oozing blood were seen . Gastric biopsy pathology: poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Electronic colonoscopy showed that the sigmoid colon was 20–26 cm away from the anus with a cauliflower-like bulge, with hyperemia, edema and erosion on the surface, around the circumference, the intestinal lumen was slightly narrow, and the intestinal wall was rigid . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed irregular thickening of the gastric antrum wall, enhanced enhancement, no obvious surrounding lymph nodes , and the sigmoid colon had local wall thickness and no obvious surrounding swelling. Lymph nodes . Because the patients and their families requested surgical treatment, they signed the informed consent form for surgery. We conducted a multidisciplinary oncology consultation for the patient. After evaluating the patient’s cardiopulmonary function and no obvious surgical contraindications, we decided to perform Laparoscopic subtotal gastrectomy and sigmoidectomy combined with natural orifice specimen extraction (NOSE) under general anesthesia with tracheal intubation.
After successful anesthesia, take the lithotomy position, routinely sterilize the drape, take an incision of about 1 cm above the umbilicus, incision on the skin and all layers of the abdominal wall, insert a 10 mm trocar, establish a pneumoperitoneum, and the carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum pressure is 10–12 mmHg, and then enter the abdominal cavity. Microscopic examination: no ascites, no metastasis to liver, peritoneum and pelvis. According to the results of preoperative examination and intraoperative exploration, we decided to perform complete laparoscopic radical resection of gastric cancer and sigmoid colon cancer with specimens taken through the natural orifice. We first underwent subtotal gastrectomy. 12 mm trocar was placed as the main operation hole above the midline of the right clavicle and below the costal edge of the left anterior axillary line, and 5 mm trocar was placed above the midline of the left clavicle and below the costal edge of the right anterior axillary line as an auxiliary operation hole. Distal subtotal gastrectomy and standard lymph node dissection were performed under laparoscopy. Digestive tract reconstruction was performed with Billroth II + Braun anastomosis.
To perform sigmoidectomy, 12 mm trocar was placed as the main operating hole at the medial 2 cm of the right anterior superior iliac spine and 5 mm trocar was placed at the left lower abdominal McDonnell’s point . Cut the sigmoid colon at the upper and lower 5 cm of the tumor, Cut open the distal intestine, disinfect with iodophor gauze, and remove the gauze through the rectum to prevent abdominal infection. Put the sterile protective bag into the abdominal cavity from the right 12 mm trocar, put the oval forceps through the anus, pull out one end of the sterile protective bag from the anus, and first put the nail head of the tubular stapler into the abdominal cavity by aseptic protective bag. Then the oval forceps were used to remove the stomach and sigmoid colon specimens successively through the anus. After the specimen was removed, the aseptic protective bag was closed and protruded through the anus . Close the broken end of the rectum, insert the nail anvil head of the tubular stapler in the proximal colon by reverse puncture, and insert the tubular anastomosis through the anus for end-to-side anastomosis of the rectosigmoid colon, and the anastomosis can be strengthened with absorbable sutures. The abdominal cavity and pelvic cavity were washed, no active bleeding was examined. Abdominal drainage was placed in the splenic fossa, under the gallbladder and in the pelvis and suture the abdominal incision .
The operation time was 365 min, the blood loss was 50 mL, specimens of subtotal gastrectomy and sigmoid colon in . The patient got out of bed 36 h after the operation and was discharged from the hospital 10 days later. Postoperative pathology: (1) Gastric poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, with an area of 4.5 cm × 3.5 cm, invading the full thickness of the gastric wall, no clear nerve invasion and intravascular tumor thrombus, positive serosal surface, and 48 lymph nodes were detected, none of which were found. See cancer metastasis, no cancer metastasis in omentum tissue, mouth, anus clean margins. (2) Moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon, with an area of 3.5 cm × 2 cm, invading the entire thickness of the intestinal wall and reaching the fat, with tumor thrombi in the vessels, no clear nerve invasion, clean serosa, and 17 lymph nodes were detected around the intestine, all of which were No cancer metastasis was found, the mesenteric resection margin and the surrounding near incision margin were clean, and the mouth and anal incision margins were clean.
There were no complications after the operation, and the patient was discharged smoothly. As of 12 months after operation, no tumor recurrence or metastasis was found.