A 23-year-old man sprained his left ankle while playing football 3 years previously. He complained of left ankle swelling and chronic pain. His ankle X-rays were unremarkable. Following this initial presentation, his symptoms gradually improved, but he continued to note intermittent resting pain at night that was unrelated to activity. This night pain could become severe but was relieved by NSAIDs. One year after his injury, the patient presented for treatment because of recurring left ankle pain and swelling. X-rays showed sclerotic lesions in the neck of the talus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his left ankle showed oedema in the talar bone marrow, left ankle joint effusion, and periarticular soft tissue swelling . He was diagnosed with ankle traumatic arthritis and underwent ankle arthroscopy at a local hospital. We referred to the patient’s record at the local hospital. The attending doctor performed arthroscopic debridement of the left ankle joint and found free small pieces of broken bone and osteophytes in the ankle joint during the surgery. However, no lesion was detected on the articular surface of the talus. We speculated that this may have been related to the limited arthroscopic field of view as well as the diagnostic level of the physician and his or her the lack of experience in arthroscopic techniques. The patient obtained short-term relief of pain for 3 months after the surgery because the arthroscopic debridement reduced inflammation around the joint. Additionally, long-term bed rest after surgery helped to temporarily control the symptoms. However, unless the nidus is completely removed in cases of OO, the symptoms gradually worsen after a short period of relief. The patient’s pain reappeared 3 months later, with more frequent night pain than before surgery. Postoperative MRI exhibited widespread oedema in the talar bone marrow . The attending doctor provided supportive treatment such as ice, compression, physical therapy, and oral NSAIDs to ease the pain. During the following 2 years, the patient’s pain continued but remained unassociated with activity. When the patient presented to our hospital, he could hardly stand or walk. His left ankle joint was swollen with a slightly increased local skin temperature. His foot was diffusely tender, especially at the anterolateral talus, without exacerbation upon palpation of the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL). The ankle anterior drawer test was negative. A typical OO nidus was demonstrated in the talus on X-ray , CT , and MRI . The patient subsequently underwent nidus excision and artificial bone grafting . Postoperative pathologic examination confirmed that the excised tumour was a 1.5- × 1.5- × 1.0-cm OO . The patient’s pain and swelling disappeared after the treatment. He was able to walk normally when he presented for follow-up 3 months later.