A 33-year-old male was found alone and unresponsive on a public bathroom floor lying on top of his left arm for an indeterminant amount of time; however, it was estimated to be several hours. EMS administered Narcan to the patient, which led to minimal improvement in responsiveness. Upon evaluation in the emergency department, he was intubated and given Naloxone, hydrocortisone, and piperacillin-tazobactam. A stat CT of the head was performed, which was negative for intracranial bleed, and he was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit for further workup. His laboratories on admission included a creatine kinase (CK) of 1547 IU/L, creatinine of 1.7 mg/d, and GFR of 56 ( and ). The urine toxicology screen was positive for opioids.
On the 2nd day of admission, the patient’s CK was noted to increase to 38640 IU/L . The medical team also became concerned with left upper extremity swelling, and orthopedics was consulted to rule out an underlying musculoskeletal injury. The physical examination was limited by patient sedation, but he was noted to have severe swelling of the arm and forearm as well as a decreased radial pulse in comparison to the contralateral side. Compartment pressures of the left forearm were obtained using an intercompartmental measurement device. The volar compartment was found to have a pressure of 25 mmHg, the dorsal compartment was 41 mmHg, and the mobile was 25 mmHg. Based on these findings, in conjunction with a diastolic blood pressure of 80, it was decided that the patient should undergo an emergent bedside fasciotomy. Laboratories at this time demonstrated myoglobinuria, which was consistent with ischemic muscle damage.
The patient underwent emergent fasciotomies within 1 h of consultation. The skin was prepped with betadine, and a volar forearm incision was made overlying the flexor carpi radialis tendon. There was moderate pallor of the superficial flexor muscles, providing further evidence of ischemic damage and muscle necrosis. Blunt dissection was carried out digitally on the underlying fascia, which was then incised. The flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus were released and mobilized until the radius was encountered and all volar compartments were released. Next, the dorsal forearm compartment was released through a longitudinal incision. The dorsal musculature also showed pallor consistent with muscle necrosis. Blunt dissection was carried out to the level of the ulna, ensuring that all muscles in the dorsal compartment had been adequately released. At this point, the upper arm was noted to have moderate to severe residual swelling, although the compartments were noted to be somewhat compressible. Given the amount of tissue damage and necrosis present in the forearm, it was deemed appropriate to proceed with fasciotomies of the arm. A longitudinal anterolateral incision was made along the arm. The brachialis and coracobrachialis muscle bellies were identified and appeared to have adequate blood supply and normal contractility. All grossly necrotic tissues encountered in the forearm were debrided before the wounds were packed with sterile wet-to-dry dressings and loosely wrapped.
He returned to the operating room for irrigation and debridement of his fasciotomy wounds on post-operative day 4 (-). At this time, the volar forearm was noted to have further necrotic muscle, which was sharply debrided. On the 4th day of admission, his creatinine improved to 1.7 mg/dL, while his BUN was 35 mg/dL . This further decreased on the 6th day of admission to 1.41 mg/dL and 26 mg/dL, respectively . On post-operative day 7, he underwent a second irrigation and debridement of his wounds, which were still deemed unacceptable for primary closure. On the 8th day of admission, the patient’s creatinine and BUN had normalized . The patient subsequently underwent split-thickness skin grafting on postoperative day 9 for wound coverage. Donor-site grafting was obtained from the patient’s left anterior thigh. At the last encounter, the patient had limited elbow and wrist range of motion. Additionally, he had minimal flexion movement and no extension in the digits of the hand, and there was residual pain and paresthesia in his left upper extremity. He was prescribed Gabapentin for neuropathic pain and referred to Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation for his paresthesia and hemiparesis. He was seen by psychiatry for his opioid addiction. He was then lost to further orthopedic follow-up.