A two-year-old girl was brought to the emergency room because of shortness of breath and chest distress (History of present illness seen Table ). However, the hemodynamics including heart rate and blood pressure were stable. She also had an intermittent fever for the past one month, and the highest was 39 °C. A 3/6 grade systolic murmur was heard at the apex auscultation area. ECG was nearly normal. Chest X-ray and thoracic CT showed a needle inserted from the chest wall into the heart cavity . Echocardiography showed severe mitral valve prolapse and regurgitation ; the needle was inserted into the left ventricle and papillary muscle . We asked the patient’s parents about the medical history of the child; however, they were unaware of how the needle was penetrated the girl’s body. After the exclusion of surgical contraindications, we decided to perform this operation. After thoracotomy, we found that the left ventricular surface had severe hyperplasia and adhesion to the pericardium. However, the needle was invisible. We then established a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). After cardiac arrest, we observed that the apex of the needle penetrated from the right atrium-atrial septum into the posterior wall of the left ventricle through the anterior papillary muscle. Anterior papillary muscle and chordae tendineae were partially destroyed and showed infectious endocarditis-associated changes. The mitral valve was severely refluxed. We took the needle out from the mitral orifice and fixed the chordae tendineae to the papillary muscle. However, some chordae tendineae and papillary muscles were destroyed, and moderate-to-severe mitral valve regurgitation persisted. Accordingly, we repaired the mitral valve by double-orifice (edge-to-edge) technique . Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed mild mitral valve regurgitation (Additional file : Video 3). Finally, we separated the left ventricular surface from the pericardium and closed the crevasse by a mattress suture using a felt pledget . Finally, the girl recovered and was discharged 26 days after the operation. The child was already treated with antibiotics before coming to the hospital, and preoperative blood cultures were negative. However, endocarditis could be diagnosed by 1 major criteria (imaging positive for IE) and 3 minor criteria (predisposition, fever defined as temperature > 38 °C and vascular phenomena) according to 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis. As a result, diuretics were used within 2 months after the operation, and antibiotics were used because of endocarditis according to the ESC guidelines of infective endocarditis. Fortunately, she was well at the 2-year follow-up. Echocardiography at the local hospital showed that mitral valve was normal, but she did not come to our hospital for echocardiography examination due to the long distance and economic reasons. Nonetheless, close attention must be paid to the fragile mitral valve as the girl grows. There have been previous reports of a heart stuck by a needle; however, reports on the damage of the papillary muscles and chordae tendineae are rare.