The patient was a 39-year-old man, who was the first of 2 siblings. His mother had a history of slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness, received pacemaker implantation for slow heart rate at the age of 40 years, and died from sudden cardiac arrest at the age of 50. His younger brother also had similar proximal lower limbs weakness; however he committed suicide at age 31 years. For our index patient, toe-walking and frequent falls were first noted at the age of around 5 years. In his adolescence, he developed proximal leg weakness with Gowers’ sign (i.e., with hip girdle weakness, the patient arises from a stooped or a squatting position by using his hands to “climb up the legs”). Around age 30 years, atrial fibrillation (AF) was found, and he was prescribed with aspirin and an angiotensin-converting enzymes inhibitor. In addition, mild ankle contractures were noted. An electromyographic study revealed myopathic changes, consisting of muscle potentials of small amplitudes and polyphasic waves of short duration, in biceps brachii and rectus femoris. His baseline creatine kinase level was around 200 IU/L (reference range, <190 IU/L for a male). At age 36 years, he complained of chest tightness, and electrocardiography showed AF with slow ventricular rate, right bundle branch block, and transient ventricular tachycardia. Pacemaker implantation (VVI pacemaker, i.e., ventricular pacing, ventricular sensing, pacemaker inhibited) was done at that time.
He suffered from acute onset of right limb weakness and speech disturbance. The acute onset of focal neurological symptoms was suggestive of stroke, thus he was sent to our hospital immediately. Neurological examination revealed global aphasia, right hemianopia, gaze deviation to the left side, and right hemiplegia. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 22. Initial head computed tomography (CT) did not reveal intracranial hemorrhage. He received intravenous thrombolytic therapy of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) (73 mg, equal to 0.9 mg/kg) within 3 hours of stroke onset. CT angiography right after thrombolytic therapy revealed nearly total occlusion of the left distal internal carotid artery and proximal middle cerebral artery (MCA) , and CT perfusion image revealed reduced cerebral perfusion in the left hemisphere . Follow-up head CT on the next day showed a hypodensity lesion mainly in the left MCA territory , and the size was much smaller than the previous perfusion defect. Transcranial color-coded sonography showed a visible MCA flow signal on color mode but mildly reduced flow velocity on Doppler mode, indicating partial recanalization. Two-dimensional echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 47%, and enlargement of bilateral ventricles and left atrium. Twenty-four hours after thrombolytic therapy, his NIHSS score was 16; one week later the NIHSS score significantly improved to 5. He was treated with an oral anticoagulantion for secondary stroke prevention. After rehabilitation, his right hemiplegia and aphasia improved gradually. Six months after stroke, he could ambulate without assistance, and speak fluently with only mild naming difficulty.
Given the myopathic features with mild contracture, cardiac arrhythmia and dilated cardiomyopathy, and also positive family history, LMNA related muscular dystrophies was highly suspected. For further genetic analysis, the patient’s peripheral blood was obtained with informed consent. All the coding and flanking regions of the LMNA gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction with primers. The confirmatory sequencing demonstrated a heterozygous mutation of “G” to “A” transition at the splicing donor site at intron 2 (c.513+1 G>A / wild type, Figure ). The nucleoside change was not identified in screening 50 Taiwanese controls. All the study subjects had signed informed consent and the study protocol was approved by the National Taiwan University Hospital ethics board committees.