We report herein the case of an 80-year-old caucasian man who developed vesiculobullous rashes involving his trunk, shoulder close to the axilla, and inguinal regions for 2 months before admission on 17 June 2019 . These were associated with severe pruritus causing significant sleep disturbance, and Nikolsky sign was negative. Clinical and histological findings were consistent with bullous pemphigoid (BP). His past medical history was only significant for chronic tophaceous gout and hypertension. He was a current smoker with 40 pack-years history of smoking. He lived alone and had a supportive friend who was the only close person in contact with him.
He was commenced on betamethasone cream and oral doxycycline followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) daily without any response. Paraneoplastic nature of the disease was suspected, and computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest was performed given the significant history of smoking. CT scan revealed a spiculated left lung lesion along with mediastinal lymphadenopathy. PET scan showed a hypermetabolic focus on left lung apex mass suspicious of primary malignancy with metastases to the mediastinal nodes and liver lesion. Fine needle aspiration from the mediastinal lymph node confirmed advanced squamous cell lung cancer, which was PDL1 80%.
Although eligible for first-line immunotherapy, because of the likelihood of autoimmune mechanism and association of bullous pemphigoid, the decision was made to treat with chemotherapy. He was treated with carboplatin and gemcitabine , based on a previous case report of BP associated with squamous cell carcinoma treated with cisplatin and gemcitabine. The dose was reduced at 75% of the calculated dose due to his age and high risk of toxicity predicted by Cancer and Aging Research Group (CAGR) chemotherapy toxicity calculator. A significant response was seen within 3 days of chemotherapy as depicted in Figs. and (pictures 3–6). But the subsequent dose of chemotherapy had to be withheld after he developed small bowel obstruction secondary to incarcerated inguinal hernia. Even after stopping chemotherapy, the bullous pemphigoid rashes continued to remain in remission after marked clinical improvement . On further follow-up, he wanted to pursue best supportive care under palliative care team, hence further scans were not organized.