On 24 March 2020, a 61-year-old man was presented to the emergency department with a history of chest pain that started 3 h prior to his admission. His electrocardiogram revealed inferolateral ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) . Treatment was started with clopidogrel, acetylsalicylic acid loading doses (600 mg, 300 mg, respectively), and bolus unfractioned heparin (5000 unit). Transthoracic echocardiography (ECHO) revealed left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) (45%) and inferior wall mild hypokinesia. On presentation, his physical examination was normal and past medical history was significant for only hypertension. The patient was taken emergently to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Coronary angiography revealed thrombotic occlusion in the ostium of the first marginal branch of the proximal left circumflex artery (LCx) .
PCI of the culprit lesion in the LCx was performed using an everolimus-eluting stent and abciximab treatment was started (a 0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by a 0.125 µg/kg/min infusion for 12 h, intravenously) for the high thrombus burden. The patient was then transferred to the coronary intensive care unit without any complications. The initial laboratory tests results were unremarkable .
Two hours following the procedure, the patient developed dyspnoea and hypoxaemia (SaO2 of 89% while receiving oxygen through a nasal cannula at a rate of 2 L/min). Chest examination revealed diffuse rales over both lung fields and the bed side chest X-ray revealed bilateral diffuse alveolar infiltrates . In the bedside ECHO, there were preserved EF (50%), estimated pulmonary artery pressure of 30 mmHg and no significant valve dysfunction or any mechanical complications of STEMI. Intravenous diuretic therapy, morphine and supplemental oxygen via a face mask was initiated considering pulmonary oedema related to the myocardial infarction. Despite 6 h of treatment, the patient’s dyspnoea was not resolved and his oxygen saturation remained <93% on supplemental oxygen, developed paroxysm of coughing without haemoptysis and became febrile (37.9°C). A high-resolution chest computed tomography (CT) was performed without contrast and showed bilateral severe ground-glass opacity with superimposed inter and intra-lobular septal thickening (crazy paving appearance) and interstitial infiltrates . Laboratory tests again revealed no remarkable changes with the exception of elevated d-dimer, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), neutrophil count, and lymphopenia . According to the CT and clinical picture, the patient was considered to be highly suspected of COVID-19 and was transferred to a quarantine unit. After nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab for the real-time reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test and obtaining blood cultures, azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine treatments were initiated. During the subsequent 36 h, the symptoms persisted and first RT-PCR test was reported negative (test results are available within 24 h in our clinic). At the 48 h of admission, suddenly, a 2.6 mmol/L decrease in haemoglobin levels and haemoptysis were observed and the second RT-PCR result was also negative. The diagnosis of abciximab-induced DAH was suspected but not confirmed by bronchoscopy, since it was relatively contraindicated in recent myocardial infarction (MI). Immediately, CT was repeated and evaluated together with the first CT and reported to be compatible with DAH by the council consisting of three separate radiologists . Azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine treatments were stopped, two units of erythrocyte transfusion was performed and ceftriaxone was started to avoid possible bacterial superinfection. Acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel treatments were interrupted and restarted again when the patient regained stable haemoglobin levels during the next 3 days. The patient’s haemodynamic status and oxygenation stabilized over the next several days, with only minor recurrences of haemoptysis and mild anaemia that did not lead to haemodynamic disorder. He was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks later without additional complications.