A 54-year-old male with body mass index of 32 presented with a one-month history of acute-on-chronic LBP following heavy lifting during a recent move. The pain was experienced constantly, characterized as sharp, stabbing, and shooting, and radiated into the right buttock, lateral hip, and anterior thigh. He had associated right lower extremity numbness and tingling, in addition to weakness affecting the gluteal and quadriceps muscles. Pain was worse with lying supine and improved with sitting. He reported new onset difficulties with ambulation, including navigating stairs, transfers, and activities of daily living. Visual analog pain score was reported at 10/10. He denied symptoms of saddle anesthesia, bowel or bladder dysfunction and other CES-like symptoms. He tried over-the-counter analgesics, opioids, muscle relaxants, gabapentinoids and therapeutic exercises without improvement. Of note, he reported that these symptoms were significantly different from his intermittent axial, non-radicular LBP symptoms, which typically resolved spontaneously in 2–3 weeks with over-the-counter analgesics and adherence to his home-exercise program.
The patient was evaluated by a neurosurgeon and an interventional pain medicine physician. Physical exam revealed 5/5 strength on manual muscle testing of the bilateral lower extremities, except for 4/5 strength in the right quadriceps and hamstrings muscles. Sensation was intact to light touch in all dermatomes throughout the bilateral lower extremities. Perineal sensation was intact. Right-sided straight-leg raise was positive eliciting increased low back pain with aggravation of pain and tingling down the right leg, including the gluteal region and anterior thigh. Right lower extremity deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were hypoactive compared to the contralateral side. Babinski's sign was negative. MRI of the lumbar spine revealed high-grade central canal stenosis due to intradural disc herniation completely effacing the subarachnoid space and causing bilateral nerve root compression at the L3-4 level (, ). The case was discussed among the neurosurgeon, pain physician and patient/family, and the decision was made to pursue a LESI as the patient declined surgery at this time, since he was leaving the city for an out-of-state job. The first LESI was performed roughly 6-weeks post injury. Due to nerve root redundancy above the level of the herniation (L3-4) and intolerance to injection at the L3-4 level due to pain, the epidural space at the L2-3 level was targeted via interlaminar approach under fluoroscopic guidance with notable cranial and caudal contrast spread . A standardized solution of 1% lidocaine anesthetic and 80 mg of methylprednisolone acetate was injected. There were no procedural complications. At one-week follow-up post injection, the patient reported minimal pain relief, and the decision was made to proceed with a second LESI. Two weeks later, the patient underwent the second LESI by right-sided interlaminar approach at the same L2-3 level without complication. He reported approximately 40% overall improvement with reduction in pain, improved mobility, and increased ability to participate in daily activities and work duties. However, there was no recovery in motor weakness or DTRs at either post-injection follow-up visit.
At three-month follow-up post injury, the patient reported worsening and debilitating LBP characterized as sharp, electrical shock-like sensations involving the back and legs. Symptoms progressed from unilateral right-sided radiculopathy to bilateral lower extremity tingling and intermittent numbness. He reported that he had done “more than usual” at work, particularly, he noted having ambulated 14,000 steps the day prior to pain exacerbation. He endorsed associated lumbar muscle spasms with impaired ability to stand or walk for more than five minutes. He reported significant fear-avoidance behavior and inability to find comfortable positions. He tried meloxicam, gabapentinoids and opioid analgesics, as well as physical therapy without improvement. The patient reconsulted with the neurosurgeon and the pain physician four months after initial injury. His physical examination was unchanged from prior visits and an updated lumbar spine MRI was obtained reconfirming the intradural location of the disc herniation without significantly increased mass effect on the nerve roots within the thecal sac. Based upon the progressive nature of the patient’s symptoms, the decision was made to proceed with surgical intervention.
In this case, the patient underwent an L3-L4 laminectomy and intradural resection of the disc herniation . The ventral dural rent was identified and noted to be adherent to the annulus of the L3 disc space. Following complete resection of the intradural disc herniation, the dural was closed primarily. The dural repair was tested with intraoperative Valsalva to 30 mm water with no evidence of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. The dural repair was reinforced with Tissel® and the remainder of the incision was closed in anatomical layers. Intraoperative motor evoked potential monitoring was performed throughout the course of the case, and there was no change between the preoperative and intraoperative recordings. The patient tolerated the procedure well, was monitored for cerebral spinal fluid leak post-operatively, and ultimately discharged on post-operative day 4 to acute inpatient rehabilitation. At the 6-week postoperative visit, the patient’s symptoms had resolved, his neurologic exam had normalized, and he was able to return to full employment without restriction. At five month follow-up, his Oswestry Disability Score was 8/50 (16%), a 79% decreased from the pre-surgical score of 39/50 points (78%) of complete disability.