A 58-year-old man collapsed on the street and was raced to our emergency room. He had a prior history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and dysuria. Time last known well was 90 min before arrival. His blood pressure was 155/81 mmHg and his pulse rate was 90 bpm. His body temperature was 36.9°C. On neurologic examination, his Glasgow Coma Scale score was E3V1M5 (total score 9). He had total aphasia, right-sided hemiparesis, and left conjugate deviation of the eyes. His initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 20. Hematology test results were as follows: white blood cell count 9500/μL; C-reactive protein 3.46 mg/dL; brain natriuretic peptide <5.8 pg/mL; and D-dimer 1.1 μg/mL. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed no intracranial hemorrhage and early ischemic change was absent (CT – Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score 10). Diffusion-weighted images from magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed a high signal intensity area in the left MCA territory (diffusion-weighted image – Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score 4), with a small high signal intensity area in the peripheral region of the left ACA , which was barely delineated in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence. Magnetic resonance angiography showed occlusion of the M1 segment of the left MCA. Although the onset of symptoms was unknown on arrival, magnetic resonance imaging results indicated it to be within 6 h. Mechanical thrombectomy was performed with a door-to-puncture time of 75 min. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator was not administered.
The right femoral access was obtained. A 9-French balloon guiding catheter was placed in the left internal carotid artery. The left internal carotid artery angiography showed occlusion of the distal part of the M1 segment of the left MCA and the peripheral region of the pericallosal artery of the left ACA [-]. The stent retriever (Embotrap II 5.0 × 33 mm; Cerenovus, Irvine, CA, USA) was deployed from the M2 segment to the M1 segment and retracted into the aspiration catheter (REACT 71; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) in the M1 segment that was proximal to the thrombus. On the second attempt, the clot was retrieved, and reperfusion of the left MCA was achieved with a puncture-to-reperfusion time of 51 min . Because the occlusion site of the left pericallosal artery was peripheral and collateral blood flow was observed distal to the occlusion site, thrombectomy was not performed [ and ].
After thrombectomy, aphasia and right-side hemiparesis improved quickly. His NIHSS score improved to 4. Electrocardiographic monitoring showed no atrial fibrillation. Head magnetic resonance imaging obtained 4 h after thrombectomy showed a reduced diffusion-weighted imaging high signal intensity area in the left MCA territory with a small high signal intensity area in the peripheral region of the left ACA . Head CT obtained 24 h after thrombectomy showed a small high-density area in the left ACA territory . He was diagnosed with hemorrhagic infarction and antihypertensive therapy was started. Thirty-eight hours after thrombectomy, aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis appeared again. Head CT showed subcortical hemorrhage in the left ACA territory and intraventricular hemorrhage . Head CT obtained 48 h after thrombectomy showed enlargement of subcortical hematoma and intraventricular distension . After endoscopic intraventricular hematoma removal, septostomy, and third ventriculostomy, a ventricular drain was placed. In addition, endoscopic subcortical hematoma removal was performed from the parietal lobe side. After the intracranial pressure was reduced, the operation was terminated, leaving the hematoma in the deep area around the hemorrhage source. Postoperative CT showed residual hematoma around the infarct area in the left ACA territory . On the 4th day of hospitalization, fever in the 38°C range appeared, and blood testing showed elevated such inflammatory markers as white blood cell 8400/μL and C-reactive protein 7.07 mg/dL, which were considered postoperative changes.
On the 6th day of hospitalization, the diagnosis was made on the basis of pathological findings of the thrombus retrieved from the left MCA. The thrombus was a single mass of 8 × 5 mm, with a visually recognizable red component mixed with a localized white component. It was firm and maintained the shape of the vessel at the distal part of the M1 segment and the bifurcation . Hematoxylineosin staining showed that the thrombus consisted mainly of fibrin and platelets, with bacterial colonies and focally abundant neutrophils at the margins of the thrombus. Gram staining showed that the bacteria were Gram-positive cocci [-]. Consistent with the visually recognizable white component of the thrombus, Gram-positive cocci were observed [-].
After the pathological diagnosis of the thrombus was made, an infected aneurysm was suspected of the source of the left frontal subcortical hemorrhage. CT angiography was performed, which revealed an aneurysm in the peripheral region of the left ACA . On the 7th day of hospitalization, endovascular embolization was performed. The left femoral access was obtained. A 6-French guiding catheter was placed in the left internal carotid artery. The left internal carotid artery angiography and three-dimensional rotational angiography showed a 5.8 mm saccular aneurysm in the peripheral region of the pericallosal artery of the left ACA [-]. The location of the aneurysm coincided with the occlusion area identified during thrombectomy [ and ]. No aneurysm was formed in the recanalized distal part of the left M1 segment. A microcatheter (Marathon; Medtronic) was navigated into the aneurysm using a microguidewire. Coils and n-butyl cyanoacrylate were used to embolize the aneurysm and the parent artery of the left pericallosal artery. Posttreatment angiography showed complete occlusion of the aneurysm [ and ].
A diagnosis of septic embolism was made, and ceftriaxone and vancomycin were administered. Streptococcus gallolyticus developed from the blood culture taken on the 6th day of hospitalization. The antibiotics were switched to aminobenzylpenicillin, and the patient was treated for 5 weeks after the blood culture became negative.
Because of his poor general condition, transesophageal echocardiography was not performed. Postoperative magnetic resonance angiography and CT angiography of the head showed no new intracranial aneurysms. On the 49th day of hospitalization, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital. At the time of transfer, he was still suffering from aphasia and right hemiparesis (NIHSS score of 21), with a modified Rankin scale score of 5.