A 34-year-old woman with past medical history of mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) previously on immunosuppressive therapy and immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) status-post splenectomy presented with sepsis secondary to recurrent neck abscesses.
The patient reported two erythematous, painful, warm, and indurated areas on her chest and posterior neck that had been worsening over the past 10 days . She had a history of recurrent presentation of neck abscesses over the few years prior to this admission and most recently had a neck abscess drained one month prior. Bacterial culture from the drainage was noted to be negative, but Mycoplasma pneumoniae was detected upon microbial cell-free DNA analysis. She was started on oral azithromycin, which she had been taking daily until admission. No evidence of fever, dysphagia, or arthralgia in this time was noted.
In addition to ITP, past medical history revealed several years of recurrent abscesses of the neck and perianal region with negative cultures. She had previously received rituximab for six weeks over a decade prior to presentation. In 2016 she had mycoplasma pneumonia lasting six months . She also was found to have pulmonary nodules which were biopsied, revealing granulomatous inflammation. Later that year, due to her history of ITP, pulmonary nodules, positive antinuclear antibody (ANA), positive ribonucleotide protein (RNP) antibody, family history of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), she was diagnosed with MCTD for which she followed with rheumatology and was started on azathioprine and hydroxychloroquine (she self-discontinued both medications several months prior to admission out of concern for immunosuppression contributing to her recurrent abscesses). In 2018 she developed sepsis from lymphadenitis. A lymph node biopsy showed chronic inflammation with granulomatous features and serological detection of microbial cell-free DNA of M. pneumoniae. Warthin-Starry stain, Grocott-Gomori methanamine silver (GMS), and acid-fast bacilli stains (AFB) were negative.
Her vaccinations were up to date, including a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV-13) she had received following her splenectomy for ITP. She affirmed a strong family history of lupus and thyroid disease.
She initially met systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria due to fever of 101.4°F and tachycardia. Physical exam revealed an atraumatic neck with diffuse cervical lymphadenopathy and three abscesses in the submental, supra-jugular, and right lateral posterior neck. She underwent incision and drainage and empiric treatment for M. pneumoniae with IV azithromycin. Her white blood cell count was within normal limits, but C-reactive protein was elevated at 5.86 mg/dL (range < 0.5). Gram stain and multiple wound cultures and blood cultures were negative. Broad range PCR of the lymph node aspirate was again positive for M. pneumonia.
Given her known history of recurrent and prolonged mycoplasma infections, her mycoplasma IgM and IgG antibodies were measured to rule out primary immunodeficiency. Both were revealed to be negative, raising concern for inability of memory B-cell differentiation. Further immunological workup revealed IgG = 541 mg/dL (reference laboratory range 552–631), IgA = 83 mg/dL (range 65–421), and IgM = 21 mg/dL (range 33–293); her hypogammaglobulinemia pointed toward possible underlying CVID. Her absolute T cell count = 875/mm3 (range 603–2990), CD4 helper = 540/mm3 (range 441–2156), CD8 = 319 (range 125–1,312), CD19 B cell = 150 (range 107–698/mm3), and CD16/56 natural killer cells = 66/mm3 (range 95–40). Her pneumococcal vaccine titers were measured, which were low for 11/23 serotypes, solidifying the diagnosis of CVID. She subsequently received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
Her remaining hospital course was unremarkable. She was discharged on oral azithromycin with a referral to Allergy and Immunology (A&I) outpatient.
Shortly after discharge she returned to the hospital with a similar presentation, again underwent incision and drainage (I&D) by surgery, received IVIG, and was prescribed levofloxacin. Immunoglobulin levels were followed, and IgG initially was within normal limits, but continued IVIG treatment was delayed due to insurance. IgG levels trended down and during this time, and her lymphadenopathy increased in size and number, for which doxycycline was added. IgA levels remained normal and IgM levels remained persistently low. She has since received regular IVIG treatments, with her IgG levels responsive to treatment (IgG = 966 range 552–631, IgA = 79 range 65–421, and IgM = 13 range 33–293). Her pneumococcal vaccine titers have also since normalized.