This is a healthy 53-year-old male with an unremarkable medical or surgical history, who has a 6-month history of progressive neck pain that radiates to his right and left shoulders. The patients’ pain, which was alleviated by analgesia and physiotherapy, increased when he lay flat or on his left side. His neurological examination, including a cranial nerves exam, indicated normal findings. There was no history of trauma or sinus disease.
Imaging of the cervical spine and brain was performed. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined mildly expansile bone lesion in the clivus with low T1 and high T2 signal intensity with nearly complete suppression of signal intensity on fluid attenuated inversion recovery. No contrast enhancement or solid tissue was identified. There is a mild posterior expansion of the clivus, which caused effacement of the prepontine cistern, mild collapse of the clivus, and relatively acute angulation of the clivus canal angle. Surgery was discussed to perform a biopsy and reach a diagnosis.
The patient underwent transnasal endoscopic resection of the clival lesion in collaboration with the ear, nose, and throat team using neuronavigation. The superior margin of the clival lesion was identified by neuronavigation, and then trepination of the anterior portion of the clivus was performed using a high-speed drill . A gush of clear colorless fluid leaked under high-pressure. Direct communication was detected between the subarachnoid space and the cyst through a dural defect. The cyst wall was a direct continuation of the arachnoid membrane. Specimens were taken from the bone, cyst wall, and cavity and were sent for analysis. The intraoperative fresh frozen section was inconclusive. A fat graft was obtained from the thigh, placed in the cystic bony cavity and supported by a synthetic plate and septal flap. There were no intraoperative complications, and the patient was transferred to the recovery room in stable condition for observation.
The specimens taken from the bone, cyst wall, and cavity consisted of a fragmented white tan hemorrhagic bony and soft tissue. Microscopy confirmed fragments of bone with focal degeneration and fragments of fibrous tissue with foci hemosiderin deposition (indicates old hemorrhage). There was no intact defining cyst lining identified and no evidence of neoplastic process. The findings were consistent with a clival simple bone cyst.