A 35-year-old Japanese woman with no notable medical or family histories developed bronchial asthma. Treatment was initiated, and the course of bronchial asthma had been favorable. After 11 years, rotary vertigo, difficulty of hearing in the right ear, and palsies of the left lower extremity and right forearm occurred. A diagnosis of CSS was made on the basis of bronchial asthma, neuropathy of the peroneal nerve and ulnar nerve, findings of angiitis by biopsy of the left sural nerve, increased eosinophil counts, and positivity for myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA). The pathological conditions were alleviated by prednisolone (PSL) treatment with a tapering schedule from a dose of 1mg/kg and methyl-prednisolone pulse therapy (mPSL). Three years later, owing to another increase in MPO-ANCA and exacerbation of peripheral nerve neuropathy during PSL treatment at a dose of 10mg/day, mPSL pulse therapy was administered again and the dose of PSL was increased to 50mg/day (1mg/kg). However, because the neuropathy was not alleviated, intravenous cyclophosphamide (IVCY) pulse therapy (750mg/body) was administered six times every four weeks. The IVCY therapy stabilized our patient’s condition. Subsequently, the dose of PSL was decreased to 10mg/dL gradually.
More than three years later (when our patient was 52 years old), she was hospitalized again because of the recurrence of bilateral hearing difficulty and rotary vertigo. At admission, physical findings included a body temperature of 36.2°C, a blood pressure of 132/74mmHg, a pulse of 66 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 18 per minute. No abnormal cardiac sounds were noted, and mild wheezing sounds were present in the lung field. Spontaneous leftward horizontally rotary mixed nystagmus was present, and owing to strong vertigo our patient had difficulty being in a sitting position. A hearing test revealed average hearing thresholds of 86.3dB in the right ear and 78.8dB in the left ear, which indicated severe perceptive deafness (sensorineural hearing impairment). She did not have tinnitus or recruitment phenomenon. Neurological findings included neuropathies of the right ulnar, left peroneal, and right tibial nerves, and left foot drop. Chest radiography and head magnetic resonance imaging did not show any abnormalities, and examination findings included a leukocyte count of 13,300/μL, an eosinophil count of 31.0% (4123/μL), a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 6.408mg/dL, and an MPO-ANCA of 226EU . The results of serum cytokine measurements by the cytometric bead array method were as follows: interleukin-4 (IL-4) of 3.3pg/mL (normal is less than 1.4), IL-5 of 11pg/mL (normal is less than 1.1), IL-6 of 6.9pg/mL (normal is less than 1.6), IL-10 of 4.9pg/mL (normal is less than 0.13), IL-13 of 7.4pg/mL (normal is less than 0.6), and interferon-gamma (IFNγ) of 0.1pg/mL (normal is less than 1.8).
The diagnosis was neuropathy of the eighth cranial nerve associated with exacerbation of allergic granulomatous angiitis, and mPSL pulse therapy and subsequent oral PSL at a dose of 55mg/day (1mg/kg per day) were begun. This treatment resulted in gradual alleviation of bronchial asthma, eosinophilia, CRP level, and mononeuritis multiplex but not of the foot drop. Also, the hearing difficulty and vertigo were not alleviated. Although reinforced treatment by IVCY was planned initially, our patient refused because of the severe nausea that occurred in the previous IVCY treatment. Therefore, IVIg (400mg/kg per day for five days) was combined from day 14. From around day 20, the hearing ability and foot drop began to improve gradually. On day 42, a hearing test revealed average hearing thresholds of 70.0 and 61.7dB in the right and left ears, respectively, and the vertigo had disappeared. After our patient was discharged from the hospital, the dose of PSL was decreased to 10mg/day and her condition is currently stable.