The patient provided consent for publication of this case report.
A 65-year-old Chinese woman was admitted with right lumbar and abdominal pain of 1 month’s duration and intermittent fever. She had a long history of diabetes that was well controlled. There were no positive clinical signs except percussive pain in the right renal area. Colonoscopy revealed a 1.6-cm hummock-shaped protrusion in the middle of the ascending colon with a smooth mucosal surface that was the same color as the surrounding mucosa; its texture was soft when touched with biopsy forceps. An abscess (0.4 cm) was observed on one side of the protruding lesion, with local mucosal hyperemia and edema covered with a white moss-like coating . A small biopsy of intestinal mucosal tissue was taken by forceps from the lesion and sent for pathological examination. Computed tomography showed a soft tissue shadow measuring 59 × 58 × 45 mm at the lateral margin of the middle and upper parts of the right kidney, with high and low mixed density on plain scans, uneven ring enhancement on enhanced scans, an irregular shape, blurred surrounding fat space, poor demarcation between the lesion and the right posterior lobe of the liver and the hepatic curvature of the colon, and a slightly thickened adjacent hepatic curvature of the colon . We considered an infectious lesion (abscess) of the right kidney more likely than renal carcinoma and performed laparoscopic right nephrectomy, partial liver resection, and intestinal adhesion release.
A biopsy specimen (approximately 0.2 cm in diameter) was taken from the ascending colon. Surgical resection of the kidney (9.5 × 5 × 4.5 cm) attached to the ureter segment (2.5 cm in length and 0.6 cm in diameter) was performed. Incision of the kidney revealed a mass (4 × 3.6 × 3 cm) in the renal parenchyma 3 cm from the renal hilum. The section of the mass was sallow, solid, and soft. The mass had penetrated through the fibrous membrane of the kidney to invade the perirenal fat tissue and had adhered to part of the liver . Biopsy of the ascending colon revealed the disappearance of intestinal mucosal glands and mucosal tissue largely replaced by cells distributed in sheets. Neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltrates were seen around thin-walled blood vessels . The lesions in the renal parenchyma and hepatic parenchyma were well bounded , with thick incomplete fibrous envelopes and distributed sheets of histiocytes or von Hansemann cells, whose cytoplasm contained periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive inclusion bodies resistant to amylase digestion. The adhesion between cells was poor . The cells were round and polygonal, the cytoplasm was rich, eosinophilic, and granular, and the nuclei were round and centered or eccentric, with 1–2 small nucleoli observed. The cell boundaries were not clear. The cells were focally short fusiform and arranged in bundles. M-G bodies were found in the intracellular and extracellular stroma with circular inclusion bodies of 1–10 μm, comparable to the size of tissue nuclei. M-G bodies were observed as annular lamellar bodies with a bull’s eye or hawk’s eye appearance . They were slightly gray in appearance, similar to the nuclei in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections. Histiocytes were mixed with lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils.
The cells were negative for CK, CD21, CD23, CD35, CD1α, S100, Langerin, and CD30, while the cytoplasmic granules were positive for CD10, CD68, and CD163 as well as ALK1 and ALK (D5F3). The cytoplasm and nucleus of some cells were also positive , and the Ki-67 index was approximately 2%. PAS staining and amylase digestion showed PAS staining of histocytes and von Hansemann cells. M-G body corpuscular Alcian blue (AB) staining was blue , PAS and PAS with diastase staining was purple red , von Kossa staining was black , Prussian blue staining was blue , and PAS-methenamine silver staining was uncolored. The percentage of cells with a positive ALK gene break signal detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was 2%, indicating a negative result . Whole exome next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed nine individual somatic gene mutations and zero germline mutations. The genes with somatic cell changes were: GOT1L1, GLIS2, SPOUT1, TMEM97, MUC3A, NSD2, SFXN5, ADAD1 and RAD50 ; no ALK gene mutation was detected.
Ultrasound-guided puncture biopsy of the right renal mass was performed, and pus was extracted by puncture drainage. Culture of the pus indicated the presence of Enterococcus faecium and E. coli. Blood culture indicated the presence of E. faecium and Bacillus fragilis. T cell subpopulation analysis revealed an increase of Th(CD3 + CD4 +)/Ts(CD3 + CD8 +) cells. Based on the results of drug sensitivity analysis, the antibiotics imipenem and vancomycin were administered. The patient was discharged after improvement, with no discomfort during 30 months of follow-up.