The patient is a 54-year-old female with recurrent stage IIIB moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Patient had no relevant prior medical or family history. Her initial treatment included one cycle of oxaliplatin and tegafur followed by intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and vaginal brachytherapy. At completion of her radiation, the patient received five cycles of taxane and platinum-based chemotherapy with a complete response. She remained without evidence of disease for two years, when she was diagnosed with a recurrence in her retroperitoneal and thoracic lymph nodes. Oxaliplatin and paclitaxel were initiated, but discontinued after one cycle due to vague “mental status changes.” She underwent brain imaging at that time that was within normal limits. She was then treated with radiation to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes followed by immunotherapy with dendritic cell and cytokine-induced killer cell transfusions resulting in a partial response. The patient was then initiated on an oral taxane for two cycles with persistent disease. She then presented to our institution and was dispositioned to topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) daily on cycle days one, two, and three and cisplatin (50 mg/m2) on cycle day 1, administered every three weeks. The patient tolerated the first five cycles without incident and achieved an objective tumor response. However, on day two of cycle six, she developed altered mental status and was not responding appropriately to questions or commands. She was brought to the emergency room where vital signs and laboratory values, including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and urinalysis, were within normal limits. Neurological examination revealed no focal deficits. She underwent CT and MRI of the brain, which were also within normal limits. However, electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed the presence of nonconvulsive seizures (NCS). She was given a one-time dose of lorazepam with significant improvement in her mental status. The patient was also initiated on levetiracetam. A repeat EEG three days later noted resolution of the seizure activity. After this episode, the patient was transitioned to topotecan and bevacizumab with no further seizures to date. Please reference Table for timeline of events.