A 48 year old Latin American male with a history of chronic kidney disease, orthotic liver transplant in 2007 secondary to alcoholic end stage liver disease and chronic rejection on immunosuppressants (tacrolimus, sirolimus, prednisone and mycophenolate mofetil) presented to the emergency department. Two days prior to presentation, patient returned from a fishing trip in the Gulf of Mexico and began to experience fever with chills, vomiting, abdominal pain, left lower extremity pain and swelling. On the evening of his admission he developed multiple clear fluid filled blisters on his left lower extremity extending to his medial thigh ; the largest blister measured 6 cm by 7 cm in size. His temperature was 100.2 ˚F; heart rate, 115/min; blood pressure, 92/63 mmHg; and respiratory rate, 34/min. His left lower extremity was warm, tender, erythematous and oedematous with fluid filled blisters and a 2 cm by 2 cm ulcer on the plantar aspect of the left foot. His hemoglobin was 6.6 g/dl with indirect hyperbilirubinemia; LDH, 196 IU/L; white blood cells 6.1 k/ mcl (neutrophils 48%, bands 36%, and lymphocytes 4%), platelets 160 k/ mcl, creatinine 3.1 mg/dl, CK 538 U/L and lactic acid 6.4 mg/ dl. X-rays of the left lower extremity showed diffuse soft tissue swelling without bony involvement. Compression ultrasonography ruled out deep venous thrombosis. A noncontrast computed tomography (CT) of the left lower extremity did not demonstrate muscle necrosis and a CT abdomen showed diffuse colonic thickening. His respiratory status declined and he was intubated. His blood pressure dropped and he was put on two pressors and transfused two units of packed red blood cells and two units of fresh frozen plasma. He was admitted to the critical care unit with a working diagnosis of sepsis and cellulitis. Bedside exploration and subsequent surgical debridement ruled out necrotizing fasciitis. A sample from the blister and blood samples were taken for culture. Stool culture was not performed. Aggressive management with intravenous fluids and empiric treatment with ceftriaxone (2 g intravenously every 24 hours) and ciprofloxacin (400 mg intravenously every 12 hours) was initiated. Blister aspirate and blood cultures were positive for a gram-negative, non-lactose fermenting bacilli. The isolate did not ferment sucrose and yielded round blue-green colonies in thiosulphate citrate bile salt sucrose agar. Microbiologic testing demonstrated Vibrio parahemolyticus. Subsequently the patient developed thrombophlebitis and necrotic skin in a circumferential pattern from the ankle to the knee on the left lower extremity that ultimately required debridement and split thickness skin graft. The patient was treated with ceftriaxone and ciprofloxacin and was discharged home in a stable condition.