A 15-year-old Sri Lankan male, a product of a nonconsanguineous marriage, presented with gradual-onset bilateral progressive painless vision loss that developed over 3 months. Initially, he had noted a dark spot in the center of his right visual field with color desaturation in the periphery that gradually progressed. The left eye was affected within 3 months of the onset of the right eye visual loss. There was no ocular pain on eye movement, headache, or other neurological symptoms. Detailed historical inquiry did not suggest any nutritional deficiencies, environmental toxins, or drug exposures, including smoking, alcohol, or other recreational drug abuse. His family history and past medical history were unremarkable.
Examination revealed that he only had perception to light in both eyes, associated with optic atrophy on funduscopy. The rest of the neurological and systemic examinations were normal. His biochemical and hematological investigations, and inflammatory markers were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and the orbits was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal, while his serum did not have detectable anti-MOG or anti-AQP4 antibodies, which was analyzed to rule out the possibility of optic nerve demyelinating disorders.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT), done at 5 months of vision loss development, showed evidence of bilateral severe ganglion cell loss with macular thinning. Targeted mutational analysis for the three common mutations described in LHON revealed that the patient had a m.14484T > C mutation in MT-ND6 gene, for which he was homoplasmic , while whole exome sequencing did not reveal any other pathogenic variants implicated in visual impairment. Using Sanger sequencing, it was found that his mother (44 years of age), and two female siblings (22 years and 5 years of age), carried the same pathogenic variant and were all homoplasmic, despite not having any visual or funduscopic abnormalities .
Currently, there is no curative or preventive treatment; the patient was offered only visual rehabilitation therapy, while post-test counseling was provided to the family. At review 1 year after the onset of his illness, no improvement was noted in his visual impairment.