A 28-year-old primiparous female patient at 28–29 weeks gestation was hospitalized into the perinatal centre of V.A. Almazov National Medical Research Centre with clinical symptoms of heart failure [FC (functional class) III]. The symptoms had been observed since childhood. Congenital heart disease had not been verified by previous examinations.
Present pregnancy is at the age of 27; EchoCG (24–25 weeks) showed stage III pulmonary insufficiency, dilated aorta in the ascending section (up to 50 mm), estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure (ERASP) of 50–55 mm Hg, and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 62%. Due to the revealed changes, the patient was transferred to the expert centre for pregnancy and cardiac disease.
Examination showed satisfactory general state and body mass index of 19 kg/m2. Acrocyanosis at rest was found. Vesicular breathing was respiratory rate (RR) = 20/min and SpO2 at rest was 87%. Pulse was rhythmic with heart rate 82 b.p.m, and blood pressure (BP) was 100/60 mmHg. Auscultation showed a systolic murmur on the left sternal border. The abdomen was enlarged according to the gestational age. Foetal ultrasound and Dopplerometry (29 weeks) showed symmetrical foetal growth retardation. As the pregnancy progressed, there were signs of preeclampsia, reduced exercise tolerance, and desaturation to 85%. Pulmonary arterial hypertension–specific therapy with sildenafil was initiated. There was a progression of dyspnoea and desaturation to 78%. At 33 weeks of gestation, a caesarean section was performed. The patient’s intraoperative course was without complications.
Activation of the patient on the third day of the postpartum period led to a generalized convulsive seizure accompanied by loss of consciousness, desaturation to SpO2 = 40%, arterial hypertension, and tachycardia. The episode was treated as a paradoxical cerebral vascular embolism. The patient was intubated and transferred to mechanical lung ventilation (MLV). Sedative and anticoagulant therapy was administered, and PAH-specific therapy with inhaled iloprost was intensified. On the same day (the third postpartum day), the condition stabilized and the patient was extubated. On the fourth day, there was a recurrence of convulsive syndrome and a series of generalized clonic convulsions with loss of consciousness; there was desaturation to 60% on the sixth day. The patient was transferred to MLV with continuous infusion of barbiturates. In the course of ongoing MLV, the dynamics showed SpO2 decrease to 64%, increasing right ventricular heart failure; inotropic therapy with dobutamine was initiated. Subsequently, repeated episodes of increasing right ventricular heart failure at minimum exertion with desaturation to 45% were registered. FiO2 was increased to 100%, as well as the inotropic support.
On the 13th day of the postpartum period, a desaturation to 30% and cardiac arrest were registered. After prolonged unsuccessful resuscitation measures, biological death was registered. A complex congenital heart defect with a large defect of the aortopulmonary septum was identified as the main cause of death with cardiopulmonary failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) syndrome being the immediate cause of death .