A 70-year old male patient reported to clinic with a chief complaint of swollen gums of 5 year duration and wanted to replace his missing teeth. Patient noticed swollen gums prior to his 4 years of edentulous state and the condition persisted to present. He was a known hypertensive and was on medication for the same since 7 years (10 mg Nifedipine/day).On intraoral examination- pink, firm, irregular, nodular, non- tender enlargements were found on labial aspects of maxillary and mandibular residual alveolar ridges. The enlargements were asymptomatic in nature with no history of bleeding. Both arches were completely edentulous . Panoramic radiograph showed no osseous deformities of maxilla and mandibular ridges . Patient’s complete blood count, bleeding time, clotting time and platelet count were with in normal limits. An incisional biopsy was obtained from anterior right side of the maxilla. Histological report revealed hyperplastic and acantholytic stratified squamous epithelium with elongated rete ridges extending into connective tissue which was fibro collagenous and showed focal areas of fibrosis. Infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells and congested blood vessels were seen which suggested of gingival hyperplasia . As patient wanted complete dentures, we planned to surgically excise entire overgrowth. Considering medical status of the patient, drug was not altered because, dose taken by the patient was low (10 mg/day). Local anesthesia devoid of vasoconstrictor was used to remove fibrous tissue from alveolar ridge with help of 15 no. B.P blade . To avoid any discomfort during the early phase of wound healing, a surgical splint was placed on both ridges after thoroughly covering the operated site with periodontal dressing (Coe Pack). The patient was recalled and followed at a period of 1 week, 3 months, 6 months and 1 Year intervals . No recurrence of growth was observed during any of the recall visits. After 3 months of surgery, patient had his complete dentures fabricated. Even on further recall visits there was no recurrence of growth noticed.