A 64-year-old Japanese man consulted a local clinic because of tearing. Multiple nodules each approximately 5 mm in size were observed in bilateral upper and lower eyelids. He was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He had an unremarkable medical history and no history of trauma. The corrected visual acuity was 0.8 in each eye. Well defined hard lesions in both upper and lower eyelids were present, without inflammatory signs such as redness . Ophthalmoscopic findings were within normal limits except bilateral mild cataract changes. Laboratory investigations showed a white blood cell count of 10,400 per cm3 with 0.2% eosinophils. Serum concentration of immunoglobulin E was slightly elevated at 278.7 mg/dL, and immunoglobulin G4 was 59.3 mg/dL (normal range less than 135 mg/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated bilateral multiple masses localized in the eyelids. The lesions were isointense to cerebral parenchyma on T1-weighted images, and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. After gadolinium infusion, the masses demonstrated moderate enhancement.
For diagnosis purpose, biopsy of the right upper eyelid mass was performed via the skin and conjunctiva. Since a pathological examination during surgery showed eosinophilic infiltration and an allergic disease was suspected, local injection of triamcinolone acetonide was performed at the end of procedures. Histopathological examination showed proliferated blood vessels lined by plump endothelial cells with an epithelioid appearance, surrounded by a collagenous stroma containing a lymphoid and eosinophilic infiltration, and no evidence of lymphoid follicles . These histopathological findings were compatible with a diagnosis of ALHE. In immunohistochemical studies, CD31 immunostaining highlighted the prominent vascularity and the plump endothelial cells. CD3 and CD20 immunostaining was diffusely positive in the infiltrate, indicating that most of the infiltrating cells were T cells. Flow cytometry studies showed that the mass was consisted of mainly CD3-positive cells, confirming the immunohistochemical findings. No evidence of IgH or T cell receptor (TCR) rearrangement was detected.
Subsequently the right eyelid mass was surgically excised. Residual lesions were removed piece by piece. At the end of surgery, triamcinolone acetonide was injected again into the eyelid. Although the patient refused additional surgery at first, one year after the initial operation, excision of left upper eyelid masses was performed in the same manner as the right eyelid mass. Histopathological and flow cytometric findings were the same as the right mass. During follow-up of two years, although some lesions remained unexcised, no recurrence of the excised masses was observed and the patient had no subjective symptom of tearing.