A 14-year-old Japanese girl with ASXL3-related syndrome was referred to our hospital because of emotional lability lasting for approximately 3 months. She exhibited a variety of symptoms, including shouting in response to minor stimuli, laughing for no apparent reason, and difficulty sleeping. She was the first-born child of a non-consanguineous Japanese couple. Regarding family history, her younger sister had chondrodysplasia punctata. At birth, the weight was 3,056 g (-0.2 standard deviation [SD]); the length was 49 cm (-0.5 SD); and the occipitofrontal circumference was 39.0 cm (+ 4.3 SD). She showed truncal muscular hypotonia and dysmorphic facial features of ocular hypertelorism, strabismus, and anteverted nostrils. Her gross motor development was delayed, and she could run and jump on both feet at the age of 3.5 years. The Tanaka-Binet Intelligence Scale administered at 9 years of age showed a full-scale intelligence quotient of 21. Although the patient demonstrated severe expressive language disorder and communication impairments, she showed no restricted interests or repetitive behaviors, and had never been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. Although she had experienced a single afebrile seizure, she had no feeding difficulty.
At admission, she had a height of 149.9 cm (-1.1 SD), body weight of 65.4 kg (+ 1.8 SD), and body mass index of 29.0. She developed ocular hypertelorism, strabismus, anteverted nostrils, and odontoparallaxis. In the social maturity test, which is a translated version of the Vineland Social Maturity Scale and widely used in Japan , the decline was particularly noticeable in movement, operation, participation, and self-control . Blood tests showed no abnormality, including endocrine dysfunction . We suspected the onset of limbic encephalitis, and the cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed no inflammatory changes or elevation in autoimmune antibody levels. Brain magnetic resonance imaging also showed no abnormalities. A 3-day course of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1,000 mg/day) for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes was ineffective.
After discharge, the patient’s emotional instability persisted. Aripiprazole was initiated, and her emotional lability improved reasonably. However, she gradually showed a lack of interest in eating, with decreased diet volume. She presented with significant weight loss . Her swallowing function was normal, and she did not show hypersensitivity to the sensory properties of food (e.g., taste, texture, appearance, and smell). No symptoms of food allergy and family dynamic issues or conflicts were reported. Therefore, ARFID was clinically suspected. We conducted blood tests to assess endocrine function, electrocardiogram, and abdominal ultrasound to rule out organic disorders, and subsequently provided nutritional guidance to restore the child’s interest in food. Additionally, as the parents were concerned about her weight loss, we reassured them by explaining the absence of any organic disorders. As a result, the patient’s weight gradually started to recover .
At the age of 1-year, metabolic analyses (amino acid and urine organic acid analyses) and genetic screening (G-band testing) were performed, neither of which showed abnormalities.
At the age of 14 years, when her emotional lability appeared, a genetic analysis was performed since the parents strongly desired to investigate her underlying disease. Whole-exome sequencing showed an assumed de novo heterozygous variant in ASXL3, NM_030632.3:c.1560_1569dupAGGGAAGTCA p.(Glu524Argfs*21). This variant is novel, but variants with a premature stop codon downstream to this variant involved in the pathogenesis have been reported . The variant is not registered in the control database (dbSNP, gnomAD, or ToMMo). Based on the American College of Medical Genetics guidelines, this variant is considered as pathogenic .