An 83-year-old gentleman (90kg, 178cm, body mass index: 28.4kg/m2) presented with a 10 day history of pain in the right hip and a 4 day history of inability to fully weight bear following a fall. He originally had a right uncemented total hip replacement for osteoarthritis performed in May 2009. Due to aseptic loosening, the original replacement failed and was revised to a cemented Exeter V40 stem in 2012. A further revision was performed in 2017 for dislocation. On examination, his right leg was short and externally rotated. There was also tenderness in the right groin. Radiographs showed the hip still in joint and a fracture of the Exeter stem .
The patient had revision surgery through the posterior approach utilizing the old incision. Before this, he underwent aspiration of this right hip to exclude infection. Prophylactic antibiotics and tranexamic acid were administered at induction as per hospital protocol. Following dislocation of the hip, the acetabular component was found to be well fixed and was left in situ. The proximal fragment of the Exeter stem was removed with ease. The distal fragment was removed with difficulty following a 1cm × 3cm osteotomy distal to the tip of the stem, a drill to penetrate the cement mantle and explanted using a punch . There was no overt sign of infection and the tissues looked healthy macroscopically. Five tissue samples were sent to microbiology for culture and sensitivity. Subsequently, the femur was prepared for a V40 Exeter revision stem (44 offset and 125mm length) after trial reduction. A 1.5 mixture of Palacos cement with gentamicin was used. The hip was reduced with a Dual mobility bearing using a 28mm Biolox Delta head and a 28/52mm X3 insert for modular dual mobility. Intraoperatively, the hip was stable and leg length restored.
Post-operative care included routine observations, a further three doses of antibiotics, bloods, Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis and a check X-ray . The patient was mobile with a frame day 1 postoperatively. At 6 week follow-up, he was fully weight bearing independently with full range of motion in the hip. We plan to review him again in 6 months’ time.