A 65-Year-Old Woman, presented to the outpatient department with chief complains of dyspnea on exertion, cough and chest pain of 4 months' duration. Dyspnea was gradual in onset that exacerbated on exertion and relieved at rest. At the time of presentation, the dyspnea it was grade 2 based on modified medical research council (MMRC) dyspnea scale. Cough was dry at the onset with occasional mucopurulent secretion mixed with fresh blood. The chest pain was gradual in onset, involving the left side, initially intermittent but later became persistent with mild to moderate severity, exacerbated on exertion and relieved by over-the-counter analgesics. Past history was significant for biomass exposure as she had history of exposure to wood smoke during adolescence. Similarly, she was chronic hypertensive and regularly used antihypertensive medications. Before presentation to our institution, the patient was treated with multiple courses of antibiotics, including amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ceftriaxone, cefepime, and ceftazidime with no improvement.
On General Physical Examination, Patient was ill looking, febrile with body temperature of 38.5 degree Celsius, oriented in time, place and person with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15/15. Auscultation of the chest revealed decrease breath sounds and bilateral sub-scapula crackles which were prominent on left side. As shown in Table , routine laboratory investigations revealed elevated white blood cell count, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and elevated c-reactive protein.
Accordingly, CT chest was advised which was reported to have feature suggestive of left lung upper lobe tumor, multiple hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathies with bilateral emphysematous changes, as shown in Figure . Considering the above-mentioned findings, the patient was referred to oncologist as well as pulmonologist for re-evaluation.
Diagnostic bronchoscopy was done for the patient and multiple endobronchial tissue biopsies were taken from the lesion for histopathology. Similarly, Broncho-alveolar lavage was taken for cytology which was further processed through Gene-Xpert polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), fungal culture, gram stain, and bacterial culture. Biopsy revealed fibro-collagenous tissue showing predominantly anthracosis, benign respiratory epithelial cells, and focal lung parenchyma showing mild mixed acute on chronic inflammation. No evidence of malignancy or granuloma was seen in the available biopsy. Bronchial wash for cytology revealed RBCs, few neutrophils, rare eosinophils, few macrophages, few ciliated columnar epithelial cells showing reactive atypia, and rare benign squamous epithelial cells without any evidence of granuloma or malignancy. MTB was not detected in the bronchial wash by PCR. There was no evidence of fungal growth in the microbiological cultures. Bacterial culture was positive that demonstrated presence of gram-negative bacilli and the Analytical Profile Index (API) panel identified the bacteria as P. mirabilis. The antibiotic susceptibility is shown in Table . The patient was admitted in the inpatient ward and started on parenteral Ertapenem, 1 g once a day with supportive treatment that was continued for 10 days. The patient had significant resolution of symptoms and therefore was discharged from the ward to be allowed to go back home while continuing with oral Ciprofloxacin 500-mg twice a day for 30 days, bronchodilators and antihypertensive. At the follow-up visit, the patient reported feeling well with no active complaints. Her vital signs were stable, and her chest X-ray showed complete resolution of the nonhomogeneous opacity, with only a small pneumatocele visible in the left upper zone. After 1 month, the patient had another follow-up visit, when she was having no active complaint normal CBC values, normal C-reactive protein and a repeated chest X-ray demonstrated total clearing of the opacity and only had residual emphysematous changes, as shown in the Figure .