A 41-year-old woman (height, 162.2 cm; weight, 50.4 kg) with a 4-year history of SS was scheduled for an elective radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and ovary transposition under the diagnosis of cervical cancer. She had been diagnosed with SS accidentally on a preoperative evaluation when she sought treatment for a radius fracture 4 years ago. She presented symptoms of dyspnea, dry mouth, dry eyes, Raynaud’s syndrome and arthralgia of the hand and knee. On preoperative evaluation, chest X-ray (CXR) showed increased reticular opacity in both lower lung zones, and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) demonstrated increased extent of coarse reticulation, and ground glass opacity with traction bronchiectasis in bilateral subpleural and lower lung zone corresponding to fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia pattern compared to previous HRCT . Pulmonary function test (PFT) was also aggravated. Current PFT indicated a moderate restrictive pattern with negative effect of bronchodilator test (FVC 1.97 L, %FVC 64 %, FEV1 1.74 L, FEV1/FVC 88 %) while previous PFT indicated a mild restrictive pattern (FVC 2.29 L, %FVC 56 %, FEV1 1.92 L, FEV1/FVC 84 %). Arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA) revealed pH 7.419, PCO2 36.9 mmHg, PO2 92.1 mmHg, and oxygen saturation at 96.1 %. Thus, in comparison with previous result of HRCT and PFT, ILD associated with SS was showing recent worsening. The rheumatologist recommended a high dose steroid therapy to prevent disease progression and suggested that her operation be postponed for 2 months, considering the stage of the disease. However, it did not guarantee the improvement of lung function.
After consideration of the potential risks and benefits, we decided to perform combined spinal–epidural anesthesia (CSE) for the surgery. However, we also had a plan to postpone surgery if CSE technique failed. The patient arrived with graduated compression stockings in the operating room. Before induction of anesthesia, a routine monitoring was established and hydrocortisone 100 mg was administered intravenously. Using 2–5 MHz curved array probe connected to ultrasound (S-nerve, Sonosite Inc, Bothell, WA, USA), measurement of the depth of the epidural space and confirmation of interlaminar space was performed with paramedian sagittal oblique and transverse interlaminar view for a successful block. An epidural catheter was placed through the T11–12 intervertebral space before the subarachnoid block, checked by the aspiration test and by administering an epidural test dose (3 ml of 2 % lidocaine with epinephrine 15 µg) to rule out its inadvertent intrathecal or intravascular placement. Subsequently, a 25-gauge spinal needle was inserted at the L3-4 intervertebral space and 0.5 % hyperbaric bupivacaine 15 mg with fentanyl 25 µg was injected into the subarachnoid space. The sensory blockade to T4 dermatome, was achieved 10 min after spinal medication, as assessed by the pinprick method in the supine position. Surgical anesthesia for radical hysterectomy was achieved without epidural injection. One hour later, 10 ml of 0.75 % ropivacaine with fentanyl 75 µg was injected into the epidural space. Dexmedetomidine infusion was started at 1 mg/kg loading dose over 10 min and then 0.2 to 1.0 µg/kg/h of maintenance infusion titrated to level of sedation and hemodynamic variables was continued. Supplemental oxygen (2 to 3 L/min) was provided, because SpO2 had decreased to 93 % after achieving higher spinal segment blockade. ABGA monitoring was performed repeatedly throughout the surgery . The patient did not complain of pain during the surgery and her vital signs were stable without any vasoactive drugs except the SpO2 had decreased to 90 % when she was fully sedated. The surgical procedure was performed to completion uneventfully. The duration of the operation was 135 min. Estimated blood loss was 400 ml and her urine output was about 120 ml; 2400 ml of crystalloid solution was administered.
Postoperatively, patient controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) was provided with PCEA pump using 0.2 % ropivacaine with 3 µg/ml fentanyl (basal infusion 2 ml/h, demand dose 3 ml, lock-out interval 30 min, total volume 150 ml). The numeric rating scale was 0–2 while using PCEA without any rescue medication, and the patient was satisfied with pain management. The patient was discharged without any postoperative pulmonary complications on postoperative day 10.