A 42-year-old man was admitted to a Swiss regional hospital with a complaint of tiredness associated with a 2 weeks’ history of diarrhea, jaundice and 3 days of legs edema. His medical history has shown intravenous drug use, untreated HIV, and advanced liver cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis C infection. He had been treated the past month for a chronic ulcer of the right ankle.
On initial physical examination, the patient was obviously shocked with somnolence, dehydration, and marbling of the extremities. Cutaneous status was remarkable for presence of sequels of multiples intravenous injections, necrosis of 3 toes and persistence of the right ankle’s ulcer.
Vitals signs were the following: BP 116/79 mmHg, HR 152 bpm, temp 36.8 °C and oxygen saturation 93%, while breathing ambient air. Arterial blood gases were rapidly obtained and showed lactic acidosis with a pH of 7.28 and a concentration of lactates of 8 mmol/l. ECG showed sinus tachycardia with electrical alternans and the chest X- Ray revealed a massively enlarged cardiac silhouette . A point of care ultrasound (POCUS) was then performed and confirmed a large pericardial effusion .
Laboratory analyses indicated anemia, leukocytosis with severe lymphopenia, thrombopenia, hyponatremia, hyperkaliemia, a slightly elevated CRP and acute renal failure.
The diagnosis of obstructive shock caused by a large pericardial effusion was made and the patient was transferred to a reference hospital for treatment. On admission to the emergency service of this hospital a percutaneous pericardial drainage was rapidly employed to withdraw 1250 ml of purulent liquid with subsequent normalization of blood pressure. A computed tomography revealed multiple pulmonary, hepatic and splenic septic emboli, as well as lobar pulmonary embolism with bilateral thrombosis of the ilio-femoral veins. A transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal ventricular function and no valvular vegetations or other endocarditis echography signs. The pulmonary pressure was normal and there was no interatrial shunt at the color Doppler. The patient was then started on empirical Piperacillin-Tazobactam and Vancomycin and admitted to the ICU. Blood culture drawn at admission and culture of the pericardial effusion showed a Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and antibiotherapy spectrum was narrowed with administration of Flucloxacillin only.
After 3 days, a follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed a persistent circumferential pericardial effusion motivating a surgical pericardial drainage through a sub-xiphoidal midline approach. Approximately 1 week later (hospitalization day 10), a thoracic computed-tomography was repeated because of persistent fever and showed a false aneurysm of the ascending aorta measuring 2.5 × 3.7 cm, with signs of aortitis , as well as multiple new septic emboli. Given the risk of rupture associated with the development of the aneurysm in only 10 days, the patient was rapidly taken to the operating room and a replacement of the ascending tubular aorta and anterior hemiarch using a 26 mm Dacron prosthesis was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass with systemic circulatory arrest in moderate hypothermia at 28 °C and antegrade cerebral perfusion through the bracchio-cephalic arterial trunk.
The patient survived the operation and recovered quite well. He accepted to take an antiretroviral therapy and was started on Truvada and Tivicay. Thrombosis phenomenon in the legs was treated with Rivaroxaban. After a few more days in our hospital the patient was discharged to a regional hospital near his home. The Flucloxacillin therapy was supposed to be pursued for 6 weeks after surgery, but as the patient decided to leave hospital without medical consent a few days later, he was discharged on oral Moxifloxacine once a day.
Eighteen months later the patient is doing well and has stopped all drug consumption.