A 23-year-old female presented with complaints of paroxysmal hypertension (the highest BP was 230/180 mmHg) with palpitations, headache, diaphoresis and vomiting for 11 months. All of her sudden hypertension attacks were treated with antihypertensive drugs. Three days prior, the patient presented to the emergency department again with paroxysmal hypertension (BP 173/139 mmHg) and the above symptoms, but obvious abnormalities were not found on physical examination. One year prior, she had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstones. In addition, she had no history of other systemic diseases.
After an extensive workup, the patient was found to have elevations of plasma methoxynorepinephrine and urine vanillylmandelic acid, but her plasma metanephrine level was normal .
Subsequent CT and MRI showed a 4.6 × 3.1 cm retroperitoneal mass on the right retroperitoneum, and the boundary between the mass and the inferior vena cava (IVC) was not clear . Enhanced CT scanning of the thorax, abdomen and pelvic cavities showed no metastasis. Before admission, the patient had undergone cervical CT because of the symptoms mentioned above, and the results were normal. However, considering the clinical history and inapparent bilateral adrenal glands, we favored the clinical diagnosis of retroperitoneal PGL.
The patient was given doxazosin and metoprolol for 2 weeks as preoperative preparation. Then, the patient was medically managed with surgical excision. Immunohistochemical staining: Syn and CgA were positive, Melan A, HMB45 and α-inhibin were negative, S-100 cells were positive, and the CD31 vascular endothelium marker was positive. Conclusion: right retroperitoneal PGL . However, the local capsule of the tumor was incomplete.
To further determine the cause of the disease, we performed genetic testing with consent from the patient. Genetic testing demonstrated that the patient carried a missense mutation in exon 6 of the SDHB gene [c.563 T > C] . The identified mutation was classified as likely pathogenic (class 1). This variation is novel, and there are no relevant research reports at present. Since the patient is an orphan, we could not obtain her pedigree for the SDHB-linked family.
Clinical follow-up examinations were carried out three times through telephone interviews or outpatient visits. One year after surgery, the patient did not exhibit paroxysmal hypertension (BP 90–110/60–70 mmHg) or the symptoms described above. Meanwhile, an abdominal CT scan did not indicate any masses. However, it will be necessary to perform long-term follow-up and screening of this patient over her lifetime.