A 14-year-old girl was diagnosed with hypertension in the local clinic due to dizziness and treated with Enalapril maleate (10 mg, once/day) and Cilnidipine (10 mg, once/day) for 6 months. However, her blood pressure continued to be refractory. In addition, she felt dyspnea and fatigue on exertion during the past 2 months. So, she was referred to our hospital. Physical examination showed hypertension and a marked pressure gradient between the upper and lower limbs (176/100 versus 90/50 mmHg), a grade 3/6 systolic murmur along the left sternal border and subxiphoid, and weak pulses in both dorsal pedes arteries. Therefore, AC was clinically considered. Then, she was suggested to take an electrocardiogram and TTE. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm at 86 bpm with the sign of left ventricular hypertrophy and ST-T wave abnormalities.
The TTE showed left ventricular hypertrophy with a reduced ejection fraction to 44.8% , no coarctation in the aortic isthmus . However, with a slight adjustment of the probe in the parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle, the diameter of the thoracic descending aorta behind the left atrium was inconsistent . To show the longitudinal axis of the thoracic descending aorta, we did a non-standard view by rotating the probe clockwise about 45° from parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle to the long axis of the body and found that a segmental narrowing in the thoracic descending aorta below the level of the atrioventricular sulcus, with a calcified plaque in the stenotic region . Color Doppler showed a turbulent flow and elevated peak systolic velocities measuring up to 829 cm/s in the stenotic region . Abdominal vascular ultrasound revealed the segmental narrowing extending to the descending abdominal aorta (5.7 mm in diameter) above the level of the superior mesenteric artery .
Subsequently, CTA verified a long-segment narrowing in the descending aorta from the level of T8 to L2 vertebra, with a calcified plaque in the stenotic aorta, right renal artery involvement, and a rich network of collateral vessels between the pre-and post-stenotic region .
Laboratory analysis showed the complete blood count, serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine, liver function, renal function, coagulation tests and inflammatory markers were all within normal reference ranges.
Therefore, a diagnosis of MAC was made. The patient was referred for cardiovascular surgery in which a successful ascending aorta-abdominal aorta bypass was performed. One year following surgery, the patient had normal blood pressure and no symptoms without the need for medication.