A 35 year old female presented with bilateral lower limb swelling and exertional shortness of breath that had developed over few weeks. She was found to have pericardial effusion that was aspirated at another hospital. The patient was discharged two days later on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication after showing subjective improvement. Two weeks later, she had recurrence of her symptoms due to recurrent pericardial effusion with signs of impending tamponade that was managed with a pericardial window. A computed axial tomography (CT) scan of the thorax demonstrated a huge mediastinal mass, for which a CT guided biopsy was carried out. The patient was referred to us later for further evaluation. On presentation she was asymptomatic and her physical examination disclosed mild bilateral pitting edema, but was otherwise noncontributory. A review of her CT scan showed a huge mass in the anterior mediastinum and no evidence of distant metastases. Review of her pathology specimen showed proliferation of spindle cells with oval normochromatic nuclei, scattered mitotic figures and no evidence of necrosis. Prominent thin- walled blood vessels were seen with branching embarking a hemangiopericytoma-like vascular pattern . No epithelial components could be appreciated. A panel of immunostains was done. The tumor cells were positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and focally positive for pan-cytokeratin (MNF) as well as for BCL-2 and FLI-1 . They were negative for CD99, S100 protein, CD34, CD31, DOG-1, C-kit, CD20 and CD3 immunostains, which essentially excluded other sarcomas, germ cell tumors and lymphomas. The morphological and immunostains supported the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma, monophasic variant, which was confirmed with Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing for ss18 gene rearrangement . A Positron emission tomography/ CT (PET/ CT) scan was carried out and demonstrated the huge hyper-metabolic mass, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 6, in the anterior mediastinum and ruled out distant metastatic sites .
The mass was unresectable according to the thoracic surgeons’ assessment because it was invading the pericardium and engulfing the major vessels. We elected to proceed with combination chemotherapy in an attempt to downsize her tumor for possible subsequent resection. The option of EBRT was discussed, however; given the huge size of her mediastinal mass, a sufficient and definitive dose of radiation would not be feasible without severe toxicity. She received three cycles of Ifosfamide 2g/m2 every 12 hours D1-D3, Doxorubicin 75 mg/m2, Mesna and Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF) starting 24 hours following completion of chemotherapy and continued until neutrophil recovery. She had recurrent neutropenic fever following the first two cycles in addition to severe thrombocytopenia and epistaxis following the second cycle which required 25% dose reduction of both agents in the third cycle. Her chest CT scan following the third cycle showed slight increase in tumor size. The patient refused further therapy and was referred to palliative care. Three months later, she started to suffer from progressive shortness of breath and chest discomfort secondary to mass effect, A CT scan of her chest and abdomen showed progression of the size of the mass without distant metastasis. The patient is still alive with her disease 11 months after diagnosis.