A 74-year-old male patient visited our hospital complaining of dysphagia which he had experienced for half a year with no clear trigger.
He vomited after eating, bringing up the contents of the stomach. There was no obvious chest pain, hematemesis, or weight loss. He was in good physical condition.
There were no special circumstances in personal and family history.
On physical examination, he showed no evident positive characteristics.
With regard to laboratory values, only the serum tumor marker CA199 (47.85 U/mL; normal reference range: < 39 U/mL), albumin (35.6 g/L; normal reference range: 40-50 g/L), and hemoglobin (124 g/L; normal reference range: 130-175 g/L) were moderately changed. Renal function, electrolytes, blood sugar, cholesterol, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood coagulation, humoral immune function, antiphospholipid antibody, anti-autoantibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, urine, and conventional stool concentration were all within normal limits.
Color Doppler ultrasonography revealed chronic cholecystolithiasis. A chest CT scan revealed thickening of the esophageal wall . Barium meal X-ray showed that the lower esophagus presented the beak sign, suggesting achalasia . Regarding condition, no ulceration, prominence lesions, or Barrett's esophagus manifestation was found by endoscopy . In addition, routine gastroscopy was performed at a local hospital, and no tumor cell was detected by pathological examination at esophageal stenosis. EUS was performed to clarify the cause of the narrow esophageal structure. On EUS, esophageal cavity stenosis was visible at a distance of 37 cm from the incisors, along with obvious thickening of the intrinsic muscularis which reached 0.8 cm, and the first to third layer structure was not clear . High-resolution esophageal manometry suggested lower esophageal outflow obstruction . Based on these findings, a tumor that originated from the tunica muscularis esophagi was highly suspected. Therefore, we recommended the patient to undergo a positron emission CT (PET-CT) examination. The PET-CT results from Wuhan Tongji Hospital indicated dilatation of the entire esophagus, stenosis of the esophagus and cardia junction, and increased local metabolism. However, it was difficult to obtain pathological evidence as the esophageal mucosa was only roughened, with no ulceration, erosion, or bleeding. We invited a general thoracic vascular surgeon and a gastrointestinal surgeon to assist in the diagnosis and treatment. Eventually, a multidisciplinary consultation recommended that tunnel endoscopy was performed for biopsy. Therefore, the tunnel endoscopic technique was chose for pathological examination. We created a submucosal tunnel, advanced towards the stenosis of the esophagus, and obtained muscularis tissues .