A 7-year-old orphan boy presented to a small rural hospital in the Eastern Cape province of South Africa following a penetrating injury to the chest by a Withaak (Vachellia tortilis) thorn. The injury occurred after falling from a Withaak tree, and he sustained no other injuries. On presentation, two small lacerations and a subcutaneous pulsatile mass of 2 cm diameter at his cardiac apex were noted. A foreign object was apparent in one of the lacerations. The boy had no medical history of note, was not taking any medication. He was haemodynamically stable, not in pain, but reluctant to allow any close palpation. The wound was dressed, and he was referred to a paediatric surgeon at a tertiary hospital in East London (South Africa), then transferred by air ambulance to the Red Cross War Memorial Children’s Hospital (RCCH) in Cape Town. On admission, his vital signs were all normal, and besides the puncture wound, no abnormal clinical signs were detectable. A chest radiograph showed nothing of note, and an urgent echocardiogram excluded a pericardial effusion. All blood tests were within normal limits. However, formal echocardiography revealed a foreign body penetrating from the apex into the cardiac mass. A fistula with a continuous Doppler blood flow pattern between the cardiac chambers and the pulsatile mass at the apex was noted. Unusually, the Doppler blood flow pattern of the fistula crossed anatomical planes: it arose from immediately below the skin at the apex, crossed the pericardium, and seemed to cross through the anterior right ventricle (RV) and the interventricular septum and enter the left ventricle (LV). The foreign body created an obvious filling defect within the fistula .
Discomfort on echocardiography precluded certainty of the position of the tip of the thorn within the heart. Diagnostic cardiac angiography was therefore planned under general anaesthesia (GA). Echocardiography under GA suggested that the tip of the thorn was in the LV, but it remained difficult to ascertain its exact position. Transoesophageal echocardiography was unhelpful. Angiography of the LV and coronary arteries was entirely normal. On angiography of the RV, however, a fistula was seen to arise anteriorly from the RV, run anterolaterally towards the apex and end subcutaneously at the pulsatile mass . This was confirmed on angiography by placing the tip of a scalpel handle at the pulsatile mass . With this imaging, it was considered unnecessary to perform computed tomography angiography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging.
The attending cardiothoracic surgeon (A.M.) decided that the safest approach to removing the thorn would be by controlled extraction in cardiothoracic theatre. Blood was available in theatre in anticipation of potential major haemorrhage and cardiac bypass on standby in the event of coronary artery injury. The thorn was exposed and stabilized by forceps before median sternotomy was performed, and the pericardium hitched to expose the heart. No blood was noted in the pericardial space. A large adhesion from the apex of the heart traversed the pericardial space containing the thorn, which had penetrated the myocardium immediately adjacent to the left anterior descending coronary artery .
The thorn was extracted percutaneously under direct vision, and the injury at the right ventricular entry point closed spontaneously without haemorrhage. A single pericardial drain was inserted and the chest was closed routinely. The thorn was measured to be 4.5 cm long (see slide set).
Anaesthesia was maintained with isoflurane, cisatracurium and fentanyl, and analgesia included intravenous fentanyl, paracetamol, clonidine, with local bupivacaine wound infiltration. The patient was extubated in theatre and transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit. His post-operative course was unremarkable, and he was discharged without incident 4 days after admission. Echocardiography on the day of discharge showed a completely normal heart with no evidence of the penetrating injury.