A 57-year-old otherwise healthy male had fallen off a horse 20 years ago. He had had a traumatic brain injury and had been in coma for a month. Immediately after gaining consciousness, he developed dysarthria, and 6 months after the accident, he gradually developed right-sided hemiparesis and hemi-body tremor. Resting, action, and positional tremor have been significantly debilitating the patient and hindering him to perform his daily activities. He had also been unable to walk even with assistance and had been wheelchair bounded for the past 20 years.
The patient had received various medical treatments over the years, and none of them was effective in the control of the tremor. Eventually, he was referred to our movement disorder clinic in February 2020. As the possible therapeutic surgical intervention to tackle his tremor, unilateral VIMDBS was suggested to him and his family.
Nonstereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (1.5 T Integra, Philips, Netherlands) was obtained a few days before surgery under light sedation (to prevent motion artifacts secondary to tremor). On the day of surgery, after installing the Cosman–Roberts–Wells (CRW) stereotactic frame (Integra Life, USA), a stereotactic computed tomography (CT) scan was done.
The planning process was carried out using StealthStation S8 (Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA). Initially, gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI was selected as a reference, and other MRI sequences and CT scan were superimposed on it and checked if the different sets of landmarks were matched accurately. After defining the anterior and posterior commissures on the axial T1 sequences, indirect targeting of VIM was accomplished through axial and coronal T2-weighted sequences. The stereotactic coordinates of the VIM target were X: −14.6, Y: −5, and Z: −2.
Following the localization of the entrance point and the trajectory, microelectrode recording (MER) was performed using the Leadpoint system (Medtronic, Skovlundae, Denmark, and Shoreview, Minnesota, USA). The action potentials were recorded in the medial, central, and posterior tracts. The recording suggestive of the thalamic tremor was captured in all tracts from 4 mm above to 2 mm below the level of the target. Based on these findings, we decided to perform macrostimulation along the central tract. The high-frequency constant current stimulation was initiated from 4 mm above the target, under the supervision of a movement disorder neurologist. While stimulation was started from 0 mA and was increased stepwise by 1 mA at each level, the patients’ tremor was getting assessed continuously along with the ascending stimulation. The gradual increment of stimulation was cautiously continued till any stimulation-related adverse event was observed. Unfortunately, the stimulation was not effective in the central, posterior, medial, and anterior tracts. Resting, action, and intentional tremors did not respond to the stimulation with different amplitudes, and when the amplitude reached 2 mA, severe acute right hemi-body paresthesia was evident as an adverse event of stimulation. Using intraoperative lateral fluoroscopy and trunion reticles, we confirmed that the stimulation electrode was precisely placed in the correct location.
Nonetheless, due to the insufficient response to VIM stimulation, we decided to perform macrostimulation of PSA as a possible alternative strategy . After informing the patient and his family about the inefficiency of VIM-DBS and explaining the possible effectiveness of the new strategy (PSA-DBS), we proceeded with the revised target coordinates defined as X: −11.5, Y: −5.59, and Z: −5. To avoid unnecessary drilling, the entry point of the new trajectory was chosen in a way that would be placed at the previous burr hole site. It is worth noting that we preferred not to perform thalamotomy due to the possible irreversible complications of lesioning. We did not use MER in PSA, because our setup had been modified for macrostimulation and we did not anticipate finding a significant MER finding.
Interestingly, PSA stimulation (2 mA) resulted in a considerable alleviation of all types of tremors. The patient and his family were reinformed about the favorable response of PSA-DBS, and after obtaining the consent, the permanent lead (DB-2201, Boston Scientific, USA) was implanted in the left PSA in a way that contact 1 was placed 2 mm below the defined target.
An immediate postoperative CT scan was done and the images were superimposed on the preoperative imaging to check the final location of the lead and any possible surgical inaccuracy or complications. The CT scan showed no misplacement or deviation of the lead from the defined target. As the last step, the neurostimulator (Vercise PC, Boston Scientific, USA) was implanted in the right upper part of the chest under general anesthesia. We avoided the left side insertion because implanted pulse generator (IPG) would interfere with the function of implanted cardiac devices (ICD) if the patient ever needed an ICD. After recovery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and then transferred to the ward after 1 day.
The initial programming was performed 2 weeks after the surgery. Contact No. 2 of the implanted lead was selected as the active contact, and the unipolar stimulation parameters were adjusted as follows: Amplitude: 1.5 mA, pulse width: 60 µs, and frequency: 130 Hz.
Afterward, the tremor was significantly controlled and the patient gradually gained the ability to have a walker-assisted gait within 10 months and could accomplish his daily activities. At the time of the 1-year follow-up, he had an infrequent mild tremor and needed modest assistance with gait. Furthermore, no stimulation-related adverse event was observed, and the patient and his family were completely satisfied with the outcome of the surgery. Due to the unprogressive and completely alleviated tremor at the 1-year follow-up, the stimulation parameters were not readjusted at that point.