A 45-year-old man was seen in June of 2010 in the Temporomandibular Joint and Orofacial Pain Unit (Hospital Odontològic, Barcelona University, Spain) referring tingling in the left hemifacial region, including ipsilateral lingual side, for one year of evolution, accompanied by discomfort when shaving and skin compression. Once vascular disorders and central or peripheral tumors were excluded by several neurology services through the appropriate tests (computed tomography angiography, magnetic resonance imaging and laboratory blood test), the patient underwent thorough medical history and physical examination. The presence of local myalgia of the masticatory muscles (temporal and masseter) and pain in both temporomandibular joints (TMJ) in movement and at rest were observed.
The tingling sensation was located on the temporal zone at its upper limit, extending to the pinna on the posterior site and the corner of the mouth in its anterior localization, accompanied by a transient paresthesia of the left side of the tongue . It was especially important when patient woke up. Also, the patient reported dysesthesia when shaving. Clinical examination showed the patient’s inability to discriminate direction, pressure (Von Frey filaments) and sensibility (cold/hot) on the skin of the affected side.
It was diagnosed as idiopathic sensory neuropathy of the third branch of the fifth cranial nerve after an accurate clinical and radiographic evaluation . Besides, local mialgia due to an eccentric bruxism was also diagnosed, which resulted in a widespread dental attrition. Physiotherapic treatment in combination with an oral splint (Michigan-type splint) were prescribed in order to reduce dental wear and trying to enhance muscle relaxation.
Patient reported a marked improvement in terms of the tingling sensation after three months of treatment, with a complete disappearance of the dysesthetic feeling that patient referred. Extraoral examination revealed pressure, direction and sensibility discrimination in the skin of the third quadrant. On the other hand, the left side of the tongue experienced a remarkable improvement as evidenced by pressure and direction testing, despite a slight residual tingling.
After 5 years of follow up, the tingling remained stable, being especially intense in the morning, without a complete remission of numbness. The clinical evolution confirms the diagnosis of buccal and lingual nerve neuropathy by muscle compression, which manifest itself as paresthesia in the territory innervated by these nerves.