This is a case report of a 60-year-old male patient, with knee replacement two weeks ago, presented with pain in the upper abdomen and large hematoma around his operated knee. He reported impaired vision in the last two weeks and appeared confused. Clinical examination revealed only slight pain of the upper abdomen. Laboratory results showed severe thrombocytosis (1385 G/l), leukocytosis (49.7 G/l), anemia (98 g/l) and hypoosmolar hyponatremia (105 mmol/l). No clinical or laboratory signs of infection were found. CT scan of thorax and abdomen was inconspicuous. Head MRI showed only a mild microangiopathy with no evidence of hemorrhage or ischemia nor of sinus venous thrombosis. However, a jugular vein thrombosis was detected.
Because of excessively high platelet and leukocyte counts and thrombosis, a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) was suspected. Bone marrow biopsy (smear and core biopsy) confirmed the diagnosis . JAK-2V617F, bcr-abl, CALR- and MPL- mutations turned out negative. PFA 100® test was normal, but von Willebrand factor (vWF) activity and vWF ratio were decreased, consistent with an acquired von Willebrand syndrome (vWS). Based on these results a cytoreductive treatment with hydroxycarbamide was initiated.
Because of the life-threatening degree of hyponatremia the patient was transferred to the ICU. In search of the reason for the hyponatremia, a diagnostic work up was started. After exclusion of renal failure (creatinine 33 umol/l, GFR 133 ml/min), use of diuretics, hypocortisolism and hypothyroidism, SIADH and CSW were the main differential diagnoses. Very low serum sodium (105 mmol/l) and high urinary sodium (22, later increasing up to 240 mmol/l) were consistent with both SIADH and CSW . However, central venous pressure was low (3 mmHg) and remained low even under high saline infusion indicating persistent hypovolemia, which favored the diagnosis of CSW. Serum sodium was slowly increased with NaCl solution, initially 3% and later 0.9%. After stopping intravenous sodium, sodium level could only be maintained with supplementation of NaCl capsules and fludrocortison 0.1 mg daily, indicating ongoing salt loss. Concomitantly, the patient showed an impressive salt craving. After 3 weeks under continuous hydroxycarbamide therapy, thrombocyte counts normalized, serum sodium returned to normal and all salt substitutions could be stopped . In parallel, the impaired mental condition of the patient slowly improved and finally returned to normal. The cytoreductive therapy (hydroxycarbamide 500 mg/day) was maintained.