This is a report of a previously active and healthy 13-year-old Trinidadian boy of African descent with no past medical history, significant history of trauma or travel abroad. He suddenly presented with flu-like symptoms, vomiting and diarrhea of four days duration at a community health center. There was no history of known contact with S. aureus infection either at school or with family. He was assessed as a case of viral illness, possibly gastroenteritis, and was treated symptomatically with anti-emetic and analgesic intramuscular injections. Laboratory tests were not pursued and he was discharged with instructions for home care and, if necessary, oral rehydration therapy. About two weeks later he was admitted to the hospital complaining of fever, increasing pain, weakness and inability to lift or to move his left leg where he received an intramuscular injection of the anti-emetic drug.
On admission, his physical examination revealed tender and warm erythematous swelling of his left thigh extending to his upper thigh and hip joint. An ultrasound scan of his left hip, a chest X-ray, electrocardiography and Doppler ultrasound of his popliteal pulses detected no abnormality. Blood cultures, samples of pus from a skin rash and samples for clinical chemistry were taken. Initial laboratory results are given in Table .
On further review, the child was assessed as having septic arthritis with a high suspicion of necrotizing fasciitis and septicemia or infective endocarditis. Thus, treatment with clindamycin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin and cloxacillin was started. Later the same day, the cellulitic area around his right knee was noticed to increase rapidly and a computed tomography scan revealed a collection or abscess around his left hip but not involving the capsule of the joint. An immediate exploratory laparotomy and drainage of the pelvic wall abscess under general anesthesia was arranged. During the operation, 200 ml of straw colored fluid was collected and a deep pelvic wall abscess was found, measuring 8 × 6 × 4 cm, adjoining his hip joint capsule and near to the obturator canal. There was thick shiny brown pus in the cavity extending superiorly towards the inlet of his iliac bone, inferiorly to the superior and inferior ramus of his left pelvic bone. The thick joint capsule was intact and there was no evidence of gluteal abscess, but there was a compression from the external and greater tuberosity of the hip bone by the thick pus collection. The pus was drained. Our patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) although the post-operative condition was very satisfactory. While in the ICU, our patient started to have persistent cough productive of white sputum and was observed to have bilateral crepitations in all his lung fields. A chest X-ray was suggestive of acute respiratory distress syndrome with ground glass appearance. He required inotropes, and had difficulty ventilating resulting in the need for intubation and artificial ventilation. However, our patient's condition deteriorated rapidly and he died 48 hours after admission. An autopsy was remarkable for necrotizing multi-organ failure involving his lungs, kidneys, thymus and other organs. It also revealed congestion, edema and hemorrhage of his lung alveoli, necrosis of his kidney epithelia and Hassall's corpuscles and microabscesses of his thymus gland.
Laboratory results received after the death of our patient revealed grossly abnormal data. These are also shown on Table .