A 29-year-old Moroccan man without medical history, had a five pack-years smoking history and stopped smoking seven years ago. He presented with a four-month history of chest pain and minimal hemoptysis. The physical exam was normal. A chest X-ray showed a large left well- rounded pulmonary opacity.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumoral lesion at the left upper lobe measuring 12.5 × 8 cm. This process was well limited, heterogeneous containing calcifications and areas of necrosis extended into the chest wall without bone lysis or lymph nodes staged T3N0.
Bone scintigraphy, cerebral and abdominal CT scan showed no evidence of distant metastasis. Trans-thoracic biopsy was performed, histopathological study of the biopsy specimen showed a numerous glands showing an endometrioid morphology, occasional squamoid morules and relatively clear cytoplasm, the Ki-67 was 1% (low proliferation index) and based on these histopathological findings, the diagnosis of fetal adenocarcinoma was concluded , then the patient received neoadjuvant CMT based on etoposide at dose of 120 mg/m2 day one to three and cisplatin at 100 mg/m2 on day one every three weeks. Evaluation after three cycles showed disease stabilization according to Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) (as immunohistochemistry was unavailable).
Thirty days after the last cycle of CMT the patient underwent a left upper lobectomy with lymphadenectomy . The microscopic examination of the specimen found a tumor characterized by two component lesions, the first composed with well-differentiated elements of glandular proliferation rarely isolated or grouped in clusters (polyadenoid structures), which were sometimes separated by undifferentiated beaches of cells with blastomatous differentiation showing moderate cytonuclear atypia and a high mitotic activity. The tumor resection was complete with negative lymph node. The postoperative course was without anomalies.
The patient underwent a chest CT scan assessment every 3 months during the first year and then every 6 months during the second year. At 2 years of follow-up, there is no evidence of disease recurrence .