A 62-year old woman was admitted to our Emergency Department after the urinary expulsion of a 6.5 mm diameter cancellous screw. She reported low abdominal pain and recurrent urinary tract infections during the preceding five months. About seven years earlier, she had been involved in a motor vehicle crash as a pedestrian, being hit by a motorcyclist while crossing the street. At the time of this initial injury seven years ago when admitted to the Emergency Department, she was conscious with a GCS of 15, complained of low abdominal pain and an open laceration of the left calf. On initial survey, FAST was normal and macroscopic hematuria was noted. Thoraco-abdominal computerized tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast material revealed a bladder injury and pelvic ring fractures. There was both intraperitoneal and extraperitoneal extravasation of the contrast material from the bladder into the space of Retzius. An anterior–posterior type injury to the pelvic ring was diagnosed with symphyseal pubis disruption, and widening of the left sacroiliac joint with an associated sacral fracture . An explorative laparotomy confirmed the bladder laceration. There were two lacerations, one of the posterior bladder wall and a larger one involving the anterior bladder wall. The bladder was repaired primarily and the urologists protected the repairs with both urethral and suprapubic catheters. Orthopedic surgeons reduced the pelvis and stabilized it with two plates and screws; a postero-superior 4-hole, 4.5 mm dynamic compression plate (DCP) with two 6.5 mm cancellous screws on each side of the symphysis pubis and an additional antero-superior 5-hole, 3.5 mm DCP with three 4.5 mm cortical screws. An additional left-side 7.3 mm diameter x 65 mm length cannulated cancellous iliosacral screw with a washer at the level of S1 were placed. Two postoperative cystograms confirmed the absence of a bladder leak. The urinary catheters were removed successively, the suprapubic initially at three weeks postoperatively. Another cystogram performed about two months later was normal.
Seven years after the original injury, the patient presented to our Emergency Department with recurrent abdominal pain, after she had expelled a screw into the toilet while urinating. During the previous five months she had recurrent urinary tract infections. Planar radiographs were obtained and showed only five screws remaining in the two symphyseal plates. All screws appeared to have loosened when compared to the original fixation radiograph. CT scan and cystogram showed no bladder foreign bodies. However, the cystogram demonstrated 1.5-2 cm diameter bladder ulceration in the anterior wall, with the posterior pubic plate being seen through the laceration . Urine culture was positive with a mixture of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, and the patient was treated according to their antibiotic sensitivities. During her hospitalization, the patient mentioned another episode of a screw being expelled while urinating three years earlier (four years after the accident). After that episode, she reported improvement and disappearance of the low abdominal pain, without consulting a physician.
Following eradication of the bladder infection, the patient had elective surgery for removal of the symphyseal plates and repair of the bladder ulceration. The previous Pfannsetiel incision was used for exploration. A pressure ulceration of the anterior bladder wall was contiguous with the posterior-superior plate which was protruding into the bladder and associated with multiple adhesions between the outer bladder wall, the pubic bones and the Retzius space. The plates were removed and the bladder was repaired primarily in a double layer, protecting the repair again with both suprapubic and urethral catheters. Bone cultures taken during the procedure showed growth of no organisms. A cystogram two weeks later was normal without leak and the catheters were removed . Two months post removal, follow-up was normal and the patient denied any additional urinary symptoms and had sterile urinary cultures.