A 24-year-old man with no significant past medical history and on no medications presented to the emergency department with three weeks of headaches. One month prior to presentation he developed sinus pain, subjective fevers, nasal congestion, and ear fullness lasting for one week. He received an unknown course of antibiotics at the time. The symptoms improved; however, he noticed a new, constant headache with associated nausea, vomiting, blurry vision, and night sweats. He worked as a welder with prior employment in the coal industry. His hobbies included hunting and fishing and he reported significant time spent outdoors. Over the summer, he aerated his dirt basement after a plumbing leak.
On presentation, he was afebrile with normal vital signs and a non-focal physical exam. He had a white blood cell count of 10.4 × 103/μL (normal range 3.9–10.7 × 103/μL) with 0% eosinophils and 80% neutrophils (absolute neutrophil count of 8.37 × 103/μL). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 22 mm/h (normal range 1–33 mm/h) and C-reactive protein was 3.1 mg/L (normal range 0–5 mg/L). Computed tomography (CT) of the head was notable for three right parietotemporal masses with 9 mm midline shift and significant edema; sinus CT ruled out rhino-orbital involvement. He was started on dexamethasone with subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirming three irregular rim-enhancing lesions . He was taken to the operating room where he underwent stereotactic abscess evacuation with aspiration of purulent material. This was sent for bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial cultures and histopathological analysis. Microscopic examination of the abscesses revealed septate hyphal elements on the Gram stain .
Based on the gram stain result, he was started on liposomal amphotericin B, five milligrams per kilogram intravenously once daily. By day 6, fungal and bacterial cultures had grown a dematiaceous mold with velvety, olivaceous black colonies at 30 °C and 35 °C. Tape preparation of colonies with lactophenol cotton blue revealed long brown septate hyphae with sparsely branched wavy chains of smooth conidia . 5-Flucytosine 25 mg per kilogram by mouth four times daily and posaconazole 300 mg by mouth twice daily were added. Serum galactomannan antigen and (1,3)-β-d-glucan serum tests returned negative, while baseline positron emission tomography (PET) CT showed known brain abscesses with a few small 5–6 mm lower lobe pulmonary nodules. Repeat MRI brain was obtained two weeks after the original surgery and demonstrated progression of abscesses and midline shift. He underwent operative debulking with resultant homonymous hemianopsia, but otherwise tolerated treatment well. He completed a 6-week course of liposomal amphotericin B and has remained on 5-flucytosine and posaconazole since discharge.