A 39-year-old woman of mixed Northern European descent was diagnosed with gestational diabetes (GDM) at sixteen weeks of gestation during her first and only pregnancy. Age was her only risk factor for GDM. She was treated with insulin, up to a maximum of 25 units per day, to maintain euglycaemia during pregnancy. Her pre-insulin-treatment A1c was 6.1% (43 mmol/mol) (upper limit normal range A1c < 6.1%, 43 mmol/mol). A healthy female neonate weighing 3374 g was delivered at 39 weeks of gestation by cesarean section, due to transverse lie. Three months postpartum, the patient met criteria for diabetes mellitus based on a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test; her 2-hour glucose value was 13 mmol/L (234 mg/dl) and fasting glucose 6.0 mmol/L (108 mg/dl). Following pregnancy, her daily insulin requirements dropped, to 6–12 units per day (0.12 to 0.24 units/kg/day).
Currently, 11 years after the birth of her daughter, her quarterly A1c values remain less than 7.0% (53 mmol/mol). Her 2-hour postprandial glucose values usually remain less than 6.5 mmol/L (117 mg/dl) despite only administering premeal insulin when her meals contain more than 60 g of carbohydrates. She consistently administers intermediate insulin at bedtime. She has never experienced diabetic ketoacidosis or severe hypoglycaemia requiring the assistance of another person. In the last year, she has begun to experience the need to drink water when swallowing food.
Her past medical history was significant for optic atrophy, diagnosed at age 10 which progressed to severe visual impairment over the following 8 years. From the age of 25 years, the patient complained of dizziness, unsteady gait with minor falls, and high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss.
Family history revealed one healthy sister, a brother with trisomy 21 who died at the age of 2 years from a congenital heart defect, and late onset deafness in her mother and maternal grandmother (in their seventies). Her father died at the age of 69 years of prostate cancer. There was no family history of diabetes mellitus or optic atrophy and no consanguinity.
On examination, her BMI was 17.8 kg/m2. She reported a low BMI throughout her life. She had bilateral optic atrophy with pale discs and impaired colour vision. Visual acuity was 20/400 in both eyes, with bilateral central scotomas. She had mild dysdiadochokinesia without dysmetria. She was unable to perform tandem gait for more than a few steps. She notably lacked typical findings associated with diabetes mellitus type 2, such as obesity, hypertension, and acanthosis nigricans.
Brain MRI revealed marked cerebellar vermian and hemispheric atrophy, as well as brainstem atrophy, particularly involving the pons. There was minimal change on MRI of her brain over a 10-year interval.
Antiglutamic acid decarboxylase and anti-islet cell antibodies were negative. Nutritional and vitamin deficiencies were ruled out with biochemical testing.
Genetic testing for autosomal dominant optic atrophy (OPA1) and spinocerebellar ataxia 1–8 and 17 were negative. Clinical sequencing of the WFS1 gene was performed through the Casey Eye Institute. Two mutations were identified. The first variant was c.2590G>T (p.E864), a truncating mutation previously reported in patients affected with WS. The second variant was c.977C>T (p.A326V) and has been previously described in psychiatric patients but has not yet been described as a known causative mutation in WS. This variant was predicted as likely damaging by some in silico prediction models (Polyphen 2) but also predicted as tolerated by other models (SIFT, PROVEAN). Targeted sequencing was performed for these two variants on a first-degree relative, and this family member was found to have only one of the two mutations. This segregation analysis therefore confirmed that the mutations were in trans in the patient and therefore affecting both maternally and paternally inherited alleles. Mitochondrial DNA sequencing had been considered to assess for maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD) but was not pursued once testing for WFS1 returned positive. A comparison between WS and MIDD is provided in .
An experimental therapeutic trial of a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor (DPP-4) was offered in the hope of extending neurologic and β-cell function; however the patient declined this.