In 2017, an 83-year-old Japanese woman presented to our department with a chief complaint of a mass in her right maxillary premolar region. She had initially noticed a painless mass in her right maxillary premolar region in 2002. After she had first noticed of the mass, it grew gradually in size, but she sought no treatment for it. She was referred to us for examination and treatment because it was difficult to perform tracheal intubation for surgery of sigmoid colon cancer at another hospital. Her history included sigmoid colon cancer, subarachnoid hemorrhaging, bronchitic asthma, and cardiac insufficiency. Regarding the intra- and extra-oral findings, a massive pedunculated mass in the right maxillary premolar region measuring 83 × 58 × 35 mm was palpable . Furthermore, it covered the front of the right palate, and it protruded to the extra-oral region from the right maxillary premolar alveolar region. Its surface was almost entirely smooth, and some erosions and ulcerations were seen. It was elastic and hard and showed no tenderness on palpation. There was no palpable regional lymphadenopathy, and a laboratory examination revealed no abnormal values.
Panoramic X-ray revealed the shadow of the mass in the right maxillary premolar region, which included some hard tissue . Computed tomography (CT) showed scattering calcified images in the mass . Magnetic resonance imaging was not performed because she had vertebral artery clips and screws in her forehead. Given the above findings, we suspected benign gingival tumor in the right maxillary premolar region and performed a biopsy under local anesthesia .
Histologically, proliferation of dysplastic squamous epithelia was observed . We noted subepithelial mild dysplastic spindle-shaped cells and collagenous fibers, and scattered calcification and ossification were also observed . Immunohistochemically, the spindle cells were negative for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), and nuclear translocation of β-catenin was not observed in the spindle cells (data not shown). Therefore, we excluded a diagnosis of carcinosarcoma and fibromatosis. However, we were unable to diagnose absolutely whether the dysplastic squamous epithelia were pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia of the gingiva or well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. In addition, positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed that the maximum standard unit value (SUVmax) of the sigmoid colon and the oral lesion were 15.27 and 14.99, respectively, and there were no other obvious metastases . Therefore, we performed tumorectomy under general anesthesia. The pedicle of the tumor was located at the right maxillary premolar area, and the tumor—including the tissue surrounding the lesion—was resected as one mass together with the periosteum . At that time, partial destruction of the maxillary bone was seen. The exposed bone surface was slightly curetted. After resection, the wounded area was covered with artificial dermis (TERDERMIS). Finally, tie-over dressing by gauze with ointment was performed.
The microscopic findings of the surgically removed tumor were similar to those of the biopsy specimen. The body of the tumor was composed of spindle-shaped cells that were proliferating with collagenous fiber, and scattered bone formation was also observed . The destruction of the basement membrane by atypical squamous epithelia was observed in the surgically removed specimen, suggesting stromal invasion. In addition, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the dysplastic squamous epithelia were positive for Ki67 and CK17, suggesting that they were squamous cell carcinoma, not pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia. Furthermore, some spindle cells were positive for smooth muscle action (SMA), indicating myofibroblastic differentiation. Therefore, the epithelial component of the tumor was considered to be well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Because most of the tumor was occupied by spindle-shaped cells and marked ossification histopathologically, we diagnosed the tumor as POF with squamous cell carcinoma (pT1N0M0).
One week after surgery, we removed the gauze and covered the wound with an oral appliance for protection . There have been no signs of local recurrence or metastasis during follow-up as of 2 years after surgery.