A 4-year-old Japanese girl had fever and swelling in the right leg, with marked elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. Based on computed tomography, echocardiography and skin biopsy, she had been diagnosed with Takayasu arteritis at the age of two years. Due to aggravated inflammation, blood flow decreased in her legs, and part of her right leg became necrotic. As she had been resistant to standard therapy with prednisolone or tocilizumab without monitoring plasma concentrations, we started to administer IFX (day 0). IFX was given at a dose of 5 mg/kg on days 0 and 10. Although the levels initially decreased from 8.7 (day 0) to 1.6 mg/dL (day 10), CRP contents elevated again on day 23 (9.0 mg/dL), and IFX was administered at 10 mg/kg on the same day. Body fluid leakage from the inflammation sites in her legs was observed. Because blood IgG levels were lower than standard value, immunoglobulin (2.5 g) has been administered on days 17, 31, 37, 45, 51, 59, 65, 72, 85 and thereafter once a week for at least a few months.
Plasma IFX concentrations were measured by LC-MS/MS with nano-surface and molecular-orientation limited (nSMOL, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) proteolysis [, ]. Based on the clinical courses of blood CRP and IFX levels , trough IFX levels were decreased from 23.6 μg/mL (day 10) to 2.5 μg/mL (day 23). Dosages and intervals of IFX administrations were then adjusted according to the trough IFX levels. IFX was given biweekly at 8 mg/kg per administration. Plasma IFX levels gradually increased, and CRP levels decreased to around 2 mg/dL 40 days after IFX administration. Inflammation was suppressed, and the dosage of prednisolone could be gradually decreased. CRP levels transiently elevated to 5.8 and 7.0 mg/dL after infection on days 87 and 126, respectively. Blood culture results confirmed the presence of gram-positive cocci. ADA against IFX was not detected using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (Somru BioScience, PEI, Canada). During the observation period, no renal failure was observed. It is noteworthy to mention that a similar pattern -initial decreases followed by increases- was observed in the clinical courses of IFX and IgG .