A 16-year-old female patient presented to our centre with a non-healing wound on her right inner thigh for a year and half. She reported that she sustained injury to that area after a fall off a double-decked wooden bed at her boarding school and sustaining injury on her right inner thigh on hitting its corner with minimal bleeding and the wound healed initially within some days. She did not sustain any other injuries and was attending her school normally. She then subsequently had on and off pus discharge with occasional swelling on her right inner thigh that had been incised and drained on two occasions at a nearby health centre with little relief and recurrence. Throughout that period she reported normal urinary habit, normal bowel habit, occasional low-grade fevers, and good appetite with no history of body weight loss. Neither history of diabetes mellitus nor hypertension were reported and no known history of malignancy in the family.
On examination she was fully conscious, afebrile, not pale, not jaundiced, not dehydrated, nutritionally sound with stable vitals. Local examination revealed a right upper medial thigh pus-discharging sinus, 1х1 cm with exophytic granulomatous margins with scar tissue around. Chronic sinus was then suspected and a pelvic X-ray was ordered that revealed normal osseous outlines. An MRI was requested and reported a fistulous tract measuring about 10 cm in length with a foreign body originating from right lateral wall of the urinary bladder passing through pectineus, adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus and gracilis muscles exiting through medial aspect of right thigh; in keeping with vesico-cutaneous fistula with a foreign body in-situ .
Laboratory work up showed hemoglobin of 11.5 g/dL, serum creatinine of 43 mmol/l, BUN of 1.95 mmol/l and serum potassium and sodium within range. She was scheduled for cystoscopy, exploration and fistulectomy. On examination under anesthesia she was noted to have normal appearing external female genitalia, and a 1 by 1 cm sinus on her upper thigh in the inner aspect, with exophytic edge, discharging pus and surrounded by firm scar tissue . Cystoscopy revealed a 2 by 2 cm mass at 10 o’clock approximately 5 cm away from the trigone that was easily bleeding to tough. The mass was resected off the wall using monopolar TUR set and the fistula opening was appreciated , a 2-way 16Fr Foley catheter was left in situ and the tissue chips were sent for histopathology which revealed pyogenic granuloma .
On exploration of the sinus, incision was made around the fistula, externally, few centimeters from the center and extended upwards about 2 cm. A foreign body was felt with forceps that seemed to project in the direction of right lateral wall of the urinary bladder through muscle layers. On controlled division and layered dissection a round old piece of wood measuring about 7 cm long with an estimated diameter of 6 mm was extracted out with no calcifications around . The fistula tract was curated and debrided, thoroughly lavaged, hemostasis achieved and wound was dressed up aseptically. Tissue sample from the fistula tract was taken for histology analysis which confirmed pyogenic granuloma and no features of metastasis.
Post operatively she was kept on Sitz-baths, a course of antibiotics and analgesics with no leakage of clear fluid/urine from the fistula tract or any adverse event noted. On day 21st post operatively the urethral catheter was removed and she continued to fair well .