A 15-year-old girl was hospitalized with severe weight loss and difficulty standing due to restricting-type AN. She weighed 51.2 kg (body mass index [BMI] 20.5 kg/m2) a year before admission but was jealous of her thin friend and tried to lose weight through intensive exercise and calorie restriction. Owing to her continuous weight loss, she was referred to the psychiatric department of our hospital, weighing 28.7 kg (11.42 kg/m2) on admission; she was further referred to our department for medical stabilization. Her medical history was unremarkable, and she had been taking vitamin B complex, including benfotiamine 75 mg/day, pyridoxine 75 mg/day, and cyanocobalamin 0.75 mg/day to prevent vitamin B1, B6, and B12 deficiencies, which had been prescribed by her previous doctor, for three months before admission.
On day 3, her test results showed hypoglycaemia and elevated liver enzymes, TSAT, ferritin, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine (Cre) ratio. However, her serum iron and electrolytes were within normal limits . Her endocrine tests showed typical findings of AN, including stress-induced hypercortisolaemia, low triiodothyronine and thyroxine levels with normal thyroid-stimulating hormone indicating euthyroid sick syndrome, high growth hormone levels accompanying low insulin-like growth factor-1, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism .
Initially, she would spit out food, but a few days later, she began to eat the whole amount. As she was able to consume the entire diet, we increased the total calories of the diet . One week later, her weight began to increase, and on day 44, she weighed 35.2 kg (BMI 14.0 kg/m2), with liver enzyme improvements . A non-parametric test determining the correlation between weight and ALT showed a significant correlation (r = -0.816, P = 1.16 × 10−4) . By contrast, her serum Alb peaked when her BW was around its lowest and reached the minimum right after her rapid weight gain two weeks after hospitalization . Therefore, as reported elsewhere, Alb itself appeared to be unrelated to the change in BW .
As shown in Fig. A, blood Alb appeared to have a low correlation with BW. Regardless, since patients with AN tend to be dehydrated, and the patient’s BUN/Cre ratio was high on day 3 , we realized that dehydration might elevate her blood test parameters; this could cause us to misinterpret her nutritional status. When we divided Alb values by HCT (Alb/HCT) to correct for the effects of dehydration, we found a trend toward an increase in Alb/HCT along with weight gain . A non-parametric test determining the correlation between Alb/HCT and BW indicated a significant correlation with a Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (rs) of 0.661 (P = 5.28 × 10−3) . Thus, we decided to use Alb/HCT as a surrogate marker for nutritional status in this study.
Conversely, since ferritin and TSAT increased with ALT on day 3, we investigated the relationship between liver dysfunction and iron metabolism. The patient’s ALT and TSAT decreased during hospitalization , but a non-parametric test between ALT and TSAT did not indicate a significant correlation (r = 0.9, P = 8.33 × 10−2) .
Next, we examined the relationship between Alb and ALT. As mentioned above, we divided ALT and Alb by HCT to eliminate the change by dehydration. ALT/HCT correlated inversely with Alb/HCT in the patient , and the non-parametric test indicated a significant correlation (r = -0.835, P = 5.24 × 10−5) . By contrast, the iron-storage protein ferritin and the liver enzyme GGT showed an upward trend up to day 15 when adjusted for HCT, which then decreased . A non-parametric test between ferritin/HCT and GGT/HCT also suggested a significant correlation (r = 1.0, P = 2.78 × 10−3) .
A few days after dietary calorie intake exceeded 1,400 kcal per day, we observed a decrease in the patient’s blood phosphorus levels due to refeeding syndrome (blood phosphorus = 1.4 mg/dL). Accordingly, we performed phosphorus supplementation as needed (inorganic phosphorus 30 mmol per day was administered by intravenous drip from the 9th day, followed by oral preparation 32.3 mmol per day from the 18th day, and gradually decreased and discontinued from the 39th day), in an attempt to maintain the blood phosphorus concentration within normal limits. As for other electrolytes, which tend to decrease during refeeding, we prophylactically administered intravenous fluids containing potassium and magnesium (10 milliequivalents [mEq] and 2.5 mEq per day, respectively). We did not find severe hypokalaemia or hypomagnesemia in her test results. At follow-up four months after discharge, she weighed 56.2 kg (BMI 22.2 kg/m2) and noted resumption of menstruation for the first time in 15 months.