A 25-year-old male patient re-presented to our department for the first time in 7 years with otorrhea in the right ear and recurrent meningitis. He had been treated for meningitis in another hospital and had experienced fever and seizures two weeks before visiting our hospital. The patient had a history of multiple surgeries for cholesteatoma and had been treated for severe otitis media at the age of 2 years, at which point right temporal bone osteolysis was identified. He subsequently suffered from recurrent meningitis and underwent several brain abscess drainage procedures. At ten years of age right temporal bone surgery was performed to rebuild the separation between the middle ear and lateral temporal lobe. At 16 years, he was diagnosed with cholesteatoma, and radical mastoidectomy was performed. Further details of these operations, performed at other hospitals, were not available. We were unable to obtain detailed past medical records regarding treatment (including surgical procedures) of his cholesteatoma, and we could not estimate whether the past intervention of the cholesteatoma was appropriate. When the patient was 17 years old, he visited our department for the first time to undergo assessment for controlling cholesteatoma, recurrent meningitis, and otalgia. First, tympanoplasty was performed to assess the disease and remove residual cholesteatoma from the middle ear; cholesteatoma was diagnosed by histopathological analysis. It was not possible to determine whether the cholesteatoma was a residual congenital cholesteatoma or a secondary cholesteatoma formed as a result of osteolysis of the external auditory canal or middle ear. At that time, we hesitated a more extensive procedure because of his age and limited information about his past surgical interventions. Meningitis and otalgia were subsequently controlled. However, after six months, when he was 18 years old, the patient experienced another episode of meningitis. At that time, he was also suffering from an epidural abscess, which was drained during hospitalization. He attended our department until he was 19 years old, at which point he chose to discontinue the hospital visits.
When the patient presented at our department again at the age of 25 years, computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed massive osteolysis of the temporal bone . Notably, while most of the temporal bone had disappeared, the cochlear bony lateral wall was relatively well preserved, and his hearing by bone conduction had not been completely lost. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the temporal lobe of the brain had herniated into the mastoid . Compared with a previous CT scan image , there is clear progression of boney destruction during a time when the patient did not undergo any surgery to the temporal bone. At this point, we chose an observational approach as otorrhea had spontaneously resolved. However, during the patient’s follow-up, otorrhea recurred, and cerebrospinal otorrhea was suspected. The patient was hospitalized and treated conservatively with antibiotics. Once again, the otorrhea resolved spontaneously with 2 weeks of bed rest, and skull base reconstruction was planned to prevent recurrence.
?A3B2 twb=.27w?>Pre-operative CT imaging with three-dimensional reconstruction clearly revealed not only temporal bone osteolysis but also spotted osteolysis of other bones of the skull, including the mandibular bone, zygomatic bone, and contralateral temporal bone . At this point, Gorham-Stout disease was suspected for the first time. To support the diagnosis of Gorham-Stout disease (by ruling out other possible differential diagnoses), we performed temporal bone biopsy under general anesthesia. An incision was made on the post-auricular scar from previous surgery. When the periosteum flap was created, an unexpected massive serous leakage was encountered, spouting from abnormal pores or lytic lesions in the temporal bone , which were similar to those described in previous reports . Part of the temporal bone appeared blue in color, suggesting resorption. Samples were quickly collected from the bone surrounding the pores, and serous leakage (which appeared to be CSF) was stopped using fibrin glue and absorbable hemostat. There are no signs of recurrence of cholesteatoma at that time. Histopathological analysis revealed abnormal bony structures and accompanying small slits lined by epithelial cells . The findings ruled out other diagnoses, and were supportive of a diagnosis of Gorham Stout Disease in conjunction with the clinical and radiographic information. We concluded that the progressive osteolysis was far more likely to have been caused by Gorham-Stout disease rather than cholesteatoma. Skull base reconstruction was abandoned as osteolysis was considered to be progressive. Conservative treatment with infectious control was implemented as an alternative.
During the first year of follow-up, he suffered a mild headache on one occasion, leading to an unscheduled visit. He was treated with intravenous antibiotics at an outpatient clinic to prevent the development of severe meningitis. At this point, no apparent CSF leakage was observed, no hospitalization was required and his headache had resolved within a few days. After that, there was no need to visit the hospital, except for follow-up once every few months. He was followed every two or 3 months for the next 1 year, during which time there were no signs of CSF or cholesteatoma recurrence.
We think that he has little risk of recurrence of the cholesteatoma because there has been no clear evidence of recurrence of cholesteatoma since the age of 18. However, this is an extremely rare case. CT imaging with three-dimensional reconstruction has been taken in every six months to assess the progression of osteolysis of the temporal or other bones of the skull and to watch out recurrent cholesteatoma. He remained well at the time of his last follow up. His quality of life has been maintained.