In December 2016, a 55-year-old male was referred for volatile IOP with a history of myopic LASIK bilaterally and photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) enhancement OS. Seven years ago, the patient first noted episodes of blurred vision and halos lasting up to 2 hours, OD > OS, following sexual excitation. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/80 OD and 20/25 OS. The pupillary response was sluggish OD > OS. IOP was 36 mm Hg OD and 24 mm Hg OS on no topical medications. Anterior segment exam showed 2 + stromal corneal edema OD and 1 + OS. The anterior chamber was deep centrally and shallow peripherally. There was trace anterior segment reaction and trace nuclear sclerosis. Angles appeared closed bilaterally on gonioscopy. Dynamic gonioscopy showed scattered peripheral anterior synechiae OD > OS and a double hump sign. There was trace pigment in the trabecular meshwork. Optic nerve, optical coherence tomography (OCT) and visual field assessment demonstrated advanced glaucomatous changes OD and mild-to-moderate changes OS. Anterior segment OCT showed a deep anterior chamber with minimal lens vault, iris trabecular meshwork contact, and minimal pupillary block . Ultrasound biomicroscopy demonstrated closed angles and anteriorly positioned prominent ciliary processes .
Various treatment modalities were explained, including pilocarpine, laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI), laser iridoplasty, lens-based surgery, goniosynechialysis, endocyclophotoplasty, trabecular bypass procedures, and sub-conjunctival filtering procedures. We proceeded with lens-based surgery with goniosynechialysis and endocyclophotoplasty, pilocarpine 2% and travoprost-timolol 0.004%/0.5% were started. OD surgery went uneventfully with the mild cataract removed and a ZCBOO IOL implanted targeting distance. Two hundred degree of endocyclophotoplasty was performed nasally through the temporal incision with a curved 19-gauge probe. Total 270° of goniosynechialysis was performed using an Ocular Ahmed 1.5X Surgical Gonio and 25-gauge MST iris microforceps. Postoperatively, he was left on travoprost-timolol 0.004%/0.5%, pilocarpine 2% for the first 2 months, moxifloxacin 0.5% tid for the first week, nepafanac 0.1% tid for the first month, and prednisolone 1% q2h for the first week with a gradual taper over 6 weeks. He has achieved 20/20 UCVA, and his IOP has ranged from 7 to 12 mm Hg on travoprost-timolol 0.004%/0.5%. His postoperative anterior segment OCT and UBM show open angles and a well-centered 1-piece IOL in the capsular bag ( and ).
During OD recovery, the patient reported an episode of visual blurring OS secondary to sexual excitation. On examination, the IOP was 7 mm Hg OD and 40 mm Hg OS, with a fixed, mid-dilated pupil and closed angles with pupil block OS. The patient was treated with acetazolamide 500mg and an LPI. This reduced the IOP to 7 mm Hg OS and broke the acute angle-closure attack. The patient underwent lens-based surgery with goniosynechialysis and endocyclophotoplasty OS. He achieved J1 reading vision (near target for monovision) and a stable IOP after one-year of follow-up. He has developed scattered peripheral anterior synechiae over time, and we may consider iridoplasty or slit-lamp goniosynechialysis if there is future progression.