A 32-year-old man was hospitalized for progressive swelling and pain in the right lower extremity for 30 days. Physical examination revealed variegated skin on the right lower extremity. His D-dimer level was 35.2 mg/L. Color Doppler ultrasonography revealed thrombosis in the right external iliac vein, common femoral vein, and superficial and deep femoral veins (up to the popliteal fossa). Patient underwent inferior vena cava filter placement, followed by deep vein angioplasty of the right lower extremity, and catheter-directed urokinase thrombolysis on November 02, 2016. Venography revealed occlusion of the right common iliac vein (CIV) and right external iliac vein with several collateral vessels, occlusion in the distal segments, and extensive filling defects in the proximal and middle segments of the right femoral vein, exhibiting a stenosis degree between 50%–90%. In addition, a 10 mm×8 cm balloon dilatation was performed in the right CIV, right external iliac vein, and right femoral vein, and a right CIV catheter was placed for thrombolysis. Urokinase was administered into the thrombus, with maintenance infusion of 20000 IU/h in the right CIV, and 30000 IU/h in the right foot dorsal vein. Five days later, deep venography of the right lower limb was performed, which revealed the following findings : The signal in the right superficial femoral vein was unobstructed, the signal in the right deep femoral vein was unobstructed with several collateral vessels, the contrast agent returned to the right inferior abdominal vein and pelvic vein in collateral circulation; an obvious stenosis in the middle and distal segments of the right iliac vein and occlusion in the opening of the right iliac vein, and the contrast agent returned to the inferior vena cava through the right inferior abdominal vein and pelvic vein; unobstructed lumen and smooth wall of the inferior vena cava with a filter at a level slightly far from the opening of the renal vein. The inferior vena cava filter was subsequently removed. Post-operatively, warfarin dosage was adjusted to maintain an international normalized ratio of 2–3.
Patient was discharged with complete resolution of leg edema. However, he was readmitted 20 days later for pulsatile pain in the right groin. A detailed investigation of his previous medical history revealed repeated oral and perineal ulcers for 4 years (>3 times/year), as well as 2 months with blurred vision. Physical examination revealed positive reactivity of the skin-to-needle prick (pathergy reaction). Laboratory tests showed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 25 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 34 mg/L, rheumatoid factor (RF) was negative, and antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-dsDNA), anti-Sm antibody, and anti-cardiolipin were all negative. Abdominal computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed the following findings: a cystic low-density shadow at the medial edge of the right psoas major muscle, with a range of 6.6 cm×5.6 cm, and contrast agent was observed to infiltrate into the cyst from the right common iliac artery (CIA) on enhanced scan. A cystic low-density shadow on the medial side of the left anterior sacroiliac muscle was discovered, with a size of 5.1 cm×4.3 cm. The contrast agent was observed to infiltrate the cyst from the left internal iliac artery (IIA) on enhanced scan, suggesting rupture of the right CIA and left IIA, complicated by the formation of a pseudoaneurysm . Patient was diagnosed with BD in the active phase on the basis of clinical manifestations and auxiliary examination results. Methylprednisolone (40 mg/day) followed by infliximab injections (300 mg, 6 cycles) was administered as systemic treatment. Abdominal CTA was performed after 1 and 10 months of drug therapy, which showed the following findings: the area of the pseudoaneurysm of the right CIA increased from 6.8 cm×4.3 cm to 7.7 cm×6.3 cm, and the contrast agent still infiltrated the pseudoaneurysm from the right CIA on enhanced scan. However, the area of the pseudoaneurysm of the left IIA decreased from 5.5 cm×4.3 cm to 3.4 cm×3.0 cm, and no contrast agent was observed flowing gradually in the area of the left IIA pseudoaneurysm on enhanced scan .
After one year the patient was readmitted on November 14, 2017 for an increscent pseudoaneurysm of the right CIA. Physical examination revealed no positive findings. Laboratory testing showed an ESR of 2 mm/h and CRP levels <0.754 mg/L. As the patient’s condition was controlled with 8 mg/day methylprednisolone, he underwent stent implantation within the right CIA. Duplicate 10 mm×6 cm bare stent (Bard® Luminexx™) implantation was performed in the right CIA, and postoperative angiography revealed contrast agent blowing into the pseudoaneurysm cavity . The patient was administered aspirin (100 mg/day) and methylprednisolone (8 mg/day), and dynamic abdominal CTA reexaminations were performed post-operatively. Abdominal CTA was performed at 4, 11, 27 months postoperatively, which showed the following findings: the signal within the stent was unobstructed in the right CIA, while a small amount of contrast agent at the stent in the right CIA still flowed into the cavity of the pseudoaneurysm; the size of the pseudoaneurysm was gradually increasing compared with post-operation, up to 9.7 cm×7.0 cm. However, no contrast agent was observed in the area of the left IIA pseudoaneurysm (, ). This suggested that the laceration of the right CIA did not completely heal, despite the immunosuppressive therapy and bare stent implantation. Therefore, the patient underwent stent implantation within the right CIA once again. Venography revealed a stent shadow in the right CIA and contrast agent spraying out of the stent, complicated by the formation of a pseudoaneurysm of the right CIA, sized approximately 4 cm×5 cm. A 10 mm×5 cm covered stent (Bard® Luminexx™) implantation was performed in the right CIA, followed by 10 mm×8 cm balloon dilatation to avoid poor adherence to the covered stent. Post-operative angiography revealed that there was less contrast agent blowing into the cavity of the pseudoaneurysm . The patient continued immunosuppressive therapy after discharge. The patient was followed up for two years after bare stent implantation, and the postoperative course was in stable condition. The DSA examination results at 2 years after operation were similar to the first DSA examination results postoperatively, which showed there was less contrast agent blowing into the cavity of the pseudoaneurysm of the right CIA.