A 72-year-old man visited Shiga University of Medical Science Hospital for regular follow-up of sigmoid colon cancer in December 2019. He had a medical history of undergoing an appendectomy at age 10 and laparoscopic sigmoidectomy for sigmoid colon cancer (pStage I) at age 70. The histopathological diagnosis of the colon cancer was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and tumor invasion to the submucosa with venous invasion. His father died of gastric cancer. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass involving the left ureter that had grown slowly since the previous CT. He underwent further examinations for the diagnosis. A physical examination revealed no abdominal pain or palpable mass. Additionally, no enlarged lymph nodes were palpable in the cervical, axillary, or inguinal regions. Laboratory data included elevated lactate dehydrogenase (239 U/L), creatinine (1.14 mg/dL), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (41 U/mL) levels. Other serum biochemical parameters and tumor markers were within the normal ranges. Urine cytology showed no atypical cells (class II).
Enhanced abdominal CT showed a 30-mm soft-tissue mass involving the left ureter in front of the bifurcation of the left common iliac artery but no enlarged lymph nodes, hydronephrosis, or other abnormal findings . The mass had grown from 16.7 × 10.3 mm to 30 × 13.7 mm in 17 months. Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT) showed significant accumulation of FDG uptake in the same region (maximum standardized uptake value, 8.93; Fig. ). Significant FDG uptake was not observed at any of the other sites. Ureterography and colonoscopy showed no abnormal findings.
Due to the possible lymph node recurrence or peritoneal seeding of colon cancer indicated by the slow growth and significant FDG uptake, we performed a laparoscopic excisional biopsy. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the lithotomy–Trendelenburg position. First, a ureteral stent was inserted in the left ureter radiologically using a guide wire. The endoscopist stood to the upper right of the patient, the surgeon stood near the surgeon’s right hand, and the assistant stood opposite the surgeon. A transumbilical skin and fascia incision was performed. The peritoneum was opened, and a 12-mm trocar was introduced. Under pneumoperitoneum, a 12-mm trocar was placed in the lower right abdomen, and 5-mm trocars were placed in the bilateral lower and upper abdomen. We dissected and mobilized the left-sided colon using the medial-to-lateral approach in Toldt’s space. After recognizing that the left ureter was involved in the mass-forming lesion in front of the bifurcation of the left common iliac artery, we mobilized the left ureter throughout the whole circumference of the mass-forming lesion . After removing the stent, we dissected the proximal and distal ureter of the mass-forming lesion and removed the specimen from the umbilical port site. The intraoperative frozen section examination diagnosed the mass as a benign lymphoproliferative lesion. Two 4-0 Vicryl® sutures were used to form a running anastomosis. After finishing the anastomosis of the posterior ureteral wall, a 6Fr 26-cm double-J catheter was inserted laparoscopically. After ensuring the double-J catheter into the renal pelvis, running suture anastomosis of the anterior ureteral wall was completed. The total operative blood loss was 8 mL, and the operative time was 321 min. The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 6. After 3 months of follow-up, he had not developed any recurrent lesions or any other IgG4-RD, including autoimmune pancreatitis.
Macroscopically, an elastic and soft mass similar to a swollen lymph node with a lumen structure was detected . A histological examination showed abundant infiltration of lymphocytes with lymphoid follicles around the left ureter and peripheral proliferation of collagenous fibers. Immunohistochemically, the mean IgG4-positive plasma cell count was 50 per high-power field (HPF), and the ratio of IgG4-positive/IgG-positive cells was 54% . The postoperative serum IgG4 level was 384 mg/dL. Applying these findings to the diagnostic algorithm in the comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD , the mass-forming lesion was definitively diagnosed as IgG4-related focal retroperitoneal fibrosis.