A 51-year-old male presented 5 years ago for the first time with cardiac complaints. He was referred to our hospital with dyspnea, general malaise, and a Grade 4 systolic murmur combined with a Grade 2 diastolic murmur at physical examination. At lung auscultation, there were normal respiratory sounds without crackles and there was no peripheral oedema observed. Abdominal percussion sounds were normal and joints were not red or swollen. Electrocardiography and chest X-ray did not show any abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed LV dilation, severe MV, and TV regurgitation, thickening of MV leaflets, and a reduced LVEF, whereupon transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and MRI were performed. Transoesophageal echocardiography and MRI confirmed LV dilation, severe MV and TV regurgitation, and moderate MV stenosis with a thickened aspect of the MV cusps and its subvalvular apparatus ( and Video 1). The mechanism of MV regurgitation seemed to be a combination of both degenerative (thickening of valve leaflets) and functional (LV dilation) valve disease, whereas the mechanism of TV regurgitation was functional (annular dilation). Furthermore, the AV showed mild regurgitation, LVEF was mildly reduced (41%), there were no signs of wall motion abnormalities and MRI showed delayed subendocardial enhancement in the mid inferior wall suggestive for myocardial oedema. Further analysis with coronary angiography and positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan excluded the possibility of endocarditis, myocarditis, and coronary disease. Lab results showed increased inflammation values C-reactive protein (CRP) 47 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 48 mm/h.
Besides cardiac complaints at presentation, the patient suffered since his youth from chronic lower back pain and recurring uveitis anterior. In earlier years, extensive examination with blood tests and spinal X-rays for these complaints were performed on suspicion of rheumatic disease, including rheumatic fever, but with negative results.
Due to these unexplained noncardiac complaints and suspicion of a link with the observed heart valve disease, further examination was performed. X-ray and MRI of the sacroiliac and low spine joints showed symmetric sacroiliitis. Following consultation of the rheumatologist resulted in the diagnosis AS with a human leucocyte antigen (HLA) B27-negative profile. According to European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology recommendations and persistent high disease activity after non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs treatment with Naproxen (500 mg twice a day), adalimumab (TNF-α inhibitor) was initiated as biologic treatment. Disease activity was defined and monitored as complaints specific for AS and inflammation values (CRP and ESR).
Together with cardiac medical therapy [angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (Fosinopril) and diuretics (Eplerenone)], both cardiac and musculoskeletal complaints diminished to an acceptable level. Because cardiac complaints and mitral regurgitation diminished and LVEF improved after starting cardiac medical therapy, the medical team remained expectative. The patient was discharged and remained under control in the outpatient clinic. In the following 4 years, the complaints remained stable with cardiac medical therapy and biological treatment, however, then cardiac complaints started to increase slowly again (see TTE findings during follow-up in ).
Four years after first presentation, the patient presented with progressive dyspnoea on minimal exertion. Transthoracic echocardiogram and TEE revealed increased thickening of MV leaflets causing severe mitral stenosis with a mean and maximum pressure gradient of, respectively, 12 and 19 mmHg ( and Video 2) and MV area was 2.1 cm2. This was combined with mitral, tricuspid, and AV regurgitation of, respectively, Grade 4, Grade 2, and Grade 3. Furthermore, left atrial size was 50.1 mm, MV diameter was 40 mm, and LVEF was 43%. The patient was treated surgically with MV replacement, AV replacement, and TV repair. The excised MV (in toto) and AV (in fragments) were preserved for histopathologic analysis. There were no relevant complications in the postoperative setting and the patient was discharged 7 days after surgery.
On gross examination, the excised MV showed extensive fibrotic thickening of the leaflets with commissural fusion, a rigid oval to slit like orifice and fibrotic retraction, and fusion of chordae up to the apical parts of the papillary muscles . Macroscopically, similarities with end-stage rheumatic MV disease were evident.
Histologic analysis of MV leaflets and adjacent chordal tissues using haematoxylin and eosin stain and elastic von Gieson stain showed thickening of the valves due to dense collagen-rich fibrous tissue admixed with elastic fibres and scarce calcifications. Within the fibrous tissue, there was a multifocal presence of mononuclear cell infiltration composed of macrophages, T-lymphocytes and plasma cells, and neovascularization by dilated micro vessels and some thick-walled muscular vessels. Granulomas or necrosis was not observed. Also tendinous cords were surrounded by closely packed cords of fibro elastic connective tissue. Due to the high amount of plasma cells, IgG and IgG4 immunostains were performed, showing only small fraction of IgG4 positive cells, which excluded the presence of IgG4-related disease. For histology, see .
Fragments of the resected AV were also examined histologically, and showed a basically similar histologic composition of fibrous thickening and scarce mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltration.