Our patient was a previously healthy 20-year-old woman with unremarkable medical/neurological history. She presented with a first-onset focal tonic-clonic seizure on her left face and arm, followed by a drowsy mentality. The family reported that the patient experienced an unusual personality change from a week ago, exhibiting reckless and violent driving. The day before the hospital visit, the patient complained of dizziness and somnolence. She did not have a history of febrile seizures or any family history of seizure disorders. On presentation, she had an unnoticed fever, for which the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 on nasal swab was tested and yielded a positive result. Vital signs were normal, with a respiratory rate of 18/min and SpO2 of 98% in room air. The arterial blood gas analysis was within the normal range, revealing pH 7.40, pCO2 37.6, pO2 84.6, and HCO3 23.4.
The progress of the patient is depicted in Fig. . Upon admission, focal seizures persisted, and continuous video-electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring showed repeated high amplitude polymorphic delta activities from the right frontotemporal area evolving to generalized 1-2 Hz spike-wave discharges, suggesting an impending focal status epilepticus . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (white blood cells 18 /ul, 93% lymphocyte) with CSF interleukin-6 (IL-6) level of 14.0 pg/ml, while a PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 in CSF was negative. Serum IL-6 was mildly elevated to 21.7 pg/ml, while serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal (0.70 mg/dl). Pathogen screening panels for serum and CSF included herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, enterovirus, tuberculosis, Ebstein-Barr virus, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis which came back negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse cortical high signal intensities, especially on bilateral insula with increased arterial spin labeling signals. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed patchy ground-glass opacities on bilateral lung fields, compatible with COVID-19 pneumonia. Serial images of brain MRI and chest CT are depicted in Fig. .
Given the subacute onset of neuropsychiatric symptoms with new-onset focal status epilepticus and CSF pleocytosis, a tentative diagnosis of probable autoimmune encephalitis was made. Antibodies against neuronal synaptic or intraneuronal antigens were negative in serum and CSF, and no solid tumor was found. Extensive screening tests for the autoimmune diseases came back negative as well, including thyroid panel, vasculitis lab, immunoglobulin G subclass, and anti-ganglioside antibodies. Clinical and EEG seizures progressively aggravated up to 35 per day during the first week. Despite the persistent seizures, intravenous (IV) anesthetic therapy was not considered because the seizures remained focal with only occasional generalization, and therefore the vital signs remained intact.
On day 7, a newly developed embolic stroke on the right frontal lobe was detected on a follow-up MRI. Considering the extensive seizure-related changes involving both insula areas, the new isolated focal lesion was thought of as evidence of an embolic stroke. Etiological evaluation of stroke revealed negative results, including transthoracic echocardiogram, electrocardiogram, Holter monitoring, and transcranial Doppler bubble study to rule out patent foramen ovale. Initially elevated D-dimer level (1.48 μg/ml) was decreased to 1.00 μg/ml. Routine thromboprophylaxis using low molecular weight heparin was increased to a therapeutic dose of secondary stroke prevention (2 mg/kg). The follow-up CSF study showed more increased IL-6 level of 75.8 pg/ml. Contrary to the exacerbated COVID-19-associated neurological complications, the follow-up chest CT revealed completely cleared bilateral lung fields. Daily followed serum CRP level was maintained under 1 mg/dl.
Along with IV acyclovir and remdesivir, IV methylprednisolone pulse therapy was given to treat autoimmune encephalitis. Because the seizures persisted after the methylprednisolone, IV immunoglobulin G was administrated next, to which the patient started to respond. The seizures finally halted on the 12th day, and her neurological deficits gradually resolved thereafter. During the course of the treatment, her otherwise vital signs remained stable and intact oxygenation was maintained. A Follow-up study revealed normalized CSF IL-6 level to 3.7 pg/ml and decreased serum IL-6 level to 13.3 pg/ml. After 39 days of hospitalization, the patient successfully recovered from COVID-19 pneumonia, encephalitis, status epilepticus, and stroke, and she was discharged home at a modified Rankin scale of 1.