A 22-year old woman was diagnosed with colonic CD 6 years earlier. For 4 years, she experienced fluctuating disease, with periods of remission and recurrence. She was initially treated with maximal doses of 5-aminosalicylate (5-ASA), and corticosteroids, but later switched doses to azathioprine. Two years earlier, she started to pass gas from her vagina, and she was diagnosed with RVF due to CD. She was started on induction therapy using infliximab, but her symptoms did not improve. She also had a 2-year history of intestinal obstruction due to CD-associated rectal stenosis. She underwent endoscopic balloon dilatation to treat the stenosis, but experienced no improvement. Because of her inability to take nutrition through her intestinal tract, she was started on total parenteral nutrition. She consulted our department for the treatment of RVF and repeat intestinal obstruction. A lower gastrointestinal series showed the disappearance of haustra, along with stenosis in the transverse and descending colon , rectal stenosis and RVF . Dual-port laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection, from the transverse colon near the splenic flexure to the rectum, was performed. The resected specimen showed both the RVF and rectal stenosis . The patient experienced no perioperative or postoperative complications. She was discharged 14 days after surgery and has not experienced any recurrence of CD for 3 years.
A 33-year old woman was diagnosed with small intestinal and colonic CD 14 years earlier. Six years ago, she underwent ileocecal resection for stenosis of the ileum. After surgery, she was started on infliximab but had to discontinue treatment because of the side effects of that drug. Three years ago, she started to pass gas from her vagina, and she was diagnosed with RVF due to CD. Medical therapy was unsuccessful, and she consulted our department. A preoperative lower gastrointestinal series showed the RVF, along with stenosis and the disappearance of haustra in the transverse and descending colon. She underwent the same operation as the first patient, with the same extent of resection. Pathological examination showed a fistula from the rectum to the vagina and stenosis from the transverse colon to the rectum. She did not experience any perioperative or postoperative complications. She was discharged 15 days after surgery and has not experienced recurrence of CD for 4 years.
A multichannel port was inserted through a 25-mm skin incision in the right or left lower quadrant at the colostomy site. The colostomy site was determined by the preoperative marking, regardless of the surgical procedure. The choice of multichannel port site was based on the length of colon to be resected. An additional 5-mm trocar for the left hand was inserted at the umbilicus . The surgeon and the assistant were positioned on the patient’s right side . For anterior dissection, the uterus was suspended by two stitches of 3–0 monofilament thread penetrating the left and right lower abdomen near the pubic bone. The assistant retracted the rectosigmoid ventrally using a curved grasper, and the peritoneum was incised using an ultrasonic coagulation incision device from the level of the sacral promontory to the base of the inferior mesenteric artery. After identification of the left ureter, the vascular pedicle was lifted vertically by the assistant. The inferior mesenteric artery was isolated and ligated 1 cm distal to the aorta. The inferior mesenteric vein was also ligated. Pelvic dissection was performed along the presacral avascular plane down to the pelvic floor and the top of the anal canal. The rectum was completely mobilized to the level of the levator ani muscle. The oral side of the intestine, which was free of the mucosal disorder due to CD, was cut off. Perineal dissection was performed circumferentially to the pelvic cavity. The specimen was retrieved through the perineal wound. A drain was placed from the umbilicus into the pelvic bottom, and a colostomy was fashioned at the site of the multichannel port .