A 58 year old lady sustained posterior dislocation of right elbow following a fall at home. She underwent closed reduction for dislocation elsewhere, and above elbow slab application (,). She was referred to our hospital three days later with complaints of severe pain, swelling around the right elbow and numbness of fingers. As per the treatment notes there was no obvious neuro vascular injury and radialartery pulse was felt immediately after reduction of elbow dislocation. On examination, We noted that the elbow was swollen, there were superficial blebs, forearm was tense, and there was mild stretch pain. Vascular examination showed good capillary refill with palpable radial artery pulse and decreased sensation over fingers. We evaluated the patient using X-ray of the right elbow -which showed well reduced dislocation and no evidence of fracture. To rule out any vascular injury, arterial doppler scan was performed which showed -large hematoma causing extrinsic compression over distal end of brachial artery with minimal monophasic flow in distal arteries. We took the patient for brachial artery exploration to clear-the hematoma under general anesthesia. A two cm vertical incision was made over medial aspect of lower arm and hematoma was removed. We were surprised to note a pulsating tubular structure with occluded lumen, which led to our suspicion of a complete brachial artery rupture. Immediately, the patient was referred to a vascular surgeon for CT-angiography and for further management. CT angiography showed complete right brachial artery transection five cm above the elbow with thrombus in both ends and significant blood flow in distal arteries through collateral circulation . The patient was further treated with excision of injured segment of vessel and right transbrachial proximal and distal thrombectomy. The artery was reconstructed by interposition repair of right great saphenous vein graft and forearm fasciotomy in anticipation of compartment syndrome and reperfusion injury. The elbow was immobilized in above elbow slab. Patient was administered with antibiotics, analgesics and anticoagulants as a post-surgical procedure. Sutures were removed on 15th postoperative day; and skin grafting was done for fasciotomy wound after three weeks. Three weeks after immobilization, the patient was advised with elbow range of motion exercises.