A 27-year-old Japanese man missed a step while descending a flight of stairs. He stumbled and both knees were forced into hyperflexion causing severe pain in both knees. He visited an orthopedic clinic complaining of inability to walk and severe bilateral knee pain. Five days after injury, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He had no past medical history, and no history of trauma or tendonitis around both knees, but was severely obese with a body mass index (BMI) of 43.7 kg/m2 (height 177 cm, weight 137 kg). On physical examination, palpable defects and severe tenderness were identified around the quadriceps tendons. He was unable to actively extend either knee, and the Lysholm score was 15. Although radiographs of both knees showed no skeletal damage, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both knees showed disruption of the quadriceps tendon integrity .
Bilateral QTR was diagnosed based on MRI findings, and quadriceps tendon repair with SAs was performed on both knees, 14 days after injury, and under general anesthesia with tourniquet use. In the left knee, all quadriceps tendons were ruptured at 2 cm above the superior pole of the patella. The tendons were fixed end-to-end with nonabsorbable sutures passed through two 5.5-mm-diameter SAs (Corkscrew FT; Arthrex, Naples, FL) placed at the superior pole of the patella. Any additional tears were sutured appropriately with absorbable surgical sutures. The suture site was checked for instability when the knee was flexed to 90° . In the right knee, quadriceps tendons, except for the vastus lateralis, were ruptured 2 cm above the superior pole of the patella, and QTR repair was performed in the same way as in the left knee. The postoperative rehabilitation protocol was to immobilize both knees in extension for 2 weeks, then to gradually proceed with weight-bearing and gait training with hinged knee braces. Both knees obtained a range of motion from 0° to 130° without any extension lag by 3 months postoperatively.
Twelve months postoperatively, the patient had lost 13 kg and his BMI was reduced to 39.9 kg/m2; however, he complained of gradually worsening right knee pain. Tenderness was evident at the superior pole of the right patella. Radiography revealed loosening of one of the SAs. Since the pain was attributed to loosened SAs, the SA placed in the right patella was removed. During this second operation, histological evaluation of the tendon of the right knee revealed no pathological abnormalities other than slight inflammatory cell infiltration between tendon fibers . By 19 months after the primary surgery, the patient showed a range of motion from 0° to 140°, with no extension lag in either knee . Lysholm score was 100, and the patient did not complain of any disability and had fully returned to normal daily activities. Six years after the primary surgery, no rerupture of any quadriceps tendons had occurred, and no rupture or inflammation of other tendons was identified.