A 72-year-old woman with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease presented with several hours of severe, substernal chest pain at rest. She had accompanying mild upper respiratory tract infection (URI) symptoms, but denied any prior similar episodes of chest pain. She was taking no medications. On presentation, she had a heart rate of 130 b.p.m. and a blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg. She appeared uncomfortable with distant heart sounds and elevated jugular venous pulsations. Initial bloodwork was notable only for leukocytosis of 29.3 k/uL (ref 4.5–10.0 k/uL) and a troponin of 1.6 ng/mL (ref <0.04 ng/mL). Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed inferior ST-segment elevations .
The decision was made to proceed with emergent cardiac catheterization. While the cardiac catheterization lab was being activated, CT angiography of the chest was performed, demonstrating a normal aorta and a pericardial effusion. Emergent coronary angiography revealed a subtotal occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) and a 95% stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery . Recognizing that this might proceed to a complex percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) requiring mechanical circulatory support, the decision was made to perform pelvic angiography. This demonstrated diffuse severe stenosis of the aortoiliac system in which the six French sheath in the right common femoral artery was occlusive in the right external iliac artery . An emergent transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) in the catheterization lab revealed a large circumferential pericardial effusion with echocardiographic criteria for cardiac tamponade. Emergent pericardiocentesis was performed at this time rather than PCI. An eight French pericardial drain was placed and 800 mL of serosanguinous pericardial fluid was evacuated. The opening pericardial pressure of 22 mmHg (ref <10 mmHg) was reduced to 6 mmHg following drain placement, with improvement in systolic blood pressure to 140 mmHg from 80 mmHg and complete resolution of ST-elevations on subsequent ECG . Similarly, the patient’s chest pain resolved following pericardiocentesis. The patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit where she remained stable overnight. Her serum troponin level peaked at 34.6 ng/mL (ref <0.04 ng/mL). The decision was made to repeat coronary angiography the following morning and pursue PCI of the LAD stenosis. However, repeat coronary angiography was dramatically improved, with no significant stenosis in the RCA or the LAD . There was marked increase in the caliber of the aortoiliac vessels visualized on repeat iliofemoral angiography .
The patient remained stable for the remainder of her hospitalization and the pericardial drain was successfully removed. She was discharged and a subsequent TTE 4 weeks later was normal without recurrence of pericardial effusion. Pericardial fluid analysis failed to produce an underlying etiology for the pericardial effusion and we speculate it was secondary to viral pericarditis given her URI symptoms on presentation.