A 46-year-old woman with a history of sleep apnea, obesity, and osteoarthritis presented to the emergency department with progressive generalized headaches accompanied by worsening vision. One month previously, she noted a gradual increase in frequency of headache which she interpreted as related to underlying migraine events. The headaches were accompanied by increasing visual changes, notably zigzagging lines and a string in the middle of her visual field. After admission, the patient underwent a diagnostic brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) followed by MR angiogram and MR venogram. The diagnostic MRI showed a solitary 7 × 6 × 10 mm homogeneously contrast-enhancing lesion within the lumen of the posterior aspect of superior sagittal sinus not accompanied by ventricular enlargement or peritumoral edema . Long TR (repetition time) MR imaging showed a tumor isointense with brain signal. CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis failed to detect any other tumor.
After initial stabilization in the emergency room, she was discharged after gentle intravenous hydration for her headache. Neurological evaluation failed to disclose any clinical signs. To evaluate the suspected increased intracranial pressure, a lumbar puncture was subsequently performed and demonstrated an opening pressure of 30 cm H2O. After drainage of 40 cc of CSF, the spinal closing pressure was 9 cm H2O. Ophthalmological examination demonstrated normal visual acuity and fields including a slip lamp examination. The clinical suspicion of papilledema was confirmed by optical coherence tomography (OCT) which showed bilateral optic edema . As a result, the patient was started on anti-angle glaucoma therapy (Diamox 500 mg twice a day), while surgical options were considered. Given the critical location of the tumor in the posterior one-third of the superior sagittal sinus, stereotactic radiosurgery using the Leksell Gamma Knife was proposed as an alternative to high-risk surgical resection by craniotomy or shunting. The time from diagnosis to GKRS treatment was 2 weeks and the patient was on Diamox for the entire duration. She was then slowly weaned off Diamox over a 3-month time period post-GKRS.
Using mild intravenous conscious sedation with midazolam and fentanyl supplemented by local anesthesia (0.5% bupivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine mixture, 40 cc total given with 10 cc at each pin site), a Leksell Model G (Elekta, Inc., Atlanta, GA) stereotactic head frame was attached to the cranial vault. Axial plane contrast enhanced 1.5 mm SPGR and 3 mm nonskipping T2-weighted whole-head MRI imaging were obtained. The 0.36 cc tumor was treated as an outpatient the Perfexion model Gamma Knife that used 3 isocenters of radiation employing the 4 and 8 mm diameter collimators to create a 14 Gy treatment volume at 50% isodose which enclosed 99% of the T1 contrast and T2 images with 3 mm cuts . She received a single dose of 40 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone and was discharged the same day on a tapering dose of Diamox.