A four-year old Iranian girl was referred to the neurosurgical department with severe back pain and motor regression. She was the second child of nonconsanguineous parents, and was delivered by elective Cesarean section due to being repeat. She had a history of occipital encephalocele, which was treated surgically during the neonatal period and she later received a shunt to treat progressive hydrocephalus. She could sit at nine month of age and stand at two years, but was unable to walk. Six months before her referral, she had developed back pain, which was particularly severe at night, and after three months, she was unable to stand.
On physical examination, our patient was found to be generally normal, with good mental performance, and normal results from a neurological examination of the arms. She had a head circumference on the 75th percentile and a functional ventriculoperitoneal shunt. She could move her legs, but was unable to keep them up against gravity. Her deep tendon reflexes in the legs were exaggerated, and her sensory level was undetectable. She had urinary and fecal incontinence.
Spinal MRI revealed an intradural mass extending from the T11 to T12 junction to the lower border of L2 vertebra. It was isointense on T1- and T2-weighted images, with a small piece of tissue on the dorsa of the mass, which was identified as lipoma.
The child underwent an osteoplastic laminotomy extending from T11 to L2. The dura matter was severely tense at the level where the laminotomy was opened. There was a white to creamy mass that was extramedullary at the distal level but intramedullary at the L1 and T12 levels. There was no real capsule around the mass, which contained small fine hairs and creamy fatty material. There was a small lipoma on the dorsal surface of the mass at the level of the L1 spine body.
The lesion was excised completely. Histopathologic examination of the mass revealed a variety of tissues including skin, fat, connective and adipose tissue, and vascular structures . A pathological diagnosis of mature teratoma was made.
Our patient's post-operative period was unremarkable. One year after the operation she was able to stand by herself and to walk with the aid of a brace and walker. She was continent during the day but had nocturia.