A 10-year-old Chinese boy was born to a healthy gravida 2, para 2 mother with negative family history for genetic diseases. At the time of his birth, his mother and father were 35 and 36 years old respectively. Ultrasonic examination showed intrauterine growth retardation and polyhydramnios. He was delivered by Caesarean section at full term with a birth weight of 2350 g (3rd centile). The birth height was unknown. He had a history of developmental delay and neonatal hypotonia. He had delayed milestones, feeding difficulty and week sucking and crying during the first several months of life. At the age of five, his complete blood count and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) were normal, but the serum growth hormone (GH) level was very low (0.97 ng/ml). Growth hormone provocative test showed a peak value of 2.66 ng/ml and the patient was diagnosed with growth hormone deficiency (GHD). He began to get fat with a growth rate of 2-3 cm per year when he was 6 years old and his bone age was delayed (corresponded to the age of 2 years). He is now presented with intellectual disability, language delay, learning difficulty, attention deficit and minimal communication with his peers. Physical examination at age of 9 years and 9 months showed a height of 118.3 cm (−6.0SD), a weight of 27 kg (−1.5SD) (BMI = 19.3 kg2/m), and OFC of 52 cm (50–75th percentile). He had small hands with a length of 13.5 cm and small feet with a length of 18.5 cm (The average is 20.5 cm for Chinese boys at 7–10 years of age). His physical features include short stature, truncal obesity, short neck, thoracic-lumbar scoliosis, lordosis and kyphosis, small hands and feet, fifth finger clinodactyly, buffalo hump, barrel chest, body asymmetry, cryptorchidism on the right side and abnormal skin pigmentation . His craniofacial features included ocular hypertelorism, narrow palpebral fissures, high arched palate, and depressed nasal bridge. The right and left testes were 1.7*0.8*1.0 cm and 1.7*0.9*1.1 cm in size respectively. The size of penis was 4.0*1.5 cm without pubes. No sign of precocious puberty was noticed. ECG examination showed sinus cardiac arrhythmia and brain MRI examination was normal. A recent assessment using Chinese Wechsler intelligence scale for children (C-WISC) showed a verbal scale IQ of 35 (severe), a performance scale IQ of 55 (mild), and a full scale IQ of 38 (severe). Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices (RSPM) was also used to measure his intelligence. The intelligence percentile rank was 6 %. Based on the intelligence test results above, the patient was diagnosed with moderate to severe intellectual disability. Meanwhile his motor development was close to normal level. The boy started growth hormone (GH) therapy at the age of 9 years and 9 months. He grew 4.9 cm (from 118.3 to 123.2 cm (−5.0SD)) during the first five months. He also gained 5 kg of weight (from 27 to 32 kg (−0.5SD)).
Peripheral blood lymphocytes, hyperpigmented and normal skin samples were collected from the patient and genomic DNA was extracted using Lab-Aid DNA kit (Zeesan Biotech Co., Ltd, China). G-banding was performed on metaphase chromosomes of cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes of the family trio. FISH was directly conducted on interphases chromosomes 14 of peripheral blood lymphocytes with probe specific for the region 14q11.2 (Agilent, USA, Spectrum red) on the patient. Genomic profiling were performed on blood, hyperpigmented and normal skin samples of the patient and his parents’ blood samples using Illumina Human CytoSNP 12 BeadChip array (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The SNP array data was analyzed with GenomeStudio and KaryoStudio software. All operative procedures fully followed the manufacturer’s instructions.