A 68-year-old Caucasian female with a known case of atrial fibrillation (CHA2DS2-VASc 4), diabetes mellitus type 2, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with chemotherapy in 2017(since then patient was on remission), heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction of 39% presented to a tertiary hospital in September 2022, complaining of dry cough for 5 days duration, accompanied by subjective fever, nausea, and dysuria.
Her vital signs were stable upon presentation (blood pressure 114/63 mmHg, breath rate 18/minute, heart rate 73/minute, axillary temperature 36.9 °C). On lung auscultation, the presence of basal crackles was appreciated. Lower limb edema was noted. Neurological exam was grossly unremarkable, she was alert and oriented, power exam was 5/5 for all extremities, Cranial nerves II-XII were intact and speech was normal. The patient reported receiving all three doses of the COVID-19 vaccine (Pfizer-BioNTech), the last dose being in October 2021. The patient's current pharmacological regimen consists of several medications, namely rosuvastatin (10 mg tablet once daily), warfarin (1.5 mg tablet once daily), bisoprolol (7.5 mg tablet once daily), perindopril (5 mg tablet once daily), furosemide (80 mg tablet twice daily), insulin aspart (18 units before breakfast and 10 units before lunch), insulin glargine (24 units once at bedtime), metformin (500 mg tablet twice daily), sitagliptin (100 mg tablet once daily), and ferrous sulfate (190 mg tablet once daily). She had no previous history of surgery and did not smoke or take alcohol or illicit drugs. She reported a history of four pregnancies resulting in the birth of two male and two female offspring without any record of fetal loss. Currently unemployed, she resides with her husband, who provides assistance with daily tasks. Her familial medical history was unremarkable for any cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disorders among first-degree relatives. However, both parents were diagnosed with diabetes.
Laboratory investigations revealed the following: hemoglobin 9.4 gm/dL, white blood cells (WBC) 12 × 103 uL, sodium 123 mmol/L, potassium 3.8 mmol/L, magnesium 0.71 mmol/L, C reactive protein (CRP) 239 mg/L, procalcitonin 6.41 ng/mL, creatinine 95 umol/L, international normalized ratio (INR) 3.2, and glucose 12.1 mmol/L. Blood cultures were negative for aerobic and anaerobic organisms. Urinalysis results were positive for WBC 3,672 uL and red blood cells (RBC) 28 uL, and the urine culture was found to be positive for multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli (E. coli) sensitive to meropenem. The COVID-19 rapid antigen test was positive, and the chest X-ray showed bilateral lung congestive changes seen with patchy infiltrate in the right lower lung zone. .
Based on the investigations done, a diagnosis of COVID-19 with a multidrug-resistant E. coli urinary tract infection was made. The patient was diagnosed with hypervolemic hyponatremia. To manage this condition, a fluid restriction of 1 L per day was implemented, in conjunction with oral administration of 600 mg of sodium chloride tablets three times daily. As per the established protocol for COVID-19 management in patients with multiple comorbidities at our hospital, remdesivir (200 mg IV daily) was initiated for a duration of 5 days. Additionally, meropenem (1000 mg IV three times a day) was administered to address the patient's symptomatic urinary tract infection. This decision was made in light of a previous positive culture for extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing E. coli in the patient's urine.
She started to improve clinically and, in terms of laboratory results, planned to be discharged after five days after admission.
On fifth day of admission, the patient developed a sudden onset of confusion and slurred speech. On initial assessment, there was clear dense left-sided hemiplegia with right-sided eyes deviation and a left facial droop. Vitally, the patient maintained saturation in room air with a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, blood pressure of 150/96 mmHg, respiratory rate of 20, and temperature of 36.7 °C. On neurological assessment, she was alert, but disoriented and dysarthric. Cranial nerve examination was significant for left gaze palsy, and testing for power was significant for strength 0/5 on the left side and 4 + /5 on the right side extremities. At that time, the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15/15, and the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 16. Based on the sudden onset of neurological deficits such as sudden left extremity weakness, left facial palsy and dysarthria, the stroke protocol was activated. The INR was 4.9.
A head CT and perfusion study were performed on after 2 h of initial presentation, which revealed a focal area of matched perfusion defect seen in the right frontoparietal cortical and subcortical region, denoting core infarct with surrounding penumbra and occlusion of the distal anterior M2 segment of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA).
A diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke was made, but the patient was not a candidate for thrombolysis or thrombectomy due to an INR of 4.9. One day after the initial CT scan, an additional head MRI and MRA was done which showed right frontal area of 4 × 2.3 cm of diffusion restriction with no hemorrhagic changes .
Due to swallowing difficulty post-stroke, a nasogastric tube (NGT) was inserted. Interestingly, the patient’s INR increased, reaching a peak of 5.4, despite holding warfarin since admission. However, 6 days later, the patient’s INR went down to 2.2, and she was transferred for rehabilitation.
At follow-up at the rehabilitation institute after one month, the patient still had hemiplegia, and her motor power was tested at 1/5 in the left upper limb and 3/5 in the left lower limb, showing minor improvement. The INR had stabilized in the range of 1.9 to 2.1 during this month. During the six-month follow-up appointment at the Stroke clinic, the patient continued to exhibit residual left-sided weakness, primarily impacting her arm. However, the patient reported no new, recurrent, or worsening neurological symptoms.