A ten-year-old East Asian boy presented to the Pediatric Out-Patients Department with abdominal distension of five years' duration and having suffered shortness of breath on and off for the same period. Abdominal distension, without abdominal pain, had been gradual and progressive since he was five. There was also a history of joint pain on and off during the past two to three years. There was no history of constipation, diarrhea, vomiting, bleeding, jaundice, seizure, weight loss or loss of appetite or of consciousness. His bladder habit was normal. He started school at seven years of age and was below average in his studies.
On examination his head was acrocephalic in shape, with a circumference of 54.5 cm. He had a depressed nasal bridge, a short neck, coarse facial features, small stubby fingers with flexion of the distal interphalangeal joint, and a low arched palate . Anthropometric examination showed him to be severely stunted without wasting. His fundus appeared normal. His abdomen was soft and slightly distended with a protruding umbilicus. His liver was 11 cm below the right costal margin in the mid-clavicular line, with a firm, sharp margin and a smooth surface with a span of 12 cm. His spleen was 2 cm below the left costal margin in the mid-clavicular line. His heart had a grade 2/6 non-radiating systolic murmur in the mitral area. Suspecting MPS, we performed a skeletal survey. Anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the skull showed an enlarged and J-shaped sella turcica . The bones of the skull and sutures appeared normal for his age. Anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the dorsolumbar spine showed anterior beaking . Vertebral bodies appeared ovoid due to convexity of the superior and inferior surfaces. Spinal curvature was normal and vertebral body height also appeared normal. X-rays of both hands showed his phalanges and metacarpals to be widened with proximal tapering of the metacarpals . The remaining bones and joints under view appeared normal. An anteroposterior X-ray showed his ribs as wide with tapered posterior ends (a paddle and/or spatulated appearance) . No parenchymal lesions were seen in visualized lung fluids.
Although his radiological features were suggestive of MPS, without determining the type of MPS, from his history and clinical examination we have made a diagnosis of MPS type II (Hunter syndrome). However in our patient there was atypical presentation such as an acrocephalic head, mild mental retardation, and no corneal clouding, which are important features of MPS type II. Unfortunately we could not perform any measurement of GAG, keratan and heparan sulphates, in his urine because of the lack of test kits. Enzyme assay for iduronate sulfatase is not carried out in our laboratory therefore it was not performed either. Our diagnosis of MPS was confirmed from his history, clinical examination and skeletal survey.