A 44-year-old woman was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia but showed no abnormalities on gastrointestinal tract endoscopy 5 years prior to the current presentation. A blood test for health screening showed anemia with hemoglobin 7.6 g/dL, and uterine fibroids were suspected on abdominal ultrasonography. She was diagnosed as having an intra-abdominal tumor on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for detailed examination and was referred to our hospital.
The abdomen was flat and soft, with an elastic mass of poor mobility which was the size of an infant's head was palpable below the umbilicus to above the pubis. There were no blood test abnormalities; CEA, CA19-9, SCC, and the interleukin 2 receptor level were within normal limits. Abdominal MRI revealed a homogeneous and well-demarcated 74 × 98 × 122 mm mass near the cranial end of the uterus, with a low signal intensity on T1-weighted image, and mostly low signal intensity and partially high intensity on T2-weighted image . Abdominal-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a well-demarcated and contrast-enhanced oval mass with a smooth margin in the pelvis. The tumor was supplied by the superior mesenteric artery, and the surrounding lymph nodes were enlarged . Upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy showed an easily bleeding tumor with an ulcer in the third part of the duodenum, involving half the circumference . The biopsy results were inflammatory exudates and granulation tissues. FDG-PET/CT showed heterogeneous uptake inside the tumor with SUVmax 6.3 . A slight 18F-FDG uptake was observed in the enlarged lymph nodes with SUVmax 2.6. Along with the facts that there were no malignant cells detected by endoscopic biopsy and the CT image showing enlarged surrounding lymph nodes, the patient was suspected of nonepithelial malignancy of the duodenum such as gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) and malignant lymphoma. As we could not make a definite diagnosis preoperatively, she underwent surgery for an accurate diagnosis and treatment.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia; laparotomy was performed via midline incision from 5 cm above the umbilicus to above the pubis. There was a 12 cm tumor centered on the third part of the duodenum, extending to the fourth part. The tumor extended into the pelvis and pulled the duodenum and the ligament of Treitz caudally . There was no infiltration of the tumor into the pancreas or the small intestine. The duodenum was transected at the third part of the duodenum on the oral side. On the anal side of the tumor, the jejunum immediately after the ligament of Treitz was transected, and the tumor was resected. The enlarged lymph nodes sampling were also performed. In reconstruction, end-to-end duodenojejunostomy was performed . She had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged 9 days after surgery.
Pathological findings showed a solid tumor growing from the muscle layer of the duodenum through the serous membrane. The duodenal mucosa was invaginated at the site of the tumor, forming a deep ulcer . The tumor showed uniform growth of long and spindle-shaped cells in an intricate manner, and the number of nuclear divisions was 1 or less per 50 visual fields . There were no evidence of calcification, hemorrhage, or degeneration within the tumor. On immunostaining, α-smooth muscle actin was positive, while S-100, c-kit, and CD34 were negative . The MIB-1 index was low at 3% maximum, and there were no neoplastic lesions in the enlarged lymph nodes. Based on these findings, a leiomyoma was diagnosed. Since then, no relapse has occurred for two years and six months.