A 51-year-old woman (P1), who was previously healthy, presented with chief complaints of a 4-week period of speech difficulties. Cranial MRI revealed a left frontal mass which was enhanced with gadolinium . After the surgery and concurrent chemoradiation therapy, she was enrolled to the study and randomized to receive nivolumab with TMZ. Two months after the initiation of nivolumab, an asymptomatic lesion was noted in the centrum semiovale of her left frontal lobe adjacent to the lateral ventricle . This lesion was distant from her original tumor in the left frontal lobe and showed increased T1-contrast enhancement and abnormally elevated perfusion (not shown), which appeared suspicious for a recurrent high-grade glioma. However, she was clinically stable with a mild baseline expressive aphasia and treatment with TMZ and nivolumab was continued. The left frontal lesion continued to enlarge with mass effect on lateral ventricle due to increased vasogenic edema . A biopsy was finally performed 3.5 months after trial enrollment; pathological exam revealed few atypical cells and marked lymphohistiocytic infiltration , suggesting reactive changes. MIB1 index was very low and highest foci corresponded to vascular endothelial proliferation . Without evidence of active tumor progression, she was continued the therapies as per protocol.
Despite administration of dexamethasone, the brain MRI showed a gradual increase in size of the left frontal lesion with increased contrast enhancement and increased blood perfusion . Worsening expressive aphasia, right sided weakness and headaches with prompted resection of the left frontal lesion, 7 months after the initiation of nivolumab. Pathologic analysis revealed increased cellularity, cell atypia, glomeruloid vascular proliferation, vascular wall hyalinization and geographic necrosis . Many macrophages and lymphoid cells were identified . Like previous biopsy, mitotic figures were scant, and the MIB1 index was 3% . These findings were consistent with a brisk inflammatory reaction, treatment effect and residual tumor, demonstrating a diagnosis of immunotherapy-related pseudoprogression. Dexamethasone treatment improved her expressive aphasia and right-sided motor strength. One year later there has been no further growth of the mass lesion.