A 24-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our Emergency Department presenting with a neck wound that had been slightly bleeding for six hours. The neck trauma occurred in a chaotic fight. The patient could not describe details of the injury, but he reported that the wound might have been caused by fragmentation of a beer bottle. On physical examination, there were no signs or symptoms of respiratory distress. The wound opening, measuring one cm, was identified at the submandibular area of the left side of the patient’s neck below the border of the mandibular angle. No glass fragments or other foreign bodies were detected, but slight swelling and bleeding were noted. Examinations of the oral cavity and pharynx revealed no abnormalities.
Anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the patient’s neck revealed subcutaneous emphysema and no foreign body in the soft tissues . The wound was closed by suturing. The patient was then given antibiotics and referred to the Department of Stomatology ward for observation. There was significant relief of the subcutaneous emphysema and wound swelling in the first two days. However, he still felt pain and the movement of his neck was restricted. On the third day after a bout of violent coughing he had an abrupt onset of left-sided neck swelling with neck pain and shortness of breath. Physical examination discovered that the trachea was deviated to the right without any neurological deficit. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed extensive subcutaneous emphysema in the neck and upper breast region, and a dense linear shadow at the level of the 7th cervical vertebra and 1st dorsal vertebra whose ends were embedded in the pre-vertebral soft tissue and parapharyngeal space .
A tracheotomy was promptly performed to relieve his shortness of breath. Once the skin and subcutaneous tissue were opened, a massive amount of fresh blood and blood clots poured out of the incision. Our initial clinical impression was that he had ruptured cervical arteries, and a cervical hematoma resulted in compression and marked displacement of the airway to the right. As the ongoing bleeding could not be controlled, an emergency exploration of the patient’s neck was initiated while an assistant compressed the bleeding site with gauze. His neck was opened on the left side under general anesthesia. On opening his platysma and retracting the sternocleidomastoid muscle laterally, a rapidly expanding and bulging hematoma was observed extending superiorly into the parapharyngeal space and inferiorly into the superior mediastinum. After evacuating the hematoma, an arterial tear was identified at the posteromedial wall of the CCA. The IJV wall was also torn in the region adjacent to the tear of the CCA. The points of perforation were associated with arterial pulsatile postoperative bleeding and venous extravasation of blood components, with surrounding adventitia appearing somewhat ragged, suggesting a pricking injury. A broken chopstick was noted lying across the pre-vertebral soft tissue with its tip embedded in the CCA and its butt in the right cervical pleura. The six-cm piece of chopstick was removed. The vascular defects were repaired with polypropylene 6–0 suture at the injury site, located approximately two cm distal to the bifurcation.
The patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated in the intensive care unit. A CT scan and an anterior-posterior view X-ray of the chest following cervical surgery revealed a pneumothorax, much fluid, and pulmonary atelectasis on the right side of the chest with pneumomediastinum . A chest tube and closed drainage system was used to remove the gas and fluid from the intrathoracic space. A total of 800mL of dark red bloody fluid was drained. The hemopneumothorax resolved by the third day after the operation, and the chest tube was taken off suction. Mechanical ventilation was discontinued postoperatively the same day. A further CT of the chest showed that encapsulated pleural effusion was present in the right upper and lower lobes. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed for the debridement and deloculation of the clotted hemothorax. In all, 400mL of retained clotted blood was cleared with a suction instrument intraoperatively. The patient was discharged one month later.