A 26-year-old male presented with 1–2 months of progressive right lower extremity weakness culminating in a 1-day history of the inability to ambulate. On examination, he exhibited 4-/5 hip flexion, knee extension, and knee flexion bilaterally in the lower extremities, 2/5 right-sided plantar flexor weakness, left lower extremity anteromedial hip numbness, and patellar hyperreflexia.
The thoracic MR with and without contrast demonstrated a right posterior-lateral T2 enhancing epidural lesion extending from T6 to T8 contributing to severe canal/cord stenosis and mild cord T6–T9 cord edema [-]. The noncontrast thoracic computed tomography scan demonstrated multilevel periarticular lytic/erosive lesions involving the T6–T7 to T8–T9 facet joints, accompanied by lobulated high-density juxta-articular material extending into the adjacent canal [-].
The next day, he underwent a T6–T9 decompressive laminectomy for the resection of the epidural mass accompanied by pedicle screw instrumentation [ and ]. At each level, there was a “white, cheese- like” material causing substantial dural compression; the material was grossly consistent with tophaceous deposits within the facet joints and the pathological confirmation of needle-like monosodium urate crystals.
On postoperative day 1, the patient was 4+/5 in the lower extremities bilaterally, and the numbness of the anteromedial segment of his left lower extremity was markedly improved. He was discharged 6 days later, and at 1 postoperative year, his neurological examination was normal.
The final pathology demonstrated whitish aggregates of strand-like material surrounded by inflammatory cells, including many foreign body giant cells. Under polarized light, these aggregates revealed strongly negative birefringent needle-shaped crystals consistent with gout.
Further, the postoperative rheumatologic workup documented elevated serum and urine uric acid levels. In addition, an X-ray of the right hand showed a synovial inflammatory process involving the ring finger. The patient was started on colchicine 0.6 mg b.i.d. and allopurinol 200 mg q.d.