A 41-year-old Caucasian woman presented at our hospital with a 12-month history of abdominal swelling, discomfort, urinary frequency and incontinence. She had regular menstrual cycles and had never been pregnant. Her clinical examination revealed a marked distension of her abdomen and a large palpable mass in her central pelvis. Gynecological vaginal ultrasound (US) showed abundant ascites in her pelvis, as well as a solid, smoothly outlined mass with heterogenous echogenicity. The mass seemed to extend from her pelvic cavity to her abdomen on the midline above the uterus. Her uterus and ovaries could not be identified separately from the pelvic mass. The mass was considered to be of adnexal origin. Laboratory test results of our patient showed the following values: serum carbohydrate antigen (CA)-125 level at 436.7 U/mL (normal value < 30 U/mL), fetoprotein (FP) at 2.8 ng/mL, (normal value<10 ng/ml) beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) at 5.0 mIU/mL (normal value < 3), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 1.07 ng/mL (normal value < 5 ng/ml). An MRI scan was requested to further evaluate our patient and to determine the exact nature of her mass.
The results of our patient's MRI scan revealed massive ascites and a heterogeneous ovoid pelvic mass measuring 13 × 16 cm. The mass had a broad connection to the uterus. It was located subserosally and extended superiorly from the posterior body and fundus of her uterus. The uterus was displaced inferiorly. She was noted to have a normal endometrial stripe, a normal junctional zone, and normal ovaries. The mass was heterogeneous and produced a predominantly low to intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted images relative to that of the outer myometrium. Several small foci with very high signal intensities were also seen . The foci of high signal intensity on the T2-weighted images had low signal intensity on the T1-weighted images, and they showed no enhancement on the contrast-enhanced images, representing areas of cystic degeneration . Based on the above imaging findings, the diagnosis of a large subserosal leiomyoma with areas of cystic degeneration was made. We recommended excision of the mass without hysterectomy.
Our patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy. A large firm mass, which originated from the uterine fundus, was seen. Multiple lobulated projections were also seen on the superior border of the mass . The mass was then excised and the ascitic fluid was drained. Histopathological examination of the mass revealed the presence of a uterine leiomyoma. Our patient had an uneventful post-operative course.