A 85-years-old Morrocan Arab man was admitted to the National Institute of Oncology Hospital with alteration of health (asthenia without weight loss), systemic symptoms (Fever, shudder, profuse sweat), yellow rectal secretions for 18 months, and enlarged tumour in the peri-anal region and rectal tenesmus for 3 months. The tumour mass increased rapidly in volume and was associated with ulceration at the surface. The patient suffered equally of urinary signs of dysuria and pollakiuria. The evolution was marked by the apparition of inguinal lymph nods 3 months ago. His past medical history did not include co-morbidities, polypharmacy, malnutrition or dependency. At presentation, the patient had an ECOG performance status equal to 2.0. Physical examination of the pelvis showed a heavily peri-anal ulcerative-vegetative mass measuring 10 × 10 × 4 cm . The examination of ganglionic aereas showed bilateral lymph nodes in the inguinal region measuring 2 × 2 cm . Pelvic computed tomography scan showed a circumferential anorectal tissular process associated with retro rectal and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes. The tumour infiltrated the mesorectal fate, provoked a thickness of the fascias and came in contact with obturator muscles . The rectal biopsy was performed. Histological and immunohistochemistry studies showed DLBCL of the rectum according to the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms/World Health Organisation classification of lymphoid neoplasms (REAL/WHO). Most of the neoplasic cells were positive for CD-20 and for leukocyte common antigen (LCA) antibody. Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen was normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was increased to 70 mm in the first hour. The white blood cell counts were within normal limits. A bone marrow biopsy showed no abnormalities. The patient was staged IIEXBb according to the Ann Arbor Staging system. Before first chemotherapy cycle, the cardiac fraction ejection was normal and was equal to 75%. The patient received 8 cycles of Cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 d1, Doxorubicin (50 mg/m2 in the first 4 cycles and 25 mg/m2 in the subsequent cycles) d1, Vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 d1, and prednisone 50 mg/m2 d1-5 (CHOP) regimen with good tolerance. He achieved complete clinical and radiological response and remained disease free 12 months after the end of chemotherapy treatment .