A 54-year-old male with type 2 diabetes mellitus presented with complaints of intermittent fever, cough with expectoration, occasional haemoptysis and right-sided chest pain for the previous 20 days. There was no history of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection in the recent past. The patient tested negative for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by RT-PCR and gave a history of vaccination with two doses of Covishield. The patient was a known case of type 2 diabetes mellitus for the previous 20 years and was on irregular medication of metformin and pioglitazone. On examination, the patient was afebrile, conscious and oriented. On auscultation, breath sounds were markedly reduced on the right side with fine crepitations. Renal function, liver function tests and urinalysis were unremarkable except for blood sugar levels of 516 mg dl−1 and total leucocyte count of 13 000 mm−3 on admission. Testing for HbA1c level was not performed. There was no evidence of acid-fast bacilli in the sputum. A serum galactomannan test was negative. Chest X-ray revealed consolidation in the middle and lower zone of the right lung . On day 4 blood parameters showed a markedly elevated total leucocyte count (>35 000 mm−3) with neutrophilia (>90 %) and lymphocytopenia (~3 %), and high procalcitonin (15.3 ng ml−1), d-dimer (10 000 ng ml−1), creatinine (4 mg dl−1), urea (200 mg dl−1), SGOT (209 U l−1) and SGPT (167 U l−1) levels. The patient also showed traces of ketones in urine and was subsequently shifted to the intensive care unit for close monitoring.
On admission the patient was initiated on amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, and clarithromycin. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest performed on day 2 showed a large area of consolidation with bronchiectasis, fibrosis and secondary cavitary changes showing air–fluid levels in the right lower lobe with intra- and interlobular septal thickening with ground glass haze giving a crazy paving pattern in the right lower lobes and a few patchy areas of consolidation in the right upper and middle lobe with minimal right pleural effusion . On day 4, as the patient deteriorated clinically with persistent fever, high blood counts and increasing consolidations seen on chest radiograph, the antibiotics were escalated to meropenem and teicoplanin. On day 5 due to further deterioration in the condition of the patient, fungal aetiology was suspected. A bronchoalveolar lavage sample was collected and sent for microbiological analysis. KOH examination was performed, which showed broad aseptate fungal hyphae . On day 5, the patient underwent sudden respiratory distress, for which he was intubated. Taking into account the reduced urine output and altered renal function, the patient was initiated on dialysis. The patient was started on posaconazole as the salvage therapy. On admission day 6, the patient died due to sudden cardiopulmonary arrest and could not be revived.
Fungal culture results showed a fast-growing, cottony white colony turning brown on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) incubated at 25 °C and 37 °C, within 48 h of incubation. The isolate was identified as R. homothallicus based on the characteristic golden-brown spiny zygospores and suspensor cells, along with broad, aseptate hyphae, seen on a lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) mount . DNA was extracted and outsourced for PCR targeting the internal transcribed spacer 2 followed by Sanger sequencing. The sequence has been submitted to GenBank with accession number OP019829. A sequence alignment was performed using the ISHAM database and it was confirmed to be R. homothallicus with a similarity index of 96.97 %. The evolutionary tree was prepared using the neighbour-joining method and evolutionary analysis was conducted using mega X .