A 68-year-old man was presented to the emergency department in November 2022 with an acute onset of psychotic derangement. He exhibited delirium, agitation, and slight involuntary movements involving the face, trunk, and left-sided limbs. These symptoms had suddenly developed a day earlier. The patient demonstrated, during admission, progressive behavioral changes characterized by sedentary inability, groping behavior, hallucinations, increased motor restlessness, night- and day-reversed sleep, and hypologia . The patient was diagnosed with JAK2V617F-positive PV confirmed by bone marrow biopsy 10 years previously and had been successfully treated with hydroxyurea 500 mg once daily since then.
In the past 3 years, the patient had two episodes of choreiform movements after hydroxyurea withdrawal. The movements were quickly relieved after symptomatic treatment with tiapride hydrochloride tablets. His hematological test results deteriorated, accompanied by spontaneous hematoma of the hip and infarct of the spleen, thought to be complications of PV. However, his bone marrow aspirations showed no progress or change. The hematological indicators during the past two episodes of choreiform symptoms are shown in . However, the patient continued to take hydroxyurea.
The patient was not treated with chorea-inducing drugs such as antiparkinsonian drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, or anticonvulsants. There was no history of cognitive or behavioral issues. The patient’s family history was unremarkable. There was no medical history of peripheral vascular disease, metabolic or endocrine disorders, or autoimmune diseases.
General examination revealed facial erythrosis but no splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. The patient’s blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, and his temperature was 36.6°C. Neurological examination revealed mild choreiform movements of the left limbs and orofaciolingual muscles with writhing tongue movements, pouting, and grimacing. Eye movements, muscle strength, and reflexes were normal. Neuropsychological testing was impossible to complete (secondary education). Other neurological tests showed no abnormalities or Parkinsonian, pyramidal, or cerebellar signs.
An extensive diagnostic laboratory workup for chorea and neuropsychiatric derangement was performed. The patient had a total white blood cell count of 36.5 × 109/L, erythrocyte width of 22.8%, total red blood cell count of 4.98 × 1012/L, platelet count of 125 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 11.4 g/dL, and hematocrit of 41.9%. The peripheral blood smear revealed no abnormal cells or acanthocytes. Results of serum liver enzyme, TSH, antistreptolysin O titer, ceruloplasmin, vasculitis workup, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis serology, and autoimmune encephalitis panel were negative. His initial creatinine was 275 μmol/L, but it recovered quickly after fluid rehydration, which rarely caused renal encephalopathy. Chest and abdomen CT showed no obvious signs of systemic inflammation, tumor, and splenomegaly. The cerebral magnetic resonance imaging showed encephalomalacia of the left frontal and right parietal lobes, gliosis, and signs of cerebral small-vessel disease (Fazekas 2) . There were no acute infarcts, bleeding, or space-occupying lesions in the brain parenchyma, including the striatum, basal ganglia, subthalamic region, and brain stem. Electroencephalography revealed a mild abnormality, characterized by a background of low-medium amplitude 8-10c/s alpha wave rhythm, with slightly more low-medium amplitude 5-7c/s theta wave rhythm, without epileptic waves. Bone marrow examination revealed global hyperplasia with fibrosis, consistent with post-PV MF. JAK2V617F mutation was detected in the peripheral blood, whereas the BCR-ABL gene was negative. All the above results demonstrated a diagnosis of chorea and neuropsychiatric derangement because of post-PV MF.
The dose of hydroxyurea was not increased, and it was not adjusted to a JAK2 inhibitor because of side effects and the limitation of thrombocytopenia. The severity of involuntary movement and mental and behavioral abnormalities gradually decreased, the involuntary facial and limb symptoms disappeared, and the patient could walk normally after 2 weeks of treatment with tiapride hydrochloride, clonazepam, and quetiapine tablets. A follow-up outpatient visit 6 weeks after his initial presentation showed a leukocyte count of 4.1 × 109 /L, a hemoglobin level of 12.5 g/dL, a platelet count of 115 × 109 /L, and an erythrocyte width of 11.9%. The chorea had completely subsided, and the tiapride hydrochloride tablet was slowly withdrawn. All sedating medications were discontinued, with no re-emergence of mental symptoms. The patient was referred to the hematology department for follow-up.