A 30-year-old Caucasian woman consulted for surgical correction of excess brachial skin and fat and breast ptosis. According to the Regnault’s classification, she presented a grade II ptosis when she had her arms along her body. She wanted her breasts to be enlarged but without implants. She had undergone bypass bariatric surgery in 2015 for morbid obesity [body mass index (BMI) 51]. She had no major history other than a malabsorption syndrome following surgery. She was a nonsmoker. The loss of 58 kg had caused significant excess skin and fat. After stabilizing her weight (BMI 29), she underwent surgery to repair her abdominal and back weight loss sequelae 2 years after her bypass in 2017 thanks to a body lift.
On clinical examination, there was breast ptosis with a significant loss of projection and bilateral brachial excess skin, which is classic in this post-bariatric context. A major lateral thoracic excess causing significant discomfort was noted. Excess skin and subcutaneous tissue in the lateral chest wall was assessed by means of a pinch test to determine the available width of this donor flap. Considering these findings, we proposed brachioplasty associated with breast augmentation and intramammary burial of the excess tissue in the lateral thoracic region. The patient was informed of the expected higher degree of scarring. She was informed that the scars would extend from the inside of the elbow to the inside edge of the arm (brachioplasty), from the lateral surface of the thorax to the breast base (removal of excess lateral thoracic tissue and mammary burial), and that she would have a long submammary scar (necessary for positioning the flap).
A maneuver that must be performed to convince both surgeon and patient of the eligibility for true SLT flap or augmentation mammaplasty by superolateral thoracic (SLT) flap is reclination of the lateral thoracic skin in the breast test .
Preoperative drawing must be performed in a standing position . Under general anesthesia, the patient is positioned supine on the operating table with both arms supported on arm boards abducted to 90°. The first step is classic brachial dermolipectomy. After a skin incision on the brachial drawing, de-epithelialization is performed with an electric scalpel. After hemostasis, closure is performed in two planes with 3/0 resorbable monofilament thread. This first step is carried out on both sides.
The second step consists of lateral thoracic skin resection, delimitation, and burial of the thoracic flaps. The shape of the resection must be confirmed by making a frame with staples. This frame allows the upper part of the design to be adapted and to create a continuity with the brachial dermolipectomy design with a cutaneous area preserved in an “S” shape between the two. This prevents a bridle when the arm is raised. The drawing is traced back to the frame, and the modeling staples can then be removed.
De-epithelialization of the area is carried out with coagulating forceps. The flap is detached but remains attached to the bank on the breast side . During this maneuver, the external mammary vascular network must be preserved . The flap is detached from the thoracic and pectoral planes to about half of the outer side of the breast. This flap is then buried into the breast and sutured deep down with 2/0 resorbable stitches . Sutures are then made to reattach the submammary and external mammary groove, taking in the two edges and the periosteum of the corresponding rib with 2/0 resorbable stitches. This deep mooring is essential for the outcome to be satisfactory. Sutures are made between these pressure points with transparent resorbable 3/0 monofilament thread and an intradermal overlock with the same thread. This second step is carried out in the contralateral thoracic region. Care must be taken to ensure good symmetry at the end of the procedure . No drainage system is required. To ensure better postoperative analgesia, all scars are infiltrated with ropivacaine.
The patient was hospitalized for 1 day and was allowed to leave the day after surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful, with no breast skin necrosis, no hematoma, and no seroma or infections. At 15 days, the patient did not have any scarring disorders and she was already satisfied with the result. At 6 months, she no longer had areolar ptosis with an areola above the fold under the breast when she had her arms along the body. Under the inframammary fold, a persistent slight glandular descent was noticeable but allowed to keep a natural aspect, according to the patient. She was very satisfied with the result and reported feeling much more comfortable from a functional and body image point of view .