A 66-year-old woman complained of blurred vision in her right eye and was referred to our hospital because of a choroidal elevated lesion at the right superior fundus. She had a history of left mastectomy due to left breast cancer 16 years ago. There were no special notes on family history. At the time of initial examination, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.4 oculus dexter (OD) and 0.9 oculus sinister (OS) with mild myopia and astigmatism, and her intraocular pressure was normal oculi uterque (OU). Slit-lamp microscopy did not detect any findings OU. Color fundus photography (CFP) showed a yellowish-white choroidal elevated lesion measuring 8 papillary diameters in the posterior pole of the fundus . SS-OCT showed serous retinal detachment (SRD) localized from the macula to the choroidal elevation . Moreover, SS-OCT depicted the irregularity of the anterior surface of the tumor with high reflective material deposits beneath the retina. FA showed diffuse hyperfluorescence in the tumor area in the early phase, and the enhanced hyperfluorescent area and fluorescence leakage due to SRD in the late phase . ICGA demonstrated no obvious fluorescence blockage or abnormal choroidal vascularity but hypofluorescence in the center of the tumor in the early phase. The center of the tumor remained hypofluorescent, while the periphery of the tumor was hyperfluorescent in the late phase . B-mode echography revealed a flat elevated lesion . The tumor showed iso-intensity and low intensity on T1-weighted and T2-weighted images on orbital magnetic resonance imaging, respectively .
Based on these ophthalmologic findings and a medical history of breast cancer, she was diagnosed with metastatic choroidal tumor. The systemic examination revealed multiple organ metastases including the bone, lung, liver, and mediastinal lymph node. Biopsy was conducted from a mediastinal lymph node, the histopathology of which was consistent with a pathological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma as a metastasis of breast cancer. Immunohistochemically, estrogen receptor was positive, progesterone receptor was marginally positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 was positive in tumor cells. One month after the initial visit, radiation therapy (30 Gy/10 fraction) was performed for the right eye. Two months after the initial visit, combined chemotherapy (veltuzumab + trastuzumab + docetaxel) was started. Five months after the initial visit, her BCVA was 0.9, metastatic choroidal tumor became scarred, and SRD disappeared on OCT. Twenty-seven months after the initial visit, her BCVA was 0.5, and CFP showed resolution of elevated lesions and scar formation in the retina where the tumor had existed OD . SS-OCT showed disappearance of SRD at the macula and around the superior arcade vessels . The patients did not show any findings including non-perfusion areas, retinal hemorrhage, or soft exudates, suggestive of radiation retinopathy during the course of the study. The institutional review board of Hokkaido University waived ethical assessment of this clinical study because of a single case report with a non-invasive study. This study adhered to the tenets of Declaration of Helsinki.
This study further analyzed choroidal circulatory and the CCT changes. First, the changes in choroidal blood flows before and after chemoradiotherapy were evaluated using LSFG. Relative values of the blood flow were determined as mean blur rate (MBR) based on quantitative measurements of blood flow velocity by LSFG software (LSFG-NAVIR, version 3.1.39.2, Softcare Ltd., Fukuoka, Japan) according to previous reports . Before the examination, the pupils of both eyes were completely mydriatic with 0.4% tropicamide (Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka) to obtain a mydriatic state in which the pupils of both eyes were completely devoid of light reflex. The macula in the MBR image was marked manually by one experienced operator, and the vessels were segmented using threshold values automatically defined by the system software (LSFG Analyzer, version 3.0.47.0). A circle of 750 μm diameter in the macula OU was defined as the region of interest on LSFG . Four to five consecutive measurements were taken for each circle, and the mean values were calculated and used for analysis. Ocular perfusion pressure (OPP) was calculated using the patient’s blood pressure and intraocular pressure in accordance with previous reports .
The MBR values OD were shown in Fig. B as follows: 11.1, 7.34, 7.35, 6.75, and 6.76 arbitrary units (AU) at the initial visit, 2, 5, 23, and 27 months after the initial visit, respectively. The MBR of the right eye decreased immediately after the start of treatment and remained unchanged thereafter. The rate of change assessed by MBR was 33.8% decrease OD 5 months after the initial visit . The MBR values OS were shown in Fig. C as follows: 7.46, 6.90, 6.05, 6.80, and 7.23 AU at the initial visit, 2, 5, 23, and 27 months after the initial visit, respectively. The rate of change assessed by MBR was temporarily 18.9% decrease OS 5 months after the treatments . OPP was 66.6, 66.1, 66.3, 65.4, and 59.2 mmHg OD and 65.6, 61.1, 61.3, 64.4, and 57.2 mmHg OS at the initial visit, 2, 5, 23, and 27 months after the initial visit, respectively, proving no significant changes in both eyes.
Next, the CCT was measured manually from the lower edge of the retinal pigment epithelium layer to the scleral border by one experienced examiner using SS-OCT (DRI OCT Triton; Topcon Inc., Tokyo, Japan). The CCT OD were 338, 375, 227, 179, and 171 µm at the initial visit, 2, 5, 23, and 27 months after the initial visit, respectively . The CCT of the right eye decreased 5 months after the initial visit and kept thinning thereafter. The CCT OS were 333, 336, 325, 293, and 301 µm at the initial visit, 2, 5, 23, and 27 months after the initial visit, respectively .