A 54-year-old Caucasian woman therapist with no past history of serious illness was referred for Holter monitoring in September 2008 after complaining of episodic palpitations over 4 years, resulting in disruption of daily activities. There was no history of syncope and no family history of arrhythmia or sudden death. At the time of presentation, she was taking no medication. Routine biochemistry and hematological analysis proved normal. A physical examination was normal.
A 24-hour Holter electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated frequent VEB, couplets and frequent runs of 3–5 beats of monomorphic NSVT. In total 2448 ectopic beats were present, all of the same morphology, with a relatively narrow ventricular ectopic QRS interval (VEQSI) of 160 ms. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a structurally normal heart, confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance scan. Our patient declined curative ablation. Because of a history of suspected asthma, beta-blocking drugs were relatively contraindicated. She was discharged on a slow-release preparation of verapamil 240 mg daily for control of symptoms. This reduced the frequency of ventricular ectopy and diminished the symptoms to a tolerable level.
One month later, our patient was readmitted after suffering an out-of-hospital VF cardiac arrest from which she was successfully resuscitated . Coronary angiography demonstrated normal coronary arteries. On recovery, our patient accepted our recommendation that she undergo ablation of the focus of ventricular ectopy but she refused implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy.
At electrophysiology study, a decapolar diagnostic electrophysiological catheter (Bard, Electrophysiology Division, Lowell, MA, USA) and a cryoablation catheter (Freezor Extra™, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) were used. We found electrogram amplitude to be normal throughout the right ventricle. Frequent ventricular ectopy was present; activation mapping traced the site of origin to the anterior aspect of the RVOT approximately 1 cm below the pulmonary valve.
Cryotherapy to –80 °C for 3 minutes was delivered at this site with complete suppression of ectopy during delivery but recurrence on rewarming. A second delivery at an adjacent site resulted in persistent elimination of ectopy . No further ventricular ectopy occurred during 40 minutes of observation in the electrophysiology laboratory or during the 4 days of that hospital admission.
Holter recordings 1 day and 1 week after ablation recorded only three ectopic beats on each occasion, none of which appeared to be of the clinical morphology. After reflection, our patient decided to accept ICD therapy. A single-lead ICD was implanted 10 days post-ablation. At 7.5 years post-ablation, interrogation of her ICD shows no record of any sustained ventricular arrhythmia. Our patient has requested that the device not be replaced when the battery becomes depleted.