We report a 5-year-old, Saudi girl with end-stage renal disease secondary to nephronophthisis type 2, treated with automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) and chronic kidney disease medications since the age of 2 years. There was no family history of the same disease. She experienced four episodes of peritonitis. In the last episode, she presented to emergency room with vomiting and diarrhea that had persisted for a few days. She was dehydrated, not in respiratory distress, afebrile, blood pressure of 95/50 mmHg, and heart rate of 110 beats per minute, and initial biochemistry analysis showed hemoglobin of 12 g/dL, white blood cell (WBC) count of 6.3 × 109/L, creatinine of 575 μmol/L, and urea of 20 mmol/L.
PD fluid analysis showed WBC count of 2736/mm2 and neutrophils of 93%, and culture confirmed Staphylococcus peritonitis. The patient was initially started on intraperitoneal ceftazidime with vancomycin. One day later, her condition deteriorated and she developed septic shock and was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit. The PD catheter was removed and switched to continuous renal replacement therapy, and she was maintained on intermittent HD.
Plain abdominal X-ray revealed abnormal air lucency around the center of the abdomen, suggesting pneumoperitoneum. Abdominal CT findings revealed a huge fluid collection in the abdomen with a large air fluid level, extending from the level of the left hemidiaphragm to the pelvis. Mild enhancement of the peritoneum was noted with peritoneal thickening in the right lower quadrant . The fluid collection displaced the abdominal viscera superiorly and posteriorly. Mild thickening of the right lateral abdominal wall was noted below the inferior margin of the liver, consistent with EPS. Ultrasound-guided abdominal drain aspirated 500 mL of pus mixed with fecal matter, likely due to bowel perforation. Laparotomy findings included extensive adhesions, fecal fluid, and bowel perforation. The whole bowel was matted together covered by thick membrane; the membrane was densely adherent to the bowel wall, which was difficult to separate . Therefore, peritoneal biopsy was not done during surgery. An abdominal drain was inserted. A stoma was required but was difficult to create because of matted bowel. Two months later, a stoma was created but complicated by fistula with huge secretion that improved with conservative treatment . During hospitalization, the patient required a prolonged course of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) for 6 months until the gut healed and due to several instances of sepsis . The patient made a complete recovery and remained stable on regular HD treatment and gained muscle mass. The child was on hemodialysis for 3 years before getting renal transplant from a cadaveric donor. Two and a half years post renal transplant, she is doing well on triple immunosuppressants (prednisolone, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate malate) without recurrence of EPS.