A 28-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital at 28 weeks of gestation due to a day history of decreased fetal movement and mild abdominal cramps in the past 2 hours. She was admitted during the 4th wave of COVID-19 (November, 2021), mainly dominated by the SARS-CoV-2 Delta (B.1.617.2) variant. At admission, anti-SARS-CoV-2 rapid antigen test was performed with a positive result. The patient did not receive vaccination against SARS-CoV-2, nor had previous COVID-19 disease. Medical history of the patient included transcervical fibroid and endometrial polyp resection by hysteroscopy in 2016, a loop electrosurgical excision procedure in 2017 with negative histology. No other relevant medical, family or genetic past histories were elicited. The patient’s obstetric history included one previous pregnancy delivered at term via cesarean section. The current pregnancy was uneventful until admission. She was not taking any medications and denied smoking or alcohol during the pregnancy. Obstetric examination including ultrasound revealed intrauterine fetal loss, with an estimated gestational age of 28 weeks and 1 day. Clinical or ultrasound signs suggestive of placental abruption or preterm rupture of the membranes were not detected. At admission, the uterine cervix was closed, and labor had not started, minor uterine contractions were present. She had mild upper respiratory symptoms and was classified as having an overall mild illness (stage II) according to the COVID-19 disease severity classification of the National Institutes of Health . Her vital parameters were stable and showed only minor alterations from the reference: pulse was 88 beats/min, blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg, body temperature was 36.2 °C, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and the oxygen saturation was 99% without supplemental O2 therapy at admission. Baseline clinical and laboratory parameters of the patient as compared to healthy age- and gestational age-matched controls are summarized in .
Due to the previous cesarean delivery in her history, labor was induced with the use of Foley balloon catheter, amniotomy and oxytocin infusion. Before the induction of labor, intravenous methylprednisolone (40 mg) was administered and blood was taken for the specific assessment of hemostasis and inflammatory cytokines. During induction of labor, oral antibiotics (amoxicillin and clavulanic acid, 875/125 mg), and highly purified human fibrinogen concentrate (2 g, Fibryga, Octapharma) were provided as prophylaxis to ensure a fibrinogen level ≥1.5 g/l. The amniotic fluid was meconium-stained. Less than six hours later the patient delivered the stillborn infant per vias naturales weighing 915 g without signs of fetal maceration . After delivery, placental retention and uterine scar dehiscence was excluded by manual uterine revision. One hour after delivery heavy vaginal bleeding occurred, therefore, additional 2 grams of fibrinogen concentrate was administered. Uterine atony was excluded, and oxytocin was administered as prophylactic uterotonic. Signs of heavier bleeding diminished within 20 min, and no further medication was needed. Vital signs showed no considerable change during labor and early postpartum. The stillborn infant and the placenta with the umbilical cord were subjected to histopathologic examination. The patient was discharged after three days and low molecular weight heparin prophylaxis was provided for 10 days. Bromocriptine was prescribed for ablactation and psychological counseling was offered. The late postpartum period was uneventful, no thrombotic or hemorrhagic event occurred.