A 33 year old man was seen in the emergency department of our Hospital in June of 2010 with a 2 week history of fatigue and what he described as a gurgling discomfort in his chest. He was additionally coughing up blood stained sputum. He had a past medical history of GPA, diagnosed elsewhere in 2003 when he presented with progressive deafness, loss of taste, recurrent sinusitis, arthralgia and haemoptysis. He had relapsed 3 times since his initial presentation. He was on prednisone 10milligrams daily and mycophenelate motefil (MMF) 1 gram twice daily. He was also on atenolol for hypertension. He was a life-long non-smoker, but lived with both parents who were smokers.
C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were reported at < 7 grams/millilitre and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 32millimetres/hour. A chest x-ray showed pulmonary nodules with cavitation in both lungs. Three separate sputum cultures demonstrated M. abscessus infection confirmed by gene sequencing. Proteinase 3 antibody titres over the next few months remained in the negative/equivocal range 4–6 U/ml (0–5 negative, 6–9 equivocal, >9 positive). Antinuclear antibodies, double stranded DNA antibodies and extractable nuclear antibodies were all negative.
Following susceptibility testing of his mycobacterial infection and on the advice of an infectious disease specialist, he was treated with amikacin 7.5 mg/kg q12h intravenously (iv), cefoxitin 2 g q4h iv and clarythromycin 500 mg bid orally (po) for 2 months, followed by clarithromycin and amikacin to complete 12 months of antimicrobial therapy. This mycobacterium isolate was not was susceptible to oral antibiotics except clarithromycin.
He was counselled about the side effects of amickacin including deafness and consented to treatment. Aspergillus fumigatus was isolated from his sputum on two occasions and was treated with voriconizole. His MMF dose was slowly reduced to decrease the potential risk of immunosuppression interfering with the successful treatment of his infection.
His respiratory symptoms improved until Febuary 2011 (8 months after presenting to our Unit) when he again began to feel unwell with lethargy, loss of taste, nasal crusting and discharge, senineural hearing loss, blurred vision and other symptoms. His Birmingham Vasculitis Score (BVAS) was 24 at the time
. Furthermore the bridge of his nose was noted to have begun to collapse (Figure
). Repeat ANCA tests were in the range 5–6 U/ml. However his CRP now measured 108 g/ml and his ESR 75 mm/Hr. A bronchoscopy demonstrated endobronchial involvement and a transbronchial biopsy and was reported to be consistent with active GPA. For this reason, he was treated with oral cycophosphamide 1.5 mg/kg. On this occasion, he was not treated with MESNA and after 2 months of treatment, developed hemorrhagic cystitis. His treatment was then changed to rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks. This treatment was delayed as we sought funding for his treatment which eventually started in the middle of June 2011. Shortly thereafter, his symptoms resolved and he went into clinical remission. His PR3 levels were of 0–1 U/ml and he was kept on maintenance therapy with azathioprine.
He completed his course of rituximab and antibacterial treatment in July 2011. Sputum cultures were now persistently negative and his cavitating pulmonary nodules had markedly improved, confirmed on Chest x-ray (Figure
) and CT scan. However, shortly afterwards, he began to complain of dyspnoea. Serial spirometery showed a progressive decline in pulmonary function (Figure
). His reduction in FEV1 was not reversible with nebulised salbutamol. Bronchoscopy was carried out in November 2011 and reported as showing evidence of widespread airways scarring particularly in the left main stem bronchus (approximately 65%) with sparing of the main trachea and carina.
During this period he developed severe mixed hearing loss in his right ear and profound sensory-neural deafness in his left ear with no measurable hearing above a frequency of 500 Hz and noise perception at 60 dB of 0%. This qualified him for cochlear implants, which were inserted in August 2011, and improved his hearing dramatically.