An 11-year-old Chinese girl presented to our outpatient clinic with sudden blurred vision in the left eye that occurred 7 d before her visit.
Four days before presentation at our hospital, the patient visited a local hospital with the same complaint. She was diagnosed with bilateral RD and advised to visit a higher-level hospital. The patient had no other discomfort except for blurred vision.
She had experienced blisters of varying dimensions on her trunk and limbs from the first postnatal week, followed by rupture and crusting of the blisters and streaks of pigmentation on the extremities and back of her neck . In infancy, the patient visited a dermatologist and was diagnosed with IP. Her right eye was previously diagnosed with RD in our hospital in 2017, but the treatment window was missed.
Tracing her family history, her parents and her younger brother had no history of skin or ocular disease and were all born at full term.
At initial examination, her visual acuity was assessed as no perception of light in the right eye and able to count fingers with the left eye, with no improvement with correction. Intraocular pressure in both eyes was 16 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior chamber revealed a cloudy lens in the right eye, and vitreous turbidity, elevated retinal folds, massive proliferation of membranes, exudates, and hemorrhages in the left eye.
Genome sequencing revealed a heterozygous shift in the IKBKG gene in the patient, a rare shift mutation in exon 5 (c.519-3_519dup:p?) at chrX: 153,788,619-153,788,622.
Ultrasound of the eye revealed clouded refractive media and extensive RD in the right eye and suspected RD in the left eye . Dilated fundus examination revealed a patchy macula-colored exudate and hemorrhage with greenish-gray bulging of the peripheral retina in the left eye . Fundus fluorescence angiography (FFA) revealed temporal and inferior temporal vascular occlusion, and retinal vascular endings and optic disc surface capillaries were dilated with enhanced permeability. An area without perfusion was observed in the left eye .