A 45-year-old male was hospitalized due to bloody nasal discharge, hemoptysis and rash for 11 years, which aggravated after 2 weeks, and presented with abdominal pain and melena for 1 month. The patient was hospitalized and diagnosed with WG 11 years ago. Furthermore, he had rashes on his face, trunk, limbs and feet, and had oral ulcers, perianal ulcers, and sinusitis.
The laboratory tests revealed the following: leucocytes count of 8.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin level of 79 g/L, urine protein (+), microhematuria (+), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 50 mm/h, c-ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies) with a titre of 1 in 100, and PR3-ANCA (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies proteinase 3) of > 200 RU/ml. Computed tomography (CT) revealed left frontal and ethmoid sinusitis, and bilateral maxillary sinusitis. Based on these clinical features and laboratory findings, the patient’s diagnosis of WG was accurate. In order to clarify the cause of the abdominal pain, a colonoscopy was performed with the written informed consent of the patient. Different sizes of irregular ulcerations, which were 3–4 cm and 1–2 cm in diameter, were scattered at different intervals throughout the colon . The larger ulcers presented raised margins and fibrin coatings on the base. Colonic biopsies revealed inflammatory granulation tissues. At approximately 40 cm from the anus, an annular black membrane, which was approximately 4 cm in diameter, adhered to the surface of the intestinal wall. The membrane could be lifted using biopsy forceps. Part of the membranous substances appeared like mucosal surface tissues, and was completely separated from the intestinal wall. The colonoscope could pass through the membrane, and erosions and ulcers were scattered at the bottom . The membrane biopsy revealed degenerative colonic mucosal tissues, while the colonic biopsy revealed inflammatory granulation tissues without normal colon glands . Oral prednisolone (60 mg/d) combined with intravenous cyclophosphamide (600 mg/d, once) was given. The patient was rehabilitated and discharged after 10 days of treatment. Symptoms including bloody nasal discharge, hemoptysis, skin rash and abdominal pain all disappeared.