A 10-year-old boy with septo-optic dysplasia, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and growth hormone (GH) deficiency, and CDI was treated with DDAVP 1.6 mg orally four times daily maintaining normal sodium levels. CDI was diagnosed 3 years prior, when he presented with polyuria and polydipsia. A water depravation test showed high urine output after 20.5 h of fasting, a urine osmolality of only 462 mmol/kg, and a serum osmolality of 317 mmol/kg. He responded promptly to 10 µg of intranasal DDAVP with urine osmolality of 804 mmol/kg and a drop in urine output to less than 1 ml/kg/hour, confirming the diagnosis of CDI. He was also treated with hydrocortisone 6 mg orally twice daily (6.3 mg/m2/day) and growth hormone 1.3 mg by subcutaneous injection daily. Free T4 levels, monitored routinely, were normal with values of 10 pmol/l (8-22 pmol/l) 4 months prior to admission and 5 months post-admission. In addition, he was developmentally delayed with visual impairment and poor mobility and a body mass index of 34 kg/m2. Post-admission for a femur fracture, he was discharged on ibuprofen 600 mg q6hr prn and hydromorphone 1 mg q4hr prn which he was taking regularly. Sodium was 136 mmol/l (133–148) two days before discharge.
Less than 24 h later, he returned to the Emergency Department after having a seizure at home. His mother described it as an episode of increased tone in his arms, teeth grinding, and rocking after which he was unresponsive and apneic. She reported performing cardio-pulmonary resuscitation for 1 min before he started breathing again. Approximately 3 min later he regained alertness. In hospital, he was euvolemic and mildly lethargic. Blood pressure was 121/93 with a heart rate of 90–100. The patient had a brisk capillary refill, normal skin turgor and mucous membranes were noted to be moist. His glucose was 5.6 mmol/l however sodium was very low at 108 mmol/l. His mother denied any potential error in DDAVP administration and given his limited mobility he did not have free access to water outside of what his mother provided. She denied any additional water than his normal daily intake. She reported that the only change in his medications was the regular dosing of both ibuprofen and hydromorphone.
He was admitted to hospital and stress doses of hydrocortisone (15 mg three times daily) were initiated and continued for 3 days and double maintenance for 2 additional days until returning to maintenance doses. His hydromorphone was held and he was fluid restricted. Intermittent small doses of DDAVP were given initially to facilitate gradual correction of hyponatremia.
Sodium rose somewhat but remained below the normal range. Sodium normalized and remained stable when Ibuprofen was stopped . At discharge, sodium had normalized on DDAVP 0.5 mg BID but he soon required higher doses again.