A four-month-old male infant was admitted for a palpable mass in the left upper quadrant (LUQ). The mass was first detected by his mother a week ago. The patient did not have any specific signs and symptoms and did not have failure to thrive or developmental delay. The mother’s pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. His birth weight was 2800 g. The CBC, and liver functions test, including liver enzymes, prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time, bilirubin, blood urea, and creatinine were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a large, slightly heterogeneous solid mass with clear borders containing scattered calcifications of approximate dimensions 70 × 55 × 40 mm in the LUQ, which was in front of the left kidney and inferior to the spleen and pancreas without a definite claw sign with any adjacent solid organs. Considering the infant’s age, the above findings led to the clinical suspicion of neuroblastoma. To rule in or rule out the diagnosis of neuroblastoma, bone marrow aspiration and 24-hour urine collection (VMA and HVA) were performed, which were negative.
In the next step, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was performed which confirmed the ultrasound findings. On CT scan, a few vascular channels were identified from segment III of the left liver lobe passing into the upper part of the above mass without peripheral tissue.
According to the negative results for neuroblastoma and considering the entry of nutrient vessels into the mass from the left hepatic vein and the coarse calcification areas and the pattern of enhancement, pedunculated hepatoblastoma was suggested and AFP was measured which was more than 100,000 ng/ml (normal 5-109). β-HCG was within the normal range. the patient subsequently underwent a core needle biopsy. The pathology report revealed fetal hepatocytes with enlarged nuclei, and abundant cytoplasm arranged in a light-dark pattern due to admixture of glycogenous and eosinophilic hepatocytes with rare mitosis, consistent with the diagnosis of epithelioid hepatoblastoma . According to the PRETEXT classification, the tumor was classified as PRETEXT 1.
Due to the size of the tumor, complete removal of the tumor was not feasible at first. Therefore, the patient was treated with several courses of chemotherapy . The preoperative chemotherapy regimen, which was given every 3 weeks, consisted of doxorubicin (25 mg/m2 × 3 days continuous infusion by central line) and cisplatin (20 mg/m2 × 5 days continuous infusion, days 0–4. After shrinking the tumor, the patient underwent surgery and the pedunculated mass with dimensions of approximately 20*40*40 mm, which had no adhesion anywhere, was resected along with the III segment of the left lobe of the liver. After surgery, the patient underwent 4 additional cycles of chemotherapy. He was symptom-free without complications during the 6-month follow-up.