A 67-year-old gentleman, non-hypertensive, and non-diabetic presented to our emergency department with an alleged history of slip and fall while walking at home followed by injury to the left knee joint. On examination, the knee was swollen and slightly warm with fluctuation probably due to hemarthrosis, without any neurovascular deficit. The rest of the other systemic examinations were unremarkable. A roentgenogram was obtained in both AP and lateral views showing transverse fracture of patella (AO type 34-C1). After taking informed consent and relevant pre-operative investigation, the patient was taken for open reduction and internal fixation by K-wires and MTBW using a longitudinal midline incision under regional (spinal) anesthesia. Two 2 mm Kirschner wires and 18 Gauge (1.02 mm) stainless steel (SS) wire as tension band were used. Medial and lateral retinaculum inspected and repair performed meticulously. Wound closure done in layers without drain. Postoperatively, a rigid knee brace was applied. Immediate rehabilitation protocol followed include static quadriceps exercises, active straight leg raising exercises (SLR),and gentle knee AROM exercises 0–45° immediately. A partial weight-bearing 3-point gait was allowed using bilateral axillary crutches. The hospital stay went uneventfully and the patient was discharged 2 days after the operation. A routine check-up was performed after 2 weeks for wound inspection, which was unremarkable. Knee AROM was also increased to 0–90°.
After around 6 weeks, the patient presented to us with a history of mild pain in the operated area, more at night. There was no history of any falls or injuries. On inspection, the surgical scar was well healed, without any signs of inflammation, on palpation tenderness was present, the temperature was normal, and a palpable gap of around 1 cm was noted at the fracture site. Immediately, an X-ray was obtained which revealed distraction at the fracture site due to pulling out of the medial sided K-wire, leading to loosening of the construct . After counseling the patient regarding fixation failure, and after obtaining informed consent, planning was done for revision fixation of the fracture. Pre-operative investigations and pre-anesthetic clearance were obtained as routine protocol, then the patient was taken for the operation. After sterile draping of the part, the previous incision was used and 4.0 mm CCS and SS wire (18 Gauge) was used to fix the fracture under spinal anesthesia. Wound closure was done without drain and an absorbable stitch for skin was applied.
Immediate post-operative X-ray showed a very satisfactory reduction . The patient was discharged uneventfully from the hospital after the 2nd day and the same rehabilitation protocol was started as used previously after the first operation.
After around 3 weeks, the patient presented to us again with a history of sudden slip without any fall and pain and mild swelling over the operated area. On examination, the knee was mildly swollen, the surgical wound completely healed, the temperature normal, and tenderness over the fracture site. Immediately, an X-ray was obtained which showed mildly distracted fracture without any signs of implant failure. This time we were in a dilemma whether to treat it or just wait and watch.
However, due to the patient’s request, a second opinion from a senior Orthopedic surgeon was sought, who advised just to continue with conservative management and physiotherapy. The patient agreed to that and physiotherapy was continued, with gradually increasing AROM exercises 0–140° in a few weeks.
The patient was routinely followed up after a month, and to our surprise, X-ray showed a very satisfactorily reduced fracture . At this time, active SLR also improved and the patient was allowed to walk with a walking stick only.
Subsequently, the patient appeared again after a year for a check-up, during which time, he gradually improved the function of the knee joint. At this time, X-ray showed a completely healed fracture .