An 84-year-old male patient was diagnosed in 2017 at the age of 79 years with an SDC of the right parotid gland and right facial paresis, which indicates involvement of the facial nerve. The performed FDG-PET scan revealed a locally advanced disease with a 4-cm-measuring parotic tumor and involvement of numerous lymph nodes (8 of 31) on the right neck level I – III. He underwent a right total parotidectomy, a right neck dissection, and an infratemporal fossa clearance. The initial tumor stage was identified as T4a N2 M0. There was also description of lymphangiosis with extracapsular expansion and perineural invasion. Post-surgery, he subsequently underwent radiotherapy during 6 weeks. Eight months after the initial therapy, the patient developed several metastases in the lymph nodes, lungs, and bones. In June 2018, due to a lack of tolerable treatment options and an obvious strong nuclear expression of AR (>90% of tumor nuclei), he initiated treatment with the AR blocker bicalutamide (150 mg/day), combined with a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist monthly and a RANKL inhibitor every 6 weeks. Two months later, the patient underwent a follow-up FDG-PET scan, which demonstrated a first partial remission of all apparent metastases. In February 2019, a follow-up FDG-PET scan revealed a progression in size and high FDG activity of retrocaval lymph nodes, as well a progression of peribronchial metastases in the right lung, metastasis in the right adrenal gland, and a liver lesion in segment VII. After yet another CT scan in July 2019, progression of all metastatic lesions had significantly aggravated, indicated by novel bone metastases in the spine, retroperitoneal lymph node metastases, and pulmonary metastases. Hereafter, the patient initiated treatment with enzalutamide, a second-generation AR blocker with a higher affinity for AR when compared to bicalutamide . With the intention to further detect potential characteristics for personalized therapies in the patient’s tumor, an extensive pathological workup and immunohistochemistry of the tumor tissue was performed and revealed that the tumor was HER-2-positive for both the cell membrane and cytoplasm of tumor cells (IHC score 3; silver-enhanced in situ hybridization) yet PD-L1-negative as shown in a–c. Next-generation sequencing (NGS, FoundationOne® CDx) had also been performed, which revealed that the AKT1 gene and the CDK6 gene were amplified. However, due to the limited availability of reliable treatments for these two genes, it was decided to target primarily the ERBB2 pathway as two recent studies had revealed an overall high response rate in patients with HER-2-amplified salivary gland carcinomas treated with ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), an antibody-drug conjugate consisting of the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab linked to the microtubule poison DM1 . Therefore, the patient initiated treatment with T-DM1, in August 2020. In October 2020, he underwent one more FDG-PET scan showing again a good partial metabolic response, which indicated that T-DM1 led to a robust partial remission as shown in a–d (40% reduction of SUV max).
Due to an obvious progression in July 2021, we then initiated monotherapy with neratinib (240 mg/day), an irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Clinical data on the efficacy of neratinib as a treatment of SDCs are described with clinical benefits of several months and in patients suffering from SDC with brain metastases . Although up to 85% of patients may suffer from diarrhea during treatment with neratinib, this compound was well tolerated by our patient, and he achieved good stable disease during this course of treatment . Of note, during this treatment phase, the patient used the smartphone app medidux™ for standardized and structured reporting of treatment-related toxicities and well-being [, ], which also indicated that his quality of life was conserved and no dose limiting toxicities occurred (see example under TDM-1 therapy; shown in ). During this observational period of almost 3 years and the sequential application of the abovementioned medications, no serious adverse events related to the drug intake were reported. For a comprehensive overview of drug intake and response, please refer to . Patient care was continuously provided by family members; no additional social support was required. During the course of treatment between June 2018 and November 2021, the patient maintained a robust well-being (average Karnofsky Index between 50 and 91) as well as a good cognitive and psychological state. No weight loss of more than 10% (CTCAE grade 1) occurred during the anti-HER2-directed treatment. In November 2021, we unfortunately lost track of our patient since he moved abroad.