A 39-year-old woman with a clinical history of Turner syndrome (treated with estrogen and progesterone), hypercholesterolemia, and chronic thyroiditis, complained that vision in her left eye had turned whitish and hazy during desk work. Examination revealed that her visual acuity of the left eye had decreased to 20/100 vision (right eye was 20/20 vision) with a superior visual field defect of her left eye. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 19 mm suprasellar and sellar mass lesion with contrast enhancement . The lesion pushed the optic chiasm moderately upward, particularly on the left, with extension beneath the optic canal.
We performed endoscopic endonasal removal of the tumor with a team including neurosurgeons and head-and-neck surgeons. Initially, a pedunculated full NSF was created by approaching from the right nasal cavity as our routine; with an awareness of preserving the posterior septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery, a vertical incision was initiated at the level of the sphenoid ostium and extended anteriorly until just posterior of the mucosa-skin transition. The gross total removal (Simpson Grade 2) of the tumor was achieved. For skull base defect, multilayer reconstruction was performed by inlaying the fascia collected from the abdomen, cloaking the NSF on to the dural defect, and then onlaying fat collected from the abdomen in front of it. The histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was angiomatous meningioma.
After surgery, she experienced transient deterioration of the left visual acuity; therefore, steroid pulse therapy was administered 3 times. The visual acuity slowly recovered to preoperative level. She had steadily regained ambulation. However, on the 7th postoperative day (POD), she developed clear fluid dripping from the right nostril, which was suspected to represent CSF leakage. Conservative treatment with bed rest did not improve the symptom, so we performed EES again. During surgery, careful removal of the packing around the planum sphenoidale and sella tunica revealed that the superior half of the NSF was partially necrotic and shifted posteriorly . As a result, the dural defect was exposed in front of the flap, and CSF leakage was observed thereafter. At this time, since there was a concern that the size of the flap would be insufficient for coverage of the dural defect by removing the necrotic portion, we initially filled the piece of fat collected from the abdomen to an exposed dural defect. As a result, the CSF leak resolved. The additional fat was layered thereon, and the periphery was filled. The Valsalva maneuver at the end of the procedure confirmed that there was no gross leakage.
Postoperatively, she gradually regained ambulation; however, CSF leak appeared again 6 days after the reoperation. She also developed fever, headache, and increased serum inflammatory responses suggestive of meningitis. We again performed emergent EES . CSF leakage was observed from the anterior edge of the dural defect in the sphenoid bone plane as before. Removal of the surrounding fat was evidence of known necrotic flap preventing engraftment with surrounding tissue. Therefore, we resected the necrotic region of the flap. The flap region maintaining blood flow was separated from the dura. The fascia newly collected from the abdomen was inlayed into the dura defect, and the fascia slightly larger than the dura defect was also onlayed. From above, we restored the defect by rotating the flap to cover the dura. We also inserted spinal drainage; CSF drainage was managed postoperatively, discharging approximately 100–140 cc per day. Intraoperative CSF tests confirmed bacterial meningitis, and we administered empiric antibiotic therapy. On POD7 from the second reoperation, observation of surgical site by nasal endoscopy demonstrated that there was no evident CSF leak nor flap necrosis. We removed the spinal drain and gradually progressed her ambulation. The meningitis was completely cured, and she was discharged with no more CSF leakage.