Female patient aged 50 years, hospitalized due to increased tiredness, choking and heartburn. Symptoms started six months ago. For the last couple of weeks have intensified sweating, without fever, with loss of appetite and frequent urination. Symptoms are more pronounced during night. For the last three years patient have high blood pressure, with occasional hypertensive crises. At the age of 18, she had rheumatic fever. At age 35, she was diagnosed with mitral stenosis, and during the same year, after the grade III burns, during the hospitalization, she experienced acute cerebrovascular insult. Later, in a couple of occasions, transitory ischemic insult. Father died of the stroke. The therapy, until hospitalization, included enalapril, medigoxin, metoprolol, furosemide and oral anticoagulants, without regular INR control.
Physical examination showed no signs of pulmonary stasis. The action of the heart is tachyarrhythmia, the tones clear, the strange diastolic noise of stroke and the Erb’s point. Blood pressure at admission 190/110 mmHg, hearth rate 110/min. Physical finding on the abdomen is normal. Extremities mobile, without edema, preserved peripheral arterial pulses.
From laboratory findings: hemogram, blood glucose, minerals, nitrogenous substances, bilirubin, transaminase and lipid status within the limits of reference values as well as thyroid hormone status. Protein levels, mild albumin globulin inversion with a slight increase of β2 globulin and γ globulin. Urine blurred, 0.5g protein, 20-25 white blood cell 8-10 erythrocytes, amorphous urate and plenty of bacteria. Isolated from Escherichia coli l05 in urine. Staphylococcus aureus isolated from the nose swab.
ECG at admission: absolute ventricle arrhythmia based on atrial fibrillation, average ventricle frequency about 110 / min., leftgram.
Echocardiographic finding: an enlarged left atrium measuring 6.9x7.5x9.7 cm in diameter. The left atrium shows intracavitary masses, characterized by thrombus, beside septal wall measuring 4.7x3.6 cm, and along the left wall of the left atrium of 7x5.5 cm, with a spontaneous echo contrast inside the left atrium. The mitral veins thickened and partially calcified with the “doming” phenomenon of the frontal mitral cusp and hemodynamic signs of severe mitral stenosis (area of the mitral inflow 0.75 cm, peak pressure gradient 28 mmHg, mean pressure gradient 16 mmHg). Aortic valve truncated, edges of hemogenic veins, with moderate aortic insensibility, without signs of stenosis. Mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation. RVSP elevated, and amounts to about 60 mm Hg, and is in favor of heavier pulmonary hypertension. Kinetics of LV walls are preserved. Correct systolic function of the LV with EF about 54%.
It is pharmacologically treated with the anticoagulant therapy with enoxaparin with acetylsalicylic acid, medigoxin, metoprolol, lisinopril, amlodipine, furosemide and antibiotic treatment of Escherichia coli in urine with trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (according to resistance test). Patient has undergone heart catheterization. The result of cardiac characterization: a coronagraphically normal finding, ventriculography was not performed. Suggested cardiac surgery. It is decided to undergo an emergency surgery to perform left atrial thrombectomy with implantation of artificial mechanical mitral and aortic valves.
Surgically is removed the gigantic thrombotic mass of a cauliflower appearance. The surgery has gone smoothly. The tenth postoperative day experiences a repeat cerebrovascular insult from which it is successfully recovering and remains cardiologically stable.
The pathohistological finding confirmed the thrombotic nature of the echocardiographed verified intracavitary mass, surgically removed from the left atrium.