A 71-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with a large right inguinal tumor (5 cm in diameter) on June 2, 1999. She complained of inguinal mass increasing in size for the 4 months preceding admission. She had a past history of an appendectomy for acute appendicitis 16 years previous to admission. No abnormalities were found in her complete blood and biochemistry profiles. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) were all within normal limits, but CA125 was elevated to 360 U/ml at hospitalization. Ultrasonography, CT-scan and MRI demonstrated not only a right inguinal tumor, but also showed large pelvic tumors . The uterus was myomatous, but no evident tumor mass was identified elsewhere by whole body CT, MRI and scintigraphy. Endoscopic examinations of the esophagus, gastrointestinal and colorectal tracts did not reveal any sign of malignant tumor. The tumor growth pattern was rather expansive into the adjacent urinary bladder, uterus and rectum. She had several asymptomatic tiny gallbladder stones. She underwent complete tumor resection of the right inguinal tumors with salpingo-oophorectomy and partial resection of the rectal wall at the recto-sigmoid junction on July 1st, 1999.
CT on the 23rd postoperative day demonstrated new small asymptomatic inguinal tumors adjacent to the left external iliac artery. The diameter of those tumors was 15 mm and 12 mm, respectively. Those tumors were extirpated completely on July 29, 1999.
The right inguinal tumor, approximately 4.5 × 5 × 4 cm in diameter, was relatively well circumscribed by the right inguinal ligament, and right external iliac artery and vein, which are supplying and draining tumor blood flow. After extirpation of the inguinal tumors, the intra-pelvic tumors were removed completely by total hysterectomy with salpingo-oophorectomy and a partial resection of the rectum at the rectosigmoid junction . There was no direct invasion of the tumor into the urinary bladder and there was no evidence of remaining tumor in the abdominal cavity.
Grossly, the right inguinal tumor was elliptical and well circumscribed, measuring 42 × 25 × 12 mm in size. The cut surface of the solid tumor was swollen and reddish-white, with hemorrhagic and necrotic foci . Histologically, the tumor was encapsulated by dense fibrous tissue. The configurations of the individual tumor cells were cuboidal or polygonal and growing in a micropapillary pattern. The tumor cells had marked eosinophilic cytoplasm and moderately atypical nuclei. Many psammoma bodies were recognized and these findings facilitated the diagnosis of metastatic papillary serous adenocarcinoma . Almost all of the ovarian tissue had been replaced by a fibrothecoma without carcinoma cells, but tumor cells invaded from out side of the ovary . There were 4 leiomyomas within the uterus, but no cancer cells were recognized anywhere in the uterus. On the rectum wall, carcinoma cells infiltrated from the serosal side to the submucosal layer; however, no cancer cells had reached the mucosal layer .
Her postoperative course was uneventful, except for the early detection of the left inguinal node metastasis by CT on the 23rd postoperative day. This tumor was extirpated promptly and postoperative imaging procedures confirmed that no tumor remained anywhere in the body. Pathologic examinations revealed lymph node metastasis from a papillary serous adenocarcinoma . Preoperatively, daily oral administration of UFT (450 mg/day) Cimetidine (H2 receptor antagonist; 600 mg/day) and PSK (3 g/day) was started. We used Cimetidine not only as an anti-ulcer drug, but also as an immunomodulator or biological response modifier with the hope of eradicating possible microscopic residual cancer cells [-]. PSK was used as an immunomodulator against possible remaining adenocarcinoma cells somewhere in the body of this patient [,]. In order to increase the anti-tumor effect as well as decrease the toxicity, we tried intravenous single-day continuous infusion of low dose combination chemotherapy through a port implanted on the right upper chest wall with an access catheter (Groshong®) to the superior vena cava by way of the right subclavian vein. A portable elastomeric infusion system filled with 50 ml saline dissolution of Mitomycin C (MMC; 6 mg) and Adriamycin (ADM; l0mg) was applied every other week at an outpatient clinic. Three months after we changed from UFT to 5'-FDUR (600 mg/day) because MMC may be more effective with 5'-FDUR (due to stronger inductive activity of thymidine phosphorylase (dThdPase) in tumor tissues [,].
The implanted port and access catheter were removed two years later. The serum tumor markers CA-125, CEA and CA19-9 were checked every month and image diagnostic screening by CT and US were carried out every three months during 4 postoperative years, however, no suggestive signs of relapse had been found anywhere in the body. However, from 4.5 years after the last surgery, the serum level of CA-125 had gradually elevated to 140.5 U/ml and the CT scans demonstrated newly developed asymptomatic single tumor growth (25 × 20 mm) on the right deep inguinal node , though no evident tumor was found anywhere else in the body. Complete tumor removal was carried out and the serum CA125 decreased to within the normal range . Pathologic examination revealed that papillary serous adenocarcinoma cells were growing in the lymph node in a micropapillary pattern and many psammoma bodies were recognized . Findings of US, CT and the tumor markers have suggested no relapse of disease and oral 5'-DFUR administration was discontinued at the 6th year, but oral Cimetidine and PSK have been continued. No adverse effects were encountered at any time during the clinical course and the patient is living well, disease-free almost 7 years after the primary tumor resection.