A 46 years old man with end-stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and electrical storm underwent urgent orthotopic heart transplantation: the donor was a 54 years old woman, known for diabetes, nicotine consumption, morbid obesity, combined ventilation disorder with restriction due to obesity hypoventilation syndrome and suspected chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and history of thrombophilia (activated protein C resistance) with recurrent deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in cerebral death due to brain hemorrhage. Pre-transplant cardiac workup showed a 90% stenosis in the middle right coronary artery , with normal LVEF, and no segmental wall-motion abnormalities or valvulopathy.
The technically uneventful transplant was completed with a venous coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) on the right coronary artery (RCA), with a total ischemic time of 191 min. After cross-clamp removal and appropriate induction therapy with methylprednisolone 500 mg IV, the heart showed severe global biventricular failure with severe functional mitral regurgitation. In the absence of preformed donor specific HLA antibodies in favor of an acute humoral rejection, primary graft failure was suspected, and mechanical hemodynamic support was immediately initiated with a central veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), and high dose of cathecolamines (Noradrenaline up to 30 mcg/min) A relatively low troponin release was observed during the first 24 h post-operative (peak at 2386 ng/l), favoring the hypothesis of myocardial stunning over necrosis.
A cardiac tamponade on post-operative day 1 led to surgical revision. The intra-operative status was noteworthy for an occlusion of the venous CABG on the RCA. A coronary angiogram was urgently performed in attempt to treat the stenosis in the native vessel. Surprisingly, only a < 50% stenosis could be seen the mid RCA . It was then noticed that the angiogram performed in the donor had not been preceded by the administration of nitroglycerine, which retrospectively spoke for a severe localized vasospasm of the mid RCA at the site of an atherosclerotic plaque. No further intervention was performed and the ECMO could finally be weaned on day 9, after full recovery of the LV function and moderate persistent RV dysfunction.
In stable phase, during his fourth post-transplant week at the intermediate care unit, the patient developed sustained ventricular tachycardia at rest, with a heart rate of 150 bpm and no associated hemodynamic instability or even symptoms. Rapid cardioversion was easily achieved with a single administration of 2 mg magnesium sulfate IV. Nevertheless, the immediate post-cardioversion 12-lead ECG and echocardiography respectively showed severe ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads with inferior and inferolateral hypokinesia (Additional files , and ). Urgent cardiac catheterization showed a severe localized coronary vasospasm in the proximal RCA , which was rapidly reversed after intracoronary injection of 1 mg isosorbide dinitrate. The ECG and echocardiography quickly normalized after the acute event, without consecutive elevation of troponins. An endomyocardial biopsy excluded an acute cellular or humoral rejection. The patient was treated with diltiazem without further episodes of arrhythmias or ST-segment changes during his hospital stay.
Interestingly, a few days before this coronary vasospasm, the patient complained from recurrent abdominal pain followed by melena. A colonoscopy showed ulcerations in the distal ileum, correlated with reversible signs of bowel ischemia in two consecutive CT scans, without evidence of occlusion or embolization in the mesenteric vessels. We could speculate that systemic factors in the recipient might favor vasospastic events. Because of a previously reported case of segmental mesenteric ischemia related to mycophenolate mofetil , this drug was replaced by azathioprine without any further abdominal pain or bleeding episodes.