A 47-year-old woman (weight: 57 kg, height: 171 cm) underwent ascending aortic replacement and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) using a saphenous vein graft (SVG) to the posterior descending artery for Stanford type A acute aortic dissection involving the right coronary artery (RCA) ostium in 2017. Although follow-up coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) showed that the SVG was occluded immediately after surgery, RCA beyond the occluded site was clearly visualized, suggesting that the collateral vessels from the left coronary artery to the RCA fully developed, and she had no symptoms requiring additional intervention. Subsequently, genetic testing revealed a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome. She had neither a history of atrial fibrillation nor classic coronary risk factors.
Five years later in 2022, the diameters of aortic arch and aortic root increased to 50 and 53 mm, respectively, with moderate to severe aortic regurgitation. Because myocardial perfusion imaging with single photon emission computed tomography suggested reversible myocardial ischaemia in the distribution of RCA, the patient underwent aortic arch replacement, the Bentall procedure, and repeat CABG (SVG to the RCA). Anticoagulation using unfractionated heparin followed by a vitamin K antagonist was initiated and well-controlled. She had a favourable recovery after surgery with no chest pain or signs of heart failure. The patient was extubated on post-operative day 3, and walking rehabilitation was initiated on post-operative day 4. On post-operative day 12, we performed follow-up CCTA to assess the patency of SVG and anastomosed left main coronary artery, which is routinely done after CABG in our hospital. Unexpectedly, we found severe stenosis of the mid-left anterior descending (LAD) artery, whereas pre-operative CCTA was normal . She had no chest pain, and her blood pressure was 101/56 mmHg, heart rate was 98 beats/min, body temperature was 36.4°C, and oxygen saturation was 98% in room air. On physical examination, she had a regular heart rhythm with mechanical click and no murmur. Although cardiac enzyme did not increase significantly, electrocardiogram showed new ST-segment depression in leads V5 and V6 and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a new asynergy at the anteroseptal wall without any signs of infective endocarditis. Taken together, post-operative coronary embolism was suspected, and the potential embolic sources were intracardiac thrombus, vegetations, or surgical adhesive agents, such as BioGlue. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed on day 13 after surgery. Because residual dissection involved the descending aorta and the brachiocephalic artery, we chose left radial artery access, but the catheter could not advance due to the radial loop. Finally, we managed to perform CAG via the left brachial artery.
Coronary angiography revealed 99% stenosis with a translucent area at the mid-LAD artery . Intravascular ultrasound showed a large, almost non-echoic mass with clear margins and slight echo attenuation at the stenotic site, while no atheromatous changes were found throughout the LAD artery (–, , ). Since we could not determine the nature of the occlusive material based on the findings from IVUS alone and haemodynamic was stable, we decided to perform an additional OCT analysis. Optical coherence tomography demonstrated a crystalloid mass with clear margins and no internal signal, with a red thrombus attached to the distal part (–, , ). Both IVUS and OCT images suggested that the embolus was inorganic matter, and it was suspected of being the surgical adhesive BioGlue. Although repeated thrombectomy was performed, we could not remove the embolic material even after using a high-suction aspiration catheter (6 Fr Thrombuster Pro GR, Kaneka, Tokyo, Japan) and a guide extension catheter (6 Fr GUIDEZILLA II, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). After multiple balloon dilatations, IVUS and OCT showed that the mass was compressed to some extent, which was accompanied by increased thrombus-like structures in the surrounding area. Because the mass was likely to cause thrombotic occlusion of the LAD artery and future percutaneous revascularization would be difficult due to limited vascular access, we treated the lesion with a drug-eluting stent (Coroflex ISAR NEO 3.5 × 16 mm, NIPRO, Osaka, Japan), resulting in angiographically complete repair with occlusion of the septal branch and a fully expanded stent with minor prolapse of thrombus or BioGlue on IVUS and OCT images (–). After the percutaneous procedure, the patient remained asymptomatic and was discharged on day 22 after surgery. Seven months after surgery, CCTA confirmed stent patency.
We also performed an in vitro study using a blood vessel model . We created a small grain of polymerized BioGlue according to the manufacturer’s instructions and soaked it in human blood (–). The material was placed in the vessel model filled with contrast medium and imaged by OCT (see , and ). The obtained OCT image was very similar to the image obtained in vivo (, , ).