A 75-year-old man was transferred to our hospital by the emergency medical service with a complaint of high fever (>39.0°C) for 3 days. He had a history of metastatic lung cancer following a hypopharyngeal cancer surgery and was treated with nivolumab. He also had a 25-mm abdominal aortic aneurysm involving the iliac bifurcation. Vital signs showed altered mental status (Glasgow Coma Scale score, 14 [E4V4M6]) and shock (heart rate, 117 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 66/47 mmHg). Physical examination revealed erythema on the left shoulder. Hypoxia and hypotension necessitated mechanical ventilation, continuous norepinephrine administration, and vasopressin infusion. Laboratory investigations revealed thrombocytopenia, elevated creatinine, coagulopathy, liver dysfunction, and abnormal serum lactate levels . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the trunk did not show any radiological signs indicative of the cause of fever. The patient was diagnosed with septic shock and was admitted to the intensive care unit on a regime of tazobactam/piperacillin. On day 2, the blood culture was positive for group A streptococcus, prompting a diagnosis of STSS. Accordingly, the antibiotics were changed to penicillin G, clindamycin, and vancomycin. Furthermore, hydrocortisone, fludrocortisone, i.v. immunoglobulin, and thrombomodulin were also given for 6, 7, 3, and 5 days, respectively . Continuous hemodiafiltration with an acrylonitrile-co-methallyl sulfonate surface-treated (AN-69ST) membrane was undertaken for 6 days. Finally, the group A streptococcus was identified as S. pyogenes; genetic analysis classified it as the emm1 strain of S. pyogenes (T serotyping, T1; M serotyping, M1; and emm typing, emm1; Spegene, speA, speB, and speC). Despite treatment, the C-reactive protein levels did not decrease below 8 mg/dL . An enhanced CT scan of the trunk on day 30 revealed that the aneurysm had increased in size since the previous CT scan and also revealed an enhanced aneurysm wall and a saccular appearance of the aneurysm, suggesting IAA . In situ repair with a bifurcated expanded polytetrafluoroethylene vascular graft and omental wrapping were undertaken successfully on day 31. Intraoperatively, the tissue surrounding the aortic aneurysm was observed to be edematous and hemorrhagic and had strong adhesions. Culture of the sample collected from the aortic wall during surgery was negative. Furthermore, preoperative blood cultures on days 7, 14, and 31 were also negative. After the surgery, the patient recovered and the C-reactive protein level gradually reverted to normal. On resolution of ventilator-associated pneumonia, hospital-acquired pneumonia, and pneumothorax, he was weaned off the ventilator on day 189 and walked without support from day 240.