An 11-year-old female (weight 29 kg, height 92 cm) presented to a district health clinic with a complaint of intermittent abdominal pain of one week duration, which was associated with low grade fever and episodes of loose stool. The patient described the pain as colicky and sharp in nature which was non radiating. She also had sore throat and non-productive dry cough for five days. However, she denied shortness of breath, anosmia, and close contact of confirmed COVID-19 patients. Their village house was located 20 km from the nearest township and had very difficult transportations due to the pandemic restrictions.
Our patient was initially treated as acute gastroenteritis (AGE) in a primary health care clinic and discharged with oral rehydration salt. However, her symptoms persisted and was referred to our tertiary centre. Prior to her transfer, an Antigen Rapid Test Kit (RTK-Ag) for COVID-19 was performed on her nasopharyngeal swab (NPS) specimen at the clinic, for which she tested negative.
On assessment at the emergency department (ED), the child was alert but appeared lethargic and dehydrated. She was febrile with a temperature of 37.8 °C. She was tachypnoeic with a respiratory rate (RR) of 25 breaths per minute and tachycardic with a heart rate (HR) of 125 beats per minute. Her blood pressure (BP) and oxygen saturation (SpO2) were 109/72 mmHg and 98% on room air, respectively. Further examination revealed a mildly distended abdomen with rebound tenderness over McBurney's point. There were crepitations auscultated at both lung bases. Airway assessment showed a Mallampati score of 1.
Her NPS specimen was obtained and tested with COVID-19 real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which unfortunately was SARS-CoV-2 positive. She was immediately isolated. Her chest X-ray (CXR) showed bilateral ground glass opacifications . Bedside ultrasonography of the abdomen showed free fluid in the pouch of Douglas . The urine pregnancy test (UPT) was negative. Her full blood count revealed anaemia with a haemoglobin level of 110 g/L (Normal values: 115–135g/L). Both total white blood cell (TWBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP) were raised at 20 × 109/L (Normal values: 7–11 × 109/L) and 128.8 mg/L (Normal values: < 3mg/L), respectively. All other biochemical results were within normal ranges.
Our immediate provisional diagnosis was perforated appendicitis with concurrent mild COVID-19 infection. Other differential diagnoses included ruptured tubo-ovarian abscess and pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
She was posted for an emergency open appendicectomy after obtaining a high-risk consent from her parents. The patient was transferred to the designated operating room (OR) for COVID-19 patients. All involved HCW, namely, two general surgeons, anaesthetists, and nurses donned enhanced PPE including powered air-purifying respirators (PAPR) in the operating theatre (OT).
In the OR, standard American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) monitors were applied. Adequate preoxygenation was performed followed by modified rapid sequence induction (RSI) with administration of IV fentanyl 2 mcg/kg, propofol 3 mg/kg, and rocuronium 1 mg/kg with the application of cricoid pressure. Endotracheal intubation was facilitated using a C-MAC video laryngoscope. We applied two viral filters between the patient's endotracheal tube (ETT) and ventilator to minimize transmission. Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation volume-controlled ventilation (SIMV-VCV) mode were used to ventilate her lungs with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 0.4, total oxygen and air mix flow of 1.8 L per minute, tidal volume of 6ml/kg and positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5cmH20, respectively. The patient's hemodynamics was stable and peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) generated ranged 19–22 cmH20.
The open appendicectomy was performed using a Lanz incision and her appendix was perforated, hence removed. The gynaecological structures appeared normal. The total blood loss was minimal and was replaced with adequate fluid therapy.
Postoperatively, the patient was extubated in the OR with IV sugammadex and subsequently transferred to a COVID-19 isolation ward. No growth of organisms was detected in her blood culture but Escherichia coli was isolated from the intraabdominal pus samples, which was sensitive to cefuroxime, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin, and amoxicillin-clavunalic acid. IV cefuroxime and metronidazole were administered and completed over 5 days postoperatively with no worsening sepsis. A repeated NPS RT-PCR 10 days later from her initial swab on admission tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 and she was discharged after a total of 14 days of admission.