We present a case of 55-year-old male diabetic patient who was admitted to our clinic for chest pain syndrome. His chest pain appeared occasionally during last 2 wk and had rather atypical presentation both at rest and after exertion. It was not accompanied by any other symptoms like dyspnea, fatigue or nausea. Due to recent appearance of chest pain of uncertain origin as well as previous implanted stent in left main coronary artery, the patient was referred directly to invasive coronary angiography without non/invasive functional testing.
Three years ago, he suffered from non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction due to critical lesion of the ostial circumflex (Cx) artery which was treated with implantation of one drug-eluting stent (DES) with crossover from left main to Cx coronary artery . Following DES implantation from left main to Cx, 2 intermediate stenoses of the proximal part of the long second obtuse marginal branch were observed that were estimated to be not significant without a need for further intervention. Four years ago, he also had percutaneous coronary intervention with one DES implantation in the right coronary artery (RCA). Since the last coronary event, the patient has been free of any symptom, he was feeling physically and emotionally fit. His medications included aspirin, beta-blockers, and rosuvastatin.
Patient has been obese (102 kg), and has elevated HbA1c levels with no regular anti-diabetic therapy.
Patient denies smoking, doesn’t have hypertension, and denies alcohol abuse. He has elevated cholesterol levels treated with statins.
On physical examination there was no remarkable finding. His blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. His heart sounds were normal, without significant murmurs. His lung fields were clear, and there were no signs of heart failure. His ECG was normal with sinus rhythm, heart rate of 62/min, without conduction and rhythm disturbances as well as ST-T changes.
The laboratory values showed normal blood count, elevated low density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol of 2.3 mmol/L, HbA1c was 6.1%, and the renal function was preserved with estimated glomerular filtration rate of 75 mL/min/1.73m2.
His cardiac ultrasound was normal with preserved ejection fraction, there were no wall motion abnormalities, the heart chambers were of normal dimensions as well as function and appearance of the valves. Coronary angiography showed no signs of restenosis in the left main to Cx stent, mild ostial stenosis/pinching of left anterior descending artery was unchanged to previous procedure, and 2 moderate-to-severe stenoses in the ostio-proximal part of the second obtuse marginal seem slightly tighter than 3 years ago. RCA was without signs of stenosis or restenosis. As there was no non-invasive functional testing for evaluation of myocardial ischemia, the decision was made to perform immediately invasive physiologic evaluation of the Cx obtuse marginal artery using Coroventis platform (Coroventis CoroFow Cardiovascular system, Abbot) and pressure wire (PressureWire X, Abbot) for the invasive functional assessment with FFR during hyperemia with i.v. adenosine, resting full-cycle ratio (RFR), coronary flow reserve (CFR) by thermodilution and index of microvascular resistance (IMR) for the assessment of microvascular dysfunction. FFR was preserved with a value of 0.88, RFR was also preserved with a value of 0.90 but CFR was very low (1.2) with a very high IMR of 84 . As there was a discrepancy in functional parameters (FFR preserved, CFR low) pointing out to microvascular dysfunction, OCT imaging (DragonFly OpStar imaging catheter, Abbot) was also applied to evaluate the more detailed anatomical characteristics of the lesion. OCT imaging confirmed the significant fibrotic tandem stenoses but without signs of thin-cup fibroatheroma or plaque vulnerability.