A 41-year-old Japanese woman presented with firmness of her right nipple and abnormal nipple discharge . The secretion was milky. She did not experience any pain, itching, or ulceration on the skin, and no lymph node swelling was detected at any site. No abnormality was seen in her left breast, and all standard laboratory test results were within the normal ranges.
No mass was observed upon mammography (MMG), although the subareolar region was more dense on the right side than the left. Moreover, foci of microcalcification were observed. Similarly, ultrasonography did not reveal an obvious mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass with an irregular outline in the subareolar region of her right nipple. T1-weighted MRI did not show any obvious mass in her subareolar region, while a low signal density mass was observed on the T2-weighted images . A cytodiagnosis of the nipple discharge did not indicate malignancy; however, the above-mentioned findings could not fully substantiate its benignancy. Hence, our patient consented to an incisional biopsy of her nipple lesion. A vertical incision was made to the right nipple skin along the Langer’s line, and a white, stiff mass with ambiguous borders was found in the subareolar area. As much of the tumor was removed as possible, while sparing her nipple.
The resected tumor was whitish, round, solid, and firm in consistency, and measured 7 mm in maximum diameter. With regards to the histopathology, the tumor was composed focally of ducts and tubules lined by a double layer of epithelial cells; the outer layer comprised small, cuboidal cells with scanty cytoplasm, while the inner layer consisted of rather flat cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and centrally located small nuclei . Many of the proliferating ducts assumed a teardrop or comma-shaped configuration. In addition, squamoid solid nests were found scattered among them, and the tumor cells infiltrated the stroma between the smooth muscle bundles. Immunohistochemical staining for Ki-67 indicated less than 5 % positivity. Although we were able to differentiate nipple duct adenoma, tubular carcinoma, and syringoma, the final pathological diagnosis was infiltrating syringomatous adenoma of the nipple. The clinical and histological features allowed us to exclude other lesions. The resection margin was found to be positive.
Because the tumor was so closely located to the epidermis of her nipple, additional resection of ample breast parenchyma and her right nipple was originally planned; however, our patient did not agree to immediate surgery. Although we explained the characteristics of the tumor and proposed additional resection with nipple preservation, our patient requested that surgery only be performed in case of a relapse.
Accordingly, she was kept under close surveillance. No local recurrence or distant metastasis was found during a 1.5-year follow-up period. We will continue careful monitoring for some years.