A 50-year-old man presented with intermittent fever for more than two years.
Intermittent fever occurred for more than two years. The body temperature remained at approximately 37.5 °C, and the fever usually occurred in the afternoon for 3–4 d a week. The fever was rarely high and often resolved without any treatment. The patient had been to the department of infectious diseases for treatment; however, no specific infection was found.
Six months ago, he had frequent and urgent micturition and increased nocturia. He went to the urology department, where prostatic hyperplasia was considered after ultrasound detection, but there was no cystoscopy or biopsy to be done. Then he was treated with tamsulosin hydrochloride and the symptoms, although partially alleviated, did not disappear fully.
Two months ago, he began to experience increased bowel movements and a feeling of incomplete bowel movements, accompanied by a bloated lower abdomen. So he came to the Gastrointestinal Surgery Clinic, and we ordered a colonoscopy and admitted him to the hospital.
Our patient had a 30-year-old history of hepatitis B without blatant virus replication. He also had allergic rhinitis for > 20 years, with the onset usually in August and September every year and relieved by itself after the season. He was allergic to ragweed pollen in 2017 and was cured by mometasone furoate nasal spray combined with cetirizine hydrochloride. He has never developed sinusitis.
The main drugs used in the patient’s medical records were interferon, cetirizine hydrochloride, mometasone furoate, and tamsulosin hydrochloride. He did not have a smoking and alcohol consumption history.
His family had no apparent history of colon tumors and autoimmune disease. Both his father and mother had died of cardiovascular diseases. Additionally, his mother had a history of hepatitis B.
Physical examination showed mild tenderness above the symphysis pubis in the lower abdomen without rebound pain. No other abnormality was seen.
The white blood cells count was normal as the baseline level, and hemoglobin was 92 g/L. The biochemical blood tests were within the normal range, including transaminases, bilirubin, amylase, and lipase. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic assay, cancer antigen 19-9, cancer antigen 72-4, and prostate-specific antigen were normal, while the urine culture and tuberculosis screening tests were negative. Nevertheless, this patient had a positive fecal occult blood test.
PET/computed tomography (CT) revealed a thick-walled cystic structure above the bladder, which was approximately 8.1 cm × 7.1 cm in size with increased radioactive uptake, and the maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) was 6.0. Thus, a diagnosis of a tumor or chronic infection-related mass was made. PET-CT examination did not find high uptake in the parotid gland, pancreas, biliary tract, and prostate .
An enhancement CT scan of the entire abdomen showed a noticeable expansion of the proximal sigmoid colon with significant intestinal content. The intestinal wall was thickened with contrast enhancement, and the boundary between the sigmoid colon and bladder was not evident in the apparent bladder compression . Hence, the possibility of the colonic diverticulum with infection or tumor was considered. We scanned the pancreas by CT and magnetic resonance imaging and found an enlarged pancreas similar to the “sausage-shaped” pancreas finding in IgG4-RD.
In the electronic colonoscopy, the lesion was located at the sigmoid colon. It was about 40 cm away from the anus with a blind cavity of 6 cm in diameter. The intestinal cavity is next to the blind hole with a large number of feces. Therefore, the colonoscope could no longer observe upwards .
A tissue biopsy was performed on the thickened and enlarged part of the sigmoid colon. While the intestinal wall of the biopsy was hard, the bleeding was negligible. The biopsy pathology chiefly showed inflammatory necrotic and granulomatous tissue; no defined tumorous cells were seen .
Based on all the preoperational investigations, the initial diagnosis was an inflammatory disease of the sigmoid colon with chronic intestinal perforation, with a localized pelvic abscess formed between the sigmoid colon and bladder. However, the possibility of sigmoid colon tumors could not be ruled out.
After the operation, pathological results showed multiple ulcers distributed in the diseased intestinal wall. The ulcers were surrounded by obliterative phlebitis, widespread inflammatory granulation, and fibrous tissue. Many plasma cells and neutrophils infiltrated the lesion tissues. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry showed high IgG4-positive cells in the diseased tissues (IgG4+/IgG+ ratio was about 60%, IgG4+/HPF was about 110 cells). Therefore, the pathological diagnosis was IgG4-RD in the sigmoid colon.
Immunology-related blood indices showed that the IgG4 level was 1. 830 g/L, which was higher than normal (for IgG4-RD, the cut-off value is > 1. 35 g/L).