A 16-year-old male presented to the department of emergency, with fever and cough for 1 day. The patient had no history of heart disease, no history of drug use, no history of specific familial diseases, and no history of drug allergies. At admission, the patient body temperature was 38.0°C, and blood pressure was 100/64 mmHg, heart rate was 110 b.p.m., and breathing rate was 30/min. There was no jaundice in the sclera, wet rales could be heard in the lungs, the heart rhythm was regular, and there was no murmur in the precordial area. In addition, there was no tenderness in the abdomen, no liver or spleen edge was palpable, no palmar erythema, and no telangiectasia. Skin examination showed no rash. During hospitalization, the patient coughed pink foamy sputum and could not lie on his back. Blood tests revealed that the creatine kinase (CK) level was 1089 U/L (reference value 30–135 U/L), and the CK-myocardial band (MB) level was 127 U/L (reference value 0.0–16.0 U/L). Cardiogenic shock and recurrent ventricular fibrillation occurred on the third day of admission. Endotracheal intubation (total time 188 h), 150 J or 200 J bidirectional asynchronous defibrillation (27 defibrillations in total), and then venoarterial (VA) ECMO combined with intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), and corresponding drugs were administered to the patients. The patient’s condition gradually improved and the vital signs were stable. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and IABP treatments were withdrawn after 5 days, and CRRT was retained until 7 days. During hospitalization, the patient received glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 200 mg daily for 3 days, then changed to 80 mg daily for 3 days, and then 40 mg daily for 7 days) and immunoglobulin 10 g daily for 10 days. The patient took orally 12.5 mg of betaloc twice a day during hospitalization and 47.5 mg of betaloc sustained-release tablets once a day after discharge.
Laboratory tests demonstrated extremely high inflammation and abnormal cardiac biomarkers: CK was 12 000U/L, was CK-MB 2880 U/L, blood lactate was 2.60 mmol/L (reference value 0.50–1.60 mmol/L), and blood procalcitonin was 36.48 ng/mL (reference value <0.50 ng/mL). FT3 was 4.93 pmol/L (reference value 3.39–6.47 pmol/L), FT4 was 13.80 pmol/L (reference value 10.29–21.88 pmol/L), parathyroid hormone (PTH) was 4.78 pmol/L (reference value 1–10 pmol/L), troponin I was 4.01 ng/mL (reference value <0.30 ng/mL), blood–brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) increased (5022 pg/mL, reference value 0–300 pg/mL), and anti-Epstein–Barr virus antibodies IgG and IgM were positive. There was no bacterial growth in the blood culture. On Day 7, the C-reactive protein level was significantly reduced (from 36.0 to 5.09 mg/L). Thoracic CT plain scan showed pleural infection and pleural effusion, and coronary CT scan showed no coronary lesions. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an ST-elevation at I and augmented vector left (AVL) lead and an ST-depression at II, III, and augmented vector foot (AVF) lead. Echocardiography [ultrasonic cardiogram (UCG)] showed decreased left ventricular wall motion, significantly reduced left ventricular systolic function with LVEF 38%. Based on all the data, the clinical diagnosis was FM. After 30 days of hospitalization, the patient’s general condition and cardiopulmonary function gradually improved, and he was discharged. Cardiac MRI showed left ventricular high signal shadow indicating cardiac fibrotic changes and myocardial oedema on the 37 days.
With regular outpatient follow-up, serial chest CT was performed to observe the evolution of myocardial calcification in the patient (see ): No myocardial calcification was observed in the left ventricle on the first day of admission . On the 13th day, the left ventricular wall and left ventricular papillary muscle showed dense annular shadow, suggesting myocardial calcification . There was increased calcification in the left ventricular lateral wall and apex around the 3 months . At approximately 6 months, the calcification had spread to the entire left ventricular wall and papillary muscles, as well as parts of the right ventricle, aorta, and pericardium . Left ventricular calcification peaked at approximately 6 months . At the 24- and 36-month follow-up, the left ventricular calcification further subsided ( and ). At the 48-month follow-up, the left ventricular myocardial calcification had significantly diminished . As described above, myocardial calcification was observed on the left ventricular wall on the 13th day of admission but was not seen in the right ventricle . At the third month, there was slight calcification in the right ventricular septum and free wall ; at 6-month follow-up, the calcification in the right ventricle decreased ; and at 12-month follow-up, right ventricular calcification resolved .
Subsequently, at the 3-month follow-up, UCG demonstrated myocardial motion distortion and calcification of both the anterior and posterior leaflets of the mitral valve, accompanied by a decline in left ventricular systolic function, and LVEF was 43%. At 6-month follow-up, UCG showed enhanced left ventricular wall echo and uncoordinated apex movement, and LVEF was 45%. Similarly, at 12-month follow-up, UCG showed enhanced left ventricular wall echo, left ventricular systolic function was normal, LVEF was 67%, the ventricular cavity size was standard, and the ventricular wall activity was not different. Finally, at 24-, 36-, and 48-month follow-ups, UCG showed that myocardial echo enhancement gradually subsided, and cardiac function returned to the normal range (LVEF more than 60%). During the follow-up in the 12th month, ECG showed sinus rhythm, short PR interval, and partial ST segment changes .