The patient was a 23-year-old woman charged with attempted manslaughter. She was ordered by the court to undergo a pre-trial forensic psychiatric examination which took place in a maximum security state mental hospital. The trial records and all available background information were reviewed. Both of her parents were alcoholics and she was taken to protective custody under the age of one year. Her grandmother suffered from schizophrenia and her mother had been in a psychiatric hospital after a suicide attempt. The patient used to shoplift before the age of 15 and later she stole money from time to time. She also worked as a prostitute to earn money. She started to abuse alcohol at the age of 15. She had several boyfriends but has never married and has no children. Her personality was noticed to change before the age of 17. She started to have obsessive-compulsive behaviour, paranoid thoughts as well as depressive symptoms. She tried to kill herself by hanging and by several drug intoxications. She brutally killed her own pet. She was never hospitalized before the forensic mental examination but she irregularly visited an outpatient clinic. Despite psychiatric treatment, she impulsively tried to kill her male friend with whom she was drinking. During the psychiatric examination the diagnoses – schizophrenia paranoid type, alcohol dependence and features of antisocial personality disorder – were made by a senior forensic psychiatrist using the structured clinical interview for DSM-IV, SCID I and II [,]. Neither waking EEG nor brain MRI (1.5T) disclosed any abnormality. She had no somatic disorders. She had finished high school and vocational school, and was within average intelligence (WAIS-IQ total 109). She was not sentenced, but was ordered by the Finnish National Board of Medico-Legal Affairs to stay in the state mental hospital as a criminally insane patient. The sleep recordings were performed during the psychiatric examination period and the patient was completely medication-free and had abstained from alcohol and drugs for six months.
The control group consisted of three 23-year-old female students without criminal records or a history of physical violence. They were healthy with no signs of somatic, psychiatric, or neurological disorders. As part of a psychiatric interview, the SCID-non-patient version was filled in. To exclude general diseases that could affect sleep, blood tests (including serum prolactin, thyroid function, kidney and liver function) and electrocardiograms were taken and they were within normal range, both in the patient and in controls. No history of alcohol abuse or dependence was detected in controls. The controls were asked to avoid alcohol, drugs or medication two weeks prior to the sleep examinations. Caffeine and nicotine consumption was neither restricted nor recorded.
Written consent was obtained from all participants after the study procedure had been fully explained to them. The study was approved by the local human ethics committee.
Polysomnography (PSG) was recorded over two consecutive nights but only the second night was considered for the study. The study patient slept in a single room within the department, while controls slept in the hospital guest room. All participants were allowed to sleep as long as they wanted to. Recordings took place on an ambulatory basis; the participant had a portable recording device (Embla, Flaga hf, Reykjavik, Iceland) that was connected to the recording electrodes. The recordings were performed using the standard Rechtschaffen-Kales method . The high-pass filter was 0.5 Hz and the low-pass filter 45 Hz, with a sampling rate of 100 Hz. Commercial software (Somnologica, version 2.0, Flaga hf, Reykjavik, Iceland) was used for scoring and calculation of sleep parameters. Sleep onset was defined as the first occurrence of three consecutive epochs (90 sec) of stage 1 (S1) or other sleep stages. The following parameters were calculated: time in bed, sleep latency, sleep period (time in bed – sleep latency), wake after sleep onset, total sleep time (sleep period – wake after sleep onset), sleep efficiency (total sleep time/sleep period), number of awakenings, REM latency and percentage amounts of different sleep stages (S1–S4 %, REM %). All data for the analysis were scored by the same scorer (NL), not blinded to the patient group.
A sleep diary was used for one week during the study period to ensure a normal sleep-wake rhythm and to exclude the effects of daytime naps. The participant filled in the time of retiring to bed, estimated time of falling asleep and time of awakening in the morning for each consecutive night as well as daytime naps.