A 48-year-old woman complained of dysphagia for 1 month. In April 2018, she underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy in our hospital and an esophageal submucosal tumor (SMT) was discovered in the upper-mid esophagus about 22–24 cm from the incisors. Under white light endoscopy, this lesion was broad-based, poorly defined, sessile, and elevated in size of 1.5 cm in diameter. The overlying mucosal surface was pale-whitish gray without ulcer or erosion . The adjacent esophageal mucosa was normal. There was no evidence of simon-red mucosal metaplastic changes. No additional tumor was identified. The stomach and duodenum were normal. Further endoscopic evaluation of this esophageal lesion with endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) demonstrated a hypoechoic mass with heterogeneous echo and microcystic features; signs for blood flow were absent. The lesion was located primarily in the submucosal space without involvement of the underlying esophageal muscularis propria . This submucosal lesion was considered clinically as a benign lesion that was completely resected by endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for histopathologic diagnosis and to relieve the patient’s symptoms.
The resected lesion measured 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm in size and exhibited whitish-gray, polypoid gross appearances. After routine formalin fixation, the lesion was serially sectioned to show whitish-gray, soft and vaguely spongy cut surface. No solid tumor or nodule was noted. No necrosis/hemorrhage was identified. Microscopically, the lesion involved both lamina propria and submucosa, but not muscularis propria, and was composed of thin-walled, micro-cystically dilated lymphatic channels in various sizes, which were separated by delicate fibrous stroma . The lymphatic channels were lined by flat endothelial cells with occasional small lymphocytic aggregates present between channels . Within some lymphatic channels was amorphous lymphoid fluid. Hemosiderin deposition and blood vessels invested by smooth-muscle layers were absent. No dysplasia or malignancy was identified in the tumor or the overlying squamous epithelium. By immunohistochemistry with valid controls, the lymphatic channel lining cells exhibited diffuse immunopositivity for D2–40 , but focal positivity for CD34, and negativity for FVIII.
The patient post-ESD hospital course was uneventful. She was well at a 12-month follow-up without complaints.