A 50-year-old white man with a history of progressive vision loss and elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) in both eyes was referred to our hospital. He was previously diagnosed with angle-closure glaucoma in association with ocular cystinosis and was on three topical antiglaucoma therapy. Although the leukocyte cystine level was not measured at that time, conjunctival biopsy was reported to support the diagnosis of cystinosis. He underwent comprehensive systemic and ocular examination, and laboratory investigations. His family history was negative for cystinosis and nanophthalmos.
On examination, his visual acuity was 20/400 OU with hyperopic correction of +13.5 OD and +14 diopters OS. Despite three topical medications, his IOP measured 37 mmHg OD and 35 mm Hg OS and his cup-to-disc ratio was 0.85 OD and 0.8 OS. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed bilateral refractile, polychromatic crystalline deposits in cornea and conjunctiva . Gonioscopy revealed an extremely narrow angle with peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) occupying approximately 50% of each angle . Both anterior chambers were quite shallow. Anterior chamber depths measured by Allegro Oculyzer were 1.64 mm in the right eye and 1.55 mm in the left eye. Central corneal thickness was 509 μm OD and 506 μm OS. Corneal diameters were 9.5 mm in both eyes. Anterior chamber angle measured with Allegro Oculyzer were 22.2° on inferotemporal side of right eye and 19.1° on the inferotemporal side of left eye . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed that the angle in both eyes was narrowed 360 degrees circumferentially without an evidence of plateau iris formation and uveal effusion. On A- Scan biometry, the axial lengths were 16.27 mm OD and 15.93 mm OS, with a lens thickness of 4.82 mm and 5.19 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively. Fundus examination revealed hyperopic disc with mild pallor, and areas of stippled and punctate hypopigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) at the midpheriphery and around the optic disc in both eyes . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed choroidal transmission hyperfluorescence corresponding to RPE atrophy . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging also revealed cystoid changes in a schisis-like pattern which was not detectable clinically . The electroretinography showed that both rod and cone responses were affected and the b-waves were reduced in amplitude with mildly delayed implicit time. The serum creatinine was 0.7 mg/dL, with normal electrolytes and blood counts. The urinalysis was normal. Leukocyte cystine level determined using the cystine-binding protein method was 1.1 nmol half-cystine/mg protein. No medical evidence of renal tubular or glomerular damage was found. Bilateral Nd:YAG laser iridotomy was performed in both eyes, but the angle opened minimally and the IOP remained unchanged. Patient refused further operations despite recommendations.