A 32-year-old Caucasian female (G3P2) at 25 weeks of gestation was evaluated for increasing episodes of dyspnoea, tachycardia up to 160 b.p.m. with minimal exertion, intermittent non-exertional chest pain, and presyncope. This patient had COVID-19 at 12 weeks of gestation and then had complete resolution of COVID-19 symptoms and felt well for 1 month prior to developing these orthostatic symptoms.
The patient’s pregnancy was complicated by a moderate course of COVID-19 at 12 weeks of gestation, and she presented to the emergency department with SpO2 89% on room air, heart rate at 148 b.p.m., cough with exertion, and anosmia with hypogeusia. Before discharge, she was given casirivimab/imdevimab therapy.
At 25 weeks of gestation, a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal right and left ventricular function, and a workup for pulmonary embolism was negative. On physical examination, blood pressure was 116/68 mmHg, heart rate was 107 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and SpO2 was 100% on room air. She had a tachycardic but regular rhythm, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops, and no jugular venous distension.
Obstetric history included two prior full-term vaginal births. Previous diagnoses include obesity (current weight of 99.8 kg, body mass index 32.5 kg/m2), a peripheral nerve disorder (neurogenic club feet as a child which did not require surgical intervention), gastroesophageal reflux disorder, and exercise-induced asthma as a child. The patient is an upper/middle-class woman currently working as an oncology nurse.
The patient had an uncomplicated birth of a healthy baby girl at 37 + 2 weeks after induction of labour for premature rupture of membranes. Three months following the birth, the patient remained in stable condition with minimal changes in heart rate and blood pressure as a result of postural change. In the months following the pregnancy, the patient remained on the same medication regimen of metoprolol tartrate and midodrine as recommended immediately following birth.
In light of the physiological changes of pregnancy and new-onset cardiovascular symptoms, the differential diagnoses included new-onset cardiomyopathy and pulmonary embolism. Other potential diagnoses included coronary artery disease, spontaneous coronary artery dissection, and anaemia. Her haemoglobin was 12.4 g/dL, and serum troponin I was undetectable. When considering her presenting symptoms including orthostatic intolerance, episodic exertional dyspnoea, and intermittent chest pain following a COVID-19 illness 4 months prior, PASC involving autonomic dysfunction was a possibility.