A 56-year-old woman of Han ethnicity was referred to our subspecialty clinic for recurrent SND in the right eye. The patient’s right eye had a history of corneal penetrating injury 20 years ago. After administering anti-inflammatory treatment, the ocular symptoms of pain, light sensitivity, foreign body sensation, and tears vanished. We could not obtain more ophthalmic assessment details of the first visit. After that, the above ocular symptoms occurred in the right eye three to four times a year and were relieved by a 10-day course of medication treatment, such as preservative-free lubrication and anti-inflammation eye drops. In the past year, the ocular symptoms relapsed one to two times a month and the medication could not completely relieve the symptoms. Since detailed medical records at other hospitals were not available, the above clinical history was obtained by inquiry.
In December 2019, the patient came to our subspecialty clinic for the new onset of symptoms. Slit-lamp examination revealed elevated, whitish-grey subepithelial nodules in the mid-peripheral cornea, epithelium erosion and edema at the apex of the nodules, remnant corneal scar, and posterior depression . After a routine examination, the patient was diagnosed with SND accompanied with PKC. The mydriasis test brought out the posterior synechiae at an inferior pupil margin and the overlapping lens opacity. The anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT, CASIA SS-1000, Tomey Corporation, Japan) showed prominent bright subepithelial deposits, elevation of the anterior corneal surface , localized posterior excavation , and penetrating corneal scar . The corneal tomography demonstrated that the posterior surface overlapping with corneal scar had an abnormal elevation of 28 μm, but the anterior surface was unremarkable with -1 μm. The patient’s other ocular parameters of the right eye are as follows: uncorrected visual acuity: 20/160; best corrected visual acuity (BCVA): 20/63 (− 3.50DS/− 2.50 DC*65); non-contact tonometer: 14 mmHg; axial length: 23.85 mm; and corneal endothelium density: 2509 cells/mm2.
Initially, we applied a conservative treatment, including 0.1% sodium hyaluronate eye drops (URSAPHARM Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany), recombinant bovine basic fibroblast growth factor eye drops (Essex Bio-Technology GmbH, China), 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops (Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Japan), and bandage contact lens (Bausch & Lomb Incorporated, USA) to manage the latest episode of SND. After a 30-day course, the condition could not be completely relieved. Then we performed a PTK procedure to smooth the corneal surface of the right eye using a ZEISS MEL 80™ Excimer Laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Germany). Before laser ablation, the delamination of the corneal epithelium was performed using 20% alcohol for about 20 s. After removing the epithelial layer containing degenerative nodules, the resultant underlying surface was slightly irregular. To avoid introducing significant hyperopia drift, 15 μm of PTK was performed. We chose a treatment zone of 7.5 mm that completely covered the lesion area. At the end of surgery, the right eye was covered with a bandage contact lens. Postoperatively, the patient was instructed to use topical antibiotics six times daily until the contact lens was removed. On the third postoperative day, the epithelium healed and the contact lens was removed. The further medical instruction included the topical 0.5% levofloxacin eye drops (Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Japan) four times daily, 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops four times daily, recombinant bovine basic fibroblast growth factor eye drops four times daily, and 0.1% sodium hyaluronate eye drops six times daily for 1 month.
At the seventh day postoperatively, a slit-lamp examination revealed that the nodules disappeared and the cornea returned to clarity, except for the arc-shaped scar . The uncorrected visual acuity was 20/63 and BCVA was 20/40 (− 4.50DS/− 1.00 DC*170). From 1 month postoperative to 12 months postoperative, only preservative-free lubrication eye drops were prescribed. At 12 months postoperatively, the cornea remained clear and no SND relapse was recorded . The Corvis ST (Oculus Optikgeräte GmbH, Germany) examination showed the patient had normal biomechanics with 0.06 of corvis biomechanical index (CBI) and 1.03 of stress-strain index (SSI). The tomography showed the elevation of the anterior and posterior surfaces were -13 μm and 28 μm, respectively.