A 17-month-old female referred to the pediatric clinic of Isfahan Hojjatiyeh hospital due to severe diarrhea with urticaria. She was born in the city of Isfahan and her parents lived in one of the villages around Isfahan. The child’s father was a farmer and her mother was a housewife. No similar clinical symptoms were observed in the child’s parents. The parents complained about the malaise of their child’s, abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which was accompanied by a red rash on the skin. The parents mentioned that the child’s symptoms started 20 days ago and visiting different doctors, taking antibiotics and prescribed medicines during this period were not effective. The child passed abnormal watery mucous and non-bloody loose stools 5 to 6 times a day. He was examined with moderate dehydration with minor symptoms due to dehydration such as weight loss, deep-set eyes, and pale and lethargic skin. Physical examination of the chest, abdomen, ears and throat was normal, but typical erythematous wheals accompanied by itching and without angioedema were observed on skin. The child had no fever, but presented tachycardia of 127 bpm, a respiratory rate of 20/min, and blood pressure of 85/6.0 mmHg. O2 saturation on room air was 99%.
Her peripheral blood count showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 11.7 × 103/mm3, a red blood cell count (RBC) of 4.6 × 106/mm3, hemoglobin of 13.4 g/dL, hematocrit of 41.2%, reticulocytes 1.1% and a platelet count of 541 × 103/ mm3. A differential count of WBC revealed the following: neutrophils 49%, lymphocytes 41%, eosinophils 6% and monocytes 4%. The results of biochemical tests were normal. Only a slight amount of hyponatremia (Na: 130.1 mmol/L) and hypokalemia (K: 3.0 mmol/L) was observed. The results of C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urine analysis and urine culture, thyroid function tests and thyroid autoantibodies, complement factors C3, C4 and C1 inhibitor, antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA, ENA), serum immunoglobulins, and rheumatoid factor were normal. Slightly IgE level was increased (19 IU/mL, Normal: 0–13 IU/mL). The patient’s stool sample was sent to the laboratory for rotavirus-adenovirus antigens (Immunochromatography rapid strip test, AllTest, China), Giardia antigen (Immunochromatography rapid strip test, VECHEK, China), Clostridium antigens (Clostridium difficile GDH + Toxin A + B, Immunochromatography rapid test, AllTest, China) and fecal bacteria culture (Xylose Lysine Deoxycholate Agar, HiMedia, India) and the all results were negative. Routine stool examination for enteric parasites was negative. Modified Ziehl-Nielsen staining of a stool smear showed several Cryptosporidium oocysts . Intravenous fluids with oral paromomycin (30 mg/kg/day) were started for the patient. With the diagnosis of Cryptosporidium, nitazoxanide oral solution (100 mg twice daily) was included in the patient’s medication regimen. One day after taking the medicine, the severity of diarrhea decreased, so that after 3 days, the diarrhea was completely cured. At the same time as the frequency of diarrhea decreased, the severity of urticaria also decreased and after 5 days it was generally improved. One week after taking nitazoxanide, the patient was discharged from the hospital with a good general condition.
By Modified Ziehl-Nielsen staining method, the presence of Cryptosporidium in the feces was reported negative three days after taking the drug and one week after being discharged from the hospital. Her stool pattern normalized in 1 week and she has had no recurrence after 6 months of follow-up.