A 75-year-old woman (body mass index, 24.5 kg/m2) was admitted to the emergency department with severe abdominal pain in the left lower quadrant with diverticulitis or free fluid in the abdomen as suspected diagnosis. She also noted progressing chronic pain during the last weeks in the left hip groin and limited range of motion in the joint. Ultrasound imaging on the same day revealed fluid collection (9.7 × 4.6 × 5.0 cm) in the left lower quadrant with suspected abscess or hematoma. CT images showed a 2 cm thick destruction zone around the acetabular component of the left hip joint with signs of fragmentation and bone destruction and a noticeable spread to soft tissues-m. iliacus, with thickening, edema, and lobulated collections also spread to the inferior part of m. psoas (in the upper part of the less demarcated, in the lower part with thick, contrast-enhanced capsules (largest dimensions approximately 4.3 × 4.5 cm × 16.0 cm). The next day, the patient was transferred to a specialised orthopedic hospital with a possible diagnosis of AL and soft-tissue abscess.
After transfer, blood tests were taken and revealed mild leukocytosis (12.93 10 × 9/L) with predominantly elevated neutrophils (8.96 10 × 9/L) and insignificantly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (6.35 mg/L). The synovial fluid aspiration analysis of the left hip joint showed a drastically high cell count (8533; <200 cells/μL) and neutrophil leukocytes (83; <25%), with a negative hip aspiration culture. The patient was discharged after 3 days with the final diagnosis of PPOL, the wear of the endoprosthesis insert, and the recommended conservative treatment continued at home. The following week, a revision arthroplasty was indicated, but surgery was postponed due to several circumstances and the patient was called in only after several weeks.
When reviewing previous medical records, the patient underwent a primary hip arthroplasty for both legs 14 years ago (at 61 years) and a non-cemented acetabular shell with a polyethylene insert was implanted. However, at that time, the structure of the acetabulum was characterised as sclerotic and cystic. The patient also reported having chronic C hepatitis several years ago but has gone into remission, as no detectable amounts of the virus in the blood were found in the past 3 years. The X-ray performed several years ago did not reveal any pathological changes, but the latest pelvic X-ray ( and ), performed approximately a month before admission to the hospital, revealed a fracture of the pubic bone, markedly altered bone structure of the acetabulum, and a large bone cyst around the acetabular component, but no osteolytic zones were detected. The patient did not seek further treatment.
One and a half months later, the patient was hospitalised for planned revision arthroplasty surgery. The left hip joint was sensitive to touch with no signs of acute inflammation. Plain radiographs ( and ) revealed signs of loosening of the left hip endoprosthesis, osteolytic zones around the acetabular component, scalloped areas of bone loss, and changes in bone structure with cystic inclusions. Blood analysis revealed unremarkable complete blood count, but elevated CRP - 55 mg/L. As previously, also this time, the cell count (19 000 cells/μL) and the neutrophil leucocytes (78%) increased drastically.
CT with i/v contrast showed restricted fluid collection (8.0 × 3.5 × 10.0 cm) on the left side of m. iliopsoas, through soft tissue along the iliac bone and the upper medial part of the acetabulum, destruction of the acetabulum. Abscesses and signs of dislocation of the left hip with osteolytic zones can be observed.
During surgery, an AL and migration of the acetabular component were observed, as well as unstable walls of the acetabulum, so an allograft of the femoral head was implanted in the medial wall of the acetabulum and the iliac bone. Surgeons agreed that due to the acetabulum’s unstable walls and bone defects, revision surgery is not recommended due to the high risk of implant instability. The structural graft of the acetabulum was fixed with three screws. Pathohistological analysis of surgical tissue material revealed chronic synovitis in the aggravation phase with necrosis and bleeding but without a bacterial culture of the joint capsule. The post-operative period was without complications, with no signs of infection, damaged microcirculation, or severe limitation in the hip joint, and a normal post-operative radiograph ( and ). Without complaints of hip joint pain or recommendations for hip joint fixation orthosis, the patient was released 2 weeks later and a follow-up appointment was scheduled 3 months later.
The patient was admitted to the same hospital 2 and 1/2 weeks after initial hospitaliation with complaints of subfebrile temperature (37.5°C) for 1 week and inflammatory signs near the joint of the surgical site in the left hip. From anamnesis, the family physician suggested antibiotic therapy with Amoksiklav for 10 days on the 1st day the patient had a temperature; however, this did not produce any results. Although there was no evidence of periprosthetic infection, joint aspiration revealed elevated cell count (5000 cells/l) and elevated neutrophil leukocytes (90%). The X-ray did not show changes from the previous radiograph, while the ultrasound of the hip joint showed a partially listed 3.5 × 1.0 × 2.0 cm. An infectious disease specialist consulted the patient and recommended antimicrobial therapy (Sol. Cefazolin i/v 1 g 4×/day for 6 days). The patient was discharged after 7 days without further antimicrobial treatment and indicated a follow-up visit after 3 months. At present, there is no clear vision of a further treatment plan considering bone loss and the surgical options available.