A 17 years old boy referred to department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences in Iran in 2010 with chronic recurrent mucoprulent discharge from retromollar trigone, posterior to right and to superior alveolar ridge. The patient also had fullness sensation on his right cheek, halitosis, posterior nasal discharge, pain and swelling around a fistulous site where drainage occurred. Office examination revealed a 2 mm point with mucoprulent discharge in retromolar trigone. A 4 mm 0 degree rigid rod endoscope introduced to nasal cavity to rule out any obstructing mass in nasal cavity and middle meatus.
Mucoprulent discharge from middle meatus was apparent in nasal endoscopy. Multiple courses of medical treatment with various generations of antibiotics had been used for 1years. Imaging like waters and panoramic X-ray revealed no definite diagnosis until he referred to our institute. He had no previous history of trauma, dentistry, infection and no evidence of developmental disorders.
Previous imaging was studied again and in panorex X-Ray an opaque mass was seen near the right maxillary sinus antrum, which was missed during previous visits. CT scan revealed a dense mass resembling tooth,near the accessory sinus ostium with near total opacification of maxillary sinus. Anterior and lateral walls had been eroded in lower cuts .
A Caldwell Luke approach in combination with endoscopy was selected. A sub labial incision made, preserving 2 mm of mucosa on gingival side. Dissection was made in sub periosteal plane, up to infra orbital bundle. Erosion was seen on anterior wall of maxillary sinus. The anterior wall was fenestrated with a 4 mm direct osteotome. A cystic mass in grayish color filled with mucoid secretions dissected from sinus walls, erosion in lateral and posterior wall was seen. The ectopic tooth has been placed near the sinus ostium, adjacent to floor of the orbit, compelling with sinus drainage. Using a 4 mm rod lens endoscope, the ectopic tooth extracted and uncinectomy and antrostomy was completed.
A fistulous tract was found in floor of sinus draining to retromolar trigone. It was sealed off with muscle & adipose tissue .The ectopic tooth had four roots and it was consistency lesser than normal teeth.
Because of negative history of tooth extraction and location of fistula in retromolar trigone, it could not be due to tooth eruption. Pathologic examination revealed dentigerous cyst and no evidence of dental origin mass lesions was found.