A 63-year-old female patient recognized cervical lymph nodes swelling in October 2010. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and serum corrected calcium levels kept within normal limit, but soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) elevated significantly at the initial visit (Table ). Diagnostic imaging by computed tomography (CT) revealed systemic lymphadenopathies (cervical, axial, mediastinal, abdominal and mesenteric lymphadenopathy) before the following chemotherapy. Although appetite loss and abdominal distention were added with lymphadenopathy, any other abnormal finding of physical examination could not be detected. Her ECOG performance status was grade 1 before chemotherapy. She received cervical lymph node biopsy and pathological findings of cervical lymph node revealed T cell lymphoma compatible, and HTLV-I provirus DNA analysis (Southern blot) revealed monoclonal integration. Abnormal lymphocytes were not detected in peripheral blood (PB) and HTLV-I provirus DNA analysis of PB did not show monoclonal integration. She was diagnosed as ATL (lymphoma type). She has past histories of glaucoma and pulmonary cryptococcosis. None of ATL patient was in her family.
She was referred to our hospital and received four sessions of mLSG-15 therapy in our hospital. Prophylactic intrathecal injection was performed twice, during chemotherapy and before allogeneic stem cell transplantation. No meningeal involvement of ATL cells was detected at that time. She went into complete remission (Response criteria for adult T cell leukemia-lymphoma from an international consensus meeting (Tsukasaki et al.
)) in April 2011. She received following allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (allo-PBSCT) in the National Cancer Center Hospital (Tokyo, Japan) (Figure ). The transplantation conditioning regimen consisted of fludarabine (30 mg/m2 per day for 5 days) plus busulfan (3.2 mg/kg per day for 2 days) and only cyclosporine A (CyA) was used for GVHD prophylaxis. Transplanted CD34-positive cells were 2.67 × 106/kg and rapid engraftment was achieved. Grade III (gastrointestinal tract and skin) acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) was observed 1 month after transplantation, but it improved after treatment with methylpredonisolone (mPSL) (1 mg/kg). No chronic GVHD was observed. CyA was tapered gradually and discontinued 9 months after transplantation, in February 2012. After that point, only 5 mg/day predonisolone (PSL) was continued.
In July 2012 (14 months after allo-PBSCT), the patient developed hemiparesis of the left side. Although left upper-limb paresis improved, lower-extremity paresis progressed to paraplegia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple high-intensity lesions in T2-weighted images of the medulla oblongata, cervical spinal cord, and thoracic spinal cord (Figure A), and a CSF specimen showed increased cell counts (Figure ). Morphologically, typical ATL cells such as flower cells were not detected in CSF, but abnormal small to middle size lymphocytes indistinguishable from ATL cells increased. She was diagnosed as CNS relapse of ATL, and received mPSL pulse, intrathecal injection of MTX 15 mg + Ara-C 40 mg + PSL 20 mg, and irradiation of the whole brain and spine. Following these treatments, the paraplegia improved gradually to such a degree that she could walk with a walker. During the course of these treatments, she was complicated by neurogenic bladder dysfunction, and diabetes insipidus.
In January 2013 (20 months after allo-PBSCT), she again developed left lower-limb weakness, which gradually progressed. She was admitted to our hospital in February 2013. On admission, neurological examination revealed no abnormality of cranial nervous system, but abnormal reflex such as Babinski and Chaddock reflex in bilateral lower-limb. Thermal hypoalgesia under right Th4 and left Th6 dermatome was detected, but tactile sense was intact. She was accompanied with bladder dysfunction and severe constipation. Brain and spinal MRI revealed a residual spinal lesion at Th3-7 (Figure B). The cell numbers in CSF did not increase, but myelin basic protein (MBP) level was elevated (Figure B). Morphologically, ATL cells could not be detected in CSF. Flow cytometric analysis to determine the specific immunophenotype of CD4+ lymphocytes in CSF revealed an expansion of the CD4+CXCR3+CCR4+ cell population (Figure A), which conflicted with CNS relapse of ATL but was consistent with HAM (Natsumi et al.
). Furthermore, both the neopterin and CXCL10 (IP-10) concentrations in the CSF were significantly elevated (Figure B), although lower than those associated with aggressive HAM (14). Notably, the case was insufficient to fulfill the diagnostic criteria for HAM (Mitsuhiro
) because HTLV-I antibody (PA method) was negative in CSF.
Bacterial, fungal, and tuberculous encephalomyelopathies were excluded because no increase in cell numbers and no decline in glucose concentration in CSF were observed. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for CMV, EBV, HSV, VZV, HHV-6, and JC virus in CSF showed negative results.
Serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) level was slightly elevated (Table ), but significantly lower compared with that at the onset of ATL.
Not all of the results necessarily corresponded to CNS relapse of ATL, although we could not exclude it. We treated her with mPSL pulse and intrathecal injection of MTX + Ara-C + PSL. After one course of mPSL pulse, her crural paresis improved dramatically to such a degree that she could pull up to standing after a few days. Although she was given intrathecal injections four times weekly, her crural paresis was gradually exacerbated and progressed to paralysis. mPSL pulse was performed again, but the effect was limited.
We examined her CSF again but there was no increase in cells, and ATL cells could not be detected by microscopic examination. Furthermore, the MRI findings improved over time (Figure C), although her neurological findings worsened and HTLV-I proviral DNA could not be detected repeatedly in peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after allo-PBSCT. No evidence of relapsed ATL could be found and we continued 5 mg/day PSL thereafter while she continued rehabilitation.
The results of CSF analysis in May 2013 showed the following improvements. In flow cytometric analysis, the CD4 + CXCR3 + CCR4+ cell population had decreased and the normal CD4 + CXCR3 + CCR4- cell population had increased. Both neopterin and CXCL10 (IP-10) had decreased to within the range of the therapeutic goal for HAM patients (Figure A,B). Her paralysis improved gradually and steadily only by rehabilitation, to such a degree that she could walk when holding onto parallel bars.