The proband is an Azeri boy of 14 years old from a healthy and non-consanguineous couple. Intrauterine growth retardation was identified in the pregnancy of the proband. He was born at 36 weeks by cesarean section due to no fetal movement, with Apgar scores 9/10. At birth, he was 2.97 kg (50th percentile, − 0.45 SD) and his cranial circumference was 33 cm (10th percentile, − 0.61 SD). The subject began to sit at four years of age and made his first unaided steps when he was six. He could take some steps alone and walk with an increased lift base. At nine years of age, he was referred to a medical genetic counseling center and diagnosed with blepharophimosis syndrome because of blepharophimosis and intellectual impairment. He showed a few episodes of loss of consciousness at six years old, but his electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal. He presented a non-symptomatic large atrial septal defect, ASD (ostium secundum atrial septal defects).
On physical examination at 9 years old, the patient occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) was 52cm (~ 50th centile) but had dysmorphic facial features including flat occiput, triangular long face, frontal bossing, protruding tongue that caused an open mouth expression, a thin upper lip, sparse medial eyebrows, thin eyebrow, epicanthal folds, widely spaced upward-slanted eyes, broad nasal bridge, low-set ears, anteverted ears, short philtrum, hypertelorism, ptosis, microphthalmia, hypoplastic teeth. Congenital urogenital anomaly as cryptorchidism without any renal anomalies was diagnosed. The patient was tall stature and had first (big) toe/long thumbs with patella missing but the most significant abnormal findings in skeletal and joint X-ray, which have not been reported so far, included symmetric bilateral coxa valga, hypoplastic iliac wings and scoliosis, increased diameter of the lumbar vertebral canal, genu valgum, pes planus and sloping forehead with a large brain capacity .
From the neurological point of view, he presented with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, poor eye contact, hypotonia and speech difficulties. Brain MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) showed no evidence of corpus callosum agenesis, however inappropriate myelination and disturbed white matter integrity was the significant findings . There was no sphincter control. Now, the patient is taken care of mental disability care institute on physiotherapy and speech therapy, due to inability of parents to take care and behavioral disturbances and ADHD (attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder) traits, respectively. In Table , we compared the clinical presentations of the present patient with that of some patients in previous reports.
In the present study, written informed consent was obtained from the parents of a 14-year-old male with SBBYS syndrome; then, he was included in the study. The blood sample was collected, and DNA was extracted by standard salting-out method. Finally, the integrity and purity of DNA were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis and Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), respectively .
After extraction of Genomic DNA from the proband, it was processed for whole-exome sequencing (WES) using the SureSelect Human All ExonV6 kit. The DNA was fragmented, and blunt ends were created. Adapter oligonucleotides were ligated to DNA fragments, followed by enrichment via PCR. Purification was performed using the AMPure XP system, and quantification was done using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. The captured library was sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 Illumina sequencer with an average coverage of 100X. Data quality was assessed using FastQC and NGS QC toolkits. High-quality reads were aligned to the human reference genome (GRCh37.p13/hg19) using the Burrows-Wheeler Alignment tool. Picard tools were employed to mark and remove duplicated reads, and the SAM file was converted to BAM format. Base quality score recalibration was performed using GATK. Variants were filtered based on criteria such as minor allele coverage ≥ 10, variants with coverage ≥ 15, and call quality ≥ 20. ANNOVAR was used for genetic variant annotation. Annotated variants were further filtered and selected for analysis.
This process enabled the identification and analysis of genetic variants in the proband's genomic DNA sample .
The pathogenicity of the identified variant was assessed through in silico analysis using web server Mutation Taster. Prediction of the structure of wild-type and mutant protein was done by SWISS-MODEL, the SWISS-MODEL web server . To predict whether the identified variant would escape NMD, the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) ESC predictor was used . Also, the STRING database was used to predict interactions among proteins.
After WES, Sanger sequencing was used to validate the variant through specific primers. According to the reference genomic sequences from the Human Genome from GenBank in NCBI, primer pairs were designed for the candidate loci . We identified a de novo heterozygous mutation of guanine to adenine NM_012330.4(KAT6B):c.3147G>A (p.Pro1049 =) using WES. Sanger sequencing subsequently confirmed this heterozygous variant identified by WES in this individual. The mutation could not be detected in the parental DNA by Sanger sequencing , suggesting its de novo occurrence. The results of sequence analysis revealed that the c.3147G>A; p.P1049P transition at codon 1,049 was a synonymous mutation (p.Pro1049 =) in the exon 16 of the KAT6B gene.
In addition, KAT6B protein is a 231,378 Da protein with 2,073 aa. Functional annotation of KAT6B by DAVID displayed that this protein expresses in different human tissues. Considerably, it has high quantities in the immune cells, uterus, thymus, fetal brain, and other tissues according to the . Also, KAT6B protein has been identified in different diseases such as genitopatellar syndrome, ohdo syndrome, Sbbyss variant, monocytic leukemia, and blepharophimosis. Furthermore, the NMD web server represented this premature codon likely led to nonsense-mediated degradation . According to the InterProScan as a tool for the analysis of protein domain, KAT6B encodes a histone acetyltransferase protein with the N-terminus which is involved in transcriptional activation and the C-terminus, which play a role in transcriptional repression.
The analysis of interaction among proteins by STRING indicated that KAT6B protein creates a network with about some different gene products . Also, this protein plays an important role in some biological pathways through three important activities, including histone acetylation, nucleosome assembly, and regulation of transcription . The SWISS-MODEL server displayed this mutation resulted in a truncated protein .