An 80-year-old man who had previously undergone curative thoracoscopic esophagectomy for esophageal cancer 7 years earlier then underwent gastric conduit resection and digestive reconstruction by intrathoracic anastomosis using pedicled jejunum at the upper mediastinum for heterochronous gastric tube cancer (M-7-O, type 2, 36 × 27 mm, por-tub2, pT4b-Trachea, pN0M0H0P0CYX, pStage IIIa, PM0 DM0 RM1 Cur C) . No direct invasion to other organs or apparent distant metastasis was observed in preoperative evaluation. However, the operation resulted in incomplete resection due to the residual cancer tissue on the tracheal wall. He had no postoperative complication, and he had received adjuvant chemotherapy using peroral S-1 (oral 5-fluorouracil prodrug). At 4 months after the surgery, he visited our hospital with complaints of ongoing fever, appetite loss, and nausea from 10 days ago. On examination, his vital signs were almost within the normal range, except for the mild fever. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse wall thickening of the reconstructed jejunum that was elevated in the thoracic cavity with poor contrast enhancement. In the arterial and venous phases, the mesenteric vessels of the reconstructed jejunum were clearly visualized, and no disruption or thrombus was observed. Fluid retention was observed in the reconstructed jejunum, but no torsion or strangulation of the intestinal tract or mesentery was evident. A small amount of fluid collection and free air was observed in the dorsal side of the right thoracic cavity . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed an apparent segmental mucosal necrotic finding in the reconstructed jejunum . Contrarily, no necrotic finding was observed in the jejunum in the abdominal cavity . He was suspected as having jejunal necrosis due to NOMI localized in the reconstructed jejunum with or without the penetration of the jejunum. It was suggested that small bowel resection with right thoracotomy is necessary as a lifesaving treatment. However, radical operation with right thoracotomy was considered to be excessively invasive due to the patient’s poor physical status, advanced age, and presence of left adrenal metastasis from the remnant gastric cancer that was detected on the CT image. In addition, the patient did not accept any invasive treatments. Therefore, we selected the conservative treatment with fasting, transnasal drainage, and antibiotic administration. Follow-up CT revealed the improvement of the ischemic and edematous changes in the reconstructed jejunal wall and a right intrathoracic abscess was suspected in the dorsal side of right thoracic cavity . The enhancement of the arteries and veins in the mesentery of the reconstructed jejunum was sufficiently maintained . A left adrenal metastasis from the remnant gastric cancer was again clearly detected . CT-guided right thoracic drainage for the intrathoracic abscess was performed 10 days after the start of treatment. After this additional procedure, his inflammatory response rapidly improved. Esophagography revealed no evidence of perforation or interference in the passage at the reconstructed jejunum . Fluoroscopy through the right thoracic drain showed no communication with the gastrointestinal lumen . Follow-up EGD revealed an apparent improvement of the necrotic findings in jejunal mucosa, which previously showed mucosal necrosis . Oral intake was initiated at 20 days after disease onset and the patient was discharged at the 40 hospital days without any complications and sequelae. He decided not undergo further anti-cancer treatment after discharge. Unfortunately, at 5 months after discharge, he died from the recurrence of remnant gastric cancer.