A 33-year-old gentleman came to our emergency department with a history of accidental fall from a ladder of about 10 feet height. Clinically, the patient had motor weakness in L4, L5, and S1 myotomes on the left side. There was no sensory deficit. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed traumatic L3-L4 disc protrusion . On the next day itself, L3 laminectomy with L3-L4 discectomy was done. The patient was discharged on the 5th post-operative day (POD) and was advised periodical follow-up. However, the patient did not review for a period of 4 months. At the end of 4 months, he presented with back pain and bilateral foot drop (L>R). MRI revealed recurrence of disc protrusion at L3-L4 level along with L4-L5 disc protrusion.
We performed revision spine surgery. With the patient placed prone to Hall’s frame with head ring for the face, under general anesthesia by extending the incision over the previous scar, L4 laminectomy, pedicle screw stabilization of L3, L4, and L5 levels, discectomy at L3-L4 and L4-L5 levels, and double level transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion with cages at L3-L4 and L4-L5 levels was performed. Surgery was uneventful and so was extubation. The amount of blood loss was calculated to be 1500ml and duration of anesthesia was 5.5 h. Immediately after extubation, on the operating table itself, the patient was questioned regarding his vision. The patient had complete loss of vision in the left eye. Pupillary reflex was absent. Examination of the right eye revealed normal vision. A diagnosis of post-operative vision loss (POVL) was made and a single dose of inj. hydrocortisone succinate 100mg was administered intravenously.
Immediately, ophthalmologist was called over and the examination (done after 2 h) revealed periorbital edema , conjunctival chemosis with erythema, and presence of pupillary reflex (along with fundoscopic findings of hazy cornea). Hazy cornea obscured the examination of fundus. Since the POVL was unilateral, provisional diagnosis of CRAO was made and empirically started on oral acetazolamide, intravenous mannitol, and ocular massages. On the 1stPOD, echocardiogram was done and thromboembolic phenomenon was ruled out. Until the 6th POD, same CRAO protocol was instituted. On the 7th POD, once the patient was able to sit up and cornea was clear, a direct ophthalmoscopic examination of the fundus was done and found to be normal. As advised by the ophthalmologist, an optical coherence tomography (OCT) was done at this stage, and based on the OCT findings, diagnosis was revised as PION . From this stage, inj. methylprednisolone succinate 500mg BD was administered intravenously until the 10th POD followed by oral prednisolone 20mg TDS until the 21st POD. After 3 weeks, no drug was administered for POVL.