A 28-year-old gravida 1, para 0 woman of Caucasian ethnicity without relevant past medical history was admitted to the emergency ward at 26 weeks and 1 day of gestation because of progressive dyspnea due to SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia with the Alpha variant (B.1.1.7). Despite conventional therapy with supplemental oxygen, dexamethasone, and prophylactic treatment with ceftriaxone, increasing respiratory failure and impending need of endotracheal intubation forced the decision to primary cesarean section at 27 weeks and 2 days of gestation. The child’s apgar scores were 3, 5, and 6 at 1, 5, and 10 minutes, respectively. Due to prematurity, associated respiratory insufficiency, recurrent bradycardia, and infant respiratory distress syndrome, the boy of Caucasian ethnicity needed mechanical ventilation. First clinical examination after admission to the neonatal intensive care unit did not reveal any congenital malformations, except a secundum type atrial septal defect. Body temperature was initially elevated (38.0 °C), but inflammatory parameters remained normal [C-reactive protein (CRP) levels < 0.4 mg/dl]. The growth indices were below average with a birth weight of 980 g (10th–50th percentile), a head circumference of 25 cm (10th–50th percentile), and a length of 36 cm (10th–50th percentile). His clinical status stabilized in the further course and the boy was extubated on the 4th day of life. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was not detected in sequential respiratory and stool samples [polymerase chain reaction (PCR) targets: E-gene and ORF-region, limit of detection (LoD): about 50 genome equivalents/ml, Roche diagnostics, Switzerland]. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin (Ig)M was not detected in a serum sample collected on the 3rd day of life, while SARS-CoV-2 antinucleocapside IgG was positive by chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay [(CMIA), AdviseDx SARS-CoV-2 IgM und IgG test, Abbott Laboratories, USA]. An umbilical blood sample revealed a weak positive result for the E-gene target (cycle threshold value 36.83) and a negative result for the ORF-region target, which, considering the unremarkable follow-up samples, was not interpreted as evidence of a congenital SARS-CoV-2 infection. Surprisingly, postpartum maternal infection screening revealed a so far unknown T. gondii infection of the mother. Although the woman had no pet or similar exposure at home, serology clearly indicated a primary maternal infection during pregnancy, with proof of Toxoplasma-specific IgM antibodies and increasing titers of specific IgA and IgG antibodies . Due to a low IgG avidity (index 0.036) a maternal infection in the preceding 3–4 months could not be excluded. A PCR from maternal ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood was negative (target gene: 529 bp tandem repeat element, limit of detection: 4 T. gondii DNA copies per PCR reaction, Sacace Biotechnologies, Italy). Immediately after detection of the maternal T. gondii infection, serum of the premature child was analyzed. A low IgG titer was detected by indirect immunofluorescence testing (IFT), while IgM (IFT) and IgA [Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Immunosorbent agglutination assay (ISAGA)] tested negative . The competition test in a serum sample 1 week later was weakly positive, whereas selective screening for IgG, IgM [all enzyme-linked fluorescent immunoassay (ELFA)] and IgA antibodies (ELISA) against T. gondii remained surprisingly negative . In addition, the IgG immunoblot profile (LDBIO Diagnostics, France) of mother and child was identical, suggesting a weak transfer of maternal IgG antibodies to the premature child . Accordingly, a T. gondii-specific PCR from neonatal EDTA blood was negative. A follow-up serum sample 4 weeks after birth showed no significant serological changes . Cerebral ultrasound, and ophthalmological and neurological examinations of the premature child were without any pathological findings. In addition, SARS-CoV-2 IgG had fallen below the cut-off value in a serum sample collected 5 weeks later, supporting the hypothesis of maternal IgG transfer. Six weeks after birth, the child was discharged from the intensive care unit. Unfortunately, the mother died 7 weeks after birth, despite maximum intensive care, including extracorporeal membrane oxygenation over a period of 6 weeks. Surprisingly, 11 weeks after birth, significant serological changes in the child’s serum were detected indicating congenital toxoplasmosis. At this timepoint, all Toxoplasma-specific antibody classes were detected to be clearly positive . In addition, a significant increase of T. gondii-specific IgG antibody titers using the IFT was shown (1:128 versus 1:2048, Fig. ). Accordingly, the IgG immunoblot profile of mother and child now indicated independent IgG synthesis by the child . Immunoblots for IgA and IgM antibodies against T. gondii were negative, but IgA was confirmed to be positive by ISAGA. The child had not received any blood products so far. Moreover, a neonatal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample revealed a positive T. gondii-PCR result (target gene: 529 bp tandem repeat element, limit of detection: 1–10 parasites per PCR reaction) and serum/liquor comparison blots for IgG indicated intrathecal IgG synthesis. CSF white blood cell count was 5/µl, glucose was 45 mg/dl, and protein was 1315 mg/l. Despite these pathologic CSF results, neither cerebral ultrasound nor magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) imaging indicated any cerebral abnormalities, and, moreover, neither ophthalmological nor clinical neurological manifestations were detected. Though the premature child appeared clinically asymptomatic, a T. gondii-specific treatment with pyrimethamine (1 mg/kg per day), sulfadiazine (50 mg/kg twice daily), and folinic acid (10 mg/week) was initiated to prevent or to minimize long-term sequelae of the Toxoplasma infection. The boy developed well and was discharged from hospital 4 months after birth. However, because of recurrent episodes of neutropenia, pyrimethamine had to be paused after 5 weeks. Dose increase of folinic acid only led to temporary improvement of neutropenia. Thus, sulfadiazine was additionally paused 11 weeks after start of therapy. No other antiparasitic therapy was initialized as the boy was still clinically asymptomatic and the serum control 29 weeks after birth was stable, with slightly descending IgG titers and absence of IgA . Ophthalmological, neurological, and pedaudiological examinations did not detect any abnormalities. Despite continuous folinic acid substitution, further episodes of neutropenia occurred. Thirteen weeks after stopping sulfadiazine treatment, a significant increase in IgG titers by IFT (1:1024 versus 1:8192), and occurrence of IgA by ISAGA, were observed suggesting a possible rebound phenomenon . As neither cerebral MRT imaging nor standard control examinations revealed any pathological findings, it was decided to continue the concept of frequent serological, ophthalmological, neurological, and pedaudiological controls (every 3–6 months) without further antiparasitic therapy.