An 83-year-old man was diagnosed with type 3 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (LtAe, T3N1M0, cStage IIIA, UICC-7) measuring 6 cm in diameter. Computed tomography (CT) and 8F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed no metastasis to distant organs, whereas metastatic lymph nodes were present at the lesser curvature of the stomach. The patient underwent thoracoscopic esophagectomy with two-field lymph node dissection, laparoscopic substernal gastric tube reconstruction . The final diagnosis was moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (T3N2M0, stage IIIB). Three lymph nodes at the lesser curvature of the stomach were diagnosed as containing metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. The patient suffered from diarrhea after the operation. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered because of the patient’s advancing age and postoperative condition.
After treatment, follow-up was conducted on an outpatient basis once every 3 months. Follow-up included physical examination and laboratory tests, including those for tumor markers. Alternating 6-month periods of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, contrast-enhanced CT, and FDG-PET/CT were performed. CT at 14 months postoperatively showed a small growing mass, which had enlarged to 2 cm in diameter in the right adrenal gland and PET/CT revealed high FDG uptake at the mass (maximum standardized uptake value (SUV), 7.67). The physical examination at that time showed no abnormalities. Laboratory tests showed that concentrations of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) had increased to 12.3 ng/ml (normal range, 0–1.5 ng/ml) and 18.01 ng/ml (normal range, 0–5.0 ng/ml), although these concentrations had been normal just after the primary operation . The mass was suspected to be a metastasis from the primary esophageal carcinoma. No metastases to lymph nodes or other distant organs were apparent. The patient was admitted to our hospital for surgery and underwent laparoscopic right adrenalectomy from the left lateral decubitus position. A port for endoscopy was present where the right arcus costalis and external marginal abdominis muscle crossed and the other three ports were along the subcostal lines. If there had been severe intra-abdominal adhesion, then the laparoscopic approach would have been changed to the retroperitoneal approach. Though there was inflammatory adhesion between the inferior vena cava and adipose tissue around the tumor, it was possible to exfoliate them. This second operation ended without any problems because the right adrenal gland was anatomically away from the gastric tube. The operative time was 127 min. The volume of blood loss was 30 ml. The histopathological examination revealed moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, strongly suggesting the presence of metastasis from the primary esophageal cancer . Laboratory tests after this second operation showed decreased concentrations of SCC antigen and CEA to 1 and 4.4 ng/ml, respectively. Thus far, no postoperative recurrences have occurred as of 38 months after adrenalectomy.