A 75-year-old man with a history of diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and dyslipidemia presented to a local community hospital with neck and back pain that had persisted for 4 days. During a medical examination, he felt the abrupt onset of weakness in the upper and lower extremities and suddenly became unable to walk. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain did not reveal any abnormalities and the patient was transferred to our facility for further workup of the sudden quadriplegia. His vital signs upon arrival at the emergency room were as follows: body temperature, 35.9°C; pulse rate, 64 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 21 breaths per minute; blood pressure, 187/87 mm Hg; and oxygen saturation, 97% on ambient air. His speech, cognition, and cranial nerve function were normal. Manual muscle tests (MMTs) showed left-right symmetrical findings . The passive range of motion in all extremities was complete without pain or spasticity. Reflexes were bilaterally overactive in the biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis, especially in the patellar and Achilles tendons, and Babinski sign was also present bilaterally. A rectal examination revealed normal function. Proprioception (body position in space and vibratory sense) was preserved, but pain sensation was lost below the T4 level on the right side. Urinary incontinence also developed and a urethral catheter was inserted. Other than mild calcification of the aorta, whole-body CT findings including the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine were normal. Initial MRI revealed abnormal T2 signals in the cervical spine from C4 to C5 with cord compression from C3 to C7 . An orthopedic surgeon was consulted under consideration of a diagnosis of cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM). Repeat MMT findings showed a left-right asymmetrical change . The findings of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obtained via lumbar puncture on the day after admission were: white blood cells, 2 cells/mm3; red blood cells, 25 cells/mm3; total protein, 104.7 (normal 15–45) mg/dL; and glucose, 83 (normal (70–110) mg/dL. Hematological and biochemical findings were mostly within normal ranges except for mildly elevated creatinine, 1.24 mg/dL; blood sugar, 181 mg/dL; triglyceride, 173 mg/dL; and hemoglobin A1c, 6.4%. Antihuman T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) antibody was positive in both blood and CSF specimens. No specific treatment except rehabilitation was performed until neurology consult because etiology was unknown. Diffusion-weighted contrast MRI (DWI) on hospital day 8 after a neurology consult revealed hyperintense signals predominantly at the grey matter, and a contrast T2 signal abnormality with a decreased apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) . We started the patient on steroid pulse therapy because myelitis could not be completely ruled out, but this did not improve the neurological deficits. SCI was finally diagnosed as an exclusion diagnosis. The MRI findings on hospital day 20 were the same as the initial findings . The patient started to gradually recover even before the administration of steroid pulse therapy, although he needed a walking aid. He was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on hospital day 40.