A 57-year-old Japanese man was initially referred to our hospital for treatment of multiple bone fractures. In 2007, he had fallen down and fractured his foot. Fortunately, he had recovered with conservative therapy; however, the delay of bone fusion in his case was notable. In 2008, he experienced a sudden onset of costal pain with trivial trauma, and multiple costal fractures were diagnosed. The costal pain did not resolve during these two years. Two years after his initial foot fracture, our patient exhibited a serum phosphorus concentration of 1.9mL/dL (normal range is 2.5 to 4.5mg/dL) and a serum calcium concentration of 9.0mg/dL (normal range is 8.5 to 10.5mg/dL). Furthermore, a detailed investigation revealed persistent hypophosphatemia and a serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D concentration of 18pg/mL (normal range is 25 to 50pg/mL). Serum levels of FGF-23 were elevated to 84pg/mL (normal range is 10 to 50pg/mL). Subsequent magnetic resonance (MR) images revealed a tumor in the middle cranial base; the tumor reached the temporomandibular joint and was 27 × 18 × 20mm in size. This tumor was clearly and homogeneously enhanced on gadolinium MR images (Figure
). Bone computed tomography scans showed destructive change to bone up to the external cortical layer in the middle cranial base (Figure
). We presumed that hypophosphatemia and vitamin D deficiency were related to this tumor.
Two months after the MR images were taken, we performed the tumor resection via a middle fossa epidural approach. The tumor was located and eroded in the middle fossa cranial base and was easy to remove by curretting. The tumor had adhered to the dura mater in some parts but did not invade the subdural space. Finally, the tumor was totally resected, preserving the temporomandibular joint. Histopathological diagnosis was consistent with a phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor that showed round or spindled cells embedded in a smudgy blue-gray material (Figure
).
The post-operative course was uneventful. The hypophosphatemia and vitamin D deficiency resolved five days after the surgery. Serum levels of FGF-23 decreased to normal (14pg/mL) seven days after the surgery (Figure
). Costal pain in our patient was completely resolved one month after the surgery. MR images at one-year follow-up showed no recurrence of the tumor, and his serum phosphate level was normal (Figure
).