A 49-year-old male with a history of gastric ulcer presented to the emergency department
early in the morning with abdominal pain which started during the night. He was assessed
by a surgeon and the symptoms were interpreted as gastritis (electrocardiogram showing
Q-wave inferiorly and poor R-wave progression but troponin levels were not measured) and
the surgeon discharged the patient. He returned to the emergency department the same day
with increased abdominal pain, right bundle branch block (RBBB), and high troponin and
N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels (3060 and 4370 ng/L,
respectively). Echocardiographic examination revealed a severely reduced ejection fraction
of 15–20% and ventricular akinesia/hypokinesia corresponding to the left anterior
descending (LAD) coronary artery. Coronary angiography showed proximal occlusion of the
LAD and chronic total occlusion of the right coronary artery. The patient was treated with
percutaneous coronary intervention with stent implantation in the LAD and initiated on
medications for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction including
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, beta-blockers, and mineralocorticoid antagonist.
The patient was kept in hospital post-MI because of hypotension and severe heart failure.
Treatment with the intravenous inotropic agent levosimendan was used 15 days post-MI.
Nineteen days after the MI, the patient started to experience recurrent attacks of VT,
which were initially responsive to administration of amiodarone, beta-blockers, magnesium,
and electrical cardioversion. Subsequently, the VT attacks became more frequent and
non-responsive to medical treatment including lidocaine. The patient developed cardiogenic
shock with pulmonary oedema (Troponin and NT-proBNP levels were 863 and 5530 ng/L,
respectively) and a decision was made to institute veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (VA-ECMO).
The patient underwent peripheral ECMO cannulation (femoral vein, common femoral artery,
and distal perfusion catheter) 20 days post-MI. The ECMO circuit included the Cardiohelp
system (Maquet, Germany). Continuous monitoring of invasive arterial pressure, pulse
oximetry, electrocardiography, urine output, and central venous pressure was performed.
The patient was supported with ECMO for 32 days because of heart failure, refractory VT,
and recurrent infections. Refractory VT continued after placing the patient on ECMO. A
temporary pacemaker was used for overdrive pacing with 100 b.p.m. Amiodarone infusion
with a total dose of 6.6 g over 7 days was used together with ECMO and temporary
pacemaker, to no avail.
An electrophysiological study was performed 24 days post-MI and 4 days after ECMO
initiation. A diagnostic catheter was applied to the coronary sinus/right ventricle
through the right femoral vein. A PentaRay diagnostic catheter and a 3.5 mm open irrigated
tip Thermocool ablation catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) was used
for the mapping and ablation of the left ventricle by trans-septal puncture. High-density
electro-anatomical mapping with the CARTO 3 (Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA)
was performed .
Simultaneous bipolar and unipolar maps were acquired to define areas of low voltage
(respectively, <1.5 and <8.3 mV) or scar (<0.5 and <5.0 mV).
Electrophysiological study revealed a large scar area anteriorly and inferiorly near
septum in the left ventricle. Ventricular tachycardia with RBBB morphology and a frequency
of 160 b.p.m. was induced . Exit of this VT was identified using Paso mapping (Carto, Biosense
Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) and was located at the mid-ventricular infero-lateral scar
boarder. Radiofrequency energy (40 W at ∼60 s per ablation site, irrigation 30 mL/min) was
applied 69 times inferiorly and near septum with a total ablation time of 3440 s,
rendering the VT non-inducible. We did not experience any interference with the catheter
visualization in carto due to the haemodynamic support with ECMO.
Two days after ablation, the patient suffered from 10 VT attacks that were responsive to
electrical cardioversions, amiodarone and lidocaine infusion. Repeat ablation was
considered too high risk due to large scar area and was not performed. However,
subsequently, VT attacks disappeared and the patient was weaned from ECMO after
32 days.
The patient received a left ventricular assist device (LVAD; Heartmate 3, Abbott, Lake
Bluff, IL, USA) 58 days post-MI and 5 days post-ECMO weaning as a bridge to decision and
subsequently, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator few weeks later. No VT attacks
were detected during the waiting time for heart transplantation. The patient underwent
heart transplantation 1 year after LVAD implantation.