A 32-year-old male presented to our hospital in January 2018 because of cough and chest pain along with blood in the sputum. His chest pain was on the right side and was significantly aggravated by deep breathing. The above symptoms started after he became chilled 5 days prior and were exacerbated without obvious inducements 2 days prior. After receiving anti-infection treatment in the outpatient department for 2 days with little improvement, he was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
He denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart diseases, or infections such as hepatitis B and tuberculosis. Relevant laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell: 13.54 * 109/L (reference interval: 3.50–9.50 * 109/L); neutrophil%: 87.1% (RI: 40.0–75.0%); lymphocyte%: 10.2% (RI: 20.0–50.0%); hypersensitive C-reactive protein: 92.9 mg/L (RI: < 1 mg/L); D-dimer: 1.37 µg/ml (RI: < 0.5 µg/ml). Influenza and parainfluenza IgM antibodies were tested, and the results were negative. No obvious abnormalities were found on an electrocardiogram or for the rheumatic immune system, routine urine and liver function, electrolyte or renal function. Fibreoptic bronchoscopy and sputum smear did not show any abnormalities. Chest CT imaging suggested pulmonary infection with pleural effusion , which was confirmed by pleural ultrasonography. Therefore, he continued to be treated for severe community-acquired pneumonia.
Two days after admission, he developed a fever with a temperature of 37.5 °C, with no relief of chest pain. Given this, we considered the possibility of tuberculosis. However, no acid-fast bacilli were found in sputum smears or by T-SPOT. A TB test was nonreactive. The results of gene X-pert and acid-fast staining along with that of tuberculous culture, which was obtained a few days later, were all negative. Seven days after admission, his chest pain significantly worsened. Enhanced chest CT imaging showed bilateral pulmonary embolism of the secondary pulmonary artery and its far branch, bilateral pleural effusion, and atelectasis of the lower lobe in the bilateral lungs . CT-pulmonary artery angiography one day later revealed similar results . We also noted an elevation of D-dimer up to 3.51 µg/ml. We therefore performed echocardiography and deep venous sonography to detect cardiac diseases and deep vein thrombosis, respectively, with no positive results.
We faced a clinical dilemma regarding his diagnosis and treatment; one day later, Absidia was detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid culture, which provided us with guidance for subsequent treatment. Given that he was a warehouse keeper and acknowledged a history of inhaling dust in the warehouse, we speculated that he may be infected by inhaling fungal spores attached to dust. Given that such fungi can invade the brain and sinuses, a CT scan of these organs was performed rapidly and showed no damage. Antifungal therapy with oral posaconazole and intravenous amphotericin B was started immediately. The patient was given 400 mg posaconazole and 10 mg amphotericin B on the first day followed by 20 mg amphotericin B daily as maintenance therapy. Unsurprisingly, his symptoms, such as chest pain and cough, were relieved, and his temperature returned to normal. Furthermore, chest CT re-examination showed dramatic improvement in the signs of lung infection; the pleural effusion was also obviously absorbed . During follow-up for two years after discharge, he was completely cured without any recurrence or sequelae.