A 69-year-old Japanese woman with a history of hypertension was referred to the hospital for abdominal pain and melena. No shock was evident, and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a well-defined submucosal tumor-like protruding lesion with a central ulcer in the sigmoid colon . The lesion was localized to the sigmoid colon. A localized submucosal tumor-like elevated lesion, redness, submucosal hemorrhage, and ulcer formation, which are typical findings of AL amyloid protein deposition, were not observed in other parts of the colon, so the lesion was not diagnosed as the pan-colon type. Biopsy results revealed a non-epithelial tumor with positive Dylon and Congo-red staining, leading to the diagnosis of amyloid tumor. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a localized soft-tissue mass with a poor internal contrast effect in the sigmoid colon . There was no organ invasion or perforation, no swollen lymph nodes, and no distant metastasis. Serum levels of the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (1.7 U/ml, normal range < 5.0 U/ml) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (6.1 U/ml, normal range < 37.0 U/ml) were within the normal ranges. Proteinuria and an increased serum creatinine level were not observed before surgery. No signs suggestive of heart failure were observed based on the clinical, ECG, and chest X-ray findings before surgery. In addition, there were no signs of amyloid protein deposits in other organs, and the diagnosis was localized colorectal amyloidosis.
At the time of surgical referral, the abdominal pain had improved, and tenderness and peritoneal irritation signs were absent. The gastrointestinal amyloidosis was localized but symptomatic, so the patient underwent elective laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy as well as a total biopsy. There was a soft mass in the sigmoid colon, and the serosal surface was slightly uneven . There were no other tumors. Preoperative imaging and intraoperative findings did not exclude the possibility of malignancy, and D3 dissection was performed. The colon was anastomosed using a double staple technique. There were no intraoperative complications.
Postoperatively, the patient had chylous ascites, which resolved with conservative treatment consisting of only a fat-restricted diet. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 10. Histopathologic examination revealed positive Dylon and Congo-red staining, mainly in the submucosa to subserosa, consistent with a tumor, as well as deposition of acidophilic inorganic material with green polarized light on polarized light microscopy . Immunohistochemical staining revealed AL amyloidosis (λ type) . As there was no amyloid protein in the margins, we diagnosed a localized gastrointestinal amyloid tumor. The submucosal tumor-like protruding lesion was caused by massive deposition of amyloid protein in each layer, and the ulceration was probably caused by ischemic changes due to occlusion of the blood vessel lumen. Reactive atypia of the mucosa due to ulceration and erosion was observed, but there was no evidence of malignancy or significant lymph-node involvement. She was alive without recurrence at 9 months after the operation; lower gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no anastomotic abnormalities, and there were no findings in other mucosae suspected to have amyloid deposition.