A-10-year-old female was followed closely at another hospital for a 5-year history of FD of the skull base and nasal sinus bone caused by McCune–Albright syndrome. Fundus examination showed slight pale optic papilla (indicating chronic compressive neuropathy), but bilateral corrected visual acuity was normal at that time. She was noted to have enlargement of a Mariotte blind spot in the left visual field by Goldmann perimeter, which was first detected 3 years prior to presentation. The left visual field deficit worsened to hemianopia 2 years prior to presentation, and left visual acuity worsened to 0.1 [corrected visual acuity, 0.6 partial (p) × spherical (S) − 1.00 diopter (D)] 1 year prior to presentation. Left visual acuity rapidly worsened to 0.06 [0.3 × S − 1.00D: cylindrical (C) − 0.75D axis (Ax)145] at 6 months prior to presentation. Compression of the left optic canal was suspected. Left visual acuity was 0.05 (0.15 × S − 2.00D: C − 0.75D Ax 150) at first evaluation at our hospital. Right visual acuity was not disturbed. With regard to the visual field, left hemianopia was present (the same as 2 years prior to presentation). Pupil examination was normal with pupils equally responsive and reactive to light (PERRL) in each eye and with no relative afferent pupil defect (RAPD) Extraocular movements showed no abnormalities. Specialized eye examinations, including testing for color vision, showed no abnormalities. Physical examination revealed typical features of FD, such as prominent left cheek and exophthalmos Distance from the lateral orbital rim to the corneal apex was measured using a Hertel exophthalmometer. The left side was 18 mm, and the right side was 14 mm the left side above average. Head computed tomography (CT) showed extended bone hypertrophy of the left facial bone and temporal bone . The lesser wing of sphenoid bone, anterior clinoid process, and nasal sinus were severely thickened . It had progressed over the last 4 years. The optic canal was compressed and was narrowed. Ophthalmic examination showed progressive worsening of visual acuity, slightly pale optic papilla and narrowed optic canal as shown by CT (indicating chronic compressive optic neuropathy).
Plastic surgery was planned for left visual acuity disturbance, prominent cheek and exophthalmos. Therapeutic optic canal decompression was performed via a left frontotemporal extradural approach using a surgical navigation system (Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan). We drilled the superior wall of the superior orbital fissure and optic canal using a diamond bar under a microscope. This was performed with extra care as the orbital roof was affected and thickened by FD . In addition, dissection was continued toward the anterior clinoid process. Dissected bone was mixed in composition (soft and stiff). We identified the bulging appearance of the optic sheath, indicating that it was markedly compressed. There were no vascular complications during the operation.
We dissected the hypertrophic bone around the optic sheath as much as possible. The size of the decompressed canal was 20 mm longitudinally and 12 mm horizontally. Increased mobility of the optic sheath was identified . Next, a plastic surgeon made a blowout hole (2 × 2 cm) using a cutting bar on the lateral orbital wall to decrease the orbital tissue pressure . At that time, we needed to prevent tissue in the orbit. Through the tunica conjunctiva and oral vestibule, we dissected the prominent cheek using a rasp. We identified the infraorbital foramen and preserved the maxillary nerve. This resulted in the left cheek appearing equal in size to the right cheek.
Postoperative CT revealed satisfactory decompression of the left optic canal Left visual acuity gradually improved (0.125p × S − 2.5D: C − 0.75D Ax 15) by 30 days after the operation. Her formerly prominent left cheek and exophthalmos became practically unnoticeable .