An 85-year-old man was hospitalized with a 4-day history of fever and abdominal pain. He had undergone stent-graft insertion for an abdominal aortic aneurysm 2 months prior. Computed tomography (CT) revealed periaortic fluid collection consistent with stent-graft placement . Based on the clinical information, he was diagnosed with aortic endograft infection and administered infusion of meropenem (1 g twice daily) and vancomycin (0.4 g twice daily).
Despite 14 weeks of antibiotic therapy, periaortic fluid accumulation increased as compared to that before antibiotic administration . Surgical abdominal drainage was performed, and an indwelling drain was inserted. Bacterial culture of the drainage fluid gave negative results on sheep blood agar, BTB lactose agar, and chocolate agar at 35 ℃ in 5% CO2 for 24–48 hours. Three days after the drainage surgery, the periaortic fluid increased again and spread along the drainage tube, forming a subcutaneous abscess around the drain insertion site . The abscess was drained, and fluorescent acid-fast staining of the abscess fluid revealed bacilli. The organism was identified as Mycobacterium abscessus by nucleic acid sequencing of housekeeping genes (16S rRNA, rpoB, hsp65, sodA) . The PCR product length of erm(41) was only 397 bp, which indicates deletion of this gene, according to a previous study . Thus, the organism was identified as MMA. The same organism was isolated from the periaortic fluid specimens. In addition, the first drainage sample was positive on 7-day culture in thioglycolate broth, and the organism was identified as MMA. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with aortic endograft infection with MMA.
The antibiotic regimen was changed to intravenous imipenem-cilastatin (IPM/CS) 500 mg four times a day, amikacin (AMK) 300 mg every other day (Ccr 26.3ml/min), and oral clarithromycin (CAM) 400 mg twice daily. Two months after this treatment, only oral CAM 400 mg twice daily and sitafloxacin (STFX) 100 mg once daily were administered because CT showed a decreased in the size of the abscess. Although the MIC of STFX is lower than that of other fluoroquinolones, the breakpoint of STFX is not well-defined. . However, after 6 weeks of treatment, the abscess around the aortic aneurysm increased in size again, and a new abscess appeared around the bilateral iliac arteries and veins. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the drainage fluid from the abscess resulted in the isolation of an MMA strain that had acquired resistance to CAM . Intravenous IPM/CS 500 mg four times a day, AMK 300 mg daily, and oral linezolid (LZD) 600 mg twice daily were added to the treatment regimen along with oral CAM and STFX. LZD was discontinued within 1 week because of thrombocytopenia. The four-antibiotic combination therapy and abscess drainage were continued for 4 months, but the size of the abscesses did not change. On day 286 of hospitalization, he was discharged to a nursing home with a drainage tube, and the treatment with oral CAM, STFX, and intravenous AMK was continued by a visiting physician. Six months after discharge from the hospital, the patient died of an unknown cause. Neither the full-length erm(41) gene nor the rrl gene mutation was found by Sanger sequencing in the pre- and post-treatment strains. The reserved pre- and post-treatment strains were cultured on sheep blood agar for bacterial recovery and DNA extraction, and whole-genome sequence analysis (WGS) was performed on a NextSeq550 sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA). WGS of the post-treatment strains revealed two indels and one single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) . There was one SNP between the pre- and post-treatment strains, and the average nucleotide identity was 99.99%; thus, both the strains were considered identical. Reinfection with another species of MMA was ruled out based on the WGS results.