The patient was an 80 year old man admitted to the ER with abdominal pain. At admittance, the patient was unable to walk and described an increased difficulty with movement and coordination of the lower limbs, tendency to fall, extensive fatigue, and pain. Six months earlier, the patient had full movement of his lower limbs and could walk unaided. He described an increased intensity and duration of symptoms during the last three months. He was also confused and was unable to answer correctly on orienting questions. Blood serum samples taken at the ER showed a slight thrombocytopenia and mild kidney insufficiency. An arterial blood gas showed hypercalcemia. His condition was deemed to be a combination of somatic pain and confusion. He was therefore treated as a mild trauma patient. Computer tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed and a surgical consult ruled out any surgical pathology. A pelvis CT showed deterioration of the right hip and an orthopedic consult diagnosed right-sided hip arthritis. The patient was admitted to the orthopedic trauma ward for one day before being transferred to the geriatric clinic for mobilization and pain optimization. He was placed at the neurogeriatric ward to due to space constraints caused by Covid-19.
At the neurogeriatric ward, clinical examination revealed several neurological abnormalities including apraxia, dysdiadochokinesia, intentional tremor, clonus, and parkinsonism. Both sides of his body were affected although the left side showed more pronounced symptoms than the right. He was paraspastic and there was parkinsonism in his upper extremities with cogwheel rigidity bilaterally. There was hyporeactivity in his triceps, biceps and brachioradialis tendon reflexes. His lower body display mixed neurological symptoms with peripheral rigidity and hyporeactivity in quadriceps tendons reflexes. He admitted no pain sensation in his left lower leg and foot, though both proprioception and sense of vibration were preserved. He had positive Babinskis sign bilaterally, indicative of damage to the pyramidal neuronal pathways as well as Glabellar tap sign indicating a primitive frontal release, concurrent with parkinsonism. He had difficulty with coordination and was unable to perform fine motor skill tests using his left hand. He was only capable of a wide gait and unable to performed quick turns or adjust walking speed even while using walking aid. He had orthostatic hypotension and was prone to falling. His Mini Mental State Examination score was 9/30 and he had problems with short-term memory, orientation and recall .
Anamnesis from the patient and his next of kin revealed that he had been suffering from symptoms such as diarrhea, urine retention, fatigue, and pain for at least six months. The symptoms were infrequent but had become more and more common before admittance to the hospital. He had also lost weight, estimated at 20% of his body weight. His partner noted that he had become more forgetful and occasionally did not recognize acquaintances and family members. He had trouble walking and moving around the house. Sometimes he would appear to be confused about everyday tasks. There was no family history of dementia or cognitive impairment. The patient had worked as a salesperson up until retirement at age 67 and had up until six months before admittance to the hospital not shown any signs of memory impairment or dementia. His deterioration, by all accounts, had been sudden and quick. He was subsequently treated as a patient with suspected cognitive impairment of an unknown cause and standard examinations and tests followed.
A brain CT revealed white matter changes corresponding to Fazekas stage 2 and medial temporal atrophy grade 2–3. The hippocampus was significantly reduced in volume bilaterally . There was a light global atrophy and no signs of increased intracranial pressure. There was a lytic destruction in the left frontal bone, indicative of a metastasis .
ApoE analysis showed E3/E3 variant. Electroencephalography that showed marked abnormality with laterality to the left hemisphere and loss of alpha rhythm. Extended blood panel showed highly elevated serum calcium and lactate dehydrogenase.
CSF analysis showed increased albumin at 1230 mg/L (ref < 400 mg/L), severely reduced Amyloid beta (Aβ) 42 at 265 ng/L but with normal amyloid ratio at 0,9 (ref > 0,59), elevated neurofilament light protein at 4600 ng/L. Tau protein as well as phosphorylated Tau protein were within normal range values. Immunoglobulin assay showed increased levels. Paraneoplastic antibodies were negative.
A diagnosis of possible AD was confirmed using findings of degenerative changes on brain CT, clinical status, and pathological electroencephalography. However, CSF amyloid biomarkers findings did not correlate to AD. Furthermore, neither the full spectrum of his neurological symptoms nor the very high CSF albumin levels could be explained by an AD diagnosis. These findings, coupled with the lytic destructive lesion in the frontal bone and pronounced paraspasticity, prompted further examination.
A spinal MRI revealed a large lytic tumor incapsulating the whole of Th8 as well as parts of Th7 and Th9 . Metastasis were found throughout the spine and the pelvis. Biopsy and immunocytochemistry confirmed the tumor to be a plasmacytoma containing both necrotic tissue and abnormal plasma cells. The primary tumor compressed the medulla spinalis and myelopathy was present within the spinal cord in association with the tumor.
The patient received oncological and hematological consultations and was then started on high dose Prednisolone, Bortezomib and radiation therapy. Neurosurgical intervention was dismissed considering the large involvement of the tumor and the already significant tissue damage. The patient was kept at a geriatric emergency ward and received both medical treatment as well as daily rehabilitation and physical therapy.
Treatment enabled some reduction in tumor size and after one month the patient experienced slight improvement with absence of tremor and improved walking ability. His rigidity was also less substantial, and he experienced less fatigue. Although his cognitive abilities were not improved, neither had they deteriorated any further. His prognosis at this stage was considered good given his response to treatment.