A 41-year-old man was referred to us with a history of 2 months’ headache and sudden exacerbation for 3 days, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, slurred speech, blurred vision and a fever of 38.3 °C. The physical examination revealed mental confusion, rigid neck and dull light reflex of left eye. Brain computed tomography (CT) displayed a 6.7 cm × 6.9 cm × 5.5 cm irregular hypodense mass extending from the suprasellar cistern to the anterior horn of left ventricle, where a fluid-fluid level was formed, with a CT value around −110 in the superior portion and +15 in the inferior portion . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a similar cystic lesion, with low to high stratified signal on T1 weighted imaging (T1WI) and slightly high to high signal on T2 weighted imaging (T2WI). Multiple hyperintense lesions were also identified in the anterior horn of right ventricle and over the sulci on both T1WI and T2WI . The diagnosis was unclear preoperatively. To rule out the possibility of intracranial metastasis, common tumor biomarkers were screened, which showed elevated serum level of CA 199, carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA 125), carbohydrate antigen 242 (CA 242) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). The level of CA 199 was unexpectedly higher than 12,000 U/ml. Careful history taking, physical examination and radiological study including chest and abdomen CT ruled out common cancerous and non-cancerous diseases leading to elevated CA 199. Ruptured cystic mass was considered, and therefore, craniotomy was performed. Yellowish lipoid content in the cystic lesion was aspirated and repeatedly douched, and the capsule was subtotally resected. Continuous lumbar drainage was conducted to facilitate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) clearance. Pathological report proved the diagnosis of intracranial epidermoid cyst . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of lesion capsule displayed strong staining of CA 199 and moderate staining of CA125 and CEA. A repeat MRI scan suggested subtotal elimination of lipid content , and tumor markers serum level remained extremely high 10 days post-operation. The patient improved quickly and was discharged without any neurological deficit two weeks after surgery. MRI scan and serum tumor markers were closely monitored after discharge . Serum CEA, CA125 and CA242 levels decreased back to normal range 2 months after surgery. CA 199 level also dropped dramatically 2 months post-operation, and decreased gradually in the following period, however, still beyond upper limit. A rebound of CA 199 level was observed during the last follow-up (38 months after surgery, Fig. ), companied by an enlargement of residual mass on MRI. The patient was in good physical condition, so no interventions were performed.