A 28-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for episodic gross hematuria, increasing proteinuria, and renal dysfunction. She was diagnosed with GPP at the age of 2 years. Her father also suffered from GPP. Although GPP remained in remission for a long time, her skin symptoms deteriorated with pregnancy at the age of 24, around the same time as microscopic hematuria appeared. Corticosteroids were started, and both the skin symptoms and urinary findings improved after delivery. Anti-TNFα therapy with infliximab was initiated at the age of 25. Although her skin symptoms were relieved by the anti-TNFα therapy, she experienced two episodes of gross hematuria associated with throat infections. At the age of 27, her skin symptoms deteriorated when infliximab was discontinued during her second pregnancy, but improved with the resumption of infliximab after childbirth. Serum creatinine levels, hematuria, and urinary protein gradually worsened with upper respiratory infection (from 0.5 mg/dl, 30–49 /HPF, and negative, to 0.87 mg/dl, > 100 /HPF, and 3.04 g/gCr, respectively) . When she first visited our hospital, there was mild enlargement of the bilateral palatine tonsils on physical examination. There were no findings suggesting IgA vasculitis such as fever, purpura, arthralgia, or abdominal pain. Her blood pressure was 107/65 mmHg. There were no medications other than infliximab. The laboratory workup performed on her first visit showed hematuria, proteinuria, and mild renal dysfunction .
A renal biopsy was performed to clarify the diagnosis at 3 years after the initiation of anti-TNFα therapy which was 1 month after the second course of infliximab was discontinued and a little over 2 months after the end of the second pregnancy. A total of 33 glomeruli were included in the renal biopsy samples. Most glomeruli showed segmental mesangial proliferation . Three glomeruli showed global sclerosis and one glomerulus showed segmental sclerosis. Seven glomeruli showed crescents, including three cellular , three fibrocellular, and one fibrous crescent. Interstitial fibrosis was found in 10% of the renal cortex. There was slight arteriosclerosis but no vasculitis. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed positive staining for IgA and C3 in the mesangial areas . On electron microscopy, electron-dense deposits were evident in the mesangial and paramesangial areas, and segmental moderate subendothelial edema was observed .
The diagnosis was IgA nephropathy: M1 E0 S1 T0 C1, according to the Oxford classification . In addition, segmental subendothelial edema on electron microscopy suggested the effect of pregnancy.
After discontinuing infliximab and observing whether serum creatinine and urinary findings improved, intravenous corticosteroid pulse therapy was started 28 days after the renal biopsy. Intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days at a dose of 0.5 g daily was given for three courses every 40 days. As a follow-up treatment, prednisolone at a dose of 30 mg every other day was administered, but the dose was changed to 15 mg daily because of postprandial hyperglycemia and considering that she was lactating. Serum creatinine was reduced but the urine findings did not sufficiently improve. Inflammation of the skin was initially relieved by the first pulse therapy, but the oral corticosteroid was not sufficient to maintain her skin condition. Pustules and erythema worsened despite the second pulse therapy. Secukinumab, an anti-IL-17A monoclonal antibody, was initiated and administered at 300 mg subcutaneously at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and then every 4 weeks, which controlled the skin symptoms. Bilateral tonsillectomy was performed 93 days after the renal biopsy. Serum creatinine decreased to the normal range and urine findings gradually improved . The patient was transferred due to relocation, and her urinary protein and urinary red blood cells remained at low levels.