A 40-year-old woman presented with painless gross terminal hematuria for 6 months. Urinalysis showed red blood cells notable for 65 per high power field and a negative urine culture. Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a sharply defined, heterogeneously enhancing mass involving the dome of the urinary bladder wall measuring 4.0 cm in the maximum diameter . Cystoscopy examination revealed a red, non-papillary tumor with a smooth surface, bulging into the cavity on the dome of the bladder . Transurethral resection biopsy of the mass was carried out and histopathology revealed chronic inflammation with focally florid von Brunn's nests that cannot excluded a nested variant of urothelial carcinoma. A subsequent laparoscopically partial cystectomy (including the mass and a small amount of adjacent bladder tissues) was performed and the specimen was sent for intraoperative frozen section consultation, which indicated a benign mesenchymal lesion in favor of a hemangioma. The tumor was completely removed with negative resection margins. The symptom of hematuria relieved after the procedure and the patient was in good status without evidence of recurrence by cystoscopy at follow-up 6 months later.
The cut surface of the resection specimen demonstrated a predominantly solid tumor of 3.8 cm in the maximum diameter and gray red in color with numerous tiny dilated cysts containing chylous to yellow cheese-like fluid . The covered mucosa was unremarkable grossly. Microscopically, the tumor was consisted of variably sized dilated lymphatic vessels lined by flattened endothelium which involved the full-thickness of the bladder wall and often dissected the muscularis propria . In superficial mucosa the dilated lymphatics were thin-walled that connected with thick-walled often muscular, lymphatic channels in the deep muscularis propria, and the overlying urothelium showed flatten hyperplasia with focally florid von Brunn’s nests formation . By immunohistochemistry (IHC), the endothelium lining of the vascular channels showed positive stains for D2-40 and CD31, further confirming their lymphatic properties. Based the histologic and IHC features, the diagnosis of cavernous lymphangioma was rendered.