A 40-year-old woman suffered from severe erosive rheumatoid arthritis with positive rheumatoid factor (251 UI/ml [normal <25 UI/ml]) and positive anti-cyclic citrullinated antibodies (64UA/ml [normal <2.9 UA/mL]). In 2004, etanercept was added to methotrexate to control her disease. In 2008, because of hepatic cytolysis, methotrexate was stopped but etanercept monotherapy maintained the remission. In 2012, she suddenly presented an isolated left peripheral facial palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a contrast-enhancement of the facial nerve. Rapidly, her clinical status worsened with bilateral facial palsy, anosmia, weight loss, dyspnea, eyesight deficiency, eye and mouth dryness. Ophthalmological examination revealed bilateral Bell’s phenomenon and left papilloedema with anterior uveitis. Biological analysis revealed elevated serum calcium level (2.56 mmol/L), hyperproteinemia (90 g/L), cytolysis (1.5 N) and cholestasis (4N). Cerebral MRI showed an enhanced signal of cranial nerves on the post enhanced T1-weighted sequences . C-reactive protein was normal. Serologies for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), hepatitis B, C, syphilis and Lyme were negative. Cerebral fluid analysis showed a lymphocytic meningitis (hyperproteinorachia 0,62g/L and normoglycorrhachia) without oligoclonal band. Polymerase chain reactions of human herpes virus and enterovirus were negative. Chest CT-scan found bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes. The bronchoalveolar lavage brought a lymphocytic alveolitis (53%) with a high CD4/CD8 lymphocytic ratio of 4.65. Quantiferon® assay and mycobacterium culture remained negative. The 18F-fluoride PET-CT supported the diagnosis of sarcoidosis showing a fixation of hilar lymph nodes, parotid and submandibulary glands without hepatic or other abnormal fixations. Normal serum complement and absence of anti-nuclear antibodies ruled out TNFα induced neurological lupus. Etanercept was stopped and intravenous steroid boluses were initiated (15 mg/kg per day for 3 days) followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg per day). For technical reason, transbronchial lung biopsy was delayed after 1 month of steroid and remained not contributive. Nevertheless, diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis was further supported by an increased level of angiotensin-converting enzyme in serum (77 UI/L [normal value < 68 UI/L]). After 3 months, thanks to a normalization of the liver function, methotrexate (25 mg/week) was added to treat both RA and neurosarcoidosis without another secondary hepatic cytolisys. One year later, she remained on methotrexate and prednisone 20 mg/day: eyesight has completely recovered but not the facial paralysis. Brain MRI showed normalization.