A 39 year old male presented to the emergency department, in the month of May 2009, with complaints of right lower quadrant abdominal pain and low grade fever of 2 days duration. He was a chronic alcoholic since 10 years and had no other significant prior medical, surgical history, or any evidence of a traumatic event. On examination, the patient had tachycardia, and slight tenderness and guarding, localized to the right iliac fossa. The rest of the abdomen was non tender. His routine blood tests were within normal limits, with completely normal counts. His HIV and HBsAg tests were negative. An x ray of his abdomen (erect film) showed a ground glass appearance. Ultrasound examination of his abdomen however revealed features suggestive of terminal ileitis or ruptured appendix (caecal mural thickening, with minimum peri-appendicular fluid) with a normal liver. Clinical suspicion was of a recently ruptured appendix. The patient was taken up for an emergency laparotomy, via a right paramedian incision (considering his USG findings). Intra operatively, a 3 × 2 cm caecal perforation was present along the antero lateral wall with a dusky appendix attached to the caecum via a narrow base. There was no peritoneal contamination and the rest of the bowel appeared completely normal. The liver and spleen were normal and there was no lymphadenopathy. A right hemi colectomy with ileostomy and transverse colonic mucous fistula was done and the specimen was sent for a histopathological diagnosis. A peritoneal biopsy was also concomitantly taken. The histopathology reported features of tubercular granulomatous lesion with secondary acute infection with surgical margins showing non-specific inflammation, presence of caseation with langerhans giant cells as well as acid fast bacilli-consistent with tubercular enteritis, in the caecum, with a completely normal ileum and ascending colon. Moreover, the peritoneal biopsy was found to be non specific, with no features of tuberculosis.
We then performed a retrospective analysis of our management effort towards the patient, the x ray chest was normal, mantoux test was negative, ESR was 18 mm at 1 hour, and sputum was negative(three samples). The patient was started on anti-tubercular therapy (DOTS Category 1 - incorporating 4 drugs, viz. isoniazide, rifampicin, pyrizinamide and ethambutol for initial 2 months of the intensive phase, and isoniazide and rifampicin for the next 4 months of the continuation phase), with satisfactory results as regards the improvement in the overall patient condition, with 6 kgs weight gain over two months. The patient became comfortable, ambulatory; Ileostomy was functional and viable and main wound healing occurred via secondary intention. The patient was followed up on a regular 2 weekly basis with ileostomy closure performed after 3 months, without incident.