A 61-year-old man referred from the emergency department to the ear, nose, and throat (ENT) clinic in Al Wakra Hospital because of vertigo and left ear discharge. The vertigo is rotatory in nature and is associated with hearing impairment and tinnitus as well as nausea and vomiting. Ear discharge was purulent, odorless, and intermittent for the last few years, but it became profuse and continuous for the last few days. The described symptoms were associated with severe left-sided headache and diplopia, and there were associated medical comorbidities (diabetic and hypertensive patient). On examination, the patient was conscious, oriented, and not feverish. Left ear examination showed pulsating purulent discharge with granulation tissue filling the middle ear cavity, the tympanic membrane was perforated, and the fistula test was negative. There was left beating nystagmus with left sixth cranial nerve palsy. Other ENT and neurological examinations were not remarkable. Pure tone audiometry showed left-sided severe mixed deafness, and left ear swab for microbiological study for culture and sensitivity was negative. Urgent CT scan was done to rule out intracranial complications, and it showed features of tympanomastoiditis and soft tissue shadow involving the middle ear and attic areas .
MRI with contrast showed asymmetrical signal changes in the bilateral petrous bone with reduced enhancement on the left with high suspicion of petrositis, in the context of chronic tympanomastoiditis .
In addition to the mentioned pathology, there was a 10 × 4 mm enhancing lesion in the internal auditory meatus involving the 7th-8th nerve complex most likely acoustic neuroma, and there was no extension to the cerebellopontine angle . Conservative treatment started with local and parenteral antimicrobial agents with labyrinthine sedative drugs. After ten-day treatment with good monitoring of blood sugar, the patient had satisfactory response and improvement regarding symptoms of ear discharge, vertigo, and diplopia, but there is no remarkable response regarding hearing loss and tinnitus. The patient continued on conservative treatment for the coming two months, he developed symptomatic response regarding vertigo, diplopia, and ear discharge, and further appointment given for exploration of mastoid and middle ear. Exploration of the mastoid and middle ear showed tympanomastoiditis with a lot of granulation tissue in the middle ear, mastoid, and attic; canal wall down procedure was done with successful result after postoperative follow-up.