A 79-year-old man had a history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease, distal gastrectomy due to gastric cancer at 62 years of age, and right spontaneous pneumothorax at 63 years of age. Aortic regurgitation was identified from a heart murmur and was followed up by a nearby doctor. He had no shortness of breath; however, he had gradually decreasing cardiac function and exhibited significant depression of aortic valve regurgitation. He was referred to our hospital for cardiac surgery. Doppler echocardiography showed severe aortic regurgitation and the right coronary cusp prolapsed toward the left ventricular outlet trunk in diastole and aortic valvular prolapse. There was no cutaneous abnormality upon physical examination. No major abnormality was found in the preoperative laboratory results.
We performed cardiac surgery via a lower partial median inverted L-shaped sternotomy that cut into the right second intercostal space. Since the right internal thoracic artery was exposed and stretched, we ligated and transected it. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with right atrial drainage and ascending aorta return. After cooling to 33℃, the ascending aorta was clamped under ventricular fibrillation, an aortotomy was made, and the selective coronary perfusion resulted in cardiac arrest without problems. We replaced the aortic valve with a 23-mm bioprosthetic valve. Weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass was without difficulty. The surgery was completed without blood transfusion. The patient’s postoperative blood pressure and heart rhythm were stable. However, a postoperative chest radiograph indicated a hematoma in the right upper chest wall and pleural effusion . This site did not appear to be damaged during the operation, although it was thought that the cause was blood dripping due to damage to the pleura during the operation. Therefore, we inserted a drainage tube immediately and transferred him to the intensive care unit.
Approximately 2 hours after the surgery, the patient became anemic, and his blood pressure gradually decreased. This prompted us to transfuse blood. A small amount of blood drainage from the tube was observed. Blood retention was suspected and subsequently confirmed by Doppler ultrasounds. Then, chest radiography was performed again; findings were compared with the first postoperative chest radiograph. The second radiograph indicated enlargement of the hematoma . Considering the possibility of iatrogenic bleeding, we removed the central venous catheter and the Swan-Ganz catheter immediately. We observed a gradual drop in his blood pressure; however, we performed contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). This revealed massive hemorrhage and extravasation from the fourth right posterior intercostal artery , and no obvious fractures were found under bone conditions of the CT. Bleeding was immediately stopped because the patient was in shock. We performed emergency surgery through the previous lower partial sternotomy. We made an incision in the right visceral pleura, evacuated the 275-g hematoma from the cavity, and examined it carefully. The origin of the bleeding was identified in the fourth right posterior intercostal artery, although no rib fracture was noted on palpation of the lesion. The artery was cauterized with an electric scalpel and ligated. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, with no resumption of bleeding.