A 63-year old female patient was admitted to the hospital for fatigue, jaundice, and large-volume ascites.
PNH was diagnosed 2 years earlier when she was admitted for anemia, but she was lost to follow-up. Six weeks before current admission, portal vein thrombosis was diagnosed and enoxaparin 60 IU twice daily was initiated.
The abdomen was distended, and the liver was enlarged 4 cm below the right costal margin. The spleen was mildly enlarged.
Blood analysis revealed hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL, white blood cell count 5.4 × 109/L, platelets 171 × 109/L, reticulocytes 6.5%, international normalized ratio 1.0, total bilirubin 4 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 2.6 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase 28 IU/L, alanine transaminase 12 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 456 IU/L, glutamyl transpeptidase 248 IU/L, total protein 6.6 g/dL, albumin 3.3 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 650 U/L, serum haptoglobin < 7 mg/dL, creatinine 1.7 mg/dL, urea 81 mg/dL. Ascitic fluid had a serum-ascites albumin gradient of 1.7 g/dL (ascitic fluid total protein 3 g/dL, albumin 1.6 g/dL). Hepatitis B and C and human immunodeficiency virus serology was negative. Direct globulin test was negative.
In Doppler ultrasonography of splenoportal axis, recanalization of the portal vein and large abdominal portosystemic anastomoses were evident. Hepatic veins were patent. Magnetic resonance imaging showed hepatomegaly and confirmed the above findings. No esophageal or gastric varices were demonstrated in endoscopy. Ascites was refractory to diuretics and multiple large volume paracenteses were required. Due to the absence of a clear etiology of portal hypertension, a liver biopsy was performed.
Changes of portal venopathy with portal fibrosis and sclerosis and features of nodular regenerative hyperplasia were demonstrated. A spectrum of portal vein lesions was seen in interlobular portal tracts included in the biopsy, ranging from portal venule herniation in the periportal parenchyma, to slit-like stenosed portal venules and sclerosed portal tracts without a visible portal venule. In addition, parenchymal ischemic changes indicative of decreased venous outflow, mild focal sinusoidal and perivenular fibrosis, mild cholestasis, and mild secondary siderosis were noted. There was no bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis . The overall changes supported the diagnosis of INCPH.
The flow cytometry at this point revealed that 16.5% of her red blood cells were PNH, 4.1% were partially deficient for CD59, and 12.4% lacked CD59 completely; 63% of her granulocytes and 60% of monocytes were PNH.