An 88-years-old Caucasian female with a history of arterial hypertension,
osteoporosis and degenerative lumbar disk disease, on daily treatment with
Indapamide 2.5 mg qd, Enalapril 10 mg bid, Isosorbide-mononitrate 40 mg qd and
Alphacalcidol 0.25 μg qd presented with low back pain on the left side, which
started 6 months previously and had grown worse during the 2 weeks preceding the
presentation. The pain radiated down the left lower limb leading to difficulty in
assuming an upright posture and in walking. The pain was partially relieved by
analgesics. Every 6 months, she had a course of physiotherapy for her lumbar spine
disease. She denied tobacco smoking or alcohol abuse. Physical examination revealed
pale skin and mucosae, high blood pressure (190/80 mmHg), a regular heart rhythm at
a rate of 90 bpm, a grade 2/6 systolic murmur at the right upper sternal border, a
grade 2/6 apical systolic murmur, and bilateral carotid bruits (possibly radiation
of the aortic murmur), normal breath sounds with no rales, a soft abdomen, no
tenderness, but a palpable non-tender mass in the left flank and no edema. Blood
tests revealed severe microcytic hypochromic anemia (hemoglobin 5.9 g/dL, mean
corpuscular volume 66.4 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 19.5 pg, mean corpuscular
hemoglobin concentration 29.5 g/dL), low serum iron (12 µg/dL), a total iron binding
capacity of 221 µg/dL (transferrin saturation 5.4%), low-normal ferritin
(36.6 ng/mL), a slightly increased serum creatinine (108.76 µmol/L = 1.23 mg/dL;
estimated glomerular filtration rate 39 mL/min/1.73 m²), N-terminal pro B-type
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 10 545 pg/mL suggesting volume overload. All
other blood tests, including those reflecting inflammation, were within normal
range.
No imaging studies had been performed prior to her current presentation, except for
whole body bone scintigraphy. Consequently, abdominal ultrasound was performed and
revealed a 100 mm mass in the left flank immediately adjacent to the calcified
aortic wall and
no obvious left kidney—instead, immediately adjacent to the mass, there was a
cyst-like oblong structure of about 90 mm in length and 50 mm in width, with several
septum-like structures projecting inwardly over a distance of about 1 cm from the
wall of the cyst . Some color doppler signal was evident inside the 100 mm-mass, with
unclear significance. A contrast-enhanced thoracic and abdominal computed tomography
(CT) showed a normal right kidney, but for a left lower polar cortical cyst of
27 mm, and a giant (transaxial diameters of 109 × 102 mm, cranio-caudal diameter of
94 mm), saccular, almost completely thrombosed aneurysm of the left renal artery
with discrete parietal calcifications, a 13 × 9 mm nodular calcification at the
superior-posterior pole , and no active contrast media extravasation in the retroperitoneum.
The giant aneurysm compressed the left kidney pelvis causing severe hydronephrosis
with extreme thinning of the renal parenchyma (to a thickness of 2 mm) and of renal
Bertin columns which appeared as thin septa-like structures ( and ). On abdominal ultrasound, severe
shrinking of kidney parenchyma was associated with the reduction to a minimum of the
blood flow to the doomed kidney and power doppler detected no blood flow to the
residual rim of kidney tissue. CT angiography failed to improve visualization as the
aneurysm was almost completely filled with thrombotic material leaving but scanty
room for contrast penetration. Consequently, the outpouching that holds the place
for the aneurysm on CT angiography appears quite distant from the aorta , although the wall
of the thrombosed aneurysm was in contact with the aortic wall, as demonstrated by
both ultrasound and CT . CT scan
also revealed degenerative changes in the spine with diffuse bone demineralization,
reduced vertebral body height of the second lumbar vertebra and body compression
fracture of the third lumbar vertebra.
Next, the patient was evaluated by an interventional radiologist and a vascular
surgeon. The former decided that the patient had no indication for endovascular
treatment, taking into account the size of the aneurysm and the advanced stage of
kidney parenchymal disease, while the latter considered that the patient was at a
major surgical risk if subjected to nephrectomy. The patient agreed with this
choice, declaring that she would not have accepted any kind of intervention. Her
only wish was to be given some medication to alleviate her pain.
During her hospital stay, adequate blood pressure control was achieved with
difficulty, requiring an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I)
(Perindopril 10 mg), a calcium channel blocker (Amlodipine 10 mg), an imidazoline
receptor agonist (Moxonidine 0.4 mg), a beta blocker (Bisoprolol 10 mg), and a
thiazide-like diuretic (Indapamide 2.5 mg). A decrease in potassium level, from a
normal value of 3.6 mmol/L at admission, to 3.16-3.3-3.2-3.3-3.74-2.7-3.05 mmol/L in
blood samples taken at 1 to 2 days intervals, was noticed for which the only
explanation seemed to be Indapamide administration, which made us to suspect that at
home the patient took Indapamide intermittently if at all. Consequently, a potassium
sparing diuretic (Spironolactone 25 mg) was added. The decision to associate the 2
diuretics was also supported by the increased NT-proBNP level suggesting volume
overload and, consequently, the necessity for a more aggressive volume-controlling
medication. Serum potassium level at discharge was almost normal (3.47 mmol/L),
corroborating the usefulness of Spironolactone as an adjunct to the thiazide-like
diuretic. Given the severity of her anemia the patient was transfused with 1 unit of
packed red blood cells. An iron deficiency state was suspected based on her low
transferrin saturation, although her ferritin was above the 30 μg/L
threshold. Coupled with the low red blood cell indices, this made an iron
deficiency anemia very probable, prompting the administration of a challenge dose of
iron sucrose (iron(III)-hydroxide sucrose complex).
At discharge, the patient was instructed to continue the blood pressure lowering
medication given during her hospital stay and to check creatinine, sodium, and
potassium level. A follow-up visit after 1 month was arranged but the patient failed
to comply, and she was lost to follow-up. We were unable to reach her by phone.