A 43 year-old male who presented with lower back pain for 4 years, loss of 40 pounds in 17 months and urinary urgency for one month. His past medical history was significant for Bell’s palsy, hyperlipidemia, osteoarthritis of cervical spine and vertigo. Physical exam results were normal except a firm, non-tender, mobile large mass palpated in right side of abdomen. The mass was nondistended. Abdominal CT showed a 10 cm retroperitoneal mass . Laboratory results showed normal hematologic, biochemical and coagulatory results.
Biopsy revealed a spindle cell neoplasm in a myxoid background with a delicate vascular network. The tumor cells showed small oval nuclei with some cytological atypia including hyperchromatism and angulate nuclei. No mitotic figures nor necrosis was noted. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that negativity of SMA, desmin, β-catenin, S100, SOX10, AE1/3, EMA, CD117 and CD34 in the tumor cells. DOG1 stain showed rare nonspecific staining in the tumor cells. Proliferative index was low (< 5%) on ki-67 stain (Data not shown). Further molecular classification was attempted but hindered due to the limited specimen.
Tumor resection was performed with the entire tumor removed. At intraoperative examination, retroperitoneal mass was found clearly intimate with the mesentery and adjacent small bowel showed that the. Gross examination of the resected specimen showed an intact 10.8 × 9.0 × 8.3 cm, tan-white, smooth, firm, lobulated mesenteric mass, which was completely confined within small bowel serosa and had bulging and gelatinous cut surface. The mass was predominately solid (90%) and focally cystic (10%) with a 2.0 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm calcified area .
Microscopic examination confirmed multinodular and infiltrative pattern . The majority of the tumor was consisted of regular, bland-appearing spindle cells in a fibrous and myxoid stroma . Thin walled elongated vessels were noted with areas of hyalinization. In certain areas the tumor cells assumed epithelioid morphology and formed a more cord-like and even whorls with more prominent cytological atypia, which is unusual for LGMFS . Perivascular hypercellular areas and osseous metaplasia were present . Yet, no significant atypia, necrosis nor increased mitotic activity was observed.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells lacked of reactivity with CD34; CK5/6, EMA, SOX10, S100, desmin, SMA, MDM2 and GFAP. CD117 stain highlighted rare tumor cells. DOG1 stain showed moderate dense immunoreactivity, while MUC4 immunostain demonstrated diffuse and strong positivity in the tumor cell cytoplasm .
Rearrangement involving FUS (16p11.2) gene was identified with break-apart probe, while rearrangement of the MDM2 and DDIT3 gene regions was not present, excluding dedifferentiated and myxoid liposarcoma. Additional confirmatory RNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue was extracted, and targeted RNA sequencing using a customized FusionPlex 86 genes panel (Archer, Boulder, CO) was performed to reveal a confirmatory FUS-CREB3L2 fusion .
A final diagnosis of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma was made based on the morphologic, immunohistochemical and cytogenetic features of the tumor.
In summary, we identified a rare case of low-grade myxofibrous sarcoma arising in small intestine mesentery. The tumor cells focally formed unusual epithelioid cords/whorls which contained prominent atypical neoplastic cells.