A 58-year-old African-American man presented to our neurosurgery clinic for cervical spinal stenosis. He had an approximate one-year history of slowly declining ability to ambulate, chronic pain in both hands, as well as mild paresthesias and decreased sensation involving fingers on both hands. Additionally, he described grip weakness, greater in his left than right. Both computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multi-level degenerative disc disease, causing narrowing of his spinal canal at cervical levels 3-7 (C3-C7) . Given our patient's clinical presentation and radiographic evidence of cervical spinal stenosis, he was scheduled for a C3-C7 laminoplasty for spondylosis and myelopathy.
Our patient's past medical history was significant for non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, asthma, hypertension, benign prostatic hypertrophy, gastro-esophageal reflux disease, deep venous thrombosis, post-traumatic stress disorder, insomnia, chronic pain, and obstructive sleep apnea. For these disorders his medication regimen included metformin, budesonide and formoterol fumarate dihydrate, albuterol, lisinopril, hydrochlorothiazide, tolterodine tartrate, omeprazole, warfarin sodium, gabapentin, zolpidem tartrate, ferrous sulfate, and senna, on a daily basis. He used 900 mg gabapentin three times a day. Our patient did not drink or smoke, and reported allergies to aspirin and peanuts, which caused hives.
On clinical exam, he was alert and oriented in all hemispheres. Cranial nerves II-XII were grossly intact. His peripheral neurological exam revealed decreased sensation to light touch and pinprick in both hands and feet. His muscular strength was 4+/5 in his bilateral deltoids, biceps and triceps, 4/5 in his bilateral wrist extensors, 4/5 in his right finger abductors, 3/5 in his left finger abductors, 4/5 in his bilateral finger flexors, and 4+/5 in his bilateral lower extremities. He showed no pre-operative co-ordination and/or cerebellum abnormalities. Physical examination revealed 3/4 hyper-reflexia in all four extremities. He was Hoffman positive on his right side and Hoffman negative on his left.
Our patient was evaluated by the anesthesia service and medicine services prior to surgery. He did not take metformin, warfarin sodium, or zolpidem tartrate the day before. He did, however, take 900 mg gabapentin up until the morning of his surgery.
Pre-operatively, he was given 1 mg midazolam. He was taken to our operating room and placed under general anesthesia with oral endo-tracheal intubation for C3-C7 laminotomy. Our patient's general anesthetic consisted of an initial 100 mg intubating dose of succinylcholine followed by total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) using propofol, ketamine, and fentanyl. A total of 100 mg ketamine was used throughout the entire procedure. Neuromuscular monitoring was performed during the case and remained without any significant concerns. Our patient's intra-operative fluid balance included 2400 mL Ringer's Lactate and urine output of 300 mL, with 150 mL blood loss during the three hour and fifty minute case.
Our patient's hemodynamics remained stable throughout the entire case with mean arterial pressures (MAP) maintained at approximately 100 mmHg according to the surgeon's request. At the end of the case, although breathing spontaneously, our patient was not responsive to verbal or noxious stimuli. After being given three separate doses of 40 μg IV naloxone, our patient was moving his arms with anti-gravity strength. He was extubated and taken to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) for recovery.
In the PACU, our patient was not moving his upper or lower extremities and his verbal response consisted of "aha" or blowing through pursed lips. His pupils remained equal and reactive to light. When asked to respond by blinking, our patient would blink uncontrollably. His extremities were flaccid and areflexic. Our patient's vitals remained stable and oxygen saturation was 100%. His arterial blood gas was obtained and was normal, except for partial carbon dioxide (pCO2) of 50 mmHg. No electrolyte abnormalities were detected. A urine analysis was within normal limits, along with glucose, ammonia, and lactate levels. Motor evoke potentials were rechecked and remained unchanged from pre-operative values. It was then decided to obtain a CT of the head and neck region .
After over two hours of being inappropriately non-responsive to verbal and tactile stimuli in the PACU, our patient was given an additional 400 μg of IV naloxone over a 10 minute period. He was then transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for close monitoring and care. MRI and angiography revealed a normal Circle of Willis and no evidence of post-surgical complications in the cervical spine after the C3-C7 decompression .
In the ICU, blood and imaging studies continued to be unremarkable. Our patient continued to exhibit a dissociative state. During the next four days, however, he showed gradual improvement. He would alternate from being awake and oriented to being dissociative and having decreased sensory and motor function, despite the lack of a toxic or metabolic process. By the fourth day of hospitalization, he had a significant increase in sensory and motor function and was able to answer questions appropriately. The dissociative states became less frequent and of shorter duration. On the ninth day of hospitalization, our patient was discharged home with full recovery and without any objective neurological abnormalities.