A 42 year-old woman presented with intermittent dry cough of ten months duration. No fever, chest tightness, bone pain, anorexia, dyspnea on exertion or body weight loss was noted. She took some medicines at a local clinic to control her cough. However, blood-tinged sputum appeared one month prior to hospital admission. No bone pain or lymphadenopathy was noted on examination. Her breathing was slightly coarse without rales or rhonchi on auscultation. A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) revealed a right anterior mediastinal shadow with multiple pulmonary nodular lesions.
Tracing back her history, she was a non-smoker, without occupational or environmental exposure to air pollutants or micro-organisms. No family members had any similar clinical manifestations nor had any died of cancer before. No related travel history was noted during this time.
After admission, a bronchoscopic examination revealed no endobronchial lesion or abnormal secretions. A pulmonary function test showed a mild restrictive ventilatory defect. The whole body bone scan was negative for tumor involvement. A CT-guided biopsy was recommended but the patient refused to undergo this procedure. The hemogram, leukocyte differentiation count, and coagulating profile were all within normal ranges.
A biopsy through video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was then indicated to confirm the diagnosis. A 3 cm working incision and a 1 cm scope port were designed for performing this procedure. Removing a wedge of lung tissues including the masses from two separate sites were performed smoothly and the microscopic examination showed a solid mass made up mostly of plasma cells . These tumor cells stained positively for kappa light chains , but negatively for lambda chains.
After confirming the diagnosis, the patient received a series of related evaluations such as serum calcium, urine Bence-Jones protein and plasma electrophoresis for M protein detection. However, all of the above examinations were negative. The skull, spine and pelvis X-ray revealed no osteolytic lesions. The bone marrow biopsy revealed normal patterns of cell distribution.
She received adjuvant chemotherapy, as originally planned, including mephalan and steroids, and her symptoms improved after two months of treatment.