A 53-year-old man from Pakistan presented to the Hiroshima University Hospital in Japan in January 2019 with persistent skin lesions of both malleoli of his right ankle and the dorsum of his left foot. The immunohistochemistry of a skin biopsy, performed in November 2018 at another hospital in Japan, had suggested leishmaniasis. The lesions and itching had appeared in November 2018 and did not respond to gentamicin ointment. Three years previously, he had been living and working in Japan but returned to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, Pakistan, which is an endemic area for CL caused by L. tropica and Leishmania major [–] for about 2 months (August–September) in 2018. The skin lesions manifested as erythematous nodules surrounding an ulcer in the center of the lesion. The lesions on the malleoli of his right ankle each measured 3 × 3 cm, and the lesion on the dorsum of his left foot measured 5 × 4 cm . He requested further tests for an accurate diagnosis of his skin disease. We performed a punch biopsy of each skin lesion and collected the exudate from the skin lesions. Giemsa staining of the exudate and hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of the skin biopsy tissue demonstrated Leishmania amastigotes in macrophages on histological examination . Leishmania promastigotes were detected 2 weeks later in the culture of a skin punch biopsy specimen that had been preserved in saline and then transferred to medium 199 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum . Immunohistochemical staining using the C11C antibody (a monoclonal antibody against Leishmania peroxiredoxin/thiol-specific antigen) also detected positive cells in the skin lesion . For the molecular diagnosis of Leishmania infection, DNA was extracted from the skin biopsy sample using a DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Tokyo, Japan). We performed PCR with the DNA samples to identify the Leishmania parasite mini-exon gene and detected products of expected sizes on agarose gel electrophoresis. The causative species was identified as either L. major or L. tropica . The amplified DNA fragments were size selected from agarose gels and cloned into the vector pCR2.1-TOPP, continuously subjected to sequencing. The phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the 368-nt nucleotide sequences by the maximum likelihood method and Kimura two-parameter model using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Version 10.2.2 (MEGA X) software . The bootstrap scores were calculated for 1000 replicates . The patient consented to all the specialized diagnostic tests, including DNA sequence analysis that was performed for species identification. Based on these findings, we diagnosed the lesions as CL caused by L. tropica and started treatment with intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, Osaka, Japan), which was administered intravenously daily for 6 days. The patient did not experience fever or fatigue or any other side effects during the course of treatment. Three weeks after starting treatment, the erythema disappeared, and the erythematous nodules resolved .