A 62-year-old Chinese man without smoking history was admitted to Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital in September 2019 because of cough with phlegm lasting for 2 months and presence of blood in the phlegm. On physical examination, there was no dysmorphic features. Chest enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass at the right lower lobe, multiple nodular thickening with right horizontal fissures, and local atelectasis in the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, accompanied by bilateral pleural effusion and inflammatory lesions (more severe on the right side) and plump mediastinal lymph-nodes. Further examination did not detect metastatic lesions. Subsequently, CT-guided biopsy of the lung tumor tissue was performed. Pathological examination showed NSCLC, and the clinical analysis indicated stage IVA (cT3N2M1a). The immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive expression for napsin A, Ki-67, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and negative expression for P40 , indicating an adenocarcinoma origin of the lung tumor.
To determine the possible presence of somatic mutations suitable for targeted therapy, DNA-level NGS was also performed on the biopsy specimen based on a 10-gene panel (including ALK, BRAF, EGFR, ERBB2, KRAS, MET, PIK3CA, RET, ROS1 and TP53, Berry Oncology Corporation, Beijing, China). A novel solute carrier family 8 member A1 (SLC8A1)-ALK fusion type was identified with a mutant allele frequency of 5.98%. The sequencing results showed that the SLC8A1 exon 2 rearranged with ALK exon 19 (, ). The breakpoints and corresponding fusion sequences were further examined using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), followed by Sanger sequencing to confirm its expression pattern on RNA levels. Of note, the results of targeted RT-PCR sequencing revealed a different ALK rearrangement partner gene: a B-cell CLL/lymphoma 11A (BCL11A) exon 3 rearranged with ALK exon 20 (, ). The transcript fusion type retained the N-terminal part of BCL11A and the entire kinase domain of ALK, which may lead to transformation of constitutive kinase activity and carcinogenesis.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to confirm the ALK rearrangement events on a chromosomal level in the biopsy specimen obtained from the patient , with typical positive ALK-rearrangement signals in comparison with the positive reference EML4-ALK fusion image . Apart from the aforementioned ALK fusion, there was no epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), TP53 and KRAS mutations or ROS1 rearrangement detected in this patient.
The patient was treated with crizotinib (dose: 250 mg, twice daily) from October 16, 2019. Chest CT scan images demonstrated that the mass, plump mediastinal lymph nodes and pleural effusion had obviously resolved at 1 month and reached stable disease status at 3 months after the treatment . However, a chest CT scan (July 4, 2020) revealed an increased solid composition of the mass, multiple thickened nodules with right horizontal fissures, and plum per mediastinal lymph-nodes appeared in comparison with previous CT scan images (January 11, 2020) . We considered that the patient developed progressive disease during the treatment with crizotinib, and the progression-free survival was 9 months. Thenceforward, alectinib was administered (dose: 600 mg, twice daily) from July 4, 2020. A chest CT scan performed after 4 and 8 months showed partial response. The patient remains under surveillance up to now.