A 52-year-old male was admitted to the hospital on October 23, 2021, with yellowish skin and sclera for three months and a progressive exacerbation of postoperative jaundice for one month.
Three months ago, the patient noticed yellowish skin/sclera and dark-brown urine without any apparent predisposition, which had worsened with abdominal pain a month later, so he was admitted to a local hospital for further management. The post-admission examination of liver function test revealed normal transaminases but elevated levels of direct bilirubin, indirect bilirubin, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and total bile acid . Upper abdominal computed tomography (CT) examination showed multiple intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct stones and obstructions, cholestasis, and gallbladder enlargement. The patient was diagnosed with obstructive jaundice having multiple intrahepatic bile duct stones with acute cholecystitis, so he underwent left external hepatectomy with bile duct exploration, stone extraction, T-tube drainage, and cholecystectomy on September 9, 2021. The abdominal pain was significantly relieved postoperatively without fever, nausea, vomiting, or any sign of abdominal distension, but the urine color had been persistently getting darker with aggravation of jaundice of skin and sclera. Liver function re-examination showed a progressive increase in the bilirubin level compared to before the operation. Thus, the patient was further managed with plasma exchange and symptomatic and supportive treatments. However, the effect was not good, and he was admitted to our service for further diagnosis and treatment.
He reported a history of hypertension for ten years and did not take medication regularly. However, he denied a history of long-term heavy drinking, exposure to poisons and traditional Chinese medicines, and trauma.
The patient denied any family history of malignancy and other hereditary disorders.
The patient had a Body Mass Index of 23.44, and his vital signs were stable, with clear consciousness. Moreover, the patient presented with the face of chronic liver disease and severe jaundice of the skin and sclera but did not have liver palm and spider nevus. Heart and lung examinations did not find any obvious abnormality, while the abdominal physical localized a T-tube drainage tube in place at the right abdomen with palpable tenderness at the right upper quadrant in the absence of rebound pain, muscle tension, and shifting dullness.
Dynamic changes in biochemical indicators of liver function tests were listed as follows : On Sep 6, 2021, preoperative LFTs were triglyceride (TG) as 3.62 mmol/L (Ref: < 1.7 mmol/L), total cholesterol (TC) as 4.46 mmol/L (Ref: < 5.2 mmol/L), high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) as 0.17 mmol/L (Ref:0.91-1.55 mmol/L), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol(LDL-C): 3.14 mmol/L(Ref: < 3.12 mmol/L).
On October 23, 2021, postoperative LFTs showed TG as 3.46 mmol/L, TC as 5.16 mmol/L, HDL-C as 0.64 mmol/L, and LDL-C as 3.23 mmol/L.
On October 23, 2021, C-reactive protein and coagulation function were checked with normal findings, hepatitis B and viral infection were ruled out with negative antigen in the serum antibody tests, and a negative autoimmune antibody panel ruled out autoimmune hepatitis. Other tests were in the normal ranges, including thyroid function tests, ceruloplasmin, total iron binding capacity, and unsaturated iron binding capacity.
On October 23, 2021, bile drainage fluid was sent for culture, which came back with positive Pseudomonas putida, being sensitive to antibiotics such as piperacillin, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime.
On November 17, 2021, the culture came back with negative gram-negative bacilli lipopolysaccharide and fungal (1-3)-B-D glucan.
On November 19, 2021, metagenomics next-generation sequencing (mNGS) on peripheral blood was reported back without detections of bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, viruses, mycoplasma, Chlamydia, rickettsia, and parasites.
A preoperative non-contrast CT scan of the upper abdomen unveiled left intrahepatic and multiple bile duct stones with dilated intra-and extrahepatic bile ducts and an enlarged gallbladder . Postoperative non-contrast CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging of the upper abdomen illustrated signs of liver cirrhosis with multiple intrahepatic bile duct stones in the upper right posterior lobe of the liver with cholangitis, peri-cholangitis, and portal hypertension and . Besides, postoperative magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography further confirmed multiple intrahepatic bile duct stones with mild dilatation in the upper right posterior lobe of the liver , and T-tube angiography could not visualize the right and left hepatic duct but the lower end of the common bile duct . Postoperative histopathologic examination exhibited cholestatic liver disease and intrahepatic bile duct dilatation with chronic inflammation . Furthermore, sequential immunohistochemical staining unveiled mild and delicate hyperplasia along biliary ducts, then Alpha-Smooth Muscle Actin staining spotted a few activated hepatic stellate cells, Masson and Sirius red staining revealed fibrous tissue hyperplasia in the portal area with an interlobular short fibrous septum, Periodic Acid Schiff Diastase Stain displayed a little waxy substance in Kupffer cells, and Prussian blue signified a little iron granules deposition in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells. Besides, copper staining was negative.
During hospitalization, the patient was managed on the diagnoses of cholestatic hepatitis, biliary tract infection, and decompensated liver cirrhosis with piperacillin-tazobactam sodium, dexamethasone, and supportive medications for protecting the liver and eliminating jaundice. After the treatments, re-examining white blood cells and C-reactive protein did not confirm any ongoing infection. However, the bilirubin was significantly higher than before. Afterward, intermittent plasma exchange replacement therapy with double plasma molecular absorption system (DPMAS) was administered to the patient four times to control progressive jaundice but failed to stop the progression.
CT examination was repeated after this admission to unveil the signs of cirrhosis, which was paradoxical to the preoperative finding of normal liver. Further pathological examination of the resected liver tissue revealed fibrous tissue hyperplasia in the hepatic portal area, suggesting that the patient only possessed early hepatic fibrosis before surgery. Taken together, we advised the patient of whole-exon screening to fish out any genetic disorder to search for the cause of cirrhosis, which surprisingly revealed UGT1A1 and ABCB11 gene mutations .