A six-year old female presented to the emergency department with a one month history of progressive right eye swelling. At this time, laboratory findings included ESR 120 mm/hr, CRP 7.2 mg/dL, HGB 10.1 g/dL, PLT 504 × 109/L, normal WBC and differential, negative angiotensin converting enzyme, negative anti-serine-protease 3 antibody, and negative anti-myeloperoxidase antibody . Brain MRI demonstrated a T2 hyperintense, well-marginated extraconal mass centered in the right superior rectus muscle. Subsequent periorbital biopsy findings were described as consistent with eosinophilic angiocentric fibrosis. She had no notable sinusitis on imaging nor cardiorespiratory symptoms. Ophthalmologic exam showed no intraorbital inflammation. She improved with 1 mg/kg of prednisone twice daily and was successfully weaned off by one year later with mild residual upper eyelid swelling and ptosis.
Six years later (age 12), she presented to pediatric rheumatology clinic with a two month history of bilateral calf pain and tightness with difficulty ambulating. She had a normal review of systems including no fever, fatigue, night sweats, or recent travel. Recent ophthalmologic follow-up exam showed no inflammation. She did not take medications and had an unremarkable family history. Exam revealed tender, swollen calves with limited ankle range of motion and strength due to pain and tightness. She had an antalgic gait. She had no hepatosplenomegaly, arthritis, rash, or abnormal cardiopulmonary findings on exam. Labs at this visit demonstrated ESR 112 mm/hr, CRP 7 mg/dL, HGB 9.1 g/dL, and MCV 65.6 with normal muscle markers and mildly elevated complement . She had an IgG of 4040 mg/dL (503–1719), determined to be a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. She also had a normal or negative ANA profile, anti-serine protease 3 antibody, anti-myeloperoxidase antibody, angiotensin converting enzyme, lysozyme, serum calcium, creatinine, aldolase, uric acid, T4, and TSH. MRI of the distal lower extremities demonstrated extensive bilateral myositis of the lower legs with both active inflammation and atrophy and to a lesser extent fasciitis . During this period of diagnostic assessment, the patient’s leg pains self-resolved and the patient was lost to follow-up.
The patient presented again to rheumatology three years later, at age 15, with three weeks of lower leg pain with swelling and tightness and an otherwise unremarkable history and exam. Her labs revealed ESR 107 mm/hr, CRP 7.5 mg/dL, and IgG 3240 mg/dL with a normal SPEP (predominantly IgG1). She tested positive for lupus anticoagulant (dilute Russell viper venom test) and anti-beta-2 glycoprotein-1 IgM and had an elevated d-Dimer, PTT, and PT. ANA profile and muscle enzyme levels remained negative . Chest radiograph was normal. MRI with and without contrast revealed normal pelvis and thigh musculature but diffuse muscular edema consistent with severe myositis throughout her lower legs with associated fatty infiltration indicative of muscular atrophy .
A biopsy of her left gastrocnemius muscle was performed, demonstrating non-caseating granulomatous myositis with perivascular inflammation, extensive muscle fibrosis, and fatty replacement of the muscle . Special stains of the granulomas demonstrated a histiocytic component with CD4 + T cell predominance consistent with sarcoidosis . Further pathologic assessment excluded microorganisms, inclusion body myositis, and IgG4 disease.
Re-examination of her right peri-orbital biopsy from 9 years earlier also revealed a CD4 + T cell-predominant inflammatory cell infiltrate within the skeletal muscle similar to the current findings in her gastrocnemius, although no granulomas were found. She had a normal chest x-ray and no uveitis, lymphadenopathy, arthritis, or rash.
The patient was diagnosed with sarcoid myositis and prescribed 20 mg oral prednisone daily, iron (for iron deficiency), and physical therapy.
Over the next two months, she had significant improvement in her symptoms and inflammatory markers . She began 20 mg oral methotrexate weekly with further resolution of symptoms (apart from chronic muscle tightness) when seen 4 months later on 10 mg prednisone. A few months after that visit, she self-discontinued her medications and experienced return of symptoms and lab abnormalities after one month . Chest radiograph remained normal. Ultrasound with venous doppler of her more tender left lower extremity was reassuring against clot. Abdominal and pelvic CT performed soon after due to a motor vehicle accident showed no intrabdominal masses or concerning pathology. She was once again lost to follow-up.