A 59-year-old white female was receiving regular dental treatment at the Special Patient Clinic of the University of Texas Dental Branch at Houston. During her recent clinic visit, we noticed a submucosal nodule on her posterior hard palate during routine oral examination. The patient was unaware of this lesion. This lesion was covered by intact mucosa, was non-fluctuant and had the consistency of an irritation fibroma. This submucosal nodule measured 0.8 cm in greatest diameter and palpation of this nodule elicited no tenderness or blanching.
Her medical history is significant for cervical lymph node metastasis of squamous cell carcinoma from unknown primary, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypothyroidism and depression. The patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary, metastatic to the right mid jugular lymph nodes approximately four years ago. Various imaging studies were performed at the time which failed to identify the primary site of this tumour. The patient was treated with a course of external beam radiation therapy to the pharyngeal axis and the neck. Her oral mucosa and teeth were shielded from the direct radiation therapy beams. Patient had no clinical evidence of either primary or metastatic tumour during the last four years. Her current medications include levothyroxine, enalapril malate and fluoxetine. The patient had a 10-pack-year history of smoking and social consumption of alcohol. The patient's family history was unremarkable.
Our clinical differential diagnosis for this palatal nodule included traumatic fibroma and epidermoid cyst. However, because of her past medical history of metastatic disease, we examined this nodule using a multispectral oral cancer screening device (Identafi™ 3000). This submucosal nodule revealed decreased autofluorescence at 405 nm illumination . On the other hand, a clinically similar appearing benign fibroma (arrow) from a different patient, exhibited normal tissue autofluorescence . An excisional biopsy of this submucosal nodule was performed which was diagnosed as consistent with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma because of the overlying benign surface epithelium. Patient was referred to her oncologist for further evaluation and treatment. The clinical protocol for the detection potentially malignant oral mucosal lesions with Identafi 3000 was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. Written informed consents were obtained from all participants of this clinical study.