A 35-year-old man presented with severe headache and subsequent loss of consciousness and was admitted to our hospital. No focal neurological abnormalities were noted. Initial computed tomography (CT) showed findings typical of subarachnoid hemorrhage in the basal cistern. Three-dimensional CT angiography revealed an anomalous artery originating from the posterior surface of the ACoA and a saccular aneurysm arising from the trifurcation of the anomalous artery, the branching point of the ACoA with fenestration, and the right A1or A2 segment of the ACA . The aneurysmal fundus projected superolaterally to the right. The anomalous artery arose from the posterior surface of the ACoA and ran around the genu of the corpus callosum, parallel to bilateral pericallosal arteries, which distributed branches to the m edial frontal lobes . The anomalous artery was interpreted as an accessory ACA.
Right frontotemporal craniotomy was performed. Following dissection of the Sylvian fissure and interhemispheric fissure, the ACoA complex including bilateral A1 and A2 segments of the ACA, and the anterior surface of the ACoA were exposed . After partial resection of the ipsilateral gyrus rectus, the aneurysmal fundus was found behind the ipsilateral A2 segment of the ACA, which hid the accessory ACA. After gently pushing the aneurysm forward by spatula to the corner of the ACoA, the distal artery of the accessory ACA and its origin were confirmed, working between the right frontal lobe and the right A2 segment of the ACA . A straight fenestrated Yasargil titanium clip (No. FT598T; blade length 4 mm, fenestration diameter 3.5 mm) was applied across the ipsilateral A2 segment of the ACA and toward the accessory ACA from the ACoA origin, parallel to the ACoA . The aneurysm was successfully obliterated with clipping. Complete aneurysm occlusion and patency of the ipsilateral A2 segment of the ACA and the accessory ACA were confirmed intraoper atively under indocyanine green angiography . Postoperative three-dimensional CT angiography revealed patency of both the right A2 segment of the ACA and the accessory ACA, resulting in disappearance of the aneurysm .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged with no neurological deficits.