A previously healthy 12-year-old girl presented to our hospital with fever, myalgia, sore throat, swelling, and tenderness on the right side of the neck on August 27, 2018.
She had fever, sore throat, and severe swelling of the left cervical lymph node (LN) for 4 d before hospital presentation. Furthermore, she had severe pain and tenderness in the swollen neck, which also limited the neck movement. As the fever worsened, she underwent treatment with antibiotics (amoxicillin) and antipyretics (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen) at a local clinic. However, the symptoms did not improve; thus, she was referred to a general hospital. She was hospitalized on fever day 4.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. Her physical and neurological developments were normal.
Family and genetic history of the patient was unremarkable.
The patient’s height and weight were 152.7 cm and 41.5 kg, respectively. Her vital signs at admission were as follows: body temperature, 39 °C; blood pressure, 100/60 mmHg; heart rate, 96 beats/min; respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 99% at room air. She was alert, but looked ill and dehydrated. At the time of admission, she had severe left neck swelling and pain, which hindered her from moving her neck to the left. Other than the red tonsils, she had no other notable symptoms, such as red lips, strawberry tongue, conjunctival infection, rash, and edema of the hands and feet.
Serum laboratory results showed elevated white blood cell count (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and liver enzyme level, which were as follows: WBC count, 14.7 × 103/mm3; hemoglobin, 11.5 g/dL; platelet count, 242 × 103/mm3; ESR, 120 mm/h; CRP, 6.44 mg/dL; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 459 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 650 U/L; and total bilirubin, 0.9 mg/dL. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were within normal ranges. Urinary analysis results were normal. There was no pyuria. She tested negative for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), hepatitis virus, and respiratory virus. However, she tested positive for MP immunoglobulin M (IgM), with an index of 13. The results of MP are expressed as an index (ratio between the optical density of the test sample and that of the cut-off value) that could be used as a quantitative measure, as it is proportional to the amount of specific IgM present. The test serum is considered positive when the ratio is > 10.
Neck computed tomography (CT) revealed a 2.5 cm × 2.0 cm × 3.2 cm acute infectious lymphadenitis with perilesional infiltration and necrosis .
The patient was diagnosed with lymphadenitis caused by MP (Mycoplasma IgM ratio: 13).
She was treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics [third-generation cephalosporin (cefotaxime 150 mg/kg/d) + macrolide (clarithromycin 15 mg/kg/d) + clindamycin (full gram 25 mg/kg/d)] and silymarin (legalon 70 mg/d) on the first day of hospitalization.
On hospital day 3, the test results showed mild improvement, with CRP level of 5.71 mg/dL and AST and ALT levels of 85 U/L and 198 U/L, respectively. However, the fever, cervical edema, severe pain, and tenderness persisted without improvement. On hospital day 4, the fever persisted (day 8 of fever) and the patient had very slight conjunctival hyperemia in the morning. The patient did not respond to macrolide (clarithromycin) administered for 72 h. Therefore, we suspected a refractory MP infection. We also measured the brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level to diagnose atypical KD because of the slight conjunctival hyperemia. The BNP level was 427.2 ng/mL (normal: < 100 ng/mL). Additional cardiac work-up included an echocardiography (ECG), which showed a slight QT interval prolongation (corrected QT interval: 489 ms) and a dilated right coronary artery (RCA diameter; 4.73 mm, Z score: 4.62, by Boston method) and left coronary artery [LCA diameter; 2.35 mm, Z score: -1.73, (Boston method); Figure ]. Cardiac CT, performed to accurately evaluate the degree of coronary artery dilatation, revealed a multifocal ectatic change of the entire RCA .