An 82-year-old man presented to the local clinic with abnormal liver function, and gallbladder wall thickening was found on abdominal ultrasonography (US). He was referred to our hospital for further examination. At the time of the initial visit, a physical exam revealed no abnormalities in vital signs and no abdominal findings. The patient had a 12-year history of hyperlipidemia and had undergone unilateral lobectomy plus isthmectomy for follicular carcinoma of the right thyroid gland in his 70 s. On admission, a complete blood count and serum chemical studies reflected no abnormal findings, no increase in inflammatory response, and tumor markers within normal limits (carcinoembryonic antigen 1.2 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 9.0 U/mL). Dynamic computed tomography (CT) showed localized wall thickening from the body to the fundus of the gallbladder, which was enhanced from an early stage and showed a prolonged contrast effect. There were no other findings, such as pancreatic enlargement, bile duct dilatation, or retroperitoneal fibrosis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed gallbladder wall thickening in the gallbladder body on T2-weighted images and a high signal on diffusion-weighted images. Contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI showed wall thickening with early enhancement, as seen on CT, and no intramural cyst-like structures suggestive of Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses (RAS). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed no dilatation, stenosis, or border irregularity of the bile duct and pancreatic duct . EUS showed a localized, smooth wall thickening at the base of the gallbladder with a maximum thickness of 6 mm, and the interior was delineated in a laminar fashion, while the outermost hyperechoic layer in the same area was well preserved . Although the possibility of inflammatory disease, such as chronic cholecystitis, was considered, malignancy could not be completely ruled out, the patient underwent laparoscopic whole layer cholecystectomy for the diagnosis and treatment. No malignant findings were reported in the intraoperative rapid diagnostic test of the gallbladder, and the surgery was completed. A resected specimen of the gallbladder showed a 20 × 20 mm-sized induration in the center of the body, and a grayish-white, full-thickness wall thickening was observed on the cut surface . Pathological examination revealed a high-grade lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration and fibrosis in all layers without malignant findings . The mucosal epithelium of the gallbladder remained normal, with no evidence of destruction by lymphocytic infiltration , and lymphocytic infiltration was distributed in a laminar fashion in the gallbladder wall . Although there was no obstruction, there was an apparent phlebitis . In addition, more than 10 IgG4-positive cells were observed per high-power field (HPF) , and the IgG4/IgG positive cell ratio exceeded 40% . The pathology findings of the cystic duct wall of the gallbladder showed only mild chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, including a small number of plasma cells without IgG4-positive cells, suggesting no involvement of IgG4-related disease. According to the 2020 revised comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related disease , serum IgG4 levels after surgery were normal in serological diagnosis [item 2], but the other two items providing clinical and radiological features [item 1] and pathological diagnosis [item 3] (> 10 IgG4 + cells/HPF and IgG4 + /IgG cell ratio > 40%) were relevant, and thus the final diagnosis was probable IgG4-related cholecystitis. The patient was followed up with laboratory tests and CT scans from the neck to the abdomen and has remained free of relapse without steroid administration for one and a half year after surgery.