A 28 year old Caucasian female in her first pregnancy with a low-risk quadruple test, underwent an anomaly ultrasound at 20 weeks’ and 6 days of gestation, revealing significant fetal hydrops . She had an unremarkable past medical history, no family history of note and no recent viral illness. Talipes of the right foot was the only structural abnormality noted. Growth and liquor volume were normal; however, the MCA peak systolic velocity was above 1.5 Multiple of Median (MoM).
Fetal blood sampling was performed, which identified anaemia (Hb 60 g/L). In utero blood transfusion was performed (15 ml); however, towards the end of the procedure, fetal demise occurred. Post-natal investigations were negative for red cell antibodies, thrombophilia screen and systemic lupus erythematosus. There was no evidence of fetal infection in the amniotic fluid. A hydropic male baby with intrauterine growth restriction , low-set ears, micrognathia , a right-sided talipes and malrotated intestines, was revealed at post mortem examination. The placenta’s weight was above 90th centile with no evidence of abnormal trophoblast proliferation, mesenchymal dysplasia or storage disease. Oedematous villi, increased nucleated haematopoietic cells and decidual vasculopathy were identified . The pancreas, duodenum, small and large intestines were normally formed and focally autolysed on histology with no enteritis or intra-luminal inflammatory exudate .
Comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH) array analysis of DNA extracted from a rib using oligonucleotide arrays with ~60,000 probes across the genome was performed, and results were consistent with a normal male chromosome complement.
In her second pregnancy three years later, with a different partner, nuchal ultrasound was normal, and the first-trimester screening was ‘low risk’. Booking blood tests were negative for antibody and haemoglobinopathy screening. Subsequent serial ultrasound scans at 12, 16 and 18 weeks’ of gestation were normal; however, at 20 weeks’ and 3 days of gestation, a recurrence of fetal hydrops was detected. No sonographic evidence of fetal anaemia was present, and both growth velocity and amniotic fluid index were normal. No structural abnormalities were identified. The patient was well with no history of recent illness. Subsequent repeat thrombophilia screen, complement C3, complement C4, anticardiolipin and lupus anticoagulant antibody were all normal, as was a fetal infection screen. Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome was excluded through GPC3 gene molecular analysis on DNA extracted from the first fetus.
The patient declined invasive testing. She was managed expectantly with serial ultrasound scans and monitoring for maternal mirror syndrome. At 23 weeks’ and 3 days of gestation, fetal movements were reduced, and contractures of both wrists and feet were identified. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies and IgG subsets were normal. At 25 weeks’ and 3 days of gestation this progressed to bilateral talipes and persistent arm flexion. There was no evidence of fetal anaemia by MCA PSV doppler or abnormality of fetal echocardiography, but hydropic features had increased with hepatosplenomegaly. Given the rapid progression of fetal hydrops and poor prognosis, the couple opted for medical interruption of pregnancy.
A post mortem confirmed fetal hydrops with growth parameters in keeping with gestational age. The liver was enlarged, and two small accessory spleens were noted. The spleen, pancreas, large and small intestine showed extensive autolysis macroscopically and microscopically, not allowing any detailed histological assessment. These fetuses usually have CD3+ lymphocytic interstitial infiltration, CD4+ and CD8+ cells in the pancreatic parenchyma, as previously reported by Da Silva et al. .
There were no other abnormalities and no features suggestive of fetal anaemia. Virology of ascitic fluid, brain, heart, lung, liver and spleen tissue were negative. Antibody screen was negative. Array CGH showed a normal male chromosome complement.
Recurrence of fetal hydrops in two male pregnancies with different partners raised the suspicion of an X-linked condition. Linkage analysis showed that both babies had inherited the same maternal X chromosome. Whole exome sequencing was performed using Agilent SureSelectXT Clinical Research Exome library on an Illumina HiSeq 2500. The data was processed using an in-house pipeline with subsequent filtering and assessment of variants in QIAGEN Ingenuity Variant Analysis and identified a pathogenic heterozygous missense variant in exon 12 of the FOXP3 gene [NM_014009.3:c.1189C > T p.(Arg397Trp)] on the maternal DNA. Sanger sequencing confirmed this result. Both fetuses were tested and found to be hemizygous for this variant, confirming a diagnosis of IPEX syndrome. The patient subsequently, had a successful pregnancy. She had prenatal testing with CVS, which showed a male fetus not affected by the condition.