A 4-year-old boy presented to the neurosurgical department with intense headaches, vomiting, ptosis, and only light perception in the left eye following a 12-month history of abdominal pain and headaches. Acanthosis nigricans, multiple café-au-lait spots, excessive sweating, and dental malocclusion were noted. A clinical diagnosis of pituitary apoplexy was made. He had tall stature [height +2.5 SD score (SDS); midparental height +0.3 SDS] developing over the previous year (growth velocity, 12.8 cm/y; 50th percentile = 7 cm/y). The child was irritable, aggressive, and hyperkinetic with poor attention span. His serum IGF-1 level was 5× the upper limit of normal (ULN) and his GH level was 1200 ng/mL, whereas his prolactin, free T4, TSH, 9 am cortisol, hemoglobin A1c, calcium, and electrolyte levels were within the normal range. MRI showed a 43 × 24 × 35‒mm tumor with suprasellar and left cavernous extension (Knosp grade 4) and evidence of acute bleeding in the tumor . Craniospinal MRI, whole body gallium-68 DOTATATE scan, and cerebrospinal fluid examination for tumor cells excluded systemic dissemination of the disease. There was no known family history of pituitary adenoma or gigantism , and family members were well. His paternal grandfather had a history of hyperparathyroidism due to a parathyroid adenoma. Genetic analysis revealed a previously repeatedly described germline nonsense AIP mutation (c.241C>T; p.Arg81Ter) in the proband and three family members with normal clinical, biochemical, and MRI assessments. Whole-exome sequencing on peripheral and tumor DNA revealed that 1293 variants of the 1311 detected heterozygous germline chromosome 11 variants were hemizygous (suggesting loss of heterozygosity) in tumor DNA, strongly suggesting loss of the entire maternal chromosome 11 . Somatic mutations in the tumor were analyzed using VarScan (v2.6.x) and MuTect (v1.1.4), whereas germline sequence variations were called using GATK’s UnifiedGenotyper. The effect of variants on protein function was predicted using SIFT and PolyPhen2 scores, and annotation was performed using ANNOVAR (release: March 2015) and SnpEff (v4.1). OMIM, ClinVar, and COSMIC databases were used for annotation of identified variants. Minor allele frequencies were obtained from the dbSNP (build 142), 1000 Genomes, and ExAC databases.