A 55-year-old Chinese female presented to the nephrology clinic with the complaint of abdominal pain for 2 d.
Symptoms started 2 d before presentation with no obvious cause of upper abdominal pain (the Visual analogue scale was 2), with nausea, vomiting of gastric contents, and diarrhea, with no chills, fever, chest tightness, shortness of breath, edema, hematemesis, or melena.
The patient was diagnosed with Stage 5 chronic kidney disease five years ago, combined with renal hypertension and renal anemia. She was treated with peritoneal dialysis for renal replacement therapy, and with compound α-keto acid tablets, amlodipine tablets, and clonidine tablets.
The patient denied a history of hepatitis, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, and had no family history of malignant tumors.
On initial evaluation, vital signs revealed a temperature of 36.5 °C, pulse rate of 98 bpm, blood pressure of 116/77 mmHg and a respiration rate of 19 breaths/min. The patient was conscious and oriented without chills, diarrhea, chest tightness, chest pain or any other discomfort. No yellowing of the skin or eyes was observed. Both lungs were clear, no dry or moist crackles (rales) were heard. Furthermore, the abdomen was flat, an abdominal tube was visible on the right lower abdomen, the tunnel had a little exudation, and the tunnel score was 1 point. No tenderness, rebound pain, enlarged liver or spleen, and no tapping pain in both kidneys were observed. No edema was noted in both ankles, limb muscle strength was Grade V, and Babbitt negative.
Routine blood examination showed the following results: Leukocyte count 6.0 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage 89.7%, hemoglobin 108 g/L; high sensitivity C reactive protein 244.94 mg/L. On the day of admission, routine examination of peritoneal dialysis fluid was performed after disinfection which showed that the fluid was colorless, turbid, with a white blood cell count of 6000/μL, and neutrophils of 95%. The Lifanta test was positive, and dialysate bacterial smear examination showed Gram-negative cocci identified by Gram staining .
Blood electrolyte results were: Potassium 3.52 mmol/L, sodium 131.9 mmol/L, and chlorine 89.0 mmol/L. After admission, peritoneal dialysis fluid was collected for bacterial smear examination. The peritoneal dialysis fluid was cultured on a Columbia blood agar plate for 48 h, and 2-4 mm, gray-white, round, moist, and raised colonies were observed . The pure culture was identified as Neisseria mucosa/mucosa by a Vitek MS mass spectrometer. In order to obtain accurate identification results, 16sRNA sequencing was performed. The results showed that the sequence was 99.85% consistent with Neisseria mucosa (GenBank No. NR_117696.1). Combined with the colony characteristics, the strain was finally identified as Neisseria mucosa.
Hepatobiliary system, spleen, pancreas, kidneys and ureters were examined by brightness-mode ultrasound, and the patient was found to have a right kidney cyst and ascites. She was admitted to hospital after an initial diagnosis of peritonitis. Routine enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed that the patient had multiple cysts in both kidneys and pelvic effusion. There was no evidence of intra-abdominal abscess or a focus of infection. Two weeks later, reexamination with CT showed that after treatment of peritonitis, peritoneal thickening has not been completely absorbed caused by peritonitis .