The patient, a 27-year-old male, was hospitalized because of “low fever for 12 days and difficulty in facial muscle movement for 2 days.”
On April 27, 2022, the patient had low fever, and the axillary temperature was 37.2 degrees Celsius. On the following days, he still stayed up late at night due to the large amount of work to finish (he was the only one who was in charge of the work), and his work and rest time were irregular. About a week later, there was numbness in the left middle of the tongue, and then sore throat, accompanied by fatigue and intermittent pain in front of the left ear emerged. COVID-19 nucleic acid was detected positive on May 7, 2022, and the patient was transferred to the module hospital on the same day. The next morning, his mouth deviated to the right, the left forehead wrinkles disappeared, the left ear was still painful, he coughed yellow pus phlegm and remained fatigue. Prednisone 10 mg was taken to treat facial paralysis on the same day.
On May 9, 2022, the symptoms of facial paralysis aggravated. The deviation was more obvious, accompanied by mild auditory hypersensitivity in the left ear and incomplete closure of the left eyelid. Because of the symptoms’ worsening the patient was transferred to Huashan Hospital, Fudan university. According to the history and examination results, COVID-19 (mild) with facial paralysis was diagnosed. The drug dose was adjusted to 30 mg prednisone daily, and COVID-19 was treated with traditional Chinese medicine. This patient did not accept to use western medicine for COVID-19 treatment, just as many Chinese patients did, who were more willing to accept traditional Chinese medicine treatment.
Working overtime for free and insisting on working even when falling ill has become a common phenomenon not only in Chinese workplace but also all over the world. Just as the Chinese old proverb goes that “Not to leave the front line on account of minor wounds”. This phenomenon has been supported by many literatures around the world. For example, this is also the case in Portugal and Denmark . A Chinese domestic survey shows that 74% professionals have ever presented at work while sick .
Physical examination: Physical examination showed that he was well conscious, left frontal stria faded, the left nasolabial groove became shallow, the left eyelid was not tightly as the opposite one and symmetrical facial sensation. No positive signs were found in other physical examinations.
Test results: White blood cell count on admission: 6.14 × 10^9/L. IgG antibody of novel coronavirus: positive (+), IgM antibody of SARS-CoV-2: negative; See figure (&) for specific values of nucleic acid detection of SARS-CoV-2. Interleukin-6 in cytokines: 3.51pg/mL ↑, CRP: < 5.00 mg/l, serum amyloid A: 43.07 mg/L ↑
CT and MRI: Chest CT scan: No obvious signs of viral pneumonia were found; Head MRI scan: No obvious abnormality was found. ; Head CT scan: No obvious abnormality was found;
Ethical approval: This case report was approved by Huashan Hospital Institutional Review Board (HIRB). The informed consent has been signed and the patient agreed that his data appeared in the case report.