A 60-year-old Taiwanese woman presented to the Chiba University Hospital with a four-month history of progressive weakness beginning in the right foot and spreading to all four extremities. Her medical history was unremarkable except for cough-variant asthma, and there was no family history of neuromuscular or neurodegenerative disorders.
A neurological examination showed no abnormality of the cranial nerves except for slight dysarthria. However, reduced muscle strength in all four extremities, especially in the right foot, with wasting, was observed. Fasciculations were noted in both arms. Deep tendon reflexes were brisk with a positive Trömner sign on the right, and bilateral plantar reflexes were extensor. Abdominal skin reflexes were absent bilaterally, whereas abdominal muscle reflex was enhanced. There were no signs of cerebellar dysfunction. The sensation was also intact to all modalities used for testing. The patient scored 28/30 on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) as she lost points for recall and following a command. She scored 16/18 on the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) where she lost points for similarities and lexical fluency. The overall score of Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III was 83 out of 100, with subscores of 18/18 for attention and orientation, 15/26 for memory, 9/14 for fluency, 25/26 for language, and 16/16 for visuospatial skills.
Needle electromyography demonstrated active and chronic denervation potentials in her biceps brachii, first dorsal interosseous, thoracic paraspinal muscles, tibialis anterior, and vastus lateralis. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) in the right upper and lower limbs revealed reduced conduction velocities and prolonged distal latencies in all tested motor nerves . Decreased compound muscle action potential was observed in the ulnar, the peroneal, and the tibial nerves. Sensory studies revealed reduced conduction velocities and decreased sensory nerve action potential in the ulnar nerve. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral subcortical high-intensity lesions in the precentral gyri and abnormal high-intensity signals along the corticospinal tracts on T2-weighted (T2WI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images . High-intensity signals in the medial part of the cerebellar hemisphere, right beside the vermis (paravermal lesions), were also seen in FLAIR images .
The patient met the El Escorial diagnostic criteria for definite ALS with upper and lower motor neuron involvement in the cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral regions . On the other hand, paravermal lesions on brain MRI and NCS findings that indicated demyelinating and axonal neuropathy prompted a diagnosis of NIID. A skin biopsy revealed eosinophilic, p62-positive, ubiquitin-positive, intranuclear inclusions in adipocytes, sweat gland cells, fibroblasts, and Schwann cells of the endoneurium and the perineurium. Electron microscopy showed that they consisted of tubule-filamentous material . Based on these results, we considered the following possible diagnoses, namely, (i) coexistence of ALS and NIID or (ii) an ALS phenotype of NIID; however, a definitive diagnosis was difficult to establish at that time.
Subsequently, clinical signs of upper and lower motor neuron involvement in the bulbar lesion became evident. The patient underwent a gastrostomy eight months after ALS onset and died 22 months after onset, at 62 years of age, due to respiratory failure.
The patient’s family provided informed consent for postmortem analyses, and an autopsy was performed. Appropriate brain areas were dissected and embedded in paraffin, 5 μm-thick serial sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Klüver-Barrera (KB), and then immunostained against phosphorylated transactivation response DNA-binding protein (TARDBP) 43 kDa (pTDP-43) (pS409/410–2, polyclonal, rabbit, Cosmo Bio, Tokyo, Japan, 1:3,000), TDP-43 (clone 3H8, monoclonal, mouse, Novus Biologicals, Centennial, CO, 1:3,000) and p62 (SQSTM1, polyclonal, rabbit, MBL, Nagoya, Japan).
At autopsy, the brain weighed 1,020 g. The pia mater, particularly on the central regions’ surface, appeared cloudy, suggesting cortical atrophy in these areas . The precentral cortex appeared more brown than usual and displayed an ill-defined corticomedullary boundary, which was in contrast to the other cortices . The spinal cord was atrophic with clear evidence of thinning in its anterior roots. Microscopic examination was remarkable for gliosis and loss of spinal motor neurons. Bunina bodies and TDP-43-positive cytoplasmic inclusions were occasionally identified in the remaining motor neurons of the anterior spinal horn and in the hypoglossal nucleus . TDP-43-positive cytoplasmic inclusions were absent from the neocortex, limbic areas, and subcortical gray matter, including in the striatum, pallidum, and thalamus. Precentral gyrus thinning was corroborated by severe neuronal loss and gliosis, and the precentral subcortical white matter showed severe gliosis and the presence of several vacuoles . Vacuolar degeneration, accompanied by macrophage infiltration, occurred throughout the corticospinal tracts, such as in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, the cerebral peduncle, the pyramid of the medulla oblongata, and the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord . We also observed that significant quantities of p62-positive intranuclear inclusions were widely distributed across different central nervous system areas, including the neocortex, the limbic regions, basal ganglia, brainstem, cerebellum, and the spinal cord . Most inclusions appeared to be present in the glial cells (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and ependymal cells), were well-defined and round, and appeared eosinophilic with hyaline-like features on hematoxylin–eosin staining. A small number of p62-positive inclusions were localized to the nuclei of motor neurons, and they were plotted on a brain map at × 200 magnification using a VS120 virtual slide system (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) to investigate an association, if any, between the distribution of p62-positive intranuclear inclusions and neuronal degeneration . We found no eccentric distribution of these inclusions in areas with abundant large motor neurons, such as in the spinal cord’s anterior horn and the deep Betz cell layer of the precentral gyrus. Additionally, double immunohistochemical evaluation using antibodies against p62 and TDP-43 on five different sections at the fourth level of the lumbar cord to determine the cytopathological coexistence of motoneuronal p62-positive intranuclear inclusions (NIID pathology) and pTDP-43-positive cytoplasmic inclusions with native TDP-43 loss from the nucleus (ALS pathology) did not show any motor neuron overlap between NIID and ALS pathology . These results indicated that, in the present case, ALS pathology might have occurred independently of NIID pathology.
We observed abundant p62-positive intranuclear inclusions in the cerebellar glial cells, particularly in the Purkinje and the granular cell layers and in the periventricular ependymal region . Inclusions were also occasionally identified in cerebellar cortical neurons, such as in the Purkinje and granular cells; however, neurons harboring p62-positive intranuclear inclusions in the dentate nucleus were rare. The distribution of intranuclear inclusions in the glia varied across different areas of white matter. These inclusions were more abundant in the paravermis’ white matter than in the hemispheric white matter . Interestingly, the p62-positive nuclear inclusions in the paravermal white matter were accompanied by focal demyelination . This lesion appeared to correspond with paravermal high-intensity lesions observed on MR images .