A 54-year-old Middle-Eastern female, a known case of diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, presented to King Fahad Hospital of Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University in Khobar complaining of dizziness for 1 year associated with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The vomiting was food content and related to food intake. Patient’s past surgical history included open appendectomy 20 years ago, open cholecystectomy 15 years ago, and incisional hernia repair 5 years ago.
On physical examination, the patient was conscious, alert, and oriented to time, place, and person. She was afebrile, normotensive, had a normal heart rate, and her abdomen was soft and lax.
Endoscopy revealed esophagus with more than one mucosal break greater than 5 ml without connection in between mucosal folds (type B gastroesophageal reflux disease). The stomach showed mild erythema and small subepithelial lesion near incisura angularis at 12 o’clock. The pylorus, duodenal cap, and second part of the duodenum were all normal. An endoscopic biopsy was taken from the stomach and epithelial lesions were diagnosed as inactive mild chronic gastritis with a negative Warthin starry stain for Helicobacter pylori organisms.
The patient was referred to the radiology department for further investigations. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple well-defined exophytic lesions seen along the greater curvature of the stomach. These lesions demonstrated low signal to isosignal on T1-weighted images and bright signal on fat saturated T2-weighted images with intense enhancement on post-contrast administration, and mild restriction on diffusion-weighted images. The largest mass measured 2 cm × 0.8 cm and was abutting the liver anteriorly, but with no signs of invasion. The remainder of the lesions had an average maximum diameter of 1.2 cm. The radiological impression at the time of examination was gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). An alternative possibility was a neurogenic tumor. The patient was scheduled for a diagnostic and therapeutic laparoscopic partial vertical gastrectomy. Operative findings were multiple lesions along the greater curvature and the largest lesion was subhepatically located with adhesion. Also, a large incisional hernia with incarcerated omentum was seen.
A 10% buffered formalin-fixed partial vertical gastrectomy was sent for histopathological examination. Macroscopically, it consisted of a partial vertical gastrectomy specimen, measuring 20.4 cm × 4.3 cm × 2.9 cm with 0.8 cm maximum wall thickness, and an attached 12.5 cm × 17 cm × 0.8 cm perigasteric fibrofatty tissue. Four small firm serosal nodules were identified along the greater curvature, measuring 1 cm × 0.6 cm × 0.4 cm, 0.5 cm × 0.4 cm × 0.2 cm, 0.5 cm × 0.3 cm × 0.3 cm, and 0.4 cm × 0.3 cm × 0.3 cm . All the nodules had a white-tan cut surface, and were away from the proximal and distal margins by at least 4.5 cm. Also, one gray-tan lymph node measuring 3.8 cm × 3.5 cm × 1 cm within the perigastric fibrofatty tissue was identified.
Microscopically, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections of the grossly identifed four nodules revealed a similar histological features of a cellular well-circumscribed lesion without capsule. Higher magnification revealed intermixed populations of cells, consisting of bland spindle cells in a syncytial pattern and epithelioid cells with plump eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei were bland, elongated to round in shape with a mitotic rate of 2/5 mm2. An additional interesting finding found in the first and last nodules was osseous metaplasia and bone formation . A single lymph node identified positive for metastasis accompanied with osseous metaplasia, bone formation, and tumor necrosis that ranged in between 5% and 10%
Differential diagnosis based on morphological features were gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComas), neuroendocrine tumor, leiomyoma, schwannoma, desmoid tumor, adenocarcinomas, and glomus tumor.
The immunohistochemical studies for all nodules and metastasis were positive for c-kit (CD117), discovered on GIST 1 (DOG1), and CD34, supporting GIST diagnosis . Desmin, β-catenin, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), smooth muscle actin (SMA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S100 protein, melanoma antigen (melan A), and human melanoma black (HMB45) were all negative precluding other diagnosis. Fluoresce in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of PDGFRA done for metastasis showed deletion in 84 out of 200 (42%) interphase nuclei scored . Next generation sequencing done for metastasis revealed PDGFRA exon 12 mutation (p.Y555C) and exon 14 mutation (p.N659Y), suggesting a good response to tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
Based on the above findings, the diagnosis of multifocal gastrointestinal stromal tumor, mixed type (epithelioid and spindle cell type), with osseous metaplasia. Although the calculated risk for metastasis and or death (risk of progressive disease) was very low (1.9%) . The tumor metastasized to the lymph node raising the Pathologic Stage Classification (AJCC, 8th edition) to pT1(m)N1. The patient was referred to oncology clinic to start tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib) 400 mg per day. Follow-up of the patient with abdominal CT scan after 2 years revealed interval partial gastric resection without evidence of local recurrence of the disease.