A 66-year-old woman was found to have hypercalcemia during a physical examination. The patient with a 10-year history of hypertension had no familial history of multiple endocrine neoplasia and denied any allergies. Blood biochemical examination demonstrated an elevated serum calcium level of 3.21mmol/L (normal range, 2.11-2.52mmol/L) and a diminished serum phosphorus level of 0.83mmol/L (normal range, 0.85-1.51mmol/L). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the neck and thorax revealed a 24 × 14 mm solid mass in the superior posterior mediastinum. The lesion showed contrast enhancement in the edge . 99mTechnetium methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrite (MIBI) scintigraphy disclosed an area of high tracer uptake in the posterior-superior mediastinal . Consequently, the patient was taken to the operating room for a right thoracoscopic resection of the mediastinal mass. The patient was placed in the left lateral position. A total of two ports which were marked on the skin were placed. The location of the operative port (3 cm) was placed in the right midaxillary line in the fourth intercostal space. Having regard to the location of the operative field in the superior posterior mediastinum, we decided to set the placement of our viewing port (1.5 cm) to the seventh intercostal space of the posterior axillary line. A solid structure was visualized arising from the posterior mediastinum and abutting the right innominate vein . Pulling adipose tissue on the side was required to facilitate dissection and removal of the mass completely. The operation was successful and the intraoperative blood loss was less than 50 ml. A chest drain was inserted. The postoperative pathology confirmed the diagnosis of ectopic parathyroid adenoma. Additionally, immunohistochemical staining for CgA and CK was positive. The serum calcium levels (2.30mmol/L on the first postoperative day; normal range, 2.11 to 2.52mmol/L) decreased to normal level dramatically. There were no postoperative complications related to bleeding and air leakage. The mediastinal drainage tube was removed on the second postoperative day and the patient was discharged home on the same day in stable condition. Then the patient returned for follow-up 2 weeks later, where she remained asymptomatic with a normal calcium of 2.21mmol/L.