A 56-year-old male patient with no known comorbidities presented to the emergency department with history of fever and headache for past 2 days with sporadic episodes of projectile vomiting, irrelevant talk, and poor sensorium for a day. On admission, the patient manifested fever (39 °C), a heart rate of 104 beats per minute, blood pressure of 130/60 mmHg, respiratory rate of 30/min, and capillary blood glucose of 140 mg/dl. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 9, with respective scores of 5, 2, and 2 for motor, eye, and verbal responses. There were no signs of meningeal irritation or focal neurological deficit. Clinical examination was otherwise normal except for a scar over the anterior bi-frontal region which was a surgical incision. On further inquiry, he had an accidental fall from a two-story building 23 years ago, causing a persistent CSF leak from the nose (rhinorrhea). He underwent complete repair for the CSF leak without any residual defect. There were no further hospitalizations for the past 23 years with symptoms suggestive of meningitis.
His computerized tomography (CT) scan showed cystic gliosis changes in the left frontal lobe which was communicating with the frontal horn of ipsilateral lateral ventricle. CSF analysis of the patient revealed hypoglycorrachia (< 20 mg/dl with corresponding blood sugar of 140 mg/dl), elevated protein > 300 mg/dl, and neutrophil-predominant pleocytosis (total cells 360/mm3 with 96% polymorphs) suggestive of acute pyogenic meningitis. He was started empirically on ceftriaxone 100 mg/kg/day in two divided doses, amoxycillin 100 mg/kg/day in four divided doses, and acyclovir 45 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Initial peripheral blood WBC count was 14,760 with 85% neutrophils and serum lactate levels of 5.35 mmol/l. His renal and liver function tests were normal. Antibiotics (ceftriaxone, amoxycillin) were continued, and acyclovir was stopped as there were filamentous gram-negative rods in gram staining of the CSF, which was a rare morphology to be identified . Further, the sample was plated onto blood agar, MacConkey agar, and chocolate agar and incubated aerobically at 37 °C. Non-hemolytic colonies were formed on blood agar which were lactose-fermenting colonies on MacConkey agar . The organism was identified to be Escherichia coli by Vitek 2 Compact (Biomerieux), and spectrum of antibiotic sensitivity was described in Table .
In accordance with the culture and sensitivity pattern, ceftriaxone was continued and amoxycillin was stopped. He was afebrile for the next 48 h, and his sensorium improved. Further work up was done to identify the source of seeding of E. coli to the meninges. Urine culture and blood cultures that were sent prior to initiation of antibiotics did not show any bacterial growth, and stool microscopy was negative for ova and cysts. CT scan of the abdomen revealed a non-obstructive renal calculus of 6 mm × 6mm at interpole of the left kidney without any signs of pyelonephritis. After the initial improvement, patient again had a drop in sensorium without any localizing signs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast study was done to rule out secondary complications associated with meningitis like vascular infarcts or hydrocephalus. There was post-contrast enhancement of leptomeninges and subtle enhancement of ventricular wall and posterior fossa cisternal spaces in post-contrast T1 sequence, and the same findings along with exudates in the ventricles in T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, which were suggestive of ventriculitis . CT cisternogram was performed to check for residual CSF leak at the past surgical site, in which there was an opacified density in the left frontal region representing a porencephalic cyst communicating with the left frontal horn. There was no CSF leak into the paranasal sinuses or nasal cavity .
In the CSF analysis repeated on day 7 of antibiotic therapy, there was improvement in cell count (total cell count of 26 with 100% of lymphocytes) and cultures were sterile. He was discharged from the hospital on day 10 and advised to continue intravenous antibiotics for 6 weeks in view of ventriculitis. On further follow-up, the patient has improved, with no neurological deficit and antibiotics have been stopped at the end of the sixth week.