A 73-year-old Caucasian man was referred to another health care center with complaints of severe chest pain and palpitation that had started immediately after he had eaten his dinner. He underwent urgent coronary angiography with possible diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. His coronary arteries were found to be normal. Since his symptoms were partially relieved, he was discharged. He was referred to our hospital 3 days later, with aggravation of the same complaints. On admission, his abdominal physical examination was normal except for mild epigastric tenderness. His respiratory sounds were diminished in his left lower hemithorax. His pulse rate was 112/minute and blood pressure was 90/50mmHg. His body temperature was 37.5°C. He had sinus rhythm in electrocardiography (ECG). A hemogram and biochemical test results were as follows: white blood cell count 17,280/mm3 (4.8 to 10.8mm3), urea 65mg/dL (5 to 23mg/dL), creatinine 4.2mg/dL (0.6 to 1.3mg/dL), total bilirubin 3.5mg/dL (0.2 to 1.2mg/dL), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 78U/L (12 to 64U/L), aspartate transaminase 105U/L (5 to 34U/L), alanine transaminase 118U/L (0 to 55U/L), and C-reactive protein 314mg/dL (0.0 to 5.0 mg/dL). A CT examination was performed to exclude aortic aneurysm or dissection. There was pleural fluid in both sides; an air bubble containing pericardial fluid reaching to 2cm thickness was noted. There was minimal free fluid in perihepatic, perisplenic and retrovesical spaces. With these findings and clinical situation, severe mediastinitis was considered, and his detailed clinical history was taken into consideration once again. The patient later told that he had eaten chopsteak (meat on the bone) in his dinner just before the onset of his symptoms. Then the CT images were checked again, and a dense 2cm-long linear foreign body was found in the posterior aspect of his left atrium .
These findings revealed a perforation of esophagus by a foreign body, and the patient underwent urgent left thoracotomy. At surgery, a sharp contoured piece of bone was found, perforating the 1/3 distal aspect of the posterior wall of his esophagus. It reached to the pericardium, penetrating it and eroding his left atrium. The adventitia of the aorta was affected on the left. There was pus in his pericardium. The foreign body was removed . After abundant serum irrigation, his esophagus was repaired by primary sutures, and pleura was attached on the defect side and supported by tissue adhesives. Finally, a percutaneous jejunostomy was performed for feeding by laparotomy. Parenteral broad spectrum antibiotic therapy and feeding from the jejunostomy was started. No postoperative complication was observed, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on the 15th day. After 3 days, he was readmitted and hospitalized again with the complaints of fever and weakness. Contrast extravasation from the primary suture zone was found in a CT examination, then he underwent endoscopic stent placement. His clinical condition deteriorated rapidly due to mediastinitis and he died because of sepsis and multiorgan failure.