A 62-year-old man with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease presented with a one month history of epigastric pain, epigastric fullness, dysphagia, anorexia, and weight loss of 9 kgs. Clinical examination and blood tests were normal apart from elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (42.8 ng/ml; normal value < 5.0 ng/ml). Chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and abdominal ultrasound (US) were normal. Esophagogastroscopy revealed an ulceroproliferative, intraluminar mass in the distal third of the esophagus obstructing the esophageal lumen. Biopsy showed small cell esophageal carcinoma. Due to esophageal lumen obstruction, endoscopic US was not feasible. Contrast-enhanced chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large tumor of the distal third of the esophagus without any lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis .
The patient received preoperative chemotherapy with cisplatine and etoposide for 3 months with a significant reduction of the tumor size . En block esophagectomy with two field lymph node dissection, proximal gastrectomy, and cervical esophagogastric anastomosis were performed. After an uneventful postoperative period, he was discharged on the 14th postoperative day.
Histopathology revealed a tumor (2.5 × 1.5 cm), 2 cm above the gastroesophageal junction, that was a small cell esophageal carcinoma infiltrating the submucosal and, focally, the muscular layer . The margins of the specimen were free of tumor. Metastasis in two paraesophageal lymph nodes was found. Moreover, Barrett's esophagus, of intestinal type, with predominantly low grade and, focally, high grade dysplasia was identified in the lower esophagus. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells was positive for chromogranin and neuron-specific enolase (NSE).
A diagnosis of primary small cell carcinoma of the distal third of the esophagus arising from dysplastic Barrett's esophagus was made. The patient received another 3 month course of postoperative chemotherapy with the same agents (cisplatine and etoposide) and was free of disease at review after 12 months.