A 72-year old woman presented with a 10-day history of vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. She had no relevant medical history and no family history of malignancy. Physical examination showed a mass over the right abdominal region, but palpation elicited no significant abdominal tenderness. Laboratory tests were within normal ranges, except for a slightly increased level of C-reactive protein (0.70 mg/dL). Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed the target sign in the ascending colon. An enhanced nodule was detected at the lead point, suggesting the presence of a tumor . Colonoscopy showed a tumor at the lead point of the intestinal intussusception . Evidence of bowel wall edema and bowel obstruction was also seen . Biopsy revealed the tumor as a neoplastic lesion, suspected as NET. Immunohistochemical findings showed the tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56. The impression was NET G1.
After the induction of general anesthesia, an initial vertical incision was made at the umbilicus using the open technique. A Lap-Protector (Hakko Co., Nagano, Japan) was then inserted via the umbilical incision. EZ access (Hakko Co.) was used to insert two 5-mm trocars and a 12-mm trocar was placed at the Lap-Protector. Laparoscopic observation showed evidence of intestinal intussusception . The restoration of intestinal intussusception was not successful intraoperatively due to severe bowel wall edema. Single-incision laparoscopic ileocecal resection with D3 lymph node (LN) dissection, defined as removal of the main LNs at the root of the feeding vessels, was performed. The operation time was 138 min, and the blood loss was 5 ml. The patient was discharged 10 days postoperatively with no complications. Histological examination showed a tumor measuring 2.1 cm × 1.9 cm at the end of the ileum . The tumor had invaded into the muscularis propria. Lymphatic and vascular invasion was present. The resection margins were negative. Immunohistochemical investigations revealed that tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . The impression was NET, well-differentiated G1, with 1 mitosis per 10 high-power fields, and MIB-1 0.5% . Lymph node involvement was seen in 2 of the 32 nodes investigated.