A 25-year-old male with an opioid use disorder and multiple overdoses on heroin, presented to our hospital with acute mental status changes. A month prior to this presentation, he had been found after being down for nearly 8 h following a heroin overdose, and had required intubation and ventilator support. He subsequently underwent physical rehabilitation, and apparently recovered over the course of a month.
Soon after his return, he was noted to be confused, and was seen by an outpatient psychiatrist who started him on lurasidone for treatment of suspected mania. His confusion did not improve, after which he was brought to our ED. He was found to be disoriented, and he demonstrated involuntary jerky movements of his extremities, along with a shuffling gait. He did not display any features suggestive of mania, but presented as delirious. CBC, BMP UDS and CT head were unrevealing, and he was admitted to the internal medicine service. His cognition continued to fluctuate for the next 3 days, during which he was given haloperidol 5 mg twice for agitation and restlessness. He subsequently started demonstrating symptoms of catatonia, scoring 21 on the Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS), with staring, grimacing, stereotypies, verbigeration, rigidity, negativism, ambitendency and perseveration.
Administration of lorazepam 2 mg IV resulted in the score dropping to 19 within 30 min, after which he was started on lorazepam 2 mg q4hrs. He had a partial response to his medication, and a decision was made to pursue ECT with a court order due to the refractory nature of his symptoms.
The initial treatment of ECT was without adverse events, and he became more interactive with his surroundings and family. However, after the second treatment, a brief period of diaphoresis, rigidity, tachycardia, tachypnea, for which was upgraded to the intensive care unit, but was sent back to the floor shortly. Two hours after the third ECT, he developed an abrupt episode of decerebrate posturing with profound diaphoresis, severe tachycardia (heart rate in 180 s), tachypnea (respiratory rate > 70), and his blood pressure went up to 180/100. He responded minimally to lorazepam and dantrolene, and was intubated due to increased work of breathing. Sedation was initially maintained with fentanyl, propofol and standing lorazepam. MRI brain without contrast showed bilateral white matter T1 hypointensities, and T2 hyperintensities involving the entire centrum semiovale. EEG showed generalized slowing without epileptiform activity. He was extubated and switched to dexmedetomidine for sedation, and unsuccessful trials of valproate and amobarbital were undertaken to wean off dexmedetomidine while treating refractory catatonia and autonomic symptoms.
Since its onset, dysautonomia had best responded to dexmedetomidine. Therefore, oral clonidine 0.1 mg TID was introduced to wean the patient from dexmedetomidine due to a shared mechanism of action. He appeared to respond well to the introduction of this agent, and clonidine was increased to a total dose of 2.1 mg/day, and propranolol was added to aid with further control of sympathetic hyperactivity. The episodes of dysautonomia did not recur with these changes, and his cognition and behavior improved in parallel with reduced sympathetic arousals. Propranolol was stopped soon after, while a taper of clonidine and lorazepam was initiated. He was discharged to a physical rehabilitation facility in 2 weeks with a plan to continue tapering the clonidine and lorazepam. Cognition continued to improve through 2 months of follow up, without return of PSH.