A 38-year-old male patient with no significant past medical history presented with a tumor in the left groin. The tumor began to grow and had become painful 2 months prior; the patient visited a neighborhood doctor and was referred to our hospital. Physical examination results revealed that the tumor was 6 cm in diameter, elastic, soft, immobile, and partly tender. However, there was no redness or heat sensation. Radiological examination results revealed opacities without calcification or cortical bone destruction near the tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor occupied the sartorius muscle; measured 65.8 × 62.2 × 50.5 mm; was adjacent to the left femoral neurovascular bundle; and had low overall intensity and partial high intensity on T1-weighted image (WI), moderate-to-high overall intensity with the center exhibiting strong high density on T2WI, some areas of hyperintensity on fat-saturated T1WI, and high intensity on the gadolinium-enhanced fat-saturated T1WI . Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, or leiomyosarcoma was suspected.
Histological examination results of the biopsy specimens revealed proliferating, dense, and small spindle cells with oval-to-spindle-shaped nuclei. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that these tumor cells were positive for vimentin and MIC2 and negative for CD34, SMA, and S-100P. The SYT-SSX fusion gene was detected using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with synovial sarcoma.
Whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography and brain MRI showed no metastatic regions. After administering two-cycle neoadjuvant chemotherapy based on doxorubicin and ifosfamide, wide-margin tumor resection was performed together with the adjacent femoral neurovascular bundle . The femoral artery and vein were reconstructed with artificial blood vessels, and a rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap was used for the left groin defect. After the flap was confirmed to be successful, one-cycle adjuvant chemotherapy based on doxorubicin and ifosfamide was administered, followed by conventional radiotherapy consisting of 56 Gy/28 fractions. At discharge, he was able to walk stably with a cane.
Two years later, a subcutaneous tumor was observed in the right temporal region of the head. The tumor was resected and pathologically diagnosed as a metastasis of synovial sarcoma. Post-operative chemotherapy with high-dose ifosfamide was administered. Since then, he has remained disease-free for 12 years.
Gait analysis was performed 12 years postoperatively when the patient was 50 years old. He was able to walk stably without assistance. Motion analysis was performed using a three-dimensional motion analysis system (Nexus, Vicon, Oxford, UK) with 45 infrared-reflecting markers (diameter, 14 mm) on the body, as previously described . Motion capture was conducted using 10 infrared cameras with a sampling rate of 100 frames/sec. Eight ground reaction force plates (AMTI, Watertown, MA, USA) were used at a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz for kinetic data collection. Simultaneously, the muscle activity of the vastus medialis (VM) and lateralis (VL), medial (MH) and lateral hamstrings (LH), and medial (GM) and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius (GL) were collected during the walking test using surface electromyography (Delsys, Natick, MA, USA) with precise electrodes placed according to the surface EMG for the non-invasive assessment of muscles (SENIAM) guidelines . The EMG sampling frequency was 1,000 Hz with a passband of 20–450 Hz. Using maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) activity, we normalized the EMG data from the MH, LH, GM, and GL, excluding those from the VM and VL, as a percentage of MVC values. Due to the very low electrical activity sensed in the left quadriceps femoris, drawing EMG from left VM and VL by %MVC was difficult. Therefore, only the EMGs of VM and VL are shown in volts. A walking test was performed by allowing the patient to walk along a 10-m walkway at a comfortable speed 10 times, and 10 steps from each leg were sampled unilaterally and averaged. A previously reported three-dimensional model was applied. All variables were normalized to 100% of the stance phase duration.
Normal knee kinematics during walking were observed during the entire stance phase for the non-affected limb . Knee flexion started from 0° at initial contact, increased to over 10° at the loading response, and then became slightly extended but flexed slightly at the late-stance phase, leading to the swing phase. Conversely, while walking at a comfortable speed, the knee angle of the affected limb started with slight hyperextension at initial contact, was gradually flexed during the mid-stance phase, and was able to begin toe-off without knee collapse . As shown in Fig. b, the knee joint moment for the non-affected limb started as flexion at initial contact, became extension from the loading response to the mid-stance phase, became flexion again in the late-stance phase, and then moved towards the swing phase. In contrast, the knee joint moment for the affected limb was generally small, at approximately 0 Nm. The change in knee joint moment in the affected limb from flexion at initial contact to extension in the loading response was the same as that in the non-affected limb. After these phases, the knee extension moment in the affected limb was maintained from the loading response to the mid-stance phase, except for the flexion moment at approximately 25% . According to Fig. c, the power of the affected limb in the loading response was weaker than that of the non-affected limb, but the power generation towards the extension moment in the mid-stance phase was almost the same in the bilateral limbs.
Next, according to the hip kinematics , both hips were flexed during 0–50% of the stance phase, following extension. The hip flexion angle during 0–50% of the stance phase and the extension angle during 50–100% of the stance phase for the affected limb were smaller than that for the non-affected limb. The overall trend in kinetics is shown in Fig. b; the extension moment of the affected hip was slightly smaller than that of the non-affected limb. Figure c shows that the power of the affected limb fluctuated around zero more frequently than that of the non-affected limb.
Finally, the ankle plantar flexion angle of the affected limb was larger from the initial contact to the mid-stance phase , its moment toward the plantar flexion was smaller during the entire phase (approximately) , and its power absorption by the plantar flexor muscles was larger in the late-stance phase than that of the non-affected limb.
It was clear that the EMG for both the VM and VL in the affected limb did not show a valid signal . EMG showed that the electric activity of both the MH and LH of the affected limb increased from the mid-stance phase to the late-stance phase compared with that of the non-affected limb. The electric activity of both the GM and GL of the bilateral limbs increased from their values at 50% of stance to the late-stance phase, and that of the GL of the affected limb was larger than that of the non-affected limb.