A 9-year old sukuma-black African boy was referred to the Bugando Medical Centre (BMC) from a district hospital with three weeks history of fever and abdominal distention and one week history of generalized body weakness and headache. This was the second admission in his life time; the first admission was 4 years ago due to severe malaria. He is 8th child in the family of 10 children and he was fully immunized as per Tanzanian Expanded programme of immunization. There was no history of convulsion, loss of consciousness, vomiting and diarrhea. It was reported that the abdomen was grossly distended and tender. However, he was passing stool normally. Also, it was reported that he used amoxicillin and gentamicin at the district hospital with no improvement. On examination, he was febrile (39°C), ill looking, pale, and jaundiced. Abdomen was grossly distended, tender with shifting dullness. Liver and spleen were not palpably enlarged and there was no rebound tenderness. He had neck stiffness with negative Kernig’s signs. Lungs were clear on auscultation, first (S1) and second (S2) heart sounds were heard with a gallop rhythm. Respiratory rate was 46/minute while the heart rate was 120 beats/minute with oxygen saturation of 94% on ambient air. Provisional diagnosis of severe malaria was reached with differentials of meningitis, peritonitis and typhoid fever.
Lumbar puncture (LP) was done which revealed a xanthochromic cerebrospinal fluid(CSF) with total white blood cells (WBC) count of 52/cmm3 of which 88% were lymphocytes. A reactive mononuclear cell was 10% while pandy’s test was positive and cryptococcal antigen test was negative. On CSF gram stain, no organisms were seen. A nasogastric tube was inserted and the child was made nil by mouth due to distended abdomen. Intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g 24 hrly for 2 weeks and intramuscular artemether 64 mg stat then 32 mg daily for 7 days were initiated.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed increased free fluid in the peritoneal cavity, slightly enlarged liver and distended gall bladder with thickened wall . In other laboratory investigations; hemoglobin level of 8.4 g/dl, total WBC count of 3,100/mm3 (neutrophils 75%, lymphocyte 19%) and platelet count of 181,000/μl were detected.
Widal test results against O (Salmonella Typhi O) and H (Salmonella Typhi H) were both > 1:160. The rapid Hepatitis B surface antigen, HIV rapid test and blood slide for malaria parasites were all negative. Slightly elevated liver enzymes were noted; alanine transaminase (51.63 U/L) and aspartate transaminase (54 U/L). Bilirubin levels were found to be high with total bilirubin of 176.3 μmol/L and direct bilirubin of 133.5 μmol/L.
Urine microscopy was positive for Schistosoma haematobium ova and red blood cells (RBC) (10-20/high power field). On stool microscopy no ova/cysts were seen but numerous white blood cells were seen. CSF culture on blood agar plate (Oxoid Limited, UK) was positive for a significant growth of pure culture of gram negative short rods bacteria. During subsequent culture, growth was also seen on MacKonkey agar (Oxoid Limited, UK). In-house biochemical identification tests provided inconclusive results. Further identification using MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry (Bruker, Germany) and Kauffmann White agglutination identified the isolate as Salmonella Typhi which was typed to be lysotypeE1a. Susceptibility testing using VITEK-2 showed the isolate to be resistant to ampicillin, ampicillin/sulbactam, tobramycin and co-trimoxazole while being sensitive to piperacillin/tazobactam, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefpodoxime, imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem, ciprofloxacin (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) = 0.047 mg/L), and moxifloxacin.
The condition of the patient improved clinically on ceftriaxone, paracetamol and praziquantel 400 mg. Despite the patient being weak, he was discharged following relative’s request on day 21 to be followed at pediatric outpatient clinics.