A 35.5-year-old non-smoking Caucasian G2 P1011 attended for reproductive endocrinology consultation with a history of bilateral tubal disease and unilateral oophorectomy. Two years previously, the patient underwent IVF with a two-ET (at day 3) which resulted in a healthy singleton term livebirth; that treatment cycle also produced two embryos which were cryopreserved at day 3 but did not survive thaw. She returned for a second fresh IVF cycle, but follicular recruitment was poor and only one blastocyst was available for transfer. Unfortunately, her transfer was cancelled secondary to an intrauterine fluid collection identified on transvaginal ultrasound. The single blastocyst was frozen at day 6 with spontaneous resolution of the endometrial fluid the following week.
The patient elected to begin a third fresh IVF cycle 2 months later, using a combined 600 IU/day FSH (Puregon®, Organon (Ireland) Ltd; Swords, Co. Dublin) + 75 IU/day LH (Luveris®, MSD Serono Ltd; Middlesex, UK) ovulation induction protocol beginning on cycle day 2 without pituitary downregulation. Based on the endocrine status and follicular growth monitoring, we initiated 0.25 mg/day GnRH-antagonist (Orgalutran®, Organon (Ireland) Ltd; Swords, Co. Dublin) to suppress native LH activity on day 9. Five oocytes were retrieved after a 12-day follicular recruitment phase, but only one advanced to the 2pn stage following intracytoplasmic sperm injection. This single eight-cell embryo was transferred fresh under transabdominal ultrasound guidance on day 3; the remaining cryopreserved blastocyst was thawed next and transferred on day 6. A positive pregnancy test was noted 12 days after the second-stage transfer and serial hCG determinations were consistent with a normal pregnancy. Early obstetrical ultrasound was performed on day 55 and two distinct intrauterine implantation sites were noted. These structures were asymmetric and the smaller sac appeared empty. Follow-up sonograms confirmed the regression of the smaller sac (see Fig. ), and the larger gestational sac included a foetal pole with a heart rate of 110 per min. Combined estradiol/progesterone support was continued until the 12th week. An uncomplicated obstetrical course followed, and a healthy male infant (birth weight = 3,913 g) was delivered at 40 2/7 weeks’ gestation by Cesarian. Mother and baby were discharged home in good condition after 5 days; both continue to do well.