A 69-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for persistent bone pain, weakness, and skin pruritus. She had been diagnosed with chronic renal insufficiency more than 30 years prior to her presentation. Twelve years prior to the presentation, she began regular hemodialysis three times per week. Five years before the presentation, she began to experience symptoms of bone pain, weakness, and skin pruritus. She visited a local hospital, and the clinicians found an elevated iPTH (above 2,000 pg/ml). The patient then received parathyroidectomy surgery in that hospital, during which three parathyroid glands were identified and removed intraoperatively (according to the patient's statement; surgical notes were not provided). Unfortunately, although her iPTH decreased postoperatively, it remained higher than normal (up to 1,000 pg/ml). The patient took Rocaltrol after surgery, but her iPTH level did not decrease; in contrast, it gradually increased. After 1 year of surgery, the highest iPTH level was 3,000 mg/ml. The patient continued to take Rocaltrol, but her iPTH level continued to worsen. One month before admission to our hospital, her iPTH was up to 4,000 pg/ml according to laboratory tests performed at her local hospital.
After admission to our hospital, a parathyroid ultrasound indicated a hypoechoic nodule on the left side of the suprasternal fossa . Methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) examination showed a 3.2 cm × 3.0 cm soft tissue density nodule accompanied by eggshell calcification in the superior mediastinum, located behind the innominate artery and beside the trachea . MIBI also showed an approximately 1.2 cm × 1.0 cm soft tissue density nodule in the suprasternal fossa . The MIBI scans of the two foci were all high uptake. Preoperative blood biochemistry analysis showed that the iPTH was above 3,000 pg/ml, calcium was 2.24 mmol/L, phosphorus was 1.46 mmol/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was 452 IU/L.
Bedside hemodialysis was arranged 1 day prior to the planned parathyroidectomy surgery. Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent a second parathyroidectomy via an anterior transcervical low-neck incision. After routine isolation through the subcutaneous tissue and adhered scar tissue, structures such as the trachea in the root of the neck, the cervical transverse arteries and veins, and the thymic tongue lobe were preserved. Taking particular care to protect the blood vessels of the root of the neck, we advanced a probe along the right side of the trachea to the upper mediastinum. The mass was probed near the trachea, above the aortic arch. The blood vessels around the mass were carefully separated and transected by electrocoagulation hemostasis. We gradually separated the mass from surrounding tissue and protected the capsule so it could remain as intact as possible during the parathyroidectomy. However, due to the large size of the mass, the capsule broke during removal. We removed the lump intact, and no macroscopically visible ectopic parathyroid tissue remained. The surgical site was irrigated with copious amounts of normal saline to prevent implantation of any exfoliated tumor cells. Intraoperatively, we also removed a very large parathyroid gland in the right anterior mediastinum. This second mass was 7 cm × 3.5 cm in size and weighed 23.72 g . We also removed another parathyroid gland in the left lingual lobe of the thymus. The diameter of the third mass was 1 cm, and its weight was 0.69 g. No injury was found when exploring the bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve. Furthermore, we used a nerve monitor to measure the electrical potential of the recurrent laryngeal nerve (V2, R2) and found no significant change before and after removing the parathyroids. Finally, we placed a drainage tube, sutured the soft tissue, and closed the wound.
The patient returned to the ward safely after recovery from anesthesia. An immediate postoperative blood test showed that iPTH had decreased to 102.7 pg/ml. Postoperatively, the patient reported that her symptoms of bone pain, weakness, and skin pruritus were significantly reduced. One day after surgery, the patient underwent bedside hemodialysis. The postoperative blood electrolyte analysis indicated hypocalcemia (blood calcium was 1.69 mmol/L). The patient felt numbness and acanthesthesia in her fingers. We treated her with 30 g intravenous calcium gluconate diluted in 300 ml of 0.9% NS via femoral vein catheterization. On the second day of postsurgery, the patient's blood calcium recovered to 2.6 mmol/L and the iPTH decreased to 88.79 pg/ml. The numbness and acanthesthesia in her fingers also disappeared, so we stopped the intravenous calcium treatment. The patient was discharged from our hospital on the third day post-surgery and continued oral calcium and calcitriol supplementation (calcium carbonate 1 g TID and calcitriol 2 g BID). During 1-year follow-up, the patient's iPTH was well controlled and the blood calcium remained within normal limits .