A woman in her 30s (height 163 cm, weight 64 kg) was presented as an emergency due to acute and intense right leg pain. The patient had no significant history of emotional or physical stress events 48 h before emergency visit and also no history of past personal or family history of thrombus formation (i.e., thrombogenesis), but used oral contraceptives. Her pre-operative coagulation profile revealed normal prothrombin time of 10.8 s, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio 0.93, and activated partial thromboplastin time 27.0 s, but fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products and D-dimer level were increased to 16.9 and 4.9 μg/mL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed right femoral artery thrombus , and emergency thrombectomy was scheduled. Pre-operative electrocardiogram showed non-specific ST elevation and a left bundle branch block , but no abnormal findings were seen on chest X-ray. On arrival in the operating room, the patient was alert and her blood pressure was 115/85 mmHg. Heart rate was 98 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation was 93% on 2 L/min oxygen by nasal cannula. The patient complained of strong right leg pain, but no dyspnea or chest pain. General anesthesia was inducted using a rapid sequence method with remifentanil, propofol, and rocuronium and maintained with remifentanil and sevoflurane as per standard protocol. After tracheal intubation, poor pulmonary oxygenation was observed, with PaO287.0 mmHg and FIO2 0.44; therefore, a recruitment maneuver was performed and oxygenation improved to PaO2 174 mmHg . During the operation, her vital signs remained stable, and she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after successful surgery. In the ICU, the patient’s oxygen saturation decreased to 90% on oxygen 5 L/min with use of a facemask. As pulmonary embolism was suspected, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed. TTE showed Takotsubo cardiomyopathy-like left ventricular dysfunction with left ventricular thrombus . Although she showed severe left ventricular dysfunction, creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) and troponin T elevated modestly (creatine kinase and CK-MB were 270, and 30 U/L, troponin T was 0.23 ng/mL). Continuous intravenous heparin was immediately started at 20,000 U/day for 10 days.
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation was used for 2 days until her oxygen saturation improved. Ten days after surgery, the patient was discharged from the hospital as the left ventricular thrombus disappeared and left ventricular wall motion improved. No inherited or secondary thrombophilia was identified.