A 52-year-old man underwent IOL extraction and intrascleral IOL fixation in the right eye in 2018 and the left eye in 2020 because of IOL subluxation in both eyes. The patient’s postoperative subjective visibility was good in the right eye; however, the patient noticed symptoms of light sources appearing to be divided into multiple lights indoors in the left eye immediately after surgery, which interfered with his daily life. Figure represents the image of the patient’s symptoms experienced in a shopping center, showing ceiling lights as multiple lights. Because the cause of the symptoms could not be identified at the hospital where the surgery was performed, the patient visited our department for further investigation.
At his first visit to our department, his corrected visual acuity (VA) was 20/16 and 20/20 in the right and left eyes, respectively. The ocular findings in eye position, ocular motility, intraocular pressure, and fundus were within normal limits. The pupils were circular and of the same size on both sides; however, the elongated holes of peripheral iridectomy (PI) created during the past intrascleral IOL fixation were observed to be approximately 2 mm in length on the nasal or supra-nasal sides in both eyes . The PI hole in the right eye was covered by the optics of the IOL, whereas the edge of the IOL overlapped the center of the PI hole in the left eye . The decentrations of the IOL fixed in the sclera were 0.12 mm and 0.21 mm, and the tilts of the IOL were 1.5° and 8.3° in the right and left eyes, respectively. The left eye had a slightly larger IOL tilt, and the edge of the IOL overlapped the PI hole in the left eye observed by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (CASIA2; Tomey Corporation, Nagoya, Japan) . Thus, we concluded that the abnormal photopic phenomena in the left eye were caused by PD, in which light passing through the PI hole was reflected by the edge of the IOL and formed an ectopic image on the retina.
We attempted surgical closure of the PI hole using the McCannel method . Briefly, the center of the PI hole was pierced with a 10–0 polypropylene suture, and the needle was pulled out of the eye. Then, a main incision of approximately 1.5 mm wide was created directly above the PI hole, the suture through the PI hole was pulled out of the eye from the anterior chamber, ligated, and trimmed to return the ligature to the eye , thereby closing the PI hole . The subjective symptoms of PD completely disappeared, the postoperative corrected VA was unchanged from the preoperative corrected VA, higher order aberrations measured with wavefront analyzer KR-1 W (Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) showed no abnormalities before and after surgery, and no iris capture of IOL or intraocular pressure elevation has been observed to date.