A 49-year-old Chinese female felt foreign body sensation of her left eye on an occasion of weaving bamboo baskets. She visited the local ophthalmologist who prescribed her antibiotic eyedrops and intravenous Cefradine for suspicion of infectious keratitis. Nevertheless, she developed progressively exacerbating irritation, pain and remarkably decreased vision. Forty days later, the patient was referred to us. Initial examination exhibited two superposed corneal infiltrates. The larger infiltrate presented gray interlaced braid-grid texture and irregular feathery margin, mainly involving the anterior corneal stroma . The smaller infiltrate, superimposing on the larger one, manifested slight elevation in oval shape and gray color with rough surface . In vivo confocal microscopy showed multiple linear and highly branching and intersecting hyper-reflective structures distributing mainly in the anterior stroma of the cornea . Visual acuity was finger counting OS. No abnormalities were found in the right eye with visual acuity 20/16.
Clinical diagnosis of fungal keratitis was made at the initial visit. Scraping of the corneal lesion was performed for fungal and bacterial cultures. The patient was given oral itraconazole 300 mg daily, topical 0.15% amphotericin B eyedrops every 30 min, together with 0.3% Oflaxacin eyedrops 4 times daily. Two weeks later, the interlaced braid-grid infiltration with its feathery margin of the larger infiltrate regressed remarkably in the stroma. The smaller infiltrate also dwindled in size significantly. Both the larger and the smaller infiltrates completely resolved one more month later, resulting in corneal scarring involving the optical axis. No recurrence observed over 2 years of follow-up. At her final visit, uncorrected visual acuity of the left eye was 20/40.
Inoculations of the corneal lesion samples concurrently grew two similar superposed colonies on SDA and chocolate agar plates, in which the larger colony presented molds like hairy and floccose towards the edge , whereas the smaller one was yeast-like colony with creamy and shiny surface . We used a modified slide culture, a technique developed by us and reported elsewhere previously to observe the microscopic characteristics of the mould colony . Examination of modified slide culture revealed that hyphae were septate, subhyaline to pale to mid brown. The conidiophores were simple, erect, with somewhat flexouse apical part. The conidia were brown, smooth-walled, cylindrical to slight clavate, 60–100 x 10-15μm in size, with 6 to 13 pseudosepta . The hila of the conidia were black and distinctly protuberant . The pale end cells of the conidia were not separated from the intercalary golden-brown cells by thick-walled distosepta . Based on the morphology of microscopic characteristics in the slide culture together with macroscopic feature growing in SDA, the mould colony was identified as Exserohilum mcginnisii[-]. The microscopic characteristics of the non-mould colonies after smearing in the slide showed ellipse or ovoid budding yeast-like cells, 2.0-3.5 × 3.0-4.5 μm in size, and abundant pseudomycelium consisting of elongate cells, 2.0-3.5 × 10–15 μm in size . Furthermore, we used Vitek Yeast Biochemical Card (YBC; bioMérieux, Inc., Hazelwood, Mo.) through substrate assimilation assay to identify the non-mould colony in clinical microbiology laboratory of our hospital , and the results showed the isolate was Candida parapsilosis.