A 60-year-old Arabic male patient presented to our emergency department with pulsating masses in his right torso 5 days after a traumatism secondary to a cart accident. A review of his medical chart revealed that he had undergone an AFBG about 2 months earlier for lower limb revascularization. The indication for the AFBG was an occlusion in his primitive iliac artery, diagnosed by Doppler ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) angiography. At that time, AFBG was chosen as the treatment of choice because of our patient’s low ventricular ejection fraction (35%) in addition to several comorbidities, including diabetes (type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with insulin) and high blood pressure (for which he was being treated), and his long history of tobacco use (active smoker for about 40 years). Revascularization was performed using an 8-mm, reinforced, thin-walled, fluorinated ethylene-propylene-ringed, expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft.
During the current admission, we found two masses along the side of the AFBG of about 6 cm and 4 cm each. On examination, these masses were painful and tender. The first mass was located at the level of the nipple line, while the second was located at the level of the umbilical line. The overlying skin was tense and blanched. Doppler ultrasonography demonstrated that his left femoral pulse and left distal extremity pulses were absent with monophasic flow. The strength and sensation in his left leg were intact. There were no signs of compartment syndrome. There was a left anterolateral midrib fracture deep to the hematoma. CT of his chest with intravenous contrast showed two non-anastomotic PSAs in the trajectory of the AFBG graft . His hemoglobin level was 10.0 g/dL, prothrombin time was 1.6 seconds, partial thromboplastin time was 29.7 seconds, and platelet count was 160,000/mL. His renal function was normal with a creatinine clearance rate of 70 mg/m2. Echocardiography showed a ventricular ejection fraction of 40%. Consequently, our patient underwent urgent operative repair. The surgical treatment involved flattening the PSAs and the interposition of a prosthetic segment . On completion of the procedure, his left femoral pulse was palpable and pedal pulses were present on Doppler ultrasonography. Our patient recovered uneventfully and was well 3 years after discharge.