A 68-year-old male, known case of bilateral inguinoscrotal hernia for 20 years presented to our center with complaint of increasing difficulty in micturition for past two years. He had multiple episodes of acute urinary retention that required catheterization. The patient couldn't walk and sit properly. The swelling had become irreducible with time. He didn't have abdominal pain, distension, and vomiting. He didn't have any co-morbidities.
Physical examination revealed bilateral massive inguinoscrotal swelling that descended to just below midpoint of inner thigh in the standing position . There was no evidence of inflammation, excoriation or ulceration of the scrotal skin. Penis was partially buried in detumescence state. The swelling was tender and irreducible. Cough impulse was negative and getting above the swelling was not possible. There was separate ipsilateral testicular swelling in lower one third of inguinoscrotal swelling with thickened scrotal skin and dilated veins. Haemoglobin, total leukocyte count, random blood glucose and renal function test were within normal limit.
Patient underwent elective exploration via inguinoscrotal approach in tertiary care hospital by a team of general and gastrointestinal surgeons and mesh hernioplasty performed on bilateral inguinal region. Intra-operatively, large hernia sac was present containing omentum and small bowel with only the proximal ileum (A and B). Minimal inter-bowel adhesions were found. Manual reduction of the hernia contents into the abdominal cavity was achieved through the deep inguinal ring but without any bowel resection. Adhesiolysis was done and redundant sac was excised.
A double-layered closure by prolene surgical mesh was done followed by reconstruction of the wall. This was followed by exploration of contralateral left inguinoscrotal hernia. Intraoperatively, we found hernia sac containing omentum and small bowel with only the proximal jejunum lying within the sac. Adhesiolysis was done and manual reduction of hernia content was done through the deep inguinal similar to left inguinal hernia. Closure was done with Prolene Mesh followed by reconstruction of wall and bilateral inguinal drain was placed .
Postoperatively, there was early return of bowel movement and mobilization. His intraabdominal pressure was monitored routinely to avoid abdominal compartment syndrome. No respiratory complication was seen during his stay in hospital. On the seventh postoperative day, the drain was removed before discharge. Small postoperative inguinal seroma developed which resolved within few weeks without surgical intervention. There was no evidence of recurrence at six months during follow up.