The patient was an 18-year-old man with a recent detection of a thyroid nodule. The thyroid nodule was assessed by ultrasonography (USG) and Tc99m scan. The thyroid USG reported a generalized enlargement with a heterogenic hypoechoic texture nodule with the size of 76 × 45 mm in the right lobe. Thyroid scan showed a cold nodule in the right lobe . Thyroid function test reported a normal level of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH, 0.9 µIU/mL), free T4 (17 pmol/L), and free T3 (2.8 pmol/L). In addition, fine needle aspiration (FNA) reported presence of lymphoid cells infiltration suspicious of lymph node aspiration. Based on the suspicious FNA result, re-aspiration of the thyroid nodule performed that revealed a lymphoproliferative lesion .
A mild thrombocytopenia of about 123 ×103 cell/μL was reported in complete blood count; however, as the patient had not any systemic symptoms, the clinician attributed it to the platelet aggregation. Based on this decision, he became candidate for excisional biopsy.
Unfortunately the patient was lost to follow-up for two months and he returned complaining of a continuous bleeding for two days after a tooth extraction. In addition, he expressed a history of constitutional symptoms like fever, chills, nocturnal perspiration, and cough in the last three weeks. During the physical examination, right cervical lymphadenopathy, enlarged and nodular thyroid, pale conjunctiva, splenomegaly, and left flank ecchymosis were detected. The patient was admitted to the hospital immediately.
In the next medical assessment, complete blood count revealed an Hb concentration of 10.5 g/dL, a WBC count of 12400 cell/μL, and a very low platelet count of 16 ×103 cell/μL. The USG of the abdomen and pelvis revealed splenomegaly with the size of 185 mm.
PBS showed anisocytosis, hypochromia, decreased number of platelets and WBCs, and presence of around 5% blasts. Then, bone marrow was aspirated and examined that showed increased number of blasts and a significantly hypercellular marrow packed by immature cells with high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio and increased mitoses with minimal residual hematopoietic cells. The flow cytometry of bone marrow specimen showed positivity for HLA-DR, CD10, CD19, CD20, and CD45 as well as negativity for TdT. This report confirmed the diagnosis of pre-B-cell, Ph positive, chromosome negative, acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Based on the ALL diagnosis, the R-Hyper-CVAD induction chemotherapeutic regimen (rituximab in combination with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone) was started. Interestingly, thyroid examination after induction chemotherapy became normal. Thyroid USG indicated significant thyroid nodule regression with one hypoechoic texture nodule, 4 mm in size. Moreover, Tc99m scan reported no hypoactive zone at the thyroid right lobe .
According to our experience it was so much difficult to perform an ultrasound guided FNA of a nodule 4 mm in size, therefore we relied on the thyroid USG and scan for the nodule regression. Beside the final flow cytometry of bone marrow aspiration reported ALL remission.
Thyroid function test reported the following values for TSH, T4, and anti-thyroid peroxidase (1.7 µIU/mL, 7.5 µg/dL, and 41.0 units/mL, respectively).