A 46-year-old Mongolian male, married, migrant worker presented to our department of neurology in the university hospital for the evaluation of tingling sensation and weakness of right upper and lower limbs.
Two months prior to his presentation to our hospital, the patient had nausea, hiccups, and epigastric pain. These symptoms were not accompanied by vomiting. Nausea and hiccups lasted for a week and they were not so severe as to require medical attention. A week later, he started to develop tingling sensation over his right upper limb. This persisted for nearly five weeks without the development of any other symptoms. Two weeks prior to the presentation, the tingling sensation progressed to involve the right lower limb. The tingling sensation was eventually followed by weakness in both right upper and lower limbs. The weakness in his right upper limb progressed to his right lower limb within a day and, thereafter, remained static. For these complaints, he was initially evaluated at a local hospital. He gave no history of weakness or sensory disturbances involving the left upper and lower limbs. There was no history of bowel or bladder incontinence. There was no history of fever, loss of consciousness, seizure, altered sensorium, or neck rigidity. However, he gave a history of sudden onset left eye pain followed by diminished vision which subsided on treatment two years back. There were no documentations available regarding the diagnosis and treatment for the same though. He did not have any history of alcohol intake or tobacco smoking. There was also no history of any chronic medical illness.
Clinically, his general condition was fair and stable. There was no pallor, icterus, cyanosis, oedema, palpable lymph nodes, or dehydration. On neurological evaluation, his higher mental functions and cranial nerves examination were intact. Eye evaluation with fundal examination was also normal at the time of presentation. Motor examination revealed normal muscle bulk but decreased muscle tone in both right upper and lower limbs. There was diminished power across all major muscle groups in the right upper and lower limbs. Power across the proximal muscle groups was 3/5 while it was 4/5 across the distal muscle groups in both upper and lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes in both the limbs on the right side were moderately exaggerated (+++) whereas they were slightly exaggerated (++) on the left side. Plantar response was mute with diminished pin prick and fine touch sensation on the right upper and lower limbs while there was withdrawal plantar response with normal sensation on the left upper and lower limbs. Vibration and joint position senses were intact. Lhermitte's sign was absent in this patient. His gait, however, was unsteady.
Full blood count showed haemoglobin 14.1 g/dl, white blood cells 11,900/mm3 (neutrophils 76%, lymphocytes 22%, monocytes 1%, and basophils 1%), and platelets 152,000/mm3. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 30 millimetres per hour. Biochemical evaluation showed random blood sugar level 9.7 mmol/l, urea 27 mg/dl, and creatinine 1.1 mg/dl. Urine routine and microscopic examination was normal. His vitamin B12 level was 764 pg/ml, which was within the normal range. His blood tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were negative. Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test was also negative. Peripheral blood film for malarial parasite was negative. Serological evaluation for antinuclear antibodies and anti-double stranded-deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies were also negative.
Nerve conduction study revealed normal amplitude, distal latency, and conduction velocity of right median nerve, right ulnar nerve, right common peroneal nerve, and right posterior tibial nerve. MRI of his cervical spine showed T1 iso- to hypointense signal and T2 hyperintense signal in central cervical spinal cord from first to sixth cervical level, showing subtle enhancement and causing expansion of involved cord . This was probably suggestive of myelitis or demyelination. Based on the clinical presentation and MRI findings, a provisional diagnosis of NMO was made and the patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 gram per day for three days and oral pregabalin tablets 75 mg twice a day for three days. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis and antibody assay were not performed yet and the patient wanted to get referred to higher centre.
At our centre, lumbar puncture was performed which showed clear and colourless CSF, total count 25 cells/mm3 with all monomorphs, protein 15 mg/dl, and glucose 3.6 mmol/l. CSF adenosine deaminase (ADA) was within normal limit. Visual evoked potential (VEP) was also performed which indicated bilateral conduction defect. The P100 latencies were delayed for the right eye at both frequencies and for the left eye at 1 degree. The amplitudes were within normal limits for both eyes at both frequencies. Farnsworth Dichotomous Test for colour blindness indicated bilateral normal colour vision. MRI study of the brain was normal . NMO-IgG autoantibody test was still not available in our country at the time of presentation of the patient and, hence, the CSF sample was sent to India. Immunofluorescent assay revealed strongly positive NMO-IgG antibodies in the CSF sample. CSF immunoglobulin G (IgG) level was 52.7 mg/l which was also out of range (normal reference range: 0–34 mg/l).
Hence, the final diagnosis of NMO was made. Since he had already received a course of intravenous methylprednisolone for three days, he was given prednisolone 60 mg orally for a month and then in tapering dose. Oral pregabalin 75 mg twice a day was continued. His symptoms started to resolve and was discharged after a month of hospital stay. The patient and his family members were advised for physiotherapy for muscle strengthening exercises. He was able to walk with the help of a support during his discharge from the hospital. He was under regular follow-up for the next two months during which his muscle strength constantly improved. He was lost to follow-up after two months.