A 63-year-old male with hypertension and seizure disorder presented to the renal clinic with a blood pressure of 220/110 mmHg, headache and neck pain and was sent to the emergency department. His review of systems showed that he had a 2-month history of bilateral ankle pain, anasarca, progressive renal impairment, weakness and fatigue, associated with a history of loss of appetite for this period of time. A renal workup revealed nephrotic-range proteinuria and microscopic hematuria, with urinalysis showing red cells and protein. CBC showed a hemoglobin of 8.6 g/dL, white cell count of 7.7 K/uL and a platelet count of 146 K/uL. Blood chemistry showed sodium of 146 mmol/L. potassium of 4.5 mmol/L, bicarbonate of 25 mmol/L, chloride of 113 mmol/L, BUN of 61 mg/dL and a creatinine of 4.08 mg/dL. Serology was negative for antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-double stranded DNA antibody, lupus anticoagulant, cryoglobulins and viral markers (HBV, HCV and HIV). Complement levels were normal. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis were negative for a monoclonal protein. Although he had slightly low haptoglobin, his ADAMTS13 level was within normal limits. A renal core biopsy showed predominantly medulla and a small cortical sample, containing up to 12 glomeruli of which one glomerulus was globally sclerosed. All patent glomeruli showed segmental or global occlusion of capillary loops by PAS-positive eosinophilic pseudothrombi which were non-argyrophilic and stained magenta red on trichrome ; some of the glomeruli had a membranoproliferative pattern associated with mild mesangial hypercellularity and segmental double contours . A single artery sampled showed moderate arteriosclerosis but no thrombi. The interstitium was unremarkable except for patchy fibrosis. On immunofluorescence microscopy (IF), the pseudothrombi stained for IgA, kappa and lambda and were negative for the other immunoreactants; some pseudothrombi also showed intensely staining bright foci that were more numerous in kappa than in lambda (arrow). Electron microscopy (EM) of 2 glomeruli showed several capillary loops lined by swollen endothelial cells, with occluding intra-luminal electron-dense crystals; all the crystals showed a lattice-like substructure with parallel linear arrays. No conventional immune complex-type electron-dense deposits or fibrin tactoids were seen within the glomeruli . Crystals were also not seen within proximal tubular epithelial cells. Occasional loops showed mild subendothelial widening along with rare cell interposition. A diagnosis of crystalglobulin-associated nephropathy (CAN) with possible kappa restriction was favored. Paraffin-IF with pronase digestion could not be performed as no glomeruli remained in the paraffin block. Subsequent testing with immunogold EM showed preferential association of kappa particles for the crystals, confirming kappa restriction of the crystals . A repeat serum electrophoresis 3 months later showed IgA kappa and trace amount of IgG lambda while urinary protein electrophoresis remained negative; a free light chain assay showed a kappa/lambda ratio of 3.9. Bone marrow and peripheral blood flow cytometry at this time showed a small clonal B-cell population (0.19 K/uL) with kappa restriction and a chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) phenotype, co-expressing CD5 and CD23 and being negative for CD10 and CD103. No organomegaly or lymphadenopathy was present in the patient. A diagnosis of CAN presenting as MGRS in the background of monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) was confirmed in the patient. Since the diagnosis, the patient has been dialysis-dependent. A hemato-oncology referral was sought in view of the patient’s MGRS finding but because of the low clonal B-cell count coupled with extreme frailty and recurrent episodes of C.difficile diarrhea in the patient, no specific hematologic treatment was decided to be initiated by the clinical team till the patient became clinically more stable.