A 32 years old male presented to our hospital's emergency department with severe headache, memory impairment, speech difficulty, slight right-sided weakness, and vision impairment. The complaint began eight weeks before hospital admission and worsened two weeks before admission. The symptoms began with a low-grade fever, a dry cough, and a loss of appetite, which intensified over time. The patient visited primary care physicians and the district hospital without improvement, and the chest radiograph result was inconclusive.
The patient was first referred to our hospital's emergency room and then to our neurology department. The emergency room physician noted mild spastic right-side weakness without any other abnormality on physical examination, chest radiography, and routine laboratory examinations. The patient also complained of weight loss and night sweating when he was admitted.
On physical examination, the patient was generally wasted and drowsy; he was oriented but sleepy. He had a surface temperature of 38 °C, pulse rate of 90 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 16/minute, and blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg; neck stiffness was absent. An examination of the lungs, heart, and abdomen indicated no apparent anomalies. The neurology examination showed a right-sided hemiparesis, with the proximal and distal strength of 4 out of 5 being detected, and a bilateral Babinski sign was present. The results of every cranial nerve and sensory examination were normal. The patient was consulted to the ophthalmology department for further examination due to a vision impairment complaint. The result was unilateral visual loss with fundoscopy findings of compressive optic atrophy in one eye and contralateral papilledema due to increased intracranial pressure.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head showed an enhanced lesion in the left frontal lobe, surrounded by perifocal edema . The patient's sputum acid-fast bacilli laboratory test was positive.
The abscess was removed by an open craniectomy, and antituberculous therapy was begun immediately. Isoniazid (225 mg), rifampicin (450 mg), ethambutol (825 mg), and pyrazinamide (1200 mg) comprised the antituberculous treatment regimen. Vitamin B6 was also applied to the medications, as mentioned earlier. Within a few days, the patient's drowsiness subsided, and his overall health improved after two weeks, but he still had a fever. In about a month, the disability had significantly improved.