A 42-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with diffuse abdominal pain and distension for the previous 5 days. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen with marked tenderness and rebound tenderness in her lower abdomen. She had a fever at 39 °C, a pulse rate of 80/min, and blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg. Laboratory investigations showed that WBC count of 17,320 cells/mm3, hematocrit 32.6%, platelets 263,000 cells/mm3, ESR 150 mm/hr., and CRP 88 mg/L. Additionally, serum CA19–9 was elevated to 29,770 U/ml. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed cystic masses in both adnexa with mixed echogenicity and maximum diameter up to 9 cm . Considering the clinical symptoms and ultrasound findings, we suspected chemical peritonitis due to a ruptured ovarian cystic mass. Under general anesthesia, we performed emergency exploratory laparotomy for confirmative diagnosis and treatment.
The surgical findings revealed approximately 1000 ml of ascites including hair and sebaceous material. Multiple dense adhesions were present between the omentum and bowel loops. The ovaries were fiable and bled easily, and the dermoid cystic material was noted in the cyst beds. Additionally, brownish black colored solid mass was identified within the cyst. We proceeded with cyst enucleation, partial omentectomy, and removal of all visible dermoid material in the abdominal cavity.
Histologic examination showed that most of the cystic mass was composed of mature dermoid components . However, the brownish-black colored solid mass was composed of infiltrating nests of pleomorphic cells with prominent nucleoli and black pigments . These pleomorphic cells showed strong immunoreactivity for melan-A and HMB-45 . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with malignant melanoma. The subsequent staging operation included total abdominal hysterectomy, both adnexectomy, omentectomy, appendectomy, peritoneal biopsy, and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. After the surgery, the patient’s entire body was evaluated to exclude the possibility of a malignant melanoma at any other site. We finally concluded that the malignant melanoma originated from the mature cystic teratoma of the ovary. The patient remains alive and without recurrence 4 years after treatment.