Our patient is a 47-year-old female nurse affected by chronic gastritis and gastroesophageal reflux disease for which she cyclically takes proton pump inhibitors.
On November the 2nd 2020, after having returned home from a hospital shift, she started feeling extremely tired and developed flu-like symptoms including cough, myalgia and loss of appetite. Two days later, a real time-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of nasopharyngeal swab test confirmed that she had contracted Sars-CoV-2 infection. While in self-isolation, she started developing anosmia and dysgeusia and difficulties in sleeping. It was only when she manifested shortness of breath and chest pain that she was admitted to the emergency department of a large hospital in Rome. In addition to dyspnoea, she refers to have experienced an acute and intense burning chest pain radiating to the proximal left arm, the shoulder and the upper region of the homolateral hemithorax, innerved by T1 root. A chest computed tomography scan (CT-scan) showed that she had developed a mild bilateral pneumonia Sars-CoV-2 related, without respiratory insufficiency, but could not explain the peculiar chest pain. Other causes of chest pain were ruled out and she was discharged home on oral steroids with great benefit not only for the respiratory symptoms but also for the pain. On November 21st, 2020, a new RT-PCR of nasopharyngeal swab gave a negative result.
About two months later, she was admitted to our post-acute outpatient service as a COVID-19 long hauler, referring the persistence of the unilateral chest pain radiating to the left arm and altered sense of smell and taste along with persistent fatigue and myalgia.
During her three separate days admission to our post-acute Day Hospital service, the patient performed different tests in the three different visits she attended. Overall, she undertook a full blood test panel including autoimmune markers without abnormalities, an electrocardiogram revealing a sinus rhythm, a pneumological examination with full pulmonary tests displaying normal lung function, a psychological evaluation, and a neurological examination. The autoimmune markers panel included Anti-nuclear autoantibodies (ANA), Anti-SSA/Ro, Anti-La/SSB, Anti-Jo1, Anti-RNP; Anti-topoisomerase I (Anti-SCL 70); Central-antineutrophil cytoplasmatic antibody (c-ANCA); Perinuclear-antineutrophil cytoplasmatic antibody (p-ANCA); Rheumatoid factor; Anti-cyclin citrullinated peptide (Anti-CCP); Lupus Anticoagulant; Anti-cardiolipin; Anti-beta2 glycoprotein; Anti-endomysium and Anti-tissue transglutaminase autoantibodies.
The neurological physical examination revealed the persistence of painful dysesthesia involving the left scapula, radiating to the left arm and forearm, especially on the ventral side. Muscle strength was normal. A mild hypoesthesia was present in the ventral area of the left arm, with T1 dermatome distribution. The rest of neurological examination did not report any abnormalities. Presentation of patient’s neuropathic symptoms as captured by the neurological physical examination is shown in Fig. .
Thus, she performed a neurophysiological evaluation and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brachial plexus. MRI was carried out without contrast. Sensory nerve conduction performed on both arms showed a reduced sensory action potential amplitude of the left medial and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerves, compared to the contralateral, asymptomatic side, with an amplitude difference of more than 50%. Motor nerve conduction studies were unremarkable. Needle electromyography (EMG) of the left upper limb, including deltoid, biceps brachii, extensor digitorum communis and first dorsal interosseus muscles was normal.
The MRI demonstrated segmental diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) restriction and corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) low signal of the left upper trunk , and T2 hyperintensity and thickening of the left upper trunk . Some confluent lymph nodes with irregular borders were detected in left supraclavicular fossa .
A diagnosis of atypical, pure sensory, brachial plexus neuritis was made and she was prescribed to continue oral steroids—at the dosage 12,5 mg of prednisone per day for other two months- and start duloxetine and gabapentin with a consequent significant improvement of the pain, undeterred by mild symptoms under stress.