A 24-year-old South Asian woman of Punjabi ethnicity presented with fleshy mass protruding through midline vertical abdominal scar and bleeding from the mass during menstruation for the past 5 months. She was primigravida; she underwent a caesarean section 6 months earlier at term gestation for breech presentation in a local hospital. She delivered a normal healthy baby boy and the immediate postpartum period was uneventful. On the sixth postoperative day she noticed serosanguinous discharge from her abdominal wound and wound dehiscence was diagnosed. She was managed conservatively and the wound was left for secondary healing by the attending physician. Her history revealed that she was given antibiotic coverage during this time. The major portion of her wound healed in 1 month leaving a 2 cm area in the middle of her vertical scar. An investigation at the time of her caesarean section revealed that she was anemic (hemoglobin 8 gm %). Peripheral blood film revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia. On admission to our institute she was emaciated, thin built, anemic and her vital signs were normal. An abdominal examination revealed a 2×2 cm fleshy mass protruding through the middle part of her infraumbilical abdominal scar. On per vaginal examination her uterus seemed attached to the anterior abdominal wall at the scar site and with cervical movement the mass was getting retracted into her abdomen. With her history of menstruation through the abdominal wound a provisional diagnosis of scar endometriosis/uterocutaneous fistula was made and ultrasonography (USG) and fistulogram were suggested. USG showed normal uterus and adnexa and fistulogram showed communication with intraperitoneal cavity. A tissue biopsy revealed granuloma. She was planned for excision of the fistula tract and repair. On an operating table methylene blue dye was injected through the wound to mark the fistulous tract and dye was found to be escaping through her vagina confirming communication with uterine cavity. An elliptical incision was made around the fleshy mass and on entering the abdominal cavity, the left side of her uterus was adherent with her anterior abdominal wall at the scar site and the fimbrial end of her left fallopian tube was found to be protruding through the abdominal scar. A probe (dilator) was passed through the tube and diagnosis was confirmed . The tube was pulled inside and adhesiolysis of uterine adhesions from anterior abdominal wall was done. The scar edges were freshened and the incision was closed in layers. She had an uneventful recovery. She was followed up monthly for 3 months and had no complaints.