A 48-year-old woman presented with numbness and pain of her right lower extremity 2 days before her first visit. She visited our hospital because of worsening of pain. She was treated for asthma. On physical examination, we noted muscle weakness in the right lower extremity. On the manual muscle test (MMT), the tibialis anterior (TA) and extensor hallucis longus (EHL) were 3/5, and gastrocnemius and flexor hallucis longus (FHL) were 4/5. She denied low back pain. Straight leg raising (SLR) was positive at 70 degrees; however, the femoral nerve stretch test was negative. Deep tendon reflexes were normal. An X-ray revealed degenerative scoliosis at L5–S1 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a disc herniation at L5–S1, but there was no significant nerve root compression or cord compression . Nerve conduction velocity testing in the peroneal nerve revealed that the motor nerve conduction velocity was 51.5 m/s . When the ankle brachial index was measured to evaluate vascular lesions, a decrease of 0.78 on the right and 0.73 on the left was observed (reference value: 0.91–1.40). Considering the possibility of peripheral arterial disease of the lower extremities, we performed arteriography of the lower extremities but found no significant vascular lesions. Based on these results, the initial diagnosis was LDH and we initiated symptomatic treatment using only an extract from inflamed rabbit skin inoculated with vaccinia virus (Neurotropin®).
On the 7th day after the first visit to our hospital, her muscle strength appeared to recover, and on the 10th day, MMT in the right lower limb recovered to almost normal . Because the pain remained from the lateral side of the right lower leg to the dorsum of the foot, symptomatic treatment was continued. On the 22nd day after the first visit, the pain in the right lower leg worsened, and on the 26th day, right drop foot was observed. MMT on the right side of TA, EHL, FHL, and peroneus longus were 1/5, and the left side TA, EHL, and FHL were 4/5 . The Achilles tendon reflex disappeared on both sides. MRI was performed urgently; however, no exacerbation of LDH was observed. The peroneal nerve conduction velocity test failed to derive an evoked myogenic potential . Subsequently, she was unable to walk and was hospitalized on the 30th day after the first visit.
Blood tests on admission showed eosinophilia (white blood cell 40,300/μL, eosinophil percentage 77% and IgE 1120 IU/ml), associated with mild liver dysfunction and increase of CPK levels . When we referred her to the neurology department, she was diagnosed with polyneuritis in the context of EGPA. Administration of 10 mg/day of steroid was started. The dose was gradually increased to 20 mg/day on the 3rd day after hospitalization and 30 mg/day after 1 week. Blood tests 1 week after admission showed a decrease in eosinophil fraction and improved liver function tests . Perinuclear-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and cytoplasmic-ANCA that is specific for ANCA-related vasculitis were negative. Steroid pulse therapy (1000 mg/day) was administered 2 weeks after hospitalization because the neurological symptoms of the lower extremities were not improved. Thereafter, she continued to take steroids at a maintenance dose of 50 mg/day; however, the numbness of both hands and feet and muscle weakness remained. One month after hospitalization, she was readmitted to the other hospital for detailed examination and treatment. At the time of transfer, the MMT was 0/5 below the TA on the right lower extremity and 2–3/5 below the TA on the left lower extremity . In the upper extremity, interosseous muscle and abductor digiti minimi were 4/5. After discharge from the department of neurology, rehabilitation was performed at our department. Six months after the onset of symptoms, she could walk with a right short leg brace, and MMT recovered to 1–3/5 below the TA on the right lower limb and 4–5/5 below the TA on the left lower limb .