We present the case of a 72-year-old Caucasian man originally diagnosed in 2003 with stage IA mantle cell lymphoma, nodular pattern, involving the right parotid gland. At that time, he was treated with definitive radiation therapy to a total dose of 36 Gy, and the disease was in remission until 2006. He presented in July 2006 with shortness of breath and was found to have a right pleural effusion. Thoracocentesis confirmed the recurrence of mantle cell lymphoma. Disease restaging work-up revealed multicompartment lymphadenopathy in the neck, mediastinal, retrocrural, retroperitoneal and pelvic regions. Bone marrow was also involved. The patient was treated with a total of six cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin and dexamethasone (R-HyperCVAD) completed in January 2007. That treatment led to complete remission that lasted until October 2008, when the disease was found to have recurred in the left pleural space and retroperitoneum without bone marrow involvement. At that time, the patient was started on rituximab and lenalidomide but developed secondary and prolonged pancytopenia (white blood cell count, 1200 × 103/μL [1200 × 109/L]; neutrophils, 70%; hemoglobin, 7.6 g/dL [76 g/L]; platelets, 20 × 103/μL [20 × 109/L]) after the second cycle that precluded further chemotherapy or surgical resection. In April 2009, the patient was referred to radiation oncology to consider a palliative course of radiation to both the pleural-based and the retroperitoneal masses. The most urgent problems at that time were abdominal pain and early signs of bowel obstruction secondary to an abdominal mass. The 7.5 cm × 5.3 cm mass was located in the left midpelvic region within the small bowel mesentery anteriorly located beneath the abdominal wall. Coronal and sagittal CT scans showed that the mass extended from the lower part of vertebral body L5 to the upper part of vertebral body S2. Disease was evident in the mediastinum and right pleural area but was not causing any symptoms at that time, and the decision was made to administer palliative radiation to the abdominal mass.
Radiation treatment was simulated and planned based on CT scanning as follows. CT scans (5-mm slices) were obtained over the course of several days for planning purposes; the target volume was outlined on those scans, and a radiation therapy plan was generated by a Pinnacle treatment planning system (version 8.0, Philips Medical Systems, Madison, Wisconsin, USA). During the planning process, the medical oncologist ordered a positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan. When the results of that scan became available three days later, the radiation oncologist noticed that the location of the tumor mass on the radiation planning CT scan was completely different than its location on the PET/CT scan. At that time, the patient was brought back to radiation oncology, another planning CT scan series was obtained, and the two sets of planning CT scans taken five days apart were compared. We found and confirmed that the tumor mass had moved in three dimensions, from the left side to the right side, from the lower pelvis to the above the pelvic rim, and from a mid anteroposterior location to a more anterior location, over those five days . We decided at that point to proceed with the treatment using a cone-beam CT device equipped with on-board imaging (Varian Medical Systems Inc., Palo Alto, California, USA). Cone-beam CT provides volumetric images in real time while the patient is immobilized in the treatment position immediately before each treatment session. We obtained cone-beam CT scans immediately before each daily treatment, which the treating radiation oncologist used to move the beam's-eye views (anteroposterior and posteroanterior) such that the tumor was contained within the radiation port. Because the extent of tumor motion ranged between 3 and 7 cm in all three dimensions and because we could not predict the direction or the extent of movement, we concluded that using cone-beam CT for daily verification of tumor position was the only way to effectively treat this mass.
The patient completed radiation therapy to a total dose of 36 Gy given in 18 treatment sessions. The volume of the mass decreased in from 213.9 cm3 before the radiation therapy to 70.2 cm3 at the completion of the radiation therapy.
To assess the potential differences in dose distribution between the originally planned treatment and the treatment actually delivered with the use of cone-beam CT, we fused the original planning CT scans with the cone-beam CT scans obtained on selected treatment days and contoured the tumor to illustrate the shift in its location from day to day . We also generated dose-volume histograms for each daily tumor location assessment to show the doses that would have been received if the original planning fields had been applied without the use of cone-beam CT . That analysis shows that up to 80% of the tumor volume would have been missed in several instances.
Side effects of the radiation treatment included diarrhea and fatigue. Because the mass never intercepted either kidney, no radiation was accidentally delivered to the kidneys. The patient returned for follow-up four weeks after completion of treatment, at which time a second PET/CT scan showed complete resolution of the treated mass and no other masses in the abdomen.