A 2-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan girl presented with lower abdominal pain and low-grade fever. She is from an average Sri Lankan middle class family with no significant family history of ovarian disease and with an average socioeconomic background. She was vaccinated in concordance with the extended immunization schedule of Sri Lanka and there were no significant environmental hazards. She was seen by her general practitioner 3 days prior with postprandial vomiting with no associated diarrhea, constipation, or urinary symptoms. She was otherwise well and was not in pain. She was diagnosed as having acute gastroenteritis. On the third day of the illness, as the symptoms persisted, she was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation.
On examination, she was not in pain but noted to be bent forward while walking. She was comfortable in the seated position and was playful. An examination of her vital signs revealed that they were normal for her age with good hydration and her axillary temperature was 36.2 °C. A cardiovascular system examination revealed a pulse rate of 97 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 96/70 mmHg. Her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute and her oxygen saturation 100% on room air without any features suggestive of respiratory distress. The rest of the detailed examination of her cardiovascular and respiratory systems did not reveal any abnormalities. She was rational and conscious with no features suggestive of past or acute neurological deficits. On examination of her abdomen, there was guarding, which was mainly confined to the lower abdomen, equally on both sides. There were no classic clinical features such as severe tenderness on the right inguinal fossa and rebound tenderness to suggest appendicitis. There were no hepatosplenomegaly or ballotable kidneys.
Our patient’s white blood cell count was elevated to 14,700/mm3 with 53% lymphocytes and 45% leukocytes. Her hemoglobin and platelet counts were within normal limits. Her C-reactive protein concentration was 42.6 mg/l. Her urine analysis showed 30–40 white blood cells and 2–4 red blood cells. There were trace amounts of protein with significant amounts of ketone bodies. Therefore, on the day of admission, a tentative diagnosis of urinary tract infection was made and she was started on intravenous gentamicin 5 mg/kg/day. A urine culture did not grow any organisms. There was no bacterial growth in her blood culture. Renal function, liver profiles, serum electrolytes, and other basic biochemical investigation results were within normal limits.
An abdominopelvic ultrasound scan revealed a mixed but predominantly hyperechoic mass on the pouch of Douglas on her right side measuring 5 cm × 2.5 cm × 3 cm suggestive of ovarian cyst . Her left ovary was normal. There was no evidence of appendicitis or pyelonephritis. A magnetic resonance imaging scan of her abdomen revealed an enlarged right ovary with hemorrhages at various stages with multiple enlarged follicles within it, which was suggestive of OT . It did not show any enhancement with intravenous gadolinium.
Exploratory laparoscopy revealed a twisted gangrenous right ovary following which an oophorectomy was performed as no viable ovarian tissue was noticed. Our patient recovered with no complications. Histology of the specimen revealed features suggestive of a benign ovarian torsion undergoing torsion with venous infarction.
After 36 hours, gentamicin was stopped and she was started on intravenous cefotaxime 50 mg/kg/dose every 6 hours and intravenous metronidazole 7.5 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours for 5 days.
The follow-up at 12 months revealed no complications or any other major illnesses. Her growth and development were also in concordance with the mean for her age and sex.