A 61 year-old man presented with one episode of gross hematuria without fever, flank pain, pain with urination, weight loss, or neurological symptoms. The patient had a past medical history of coronary artery disease and well-controlled hypertension. A computed tomography (CT) urogram showed a 3.5 x 2.1 x 1.3 cm, arterially enhancing mass, at the lateral mid to lower pole of the left kidney, along with a branching calculus in left lower pole renal calyces. These findings were suspicious for a renal cell carcinoma. The laboratory examination revealed a normal creatinine. There was no family history of VHL disease or neoplastic diseases. A cystoscopy was performed and revealed no tumor in the urethra, bladder or ureter. One month later, the patient underwent a laparoscopic left partial nephrectomy. Gross examination of the specimen revealed a well-circumscribed but non-encapsulated round mass, measuring 3.0 x 2.1 x 1.3 cm. Cut surfaces revealed the tumor was tan-white in color, with partial fibrosis, and mild hemorrhage. Histologically, under low power, the tumor was slightly lobulated, traversed by a prominent vascular network with thin-walled blood vessels , in a background of hyalinized and sclerotic stroma . On high power, the tumor cells were slightly variable in size, oval to polygonal in shape, and with abundant clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm with occasional fine vacuoles and eosinophilic hyaline globules . Most tumor cell nuclei were bland with inconspicuous nucleoli, although focal mild pleomorphism was present. There was no tumor necrosis or mitotic figures. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells diffusely expressed S100 , alpha-inhibin , neuron-specific enolase (NSE), vimentin and PAX8 . AE1/AE3 showed only weak, focal cytoplasmic staining. The tumor cells were negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9), CD10, KRT7, CD117, p504s, synaptophysin, chromogranin, melanin A, HMB45 and steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1). Ki-67 stain showed very low proliferative index (<1%). Extracted genomic DNA from formalin fixed paraffin-embedded material (50% tumor cellularity) was submitted for next generation sequencing (NGS) using the Oncomine Comprehensive Plus panel (ThermoFisher) enabling the detection of variants in the full coding sequence of 227 genes and hot spots of 165 genes, and the detection of copy number variants of 333 genes, including the entire coding sequence of VHL. Two variants of uncertain significance were detected in NOTCH1 (c.6061G>T, p.V2021F, variant allele frequency = 52%) and APC (c.7459T>C, p.S2487P, variant allele frequency = 52%), but no copy number changes were detected. Overall, the histological, immunohistochemical, and molecular findings supported the diagnosis of sporadic hemangioblastoma of the kidney. The postoperative course of the patient was uncomplicated, and there was no evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis on follow-up 10 months after the surgery.