A 46-year-old Caucasian woman presented at the Haematology Outpatient Department with pruritic rash all over her body. Prior to this visit, she had been examined by an infectious diseases specialist at her local hospital, who suspected a scabies-related rash.
The patient complained of pruritic, erythematous, blister-like lesions that had arose over the past 14 d. Because of scrabbing, the blisters were soon replaced with crusts . She reported having noticed no signs of infection, no fevers or chills, and no B-symptoms, and denied having been bitten by an insect or close contact with domestic animals. She was not receiving any medical drugs, with the exception of ibrutinib (started 18 mo earlier) but remembered having received a thimerosal-containing influenza vaccination (VaxigripTetraÒ, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France) 10 d prior to the first skin lesions appearing. She reported never having experienced a similar rash.
The patient had been diagnosed with CLL and treated with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) in 2017. To address a persistent CLL clone with bone marrow infiltration of 5%, she had received the above-mentioned ibrutinib. More than 3 years after the allo-HSCT, she had presented for an extra outpatient visit to address the itchy rash.
There is no personal and family history.
On admission, the patient was afebrile. Papulonodular, crusted skin eruptions (2-3 mm in diameter) were prominent on her neck, back, arms and legs. An enlarged painful lymph node (3 cm in diameter) was palpable under the left armpit. The influenza vaccination had been given on that same side.
The patient’s white blood cell and absolute eosinophil counts in the peripheral blood were within normal ranges (7.94 × 109/L and 0.27 × 109/L, respectively). Serological and PCR-based testing ruled out reactivation of herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus.
No image inspections are involved.
Since the clinical and laboratory examinations did not establish a diagnosis, we opted for skin biopsy. The skin biopsy from the right thigh revealed irregular acanthosis of the epidermis, associated with diffuse superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial inflammatory cell infiltrates composed predominantly of eosinophilic granulocytes admixed with lymphocytes and histiocytes. The inflammatory cell infiltration extended into the septa and lobuli of the subcutaneous fatty tissue .