A 36-year-old right-handed female presented to our clinic with a history of a painful mass in her right forearm for over 7 years. She reported that she was advised by her primary care provider to get an MRI to workup this lesion. However, she was lost to follow-up until her most recent presentation to our institution. She described her symptoms as an intermittent pain that is associated with touch and direct palpation over the volar aspect of her forearm. On examination, there was a palpable mass about 4.0 cm distal to the elbow on the volar aspect of the forearm, measured 3.5 cm×2.0 cm. The mass was tender to palpation and was Tinel positive with pain and paresthesia radiating distally over the median nerve distribution. There was no objective sensory or a motor deficit. The patient reported no history of trauma. The patient denied any personal or family history of neurofibromatosis (NF) or schwannomatosis. MRI was ordered to better characterize this tumor and to rule out multiple masses affecting the same nerve. Multiplanar multisequence MR images were obtained with and without contrast. The mass appeared to have a large fusiform shape. It was found to be deep to the pronator teres muscle and immediately medial to the brachial artery and vein, and it measured 3.5 cm×2.0 cm. In addition, within the volar forearm, there was a second lesion, adjacent, and concurrent. This mass was relatively smaller and appeared to be distal to the main lesion and was located posterior to the brachial artery and vein. It measured approximately 1.5 cm×1.0 cm. Both were, enhancing, well-rounded lesions associated with the median nerve. The patient was offered different treatment options and ultimately elected to proceed with surgery. A microsurgical technique was used to explore the median nerve. A curvilinear incision from the medial elbow to mid-lateral forearm, sharply through the skin, blunt dissection down onto the forearm fascia and lacertus fibrosis, and divided and then careful dissection onto the brachial artery and median nerve. The median nerve tumor at the elbow was identified and isolated. Continued dissection distally, with the release of the pronator and the forearm median nerve mass, was identified. The proximal mass was then dissected from the median nerve, with careful peeling of the fascicles that were splayed over the mass capsule. The mass was then excised. The distal mass was then similarly dissected from the median nerve, as was described earlier. The histology of the tumor showed a classic picture of a benign nerve sheath tumor. The first area appeared to be hypercellular with palisading nuclei bundles described in the literature as Antoni A tissue. There was also a second area with a loose stroma, myxoid changes, and fewer cells resembling an Antoni B tissue. The histology analysis showed an S-100 protein-positive which was consistent with schwannoma. Postoperatively, the patient reported minor dysesthesia that was resolved by the time she presented to her 2-week post-operative clinic visit. The patient was lost to follow-up 9 months postoperatively.