A 58-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with a self-palpated mass in the left breast.
The patient was in follow-up since 1996 for a previous BC located in the upper outer quadrant of the same breast: a grade 3 invasive breast carcinoma of no special type (IBC-NST; pT1cN0M0), hormone receptor positive (Allred score: ER 6/8 and PR 7/8) and treated by lumpectomy with axillary lymph node dissection and adjuvant chemotherapy (a-CT) (six cycles of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil) followed by radiotherapy (breast 50 Gy + 16 Gy boost) without endocrine therapy. Beside the presence of breast cancer in a second degree female relative (father side) older than 55 years, no further breast- or ovary-related tumors were retained in her family. Her mother died from bladder cancer.
Clinical examination confirmed the presence of an irregular nodule localized at 3 o’clock, which by palpation measured 30 mm × 25 mm in size, free from the skin and the pectoral muscle, without lymphadenopathy. Mammography showed an irregular dense mass of 18 mm × 14 mm highly suspicious for malignancy, and ultrasounds showed a hypoechoic mass with parallel orientation, irregular contours, and heterogeneous composition . On core needle biopsy a high-grade invasive BC with eosinophilic cells suspicious for squamous/epidermoid or apocrine differentiation without mucinous component was described, deferring definitive diagnosis to the surgical specimen (not shown). Standard staging with chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound, and skeletal scintigraphy excluded the presence of distant metastasis. The patient underwent to a simple left mastectomy for a rcT1NxM0 BC.
Gross inspection revealed a sharply demarcated nodular and white tumor of 20 mm diameter. Microscopically, a dominant non-capsulated nodule associated with rare peripherally located lymphoid structures was observed. The tumor cells were mostly arranged in solid nests admixed with necrotic areas. A composite population including large highly pleomorphic epidermoid cells and relatively small intermediate cells with indefinite cell borders and oval-shaped nuclei in absence of mature keratinization was observed . Additionally, the presence of cribriform and microcystic structures embedded in large extracellular mucin pools, associated with columnar mucin producing epithelial cells, was noticed as well . Frequent micro-abscesses were present . We counted up to seven mitoses per mm2. Finally, a component of poorly differentiated ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) with MEC features was also observed.
By IHC the composite mixture of tumor cells was confirmed by a combination of high and low molecular weight cytokeratins . Areas with epidermoid differentiation showed p63 and GATA3 staining; BRST-2 was negative.
Nuclear weak AR and ER expression was observed in < 10% of the tumor cells in the mucinous component. PR was negative. HER2 showed a score of 3+ . Flurescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis confirmed HER2 gene amplification and showed absence of MAML2 rearrangements. The DCIS component was HER2 positive but lacked hormone receptor expression.
The revision of the IBC-NST of 1996 confirmed the absence of MEC features.
The final diagnosis of grade 3 breast MEC was proposed (rpT1Nx).
The adjuvant therapy consisted of paclitaxel (12 cycles, weekly) and trastuzumab (18 cycles, every 3 weeks). Aromatase inhibitors were not administered because of the low ER and potential unfavorable side-effect/benefit ratio. Germ-line genetic screening excluded presence of predisposing mutations for hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome.
After 61 months of follow-up the patient is alive, without any sign of recurrence.
The patient provided her informed consent and clinical history and imaging were retrieved from her medical files.
IHC was performed using the following antibodies: ER (Dako, clone EP1, ready to use), PR (Dako, clone PgR1294, ready to use), AR (Dako, clone AR441, dilution 1:100), HER2 (Dako, polyclonal rabbit anti-human c-erB-2 oncoprotein, dilution 1:1000), cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5.6) (Dako, clone D5/16 B4, ready to use), cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (Dako, clone OV-T2 12/30, ready to use), transformation-related protein 63 (p63) (Dako, clone DAK-p63, ready to use), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) (Biomedical Care, clone L50-823, ready to use), and gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (BRST2) (Dako, clone D6, dilution 1:300). The Dako EnVision FLEX Target Retrieval Solution High pH (50×) (Dako Omnis) was used for the antigen retrieval of all antibodies, but for BRST2 EnVision FLEX Target Retrieval Solution Low pH (50×) (Dako Omnis) was used.
FISH for HER2 [PathVysion HER-2 DNA Probe Kit (PathVysion Kit)] and MAML2 rearrangements [SPEC MAML2 Dual Color Break Apart Probe (Zytovision)/Histology FISH Accessory kit (Dako)] was performed, following vendors’ specifications.