A 9-year-old Indian (Indo-Aryan) boy diagnosed as having pan-sinusitis was referred to us from an Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) department with complaints of swelling over the left side of his face involving left lower lid to rule out any ocular manifestation. He gave a history of swelling over the left side of his face of approximately 10 days’ duration. It was insidious in onset, gradually progressive in nature, and involved the left lower lid; it was not associated with pain and fever. There was no associated systemic disease. On examination, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) for his left eye was hand movement and for his right eye it was 6/6. He was unaware of diminished vision in his left eye. On dilated fundus examination we observed two yellowish white lesions with well-demarcated borders located superotemporally indicative of active lesions, which were associated with nearby areas of RPE depigmentation and pigment clumps extending into the macular area, which were suggestive of degeneration of overlying retinal layers indicative of decalcified lesions in his left eye . Fundus of his right eye was normal.
Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) revealed areas of early granular hyperfluorescence corresponding to the areas of RPE depigmentation and late hyperfluorescence over the calcified lesion with some interspersed areas of hypofluorescence corresponding to the areas of pigment clumps in the left eye .
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) was performed and revealed high reflectivity from the choroid with marked thinning of overlying retinal layers including photoreceptor inner/outer segment junction .
B-scan ultrasound (USG) of his left eye demonstrated a large irregular echogenic calcified lesion of 7.1 × 3.9 mm in the posterior choroid near to the optic disc region and extending up to optic disc, and another smaller echogenic calcified foci in the posterolateral choroid both nasally and temporally. The nasal lesion was 1.3 mm and temporal lesion was 1.5 mm .
Examination of his right eye was normal. All routine blood investigations were normal including serum calcium and parathyroid hormone level. As there was already a setup of decalcification with loss of RPE/photoreceptor and marked diminished vision, and the lesion extended into the foveal region, we asked our patient to attend follow-ups at monthly intervals to monitor the subsequent progression or regression of the tumor, because of the non-availability of a reliable treatment option.