A 5-year-old girl child was diagnosed with JORRP (histological was referred to our Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry due to throbbing pain and swelling over the lower left back tooth region with the recently developed burning sensation of the tongue on spicy food). The history of the patient revealed that JORRP was diagnosed in March 2018 and has been receiving treatment from the otorhinolaryngology department since she was 2 years old. The patient had undergone laser ablation with carbon dioxide laser (4 watts in continuous mode) several times and bevacizumab infusion (100 mg/mL) which was commenced after 1 year of the treatment, resulting in complete remission. The patient was tracheostomized with an uncuffed tube (size 4) and put on permanent tracheostomy. Subsequently, the patient was under maintenance therapy with bevacizumab (100 mg/mL) every 21 days and had eight cycles completed. The graphic timeline showing the treatment cycle evolution has been depicted .
The patient was presented with a burning sensation with spicy food after the completion of three cycles of bevacizumab infusion. She had also complained of white lesions on the tongue. These lesions appeared after the third dose but became mild within 3 weeks at the end of the 3rd week when the drug was readministered the lesions reappeared in full form (as at the end of 3rd week). There was also a repeat history of these lesions settling down after 3 weeks when it was time for the next dose (time for the sixth dose). For the lesions, the pattern of waxing and waning continued. The burning sensation was a continued feature that the parents managed with a bland diet.
On clinical examination of the oral cavity mucosal lesions characteristic of the geographic tongue were observed on the anterior two-thirds of the dorsal surface as well as the lateral surface of the tongue . Oblate pattern occurrence of white lesions with erythematous atrophic patches and loss of filiform papillae with white borders. The lesion was type III according to Hume's (1975) classification. A scraping was done and tested and candidiasis was ruled out. Also, oral examination revealed dental caries in relation to 52, 54, 62, 63, 74, and 85 teeth and with a carious breakdown of 64 .
A provisional diagnosis of benign migratory glossitis was concluded. Benign migratory glossitis is known to have a transient character and self-limiting nature and was treated symptomatically with topical local anesthesia (LA) gel—benzocaine −7.5% W/W (Mucopain gel, ICPA Health Products Ltd., Ankaleshwar, India), with reassurance, increase in fluid intakes and meticulous oral hygiene maintenance. Casein phosphopeptide—amorphous calcium phosphate-based varnish (GC Tooth Mousse, GC Dental, India) was applied using the paint-on method to all teeth for the child. This was done to prevent new caries and also helped to de-stress the patient. With subsequent follow-up after 2 weeks, the patient reported improvement with symptomatic relief on the application of the topical LA gel over the lesion. Preventive restorative treatment for 64, 65, 84, and 85 with pit and fissure sealant (GC, Fuji® VII, Sydney, Australia) and definitive restoration of carious teeth—52, 43, 62, and 63 with glass ionomer cement (GIC) (GC, Tokyo, Japan) were performed ( and ). A total of 54 were extracted under 2% LA with 1:100000 adrenaline with a peristome followed by placement of polyethylene fiber-reinforced composite (Ribbond, Inc., Seattle, Washington, United States of America) loop space maintainer (as a prevention for space loss due to premature extraction). After plaque removal with a prophylactic paste at the beginning of the procedure, a rubber dam was placed. Pulp therapy was performed for the deep carious 75 followed by permanent restoration with a stainless steel crown (3M™ ESPE™ Stainless steel crown, 3M, St Paul, Minnesota, United States of America) .
An analysis was made on the Naranjo adverse drug reaction scale . This was done to see the probability of the antiangiogenesis drug causing oral adverse effects. It was found to be four which indicates a possible association of drug reaction. Apart from this the detailed history given by the mother of the pattern followed by geographic lesion and administration of the VEGF further points to a stronger possible association. There was a resolution of the lesion observed on the cessation of the drug .