A 39-year-old man of Caucasian descent with a positive family history for NF1 disease had been diagnosed with NF1 at the age of 10 years. Two years later he underwent resection of spinal and radicular neurofibromas with stabilization of the vertebral column. He presented at our out-patient service 27 years later with a recurrent soft tissue mass involving the left gluteal region along with paravertebral extension to Th6 through L4. The paravertebral and gluteal finding on the left side was a soft tissue tumor measuring 27×15cm, whereas the paravertebral tumor on the right side measured 10×13cm. The gluteal mass entailed ptosis and bulging . Within the paravertebral moiety, a cyst-like fluctuation of 8×8cm was palpable. No pain, swelling or eczema was noted but enlargement of the paravertebral soft tissue tumor could be elicited by pressing. Furthermore, subcutaneous papulonodular indurations were palpable. The patient was heavily impaired by the tumor while sitting or performing physical activity, and reported on being distressed by the cosmetic deformity. Pressure on the tumor provoked sharp pain. After a history of multiple resections of several smaller neurofibromas, the tumor now showed a quick progression during one month. In addition, he developed multiple "café au lait" spots on his back, and bilateral gluteal freckling as well as multiple small neurofibromas on his trunk and both thighs. On his left forehead, a neurofibroma of 3×1.5cm was present. Lisch nodules without retinopathy were observed in both eyes.
An abdominal-pelvic computed tomography scan revealed an extensive mass lesion displacing the soft tissue of the left gluteal region and a fluid-filled vertebral cystic cavity of 8.3×20.3cm . Although no subcutaneous connection between the paravertebral and gluteal findings was demonstrated, the consulting neurosurgeon advised against the resection of what was interpreted to represent a meningocele.
The patient underwent wide partial excision (20×12cm) of the neurofibroma under general anesthesia. Because of the presence of irregular frail and plexus-like veins, subtle hemostasis was mandatory throughout the procedure. Direct wound closure could be achieved by advancement and rotation of the adjacent skin. Seven weeks following surgery, there was significant reduction of the left paravertebral and gluteal bulging, and an improved symmetry of the lumbar and gluteal regions . The patient also reported a reduction in the localized pain he had experienced prior to resection and remained satisfied at 1 year follow-up, with no recurrence of the neurofibromatous mass.
Following overnight fixation in 10% buffered formalin, the resection specimen was routinely processed to paraffin, and 3μm-thick slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for microscopic study. Immunohistochemistry was performed with the following panel of antibodies: vimentin (clone Vim 3B4; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), CD34 (clone QBend/10; Dako), S100 protein (polyclonal; Dako), smooth muscle actin (clone 1A4; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, United States of America), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA; clone E29; Dako), glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1; polyclonal; Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), according to established protocols in our laboratory. Slides were developed with polymer-bound horseradish peroxidase (Envision+; Dako) and 3,3'-diaminobenzidine as chromogen.
Microscopic examination of the surgical specimen showed a plaque-like proliferation of spindle cells with wavy bipolar cytoplasm and mostly cigar-shaped nuclei, diffusely involving the entire breadth of the dermis , and focally encroaching upon the subcutaneous fat . Although there was neither significant nuclear atypia nor any diagnostically relevant mitotic activity, the tumor was conspicuous for including several aggregates of multinucleated giant cells with star-shaped cytoplasmatic projections corresponding to floret-like cells . Furthermore, some areas of Meissner-like differentiation were seen . Although an occasional peripheral nerve fascicle was felt to contain neurofibroma cells within the endoneurium , no bona fide plexiform component was detected. The immunophenotype of the FMGCs included positivity for vimentin and CD34 ; whereas no staining was observed for S100 protein, SMA, EMA, and GLUT-1, respectively.