A 71-year-old right-handed woman was admitted to our hospital because of urgent onset of paraphasia and slight weakness of her left hand for 13 days. The patient had a 20-year history of hypertension, coronary heart disease and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, with no history of drinking or smoking, and negative personal or family history of neurological diseases. Educational history of the patient was five years.
She complained of involuntary and purposeless movements of the left hand and abnormal feelings in the left upper limb. She claimed that the left hand did not belong to herself but to her grandson (alien hand). She also presented that her left hand was controlled by someone else instead of herself, and the two hands always "fought" with each other during bimanual coordination, as the left hand performed movements opposite to the right hand (intermanual conflict). For instance, when she used her right hand to unbutton her clothes, the left hand interfered by buttoning the clothes up. Also, she had visual hallucination at admission, such as her grandson standing beside her bed. Although frustrated with her alien hand, she was not afraid of her abnormal hand.
On her bedside mental examination, she had no symptoms of amnesia, disorientation, agraphia, tactile naming in left hand, alexia in left visual field, hemispatial neglect and hemiballismus. The scale of the Mini-mental state examination was 24 when she was admitted to our hospital. She comprehended language well, but could not find appropriate words to answer questions, frequently using wrong words. Left hemiasomatognosia and apraxia were also noted. For instance, she did not perceive the existence of her left hand, with the abnormal perception that it was her grandson's hand (hemiasomatognosia). She had apraxia when miming how to use tools with her left hand, such as dressing, brushing teeth, combing her hair (ideomotor apraxia). She also had some difficulties in purposefully picking up objects (motor apraxia). A neurological examination showed mild left hemiparesis with slight clumsiness, and left hemianesthesia. Babinski sign was positive on the left. Activities of daily living (ADLs) were severely impaired, such as bathing, dressing and transferring, but the self feeding, bladder and bowel control were not significantly affected. The impairment for ADLs may be attributed to the left hemiparesis, apraxia, and intermanual conflict, with their disabling impact on everyday life.
Carotid ultrasound demonstrated atherosclerosis plaques bilaterally in carotid artery. A brain 3-Tesla MRI was performed 3 days after admission, including conventional MR sequences: sagittal T1, axial T2-weighted, axial fast fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), along with diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). Conventional sequences of MRI indicated regions of low signal intensity in the genu, body and splenium of the corpus callosum on the T1 weighted image and high signal intensity in the same area on T2 weighted and FLAIR images . DWI demonstrated high signal intensity in the observed T2 abnormality of the lesions, with corresponding restricted diffusion on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps . MRA showed the absence of the A1 segment of the bilateral anterior cerebral artery (ACA). Atherosclerotic segment of stenosis in the area of the bilateral middle cerebral artery (MCA) and left posterior cerebral artery (PCA) were also noted .
Two weeks later after treatment (platelet aggregation inhibitor and rehabilitation), the patient's aphasia, apraxia and hemiasomatognosia disappeared and ADLs were significantly improved. At discharge, this patient could perform routine activities independently and the behaviors of AHS were completely resolved.