A 49-year-old Caucasian man presented to the Emergency Department at a tertiary hospital in Sydney with a 3-week history of generalised malaise, non-bloody diarrhoea, abdominal bloating, shortness of breath on exertion, lower limb pitting oedema, and drenching night sweats. There was no significant past medical history, with no regular medication use. Admission vital signs included a temperature of 37.8 degrees Celsius, a sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 108 beats per minute, a normal blood pressure of 122/86 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. Physical examination revealed a petechial rash on both lower limbs along with significant pitting oedema to the knees. Abdominal distention and shifting dullness was present without appreciable hepatosplenomegaly. There was no cervical, axillary, or inguinal lymphadenopathy on examination. On laboratory testing, the serum urea was 14.5 mmol/L, creatinine 221umol/L, potassium 6.0 mmol/L, ALP 178 U/L, haemoglobin 102 g/L, platelets 78 X 10^9/L, ESR 75 mm/h, CRP 105 mg/L, INR 1.4, fibrinogen 6.9 g/L, and D-dimer 17.19 mg/L. Urinalysis was bland, with no significant proteinuria (albumin/creatinine ratio 1.1 mg/mmol), or microscopic haematuria (RBC < 10 X 106/L). Hyaline (48,180 X 103/L) and granular (494 X 103/L) casts were noted on microscopy. A chest x-ray showed bilateral pleural effusions, with otherwise clear lung fields. A non-contrast CT scan of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder showed small volume abdominal ascites with mild splenomegaly (measuring at 15 cm) without abdominal lymphadenopathy or renal tract abnormalities. Stool culture failed to identify an infective cause of diarrhoea.
A peripheral blood film noted microcytic and hypochromic red blood cells without the presence of teardrop poikilocytes, schistocytes, blasts, or other morphologically diagnostic or sinister findings . No monoclonal paraprotein was found, Parvovirus-B19 serology was negative, and haemoglobin electrophoresis did not suggest the presence of a hemoglobinopathy. Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, and HIV serology were negative. Aside from a low-titre anti-nuclear antigen antibodies (ANA) of 1:80, serum autoantibodies including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), extractable nuclear antigen antibodies (ENA), and rheumatoid factor were all negative. His progressive, and symptomatic, bicytopenia (haemoglobin 85 g/L, platelets 38 X 10^9/L) requiring intermittent transfusions of packed red blood cells prompted a bone marrow aspirate and trephine. This identified a hypercellular marrow with increased granulopoiesis, reduced erythropoiesis, megakaryocyte clustering and dysplasia in association with grade 2 fibrosis . A subsequent JAK2 V617F, CALR, and MPL mutation analysis was negative. With the renal function deteriorating, a kidney biopsy was performed with simultaneous platelet transfusion. Light microscopy showed mild expansion of the mesangial matrix, with increased endocapillary cellularity of the glomeruli , with variable thickening of the capillary walls and patchy double contour changes. There were no thrombi, sclerosing or necrotising lesions. Additionally, there was no tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, or interstitial inflammation, and no features suggestive of an arteritis, vasculitis, or cholesterol emboli . Congo red staining was negative. Immunofluorescence and C4d staining were unremarkable. The overall appearance of the biopsy was in keeping with an atypical thrombotic microangiopathy. The electron microscopy had significant reprocessing artefact but excluded immune-complex deposition, and demonstrated an expanded mesangium occupied by swollen cells and diffuse glomerular basement membrane (GBM) thickening. . Oligo-anuria with worsening pulmonary oedema prompted the initiation of haemodialysis at a creatinine peak of 531 μmol/L. A whole-body PET scan noted low metabolically active nodal disease above and below the diaphragm (SUVmax 4.2), diffuse metabolic activity throughout the bone marrow and spleen, as well as pleural effusions, a pericardial effusion and abdominal ascites. A decision was made to forego a lymph node biopsy as the patient already fulfilled criteria for a diagnosis of TAFRO syndrome (meeting all 3 of the major criteria, and 3 of the 4 minor criteria), having excluded other possible haematologic and autoimmune conditions, 2 weeks into his hospital admission. Pulse intravenous methylprednisolone was administered over 3 consecutive days, followed by daily oral prednisolone therapy. Although the HHV8 PCR was negative, the initial Interleukin-6 (IL-6) sample was not collected in the appropriate manner with the repeat sample being sent 1 week after initiation of methylprednisolone. This made the result (< 2.1 pg/mL) difficult to interpret. The renal dysfunction improved rapidly upon steroid initiation, with only 4 sessions of dialysis required during the admission. After 25 days in hospital, and 9 doses of glucocorticoid, the creatinine had improved to 165 μmol/L, with a persistent bicytopenia (Hb 105 g/L, Plts 51 X 10^9/L). After discharge, the patient received 800 mg of intravenous rituximab (375 mg/m2) administered weekly over 4 weeks, with the prednisolone weaned gradually. Over 6 months of follow-up, the bicytopenia resolved (Hb 135 g/L, Plts 246 X 10^9/L) and the renal function stabilised with a creatinine of 100–110 μmol/L, eGFR 70–75 mL/Min/1.73m2, without proteinuria. Repeat testing of VEGF and IL-6 10 months from the initial presentation confirmed elevated levels of 1155 ng/L, and 410.0 ng/L, respectively. Given these results, an IL-6 inhibitor, siltuximab, was initiated.