A 52-year-old Chinese woman was brought to the emergency room due to the history of worsening thirst, polydipsia, nausea and fatigue for 10 days and loss of consciousness after vomiting for half a day. When she was 40 years old, she was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but she hesitated to receive any medical treatment.
On admission, she developed septic shock. Her temperature was 36.3 °C and blood pressure was 105/62 mmHg which was maintained with norepinephrine. She has tachypnea with respiratory rate of 25 breaths/min and rapid heart rate of 135 beats/min. The laboratory results showed a leukocytosis of 14.2 × 109 per L with 95.8% neutrophils. Her procalcitonin concentration was severely increased at 170 ng/mL, and her blood lactate level was 4.8 mmol/L. She had abnormal renal function markers, including serum creatinine and urea nitrogen levels of 3.0 mg/dL and 17.7 mmol/L, respectively. She had hyperglycemia with a blood glucose concentration of 27.8 mmol/L. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. And she was treated with intravenous fluid, received norepinephrine, bowel rest, intravenous injection of small doses of insulin, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. However, septic shock was not improved and primary lesions leading to septic shock was unknown. Therefore, perform an urgent computed tomography (CT) scan to confirm the diagnosis.
An abdominal CT scan showed a diffusely expanded left kidney and ureter with architectural distortion due to linear and columnar streaks of gas in the parenchyma, para-renal space and left ureteral upper and middle part . There were also air bubbles in the uterine vein which showed “Dead tree branch-like” appearance. . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with EPN with air in the uterine vein. The blood, pus and urine cultures were positive for extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing E. coli.
Percutaneous drainage (PCD) therapy was conducted first to treat the primary lesion and antibiotic treatment was continued. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was conducted due to acute renal failure. Due to the poor outcomes of PCD treatment and risk of developing an air embolism, open drainage was performed. Three days after the operation, a repeat CT scan showed reduced gas in the left kidney and uterine vein . She was closely monitored, and her inflammatory markers and renal function gradually recovered. She was finally discharged 20 days after admission and was instructed to continue her follow-up at the medical office. The abdominal CT, taken 3 months post-discharge, revealed gas disappearance and a shrunk left renal volume .