A 77-year-old man with a history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and CKD (creatinine 2.4 mg/dL, GFR 29-mL/min/1.73 m2) was admitted with angina class 4 and ruled in for non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction. His ejection fraction was 40%. Coronary angiography showed a critical calcified stenosis of the LAD artery ( and , ).
On the day of admission, he was hydrated with normal saline. On the second day of admission, coronary angiography was performed. He was continuously hydrated and ULPCI was performed on Day 3 of admission (Summary figure and ). In order to minimize the contrast use, the still diagnostic image of the LAD in the right anterior oblique view was displayed on the monitor . Ultra-low contrast PCI was performed using non-compliant (NC) and lithotripsy balloons with an improvement in stenosis . Given the large profile of lithotripsy balloon, we first predilated the calcified lesion using high-pressure NC balloon inflation followed by shock wave lithotripsy. After lesion preparation with NC and lithotripsy balloons, IVUS was performed using a 60-MHz IVUS imaging system (Boston Scientific, Inc. Natick, Massachusetts) with automatic pullback at 1 mm/second to assure the calcified plaque was fractured prior to stent deployment. Given the above strategy, we did not face any resistance in advancing lithotripsy balloon, IVUS, or stent through the lesion.
IVUS of the LAD showed 360° calcific arch and plaque fractures after PCI (, Frames 1F and 1G, and , ). By IVUS, the normal proximal to distal reference length was 50 mm requiring two stents . The technique of reverse stenting technique included deploying the first stent proximally in which the proximal marker of the first stent (3.0 × 32 mm) was positioned just proximal to the guidewire in the diagonal branch (DB), as a metallic roadmap (arrowhead), and deployed ( and , ). The second stent (3.0 × 20 mm) was overlapped 2 mm at the distal edge of the proximal deployed stent, as a metallic roadmap, and deployed with no contrast injection ( and , ).
Post-dilation and the proximal optimization technique were performed using 3.5 and 4.0 mm NC balloons, respectively. IVUS showed optimal stent expansion with complete lesion coverage ( and , and ). Percutaneous coronary intervention was completed using 12 mL contrast. The total PCI time was 64 min. Glomerular filtration rate remained stable at 48 h. At 12-month follow-up, creatinine, GFR, and ejection fraction improved to 1.7%, 40%, and 55%, respectively.