A 51-year-old Chinese man (height, 168 cm; weight, 59 kg) presented to an outpatient clinic complaining of difficulty urination for > 3 years. He described urinary hesitancy for 2–3 min, urinary straining, and a weak urinary stream. The patient also had urinary retention 1–3 times per week for over 2 years, for which he performed intermittent self-catheterisation with around 120 mL post-void residual urine volume according to the urethral catheter output. The patient also complained of both daytime (12–14 times) and nocturnal (4–5 times) urinary frequencies and an urgency with 50–200 mL urine volume every time depending on the amount of fluid intake accompanied by perineal discomfort since he had an episode of withholding urination approximately 2 years prior. The patient also had erectile dysfunction. He had presented to multiple urology clinics over the last 3 years, undergoing multiple diagnostic examinations, including urinalysis, urinary ultrasound, urodynamic studies, cystoscope, pelvic floor muscle electromyography (PFM EMG), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar vertebrae to the sacrococcygeal vertebrae. The urinalysis result was negative. Urinary ultrasound revealed a prostate of normal size with < 30 mL of post-void residual urine volume; however, prostatic calcification was noted. Urodynamics showed an underactive detrusor but no obstruction . Cystoscopy showed lack of any anatomical obstruction and a normal bladder. PFM EMG indicated an abnormal bulbocavernosus reflex, and no abnormalities were detected on the pudendal nerve (PN) somatosensory evoked potential. No neurologic or urinary abnormalities were observed on MRI. Based on his symptoms and previous examinations, he was diagnosed with LUTD with the sub-category of overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome. The patient was prescribed tamsulosin hydrochloride (0.2 mg daily) and baclofen (10 mg daily); however, these medications were discontinued due to ineffectiveness. SNM was presented as an option to the patient more than 1 year ago. Following the first stage of SNM, the patient reported mild improvement. He then received a permanent implantable pulse generator (IPG) (Stage II) in the left buttock , which was provided free of charge by Chengnuo Medical Technology Co., Ltd., (General Stim, Hangzhou, China), as he participated in the company’s clinical trial to test the long-term effects of IPG. However, he reported no further improvement after the implantation with a loss of efficacy of the device 3 months later, and he also felt irritable when the IPG was turned on. The patient also complained of insomnia and depression.
The patient presented to our clinic > 1 year after the IPG was implanted due to its ineffectiveness and adverse effects. We agreed with the clinical diagnosis of LUTD and OAB syndrome and performed bilateral EPNS therapy for him. Four sacral points were selected . The two upper points were located approximately 1 cm on either side of the sacrococcygeal joint, and the two lower points were located approximately 1 cm on either side of the tip of the coccyx. At the upper points, a needle (Suzhou Shenlong Medical Apparatus Factory, Suzhou, China) of 0.40 × 100 mm was inserted perpendicularly to a depth of 80 mm to induce a sensation referred to the urethra or anus via stimulation of the main trunk of the PN. At the lower points, a needle of 0.40 × 100 mm was inserted obliquely toward the ischiorectal fossa to a depth of 90 mm to induce a sensation referred to the urethra via stimulation of the perineal nerve. Each pair of the ipsilaterally inserted needles were connected to two pairs of electrodes from a G6805-Aelectroacupuncture device (Shantou Medical Equipment Factory, Shantou, China), with the anode connected to the upper needle and the cathode connected to the lower needle [, ]. The device was set to produce electrical stimulation (biphasic 2-ms pulse) at a frequency of 2.0 Hz and a moderate intensity of 25–35 mA. Electrostimulation was performed for 60 min during each treatment. PFM contraction around the urethra was maintained during the entire electrostimulation procedure. The electrostimulation procedure was performed once daily, Monday through Friday. The patient’s IPG was turned off during the procedure. During treatments, the patient was hospitalised in the acupuncture inpatient department because he lived 200 km from the clinic. After 2 weeks of treatment, he began to report smooth voiding within 2 h after EPNS and a moderate improvement in urinary frequency, urgency, and discomfort. At this time, the patient began turning off his IPG for 2–6 h instead of only during EPNS. Two weeks later, after 4 weeks of EPNS, the patient reported > 50% improvement in his urination and stopped using the IPG. He reported smooth voiding and moderate improvements of urinary frequency and urgency and a disappearance of perineal discomfort. He also reported improved sleep and erections. He was discharged after 8 weeks of EPNS treatment. The patient was evaluated with the short form of the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire for Male Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (ICIQ-MLUTS). ICIQ-MLUTS contains 13 questions on the patient’s symptoms including urinary hesitancy, urinary straining, strength of urinary stream, interrupted urination, feeling of incomplete emptying, urinary urgency, urgency urinary incontinence, stress urinary incontinence, urinary incontinence for no obvious reason, enuresis, urine dribbling, urinary frequency, and nocturia. Every question was scored with 0–4 points, with a higher score indicating more severe symptoms, and the total scores ranged from 0 to 52 points. Each question had a sub-question where the patient rated the symptom’s impact on quality of life from 0 to 10 points; this did not count towards the total score. The patient scored 30 points before our treatment, and scored 22, 14, and 13 points after 2, 4, and 8 weeks of EPNS therapy, respectively (Additional file : Table S1). He achieved > 50% improvement after 4 weeks of EPNS therapy based on the results of the ICIQ-MLUTS. The patient also indicated a reduction in the impact of the symptoms, suggesting a better quality of life.
The patient was followed up via a phone interview 1 month later, during which he reported that he experienced smooth voiding for the first 2 weeks after the EPNS was discontinued. However, in the third and fourth week, his voiding sometimes became difficult. He had no choice at home but to turn on the IPG again, which he thought might help his voiding. His voiding difficulty persisted, but to a lower degree. Other symptoms such as urinary frequency and urgency remained moderately improved. He experienced a slight discomfort around his perineum. The patient expressed interest in continuing EPNS treatment in the future. He is being followed-up via telephone at 1-month intervals.