A 90-year-old female with a severe aortic stenosis was admitted to our institution after her first event of decompensated heart failure was treated at another hospital 4 months earlier. She had neither chest pain nor syncope and her functional status was NYHA class II. Her medical history included stage 4 chronic kidney disease. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe aortic stenosis with an aortic valve area of 530 mm2 and a low-flow/low-gradient stenosis with a peak velocity of 3.84 m/s, a mean gradient of 36.3 mmHg, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 41%. On the computed tomography (CT) scan, the aortic annulus measured 29 × 17 mm, with an area of 380 mm2. Based on a calculated logistic EuroSCORE and Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk score of 45.72% and 10.464%, respectively, surgery was considered to be of relatively high risk.
Transfemoral-TAVI was performed under general anesthesia. A 16-French (Fr) Edwards expandable eSheath (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted into the right femoral artery by surgical cut-down. Heparin was administered immediately after the eSheath insertion. Following balloon aortic valvuloplasty, a 23-mm Edwards Sapien XT valve (Edwards Lifesciences) was deployed under fluoroscopic guidance during rapid ventricular pacing. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) did not detect left atrial appendage (LAA) thrombus during the procedure nor was there any demonstration of atrial fibrillation (AF) on the electrocardiogram. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT: aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was administered after the procedure. Diuretics and human atrial natriuretic peptide were added for 3 days because of worsening heart failure, but she had no AF during her stay in the intensive care unit.
At 1:30 of day 10 after TAVI, the patient suffered aphasia and right hemiparesis with deteriorating consciousness. Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 19. Emergent brain CT was performed at 2:11 and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 2:30. The latter showed an occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) and acute ischemic lesions in its territory. Her diffusion-weighted imaging-Alberta Stroke Program early computed tomography score (DWI-ASPECTS) was 6 [Figure and ]. The stroke onset time was considered to be day 9, at 23:00, when she was last known to be without new deficits. Endovascular thrombectomy was performed without intravenous tissue plasminogen activator. A 9-Fr sheath was inserted in the right femoral artery at 4:30. A 9-Fr Optimo device (Tokai Medical, Japan) was inserted into the left internal carotid artery. A Penumbra 5 Max system (Penumbra Inc., CA, USA) was guided to the thrombotic site using a microguidewire (Chikai 0.014 inch: ASAHI INTEC, Japan) coaxial to a Penumbra 3 Max system . A direct-aspiration first-pass technique was performed twice, leading to recanalization. Post-procedural angiography at 5:13, 373 min after stroke onset, demonstrated successful recanalization of the entire left MCA (thrombolysis in cerebral infarction scale: 3) . Post-procedural MRI showed no worsening of the cerebral infarction and no hemorrhagic changes [Figure and ]. Anticoagulation therapy with heparin was added to DAPT for 8 days following thrombectomy. Subsequently, aspirin was withdrawn and oral anticoagulation with warfarin was started. After thrombectomy, TEE revealed a thrombus in the LAA that was presumed to be the cause of the stroke. AF was documented on day 12 post-TAVI. She was discharged on day 29 after thrombectomy with an NIHSS score of 11.