A 76-year-old female with a past medical history of bilateral knee osteoarthritis, previous tobacco use, cirrhosis, esophageal varices, and hypothyroidism presented to an outside hospital emergency department for increasing fatigue, weakness, intolerance to cold, and 60–90 pounds of weight loss over the past year. She also had a painful mass in her right lateral abdominal wall and “bumps” in multiple parts of her body that her PCP previously had recommended observation for. These “bumps” involved both sides of her abdomen, right axilla, and right knee area. On presentation to the emergency department, she was tachycardic with a heart rate of 115 along with the following labs included in and .
CT abdomen/pelvis with contrast showed distension of the gallbladder as well as intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ductal dilation and luminal filling defects in the common bile duct related to 1.5 cm masses versus stones in both the mid-common bile duct and near the ampulla. CT demonstrated more than 18 subcutaneous soft tissue masses ranging from 0.5 to 5.5 cm in diameter, scattered circumferentially around the abdomen and extending to the proximal lower extremities. Additional findings included a 1.7 cm left lower lobe pulmonary nodule and small right pulmonary nodules, endometrial thickening, and moderate ascites. The patient received a sepsis bolus, was started on vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, and was transferred for GI evaluation with possible endoscopic ultrasound/endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Lactic acid continued to be elevated at 6.5 after 18 h. Persistent lactic acidosis was then attributed to Type B lactic acidosis in setting of hepatic dysfunction/hepatitis after an additional 2 L bolus failed to reduce lactic acid. Endoscopic ultrasound/endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed, finding esophageal varices and 2 large common bile duct stones that were unable to be removed. Common bile duct stent was placed, and biliary sphincterotomy/dilation was performed. She became hypotensive requiring phenylephrine pushes postoperatively and was briefly transferred to the ICU. Right hip mass aspiration at bedside was unsuccessful. Incision and drainage was initially deferred due to worsening anemia with a hemoglobin level of 10 and thrombocytopenia with platelets around 50. Incision and drainage of the right lower abdomen were performed a few days later with culture studies, and the right axillary eschar was excised. Additional maintenance fluids failed to reduce lactic acid levels with lactic acid remaining elevated around 6. INR increased to 1.9 and the patient received IV vitamin K to allow for CT-guided right abdominal sidewall mass biopsy along with CT-guided paracentesis. Peritoneal fluid showed atypical cells with scattered mitotic features, not definitively diagnostic of malignancy as well as a total nucleated cell count of 56 with 0% neutrophils and few gram-negative rods that did not grow on culture. Initial biopsy of the right abdominal sidewall mass was indeterminate due to diffuse necrotic tissue, prompting biopsy at the left abdominal sidewall. Patient was found to be positive for Staphylococcus capitis in 2 out of 2 blood culture samples with positive Hep B surface antigen as well. On the second day of hospitalization, piperacillin/tazobactam was changed to ceftriaxone and metronidazole for erythema and weeping nodules present in the right groin and axilla.
Repeat CT chest re-demonstrated the 2 cm nodule in the left lower lobe of the lung and resolution of prior right lung nodules. MRI of the left knee to rule out left knee abscess/septic arthritis versus Baker’s cyst was performed . This showed concern for possible septic arthritis with superimposed osteomyelitis of the left medial and lateral tibial plateaus in addition to an anteromedial enhancing fluid collection concerning an abscess. The left knee was aspirated with findings of a monocyte predominance; aspirated fluid was negative for crystals or bacteria. Antibodies for Chlamydia psittaci were negative, and the patient was changed from vancomycin to doxycycline. Fluconazole was started for vaginal candidiasis. Rheumatology was consulted for possible polyarteritis nodosa versus pyoderma gangrenosum; however, ANCA testing was negative.
The patient developed an acute kidney injury with creatinine 1.3 likely secondary to cardiorenal versus hepatorenal syndrome and was started on a continuous IV infusion of furosemide without response. Since admission, her cumulative net fluid balance has increased to 14 L with borderline blood pressures. Low urine sodium <5 ruled out acute tubular necrosis. Labs suggested against tumor lysis syndrome with elevated calcium, low phosphorus, and normal uric acid. Acute interstitial nephritis was considered secondary to antibiotics received during hospitalization. Albumin 25% 12 g every 8 h was started in addition to the continuous IV infusion of furosemide, which improved urine output. She received pamidronate without robust response for hypercalcemia that was persistently elevated >12, likely due to malignancy with low parathyroid hormone, a normal Vit D-25-OH level, and a chloride-to-phosphorous ratio of 39, suggestive of parathyroid hormone-mediated process. She was trialed on calcitonin without improvement of hypercalcemia. The patient developed hypoglycemia and remained hypoglycemic despite dextrose at 10% in water infusion. She was transitioned to dextrose 50% in water at 75 cc/h. Palliative care was consulted, and the patient wished to remain full code. She was started on gabapentin and dronabinol 2.5 mg twice daily with only mild improvement in appetite.
After 2 weeks into the hospitalization, the core biopsy preliminary pathology report of the left abdominal sidewall resulted with high-grade hematolymphoid neoplasm with differential including MS and blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm. The patient demonstrated difficulty maintaining alertness and was unable to make decisions (thought to be due to refractory hypercalcemia). Bone marrow biopsy and aggressive anti-cancer therapy were deferred until goals of care discussion with family and correction of hypercalcemia. Antibiotics and continuous IV infusion of furosemide were discontinued. The patient declined recommended Dobhoff nutrition. Lactic acid continued to worsen up to 21 despite ½ normal saline with 3 ampoules of sodium bicarbonate at 150 mL/h. Palliative care had discussion with family and decided to transition to comfort care when additional family arrived. The final pathology report from the left abdominal sidewall, core biopsy resulted in a positive for MS rather than blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm. The immunohistochemistry was positive for lysozyme and MPO while negative for CD56 and TdT, and only rarely positive for TCL1 (, ). The patient’s additional family arrived, all IV’s were turned off, and the patient unfortunately passed away. The clinical course timeline summary can be seen in .