A 49-year-old male presented to the emergency room with pain in the left upper abdomen and melena, accompanied by symptoms of dizziness and weakness.
Patient had intermittent left upper abdomen pain and melena for 5 d.
He had a history of alcoholism and was diagnosed with pancreatitis and type 2 diabetes for 1 year.
On admission, physical examination revealed only slight tenderness in the left upper abdomen and pale conjunctiva of eye. No muscular tension or rebound tenderness was noted. Digital rectal examination showed negative results.
Laboratory tests showed that hemoglobin was 63 g/L (normal range: > 120 g/L). The fecal occult blood result was positive, and the remaining biochemical tests including amylase were normal.
Gastroscopic examination revealed an ulcer-like depression on the upper part of the greater gastric curvature and mucus secretions adhered to the epithelial surface. The surrounding mucosa exhibited thickening and edema with obscured structural outlines. The gastric folds could not be fully extended after gas charging. We suspected that upper gastrointestinal bleeding was caused by a gastric ulcer or gastric cancer. The condition improved after proton pump inhibitors and octreotide pumping hemostasis treatment for 1 wk, but the patient suddenly excreted watery dark red stool again, accompanied by massive hematemesis. Gastroscopy was repeated, and oozing blood was found in the ulcer-like depression of the gastric greater curvature previously observed, blood vessels were exposed after repeated rinsing . Computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed widespread subversion of pancreatic parenchyma, with evidence of multiple inhomogeneous hypodense and partially confluent cystic formations. The pancreatic pseudocyst invaded part of the spleen and greater curvature of the stomach; the invaded gastric mucosa was irregularly thickened and emitted an uneven signal . Emergency digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed that the pseudoaneurysm arose from the splenic artery .