Our patient is a 4-year-old boy diagnosed with Bardet Beidl syndrome. He was referred to our paediatric haematology clinic due to refractory anaemia. He also had a history of recurrent respiratory tract infections requiring paediatric intensive care unit admission. The patient is the third child of parents of Arab origin, who are first cousins.
He was born full-term via caesarean section delivery with a birth weight of 3.5 kg.
Antenatally, at 20 weeks gestation, a detailed foetal ultrasound revealed both kidneys enlarged and echogenic, with early features of dysplasia. The same foetal ultrasound demonstrated polydactyly in all four limbs. Follow-up renal ultrasound after birth reported that both kidneys were enlarged in size and bright in echogenicity, with a loss of corticomedullary differentiation. A follow-up renal ultrasound at the age of three years showed that both kidneys were normal in size, shape, echo structure, and position, with normal cortical thickness and no hydronephrosis.
Family history includes a father with a history of rheumatic disorder and the death of an older male sibling at age 3 years, reportedly due to congenital heart disease.
A physical examination at presentation revealed a giant-congenital naevus with multiple smaller nevi all over the body” Figure ”. Several dysmorphic features were also observed, namely a broad depressed nasal bridge, full cheeks, narrow bi-frontal diameter, thin lips, and low-set, small ears with deformity of the left ear pinna. Examination of the extremities revealed postaxial polydactyly and central polydactyly of the left hand (7 digits), central polydactyly of the right hand (6 digits), postaxial polydactyly of both feet (6 digits each), and abnormal left palmar creases “Figure ”. BMI was 26.3 kg/m2, which is overweight according to the WHO classification for BMI. Based on these findings, the patient was referred to a multidisciplinary team for evaluation.
Ophthalmological examination revealed esotropia, mild cyclo-refraction-hypermetropia with healthy optic discs, and retinal vasculature. Neurologic evaluation revealed language impairment with a limited vocabulary and expressions. Electroencephalography and brain MRI investigations were unremarkable. Laboratory test results were normal.
Exome sequencing was performed and showed that he is homozygous for a variant (chr20: 10393994 T>C; c.169A>G; p.Thr57Ala) in the MMKs gene. Pathogenic variants in this gene cause BBS.
On arrival at our paediatric haematology-oncology clinic, the child was clinically stable, with pallor. Physical examination revealed the aforementioned dysmorphic features associated with a remarkable congenital giant naevus distending from the mid-trunk region to the mid-thigh. He was started on oral iron treatment for more than four months with minimal improvement in the haemoglobin level. His complete blood count was indicative of severe iron-deficiency anaemia, with a haemoglobin level of 8.1 g/dl; mean corpuscular volume of 40.6 fl; mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 10.8 pg per cell, platelet count of 751 109/l, reticulocyte count of 1.5% and haemoglobin electrophoresis was normal.
His iron study revealed a serum iron level of 9 ug/dl, ferritin of 3.91 ng/ml, and a total iron binding capacity of 512 mcg/dl. His blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were normal.
We decided to treat him with intravenous iron 100 mg weekly, to which his haemoglobin responded well at 1 month -up, with an increase to 11 and greater than 13 at 3-month follow-up. Serum iron, serum ferritin and reticulocyte count also improved dramatically at 1 month to 45 ug/dl, 15.54 ng/ml and 1.9%, respectively.