A 32-year-old primigravida was referred to our clinic during the 32nd gestational week after her gynaecologist found that she had irregular heartbeat during a routine visit and a family history for ARVC: her brother was a known case, with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implanted in primary prevention and a positive genetic test for a homozygous mutation of Desmoglein-2 (DSG2) gene. Her past medical history was unremarkable, she was asymptomatic.
Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, incomplete right bundle branch block, epsilon wave in V2, negative T waves in V1–V4, and premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) with negative concordance .
Echocardiogram revealed dilation of the right ventricle (RV), with RV outflow tract parasternal long axis (RVOT PLAX) 37 mm, RVOT parasternal short axis 38 mm; apical RV thinning/aneurism; reduced RV systolic function, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion 15 mm, and S wave 7.7 cm/s. Global left ventricular (LV) function was preserved, despite septal dyskinesia.
A 24-h Holter ECG monitoring confirmed frequent PVCs (17 075), 769 couplets and a few runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) .
She was admitted to our tertiary referral hospital for monitoring. Metoprolol 150 mg/day was started. Genetic testing revealed the same homozygous mutation of DSG2 (c.1496T>G, p.L499R, missense) described for her brother.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy diagnosis was made according to three major Task Force criteria: ECG, echocardiogram, and family history.
Antenatal corticosteroids were administered to prevent foetal lung immaturity and an elective caesarean section was planned, during the 37th gestational week.
No complications occurred: baby’s Apgar score and birth weight were normal; mother's N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was stable (peak 177 pg/mL).
After delivery, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for monitoring. Metoprolol was stopped and sotalol was started (20 mg t.i.d., then titrated up to 80 mg t.i.d.). Cabergolin 0.25 mg b.i.d. for 2 days was administered to suppress lactation; ramipril 2.5 mg was started.
The subsequent Holter ECG monitoring showed a reduction of PVCs on sotalol.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) revealed biventricular dilatation (LV end-diastolic volume index 109 mL/m2 − RV end-diastolic volume index 141 mL/m2) with diffuse late gadolinium enhancement showing areas of fibrofatty infiltration, mostly in the antero-lateral wall of the LV and in the RV . Multiple areas of dyskinesia were detected in both ventricles that showed reduced ejection fraction (EF): LVEF 44% − RVEF 32%.
At discharge the patient was asymptomatic and there were no signs of heart failure (HF).
A thorough follow-up programme was started; she has been stable and asymptomatic for 13 months after delivery. Then she started to have some episodes of palpitations and subsequently she was readmitted in our hospital due to an episode of pre-syncope.
The ECG monitoring during the admission showed runs of NSVT (160/170 b.p.m.), monomorphic with left bundle branch block pattern; an exercise stress test did not elicit sustained ventricular arrhythmias (VA), but some couplets were seen. A new echocardiogram and CMR revealed a mild reduction of the LV volumes and a mild improvement of LV function (LVEF 55%), while the other features remained substantially unchanged.
Considering the clinical evolution with symptomatic arrhythmia and the biventricular extension of the disease, after team discussion, a single-chamber ICD was implanted. So far, there were no ICD interventions.