The patient was a 55-year-old man in whom leukocytosis and systemic enlarged lymph nodes had been pointed out on positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT), which had been performed in an annual health check four years previously. The urinalysis findings at that time were normal without hematuria or proteinuria. He was referred to a hematologist in a regional hospital. Peripheral blood flow cytometry revealed that the percentages of lymphocytes that were positive for cluster of differentiation (CD)5, CD19, CD20, and CD23 to be 97.5%, 91.7%, 80.7%, and 84.3%, respectively. He was diagnosed with CLL Rai stage II. At the time, his serum creatinine level was 0.69 mg/dl and he was not taking any medications, including traditional Chinese medicines. He was followed up without treatment, and his serum creatinine level remained normal for three and a half years. However, his serum creatinine level gradually increased from 1.11 to 2.66 mg/dL in the 6 months before he presented to our hospital. He was referred to our hospital to undergo an evaluation for progressive renal dysfunction.
On admission, his height was 167 cm, and his body weight was 70 kg. His body temperature was 36.8 °C, and his heart rate was 60 beats per minute. His blood pressure was 108/69 mmHg. A physical examination revealed the palpable enlargement of the cervical and inguinal lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. The laboratory data on admission are summarized in Table . The patient’s urinary protein level was 0.23 g per day without any occult blood. The levels of urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase and β2 microglobulin were high. Leukocytosis was observed (91.8% lymphocytes). The blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels were 40 mg/dL and 3.89 mg/dL, respectively. The patient was negative for myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, proteinase3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, M-protein, and Bence Jones protein. The patient was also showed negative results for the interferon gamma release assay (IGRA). The patient’s angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level was normal. No bilateral hilar adenopathy or infiltration was detected on a chest radiograph. No uveitis was detected in an ophthalmic examination. Abdominal echography showed that the right and left kidneys were 10.7 × 4.8 cm and 10.6 × 5.3 cm in size, respectively.
A renal biopsy obtained 53 glomeruli, 30 of which showed global sclerosis and 11 of which were collapsed without glomerular lesions. Immunofluorescence staining of immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, IgM, C3, C1q, and fibrinogen was negative. Tubulointerstitial injury with the interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes was observed in 90% of the total area, and there were some non-caseating epithelioid cell granulomas with Langhans giant cells . Ziehl-Neelsen staining for acid-fast bacilli was negative . Immunohistochemistry was performed with the T-cell marker CD3 and B-cell markers CD5, CD20, and CD23 . The interstitial area was strongly positive for CD5 and CD20, positive for CD3 and weakly positive for CD23. The area inside or in the vicinity of the epithelioid cell granulomas was positive for CD3 and CD5 and negative for CD20 and CD23.
We determined that progressive renal dysfunction had occurred due to the diffuse infiltration of CLL cells in the interstitial area of the kidneys, and the patient was treated with two cycles of cyclophosphamide. The treatment was unable to attenuate the progression of the renal dysfunction, and the patient ultimately required maintenance hemodialysis due to end-stage renal failure.