A 74-year-old man treated for a stage IV lung adenocarcinoma initially presented with a mild hemoptysis (estimated volume: 100–200 mL over 24 h) and underwent a bronchial artery embolization at our institution. No complication was noted and the patient was discharged the day after. He presented with a severe recurrent hemoptysis one month later and was admitted in the intensive care unit for initial care. Nasal Oxygenotherapy was immediately administered at a 15 L/ minute flowrate for target oxygen saturation > 90%; invasive ventilation was considered unreasonable by the intensive care physician given the highly compromised health condition of the patient. Computed tomography angiography showed a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm arising from the left pulmonary artery adjacent to the lung tumor , which was retrospectively not present one month prior to the recurrence. After a multidisciplinary discussion, a salvage treatment was proposed and the patient was transferred to the interventional radiology angiographic suite.
Access to the right femoral vein was performed using a 10-French vascular long sheath placed in the origin of the right atrium, under local anesthesia. The initial angiogram was performed in the left pulmonary artery using a pigtail 5-French catheter with an injection protocol of 30 mL of contrast injected at a rate of 15 mL/second. Cone-Beam computed tomography was not feasible given the overall patient agitation. Selective angiography within the inferior lobar artery using a multipurpose 5-French catheter confirmed the pseudoaneurysm arising from the posterior wall of the artery . After careful selective catheterization of the pseudoaneurysm using a 2.4-French microcatheter, we injected a few mL of Onyx 34 (Medtronic) but the microcatheter instability did not allow us to inject enough to obtain a satisfactory filling. Subsequently an endovascular stent graft was deployed (11,5 × 33 mm LifeStream balloon expandable covered stent (Bard Medical)) to exclude the pseudoaneurysm. The stent was over dilated with the provided balloon at its origin to allow maximum coverage along its length and to prevent endoleak or material migration. The patient was immediately placed under an antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 75 mg daily).
Control angiography showed no immediate complication and confirmed the exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm, as reassessed by a second CT angiography . There was no pulmonary infarction described on the postoperative scan. There were no acute complications and no recurrence during hospitalization and the patient was discharged on day 6. During the follow-up, the patient did not return to the hospital for an acute pathology. A CT scan performed one and a half months after this episode showed a permeable stent without pulmonary infarction.