A 79-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for recurrent paroxysmal AF with palpitation. She had a history of transient ischaemic attack and hypertension. She was on candesartan (8 mg once daily), amlodipine (2.5 mg once daily), and apixaban (2.5 mg twice daily). Her body weight was 39 kg, and height was 159 cm. All laboratory findings were within normal range. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and no evidence of ischaemic changes or ST elevation. Chest X-ray was unremarkable. She showed a dilated left atrium (LA diameter: 31 mm, LA volume index: 35 mL/m2) and normal left ventricular systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction: 76%). Pre-procedural cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed four pulmonary veins, and slight dilated ascending aorta (maximum diameter: 40 mm, ) with mild calcific plaques. We decided to perform CA for AF, and recommended TOE before the CA to assess the presence or absence of left atrial appendage thrombus (LAAT) because she had a CHADS2 score of 4.
On the day before the CA, TOE was performed with an iE33 (Philips Medical System, Andover, MA, USA) with a 4-MHz OmniPlane probe. After local pharyngeal anaesthesia with lidocaine spray, the patient was placed in the left lateral position and midazolam (3 mg) was administered for mild sedation. Her physical examination showed a regular pulse rate (PR) of 62 b.p.m., a blood pressure (BP) of 117/84 mmHg, and a normal temperature. Her physical examinations at the time of TOE procedure were unremarkable. At 3 min after probe insertion, she had a BP of 117/84 mmHg, PR of 62 b.p.m., and there was no abnormal finding of the ascending aorta at that time . We then administered additional midazolam (2 mg) due to body movement. At 5 min after the insertion, we confirmed that the absence of LAAT (BP: 95/40 mmHg, PR: 76 b.p.m.). However, TOE showed ascending aortic dissection without pericardial effusion . The probe was removed at the end of anaesthesia after flumazenil (0.2 mg) infusion. After waking, she had severe back pain, and underwent a contrast-enhanced cardiac CT. Cardiac CT demonstrated Stanford type A aortic dissection extending from the aortic root to the bifurcation of common iliac arteries, and tight stenosis in the right coronary artery (maximum diameter; 49 mm, ). An electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm and no ST-segment abnormalities. The patient underwent a replacement of the ascending aorta, and a coronary artery bypass graft surgery for the right coronary artery. After surgery, the patient gradually stabilized, and she was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on the 60th postoperative day. After 9 months of follow-up, the patient is doing well.