This presentation details the case of a 34-years-old non-vaccinated pregnant woman who had a COVID-19 infection during the first month of pregnancy. She was given azithromycin and acetaminophen, both of which have been shown to be safe in terms of causing preterm birth and birth abnormalities . There were no congenital birth defects in the family. In the 17th week of pregnancy, fetal ascites was identified. In this week's 4D obstetric ultrasonography, substantial fetal ascites was seen, as well as an abnormal four-chamber image of the fetal heart with a major atrial septal defect (ASD). The fetal heart showed an atrioventricular valve (AV) canal defect during the second 4D obstetric ultrasonography in the 20th gestational week. There was a significant amount of fetal ascites .
In the 34th week of pregnancy, a 4D obstetric ultrasonography revealed an AV canal defect and fetal hydrops (marked ascites, pericardial effusion, and skin edema) Fig. . Fetal bradycardia (48–56 beats per minute) was detected.
Polyhydramnios was also noticed. The mother had been edematous and had hypoalbuminemia (2.6 g/dL) over the past week.
A preterm cesarean delivery took place on June 13, 2021. The umbilical cord and placenta were normal. The infant girl was 34 weeks old, the third sibling of a negative consanguineous marriage with no maternal history of any risk factor, and her weight was 2.5 kg, according to the pediatric checkup performed after birth. She exhibited cyanosis, AV canal defect, bilateral choanal atresia, hydrops fetalis, and bradycardia (60 beats per minute) and was in poor general condition. The infant girl was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), where she was intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation (MV). She took amikin, atropine, and ampicillin/sulactam as a pharmacological treatment in the NICU.
An echocardiogram was performed on the infant girl on the 1st and 3rd days after birth, revealing only two pulmonary veins were seen connected to the left atrium, left-sided superior vena cava, and common atrium due to large secundum ASD and a common AV valve with mild regurge on the right side of the valve. There was also severe regurge on the left side, an inlet ventricular septal defect (VSD) with large perimembranous extension and malposed great arteries with the aorta to the right and overriding the VSD, and the pulmonary artery to the left with pulmonary atresia and hypoplastic confluent pulmonary arteries with no antegrade flow. Trivial aortic regurgitation (AR), a left-sided arch with a slender descending aorta and pulsatile flow, was also seen. Pericardium was normal.
General ultrasonographic assessment and blood tests for the infant girl were performed on the 4th day of her life. She experienced germinal matrix hemorrhage (grade 1), brain edema, and hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (grade 3), according to the results of the cerebral vascular investigation. According to the abdominal and pelvic exams, the liver was left-sided and the spleen was right-sided. There have also been reports of significant ascites with intact abdominal organs.
A normal karyotype was found in the infant girl. Hypoalbuminemia (2.2 g/dl), leukocytosis (20.9 × 109/L), thrombocytopenia (105 × 109/L), and a normal hemoglobin serum level (12.9 g/dl) were all present in her blood. The infant girl died on her 5th day of life. On the 10th day after giving birth, the mother's albumin level returns to normal (4.6 g/dL).