An 86-year-old female without significant past medical history, presented with headache of 1 year duration. Headache was exclusively nocturnal, occurring each night around 12 a.m., waking the patient up and lasting 2–3 h. She graded the severity of headache as ranging from 4 to 7 on a scale of 1 to 10 (10 being the most severe). It was unilateral, occurring mainly around the right orbital region, sometimes involving the auricular area and was described as a dull aching, non-pulsating headache without radiation. Sometimes the headache was associated with right sided rhinorrhea. There was no conjunctival injection, tearing, nausea, vomiting or photo-/phonophobia. She reports uninterrupted sleep prior to the onset of these headache episodes. There were no features to suggest obstructive sleep apnoea or other sleep related disorders. She did not give a past history of migraines or recurrent headaches, seizures, neuralgias or other neurological disease. Family history was unremarkable. She had multiple medical consultations with poor resolution of symptoms. On examination she appeared well at rest with a regular heart rate of 70 beats/min, blood pressure of 142/68 mmHg and clear lung fields. Ophthalmoscopy was normal and temporal arteries were pulsatile and non-tender. The neurological examination was unremarkable. Oxygen saturation was 97% on room air using pulse oximetry. Haematological and biochemical investigations including full blood count, blood picture, electrolytes, urea, creatinine, fasting blood glucose, lipid profile and liver profile were normal. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was 20 mm per first hour and C-reactive protein level was 7 mg/L (normal 0.08–3.1 mg/L). Gadolinium enhanced MRI brain was unremarkable except for mild cerebral atrophy and volume loss compatible with age. She had been previously treated in private clinics by several general practitioners and a neurologist with paracetamol, diclofenac sodium, mefenamic acid, tramadol, flunarizine and sodium valproate without success. She had used these drugs either singly or in varying combinations for at least 2 weeks at a time. As her symptoms continued the diagnosis was reevaluated. Chronic nocturnal headache which would awaken an elderly patient from sleep was considered characteristic of hypnic headache and she was started on indomethacin 25 mg three times a day with a proton pump inhibitor. Improvement in headaches was noted from the first day itself. By day 3, there was absolute response to indomethacin. After continuing treatment for 1 month she was symptom free and the dose was reduced. After a while, the patient had discontinued treatment without medical advice, leading to recurrence of the headache and treatment was re-started. At 1 year after diagnosis she remains headache free on a daily low dose of indomethacin without significant adverse effects.