A previously healthy 13-year-old boy presented to an emergency department with chest pain and shortness of breath 20 h after receiving the second dose of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 following the first dose 3 weeks ago. The symptoms started with fever, followed by chest pain and shortness of breath.
Initially, the patient had stable vital signs, normal oxygen saturation, and normal physical examination. However, ECG demonstrated diffuse ST-segment elevation . C-Reactive protein (CRP) was slightly elevated (16.8 mg/L, normal range < 5 mg/L) but the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and ferritin were normal. N-Terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was normal (90 pg/mL, normal range < 125 pg/mL). High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hsTnT) was initially elevated (506 ng/L, normal range 0–16 ng/L) with a peak level on day 3 . A nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for COVID-19 and another respiratory viral panel test were negative. Furthermore, the result for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody was positive, and anti-nucleocapsid IgG was negative. Chest radiograph was normal. Echocardiogram revealed normal global cardiac function except mildly depressed left ventricular septal regional longitudinal strain and no pericardial effusion.
First CMR imaging on admission revealed normal biventricular volumes and systolic function. Coronary artery abnormalities were excluded by coronary magnetic resonance angiography (see , ). A conventional qualitative analysis of signal intensities on T2-weighted and late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images did not show oedematous change or myocardial necrosis . On the other hand, a quantitative analysis of myocardial tissue showed an increase in all segments of the native T1 by mapping technique , and extracellular volume (ECV) (1031 ± 23.7 ms and 0.32, respectively) . The native T1 value was highest at the inferolateral and anterior segments (1092 ± 41.8 and 1039 ± 74.8 ms, respectively), which indicated myocardial oedema and fibrosis. CMR imaging was performed on a 1.5-T MR unit (Ingenia Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands) using a body and phased array coils. Myocardial T1 mapping was assessed by the modified Look-Locker inversion recovery (MOLLI) sequence.
The patient required only an oxygen cannula for respiratory support during this admission. On day 2 of admission, he developed severe chest pain but stable vital signs. ECG showed progression of ST elevation , hsTnT elevated to 1405 ng/L. However, his symptom was relieved by oral ibuprofen 400 mg once daily without any other medications and ECG was significantly improved within 3 h . He was discharged on day 5. After a 1-week follow-up, he had no symptoms, normal troponin T level, mild ST elevation, and incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB) on ECG . He did not receive any medications at the follow-up.
Subsequently, the patient’s clinical condition and ECG were assessed at week 2, month 3, and month 6. The echocardiogram and CMR were done at week 2 and month 6 until CMR returned to normal ( and ). After the normalization of CMR, the last follow-up schedule was at month 12 to ensure that there is no additional change in clinical and ECG including advising any concerns about the booster vaccine before discharging the patient from our clinic.