A 73-year-old male patient with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, dyslipidaemia, and a cerebral infarction was admitted to our hospital to undergo an ablation of paroxysmal AF . He was receiving optimized medical therapy for his conditions. On admission, he had a blood pressure of 130/68 mmHg and regular heart rate of 72 beats/min. A precordial auscultation revealed normal cardiac and respiratory sounds. A 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed a sinus rhythm. An echocardiography revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction and left atrial (LA) enlargement of 42.8 mm. The patient’s CHADS2/CHA2DS2-VASc score was 5/7. Prior to the procedure, a contrast-enhanced cardiac computed tomography (CT) revealed an atypical PV, wherein the right and left superior PVs had normal separate ostia, while the two right and left inferior PVs had a common ostium, exhibiting a CIT . Because the diameters of the antrum of the right and left superior PVs and the junction between the CIT and the LA were 34, 35, and 34 mm, respectively, we decided to perform ablation using an LB, which has a maximum diameter of 41 mm.
A temperature probe (Esophaster™, Japan Lifeline) for monitoring the oesophageal temperature was inserted and placed between the levels of the left superior PV and the CIT, and a deflectable catheter, a BeeAT™ (Japan Lifeline), was placed in the coronary sinus and right atrium . Following a double transseptal puncture, a steerable 12 Fr transseptal sheath (HeartLight Deflectable Sheath™, CardioFocus) and an 8.5 Fr sheath (Biosense Webster) were placed into the LA. The LA and three PVs were reconstructed using a three-dimensional (3D) mapping system (EnSite™, Abbott) with a circular mapping catheter (Optima™, Abbott) and the LA was confirmed to have an almost normal voltage . The third-generation (X3) LB (HeartLight X3 Catheter™, CardioFocus) was navigated to the target right and left superior PVs using a 12F sheath and inflated for an optimal PV occlusion at an antral balloon position. Laser energy was deployed individually, with a 30–50% overlap in the manual energy mode. The rapid mode is continuously delivered and is not defined by this overlap percentage ( and ). Next, the X3-LB was positioned at the ostium of the right branch of the CIT and inflated for optimal PV occlusion at the antral balloon position. The endoscopic view of the right branch of the CIT revealed that the right side of the LB came into complete contact with the right-sided antrum of the CIT, but the left side of the LB was in contact with the posterior wall of the CIT . Conversely, the X3-LB was positioned at the ostium of the left branch of the CIT and inflated for optimal PV occlusion at the antral balloon position. The endoscopic view of the left branch of the CIT revealed that the left side of the LB came into complete contact with the left-sided antrum of the CIT, but the right side of the LB was in contact with the posterior wall of the CIT . Thus, the laser energy was then individually deployed to the right-sided and left-sided antra of the CIT with the X3-LB positioned at the ostium of the CIT’s right and left branches. During ablation of the right superior PV and CIT, continuous right phrenic nerve pacing in the superior vena cava and monitoring of compound motor action potentials were performed to prevent phrenic nerve injury. Finally, the complete extensive electrical isolation of the three PVs, including that of the right-sided and left-sided PV carinas, was achieved without any complications ( and ). The patient remained stable without any symptoms or AF recurrence 1 year post ablation .