A 75-year-old woman, who was being treated with prednisolone 5 mg/day for polymyalgia rheumatica, presented with anorexia and general malaise for 3 days and then developed vomiting and diarrhea. She experienced difficulty moving her body, and her consciousness deteriorated. The patient was brought to our hospital on an ambulance. The consciousness level on admission, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and peripheral oxygen saturation were E3V4M6, 39.5 °C, 153/88 mmHg, 124 beats/minute, 25 breaths/minute, and 90% (with oxygen mask 6 L/min), respectively. Her bulbar conjunctiva was congested on both sides, and coarse crackles were heard in the right lung field. Reticular dermatosis was found on both of her lower legs, and erythematous dermatosis was observed on the lower side of the back. Laboratory blood tests on admission showed elevated inflammatory markers (white blood cell count and C-reactive protein), creatine phosphokinase, and liver aminotransferase. Further, a rapid influenza diagnostic test was positive for influenza A . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse airspace opacification in the right middle lobe . Head CT demonstrated a slight fluid collection in the right upper sinus suggesting sinusitis.
Her clinical signs and symptoms fulfilled three out of five clinical criteria of TSS with a fever of 38.9 °C or higher, diffuse erythroderma, and multisystem involvement (conjunctival congestion, gastrointestinal symptoms of vomiting and diarrhea, hepatic dysfunction, and disorientation). At this time point, she had not developed desquamation yet and had no hypotension. Therefore, the patient was clinically diagnosed with influenza with bacterial pneumonia and potential TSS, and her treatment was started with meropenem (1 g every 8 h), vancomycin (1 g every 12 h, therapeutic drug monitoring: ≥15 μg/mL), and clindamycin (600 mg every 8 h).
The next day, S. simulans, a CoNS strain, was detected in both sets of blood cultures. Furthermore, pneumococci and methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) were identified in sputum cultures (Geckler 4 group) and pharyngeal cultures (small number of colonies), respectively. Exotoxins, such as TSST-1, and staphylococcal enterotoxins (type A, B, C, and D), which are known to cause TSS, were not detected in culture samples of MSSA and S. simulans. We used the reversed passive latex agglutination method to evaluate the exotoxins and enterotoxins; the minimum detection sensitivity of sensitized latex using this method was found to be 1–2 ng/mL. We changed the antimicrobial therapy to cefazolin (1 g q8h) and clindamycin (600 mg q8h), based on microbiologic test results, and this therapy was administered for 14 days. Finger desquamation appeared on the 8th day of hospitalization, fulfilling four out of five clinical criteria for TSS. Therefore, we diagnosed the case as probable TSS.
Serum levels of inflammatory cytokines were high: neopterin 62 mmol/L (reference range, ≤5 mmol/L) and IL-6 38 pg/mL (reference range, ≤5 pg/mL). Lymphocyte subpopulation distribution was then analyzed in peripheral blood , showing prominent CD57 expression in CD8+ T cells, suggesting strong activation of this T lymphocyte subset.
Furthermore, T cell receptor (TCR) Vβ repertoire distribution analysis was carried out . A specific subset of CD8+ T cells, including Vβ7.2 and Vβ14 cells, was increased, indicating the oligoclonal activation of CD8+ T cells likely due to antigen exposure. However, the distribution of CD4+ T cell TCR Vβ repertoire was normal. The activation of Vβ2+ population, which is characteristic for TSST-1, was not observed.