A 43-year-old, unemployed, unmarried, university graduated, Japanese male patient presented with chronic pain that had recurred and persisted for 15 years at our child and adolescent psychiatric outpatient department after being referred from an adult psychiatric unit for further ADHD examination in our tertiary hospital.
History of chronic pain symptoms included somatic complaints of chest pain, back pain, and headache, which occurred alternately, and sometimes epigastric pain and nausea. The pain was evaluated with a numeric rating scale (NRS) score, which ranged from 1 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain). Daily, his pain had ranged from 2/10 to 6/10, but mostly 5/10 on average. The patient had histories of anxiety and depression that preceded pain and received antidepressants at a primary hospital. At the onset of pain, the patient visited a primary healthcare clinic due to chest pain, but the medical examinations revealed no abnormalities.
Consequently, he visited various clinics and received various examinations and medications for the pain. However, none of the treatments provided optimal outcomes. He was referred to a psychiatrist in a primary hospital and was also prescribed immediate-release MPH (IR-MPH) because of suspected ADHD comorbidity. With IR-MPH, the patient reported dramatic improvement in his pain symptoms with an NRS score of 0/10 and discontinued the visit. When the pain symptoms recurred, he visited the same hospital and received IR-MPH again, reducing the pain to an NRS of 3/10 on average. However, IR-MPH was discontinued following Japan’s drug distribution regulation change, and his pain worsened. Subsequently, he was referred to an anesthesiologist and received oral gabapentin and epidural block therapy, neither of which improved his pain.
He was referred to an adult psychiatrist in our tertiary hospital. Physical examination, electroencephalography (EEG), and head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities. The patient insisted on having MPH treatment because he believed it would improve his pain based on his experience. However, his attending psychiatrist suspected an MPH dependency and thus rejected his request. The following year, he was hospitalized because his global assessment of functioning (GAF) score was 38–40, with chronic pain and depression. Following discharge, the physician recommended cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), but he refused. Subsequently, he consented to modified electroconvulsive therapy (m-ECT), but his pain worsened after the eighth m-ECT session. Therefore, it was discontinued.
Throughout his medication history, he ever received acetaminophen, non-opioid analgesics, and various combination of antidepressants. However, combinations of two or three drugs did not adequately alleviate his pain, and MPH is an exception. The report on detailed medication history could not be obtained from previous physicians, clinics, and hospitals.
There was no family history of chronic pain or neurodevelopmental disorders. The psychosocial history indicated that during childhood, the patient was forgetful, careless, and had difficulty organizing schoolwork tasks. He sometimes forgot his school bag when he went to school. He was not good at maintaining social behavior and had been called a ‘strange child’. However, his parents overlooked his behavioral problems. His condition continued into adulthood, during which he often changed jobs, was reprimanded for his inadvertent mistakes, and had relational conflicts in the workplace. Regarding the psychological aspects of this case, especially coping strategies, the patient prefers treatment with a clear scientific basis, and willingly received treatments such as drug therapy, nerve blocks, and ECT for his chronic pain. On the other hand, the patient thought that psychosocial treatments were ineffective, such as he refused cognitive-behavioral therapy.
When we examined the patient, his NRS was 5/10, with predominantly chest pain. Current physical, electrocardiography, chest radiography, and laboratory examinations revealed no abnormalities. Thus, we suspected that his type of chronic pain was idiopathic. A thorough psychiatric examination led by a child and adolescent psychiatrist resulted in a diagnosis of ADHD. The patient met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-IV criteria for ADHD, predominantly inattentive type, in which eight symptoms of inattention had persisted for 15 years. We used the ADHD Rating Scale (RS)-IV with slight adjustments of items to suit an adult patient. The inattention subscale score was 19. The delay in the firm diagnosis of ADHD in this patient was likely due to the solely inattentive type, overlooked impact in life, and masked by pain comorbidity. The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III scores consisted of verbal intelligence quotient (VIQ), performance IQ (PIQ), and full scale IQ (FIQ) were 130, 86, and 106, respectively. shows a timeline of his clinical symptoms and treatments.
Following the ADHD diagnosis, OROS-MPH was started at a titrated dose of 18 mg/day, increasing monthly to 36 mg/day, 54 mg/day, and up to 72 mg/day as the optimal maintenance dose. In addition, we treated his recurrent depressive episodes with amoxapine 100 mg/day. Flunitrazepam 2 mg/day and etizolam 0.25 mg/day were also prescribed for each of his secondary insomnia and anxiety symptoms in combination or separately when necessary.
After 1 month of OROS-MPH treatment, he reported no more pain with an NRS score of 0/10 and could resume light activities. After 4 months, he reported chronic pain alleviation and inattentive symptoms improvement at work. His ADHD-RS-IV inattention subscale score was 14.
The patient has been followed up for the last 7 years and is currently in ‘peak performance’ condition, functioning well in daily activities and attending employment support facilities twice per week. His current GAF score is 55, his ADHD-RS-IV inattention subscale score is 11, and his NRS score is 0/10. Regular addiction evaluation using the DSM-5 criteria showed no evidence of stimulant use disorder, and the patient adhered to the recommended use and dosage of MPH and indicated no self-medications. The regular evaluation through anamnesis indicated that the patient could tolerate MPH well, no adverse effects were reported, and his pain never recurred.