A 59-year-old asymptomatic caucasian male patient was enrolled in follow-up for Ta low-grade transitional cell bladder cancer 4 years ago in our clinic. Intracavitary treatment was not performed, and no recurrence was observed last year during the follow-up period. The medical history of the patient included a smoking history of 30 years and no comorbidities other than hypertension. No additional findings were observed on physical examination, and all laboratory findings were within normal limits.
A suspicious, solid, contrast-enhancing mass 15 × 9 mm in diameter in the anteromedial mid-section of the left kidney, which was causing minimal washout and largely located in the parenchyma, was reported as renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in the arterial phase of triphasic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in the routine controls of the patient for transitional cell cancer (TCC) . In the excretory phase, soft-tissue densities of approximately 30 mm in length, which were located in the distal part of the left ureter at a distance of 40 mm from the ureterovesical junction, extending towards the lumen suggested a urethral carcinoma . No pathological finding was observed on thorax CT.
On endoscopic evaluation under general anesthesia, no suspicious formation was found in the urethra and bladder. On ureteroscopy performed in the same session, a polypoid-like tumoral formation with a pedicle at the base in the left distal ureter, approximately 25–30 mm in length, was observed . The lesion was resected endoscopically following obtainment of a selective urine cytology sample from the ureter. To prevent a recurrence, the tumor base was ablated by a holmium:yttrium–aluminum–garnet (Ho:YAG) laser. Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed a FEP, and selective urine cytology was negative for malignant cells.
Partial nephrectomy for RCC mass in the left kidney was performed in the first postoperative month. Histopathological examination of the mass revealed a Fuhrman grade 1 papillary type RCC, and no recurrence was observed in the first year after treatment.
The patient was satisfied with the partial nephrectomy procedure, which somewhat preserved the kidney, and the treatment of the lesions in the bladder and ureter, which was performed without major surgery.