A 67-year-old female with a prior history of cardiac transplant 1 year prior, on an immunosuppressant regimen, presented to University Medical Center (UMC) with worsening shortness of breath. Her symptoms of fever, headaches, and myalgias had started 6 days prior. Two days later, she was seen in clinic and diagnosed with COVID-19. At that time, she was paucisymptomatic and was sent home with over the counter medications. Her immunosuppressive regimen included mycophenolate 250 mg twice daily and tacrolimus 9 mg daily. On the day of admission to UMC, her symptoms of cough and dyspnoea worsened acutely. Her dyspnoea had become so severe that she was unable to walk around her home or take care of her activities of daily living.
In the emergency room, she was found to be dyspnoeic at rest requiring 4–5 L per minute nasal cannula to maintain saturations >90%. Her physical exam was unremarkable other than ‘mildly distant heart sounds, and globally diminished breath sounds, no rales, or wheezing noted’.
Labs were drawn that demonstrated leukopenia (2.7 k/mm3), lymphocytopenia (absolute lymphocyte count 0.72 k/mm3), and elevated creatinine (1.67 mg/dL). Furthermore, she was found to have elevated inflammatory markers . Since the D-dimer was mildly elevated (0.62 mg/L), she was started on a prophylactic dose of enoxaparin 40 mg twice daily. Repeat testing confirmed COVID-19 infection. Troponins were negative. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was elevated 136 pg/mL. Blood and respiratory cultures were drawn that demonstrated no growth throughout her admission.
Chest X-ray demonstrated new increased density in the right lower lung concerning for infiltrate as well as central vascular prominence . A chest computed tomography (CT) was ordered to evaluate her developing COVID-19 pneumonia . Chest CT demonstrated diffuse peripheral and lower lung predominant ground-glass opacities, with some underlying septal thickening. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a normal left ventricular ejection fraction 55–60% and normal right ventricular systolic function.
She was admitted to the coronary care unit because of her history of heart transplant and concern for progression of her acute hypoxic respiratory failure given her COVID-19 status. The case was discussed with infectious disease who initially held remdesivir given her elevated creatinine. She was instead given convalescent plasma, dexamethasone, and started on empiric antibiotics for possible community-acquired pneumonia. Clinically she appeared dehydrated; maintenance fluids were thus administered and resulted in improvement of her renal function back to baseline. The very next day, she was started on a course of remdesivir for 5 days.
Mycophenolate mofetil was stopped in line with recommendations from the International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Initial tacrolimus trough level was found to be supratherapeutic (12.5 ng/mL), so it was initially held as well. Throughout the course of her admission, her renal function improved and her tacrolimus levels were adjusted to goal target of 6–10 ng/mL. Her leukopenia resolved; however, she continued to have a persistent lymphocytopenia consistent with her COVID-19 infection. Inflammatory markers trended downwards .
She completed her courses of remdesivir and empiric antibiotics, and was weaned from oxygen completely. Repeat chest X-ray demonstrated significant improvement . She was discharged home with instructions to complete 20 days of isolation per recommendations by infectious disease. She was additionally instructed to follow-up with her primary care and transplant physicians to discuss restarting her home regimen of mycophenolate mofetil. She was discharged with dexamethasone 6 mg daily and tacrolimus extended release 8 mg daily.