A 27-year-old Caucasian woman recently diagnosed with chronic renal failure, pulmonary embolism and calciphylaxis was admitted to our hospital due to weakness and mental alterations. Two months earlier, this patient had presented with a severe nephrotic syndrome, with a renal biopsy revealing a primary FSGS with typical almost complete podocyte foot process fusion on electron microscopy. Calciphylactic skin changes were confirmed by deep skin biopsies, which showed calcifying panniculitis. The patient was started on daily hemodialysis to treat her calciphylaxis and owing to a poor response of FSGS to steroids. She was also administered sodium thiosulfate thrice weekly, along with careful wound care and lymphatic drainage.
Physical examination showed obesity, sclerotic lipolymphedema, deep necrotic ulcers on the lower legs and generalized pitting edema . Peripheral pulses were intact. Neurological examination revealed clouding of consciousness and psychomotor slowing. Inspection of her hands showed noticeable atrophy of the interosseal and thenar muscles. She was able to hold her arms over her head but could not lift her legs due to pain and weakness. The reflexes of her upper extremities were symmetrically normal. Owing to hyperalgesia of the limbs, however, she did not tolerate a knee jerk. An ophthalmologic examination showed physiological findings.
Electrophysiological testing, including nerve conduction tests and an electromyogram, revealed an axonal-demyelinating polyneuropathy. Electroencephalography showed a mild encephalopathy, but no epileptiform activity.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed fine calcifications of the basal ganglia and the dentate nuclei, indicating strio-pallido-dentate calcinosis. Bilateral chronic lesions in the putamen and in the head of the caudate nucleus were also observed. There was no evidence of mitochondrial encephalopathy, because lactate was not detectable on magnetic resonance spectroscopy .
Laboratory results showed anemia and leukocytosis. C-reactive protein concentration was highly elevated. There was marked hypoalbuminemia and nephrotic-range proteinuria, with a urinary protein/creatinine ratio of 19.9 g/g. Creatinine kinase activity was normal, but thyroid function tests revealed hypothyroidism. The patient experienced one episode of hypoglycemia of 50 mg/dL. Secondary hyperparathyroidism was detected, consistent with chronic renal insufficiency. Serum immunofixation revealed a monoclonal gammopathy (immunoglobulin G lambda). Serum VEGF levels were highly significantly elevated (1.329 ± 80 pg/mL). Extensive immunologic testing was unremarkable. The cerebrospinal fluid showed a mild blood–brain barrier disruption.
Histological and cytological examination of the bone marrow showed a proliferation of plasma cells, consistent with a monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). Additional histological examinations of the renal biopsy did not provide any evidence for renal involvement in MGUS. Muscle biopsy revealed type II fiber atrophy. There was no evidence of muscular inflammation, metabolic myopathy or a mitochondrial disorder.
POEMS syndrome was diagnosed based on polyneuropathy, monoclonal plasma cell disorder with IgG lambda, elevated serum VEGF, extravascular volume overload, endocrinopathy and skin changes, consistent with proposed diagnostic criteria .
The patient was treated with cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone, rituximab and bortezomib. Calciphylactic skin changes and hyperalgesia ameliorated gradually. Neurocognitive abilities improved slightly and mobilization was possible with the aid of a walker, but the patient still requires care.