A 33-year-old, white, gravida 2, para 2 woman was referred to our Gynecology Department with intermittent abdominal pain that had intensified during the previous 3 months and progressive abdominal swelling during the previous 2 years. Her past medical and gynecologic history was otherwise unremarkable. No familial history of any disease was reported. A physical examination revealed a firm giant palpable abdominal mass with identifiable borders. The mass extended to her umbilicus and measured 15 cm above her symphysis pubis. These findings were confirmed by abdominal sonography. The abdominal ultrasonic examination revealed a markedly enlarged and lobular uterus containing intramural uterine leiomyomas, the largest measuring 17×15 cm without ascites in her abdominal cavity. No additional pathology was noted in the remainder of her pelvis or abdomen. The results of the routine laboratory testing, including a complete blood count, serum electrolyte levels and biochemical tests, were within normal limits. On the basis of these findings, a giant intramural myoma was assumed, and myomectomy was selected as the treatment.
She was offered laparoscopic removal of the myoma. Pneumoperitoneum was achieved using a supraumbilical Veress needle until an intra-abdominal pressure of 12 mmHg was reached. We first placed a midline supraumbilical 10 mm port for the telescope, and then two 5 mm accessory trocars were positioned in the left and right lateral quadrants visualized via a 10 mm telescope inserted through the supraumbilical port. The left and right accessory ports were inserted lateral to her deep inferior epigastric arteries and higher than usual; the accessory trocars were inserted sufficiently high enough to provide an unobstructed passage to the myomas for the laparoscopic instruments. Intra-abdominal visualization revealed an enlarged, lobular uterus containing a fundal intramural myoma with a maximum diameter of 17 cm, as diagnosed by ultrasound . The adnexa on both sides, round ligaments, and other pelvic and abdominal organs were normal. A myomectomy was performed using the standard technique as described elsewhere . A vertical incision was made on the prominent part of the principal myoma using a monopolar hook. The cleavage plane between the myoma and its surrounding connective tissues was then dissected. When the myoma was identified, the myoma was fixed, and enucleation was then accomplished by traction on the myoma with a tenaculum clamp, associated with countertraction on the uterus-facilitated dissection. The myoma was completely enucleated and removed without disturbing the endometrial cavity. A Harmonic ultrasonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc, Cincinnati, OH, USA) was used for most of the procedure. Bipolar coagulation was used when extra hemostasis was required. The myometrial defect and edges were closed with a continuous suture using a V-loc unidirectional barbed suture (Covidien, UK) in two layers . The left accessory 5 mm port was converted to a 10 mm one for the insertion of the morcellator. The entire myoma was removed using an electromechanical Rotocut G1 tissue morcellator (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany). The total intraoperative blood loss was 720 mL, the total weight of the myoma removed was 2005 g and the operation lasted for 140 minutes.
There were no major intraoperative complications. The final histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a uterine leiomyoma. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged on the second postoperative day.