An 18-year-old male worker was admitted to the emergency department due to pain, paresthesia, and coldness of the right lower limb. He has no history of cardiac disease or trauma and otherwise in good health. On physical examination, the right lower limb was cold and with cyanotic toes. The right femoral and popliteal pulses were undetectable. An urgent color-flow duplex scanning had been arranged which revealed a complete obstruction of the right external iliac artery blood flow by a rather big embolus. A trans-thoracic echocardiography showed an anechoic lesion of 36–40 mm originating from the left ventricle (LV). Since it was an endemic area of hydatid disease, a provisional diagnosis of (CHC) had been postulated. An urgent surgical embolectomy through the common femoral artery had been done. The obstruction has been opened with a Fogarty catheter. The catheter harvested a cruor thrombus with a white membrane from the common femoral artery, the histopathology of which was a hydatid tissue as it is shown in a and b. After immediate subsidence of symptoms and signs, and an uneventful post-operative night, a CT scan of thorax revealed a well-defined cystic lesion of 45 mm diameter was protruding into the LV, as shown in a, b, and c. A week later, the patient had been submitted to a standard a sternotomy and under cardiopulmonary bypass between the ascending aorta and the two-vena cava. The LV cavity showed an inside protruding mass, . The mass was incised and the cyst was removed, as shown in a and b). This has been followed by mopping of endocyst, as in , putting stay suture of LV as in , and enlarging of a cystic cavity as in . The perforated myocardium was sutured by prolene, and the cavity closure was achieved by a standard mattress suturing with gel foam, . The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 9 days with no complications. The follow-up plan consisted of a standard albendazole treatment for 3 cycles each one for 28 days with a period of one-week rest to avoid drug complication. An abdominal ultrasound, and a single brain CT scan to rule out another organ involvement, all of which were negative.