A 47-year-old male patient with increasing breathlessness and dry cough for a 1-year history was reported here. He has received a diagnosis of PAP in a local hospital, confirmed by radiological findings of bilateral patchy reticular opacities in both lung fields in chest computed tomography (CT) scan and pathological features of alveolar filling with amorphous materials with a positive stain of periodic acid-schiff by transbronchial lung biopsy. He didn’t take any medicine like steroid before.
The patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. He was tachypnoeic and tachycardic with fine crackles in both lungs. Arterial blood gas after oxygen supply (5 liters/min) showed as follows: pH 7.394, PCO2 37.6 mmHg, PO2 71.6 mmHg, and SaO2 93.8%. Before lung lavage, chest CT scan showed a bilateral ground-glass opacity with interlobular septal thickening, characterizing by a crazy paving pattern . Bilateral whole lung lavage was performed on the third day after admission as described by Silva et al. (Silva et al. ). After general anesthesia and single-lung ventilation, the patient received lavage first on the left side with 4 liters of saline at 37°C and then on the right side with 6 liters of saline. The lavage fluid was initially turbid with sediment but gradually cleared. A sputum sample (approximately 10 mL) from right site was obtained from the second lavage and sent to the laboratory for culture. The total recovery rate of lavage fluid was 90%. Namely, the residual amount of liquid was 0.3 liters in the left site and 0.7 liters in the right site. After lung lavage, the patient was transferred to intensive care unite (ICU) for further treatment.
The patient was extubated on the second day in ICU, but high fever was occurred. The body temperature was between 39.0 and 40.0°C. Blood routine test, blood and sputum cultures, and chest CT scan were performed rapidly. The white blood cell count was normal with a high percentage (95.2%) of neutrophils. In addition, newly multi-nodular consolidations occurred in both posterior segments of lower lobes in chest CT scan . A possible diagnosis of secondary lung infection cannot be excluded completely, but the patient was not treated by broad-spectrum antibiotics immediately and observed closely for vital signs. At the same time, treatments like liquid limitation, glucocorticoid administration and diuretic treatment were continued. The patient’s condition was improved gradually. The body temperature was returned to normal level three days later. Importantly, multi-nodular lung consolidations were absorbed almost completely in chest CT scan . There was no bacterial/fungi growth from samples of blood, sputum and lavage fluid. The value of C-reactive protein (CRP) was dropped from high level of 223.9 mg/L to 10.5 mg/L (normal range, < 10 mg/L), and procalcitonin (PCT) was also recovered from 0.71 ng/mL to normal level of 0.10 ng/mL (normal range, < 0.5 ng/mL). The secondary infection was excluded, and the final diagnosis of lavage-induced pulmonary edema was confirmed. The patient was asymptomatic at discharge two weeks later with improved SpO2 (93.0 ~ 95.0% in room air), and remained well within six months of follow-up after discharge.