A 46-year-old Han Chinese male (height 158 cm, weight 51 kg) was admitted to our department because of renal failure.
He had a history of gout for approximately 18 years, and his serum creatinine level had been elevated for 5 years. The patient was referred to our hospital for better treatment.
Not special.
Pedigree analysis showed that his mother had renal impairment.
No obvious edema was noted, except for slight anemia at the admission check.
Routine blood tests showed decreased blood red cell counts and hemoglobin . Serum chemistry showed elevated levels of serum creatinine, uric acid, parathyroid hormone, and cystatin C, as well as decreased levels of albumin and calcium. Urine tests revealed mild proteinuria and occult blood. Based on estimated glomerular filtration rate, the patient was categorized as having end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and was undergoing hemodialysis.
During hospitalization, an abnormality in his hand was noted by our nephrologist, and a more detailed physical examination was performed. Excessive earlobe and toe deformities were detected, and the preaxial polydactyly underwent surgical resection when he was a boy . He was born with an imperforate anus, and surgery was performed after birth to correct anal stenosis. Visual impairment was recognized on examination of the ocular fundus, but no hearing loss was evident.
Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed obvious renal atrophy (right 4.9 cm × 2.0 cm × 0.52 cm, left 5.3 cm × 2.0 cm × 0.59 cm), with thinned renal cortex and hyperechogenicity. No abnormalities were detected in the liver, pancreas or spleen on ultrasound examination.
Pedigree analysis showed that his mother had the same appearance of ears and toes, and renal impairment was observed at the age of 68 years . His second daughter had the same symptoms, such as ears, preaxial polydactyly, and toes. She was diagnosed with leukemia at the age of 18 years without any renal impairment. The proband’s son had similar symptoms, but his renal function was normal, except for elevated uric acid (529.0 μmol/L). Based on these findings, TBS was highly suspected in this family.
Considering the diagnosis of TBS and the similar symptoms of the family members, the proband was recommended to undergo genetic testing to make a precise diagnosis. As his father had already died for unknown reasons, DNA samples were isolated from the peripheral blood cells of the proband, his mother, and children. WES was performed by the Chigene (Beijing) Translational Medical Research Center, as previously described. Sequence analysis revealed a heterozygous variant of the SALL1 gene. The variant NM_001127892 c.1289_c.1290 insC led to a read-frame shift of the encoded protein. Sanger sequencing was performed to validate the identified variations . The variant cosegregated with the phenotype among affected members. The variant was excluded from the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (dbSNP) and Human ClinVar databases. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics standards and guidelines, the variant was classified as pathogenic (PVS1+PM2+PP1).