An 8-month-old female infant born as the first child of a nonconsanguineous Hungarian couple presented with severe respiratory failure with low oxygen saturation (70%) requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation with pressures of 16/5 cmH2O and 50% fraction of inspired oxygen. Chest radiograph at presentation revealed bilateral diffuse reticulogranular opacity. The infant was born at term gestation without complications and had been previously fit and well, with no history of immunocompromise, previous hospital admission or relevant family history. On examination the patient was pale and her weight was < 3 percentile (6600 g on admission). Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly were noted. As polymerase chain reaction test revealed Cytomegalovirus in the bronchoalveolar lavage, she was started on Valgancyclovir. Initial laboratory test results showed a white blood cell count of 11.85 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 3.7 mg/L, procalcitonin of 0.11 µg/L, LDH of 807 U/L, and serum ferritin of 707 µg/L. HIV test was negative and the lymphocyte subsets were normal. Immunoglobulin levels revealed low IgA concentration (0.57 g/L). Computed tomography (CT) scan of chest revealed a „crazy paving” pattern suggesting the diagnosis of PAP . An empirical course of high dose corticosteroid therapy (5 mg/kg/day), azithromycin (10 mg/kg/day) and hydroxychloroquine (6 mg/kg/day) did not improve her respiratory status. The patient rapidly deteriorated and required high ventilatory support with 100% oxygen. Whole exome sequencing confirmed that the index patient was compound heterozygous for the maternal c.1429 + 2T > C and for the paternal c.821 A > G SLC7A7 mutations. In accordance with the clinical presentation, SLC7A7 mutations are responsible for LPI. Based on the genetic findings, our patient was started on a low protein intake diet with lysine, ornithine and citrulline supplementation. Neurodevelopmental examination was appropriate for age except for a 3-month delay in gross motor development. The parents underwent several multidisciplinary consultations where necessity for prolonged pediatric intensive care was repeatedly emphasized.
At 10 month-of-age, the patient received tracheostomy for chronic ventilation. For children with PAP with moderate to severe respiratory symptoms, the treatment of choice is WLL [, , ]. Therefore, WLL was first attempted under general anesthesia and mechanical ventilation using a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope. However, as the patient rapidly desaturated, the procedure was abandoned. During the ensuing multidisciplinary team meeting the decision was made to attempt the pulmonary lavage on VV ECMO support . After percutaneous cannulation and the placement of the patient on ECMO support, the WLL was successfully performed with instillation of 25 mL of 37 °C normal saline in each lung at a time. In addition, WLL was performed with gentle suctioning using a syringe, because positioning the patient in the Trendelenburg and anti-Trendelenburg positions did not result in adequate draining of the saline from the lungs. The fluid collected was initially pink and turbid but it cleared up with time (Additional file , Fig. ). The left and right lungs were rinsed with a total of 3100 mL warm saline over the course of the 210-minute procedure. Five days after the procedure, the infant was successfully weaned from ECMO and her respiratory status improved. The patient had been stable on CPAP provided through the tracheostomy for a few weeks. Head MRI revealed a small, subacute-appearing ischemic lesion in the left cerebellum. However, due to the gradual recurrence of respiratory deterioration one month after the first procedure, the pulmonary lavage was repeated under general anesthesia on mechanical ventilation using a selective bronchial blocker. The patient tolerated the procedure well and she was weaned to CPAP on the following day.
Simultaneously, at 11 month-of-age, the patient was started on regular subcutaneous GM-CSF administration at a dose of 10 µg/kg/day. During the subcutaneous GM-CSF administrations, she developed several episodes of fever and leukocytosis (peak leukocyte count of 20 × 109/L) without identifiable infectious etiology. Her respiratory status also improved on CPAP and she was weaned to low-flow oxygen supplementation through the tracheal cannula and was transferred to the Pulmonology Unit. Two months later she was transferred to a local hospital requiring BiPAP noninvasive ventilation at night, while on low-flow oxygen support during daytime. At 22 months of age, she was switched to inhaled GM-CSF (sargramostin, 125 µg/day) administration followed by the cessation of recurrent fever and leukocytosis episodes. Subsequently, we were able to completely wean her from daytime respiratory support.