A 53-year-old male, with a history of a squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip was admitted to our surgical department for an asymptomatic retroperitoneal mass. The lesion was incidentally discovered on a thoraco-abdomino and pelvic CT scan done as part of the follow-up of the squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip. No abnormal clinical findings were recorded, notably no palpable mass. Routine blood investigations including hematological and biochemical tests were normal. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), CEA and CA 19-9 were unremarkable. The Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed a homogenous enhancing mass lesion in the retroperitoneum, with lobulated contours measuring 26 × 88 × 150 mm, massively calcified with significant collateral venous circulation .
Based on the radiological findings, a provisional diagnosis of atypical retroperitoneal liposarcoma was made and the patient was prepared for surgical resection. The mass being calcified and hypervascular, it was considered any form of pre-operative biopsy (even fine needle) might be difficult and carry a high risk of bleeding.
At laparotomy, a retroperitoneal large mass of size 15 cm × 8 cm was found. The tumor was limited posteriorly by the psoas muscle, forward by the caecum and laterally by the parietal muscles. The retroperitoneal mass was widely dissected and completely excised along with its capsule, carefully and without complications .
The microscopic examination revealed an enlarged lymphnode composed of multiple follicles of various sizes with involuted germinal centers . The immunohistochemical study revealed CD20 (+, follicles), CD3 (+, parafollicles) and Bc12 (+, follicles) . These findings were consistent with Castleman’s disease hyaline vascular variant.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the fourth postoperative day. He is now nine months post surgery and is well and without any evidence of disease. He is being followed-up at six monthly intervals.