A 19-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital in April 2009. Four years prior to this admission, she noticed mild pretibial edema. At that time, urinalysis showed proteinuria 3+. Blood pressure was normal. She was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome. Oral prednisone was initiated for 2 months with a dosage of 1 mg/kg per day, then tapered. The total period of prednisone treatment was 6 months. During this period, cyclophosphamide 100 mg per day orally was added for 10 days. The total cyclophosphamide dosage was 1 g. The patient did not improve with this regimen. During the next 3 years (2005–2008), she maintained stable renal function and normal blood pressure. Six months before admission (November 2008), hypertension developed at 150/90 mmHg. The 24-hour urinary protein was 8.8 g/d. Laboratory findings showed a serum total protein of 4.23 g/dL, serum albumin 2.46 g/dL, triglyceride 241 mg/dL, total cholesterol 350 mg/dL, HDL-C 71 mg/dL, and LDL-C 233 mg/dL. A complete blood count showed a hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dL, WBC counts 6.6×109/L, and platelet counts 130×109/L. Felodipine 5 mg per day was administered to keep blood pressure at a normal range. Just two months before admission (February 2009), she felt a severe headache, blurry vision, nausea, vomiting, and presented to a local hospital. On admission at that hospital, physical examination showed blood pressure was up to 220/160 mmHg, with facial pallor, and pitting edema of the lower extremities. Laboratory data showed a hemoglobin of 3.8 g/dL; WBC counts 3.75 × 109/L; platelet counts 29 × 109/L; urinary protein 7.90 g/d; total bilirubin 29.9 umol/L; indirect bilirubin 28.2 umol/L; ALT 22 U/L; AST 36 U/L; LDH 1172 U/L; ALB 2.66 g/dL; urea nitrogen 52 mg/dL; serum creatinine 3.2 mg/dL; triglyceride 253 mg/dL; total cholesterol 273 mg/dL, HDL-C 46 mg/dL, LDL-C 200 mg/dL, VLDL-C 50 mg/dL, apoA1 0.90 mg/dL, apoB 1.21 mg/dL. ANA, ds-DNA, ANCA, anti-GBM antibody and anticardiolipin were all negative. HIV, HBV and HCV tests were all negative. Urine HCG was negative. A brain CT scan did not reveal any abnormality. The patient did not have any evidence of malignancy, pregnancy or abortion. During this period, she had not experienced diarrhea or infections. There was no family history of renal diseases, hypertension or hematologic diseases.
A kidney biopsy was performed. Light and electron microscopic examinations of renal biopsy material showed a marked dilatation of the capillary lumen in the glomeruli, and the presence of laminated intraglomerular lipoprotein thrombi due to deposition of lipid droplets within the glomerular capillaries . Immunofluorescence showed IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, C1q were all negative. Oil Red O staining was positive . Electron microscopy showed that the glomerular capillary lumina were occupied by granules of various sizes . She was diagnosed with LPG and treated with antihypertensive drugs (Nifidipine 60 mg + Prazosin 12 mg + Metoprolol 50 mg per day) and Simvastatin. At the same time, she received hemodialysis and red blood cell transfusion. Over the next four weeks, blood pressure was observed to be under control (average level 135/80 mmHg). Anemia and thrombocytopenia were improved. Hemoglobin was 7.8 g/dL, platelet counts were 110 × 109/L; albumin also increased to 3.17 g/dL; but renal insufficiency was aggravated, with urea nitrogen 24 mg/dL, and serum creatinine 7.2 mg/dL. Urine output decreased progressively to anuria. The patient was then transferred to our hospital.
Because LPG has rarely developed into irreversible acute renal failure, a re-examination of the renal biopsy specimens was performed. Among the 17 glomeruli sampled for light microscopy, three were globally sclerotic, and one was segmental sclerotic. The size of the glomeruli varied greatly. The seven greatly-enlarged glomeruli showed severe dilated capillaries filled with a foamy, whorled, mesh-like material in the glomerular capillary lumens. The other six moderately-enlarged glomeruli showed extensive ischemic changes, retraction of the glomerular tuft and marked thickening and wrinkling of the capillary wall . Even in the ischemic glomeruli, a thrombus-like material was observed in some capillaries, so the sizes of these glomeruli were still larger than normal glomeruli, which made the ischemic appearance of these glomeruli hard to identify. Double-contour formations were obvious. Vascular lesions were severe. Swelling of endothelial cells and fluffy masses (fibrin) in arterioles caused narrowing and closure of vascular lumens . Thrombosis was found in the arterioles, and it extended to the vascular pole of the adjacent ischemic glomerulus, without inflammatory cell infiltration . Under electron microscopy, the glomerular capillaries contained large, intraluminal, finely vacuolated extracellular masses. The vacuoles were predominantly electron lucent, suggesting lipid “thrombi.” The subendothelial zone was focally expanded by electron-lucent material . LPG with TMA was diagnosed. In our hospital, funduscopic exams revealed significant cotton exudates in both retinas. Serum apoE was 7.2 mg/dL. Serum ADAMTS13 and fecal Shiga toxin were not measured. Although she received fenofibrate (200 mg per day), hemodialysis, antihypertensive therapy and other supportive therapy, renal failure could not be improved.
Genomic DNA of the patient was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes using DNA-isolation kits (TaKaRa, Ostu, Japan). The patient, her sister, and her mother were screened for mutations in the coding sequence of APOE. Four pairs of primers (see Additional file : Appendix Table S1) were designed with Primer Premier 5.0 to amplify all exons and adjacent intron/exon boundaries of APOE (reference sequence GenBank accession no. NM_000041). PCR products containing the sequences of exons 1, 2, and 3 were sequenced directly in both directions, and that of exon 4 was cloned into the pGEM-T vector (Promega, Madison, WI), and sequenced on an ABI377A DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). APOE Kyoto mutation was identified . Family study showed that her mother also carried the APOE Kyoto mutation, but she did not present any evidence of renal dysfunction, proteinuria or thrombocytopenia. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis for APOE genotype showed these APOE Kyoto mutations were located in ε3 . Her sister did not carry APOE Kyoto. Written informed consents were obtained from the patient and her relatives prior to commencement of the genetic analysis.