A 14-year-old Caucasian Spanish male, right hand dominant presented to the emergency department after falling on his left hand with elbow extension. On examination there was gross deformity and swelling on his elbow. There were no external wounds and no neurovascular involvement. No abnormalities were found in ipsilateral shoulder and wrist joints.
Plain radiographs of the elbow revealed a posterolateral dislocation of the elbow . Closed reduction with traction in prone position was performed immediately. After initial reduction, the patient was neurovascular intact, but referred no pain improvement. Examination revealed no possibility of passive flexion or extension through the elbow joint and valgus instability. Post-reduction radiographs showed incongruity of the joint with an entrapment fragment into the humero-cubital joint . A CT scan was performed revealing the intraarticular fragment belonging to the medial epicondyle .
After written consent from the parents, surgery was performed. The patient was placed in supine position with the injured elbow on a hand table under general anaesthesia, with a tourniquet and prophylactic antibiotic administration. A medial approach to the elbow joint was performed, and the ulnar nerve was identified and protected. A tear of the origin of the wrist flexors on the medial epicondyle was observed. The epicondylar fragment was removed from the joint and fixed anatomically into its origin with a 3.0 mm diameter cannulated lag screw (Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland), under fluoroscopy control . Rigid fixation was achieved. The joint was inspected to be free of any small fragments of bone. Intraoperative testing revealed stability of the joint in the entire range of motion and varus and valgus stress. Postoperatively, a posterior above-elbow splint with the elbow joint in 90º of flexion and neutral rotation was applied for 7 days followed by early motion and a physiotherapy program to improve the muscle strength. At 3 months of follow up the patient had almost full range of motion with only a lack of 5 degrees of extension and slight atrophy of biceps and triceps muscles. At 6 months he restored full range of motion and muscle strength.
At final follow up at one year postoperatively there was full range of motion with no pain or instability, and no valgus or varus deformity was observed.