A 67-year-old man was referred to the general practice department of our hospital due to subxiphoid pain. The patient was emergently admitted to our hospital. He had a 7-day history of eating fish. Before emergency admission, no special treatment was performed, except for an abdominal CT at the local hospital. He had a medical history of penicillin anaphylaxis. On emergency admission, his body temperature was normal. On the evening of admission, relevant laboratory investigations, such as routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, and inflammatory proteins were performed. Upon physical examination, the patient’s right upper quadrant was mildly tender to palpation without rebound tenderness. The white blood cell count was 18,150/μL (91.1% neutrophils). The C-reactive protein level was 125 mg/L. Serum bilirubin was normal. Glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, and glutamic-pyruvic transaminase levels were 42 U/L, and 65 U/L respectively. On the first day after admission, considering that the patient had elevated inflammatory proteins and leukocytes, we performed a chest CT to see if there was a lung infection. Chest CT was also done as a routine test because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Chest CT revealed an infectious lesion in the upper lobe of the left lung with segmental atelectasis. On the second day after admission, we decided to perform a contrast-enhanced abdominal CT to better understand the patient’s abdominal cavity situation. The contrast-enhanced CT revealed two linear dense shadows in the gastric cardia, one of which penetrated through the gastric wall and was adjacent to the caudate lobe of the liver, accompanied by inflammatory changes in the caudate lobe. A patchy low-density shadow with enhanced edges measuring 41 mm × 38 mm was observed . To further understand and clarify the depth and localization of the caudate lobe mass, we decided to perform endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) examination under sedation. The EUS under sedation showed mixed echo lesions in the hepatogastric space . Combined with the patient’s history, there was a possibility of foreign body wrapping, however, the EUS was unable to detect any lesions in the gastric wall . Blood culture results did not detect bacteria 2 days after admission. The results of the examination interfered with our judgment.
On the third day after admission, we also performed upper gastrointestinal radiography (iodinated water) examination to further confirm the presence of foreign material on the gastrointestinal tract, but the results did not reveal obvious leakage of contrast medium in the esophagus and stomach.
Based on the patient’s history, signs and symptoms, and auxiliary examination results, we made a definite diagnosis of liver abscess caused by a fishbone piercing through the gastric wall and penetrating the caudate lobe.
On day 4 of hospitalization, we performed a model reconstruction of the surrounding liver before surgery to better evaluate the general situation .
On the 5th day after hospitalization, we decided to perform a 3D laparoscopic partial resection of the caudate lobe of the liver, incision and drainage of the liver abscess, and repair of the gastric perforation.
Laparoscopic exploration revealed no significant ascites in the abdominal cavity, the liver was soft in consistency, and no significant sclerosis or tumor lesions were found. After exposing the caudate lobe, a sigmoidal fishbone could be seen outside the caudate lobe, and it was connected to the lesser curvature of the stomach .
The liver surface was covered with white pus. Inflammation, edema, and adhesions were observed in the lesser curvature of the stomach penetrated by fish bones, and perforation was observed. No other abnormalities were observed. Liver abscess, foreign body, and gastric perforation were diagnosed.
During the procedure, firstly, we cut the ligamentum teres, the falciform ligament, the left part of the coronary ligament, and the left triangular ligament. Then we turned the left lateral lobe of the liver to the right, incised the lesser omentum close to the surface of the liver, exposed the caudate lobe, and pulled out the fishbone under direct laparoscopic vision. We also removed parenchyma with a radius of 1.5 cm around the fishbone until the abscess cavity was exposed. The pus in the abscess cavity was aspirated, and part of it was sent for bacteriological examination; at the same time, the lesser omentum around the caudate lobe, close to the lesser omentum at the lesser curvature and lower esophageal-cardia was resected posteriorly up to the anterior abdominal aorta, and repeated exploration along the lower esophageal-cardia revealed no leakage. After a complete examination of the condition in the abdominal cavity, the specimen was intactly removed. The first porta hepatis and inferior hepatic vein were not blocked during the operation. Postoperative histopathological examination revealed a large number of neutrophils infiltrated into some areas of liver tissue, along with necrosis, which was consistent with the changes observed in liver abscesses. The patient underwent iodine hydrography on the 4th day after surgery, and the examination results showed no significant contrast agent leakage in the esophagus and stomach. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged on the 9th postoperative day (Additional file ).