A 20-year-old white woman arrived at the Emergency Room (ER) complaining of sudden onset severe left flank and lower left quadrant (LLQ) abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Her height and body weight were 180 cm and 63.5 kg (BMI of 19.5). Her history revealed that at the onset of pain, she believed she was suffering from severe menstrual cramps. The pain was not relieved by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) even at higher doses. Eventually she became nauseated and started vomiting. She admitted to having felt increasingly more nauseated for several months prior, but had not vomited until the day she arrived at the ER. Her past clinical history included type IV (Graf classification) congenital bilateral developmental dysplasia of the hip diagnosed at birth (now resolved), adenoidectomy (3 years of age), and severe menstrual pain starting at 15 years of age, which had increased in severity over the course of the subsequent 4 years. There was no other remarkable clinical history, injury, or accident.
She was afebrile, and laboratory results were unremarkable with the exception of a white blood cell (WBC) count of 13 and gross hematuria with significant WBC in her urine. On physical examination, her abdomen was very tender in her left flank, LLQ, and pelvic area. She denied burning during urination and frequency. A pelvic ultrasound (US) was read as unremarkable. No other tests were ordered. She was released with the diagnosis of cystitis/UTI and prescribed ciprofloxacin, ibuprofen, oxycodone, and ondansetron.
Four days later she returned to the ER complaining once again of severe abdominal pain, but now also vomiting violently. The pain was no longer localized to just her left flank and LLQ, but had generalized to her right upper quadrant (RUQ) and periumbilical region. Repeat bloodwork revealed that WBC was now 10, but serum amylase was 220 and lipase was 120. Urine analysis still showed some red blood cells (RBC) and WBC. A CT with intravenously administered contrast was ordered and was read as unremarkable. An abdominal US showed a left-sided kidney stone. A pelvic US showed a right-sided ovarian cyst. A US of her gall bladder revealed no calculi or pathology.
Three days after passing the kidney stone, she had an increased feeling of swelling, pressure, and pain in her left flank. A ureteroscopy was performed to confirm the absence of any pathology. Her left ureter had minimal reflux, but otherwise no abnormalities were noted. A second CT scan was performed, but again no obvious pathology was noted.
With no improvement 2 weeks later, the decision was made to perform an exploratory laparoscopy, which revealed severe pelvic congestion as well as small amounts of endometriosis. Her appendix was thickened and had an appendicolith and was removed. Repeat bloodwork showed that her amylase and lipase levels had returned to normal. She was discharged the same day.
Two weeks after the laparoscopy when there was still no improvement in the pain, nausea, and anorexia and because she started experiencing post-prandial satiety, an endoscopy was performed. It revealed a moderate dilation of her duodenum as well as fluid in her stomach despite the fact that she had not eaten or drunk for more than 24 hours. The findings from the endoscopy prompted a review of the images from the initial CT, and this time it was determined that her duodenum was being compressed by an external structure. An enterography and a barium swallow confirmed the constriction of the duodenum by the SMA, and she was finally given the diagnosis of SMAS. Despite the fact that she had already suffered a net weight loss of 8 kg, the option to treat the disorder conservatively by enteral or parenteral feeding was not considered since she was of normal weight when the symptoms started and there was little expectation that weight gain would resolve the issue. She underwent a Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy. An iodine swallow 3 days post-surgery showed that fluid moved freely through the anastomosed areas. She was discharged 4 days later, able to tolerate soft foods.
Four weeks after the duodenojejunostomy, the pain in her left flank became even more severe, and she also started experiencing urinary hesitancy as well as pain in both flanks and her pelvic region during urination and bowel movements. The severity of the pain in her left flank increased even more during the week of her menstrual cycle. Another careful review of the very first CT scan performed at the beginning of the onset of symptoms led to the conclusion that her SMA was also compressing her LRV, her left ovarian vein was engorged, and the severe pelvic congestion, initially discovered during the laparoscopy, was also visible. A selective venography of her LRV showed significant stenosis of the LRV, a markedly enlarged ovarian vein with retrograde flow into her pelvis, and multiple enlarged pelvic veins. The pressure gradient between the renal side of the vein and the IVC side of the vein was 5 mm Hg. These findings established the diagnosis of NCS.
Eleven weeks after the duodenojejunostomy, she underwent an LRV transposition in which her adrenal vein and the ovarian vein were also tied off. Following this second surgery she began to improve considerably. One month after surgery her left flank and RUQ pain were significantly decreased, and though the nausea persisted, she was able to eat without vomiting and started to regain the weight she lost.
Eight months after the Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy and 4 months after the LRV transposition, a CT showed patent anastomoses, reduction in the number of pelvic varices, and reduced diameter of her ovarian vein. She was able to eat with minimal GI disturbance and had regained 5 kg.