A 45-years-old man who denied systemic disease presented progressive four limbs soreness 4 months before admission. He developed nuchal soreness at first then soreness radiated to bilateral shoulders and bilateral upper arms. His muscle twitching insidiously developed on the bilateral upper limbs, lips, and bilateral shoulders one month after symptoms onset. He also noticed numbness from the right distal fingers. Gradually, both his lower legs exhibited similar symptoms in the following months. Moreover, his muscle started to cramp, especially in bilateral thighs and calves, and his toes frequently encountered flexion cramps. His lower limbs became weak three days before admission and he had difficulties in walking for a long distance, standing for a long time, and climbing upstairs. He also had progressive four limbs twitching, cramps, fullness sensation, and pain that bothered his daily activity and interrupted his sleep. On neurological examination, he had proximal muscle weakness of four limbs with a Medical Research Council’s scale grade 4. He also had a positive Gowers’ sign. We noticed fasciculation and myokymia in his four limbs, especially in bilateral calf muscles. His cranial nerve function, sensation including thermal and proprioception, coordination, and deep tendon reflexes remained intact.
Routine blood analysis showed mild elevation of liver enzymes (Aspartate transaminase 47 U/L, normal ≦34 U/L; Alanine aminotransferase 105 U/L, normal ≦36 U/L), creatine kinase (302 U/L, normal range: 20–200 U/L), and lactate dehydrogenase (344 U/L, normal range: 98 ~ 192 U/L). Other serum examinations including tumor marker (cancer antigen 19–9, carcinoembryonic antigen, prostate-specific antigen, alpha-fetoprotein), thyroid function and adrenal function, antinuclear antibody, heavy metals (copper, zinc, lead, calcium), hepatitis B, and hepatitis C titer were in the normal ranges. His cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed normal cellular count, protein, and sugar levels.
Electromyography (EMG) studies showed spontaneous motor unit discharge including fasciculation, neuromyotonic discharge, and myokymic discharge (triplet and doublet) at rest . High-rate (50 Hz) repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) test showed an incremental response (102%) at the left abductor digiti minimi muscle, which suggested presynaptic neuromuscular junction dysfunction. .
Autoantibody to acetylcholine receptor was negative. Moreover, we cooperate with UniPharma company and used the cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay (EUROIMMUN, Lubeck, Germany) to detect serum antibody, which showed positive LGI1 (1:10, results with a titer 1:< 10 were considered negative) and CASPR2 (1:100, results with a titer 1:< 100 were considered negative) antibodies. The whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan showed an enhancing mass lesion (8.7 × 3.9 cm) at anterior mediastinum, suspected malignant thymoma with great vessel attachment, and tumor seeding at right pleural and right-side pericardium . Positron emission tomography scan showed the tumor involving the anterior mediastinum, right pleura, and diaphragm, and bilateral neck lymph node lesions suspected reactive or metastasis . The pathologic report of CT-guided biopsy was consistent with thymoma (WHO type B2). The clinical stage showed Masaoka stage IVa, and American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage IV (T4N2M1). The oncologist suggested concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT) with chemotherapy (doxorubicin, cisplatin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide [ADOC]) every 3 weeks, and local radiotherapy focusing on anterior mediastinum.
However, the patient’s neurologic symptoms persisted after one course of ADOC treatment. Under the diagnosis of paraneoplastic-related Isaacs’ syndrome, he then received a 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, total 2 g/kg). Medications including tizanidine, baclofen, gabapentin, phenytoin, oxycodone, oxcarbazepine, fentanyl, codeine, and morphine were tried for muscle cramp and pain control. Mexiletine was also added for his cramps. However, his symptoms including pain, muscle twitching, and cramps persisted. His muscle cramp and pain improved only after high dose prednisolone treatment (50 mg/day) and then gradually subsided 4 months later.
Follow-up chest CT after four courses of ADOC treatment showed that thymoma at anterior mediastinum regressed partially (8.7 cm → 4.5 cm) and the right pleural masses disappeared totally. Follow-up anti-LGI1 and anti-CASPR2 autoantibodies also turned negative. The high rate RNS test showed no more incremental change. .
His steroid dose was tapered in the next 5 months. Some muscle twitching showed up again when the prednisolone was tapered to 5 mg in three out of every seven days. Follow-up serum VGKC complex antibodies assay showed positive LGI1 antibody (1:10) while CASPR2 antibody remained undetectable. Chest CT showed an enlarged anterior mass (4.5 cm → 5.7 cm), either post-radiation changes or disease progression. Prednisolone was increased to 60 mg per day, meanwhile, chemotherapy with ADOC continued. His symptoms then subsided again.