A 29-year-old Sri Lankan woman who was previously of good health presented with newly diagnosed hypertension and several recent onset lower limb ulcers which were concluded to be possible vasculitic ulcers following a dermatological review. She had no other symptoms or features of any connective tissue disorder, such as SLE, scleroderma, dermatomyositis or polymyositis. Her examination revealed her blood pressure to be 210/140mmHg. Initial investigations revealed her hemoglobin level to be 9g/dL, with a normal platelet count. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 78mm/hr. Her activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), immune screen, including anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies test results were negative. Her urine full report revealed microscopic hematuria and her serum creatinine level was 132μmol/L (normal range: 53 to 116). Her renal and mesenteric angiogram test results were normal. With a probable diagnosis of small- or medium-vessel vasculitis, a renal biopsy was performed which revealed mesangial hypercellularity, two arteries with fresh thrombi, which was in keeping with the suspected diagnosis of vasculitis. Her immunofluorescence results were negative for immunoglobulin (IgG) and C3, with IgA and IgM 1+ fine granules seen in her capillaries. Immunosuppressive therapy was initiated, however, she was a poorly compliant patient with poor compliance to treatment and follow-up procedures.
One year later, she presented with body weakness on her left side, and her computed tomography (CT) brain scan revealed a small acute right parietal intracerebral hemorrhage, which was attributed to her uncontrolled blood pressure. While in the ward she developed an antero-septal ST elevation myocardial infarction, and her coronary angiogram revealed a single 100% occlusion of her left anterior descending artery. Subsequently, over the next few weeks she developed swelling in her right lower limb. These new symptoms prompted a re-evaluation of the previous diagnosis. A duplex scan of her lower limb venous system revealed venous thrombosis in both of her lower limbs, mainly on the right side. A CT cavogram revealed a 4.8cm segment of thrombosis of her inferior vena cava, extending from just below the renal vein up to the bifurcation. Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain (performed later) revealed multiple small cerebral infarcts with complete resolution of the previous hemorrhage. There were multiple filling defects in her left and right internal carotid arteries, left posterior cerebral artery, left transverse sinus and bilateral sigmoid sinuses, suggestive of thrombi formation. The antiphospholipid antibody (aPL) screening test results were positive for IgG anticardiolipin antibodies with lupus anticoagulant, and a final diagnosis of primary APS was made.