A 74-year-old woman with a 40-year smoking history was found to have a right upper lobe lung nodule that was discovered on routine surveillance computed tomography (CT) scan. The imaging studies described a mass with a dominant 2.1 × 1.7 cm solid component . The patient underwent an endobronchial biopsy of the right upper lung mass which revealed a spindle cell tumor in the bronchial submucosa with minimal variability in nuclear size arranged in whorls and fascicles with very rare mitotic activity. A preliminary diagnosis of low-grade spindle cell neoplasm was provided and the patient was treated with lobectomy to obtain a negative margin. The lobe was received intact, and sectioning revealed a 1.7 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm white, bulging mass that was abutting the pleural surface . Histologic sections of the entire tumor recapitulated biopsy findings, showing whorls and fascicles of primitive and monomorphic spindle cells with minimal mitotic activity (< 1 per 10 high-powered fields) and no necrosis . On high-power magnification, the tumor cells showed very mild nuclear size variety and occasional overlap with ovoid to cigar-shaped nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and ample eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell borders. The tumor originated in the bronchial wall and showed an infiltrative pattern surrounding bronchial cartilage and submucosal glands. Focal ulceration into the bronchial mucosa was also noted. A panel of immunohistochemical stains was performed which revealed patchy positive staining for smooth muscle actin (SMA), and negative staining for cytokeratins (CK AE1/AE3, CK8/18), S100, CD34, ALK-1, desmin, myoD1, and myogenin. The proliferative rate was relatively low, with a Ki-67 of ~ 5%. A peculiar previously undescribed finding was the presence of scattered periodic acid Schiff (PAS) positive crystalloid structures located throughout the tumor . These are of unclear origin but may represent entrapped concretions of normal submucosal gland secretions or material produced by the tumor.
Molecular testing was performed using the PGDx elio tissue complete panel (Labcorp) and the Archer FusionPlex panel (IDT) for assessment of sequence variants and rearrangements. No variants of known or possible clinical significance were found, and the tumor was shown to be microsatellite stable with a mutational burden of 4.6 mutations per megabase. The fusion panel revealed an in-frame fusion of MEIS1 (Chr2: 66,670,180) and NCOA2 (Chr8: 71,060,718) in 267 reads using genome assembly GRCh37/hg19 resulting in a fusion of MEIS1 exon 6 to NCOA2 exon 12 (MEIS1 NM_002398.3, NCOA2 NM_001321703.2) . Additional imaging studies, including CT and PET scans, were performed and showed no other evidence of disease. Taken together, the imaging, histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular findings led to a diagnosis of a primary lung low-grade undifferentiated spindle cell sarcoma with MEIS1::NCOA2 fusion. Continued follow-up from diagnosis to present (2 years) has still revealed no additional site of primary and no disease recurrence.