A 15-years-old girl with an underlying history of epilepsy was sent to our hospital because of intermittent mood dysregulation and agitation for 4 months. The patient had no family history of epilepsy or autoimmune disease. She experienced her first episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure, which lasted for over 30 minutes, at the age of 8 years. She was diagnosed as having encephalopathy related to Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. She then received intravenous methylprednisolone, followed by a short course of low dose oral prednisolone. No further seizure was noted after the treatment, and the patient was lost to follow-up with no further medical treatment. No personality change or cognitive dysfunction was noted in the intervening years.
One year before her current admission, the patient noticed a progressive decline in confidence, insomnia, and poor memory, leading to difficulties in her interpersonal relationships and academic performance. She suffered from low mood, general fatigue, poor concentration and several somatic complaints such as headaches and extremity weakness. She visited a psychiatric clinic and took bupropion 150mg, and aripiprazole 20mg/day. Three episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizure occurred during her depressive periods, which prompted her to seek medical attention. She underwent electroencephalography (EEG) at our pediatric neurology clinic, and the EEG results revealed right centroparietal spikes. She was then administered a regimen of topiramate 200mg/day, and she claimed to have complete remission of her mood and could return to school after treatments.
Four months before the current admission, the patient complained of depressed mood, insomnia, poor appetite, poor concentration, and thoughts of helplessness. Moreover, she presented with sudden-onset agitation and self-harm behaviors, such as head banging or arm scratching, which she could not recall afterwards. The episodes occurred 3 times a day and lasted for 10 to 30 minutes each time. An aura involving machine sounds or flashes of light, occasionally preceded the mood and behavioral changes. She was admitted to our pediatric ward under the suspicion of seizure-induced behavioral change. Lamotrigine 10mg/day was added to her existing regimen of topiramate. A comprehensive neurological survey revealed no structural lesion on her brain magnetic resonance imaging scans and no abnormal findings in a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination, but her 24-hour EEG revealed epileptiform discharges during the mood swings. Immunologic screening showed positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA, 1: 1280 speckled) and mildly decreased C3. Thyroid function, ovarian sonography, and tumor markers were within normal range. Surveys for viral infections were all negative. Under the impression of immune-mediated encephalopathy, methylprednisolone pulse therapy 1g/day was administered for 3 days, followed by oral prednisolone. However, her mood remission was only partial, and the involuntary agitation and self-harm behaviors occurred 2 months after discharge. She could not attend school owing to her depression and behaviors. When she later developed Steven-Johnson syndrome, lamotrigine was stopped and was replaced by valproic acid.
Because of her aggravated clinical agitation and self-harm behaviors, the patient was again admitted to our pediatric ward. Prolonged QTc (479ms) was noted during evaluation for chest tightness. EEG revealed paroxysmal focal spikes over the right frontoparietal area. Her serum sample was positive for ANA with a titer of 1:1280, suggesting autoimmune encephalitis. She received topiramate 150mg/day and valproic acid 400mg/day for epilepsy control. She also received fluoxetine 10mg/day and aripiprazole 5mg/day for depression. Further survey for an autoimmune etiology revealed positive serum anti-SSA antibodies (67.2 U/mL), positive serum cryoglobulin IgG, IgM, and positive ANA in her CSF . Anti-Cardiolipin IgG, IgM, ribosome-P, anti-β2-glycoprotein I IgG, anti-RNP, anti-SMD, MPO, PR3, rheumatic factor, anti-double stranded DNA, C3, and C4 levels were within normal limits, and HBsAg, anti-HBs, anti-HBc, anti-TPO, anti-THYG, anti-TSHR, anti-HCV levels were all negative. Anti-neuronal autoantibodies including aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibodies, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies, glutamate acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibody, anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antibody, Voltage gated potassium channel (VGKC)-associated protein (CASPR2) antibodies, VGKC-associated protein (LGI1) antibodies, Glutamate receptors (type AMPA1 and AMPA2) antibodies, γ-aminobutyric acid type B (GABAB) receptor antibodies, Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase-like protein 6 (DPPX) antibodies were all negative. In accordance with her symptoms of dry eyes and dry mouth, the Schirmer’s test was positive (2mm). Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed cortical hypometabolism at the bilateral prefrontal, bilateral parietal, and bilateral visual cortices. We assessed her CSF again for anti-SSA antibodies and had a positive finding (0.4 U/mL). The CSF/serum ratio of anti-SSA antibodies (0.006) was three times higher than that of IgG (2.88 mg/dl/1470 mg/dl = 0.002). This result suggested local production of antibodies in the CNS rather than only passive transmission of antibodies from serum . On the basis of patient’s clinical symptoms of ocular and oral dryness, positive findings for serum and CSF anti-SSA antibodies, and the Schirmer’s test results, SS was diagnosed in accordance with the 2017 ACR-EULAR classification criteria .
Under the impression of SS-related autoimmune encephalitis and QTc prolongation , intravenous methylprednisolone 1g/day was administered for 3 days. The frequency and intensity of agitation decreased from approximately eight times per day to twice a day. After the QTc returned to normal, rituximab 500mg was infused intravenously. She had no further agitation or self-harm behaviors after the treatment of methylprednisolone and rituximab. We kept her antidepressants and antipsychotics and discharged her. She did not exhibit any involuntary agitations during outpatient follow-up. The patient reported an improvement in mood and began to bring life back on track. showed specific historical events and information in sequence.