A 28-year-old Dalit Nepalese man came to our emergency department (ED) with sudden onset throbbing occipital headache, which was severe in intensity, continuous and associated with difficulty in vision followed by right-sided retro-orbital pain, three episodes of non-projectile vomiting, and dizziness of 3 days’ duration. He denied loss of consciousness, abnormal body movements, trauma, limbs weakness, altered sensorium, chest pain, palpitation, fever, and cough. No history of diabetes, hypertension, or hyperlipidemia was noted. He was a current smoker of tobacco and an occasional alcohol consumer. No significant family history was noted.
In our ED, his blood pressure was 150/100 mmHg; he had an irregularly irregular pulse rate of 110 per minute, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, and body temperature of 38.0 °C. He did not have pallor, icterus, lymphadenopathy, cyanosis, edema, or features of dehydration. His mental state examination did not reveal any deficits. On eye examination, there was bilateral proptosis without impairment of extraocular muscles. His pupils were equally rounded, regular, and reactive bilaterally. Direct and consensual light reflexes were intact. He had right homonymous hemianopia on visual field examination but his color vision was intact. An axial non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) revealed a hypodense area on his right occipital lobe consistent with recent posterior cerebral artery (PCA) infarct . He was managed with aspirin, atorvastatin, and pain medications.
Two days later, he developed increased severity of headache and sudden onset left flank pain which was severe, non-radiating associated with nausea but without urgency, dysuria, hematuria, fever, and decreased urine output with no history of trauma. A laboratory examination showed normal lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and white blood cell (WBC) count. His blood urea nitrogen was 4 μmol/L (normal 1.6 to 7 μmol/L ), creatinine 85.0 μmol/L (normal 60 to 130 μmol/L), serum sodium 130 mEq/L (normal 135 to 146 mEq/L), and potassium 3.5 mEq/L (normal 3.5 to 4.2 mEq/L); urine analysis showed WBC of 1 to 2 per high-power field (HPF), no red blood cells (RBCs) per HPF, epithelial cells of 4 to 6 per HPF, and proteinuria (albumin 1+) without any casts and crystals. His platelet count was 212,000/mm3. His bleeding time was 2.15 minutes (normal 1 to 5 minutes), clotting time 6.30 minutes (normal 4 to 9 minutes), prothrombin time 15 seconds (control 14 seconds) with international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.07, and activated partial thromboplastin time was 30 seconds (control 30 seconds). A thyroid function test showed: free triiodothyronine 13.7 pmol/L (normal 4.26 to 8.1 pmol/L), free thyroxine 70.4 pmol/L (normal 10.2 to 28.2 pmol/L), and thyroid-stimulating hormone <0.015 μIU/ml (normal 0.46 to 4.68 μIU/ml). A liver function test revealed serum bilirubin 12.6 μmol/L (normal 3 to 21 μmol/L), direct bilirubin 2.3 μmol/L (normal 0 to 6 μmol/L), serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 28 U/L (normal 5 to 40 U/L), serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 51 U/L (normal 5 to 40 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 179 U/L (normal 64 to 306 U/L); his serology was negative for HIV, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs Ag), and anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed AF and two-dimensional cardiac echocardiography showed dilated cardiac chambers, moderate left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF = 35 to 40 %), and mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation without clots, vegetations, or pericardial effusion.
Axial contrast-enhanced CT images of his abdomen and pelvis showed a non-enhancing, hypodense, sharply demarcated, wedge-shaped area involving the cortex of his left kidney suggestive of left renal infarction ; this was followed by a CT angiogram of his abdomen revealing multiple wedge-shaped infarcts in left renal parenchyma with occlusion in the interlobar branch of his left renal artery supplying the mid-pole . As more than half of his PCA territory was involved in a CT scan of his brain and he had new onset severe headache, a repeat axial non-contrast CT of his head was performed which showed grade II hemorrhagic transformation on his left occipital lobe precluding the use of urgent anticoagulation. Thrombectomy, endovascular thrombolysis, and surgical thrombolysis were not performed due to the situation of his thrombus and involvement of a relatively small-sized deep artery. He was managed conservatively. Once resolution of hemorrhagic transformation was confirmed with a repeat CT scan, he was started on warfarin for anticoagulation; he was carefully monitored for evidence of bleeding. His hyperthyroidism was managed with carbimazole and a beta blocker. Upon discharge, his symptoms were resolved and acute kidney injury had normalized.