A 58-year-old woman (height 163 cm, weight 52 kg, body mass index 19.6) with a diagnosis of spinal canal stenosis was admitted to an orthopedic hospital to undergo posterior lumbar interbody fusion. Her medical history included anterior cervical fusion 12 years previously without any anesthetic complications such as allergy or bronchial asthma. No full-time anesthesiologist was on staff at the hospital, so a part-time anesthesiologist was in charge of the anesthesia.
The patient had been fasting for 15 h, from dinner the night before surgery until entering the operating room (OR). Four hours before entering the OR, an intravenous infusion was started. The patient was administered ranitidine (150 mg orally) with a small amount of water 180 min before entering the OR.
Immediately before starting the anesthesia induction, the anesthesiologist reconfirmed the patient’s medical history and whether she had any allergies or bronchial asthma. The patient did not provide any new medical information. Electrocardiography, pulse oximetry (SpO2), noninvasive blood pressure, and capnometry were applied. After preoxygenation with 100% oxygen for 3 min, general anesthesia was induced with fentanyl 50 μg and propofol 100 mg. After confirming the patient’s spontaneous breathing cessation, assisted ventilation was initiated with a face mask, followed by rocuronium 50 mg. Immediately after that, the patient threw up a massive amount of watery vomit. The vomit in her oral cavity was immediately suctioned, and then her trachea was intubated. A small amount of watery vomit was suctioned through the endotracheal tube. Lung compliance was low with manual ventilation, and wheezing was heard on auscultation with an obstructive pattern on capnography. Bronchospasm due to aspiration was suspected, and treatment was initiated. Under anesthesia (sevoflurane 2% in oxygen 100%), her SpO2 remained above 98%. Hydrocortisone 100 mg and aminophylline 250 mg were administered by drip infusion. Forty-five minutes after the event, her wheezing disappeared, and mostly normal lung compliance returned. The scheduled surgery was postponed, the patient was awakened from anesthesia with the aid of sugammadex to antagonize rocuronium, and her trachea was extubated.
After returning to the ward, a more detailed medical history was obtained from the patient. She said that she usually had to drink a large amount of water to get food into her stomach. Therefore, she made it a daily habit to purge watery vomit before bed, as it would reflux when she lay down. Although she had an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy a few years prior, the physician had not pointed out anything unusual. Since then, she believed that this was a constitutional problem as opposed to a disease. The patient had not experienced any weight loss for the past few years.
Although no clear image of pneumonia was seen on a chest X-ray at the ward, ampicillin and sulbactam were administered for prevention. The patient was discharged the next day without any medical problems. Based on an overall assessment of the episode, we believed that this patient had esophageal achalasia and advised her to visit a gastroenterologist.
At the gastroenterology department in another hospital, fluid retention in the dilated esophagus was revealed by upper endoscopy and chest computed tomography (CT) . The esophagogram showed a dilated esophagus with a diameter of 32 mm and functional narrowing of the esophagogastric junction . Esophageal manometry showed the disappearance of primary peristaltic waves and the occurrence of simultaneous contraction waves. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with esophageal achalasia and underwent laparoscopic Heller myotomy with Dor fundoplication surgery. After the surgery, her subjective symptoms, including choking with food and daily vomiting before bed, disappeared. She was discharged on the sixth day after surgery. Three months later, she underwent posterior interbody fusion of the lumbar spine without any anesthetic complications.