A 53-year-old woman with a long medical history, including Crohn's disease with two intestinal surgeries (one of them due to an intestinal perforation), psoriatic arthritis and mild chronic renal failure was referred for consultation because of a solid mass on the left flank. The CT scan showed a subcutaneous tumor in the left lateral abdominal wall and multiple giant bilobar liver metastases which consisted in a 13.5 cm tumor in segment VII and a 9.5 cm tumor in segment IVb . The only related clinical record was the resection of a lipoma in that same area (left lateral abdominal wall) 12 years ago. An ultrasound-guided core-biopsy was performed on the subcutaneous lesion located in the left lumbar region and also on one of the focal lesions of the right hepatic lobe. Histologically, both samples were practically identical, which confirmed that the liver lesions were metastatic. The pathology showed a fusocellular proliferation of highly cellular mesenchymal lineage, with eosinophilic cytoplasm cells and ovoid nucleus with finely granular chromatin, without evident mitotic images. The Ki67 proliferative index was 20%. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for STATS6. After a multidisciplinary discussion, the preferred strategy proposed was an upfront resection of the primary tumor and liver metastases, without neoadjuvant chemo or radiotherapy due to lack of evidence as do its usefulness. The extend of the liver involvement precluded a complete resection in one procedure, so we designed a two stage strategy consisting in resection of the primary tumor and left hepatic metastases, followed by portal vein embolization and subsequent right hepatectomy. The liver function test prior to the surgery included a direct measure of the portal systemic gradient via transjugular catheter, and indocyanine green clearance (IGC) test, both favorable to perform a major resection (4 mmHg gradient; PDR 25; R15: 2). The first surgical procedure was carried out as planned, including metastasectomies of lesions located in segments IVa; IVb and particularly bulky one in segment I, and radiofrequency ablation of a lesion in segment II. Right portal vein embolization (PVE) was performed in the same hospital admission by interventional radiology using cyanoacrylate-lipiodol and particles (PVA: 350–500 and 500–700 microns). The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged at 7 postoperative day. The anatomopathological characteristics of these samples coincided with the findings described in the previous biopsies: a neoplasic mesenchymal proliferation, hypercellular, solid-growth, with a storiform pattern consisting of spindle cells with imprecise boundaries, with ovoid nuclei with finely granular chromatin, without atypia, which are accompanied by medium-sized blood vessels, some with deer horn morphology, branched, showing thin walls and unaltered endothelium. No vascular or perineural invasions were observed. A Ki67 proliferation rate of 15% was also noted, with a low rate of mitosis (2 mitosis/10HPF). Immunohistochemical staining remained positive for STAT6 and CD34 . A CT scan was performed one month after the PVE and the volume estimate of FLR was insufficient, (35%) . In the meantime the patient had severe Crohnʼs exacerbation which coursed with digestive bleeding and required hospitalisation for more than two weeks, intensive corticoid treatment and the commencement of biological therapy with Adalimumab. It was decided in the multidisciplinary committee to perform a TARE-Y90 on the right liver in order to avoid tumoral progression and to try to increase the FRLV . In the following months, the patient needed hospital admission due to a septic shock caused by an urinary tract infection. She also suffered malnutrition in the context of Crohn's disease and the second stage of the liver surgery was postponed for six months until the patient was sufficiently recovered. In the reevaluation study for the second liver surgery, the CT-scan showed voluminous hepatic masses in the right lobe with diameters up to 10 cm, particularly in the posterior sector with areas of necrosis and reduced contrast enhancement as a sign of response following modified RECIST criteria . There was no sign of recurrence in the remnant left lobe, nor distant metastases. The volumetric study showed an important left hepatic lobe hypertrophy (FLR 50%) . With this information, a right hepatectomy was planned. The surgery was particularly difficult mainly due to the adherent syndrome caused by previous surgeries. We utilized an anterior approach with hanging maneuver in order to avoid tumor spreading during the right liver lobe mobilization . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged at 7th postoperative day. The pathologic study showed images of necrosis representing up to 80% of the tumoral volume. The mesenchimal cells had few mitotic images, and were positive for CD34, BCL2, and STAT-6, with a proliferative index, measured with Ki67, of 10%. Currently, 30 months after the first liver surgery, the patient is asymptomatic and free of active disease.