An 8-month-old female spayed Burmese cat was referred for a 2-week history of polyuria and
polydipsia (PU/PD), progressive lethargy, reduced appetite and difficulty ambulating. The
cat was reportedly small at the time of adoption when compared with its litter mates. It was
routinely spayed 3 months prior to presentation, and was up to date with core vaccinations
and ecto-/endoparasite prophylaxis. There was no outdoor access. No access to toxins and no
history of trauma were reported; however, owing to hyporexia, its recent diet was
essentially just raw prawns. At the time of presentation to our referral facility, the cat
was receiving treatment with antibiotics (amoxycillin/clavulanate 16.6 mg/kg q12h PO
[Noroclav; Norbrook]) owing to suspicion of a urinary tract infection, which was based on
the identification of pyuria and bacteriuria by the referring general practitioner. No urine
specific gravity (USG) had been recorded at the time.
On physical examination the cat’s body condition score was 4/9, and there was a grade II/VI
systolic heart murmur with a point of maximal intensity localised to the left side. On
neurological examination the cat was mentally dull and had reduced pupillary light responses
bilaterally, absent menace response and no ability to track objects visually. These findings
could be suggestive of a lesion of the retina, optic tract, brainstem or visual cortex. The
fundic examination was unremarkable. There was normal proprioception but profound weakness
of all four limbs with reduced withdrawal reflexes, and ventroflexion of the neck. Using
Doppler measurement on the right front leg with a size three cuff, the mean systolic blood
pressure was 130 mmHg (normal range 125 ± 10.6).
Haematology, serum biochemistry and electrolyte tests were performed and revealed a marked
neutrophilia of 39.47 × 109/l (reference interval [RI] 1.48–10.29) with normal
haematocrit and platelet count, severe hypokalaemia of 2.4 mmol/l (RI 3.5–5.8), a
significant increase in creatine kinase of 1950 U/l (RI 0–314) and moderate azotaemia
characterised by increased urea at 24.9 mmol/l (RI 5.7–12.9) with normal creatinine.
A feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)/feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) test (IDEXX SNAP
FIV/FeLV Combo test) was negative. Urinalysis obtained by cystocentesis showed suboptimally
concentrated urine with a USG of 1.026, aciduria (pH 5), scant haematuria (presumed
iatrogenic due to the sampling technique) and trace proteinuria. The sediment was inactive
and urine bacterial culture was also negative at this time.
At this stage the most significant findings were considered to be the loss of vision, the
generalised weakness and the 2-week history of poor appetite and PU/PD. The generalised
weakness could be explained by the profound hypokalaemia. We considered the following broad
categories of differential diagnoses for hypokalaemia in a cat: reduced intake due to
hyporexia, gastrointestinal loss, renal loss (either through chronic kidney disease [CKD] or
a specific potassium-wasting nephropathy), or hyperaldosteronism. The neurological signs
were characterised by blindness, mental dullness and lower motor neuron tetraparesis. While
the lower motor neuron signs could be explained by hypokalaemia and there may have been
concurrent but unrelated central disease (eg, thiamine deficiency, cerebrovascular accident
and neoplasia), we also considered multifocal systemic diseases affecting the brain and the
neuromuscular unit, such as toxoplasmosis, feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) and
lymphoma.
In Australia, no commercial laboratories offer serum thiamine testing for cats with
reliably established RIs; however, there are well-described characteristic findings on MRI,
including bilaterally symmetrical foci of hyperintensity in the lateral geniculate nuclei,
caudal colliculi, medial vestibular nuclei and cerebellar nodulus. Ready MRI access was not available in this instance, so to investigate further a pre-
and post-intravenous (IV) contrast CT scan was performed. The images were submitted for
interpretation by a board-certified radiologist. The following abnormalities were identified
on the kidneys: the kidneys were bilaterally at the lower limit of normal renal size, there
was a right circumcaval ureter and subtle right renal subcapsular fluid (differentials
suggested by the radiologist included FIP, nephritis and renal lymphoma). There were no
structural changes of the gastrointestinal tract to explain excess potassium loss, and this
was considered unlikely in the absence of any gastrointestinal clinical signs. There were
also some likely incidental abnormalities identified: fusion of the thirteenth thoracic and
first lumbar vertebrae with focal scoliosis but no apparent spinal cord compression, and a
heterogeneously enhancing spleen with incomplete caval opacification (interpreted as likely
associated with phase of contrast enhancement).
Considering the CT findings – and appreciating the limitations of this imaging modality –
there were no abnormalities suggestive of multifocal systemic neurological disease such
lymphoma or FIP, and there were no gross findings suggestive of gastrointestinal or
metabolic illness such as gastrointestinal obstruction, adrenal gland tumour or
portosystemic shunting.
The appearance of the kidneys and the anamnesis (Burmese cat) lead us to suspect periodic
hypokalaemic polymyopathy (PHP) of Burmese cats, other renal diseases such as acute-on-chronic kidney disease with tubular
interstitial nephritis and subsequent hypokalaemia, and renal tubular acidosis (previously
described in isolated case reports). Considering
the normal blood pressure and normal adrenal glands, hyperaldosteronism was considered less
likely, which was further confirmed by a normal serum aldosterone level of 234 pmol/l (RI
194–388). Toxoplamosis was excluded on the basis of negative serum IgM and IgG titres (both
<1:16).
In the meantime, the cat was treated empirically for thiamine deficiency and improved
within 4 days. The generalised weakness improved with potassium supplementation. During
hospitalisation, the cat received IV fluids (Compound Sodium Lactate [Hartmann’s]; Baxter)
with potassium chloride supplementation (40 mmol/l), oral potassium supplementation with
potassium gluconate (0.5 mEq/kg PO q12h [Hypokal; Mavlab]), vitamin B complex (equivalent to
3 mg/kg thiamine SC q24h [B-Complex; Troy]) and empirical clindamycin (12.5 mg/kg PO q12h
[Clinacin; Hypervet]) while awaiting the Toxoplasma titres.
Repeat haematology and biochemistry was performed prior to discharge and showed marked
improvement of the inflammatory leukogram, with persistent – although improving –
hypokalaemia (3.3 mmol/l) and markedly reduced creatinine kinase vs admission (451 U/l).
Further investigation into the renal disease included venous blood gases, which showed
normal serum pH (7.35) with bicarbonate and partial pressure of carbon dioxide within the
RIs. Concurrent urine pH was neutral (pH 7), thereby excluding renal tubular acidosis. Of
particular note, the Orivet buccal swab PCR test for PHP was also negative.
The cat was discharged home with oral clindamycin and potassium gluconate (doses and
frequency as above), in addition to oral vitamin B1 supplementation (16 mg/kg PO q12h) and
instructions to feed good-quality kitten food.
The cat was clinically normal at its follow-up appointment 3 weeks later, and serum
potassium was normal (3.5 mmol/l). Vitamin B1 supplementation was weaned over the following
2 weeks and clindamycin treatment ceased. Potassium gluconate supplementation continued, but
the frequency was reduced to once daily, resulting in recurrent hypokalaemia. Subsequent
urine cultures were negative.
Urine fractional excretion of potassium was then performed . Urine potassium fractional excretion was
therefore calculated as 37% (normal <4%). This was interpreted as an inappropriately high
fractional excretion of potassium at the level of the kidney, especially in the face of
hypokalaemia.
Potassium gluconate was henceforth prescribed ongoing (at a dosage of 0.3 mEq/kg PO q12h).
A commercial adult renal food was also prescribed. This treatment resulted in normalisation
of serum potassium at subsequent rechecks (between 3.5 and 4 mmol/l) and the cat was
clinically normal at its 6-month and 1-year follow-up appointments.
The working diagnosis was a renal tubular defect resulting in chronic potassium wastage.
This defect is not linked to the genetic disorder previously identified in Burmese cats, and
questions remain about the origin of this defect: whether it was acquired and secondary to
pyelonephritis, or congenital. The acute presentation, inflammatory leukogram and initial
azotaemia would support an acquired cause; however, the persistence of hypokalaemia, despite
correction of azotaemia and regaining normal urine concentrating ability, and concurrent
congenital structural anomalies on CT scan would support a congenital defect.