A 57-year-old man presented to Jinhua Central Hospital affiliated with Zhejiang University (Jinhua, China) with a complaint of frequent cough with bloody sputum for 4 days. He denied any history of skin, mucous membrane or eye surgeries; electric cauterisation; or any family history of cancer. Physical examination at the outpatient clinic revealed diminished breath sounds over the lower lobe of the right lung, and no abnormal lesions were detected in other sites of the body, including the skin, head, neck, scalp, anogenital region and eyes. Chest radiography showed a high-density shadow. Subsequent CT plain and contrast-enhanced scan showed a space-occupying lesion in the lower lobe of the right lung adjacent to the pleura with a clear boundary. A right lower lobectomy for the space-occupying lesion was performed and further diagnosed by pathological examination. Before the excision, whole body positron emission tomography–CT (PET-CT) was performed, showing a malignant space-occupying lesion in the lower lobe of the right lung with liver metastasis .
Grossly, a solitary mass measuring 3.5 cm × 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm was located in the lower lobe of the right lung, appearing as a round, darkly pigmented, solid neoplasm with significant necrosis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated that the tumour was located in the lung tissue, comprising malignant epithelial tumour cells with large amounts of acidophilic cytoplasm and prominent nuclei. Melanin pigmentation could also sometimes be noticed, and there were junctional changes with characteristic tumour cells invading the bronchial subepithelial area from the basement membrane. All of these findings were suggestive of MM . Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the cytoplasm of the malignant cells was positive for human melanoma black 45 (HMB-45), Melan-A, and S-100 and negative for cytokeratin (CK), CK7, Napsin A, transcription termination factor 1 (TTF1), P40 and P63, confirming the diagnosis of MM .
Based on the clinical characteristics, CT and PET-CT findings and pathological evaluation, a final diagnosis of PMML was made. After surgery, the patient received one cycle of chemotherapy. However, as his general condition was very poor, the patient died of pulmonary infection 27 days later.