An 83-year-old diabetic man of African descent presented with a four week history of constipation and a two week history of obstipation to our emergency department. He noticed painless increasing abdominal distension with concomitant leg edema. He denied any history of vomiting, fever or anorexia. He used several laxative concoctions with no relief. He revealed a long standing history of incontinence at night with hesitancy and poor stream but denied frequency and strangury. He had been diabetic and on treatment for 25 years with a history of diabetic retinopathy.
On admission, he was tachycardic (pulse 102 beats per minute) with a blood pressure of 160/85 mm Hg and random blood glucose of 511 mg/dL (28.39 mmol/L). He had bilateral pitting edema up to mid leg. A large abdominal mass extended out of the pelvis just below the xiphisternum . The mass was dull to percussion and tender on palpation. His bowel sounds were hyperactive. A symmetrically enlarged, smooth, rubbery prostate was felt on palpation with a bulge above the prostate. All other examinations were normal. Blood test results revealed a normochromic normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.4 g/dL, MCV 90.9 fL) with renal impairment (blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 30 mg/dL, creatinine 1.8 mg/dL) and a normal prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (4 ng/mL). Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was ordered with a working diagnosis of bowel obstruction likely secondary to a tumor in mind. The results showed gross distension of the urinary bladder above the level of the umbilicus with marked bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureter .
A Foley catheter was inserted which yielded 5000 ml of clear urine. On the following day the patient passed flatus and his leg edema had decreased markedly. He passed stool on the third day with the aid of a suppository. The catheter was removed at the patient's request and he was sent home passing urine freely. His renal impairment resolved (creatinine (Cr) 1.5 mg/dL) on discharge. He was non-compliant with follow up.
One week later, he returned to the emergency department with constipation and bilateral pedal edema. A Foley catheter was re-inserted and 3100 ml of clear urine was drained. The edema completely resolved thereafter and the patient was sent home with the catheter in situ.