A 40-year-old male presented with Class IV shortness of breath, according to the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification, in the last 3 months. At presentation, blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, heart rate was 105 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 24 cycle/min, and O2 saturation was 93%. There was a fine bilateral basal cripitations, elevated jugular venous pulse (JVP), and no lower limb oedema. In 1998, he underwent mechanical aortic valve replacement and mitral valve replacement (MVR) due to severe rheumatic heart disease. In 2015, he had a prolonged fever and was diagnosed with infective endocarditis, he underwent a mechanical MVR, which was repeated in 2017 due to recurrence of the endocarditis. In 2018, he had a fourth mechanical MVR due to severe PVL and progressive heart failure. He was on regular oral anticoagulation (Warfarin) with international normalized ratio around 3. The clinical and laboratory findings obtained upon admission did not suggest endocarditis. On examination, a pan-systolic murmur was heard over the left sternal border that radiated to the base of the heart and apex. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) indicated that the mechanical mitral valve was abnormally located, with its sewing ring inserted at the middle of the interatrial septum . The distortion of the mechanical mitral valve anatomy was caused by the previous three mitral valve surgeries. Both mitral valve discs opened well; however, a severe PVL with vena contracta was measured at 1.7 cm . The jet of the leak filled the left atrial appendage and the left upper pulmonary vein . The leak was located laterally at the 9–12 o’clock position of the three-dimensional (3D) surgical view ( and ). The mechanical aortic valve was functioning well.
We discussed the case in our heart team meeting and decided to perform a device closure of the leak. A Live 3D TOE was mandatory for guiding the procedure. The interventionist was dependent on the Live 3D while crossing the PVL, determining the type and size of the device, deploying of the device, and assessing the mechanical valve function after leak closure. The transseptal approach was selected because of the lateral position of the hole . Transcutaneous PVL device closure was performed using 8 and 10 mm ventricular septal defect (VSD) closure devices. A small residual leak was left in between the two devices ( and ). The vena contracta of the residual leak was 2.5 mm, which was deemed acceptable due to the improved pulmonary venous flow.
At 6 h after closure, the patient became pale, jaundiced, and dyspnoeic with decreased urine output. The chest X-ray (CXR) showed mild congestion on small dose of diuresis. He developed severe haemolytic anaemia, diagnosed via laboratory data: (i) haemoglobin dropped from 10.0 to 5.9 g/dL, normal range is 12.4–14.9 g/dL. (ii) Serum lactate dehydrogenase increased to 1896 units/L, normal range is 122–222 units/L. (iii) Reticulocyte count increased to 4.6%, normal range is 0.5–1.5%.
He received 16 units of packed red blood cells after the leak closure. He developed acute kidney injury and was started on continuous renal replacement therapy. A small residual leak and a small atrial septal defect (ASD) with bidirectional shunt ( and ) were left during the PVL closure and we thought they are the cause of haemolysis. On the third day after the device closure procedure, we closed the residual leak and the ASD using the transapical approach to negotiate all the mitral valve aspects and to cross the small leak. An amplatzer vascular plug (AVP) II 8 mm device was deployed in between the two VSD closure devices. We detected a small leak beside the AVP II 8 mm device, we deployed another AVP II 8 mm device beside the first one, and the leak was no longer observed ( and ). Closure of a bidirectional interatrial septal defect with an ASD 8 mm device was performed ( and ). Although unlikely the ASD was contributing to haemolysis, we prefer to close it to avoid any flow turbulence beside the MV. The four closure devices were observed during fluoroscopy ( and ). Two days after this procedure the patient’s renal function returned to normal, and his anaemia improved (haemoglobin: 9.1 g/dL). The patient was discharged after 1 week. At his 6-month follow-up appointment, his shortness of breath had improved to Class II (NYHA functional classification), his haemoglobin stabilized at 9 g/dL, and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal function of both mechanical valves. The patient planned for regular follow-up every 6 months with TTE as needed.