The patient was a 32-year-old white woman who presented to a specialized combined care program offering obstetrical care and addiction medicine support in a single visit, at 6 weeks gestation in her first pregnancy. She reported using 200–300 Canadian dollars worth of crystal methamphetamine daily via a smoked route and was diagnosed with a stimulant use disorder. Complicating her presentation was a diagnosis of HIV made 2 years prior. She believes she contracted HIV through sexual activity with a known HIV-positive partner. The patient had never been on HIV treatment, and there were no recent viral loads, CD4 counts, or genotypes to guide treatment. She denied other substance use history (alcohol, cocaine, benzodiazepines, opioids including fentanyl and heroin, and cannabis). She did smoke 1 pack of cigarettes per day and had quit smoking after the diagnosis of pregnancy.
The patient’s psychiatric history included a childhood diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This was diagnosed at the age of 13, when she was started on treatment with extended-release methylphenidate. She continued this medication with significant improvement in her academic function. She continued extended-release methylphenidate until she was 20 years old and decided to stop taking it when she was in university, as she did not like how the medication made her feel and the perceived impacts it had on her personality. She denied any current or past symptoms of anxiety, depression, psychosis, obsessive compulsive disorder, or eating disorders. She had no judicial system involvement.
The patient reported that her main driver for methamphetamine use was reduction in her ADHD-type symptoms, particularly related to organization, concentration, and ability to engage in employment. On becoming pregnant, the patient was able to reduce her methamphetamine use from 200 to 300 Canadian dollars per day to 60 Canadian dollars per day. However, she had difficulty further reducing her use from this amount. She did not think she would be able to remember to take antiretroviral therapy on a regular basis without treatment of her ADHD symptoms and reduction in her methamphetamine use (which required her to spend a great deal of time during the day acquiring and using the substance).
The risks and benefits of stimulant treatment during pregnancy were reviewed with the patient. The patient provided formal consent to treatment and was aware this was an off-label treatment for stimulant use disorder and provided consent despite limited safety data for lisdexamfetamine in pregnancy.
A contingency management approach requiring the patient to attend the pharmacy daily for observed stimulant therapy was employed. This approach provided carried (take-home) doses of her stimulant for negative urine screens. Weekly urine drug screens were sent to a tertiary care hospital-based laboratory that was able to discern prescription stimulants from illicit methamphetamines. The patient was able to stop illicit methamphetamine use at 15 weeks’ gestation on a daily dose of lisdexamfetamine 30 mg. She obtained full carried doses (one observed dose and six carried doses 20 weeks after starting therapy). This was based on a carry schedule like local methadone programs, where a once weekly carried dose was granted for four weekly negative urine drug screens. Sunday carried doses were provided immediately secondary to limited pharmacy availability.
As the patient indicated that the daily observed lisdexamfetamine helped with her organization, she started on daily observed ART with a single tablet regimen containing emtricitabine, rilpivirine, and tenofovir. At initiation of ART, her viral load was 8530 and her CD4 count was 790. The patient’s viral load after 1 month of daily observed emtricitabine, rilpivirine, and tenofovir was undetectable.
She engaged in all weekly appointments for combined obstetrical and addictions care. She received all standard obstetrical care including blood work, immunizations, and ultrasounds. After 20 weeks on daily observed lisdexamfetamine, she was transitioned to six carries with once weekly observed dosing. Her second trimester, third trimester, and labor and delivery blood work revealed an undetectable viral load. Her urine drug screens continued to be consistent with self-reports of no illicit methamphetamine use.
The patient delivered a male child via spontaneous vaginal delivery at term and received more than 4 hours of zivovudine. His Apgar scores were 8 and 9, and his birthweight was 3255 g. He was followed by a tertiary care neonatal HIV clinic. He received 4 weeks of treatment with zidovudine. Following his newborn and 4-week blood work, he was taken off the antiretrovirals secondary to a negative viral load.
The patient was followed for 6 weeks postpartum. During this time, the patient continued lisdexamfetamine, and her urine drug screens remained negative in the postpartum period. She remained adherent to her ART.