The patient, a 55-year-old female, was admitted due to persistent chest pain experienced over a period of 2 years, and had worsened in the past 2 months. Both the patient and her family denied that she had a history of heart failure. Upon examination, the patient’s vital signs were stable, and no significant murmurs were detected in the heart. Electrocardiogram results showed the following: (1) sinus tachycardia; (2) suspected old myocardial infarction in the high lateral wall; and (3) T-wave changes. Color Doppler echocardiography findings showed enlargement of the left heart and mild enlargement of the right heart. Specifically, the measurements revealed a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 60 mm, a left atrial end-diastolic diameter of 47 mm, a right ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 23 mm, and a right atrial end-diastolic diameter of 40 mm. Other abnormalities observed during the echocardiography included dilation of the right coronary ostium, an abnormal side branch of the left posterior wall of pulmonary artery, apical thinning, the reduced motion of the left ventricle, and moderate to severe Carpentier-type I mitral valve regurgitation. The results of coronary angiography showed no visible left main stem, a diffuse large tumor-like dilation that spread throughout the periphery of the right coronary opening, and an evident lateral branch circulation in the right coronary opening resembling a normal tube diameter towards the left coronary. A large tumor-like expansion was observed in the branch circulation from the right coronary periphery towards the left coronary artery. An atrial fistula is present in the conical branch of the right coronary artery. No significant plaques or stenosis were found in either the left or right coronary arteries. Coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA, Fig. ) demonstrates rightwards dominance, an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, and an origin of the right coronary artery from the right coronary sinus. Both the right and left coronary arteries, along with their branches, exhibit numerous twists and dilations. The diagnosis includes an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, a fistula between the right coronary artery and the right atrium, and a coronary artery aneurysm. After admission, the patient received treatments aimed at improving the overall functioning of the heart, such as diuretics, and circulatory enhancers. The patient underwent corrective surgery for the anomalous origin of the coronary artery and aortocoronary bypass under extracorporeal circulation. The procedure involved routine cannulation of the ascending aorta for blood supply, as well as cannulation of the superior and inferior vena cava for blood drainage, and insertion of the left heart drainage tube into the right upper pulmonary vein to establish extracorporeal circulation. Y-tubes were inserted into the aortic root and pulmonary artery root. The aortic root and bilateral pulmonary arteries were blocked, cardioplegia solution was perfused to the aortic root and the pulmonary artery root. Ice chips were placed on the surface of the heart surface to successfully arrest it. A T-cut was made in the pulmonary artery, releasing the left coronary artery. The left coronary artery was then clipped with button scissors, and a GORE 6 mm artificial blood vessel was anastomosed to the side of the left coronary with a 6 − 0 CV line. A bovine pericardial patch of appropriate size was successfully used to patch the pulmonary artery defect. The patch was secured with a continuous suture technique using 5 − 0 prolenesuture, effectively closing the pulmonary artery incision. Additionally, a hole was created at the aortic root, and the GORE 6 mm artificial blood vessel, was carefully positioned in front of the pulmonary artery. Anastomosis of the artificial blood vessel to the aortic root was performed using a 6 − 0 CV suture, to ensure thorough hemostasis. During the surgical procedure, the patient experienced an episode of cardiac fibrillation. Prompt intervention in the form of cardiac massage and defibrillation successfully restored the patient’s heart rhythm to sinus rhythm. After achieving stable circulation, the machine was turned off, and the tube was removed. Following the surgical intervention, the patient showed a significant improvement in anterior chest pain compared to the pre-operative state. A subsequent color Doppler echocardiogram revealed a successful connection between the left coronary artery and the aortic root via the artificial blood vessel .