A 66-year-old male patient, with Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score 1–2, was admitted to our clinic. Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient. Ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of “Theageneio” Anticancer Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece. His major symptoms were dyspnea on exertion with stridor, cough, and mild hemoptysis over the past 2 months. His medical record was long; starting in 1977, when he had undergone surgical removal of an anterior chest wall dermatofibrosarcoma, for which he received adjuvant radiotherapy with a total dose =5,500 Gy. He developed locally advanced skin necrosis that was attributed to former irradiation of the area, 25 years later. He subsequently underwent an esthetic reconstruction with the use of distant flap. He was also a heavy smoker of 70 pack-year and was treated for hypertension.
Cervical and chest computed tomography (CT) scan upon admission revealed multiple lesions in a 5 cm area in the upper trachea. Cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes were within normal limits. Laboratory values indicated slightly elevated white blood cell count (10.3×109/L), with 83.7% neutrophils. Physical examination revealed a normal temperature of 36.9°C; oxyhemoglobin saturation was at 88% breathing room air, while respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy under general anesthesia with a rigid bronchoscope, where multiple intraluminal lesions were visualized in the upper trachea . The lesions resulted in ~80% central airway obstruction, which prevented the passage of the rigid bronchoscope . Multiple biopsies were taken, followed by laser ablation of the lesions. Pathology revealed squamous cell papillomatosis with local degeneration into squamous cell carcinoma.
One week post-laser ablation, the lesions recurred causing tracheal stenosis and severe dyspnea. An urgent tracheostomy was performed, with removal of a fibrous tissue lesion that caused severe airway obstruction above the carina, resulting in a remarkable improvement in the patient’s breathing condition. Meanwhile, the patient’s case was discussed by the Thoracic Oncology board of “Theageneio” Anticancer Hospital. Concurrent chemotherapy along with radiotherapy of the trachea was decided. The patient started chemotherapy at a plan of cisplatin 70 mg/m2 once weekly for 3 weeks, as well as radiotherapy of the trachea and the upper mediastinum at a total dose =2,000 Gy/FD =400 Gy in a sitting position.
One month post-chemotherapy and radiotherapy, the patient was re-examined through bronchoscopy under general anesthesia with a rigid bronchoscope, which revealed complete elimination of the intraluminal lesions . The patient was discharged from “Theageneio” Anticancer Hospital, experiencing only moderate pain when swallowing due to radiation-induced esophagitis, as was revealed by an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy that was performed. The patient entered a follow-up with cervical and chest CT scan along with bronchoscopy every 6 months. One year later, no evidence of recurrence was noted.