An 86-year-old man who reported chest pain was referred to our hospital and diagnosed with acute type A aortic dissection. He had a 13-mm intramural hematoma (IMH), an ascending aorta with a diameter of 50 mm, and shaggy descending aorta . His history included outpatient treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and a 55-mm thoracic aortic aneurysm. The patient was scheduled to undergo urgent surgery for the type A IMH and progressive aortic aneurysm; however, laboratory test results revealed blood clotting and cold agglutinin. His titers were 1:512 at 4 °C and 1:555 at 30 °C, and his thermal altitude was 32 °C. Surgery was rescheduled as an elective case because the IMH did not progress . We consulted hematologists regarding cold agglutinin disease (CAD) treatment. Weekly infusions of rituximab (375 mg/m2/week) were initiated 2 months before surgery for a total of 4 weeks, and plasmapheresis was performed 2 days before surgery. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established through median sternotomy with cannulations on the ascending aorta because the thrombus in the ascending aorta was absorbed, and atherosclerotic lesions were observed from the descending aorta to the distal arch. Therefore, the ascending blood flow was selected because of the concern that cerebral infarction could be caused by the retrograde blood flow with femoral cannulation, and the prosthetic graft was anastomosed to the left axillary artery. Bicaval drainage was established, and warm blood antegrade cardioplegia was administered every 20 min.
Cardioplegic solution and blood transfusion should be performed while maintaining a temperature of 32 °C or higher. We discontinued CPB and initiated selective cerebral perfusion (SCP) from the left axillary artery at minimum tympanic and bladder temperatures of 32.5 and 33.2 °C, respectively. Subsequently, we opened the aneurysm and rapidly placed cannulas (SP-GRIPFLOW™; Fuji Systems, Tokyo, Japan) in two other carotid branches. Although 5 min was required to establish total SCP and right rSO2 decreased dramatically , we avoided cerebral embolism during SCP by directly monitoring the two other cannulation sites and maintaining the SCP flow at 12 to 15 mL kg-1 min-1 and less than 60 mmHg.
A frozen elephant trunk (J Graft FROZENIX; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was deployed under the guidance of a transesophageal echocardiogram. After right femoral artery (FA) cannulation, a 12-Fr aortic occlusion balloon catheter (Reliant Stent Graft Balloon Catheter, Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted to reduce the risk of spinal cord ischemia, and an arterial cannula was placed at the left FA for distal perfusion. The balloon was inflated to 25 mL in the frozen elephant trunk, but not in the shaggy descending aorta. The interval from the time we stopped CPB to the time we started retrograde perfusion via the FA (complete cardiac arrest time for the distal body) was 10 min. The flow rate was adjusted to approximately 0.7 to 1.5 L/min so that perfusion was performed at a mean pressure of 60 mmHg, as determined by near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRO-200NX; Hamamatsu Photonics KK, Hamamatsu, Japan). The normal physiological values of some cardiac patients are between 55% and 60% . In this case, the value decreased by 40% at the time of circulatory arrest; however, it was recovered within a few minutes under lower body flow control .
After completion of distal anastomosis with a 28-mm four-branch graft (Triplex; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), anterograde perfusion of the lower body and rewarming were started through a graft branch. The duration of lower body perfusion from the left FA was 44 min. We transected the arch at zone 2 and reconstructed the left subclavian artery, left common carotid artery, and brachiocephalic artery, followed by proximal anastomosis . The total CPB and cardiac ischemic times were 230 min and 143 min, respectively. Postoperative bleeding occurred; therefore, 280 mL of fresh-frozen plasma and 480 mL of red blood cells were transfused in the intensive care unit. The peak serum lactate dehydrogenase and total bilirubin levels were 589 IU/L and 1.7 mg/dL, respectively, on postoperative day 10. Leukopenia was diagnosed on postoperative day 17, and improvement was confirmed. On postoperative day 42, the patient was discharged without any neurological deficits or infection.