A 53-year-old man, who had undergone sternoturnover for pectus excavatum as a child, was diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction, and percutaneous coronary intervention was performed as the acute treatment of the culprit lesion. Two drug-eluting stents were implanted at the aneurysmal site of the left anterior descending artery and the high lateral branch. However, coronary angiography after coronary intervention demonstrated residual stenoses of the left anterior descending artery, high lateral branch, and left circumflex artery, and intravascular ultrasound revealed stent malappositions at the sites of the coronary aneurysm . Because the duration of patency of the stent implanted within the coronary artery aneurysm was unpredictable and a residual lesion was present, he was referred to our department for CABG. Echocardiogram showed left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 19%. Enhanced computed tomography revealed bilateral occlusions of the internal thoracic arteries and a small fragile sternum after sternoturnover fixation . Considering postoperative respiratory dysfunction associated with instability of the thorax following median sternotomy, low left ventricular function, and left coronary artery as the only target vessel, we selected left thoracotomy for CABG without cardiopulmonary bypass.
The left radial artery and great saphenous vein were harvested with the patient lying supine under general anesthesia. He was then placed in a semi right lateral decubitus position . The thoracotomy was made by a left anterolateral incision at the fifth intercostal space. The pulmonary ligament was dissected to open a route for the grafts. The pericardium was opened posterior to the left phrenic nerve, and the target vessels were exposed. After systemic heparinization, the saphenous vein graft was anastomosed to the descending aorta using the PAS-Port System (Cardica Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA). The venous graft was sequentially anastomosed to the left circumflex artery and high lateral branch. The radial artery graft was anastomosed proximally to the venous graft and distally to the left anterior descending artery. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 12. Postoperative enhanced computed tomography proved all bypass grafts patent .