A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with dysfunction in the right hip without a history of hip injury. The patient had local repeated pain over 4 months and gradually lost the capacity to stand and walk because of the hip pain. However, the patient did not report resting pain while sleeping. Before his illness, the patient’s regular activities were walking and going up and down stairs without strenuous exercise. Physical examination revealed tenderness and restricted range of motion of the right hip. Percussion pain was found in the direction of the right lower limb alignment. The length of the right leg was 4 cm shorter than the left leg. Computed tomography (CT) scans with three-dimensional reconstruction showed the deficiency of the right femoral head and neck . Based on the self-reported clinical history, and the physical and radiologic examination, we firstly presumed that end-stage avascular necrosis of the femoral head, cancer metastasis or tuberculosis (TB) might be the causes of the bone defect. Subsequently, we carried out a series of radiologic and laboratory examinations to validate our judgement. However, in relevant laboratory examinations, including alkaline phosphatase, cancer markers, white blood cell (WBC) count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), TB and purified protein derivative (PPD) test, the results suggested no abnormal values. In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and emission computed tomography (ECT) showed a signal change in the right acetabular, suggesting the disappeared femoral head and neck were eroded by pathologic tissue . Thus, cancer and TB would not be the pathologic cause of the bone defect. Subsequently, the titre of the patient’s rapid plasma regain (RPR) test was 1:128, which indicated the probability of syphilis. The RPR test possesses the advantage of high sensitivity to syphilis and low specificity. Collagenosis, chronic liver diseases, TB and HIV infection may lead to a false-positive result of RPR test by raising the antibody titre. Our patient denied having a history of these diseases. Furthermore, no evidence existed of the related clinical and laboratory findings, such as negative HIV test. The diagnosis of syphilis was eventually validated by the positive result of the Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay (TPHA) test [, ], which is highly specific to syphilis. Percutaneous needle biopsy of synovium in the right hip joint also revealed that periangitis, obliterative endarteritis and an intense infiltration of plasma cells accompanied by scattered macrophages and lymphocytes [, ] were in the lesion. These correspond to the characteristics of syphilitic lesions. The patient denied having had previous rash or genital ulcers but admitted having unprotected sexual intercourse more than 1 year earlier. Thus, we concluded that syphilitic arthritis caused by early syphilis, rather than cancer metastasis or TB, results in the deficiency of the right femoral head and neck.
To confirm the duration of syphilis, we repeatedly asked the patient his history in detail. The patient admitted that he once sought treatment for pain in the right knee in the Division of Pain Management in our hospital 4 months ago. At that time, the patient reported that the pain in the right knee had lasted for 1 year while the symptom had little influence on the joint function. He had a fever, which peaked at 38.2 °C. The WBC count was 12.5 × 10^9/L. ESR was 72 mm/h. The right lower limb swelled, especially the knee. The puncture synovial fluid culture showed no growth. The values of TB, PPD test and cancer markers were in the normal limits. X-ray film showed osteoarthritis of the right knee joint. Then, the physicians diagnosed osteoarthritis accompanied with active infection, with unknown cause. The patient improved and was discharged after the treatment of painkiller, intravenous mezlocillin, oral meloxicam and the joint injection of sodium hyaluronate.
After becoming familiarised with the disease course, we planned to perform a THA on the patient, to which the patient consented. The operation was performed in the left recumbent position, under general anaesthesia and through the lateral approach. After opening the joint capsule, clear synovial fluid was discharged and was sampled for bacterial culture. Thickened joint capsule was accompanied by synovial hyperplasia. Extensive bone defect was found on the lateral wall of the right acetabulum. Granulomatous tissue occupied both the acetabular and stump of the femur neck and substituted for the femoral head and neck. No purulent fluid existed. An excisional biopsy was performed from the site of the stump of the femur neck. The frozen section examination suggested that the biological tissue was pathologically modified by syphilis . The specific features were obliterative endarteritis and a perivascular infiltration with plasma cells and lymphocytes. Furthermore, we observed degenerated vessels and osteonecrosis. After a radical joint debridement, the patient received THA as we originally planned. We performed bone graft to rebuild the extensive acetabular lateral wall defect. The synovial fluid culture showed no growth postoperatively. The paraffin and the frozen sections examinations were consistent.
The intraoperative and postoperative x-ray examinations of the pelvis indicated a favourable implantation of the prosthesis . The patient underwent standard postoperative physical therapy, including a rehabilitation programme [, ]. In addition, the patient received intravenous penicillin 4.8 million units twice daily and azithromycin 0.5 g daily for 12 days and subsequent intramuscular injections of benzathine benzylpenicillin at a dose of 2.4 million units per week for 4 weeks. One year after the last intramuscular injection, an RPR test was performed, and the result suggested a negative finding of syphilis.
We asked the patient to exercise in bed within 3 months after the operation. Afterward, he began weight-bearing exercises. After our treatment, the patient recovered full mobility without pain. At the follow-up of 1, 3 and 5.5 years after the operation, the patient presented with a pain-free and functional hip prosthesis without local signs of infection and loosening. The values of hs-CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are also in normal range. X-ray examination revealed the prosthesis location was stable without signs of loosening or migration and that bone healing was satisfactory at the acetabular bone graft site .