A 53-year-old female patient presented with a 2-month history of a mass in the left breast. A physical examination at the first consultation revealed a massively bleeding, stiff and ulcerated palpable mass (10 cm maximum diameter). No locoregional nodes were palpable. Mammography showed a round, high-density mass of approximately 8.5 cm. Ultrasound of the right breast showed a solid, heterogeneous mass with no axillary involvement.
A core needle biopsy of the mass was performed. The microscopic examination showed a poorly differentiated carcinoma of the breast composed of malignant cells with abundant clear cytoplasm . At immunohistochemistry, many cells were positive for keratins AE1/AE3, E-cadherin and p53, but negative for PAX8, vimentin and HER2 (score 0). Ki-67 was at 80%. The tumor was weakly positive for estrogen receptors (ER) and negative for progesterone receptors (PR). PET-CT revealed suspicious lymph node metastases in the homolateral axilla, but no distant metastases or other primary tumors.
The patient had no serious concomitant diseases or significant systemic symptoms, but the tumor continued to bleed, with fast development of symptomatic anemia, requiring several blood transfusions. The patient initially underwent hemostatic radiotherapy, without any local improvement. Therefore, a left mastectomy with axillary dissection was performed.
The definitive histology confirmed the initial diagnosis. Extensive areas of tumor necrosis were detected, consistent with significant tumor regression after radiotherapy. No angiolymphatic invasion or nodal involvement was observed and the surgical margins were tumor free. The final pathological stage was ypT4 (8.5 cm maximum diameter) ypN0 (0/22).
Wound healing was long and complicated, delaying the start of adjuvant chemotherapy and chest wall radiotherapy. Three months after the surgery, another PET-CT was carried out, which showed lung and mediastinal node metastases. The patient started palliative chemotherapy with cisplatin and vinorelbine, which elicited a partial disease response after 3 and 6 cycles. Ototoxicity (grade 1) and peripheral neurotoxicity (grade 2) developed at the end of the 6th cycle, which prevented the continuation of treatment. The radiological evaluation after 12 weeks showed progressive disease at all sites. A second-line chemotherapy with epirubicin was started (no phase I trial available, because of the persistent neuropathy). We observed a rapid disease progression with endobronchial infiltration. Despite endobronchial laser therapy, the patient died of respiratory failure within a few weeks.