A 19-year-old male patient presented to our clinic with the complaint of intermittent left lower abdominal pain of one-year duration and increasing in severity for the last two months. He does not have any comorbidities. There was no family history of kidney disease. His physical examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory investigations including CBC (complete blood count), serum electrolytes, serum creatinine, BUN (blood urea nitrogen), and urinalysis were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a hydronephrotic left kidney with multiple stones. He further underwent computed tomography urography (CTU), which showed two fused left kidneys and a single right kidney (–). The right kidney measures 11cm x 4.8cm and had normal anatomical findings. The cranially located kidney on the left side measures 11.5 cm x 5.1cm and the caudal accessory kidney measures 9cm x 4.3cm. The PCS (pelvicalyceal system) of the upper kidney was located anteromedially and that of the lower kidney was malrotated, facing anterolaterally . There are two separate renal arteries (both arise from the aorta) and renal veins ( and ). Multiple calyceal stones of varying sizes were seen in both left kidneys and one big obstructing stone (4cm x 2.2cm) in the common renal pelvis . The left fused kidneys had a separately draining calyceal system with a common extrarenal left pelvis and a single ureter .
After informed consent, the patient was operated on. The intraoperative finding was two fused left kidneys in an “S-shaped” manner. The caudally placed supernumerary kidney was smaller in size and had a rotational anomaly, facing anterolaterally. Both kidneys had a common renal pelvis and ureter which are located along their anterolateral aspect. There was a dilated renal pelvis with a palpable big stone inside . Left pyelotomy was done, and there was communication between the two fused kidneys. So, we were able to access both kidneys through the common renal pelvis, and most of the stones were extracted . Radial nephrotomy was also done to remove the remaining stones in the native kidney. A total of 13 stones were removed , and a Double-J stent was placed. The patient was doing well, with an improvement of abdominal pain, during the subsequent follow-up visits. Postoperative control X-ray showed 1.5cm x 1cm residual stone . We decided on extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) for the treatment of residual stone. Since ESWL is not available in our hospital, the patient was referred to another hospital where the service was available.