A 78-year-old man referred to our hospital had a history of hypertension, Type 2 diabetes, hyperuricemia, and chronic subdural hematoma. The patient visited a former physician due to transient ischemic attack causing paralysis on the left side. Cervical magnetic resonance angiography revealed severe stenosis of the right internal carotid artery. The patient did not experience impaired consciousness or neurologic deficits, and the coagulation/fibrinolytic testing results were not remarkable. A carotid echography revealed that the peak systolic velocity of the right internal carotid artery was 276 cm/s. The plaque was mobile with low echogenicity.
A cervical three-dimensional computed tomography angiography examination showed stenosis of the right carotid artery from C4/5 to C5/6. The stenosis rate was 71% based on the method used in the North American Symptomatic CEA Trial .
Cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an unstable plaque with a major axis of 20 mm showing T1 (black blood) high intensity from the right common carotid artery to the proximal internal carotid artery .
The patient had severe symptomatic stenosis of the right internal carotid artery, which was an indication for revascularization. We planned to perform CEA because the plaque was vulnerable, and the patient did not present with high-risk factors for the procedure. Clopidogrel 75 mg/day was initiated at the time of onset but was discontinued 5 days before surgery.
We performed CEA in a hybrid operating room. The Furui’s double-balloon shunt system (Muranaka Medical Instruments, Osaka, Japan) was used, and balloons in both the common carotid artery side and the internal carotid artery side were injected with 0.5 mL of air. Then, we removed the plaque and sutured the carotid artery. An intraoperative digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed extravascular pooling of contrast media in the distal carotid artery of the cervical region, indicating vessel injury. The internal carotid artery, distal to the injury site, presented with severe stenosis due to hematoma compression . Since the injury site was distal to the operative field, vessel repair through direct surgery was challenging to perform. Hemostasis was achieved in the operative field. Therefore, we urgently performed CAS to repair the injured vessel and to facilitate dilation of iatrogenic internal carotid artery stenosis. We explained to the family that CAS for hemorrhagic lesions is an off-label treatment, and they provided informed consent for the procedure. Aspirin 200 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg were administered through the nasogastric tube before the procedure.
Since we performed CEA in the hybrid operating room, immediately after the end of CEA, we also performed DSA with the transfemoral technique on the same bed. A right common carotid angiography revealed extravasation of the right internal carotid artery at the injury site, and contrast medium pooled in the extravascular space. The internal carotid artery, distal to the injury site, had severe stenosis and blood flow delay in the right middle cerebral artery. The right anterior cerebral artery could not be visualized .
The Carotid WALLSTENT (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) measuring 8 × 29 mm was placed to cover the distal stenosis and the injury site. Although stenosis improved, blood flow delay from the injury site to the hematoma cavity remained. Hence, the Carotid WALLSTENT, measuring 10 × 31 mm, was placed and overlapped. Then, leakage of contrast medium from the injury site decreased . We did not superimpose the third stent considering the high risk of thrombosis. On the right common carotid angiography after CAS, blood flow delay in the right middle cerebral artery improved, and the right anterior cerebral artery could be visualized .
Postoperatively, the patient continually received conservative management, including strict blood pressure control, under general anesthesia with intubation. Then, aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg were continuously administered. On DSA, extravascular pooling was further reduced at the end of CAS on postoperative day (POD) 1 . Cervical computed tomography scan images were obtained on POD 2 (without contrast), 3 (with contrast), and 6 (without contrast). However, there was no increased blood mass [-].
The patient was extubated on POD 6. He presented with hoarseness and right miosis due to Horner’s syndrome, that is, lower cranial nerve symptoms. However, both spontaneously disappeared overtime. Therefore, hematoma decompression was considered effective. A head MRI on POD 13 revealed no new cerebral infarction or intracranial hemorrhage. On DSA, the extravascular pooling of contrast media in the injury site disappeared on POD 14 . He was discharged to home without sequela on POD 21.