A 61-year-old woman was admitted to our department with progressive brachiofacially accentuated hemiparesis, dysdiadochokinesia and hemi-hypoesthesia of the right side of the body, which began 3½ years previous. She initially presented with dyspraxia and fluctuating hypoesthesia of the right hand at the end of 2006; her cranial nerves were not affected. She complained of increased fatigue but did not present with weight loss, night sweats, fever or headache. The woman had a history of hypothyroidism related to Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and suffered endocarditis and streptococcal sepsis in 1982. She was under a long-term medication treatment of 100 μg of thyroxin daily. An MRI scan performed in May 2007 revealed a 2.8 × 2.0 × 2.4 cm lesion of the white matter at the level of the left subcortical parieto-insular lobe and basal ganglia . The lesion presented as hypointense on T1-weighted scans with some regions displaying slight enhancement after gadolinium administration and moderate inhomogeneous hyperintensity on T2-weighted scans. Blood serum inflammatory markers (leukocytes and CRP), cerebrospinal fluid protein, and the cell count revealed no abnormalities. A stereotactic serial biopsy was performed in June 2007. The histological analysis demonstrated colloidal-bodied particles with scattered single cells with no proof of tumors or inflammatory cells. Based on the obvious diagnosis of an atypical colloidal cyst, no further therapy was initiated. The first control MRI (3 months after biopsy) demonstrated no progression of the disease. However, a clinical deterioration and progression of the lesion (3.6 × 2.3 × 2.6 cm) at the follow-up MRI session in July 2008 warranted a stereotactic serial biopsy, which was conducted at a neurosurgical clinic that specialized in stereotactic procedures. Prior to the stereotactic surgery, CSI (chemical shift imaging) was performed, which revealed a prominently reduced NAA peak, an elevation of lactate and only slight alterations of choline and creatine peaks .
The histological analysis of the biopsy that was performed in June 2007 showed a glial cyst but exhibited no evidence of malignancy or inflammation. In May 2010, the patient presented for the first time at our department because of clinical and radiological progression of the disease. Surgical resection of the lesion with a subsequent histological diagnosis was recommended At the day of admission, the patient displayed poorer health and a worsened nutritional status. The neurological examination demonstrated moderate hemiparesis of the right side and hemi-hypoesthesia, including the trigeminal nerve, with no other cranial nerve deficits. The woman had a high-grade disturbance of the fine motor skills of the right hand, dysdiadochokinesia of the right side and displayed an instable standing posture and gait. Her reflexes exhibited increased positive Troemner’s and Babinski’s signs. On the day of admission, a control MRI that included diffusion tensor imaging and a functional MRI were performed. The lesion progressed in volume to 4.2 × 3.2 × 5.3 cm with the same signal characteristics in T1- and T2-weighted imaging; displacement of the left pyramidal and corticopontine tract was observed with significantly altered values of the fractional anisotropy compared with the healthy contralateral side.
The patient underwent a left-sided standard pterional craniotomy and a removal of the lesion via a transsylvian, transinsular approach (with respect to the displacement of the left pyramidal and corticopontine tracts) under continuous intraoperative monitoring with sensory evoked and motor evoked potentials (SEPs and MEPs, respectively). The lesion appeared intraoperatively as an amorphous, gelatinous mass with some regions appearing dull and lucid . The tumor mass could be almost completely removed with the preservation of the MEPs and SEPs. After the operation, the patient exhibited increased hemiparesis of the right side with hemiplegia of the right arm and partial facial palsy in addition to a new expressive aphasia. A postoperative head CT revealed no signs of bleeding or infarction. By the time of discharge, the patient had partially recovered from aphasia and was mobilized with a Zimmer frame. In the follow-up control in the outpatients’ department after rehabilitation in October 2010, the patient demonstrated almost complete recovery from expressive aphasia and had slight palsy of the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve but continued to display moderate brachially accentuated hemiparesis of the right side. Subsequently, the department of hematooncology initiated diagnostic staging, and no further manifestations of B-cell lymphoma could be identified. Whole-body CT, abdominal ultrasound and bone marrow puncture revealed no suspicious findings. Electrophoresis showed a regular distribution and quantity of serum proteins (7.6 g/dl) and immunoglobulins. Additionally, there was no hint of monoclonality of serum proteins in the immunofixation assay. Physiological albuminuria in urine electrophoresis was observed.
Histological examination of the resected tumor revealed large, amorphous, proteinaceous eosinophilic deposits and small islands of lymphoid cells between them . The amorphous deposits were strongly PAS positive but negative for Congo red staining and did not display apple-green birefringence under polarization . Most of the small lymphoid cells expressed the B-cell marker CD20 . There were also few CD3-positive T-cell lymphocytes . Immunoreactivities for the Ig-A heavy chain and λ-light chain immunoglobulins were partially observed in the deposits, plasmacytoid lymphocytes and mature plasma cells. The plasmacytic cells expressed CD38 and CD138, whereas they were negative for C79a. There was a negative reaction for IgM, IgG and IgE heavy chains and for κ-light chains. The lymphoid cells had a low proliferation rate (IHC for Ki67, 3 %). Some expressed bcl2, a few lymphocytes expressed CD5, and there was negative immunoreactivity for CD10, CD19, MUM1 and bcl6. Semi-nested PCR revealed monoclonal amplification of the complementarity-determining region III (CDR III) of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene , supporting the diagnosis of low-grade lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma with light chain deposition disease and IgA- and λ-light chain restriction.