The patient is a 43-year-old male from the Caribbean with a history of CML, BCR::ABL1-positive, diagnosed in 2015, who subsequently developed recurrent pleural effusions. The patient was initially treated with imatinib but was switched to dasatinib 3 years later due to suboptimal clinical and molecular responses. After 3 years of dasatinib treatment, the patient developed pleuritic right-sided chest pain and shortness of breath that worsened with exertion. A chest X-ray showed new bilateral pleural effusions associated with presumed passive atelectasis. A PET CT revealed a moderate volume, partially loculated, right pleural effusion without focal FDG nodularity or FDG avid lymphadenopathy above or below the diaphragm. A thoracentesis, with removal of 1,500 mL of serosanguinous pleural fluid, was performed, which based on cytologic examination, did not contain neoplastic cells (a–c). Immunohistochemistry performed on the cell block for KSHV (latency-associated nuclear antigen [LANA]/HHV8) was negative (d) as was in situ hybridization for EBV (EBER) (e). Immunostaining for CD45 (f) and calretinin highlighted the hematopoietic and mesothelial cells, respectively. Concurrent pleural fluid flow cytometric analysis showed no immunophenotypic evidence of a hematolymphoid neoplasm. Based on these findings, the patient’s pleural effusions were thought to be secondary to dasatinib. The patient’s dasatinib treatment was discontinued for 2 weeks and subsequently restarted at a lower dose.
Six months after his first pleural effusion and 5.5 months after reinitiating dasatinib, the patient complained of recurrent right-sided chest pressure and symptoms similar to what he experienced with his previous pleural effusion. Chest X-ray showed a moderate right pleural effusion with atelectasis. The left lung was clear without a significant pleural effusion. An ultrasound-guided right-sided thoracentesis drained 1,550 mL of slightly cloudy amber fluid. Pleural fluid cytology showed medium to large-sized atypical cells with amphophilic cytoplasm containing vacuoles and irregular nuclei with prominent nucleoli (a–c). Immunohistochemistry performed on the cell block of this specimen showed that the aberrant cells were positive for CD45, MUM-1, CD38, CD138, CD30, and LANA/HHV8 and negative for CD20, PAX5, CD3, CD34, CD117, CD163, and EMA. In situ hybridization showed that the cells were negative for kappa and lambda light chain expression but were weakly positive for EBV (EBER) (e). In addition, the atypical cells were negative for the mesothelial markers calretinin (k) and WT-1 and the epithelial markers CK5/6, Ber-EP4, B72.3, and claudin-4.
Flow cytometric analysis performed on the pleural fluid showed a discrete population of cells with high forward scatter characteristics which co-expressed CD45 (dim), CD38, and CD30 (dim) and lacked expression of immunoglobulin light chains. Background T cells and B cells were highlighted by expression of CD3 and CD20, respectively. PCR-based molecular genetic studies demonstrated clonal rearrangements in the immunoglobulin heavy chain and immunoglobulin light chain kappa genes. These findings were diagnostic of PEL. A concurrent bone marrow biopsy demonstrated features diagnostic of CML, BCR::ABL1-positive, in the chronic phase without PEL involvement. PET/CT scans demonstrated a partially loculated right pleural effusion without FDG-avid nodularity or masses. Molecular genetic studies performed on the peripheral blood demonstrated the presence of BCR::ABL1 p210 transcripts at 0.611% on the International Scale (IS). Serologic studies for HTLV-1/2, HIV-1/2 antibodies, and HIV-1 p24 antigen as well as quantitative RT-PCR for EBV performed on peripheral blood were negative. Following his diagnosis, combination chemotherapy was initiated.
Four months following his initial diagnosis, after completion of six cycles of combination chemotherapy, the patient was admitted with sepsis, neutropenic fever, and right pulmonary effusion. A thoracentesis was performed, and 1,500 mL of turbid yellow fluid was removed. The pleural fluid was composed of mostly segmented neutrophils (82%). Flow cytometric analysis of the pleural fluid showed a minute population of atypical cells which co-expressed CD38 and CD138, suspicious for involvement by the patient’s previously diagnosed PEL. However, there were some immunophenotypic differences, including co-expression of CD56 and lack of definite CD30 expression. Pleural fluid cytology showed few scattered medium-to-large-sized atypical cells that were positive for CD38, CD138, MUM-1, and LANA and negative for CD30 and EBER, consistent with a low-level involvement by the patient’s known history of PEL. Taken together, these results indicated that the patient’s worsening pleural effusion may have been the result of an underlying pulmonary infection secondary to his neutropenic state in the background of residual PEL. The patient’s symptoms improved following drainage of his pleural effusion, antibiotic therapy, and pleurodesis. He is currently being monitored as an outpatient.