Following a game of volleyball whilst on holiday in Spain, a healthy, athletic 26-year-old man of Caucasian origin from the United Kingdom developed a pain in the posterior region of his left thigh and buttock. The only recent medical history of note was a mosquito bite on the nose, which had become infected and discharged pus 3 days earlier. At a hospital in Spain, the pain was attributed to a radiculopathic process and managed with bed rest and non-steroidal and opiate analgesia. Despite this the symptoms worsened, with increasing pain and malaise and, eventually, he developed a noticeable limp.
Upon his return to the United Kingdom, the patient was re-assessed by a consultant neurosurgeon. At this time, the patient appeared mildly unwell, with the only physical finding a limited ability to raise his left leg. The patient was initially diagnosed with left sided sciatica, likely resulting from a prolapsed intervertebral disc. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbo-sacral spine, however, revealed no causative pathology, and the patient was referred to a consultant orthopaedic surgeon for further investigation.
The following day, the patient became systemically unwell, in that he became pale, sweaty and tachycardic with low-grade pyrexia. Passive left hip movements were extremely painful, and a palpable area of warmth and induration over the left gluteal region was now evident. Haematological and serological investigation revealed a total leukocyte count of 18.4 (14.0 neutrophils), C-reactive protein of 242 and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 40 mm/hour. MRI of the hip and buttock area showed a collection of fluid posterior to the femur, between the gluteus maximus and medius muscles, and pressing upon the sciatic nerve .
Later that day, the affected area was explored surgically through a posterior approach and 30 ml of purulent material was drained, followed by a thorough washout of the cavity. The patient was treated with parental flucloxacillin for 3 days (1 g four times a day), and he was discharged on the fourth postoperative day fully able to bear weight on his left leg. He made a full and uneventful recovery following treatment with oral flucloxacillin for 4 weeks (1 g four times a day). Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to flucloxacillin was cultured from the abscess fluid.