A 72-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our facility with an isolated right-side epistaxis that had been present for three months without other associated otolaryngological, ophthalmological or neurological symptoms. There was no history of trauma or chronic sinonasal infections. Ten years prior to the incident, our patient was diagnosed as having breast cancer and was treated with surgery and chemoradiotherapy. The results of a physical examination were normal except for a thread of blood coming out of the right middle meatus. A neck examination revealed no palpable lymph nodes. Routine laboratory investigation results were normal. A paranasal sinus (PNS) computed tomography (CT) scan showed expansion of the right maxillary sinus by a homogenous soft tissue mass without calcification, occupying the entire sinus cavity. The sinus walls were intact with no bony erosion. There was an impacted tooth visible inside the mass . Other sinus cavities were normal. Endoscopic maxillary sinus meatotomy with tissue biopsy revealed carcinoma of the lymphoepithelial type. Our patient underwent a lateral rhinotomy with an orbital floor and hard palate saving maxillectomy, with complete excision of the tumor.
Histopathological examination revealed a poorly differentiated carcinoma composed of malignant epithelial cells having large oval vesicular nuclei and containing fine chromatin with prominent one to three eosinophilic nucleoli. The tumor showed large quantities of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that these cells were positive for pancytokeratin marker (MNF 116), proving the epithelial nature of these cells. Tests for cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 were mildly positive and favored squamous differentiation, while CK7 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) tests were negative. By performing these investigations, we excluded a poorly differentiated squamous carcinoma. Melanin marker studies excluded a malignant melanoma. A CK20 antigen test result was negative, thus excluding an intestinal type of adenocarcinoma. There was a strong positivity for the proliferative marker Ki-67 (MIB-1) . Results of hybridization assays for Epstein-Barr virus were negative. Thus, the immunohistochemical studies were diagnostic for a lymphoepithelial carcinoma. External radiotherapy with a cumulative dose of 48Gy was delivered post-operatively. Our patient showed satisfactory treatment response and has been followed up very closely over the last three years. She has remained free of disease with no locoregional or distant metastasis.