A 14-year-old boy (46, XY) was admitted in September 2015 because of precocious puberty and recurrent episodes of periodic paralysis without special intervention. His sexual development, such as pubic hair, laryngeal prominence and spermatorrhea, occurred earlier than that in peers. He was born after an uneventful full-term pregnancy to a non-consanguineous healthy couple of Chinese origin with no family history of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. He was taller than boys of the same age until he was 12 years old. In addition, axillary hair and laryngeal prominence had appeared at 7 years old, and spermatorrhea and pubic hair growth had occurred at age 9. Physical examination showed hypertension (143/106 mmHg), slightly black skin, and external genitalia maturation (pubic hair and axillary hair at stage 5 assessed by Tanner classification and an estimated testicular volume of 25 ml on both sides, as measured by an orchidometer), which confirmed precocious puberty . Laboratory data in the absence of medication showed decreased plasma potassium and cortisol but elevated levels of plasma 17 hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP), androstenedione, adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), and uric 17 ketosteroid (17 KS) (Additional file : Table S1). Additionally, serum aldosterone (ALD) was normal with low rennin activity, and renal, liver, metadrenaline, normetadrenaline and thyroid function, were all normal (Additional file : Table S1). Radiation imaging showed accelerated bone aging (over 18 years according to the Greulich and Pyle Atlas) and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia . The hypokalemic hypertension, elevated 17-OHP and androstenedione were all suggestive of an 11OHD diagnosis. Interestingly, low urine osmotic pressure and specific gravity could not be significantly elevated by water deprivation and a desmopressin test. This phenomenon is consistent with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus that may be due to long-term hypokalemia (Additional file : Table S1).
Given this clinical presentation, we then sought to confirm whether it was indeed a case of 11OHD. To find the possible genetic pathogenic mechanism, we conducted sequencing of the nine exons and flanking sequencing of the CYP11B1 gene and identified the novel mutation p.L340P (CYP11B1mut) . Bioinformatics and molecular dynamics simulation indicated that CYP11B1mut altered the free energy, and change the stability and conformation of the protein by driving the uncoiling of a partial helical structure into a loop structure, leading to positive group migration and pocket structure enlargement (Additional file : Table S2, Figure ), suggesting that the mutation could be pathogenic. However, his mother did not carry this pathogenic mutation , indicating the proband only carried the point mutation on one allele, with the pathogenicity of the other allele unclear. Since 11OHD is understood to be an autosomal recessive condition, we then investigated the genotype of the patient in greater detail. QPCR of the sequence around the mutation of the proband showed that the copy number was half the normal number, which indicated a fragment deletion, and this was also found in his mother (Additional file : Figure S1). Targeted next-generation sequencing of the patient genome then revealed a large fragment deletion that included exons 1 to 6 of CYP11B1 (Additional file : Figure S1). To validate the deletion, we conducted PCR in proband with mixed oligonucleotide primers that have been previously reported (a forward primer complementary to the CYP11B2 sequence and a reverse primer complementary to the CYP11B1 sequence) and confirmed a chimeric CYP11B2/CYP11B1 gene. Interestingly, extended familial analysis revealed that the chimera was also present in his mother, uncle and grandfather , and multiple sequence alignment revealed that the breakpoint was located at g.9559–9742 of CYP11B2, considering the cytosine nucleotide base (C) of rs6391 in this family with 3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) . Our results suggested that the proband harbored a compound heterozygosity for a chimeric CYP11B2/CYP11B1 gene combined with a novel missense mutation p.L340P as two contributors to pathogenicity.
Since the blood pressure of the patient was poorly controlled by hydrocortisone, the proband was treated with a combination of dexamethasone (0.75 mg/everyday) and levamlodipine (2.5 mg/everyday) for 20 months. After treatment, clinical parameters, such as blood pressure, 17OHP and ACTH decreased, and the volume of the adrenal glands was reduced (Additional file : Table S1, Additional file : Figure S3). Main methods used in the study are summarizing in Additional file . This study was approved by the ethics committees of Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, and informed consent was obtained from the patient’s mother (Additional file ).