A 50-year-old man with underlying hypertension, presented to the ED with shortness of breath for 1 week. He was conscious on arrival, but restless, and sitting in a tripod position. His vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 85/45 mmHg, heart rate of 120 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 28 breath per minute, temperature of 37 C, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 82% with oxygen 12 l/min. Physical examination revealed he had labored breathing with usage of respiratory accessory muscles, and he was diaphoretic. His jugular venous pressure was not raised and his cardiorespiratory system did not reveal any significant findings. He was intubated and mechanically ventilated. His electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, and his chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly with right pleural effusion. A bedside point-of-care echocardiography showed hyperdynamic left ventricle, with massive pericardial effusion. Right ventricular collapse was also noticed during diastole and collectively, this was indicative of a cardiac tamponade (Additional file : Video S1).
Pericardiocentesis was done by the emergency physician in-charge under ultrasound guidance using subcostal approach. A high-frequency linear ultrasound transducer was placed horizontally at subcostal area with the marker pointing caudally. Using in-plane technique, the needle tip was fully visualized as it was advanced into the pericardial space. 200 ml of hemoserous fluid was aspirated and a pigtail catheter was left in-situ for continuous drainage . Post procedure, his blood pressure improved to 130/90 mmHg, he became less tachypneic and his heart rate improved to 100 beats per minute.
The pericardial fluid cytology revealed malignant epithelial cells exhibiting large pleomorphic nuclei. A computed tomography of his whole body showed multiple metastatic lesions of the lungs, liver, right adrenal and pelvic region with unknown source of malignancy. He was ventilated in intensive care unit for 13 days, and was referred to palliative care team upon discharged.