An 83-year-old man presented to our hospital with left inguinal pain, slight low-back pain, and the inability to ambulate because of pain after falling from a standing position without any neurologic deficits. He presented with a medical history of chronic atrial fibrillation, carotid artery stenosis, arteriosclerosis obliterans of the lower extremities, alcoholic liver disease, and diabetes mellitus. For the treatment of atrial fibrillation, he was using the DOAC edoxaban, which is a selective, reversible, and competitive inhibitor of human factor Xa.
Radiography showed no evidence of hip fracture but revealed a thickening of left psoas major muscle, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed stable-type VCF of the fourth lumbar vertebra . Moreover, fast STIR MRI revealed a 53- × 54- × 142-mm intramuscular hematoma in the psoas major muscle, which expanded to the iliac muscle and around the hip joint . Computed tomography angiography showed that the hematoma arose from the ruptured segmental artery running around the fractured vertebra . Blood tests showed platelets of 149,000/mm3 (normal, 140,000–400,000), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 30.1 s (normal, 26–40 sections), and slightly prolonged international normalized ratio of prothrombin time of 1.25 (normal, 0.90–1.10). Creatinine was 1.22 mg/dL (normal, 0.5–1.0 mg/dL), with a creatinine clearance of 44.8 mL/min.
Based on the analysis of the blood coagulation system, we estimated that extravasation from the segmental artery was encouraged not by depletion of coagulation factors due to liver disorder but by DOAC usage, which does not affect APTT. Interrupting the anticoagulant therapy was considered to pose a risk of stroke because the patient exhibited a CHADS2 score (defined as congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥ 75 years, type 2 diabetes mellitus, previous stroke [doubled]) of 3 points, and his CHA2DS2-VASc (defined as congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥ 75 years, type 2 diabetes mellitus, previous stroke [doubled], vascular disease, age 65–74 years, sex category) score was 5 points. Conversely, continuation of edoxaban makes decreasing hematoma expansion difficult. Therefore, we chose to treat the patient with heparin replacement with a lower therapeutic range starting the day after admission and expected spontaneous hemostasis.
On day 8 of the patient’s hospital stay, neurologic examination revealed hypoesthesia and motor weakness of the left lower limb, evaluated as 13 of 25 points of the American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA) motor score. Enhanced computed tomography showed that contrast die leaked into the hematoma from the injured segmental artery, and the psoas major muscle was tense due to a massively expanded hematoma . Vascular surgery was consulted, and an angiography aimed for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed but did not demonstrate any active extravasation; thus, TAE was abandoned. Percutaneous or surgical drainage was rejected because of the increased risk of bleeding complications and expected potential for spontaneous reduction, based on the findings of TAE. The hematoma began to decrease 1 week later.
On day 23 of his stay, the patient experienced dysarthria and motor weakness of the right upper limb, which was evaluated as 12 points of the ASIA motor score without any sensory disturbance. A brain MRI revealed cerebral infarction on the left cortex of the frontal lobe and radiate crown , and the neurosurgeon selected conservative treatment rather than thrombolytic therapy. The patient’s low-back pain and inguinal pain disappeared and bone healing was achieved; furthermore, the psoas hematoma vanished approximately 2 months after the patient’s hospital admission . However, the patient experienced persistent motor weakness of the left lower limb and right upper limb as well as dysarthria, with no neurologic improvement observed at 1-year follow-up.