A medically-free 46-year-old male was referred to our tertiary center with a history of a recent-onset generalized tonic clonic seizure two weeks prior to his presentation. He had five episodes of these generalized tonic clonic seizures, each lasting for approximately two minutes. One week later, he became confused as he could not recognize his family and became very agitated. His symptoms were not associated with any visual changes, fever, chills or neck stiffness. He had a positive history of on and off headache since he was 20 years old that did not require any medications. His past medical and surgical history, family history and drug history were all unremarkable.
Upon examination, he was found to be drowsy, agitated and confused but was able to obey commands. His Glasgow coma scale was 15/15. His vital signs were all within normal ranges. The rest of the neurological and the respiratory examinations were found to be unremarkable. He was put on leviteracetam 500 mg orally twice per day for his seizures as well as haloperidol 5 mg IM four times a day as needed for his agitation.
The patient was seen by endocrinology and was found to have a low adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), a low PM cortisol, hyponatremia and a high thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Synacthen test was within normal range. He was put on hydrocortisone 20 mg q am and 10 mg q pm initially then decreased to 10 mg am and 5 mg pm as well as levothyroxine 75 mcg daily. Unfortunately, the patient started to develop extra-pyramidal symptoms presenting as abnormal movements in the lower limb and orofacial dyskinesia. It was believed to be caused by the haloperidol, which was therefore stopped. It was also believed that his agitation could be caused by leviteracetam, hence it was switch to sodium valproate 500 mg twice daily and clonazepam 1 mg once daily at bedtime.
After being sedated and stabilized, on MRI image, he was found to have a sellar/supra-sellar lesion measuring approximately 3.04 × 2.21 cm, predominantly cystic in nature with prominent calcification of the anterior wall. On T1 imaging, it was found to have a hyperintense signal. There was resultant expansion of the sella and scalloping of its walls as well as elevation of the optic pathway. The lesion was closely related to the anterior cerebral arteries, supra-clinoid internal carotid arteries and the basilar artery (A and B). Images were otherwise normal. EEG showed mild nonspecific generalized cerebral dysfunction with no epileptiform discharges identified. Based on MRI findings the patient was initially diagnosed with CP.
Pre-operatively, the patient required to have a stress dose of hydrocortisone 100 mg IV. Surgical transphenoidal approach was done for complete resection of the CP. The solid component of the lesion was sent for frozen section and the fluid was sent for cytology. The patient was shifted to the ICU in a stable condition. There were no surgical complications.
Cystic fluid cytology confirmed cytomorphological features consistent with cyst contents and negative for malignant cells. Histopathological examination of the supra-sellar lesion revealed microscopic focus of glandular tissue suggestive of salivary origin within a background of vascularized connective tissue. The supra-sellar tumor also revealed dense fibrous tissue with calcification, old hemorrhage, cholesterol clefts and hemosiderin laden macrophages.
Upon endocrinology, otolaryngology and neurosurgery clinic follow ups, the patient was found to be stable, seizure free, and without active complaints. He was still found to have panhypopituitarism and was maintained on hydrocortisone and levothyroxine. Post-operative EEG was normal. Post-operative MRI, done 9 months later, revealed residual calcified component at the anterior surgical margin, asymmetric to the right side in the supra-sellar region (with resultant elevation of the optic chiasm) and symmetric to the left side in the sellar region. There was no acute infarct, hydrocephalus or herniation syndrome (C).