A 70-year-old Caucasian male with past medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia managed with aspirin presented in the emergency room with the complaints of increasing fatigue, shortness of breath and coffee ground stool. An ulcer was found during emergency esophagogastroduodenal endoscopy. He was managed conservatively with Protonix and secession of aspirin. He returned two months later for follow-up esophagogastroduodenal endoscopy. A single 25 mm submucosal nodule was found at the gastroesophageal junction 40 cm from the incisor and appeared to extend 2 cm up into the esophagus . There was no Barrett esophagus or mucosal disease identified. A biopsy was taken and a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was rendered. An endoscopic mucosal resection was subsequently conducted. Patient is disease-free for seven months since resection.
The biopsy showed proliferation of haphazard and angulated glands with focal crowding accompanied by desmoplastic stroma underlying squamous-columnar junctional mucosa . A diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was made.
The endoscopic mucosal resection specimen demonstrated that the adenocarcinoma invaded into submucosa . The tumor showed various levels of differentiation from poorly-differentiated area composed of solid tumor growth and small glands to well-differentiated area composed of cystically dilated glands with attenuated epithelial lining . Eosinophilic secretion with focal crystallization was present in the lumina of majority of the glands. The distribution was in such a way that poorly-differentiated area was situated directly below the epithelium and well-differentiated component in the deep portion with differentiation progressing in a gradient fashion.
Despite of various differentiation, tumor cells in different areas showed similar cytomorphology . They had abundant cytoplasm (low nuclear: cytoplasm ratio) containing eosinophilic coarse granules and centrally located nuclei, reminiscent of Paneth cells or gastrointestinal neuroendocrine cells. The texture of the cytoplasmic granules was similar to luminal secretion, suggestive of active secretion. The tumor cells in the poorly-differentiated area displayed frankly malignant cytology with pleomorphic nuclei and prominent cherry-red nucleoli. In contrast, the tumor cells in the well-differentiated area had much blander cytology. There was no mitosis or necrosis appreciated.
The mucosa was focally eroded with focal reparative and regenerative changes characterized by pseudostratified columnar cells confined within the crypts . The adenocarcinoma focally colonized glandular epithelium. However, no Paneth cell metaplasia was identified. There were no goblet cells as evidence of Barrett esophagus. The adjacent gastric cardiac mucosa showed reactive foveolar hyperplasia and dilated fundic glands with proton pump inhibitor therapy effect.
To further characterize the cellular origin, special and immunohistochemical stains were performed. Both the cytoplasm of tumor cells and luminal secretion were diffusely and strongly positive for lysozyme immunohistochemical stain and Periodic acid–Schiff with diastase digestion . Synaptophysin and chromogranin immunohistochemical stains highlighted scattered entrapped neuroendocrine cells while negative in tumor cells . The cytomorphology in combination with strong immunoreactivity with lysozyme antibody and absence of neuroendocrine differentiation support a Paneth cell differentiation. Ki-67 and p53 (data not shown) showed similar staining pattern with positive stain in approximately 40% nuclei of tumor cells in poorly-differentiated area and only rare positivity in well-differentiate area. Mammoglobin was negative in the tumor cells (data not shown). Beta-catenin immunohistochemical stain showed membranous stain in the tumor cells . Her-2/neu immunohistochemical stain demonstrated nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in the poorly-differentiated area and was completely negative in the well-differentiated area .