A 68-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with a skilled movement disorder of the left hand, which had gradually progressed over the previous few months. She showed normal consciousness and slight fatigue without thirst. She had no psychological problems and no challenges regarding financial, language, and cultural matters. She previously underwent a uterine myoma surgery and had two sisters who had been diagnosed with breast cancer. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed two mass lesions. One lesion was 21 × 21 × 17 mm and was located in the right thalamus with accompanying brain edema. On T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), this was shown as high-density areas that progressed to the right pedunculus cerebri. The other lesion was located in the hypothalamus, infundibular stalk, and pituitary posterior lobe, which compose the hypothalamic–pituitary axis (HPA). The stalk was thickened on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), showing an absence of the normal posterior pituitary bright spot (PPBS). Contrast-enhanced T1WI showed intense enhancement along the lesion edges and uniform enhancement within the lesions . Furthermore, she had an undiagnosed and untreated left breast mass, which was considered as a breast cancer with accompanying axillary lymph node metastasis.
Upon hospital admission, her plasma sodium levels (140 mEq/l) were within the normal range. She underwent a stereotactic biopsy targeting the thalamus, but not HPA, lesions . Pathological examination revealed a carcinoma. Therefore, we considered that the pituitary and thalamus metastases were from the breast cancer which had not been previously treated. We opted to treat the metastasis before breast cancer treatment since the metastasis compressed the pyramidal tract.
After undergoing biopsy surgery, she complained of polyuria and thirst. At postoperative day (POD) 0, her urine volume was > 3000 ml. At POD 1, plasma sodium levels increased to 155 mEq/l . We suspected that the transient DI and polyuria were induced by biopsy-related stress and would improve within some days. As such, the patient was instructed to intake fluid as dictated by her thirst and was prescribed desmopressin nasal spray for rescue use (POD 8 and 11 in Fig. C). Subsequently, her plasma sodium levels normalized, and her daily urine output improved to < 3000 ml/day. However, the left hemiplegia progressed and she had become bedbound. She also complained of fatigue and lethargy. We assumed that the metastasis had enlarged, with worsening brain edema. Consequently, glucocorticoid (betamethasone) was administrated (red wedge arrow in Fig. ). After glucocorticoid administration, there was notable polyuria and elevation of plasma sodium levels. These symptoms suggested that central DI due to a metastatic pituitary tumor was masked by adrenal insufficiency, which was revealed by glucocorticoid replacement. In retrospect, the gradual decrease in plasma sodium levels was due to ACTH deficiency (POD 1–18 in Fig. B).
Regular desmopressin administration ameliorated the polyuria . Intranasal desmopressin was initially used due to easy regulation of the administration amount. Subsequently, oral formulations were used. We also prescribed tapered administration of betamethasone, followed by hydrocortisone administration for replacement therapy and an increase in plasma sodium levels . Conventional multiple fractionated radiation therapy was implemented from POD 27 to POD 47 (37.5 Gy/15 fr). Levothyroxine sodium hydrate was additionally administrated due to hypothyroidism from POD 50. Needle biopsy of the breast masses revealed carcinoma (T4N3M1, stage IV). The breast cancer had no surgery indication. Thus, abemaciclib and anastrozole were administered in addition to radiation therapy for the breast cancer (50 Gy/25 fr). The DI and panhypopituitarism were managed through the prescribed medications, and her fatigue and lethargy improved. However, she showed permanent left hemiplegia and died 9 months after the first admission due to the progression of the brain metastases.