62-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency room with acutely worsening epigastric pain lasting for several days and black stool lasting for a week. Symptoms of vomiting, inappetence and weight loss that have been lasting for the past six months without doctor appointment was also reported in medical history. Patient had a history of diabetes mellitus on insulin therapy. Upon clinical examination abdomen was not distended, there was no signs of guarding or rebound tenderness. Laboratory data showed anemia (hemoglobin 119 g/L, normal range 130–170 g/L; hematocrit 0.343, normal range 0.4–0.5), leukocytosis (13.5 109/L, normal range 4.0–10.0) and normal value of C-reactive protein (below 5 mg/L, normal range 0–5 mg/L). Tumor markers CEA and Ca 19–9 were within normal range.
Due to melena lasting for a week, patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and ultrasound of the abdomen on the outpatient bases only few days prior to admission to the hospital. EGD was technically demanding due to the poor passage of the endoscope through the stomach, duodenal bulbous and upper part of the duodenum. Inflation of the gastric body was not possible, therefore the visualization of the gastric wall was poor with no obvious intraluminal mass or hemorrhage detected. Additionally gastric peristalsis was described to be absent. Abdominal ultrasound showed tumor formation of the gastric body, measuring 7 × 5 cm, but no intussusception was described. CT scan revealed a 5.4 × 5.6 × 6.2 cm intraluminal tumor formation of the lesser curvature of the gastric body with well defined borders was described. Tumor mass caused invagination of the gastric cardia through the antrum and pylorus into the D2 part of the duodenum producing gastric outlet obstruction . No dissemination to the parenchymal organs was described.
Explorative laparotomy was performed. Palpable gastric mass with impaction of the tumor through the pylorus into the duodenum without signs of disseminated disease in the abdomen. Was found . Kocher mobilization of the duodenum and the head of pancreas was necessary for the successful desinvagination of the tumor. Anterior gastrotomy reveled a solid, well defined, intraluminal tumor of the lesser curvature of the gastric body just below the gastroesophageal junction. Circular radical resection of the tumor with one centimeter resection margin was performed. The gastric wall defect was sutured in transverse manner in two layers. Postoperative period was uneventful and patient was discharged on the ninth postoperative day.
Sample was send for pathohistological examination. Macroscopically specimen contained a well-defined 7.5 × 5.5 × 4 cm solid, grey mass with no necrosis . Microscopical examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining (HE) and imunohistochemical staining revealed GIST with expression of CD117 and DOG1 . Tumor invaded the submucosal layer and muscularis propria but no necrosis or lymphovascular invasion was observed. Mitotic rate was 0/5/mm2. Proliferation marker Ki67 was less than 5%. Resection margins were free of disease. Tumor was pathologic staged as T3.
Patient case was presented on the multidisciplinary team meeting and due to low-risk GIST with favorable prognosis only observation is suggested.