A twenty three year-old female presented to transition her care from pediatric to adult endocrinology. At the age of one year, she had presented to her local emergency department with seizures and was found to have serum calcium of 6.7 mg/dL (reference range 8.2–10.2 mg/dL). Her serum phosphorus level at that time was 7.8 mg/dL (reference range 2.3–4.7 mg/dL) and magnesium of 2.3 mEq/L (reference range 1.5–2.5 mEq/L). Testing performed at that time included an intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) level of 15 pg/mL (reference range 10–65 pg/mL), a 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of 61 ng/mL (reference range of 30–80 ng/mL) and a 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D level of 45 pg/mL (reference range 15–65 pg/mL), consistent with hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism. There was no history of candidiasis. By two years old, she was also diagnosed with multiple other conditions including hydrocephalus, atrial septal defect, bicuspid aortic valve, left kidney agenesis and thoracolumbar scoliosis. She was later diagnosed with learning disabilities including cognitive and attention deficits, no other psychiatric disorders were diagnosed. Her facial features are shown in Fig. and are noticeable for dysmorphism of the nose, flattened philtrum, micrognathia and hypertelorism (not shown in the figure). She did not have palatal or teeth abnormalities. She underwent an immunological evaluation that was unremarkable. Her biochemical thyroid evaluation was also normal. Her hypoparathyroidism has been managed with calcitriol and calcium supplementation. Her corrected calcium levels were maintained in the range of 8.0–9.5 mg/dL. Her last 24-h urinary calcium was 163.5 mg/dL. She has not developed nephrolithiasis, and renal ultrasound is significant only for an absent left kidney. Given the clinical features that were compatible with 22q11.2 deletion, she initially underwent FISH that did not reveal the targeted deletion. She then had bi-directional DNA sequencing that detected a heterozygous mutation (c.1055 C > T; p.Pro352Leu) resulting in a proline to leucine substitution at amino acid 352 in the TBX1 gene.