A 47-year-old man was diagnosed with erectile dysfunction due to suspected venous leakage following an urological intervention not further specified 20 years ago. Patient especially complains about insufficient penile rigidity and early penile relaxation during sexual activity. Furthermore, he is a non-responder to PDE-5-inhibitors. Patient was assessed with an International Index of Erectile Function Questionnaire (IIEF-15) score of 43 indicating moderate erectile dysfunction.
For patient work-up, initially color Doppler flow analysis was performed using direct pharmacological stimulation with an intra-cavernosal injection of 10 μg prostaglandin E1 resulting in penile tumescence grade E3 (considered not sufficient for sexual intercourse). At 15 min post injection (rigid phase), systolic flow rates of 50 cm/s (right cavernosal artery) and 47 cm/s (left cavernosal artery) (normal > 30 cm/s) and persistent end-diastolic velocities of 11 cm/s (right cavernosal artery) and 10.5 cm/s (left cavernosal artery) (normal < 5 cm/s) were found compatible with venous leakage (Varela et al., ).
For confirmation of diagnosis and anatomical depiction of venous leaks computed tomography cavernosography was performed post intra-cavernosal injection of 10 μg prostaglandin E1 resulting in penile tumescence grade E3. Fifteen minutes post injection a 23-G needle was inserted at the dorso-lateral side of the corpora cavernosum. Graduated injection of normal saline into corpora cavernosum at increasing flow rates up to a flow rate of 0.6 ml/s resulted in penile tumescence grade E4. Subsequently injection of 30 ml 50% saline-diluted non-ionic iodinated contrast medium (300 mg ml− 1) with an infusion velocity of 0.6. ml/s was performed. Computed tomography parameters were as follows: 64 × 0.625 mm collimation, gantry rotation time 0.75 s, time resolution 30 ms, pitch factor 0.984. Continuous scanning was performed under real time monitoring of contrast distribution up to the iliohypogastric veins extending from the upper brim of the true pelvis to the most distant level of the penis. The data constructive section thickness was 1 mm with a reconstruction increment of 1 mm for post-processing. For post-processing, multiplanar reformation using maximum intensity projection and volume rendering was applied. This patient demonstrated major venous leakage of paired deep dorsal penile veins via periprostatic veins and internal pudendal veins draining into both iliohypogastric veins . Furthermore, a more peripheral minor venous leak was found with drainage to superficial inferior epigastric veins .