A 54-year-old Filipino male was referred with a 6-month history of painless blurred vision and a subretinal peripapillary lesion in his right eye. Treatment had been administered elsewhere for a possible inflammatory choroidal neovascular membrane (CNV) with oral prednisone and five injections of intravitreal bevacizumab. This initially led to resolution of the peripapillary subretinal fluid but not the subretinal mass. The subretinal fluid recurred as the prednisone was tapered. He had no significant ophthalmic history and fundus photographs taken by his optometrist, two years prior were normal. His past medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, left herpes zoster ophthalmicus (without ocular involvement), steatohepatitis and obesity with previous gastric sleeve surgery.
On examination, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/25 in the right eye, and 20/20 in the left eye. Intraocular pressures were 9 mmHg right eye, 10 mmHg left eye. There were no signs of anterior uveitis, vitritis or retinal vasculitis in either eye. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed a large, white, subretinal lesion, centred on the optic nerve head that demonstrated speckled autofluorescence . Enhanced-depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) showed a hyper-reflective subretinal mass without thickening of the choroid, subretinal fluid or macular edema . On fluorescein angiography there was hyperfluorescent leakage of the optic nerve, staining of the peripapillary subretinal lesion and blocked fluorescence at its margin but no signs of retinal vasculitis . Indocyanine green (ICG) angiography demonstrated striking absolute blockage of fluorescence by the lesion with multiple small hypofluorescent satellite spots throughout the fundus . B-scan ultrasonography revealed an echodense lesion at the optic nerve head . 24–2 Humphrey visual field testing showed a right inferotemporal scotoma . The left eye was normal.
Complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, QuantiFERON gold testing and an autoimmune screen revealed no abnormalities. Syphilis, Toxoplasma and Bartonella serology were negative. The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level was taken twice. The first reading was normal at 55 U/L, but a subsequent second test was slightly raised at 82 U/L (reference range: < 81 U/L). The patient was not taking any ACE inhibitors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits revealed increased intra-neural signal in the right optic nerve but no optic nerve sheath tumour or glioma . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a bulky appearance to the lower oesophagus with an adjacent right retrocrural lymph node noted, thought to be related to previous gastric sleeve surgery. No hilar lymphadenopathy was detected.
The patient was referred to a haematologist due to concern for the possibility of an unusual presentation of an ocular lymphoma or a paraneoplastic process such as paraneoplastic cloudy vitelliform subretinopathy. He underwent a lumbar puncture which showed no malignant cells. A bone marrow biopsy was obtained from his left posterior superior iliac spine, which demonstrated reactive marrow with variable cellularity with mild megakaryocytic hyperplasia and mild dyserythropoiesis. No neoplastic lymphoid population was detected on flow cytometry. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed metabolically active disease in multiple lymph node groups (bilateral pulmonary hila, para-aortic, iliac, and inguinal), multiple bony skeletal sites, the right ventricle and liver . A core biopsy of the right deep inguinal lymph node showed a non-necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis with possible etiology including infection (mycobacteria, fungi, parasites) and inflammation.
Three months later the patient’s vision deteriorated to 20/100 in the right eye and OCT scans showed subfoveal fluid. Due to persisting diagnostic uncertainty, a 27-gauge pars plana vitrectomy and subretinal biopsy was taken from the peripapillary lesion. A posterior vitreous detachment was induced, and the intraocular pressure was temporarily raised to 80 mmHg at the time of biopsy to reduce the risk of haemorrhage. A 25-gauge curved scissor was used to excise the subretinal tissue which was removed through an anterior 18-gauge sclerostomy. A small sectoral retinal pigment epithelium tear developed superotemporal to the optic disc and the biopsy site was surrounded with endolaser retinopexy. Cryotherapy using triple freeze thaw technique was applied to the sclerostomy site, to prevent seeding of potentially malignant cells. Intravitreal silicone oil (1300 centistoke) was used for tamponade.
The subretinal biopsy showed non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, consisting of tight aggregates of epithelioid histocytes and Langhans giant cells . The lymphocytic infiltrate associated with the granulomas consisted primarily of CD3 +/CD4 + T helper cells. There was no evidence of lymphoma on light microscopy nor immunohistochemistry. Cytology on the vitreous washings showed granulomatous vitritis, with no evidence of lymphoma by flow cytometry. Microbiology did not demonstrate any growth of bacteria, mycobacteria or fungi. In the context of ophthalmic and systemic findings, the subretinal biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of ocular sarcoidosis.
The patient was started on oral prednisone initially at 50 mg then tapered down by 10 mg per week until cessation. He responded well to the corticosteroid regimen with resolution of macular edema. Six months following therapy, the BCVA in the right eye remained poor at 20/200. Fundus examination and OCT scans of the right eye showed a peripapillary chorioretinal atrophy and macular atrophy . Co-management of the systemic sarcoidosis was continued by cardiology, respiratory medicine, and immunology, with commencement of methotrexate at 10 mg weekly, given the severity of his ocular involvement.