A.M., a 12-month-old male infant, Caucasian, Italian, in good general health, with no history of recent fever or any other symptoms. The patient was evaluated for erythematous scalp lesions and annular patches combined with hair loss . The infant had not been in contact with animals; her mother and other family members were asymptomatic. No other systemic symptoms were elicited. He was suspected to have a dermatophytosis.
The Wood’s light examination revealed a brilliant green fluorescence on the scalp lesions. Mycological analysis of all suspected dermatophyte lesions was performed. Hair and scale samples were collected and examined under a light microscope with 20% v/v KOH + 40% v/v DMSO solution in distilled water. A fungal culture was performed into Mycobiotic agar (Merck, KGAA, Germany) to identify dermatophytes. Plates were incubated at 25 °C and examined every 2–3 days for at last 15 days. Mold identification was based on macroscopic and microscopic assessment of colonies . Macroscopic examination revealed some white fluffy spreading colonies , and a characteristic deep yellow-orange pigment on the reverse. Spindle shaped multicellular macroconidia with thick cell walls were detected on microscopic examination . Clinical features and culture results reveled TC caused by Microsporum canis.
Therapy was started with oral griseofulvin (20 mg/kg/day) with a 2 daily tioconazole cream application. The lesions were also treated with iodized alcohol. At 15-day intervals, the child was subjected to objective examination, including culture tests. The patient was treated for two months in total with both medications and iodized alcohol. After this period of treatment, the first negativization of the culture for M. canis was observed. However, 15 days later at the end of treatment, in the area of the lesions, where hair regrowth was observed, the infant patient presented with a single vesicle with growth of M.canis on culture. Oral treatment with griseofulvin (20 mg/kg/day) was administered for one month. After this period, all scalp lesions were completely healed and cultures resulted negative for dermatophytes. After 3 months of follow-up, no recurrence was observed (Additional file ).