A 60-year-old male with known hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and positive family history of heart disease presented to our hospital with persistent moderate-intensity chest pain that began 6 h before ambulance arrival. There were no abnormalities on respiratory examination and cardiac auscultation. Blood pressure was 150/100 mmHg. The initial electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, heart rate of 80 beats/min, ST-elevation of 3 mm, and formed Q-waves in the anterior and lateral wall leads . The high-sensitivity troponin test detected significantly elevated troponin levels. The patient stated that he had episodes of brief, dull pain in his left shoulder for the past month. In 2007, he lost his sight in both eyes due to hereditary retinopathy.
The patient was diagnosed with ST-elevation MI and was urgently transported to the catheterization laboratory. He was previously loaded with dual antiplatelet therapy: 300 mg aspirin and 180 mg ticagrelor. The proximal segment of the LAD was occluded and two drug-eluting stents (Xience Pro 3 × 23 and Synergy 2.5 × 8) were implanted. The Runthrough NS Floppy guidewire was used. A 70% stenosis of the medial segment of the right coronary artery remained untreated. After PCI, the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 3 flow was achieved with no visible signs of complications . The patient was then transported to our coronary unit, where he continued to receive dual antiplatelet therapy, a proton-pump inhibitor, and a high-intensity dose of statin. He was symptom-free.
A routine TTE was performed the following day before discharge. It revealed a spindle-shaped mass in the hypokinetic/akinetic IVS, parallel to the axis of the septum, ∼35 mm in size, on both parasternal long-axis view and apical four-chamber view, and with a central echo-lucency . The main differential diagnoses were an intraventricular thrombus, myocardial tumour, and a septal haematoma. Since a workhorse wire with a soft, atraumatic, low-weight tip designed to reduce distal perforations was used and there was no contrast extravasation to the pericardial space or intracardial cavity during or after the PCI, the possibility of coronary artery perforation caused by the guide wire was dismissed.
Cardiac images by MSCT were obtained on the same day. We could not distinguish between a haematoma and an intracavitary thrombus with certainty because it was not possible to achieve a satisfactory characterization of the myocardium and the formation on both TTE and MSCT . In the absence of enoxaparine, a lower dose of 0.4 mL/24 h of nadroparin was carefully administrated.
Coronary computed tomography angiography was performed to assess the flow through the LAD and possible vessel compression. There was no evidence of in-stent stenosis, but a significant narrowing of the artery distal to the deployed stents was observed .
An MRI was performed on the fourth day of hospitalization. There was an intraseptal mass with a hypointense signal to the myocardium on all sequences. The initial diagnosis of haematoma was based on the intraseptal location, and the absence of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) within the change itself . Nadroparin was immediately discontinued from therapy. Because the patient was clinically stable and TTE monitoring showed no progression of the haematoma, a joint decision was made by cardiologists and a cardiac surgeon to continue conservative management. Because of the CCTA report, we believed that there was a risk of stent thrombosis, so we opted for a more potent P2Y12 inhibitor and did not de-escalate to clopidogrel. The patient was discharged in stable condition after 25 days.
Cardiac MRI was repeated after 2 weeks and revealed a smaller IDH with a hyperintense signal to the myocardium due to methaemoglobin. Magnetic resonance imaging and TTE scans after 2 months indicated that the haematoma had almost completely resolved, with a hypointense signal to the myocardium due to haemosiderin .
At 3 months follow-up, a repeat CCTA was performed because the patient refused a follow-up angiography. There was no in-stent stenosis or residual haematoma . The patient continued to take 100 mg of aspirin once daily and 90 mg of ticagrelor twice a day and remained symptom-free.