The patient, a single 34-year-old man in reported good health, was referred with progressive and painless decreased vision in the left eye over the previous one month. He was evaluated by a neurologist, and bedside fundoscopy was performed that showed swelling of the left optic disc. Visual evoked potential (VEP) and brain and cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without gadolinium were performed to check for signs of multiple sclerosis. VEP showed absence of the P100 wave in the left eye and a normal P100 wave in the right eye, which indicated optic neuritis. Treatment for optic neuritis was initiated despite a normal MRI. The patient received 6.5 grams of methylprednisolone intravenously, but no response was observed.
Some days later, the patient developed progressively decreased vision in the right eye, which involved the lower half of the visual field, so he was referred to our department for further evaluation. The patient had no history of Lhermitte’s sign, Uhthoff’s phenomenon, or collagen vascular disease signs and symptoms, such as oral aphthous ulcer, genital ulcer, photosensitivity, joint swelling, or arthralgia. The patient noted that he had a history of smoking crystal methamphetamine until 4 - 5 years prior to his admission, but stopped using at that time. There was no history of similar or significant diseases in his family. The patient’s vital signs and head, ear, nose, throat, chest, heart, abdominal, and neurological exams were all normal, except for visual acuity. In the left eye, visual acuity was a 3-meter finger-count with a general reduction of sensitivity, and a Marcus Gunn pupil was noted. In the right eye, visual acuity was a 6-meter finger-count, with reduced sensitivity in the inferior visual field. Bedside fundoscopy showed optic disc edema with telangiectasia in the right eye, while the left eye had optic disc atrophy .
Perimetry was performed, which confirmed the physical examination findings .
The laboratory data were in the near-normal ranges .
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal, with an opening pressure of 18 cm H2O and no oligoclonal band detected. Transesophageal echocardiography and color Doppler sonography of the carotid and vertebral arteries were performed for evaluation of embolic sources and atherosclerotic changes, and the results were normal. The patient’s homocysteine level was also checked, and was 7.0 µmol/L (reference range: 5 - 15 µmol/L). HIV antibody was checked with the ELISA method, and was negative. Brain and cervical MRI with and without gadolinium was repeated, with normal findings and no signs of multiple sclerosis plaques or space-occupying lesions. Another probable cause for the patient’s condition was vasculitis-induced optic neuritis, so antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA), perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (P-ANCA), cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (C-ANCA), and anti-cardiolipin antibody were checked, and were all within normal range. Fluorescein angiography was performed by an ophthalmologist, which ruled out Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). The patient lost his eyesight in the course of his hospital stay and became nearly blind, so we began our search for nutritional deficiencies that could cause pseudo-Foster Kennedy syndrome. The patient’s folate level was 14.5 ng/mL (normal range: 3.1 - 17.5 ng/mL), but vitamin B12 was 200 pg/mL (reference range: 243 - 894 pg/mL). A peripheral blood smear was assessed by a pathologist and showed hypersegmented neutrophils. Vitamin B12 deficiency was diagnosed, and intramuscular vitamin B12 was administered. The day after starting treatment with vitamin B12, the progression of loss of vision stopped, and over the next several days it regressed. The patient’s visual field was improved on physical examination, and for confirmation of the examination, another perimetry was done. This showed improvement of the visual field in both eyes .
The patient’s visual acuity was improved to a 6-meter finger-count in both eyes, and fundoscopy showed sharp optic discs bilaterally. The patient was followed, and he experienced neither recurrence of visual loss nor further improvement.