A 15-year-old boy from the Philippines, with a low socio-economic level and no significant past medical history, presented to our Pediatric Emergency Department for evaluation of a right abdominal mass appeared during the last 7 days, associated with occasional dry cough and marked asthenia. No fever, weight loss or recent history of trauma were reported.
On physical examination he was comfortable, except for mild respiratory distress. Respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, heart rate 100 beats/minute, blood pressure 107/74 mmHg, temperature 36.8 C and oxygen saturation was 97% in room air. His weight was 40,5 kg.
On the examination of the oropharynx, two caries were noted affecting inferior molars. Small latero-cervical lymph nodes were palpable bilaterally. Chest auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds in the mid-apical right lung and some homolateral basal crackles. Cardiac objectivity was normal.
Abdomen physical examination showed, in correspondence of the right hypochondrium, a roundish bulging of taut-elastic consistency, with a diameter of 8 cm, painful at palpation, with slightly warm overlying skin.
A point-of-care lung ultrasound showed a sub-pleural anechoic lesion in the mid- apical right chest area, with some hyperechoic spots in the context, and a small amount of right pleural effusion.
Chest-X-ray revealed a semi-moon radiodensity in the upper and middle right lung field and atelectasis of the adjacent lung, together with a slight homolateral shift of mediastinum .
Abdominal ultrasound showed a 9 × 6 cm bi-lobed mass, with fluid-corpuscolated content, delimited by a color-doppler hyper vascularized wall. Such a lesion, of about 9 × 6 cm, seemed apparently extra-hepatic, though compressing the adjacent hepatic parenchyma .
Complete blood count demonstrated a white blood cells count of 16,97 × 10^3 cells/µL (78% neutrophils), with normal haemoglobin and platelets. Blood chemistry revealed C-reactive protein 3.56 mg/dL, lactic dehydrogenase 370 U/L, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 83 U/L, with normal electrolytes and hepatorenal function indices.
The patient was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Unit of our Institution for further evaluation, with the clinical suspicion of infectious disease versus malignancy.
A thoraco-abdominal computed tomography with contrast showed, in correspondence to the right chest wall, an extra-pulmonary lesion consisting of necrotic tissue with air-filled bubbles inside it, extended from the apical pleura to the sixth intercostal space and a right hilar lymphadenopathy of 2 × 1.4 cm without signs of colliquation. The abdominal scans revealed, in the site of the clinically appreciable swelling, an extra-hepatic mass-like lesion of 11.8 × 6 × 13 cm with central colliquation and peripheral ring enhancement dislocating the II, IV and VII segment of the liver . Such findings were confirmed and better characterized at MR.
Rhino-pharyngeal swabs for respiratory viruses (including SARS-Coronavirus 2), Mycoplasma and Chlamydia pneumoniae were negative. Quantiferon test and viral serologies revealed negative too. Blood, sputum, urine and stool cultures didn’t show growth of any microorganism. Galactomannan antigen detection and serologic tests for Entamoeba histolytica and Echinococcus gave no remarkable results.
The following tumour markers were tested: chromogranin A, carcinoembryonic antigen, human alfa chorionic gonadotropin, alpha fetoprotein, urine metanephrines, vanillylmandelic and homovanillic acid. They were all negative.
The 1st level immunological tests (immunoglobulins classes, lymphocyte subpopulations, Nitroblue Tetrazolium Test, Dihydrorhodamine Test) resulted in the range of normality.
The patient underwent a biopsy of the abdominal lesion and positioning of an aspiration drainage. The pathological finding from the biopsy was inflammatory granulation tissue without the presence of malignant cells but with the presence of sulphur granules, which raised the suspicion for actinomycosis. Three days later Aa was isolated from the culture of the drainage fluid. This microorganism was susceptible to most classes of antibiotics such as beta-lactames, quinolones and sulphonamides.
Our patient underwent a panoramic X-ray and a dental consultation. The panoramic X-ray showed partial destruction of the 45 with resorption of the root apex and hypodensity of the crown of 36 with no evidence of periapical alterations. At a careful periodontal examination, no signs of periodontitis were detected. The appropriate conservative dental treatment will be carried out at the end of the antibiotic therapy.
In order to exclude concomitant endocarditis, a complete echocardiogram which showed no evidence of vegetation.
The patient started empirical antibiotic therapy with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam, whose sensibility was confirmed by the antibiogram. After one month of therapy, it was switched to intravenous ciprofloxacin for occurrence of hepatopathy.
After two weeks our patient was discharged in good clinical condition and continued oral ciprofloxacin for a total duration of six months.
Follow-up Chest-X-Ray and abdominal US performed three and six months later respectively, showed near complete resolution of both thoracic and abdominal lesions, though remaining a mild restrictive pneumopathy.