A 58-year-old Caucasian female was admitted to our coronary intensive care unit due to progressive dyspnoea and haemodynamic instability. The patient’s past medical history included a bicuspid aortic valve complicated by stenosis and an ascending aortic aneurysm status post-successful aortic valve replacement (Carpentier-Edwards Magna Ease pericardial aortic bioprosthesis #21) and aortic root replacement performed 9 years prior. Past medical history was also significant for sarcoidosis with stage II lung disease and neurosarcoidosis which remained stable for many years on methotrexate and leucovorin at the time of admission. One month prior to admission, she experienced shortness of breath, and presented to her local cardiologist who performed a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE). Due to concern for thrombosis of her bioprosthetic aortic valve, she was started on 5 mg b.i.d. apixaban. She developed worsening dyspnoea, hypotension, and near-syncope and was thus admitted. Vital signs included a blood pressure of 102/46, heart rate of 97 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, SpO2 of 93%, and a temperature of 36.3°C. Physical examination revealed elevated jugular vein distention, harsh III/VI systolic ejection murmur with loss of S2, bilateral pulmonary rales, and cold lower extremities.
After admission to the coronary intensive care unit, a chest X-ray was performed and revealed bilateral diffuse reticular opacities .
Both a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and TOE were performed. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 49% and severe aortic valve stenosis due to prosthetic thickening and calcification. The peak gradient was 109 mmHg (peak velocity = 521.7 cm/s) with a mean gradient of 73 mmHg (mean velocity = 353.7 cm/s). The dimensionless valve index was 0.17. In addition, there was moderate mitral regurgitation with normal right ventricular function, trace tricuspid regurgitation, and a dilated and non-collapsible inferior vena cava.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram supported the finding of severe aortic valve stenosis with marked thickening of the cusps (Video 1). Additionally, there was evidence of paravalvular leak with suggestion of partial dehiscence of the bioprosthesis and perivalvular abscess, highly raising suspicion for an infectious process. Her atrioventricular conduction remained intact with a PR interval of 170 ms (Video 2).
The patient’s blood work revealed: N-terminal-pro hormone B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 58 534 pg/mL (normal: ≤300 pg/mL), C-reactive protein of 4.3 mg/L (normal: ≤0.8 mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 5 mm/h (normal: 0–20 mm/h), plasma: platelet factor 4 complex of 0.222 (negative: <0.4), lactate of 1.1 mmol/L (normal: 0.7–2.1 mmol/L), and pancytopenia [haemoglobin 10.1 g/dL (normal: 12–16 g/dL) with a reticulocyte index of 0.25 (normal: 0.5–1.5), platelet count 65 000/µL (normal: 150 000–450 000/µL), white blood cell count 5700/µL (normal: 4000–11 000/µL)]. Her labs indicated disseminated intravascular coagulation including a d-Dimer of 1840 ng/mL (normal: <500 ng/mL) and fibrinogen of 108 mg/dL (normal: 200–400 mg/dL). Her peripheral smear was unrevealing. Blood cultures were negative for growth. Further investigations revealed 1,3-b-d-glucan >500 pg/mL (normal: <60 pg/mL), Histoplasma urine antigen 17.5 ng/mL (normal: negative result), and Histoplasma antibody positive, confirming diagnosis of H.
capsulatum endocarditis.
Due to concerns for her haemodynamic instability, the patient was supported via blood product transfusions (>10 units of blood products) and norepinephrine at 10 mcg/kg/min. Despite this, she developed worsening hypotension, and an intra-aortic balloon pump was placed to maintain a mean arterial pressure above 60 mmHg. Surgical consultation was requested however, due to the patient’s critical illness, she was deemed not a candidate for surgical aortic valve replacement. Infectious disease was consulted for consideration of empiric antifungal therapy, in which they recommended vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and liposomal amphotericin B. However, the patient’s condition deteriorated, and she was transitioned to comfort care. The patient succumbed to her disease and passed away.
On autopsy, gross examination revealed bulky occlusive vegetations of the bioprosthetic aortic valve and ascending aortic graft. Histopathological examination demonstrated disseminated Histoplasmosis involving the heart, lungs, kidneys, adrenal glands, mediastinal lymph nodes, brain, and spinal cord .