A 15-year-old male from Sweden with a history of hypermobility with long standing cervical pain without other relevant medical conditions was referred to our clinic. The patient complained about diffuse pain in the entire spine that was mostly concentrated in the cervical region. He described sensation of a temporary relief when he performed self-manipulation of the cervical spine under hyperflexion. He did not complain about neuropathic pain. There was no familiar history of any specific systemic diseases. He underwent genetical examination with suspicion of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The results were negative, and he received the diagnosis of an unspecific hypermobility syndrome. His neurological status upon the initial consultation was normal. The cranial nerve functions were normal, and there were no signs of visible atrophy or weakness in his fascial expression. The deep tendon reflexes were normal. Both deep and superficial sensory examinations, as well as the coordination, were normal. The only pathological finding was significant cervical kyphosis that was visible at the cervical radiological examination. The patient was initially referred for physiotherapy but 1 year later, he was referred back to us due to weakness in his left arm. The neurological examination at that time revealed decreased strength (4 out of 5) in corresponding C5, C6, and C7 nerve roots in his left arm with mild atrophy of the deltoid in comparison to his right arm. There were no other pathological findings in his neurological status that would indicate the development of myelopathy. Further examination with ENMG revealed moderate to severe affection of the anterior horn of the spinal cord from C5-C7 on the left side. Repeated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed enlargement of the posterior epidural space . At the age of 17, the patient received the diagnosis of HD. The diagnosis of HD was based on a combination of clinical, electrophysiological, and radiographic findings. Flexion/extension radiological examination revealed kyphotic deformity between segments C3-C5 that partially reduced in hyperextension . Due to progression of the neurological symptoms and persistent mechanical cervical pain, we decided to treat the patient surgically. The patient and his legal guardian consented to a 2-level anterior cervical discectomy and fusion of segments C3–C5.