A 69-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room of our hospital with abdominal pain. She had developed epigastric pain after breakfast that extended across the entire abdomen with time. The patient had no other abdominal symptoms, such as nausea, diarrhea, or constipation. The patient had had appendectomy for appendicitis in her teens but had no other medical history. Her height was 159 cm and body weight was 83 kg. The patient had no high-grade fever, and other vital signs were in the normal range. The abdomen was soft and flat, although localized tenderness without rebound was noted in the epigastrium and right upper abdomen. Blood examination was normal, and no abnormal intestinal gas detected on the abdominal X-ray images. Abdominal ultrasonography depicted a 13-mm gallbladder stone with an acoustic shadow in the body of the gallbladder. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed, but there was no thickening or enhancement of the gallbladder wall, and the stone was not visualized. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a signal defect in the gallbladder produced by the stone but no such defect in the common biliary duct. There was no dilation of the common biliary duct, but an aberrant biliary duct of liver segment 5 (B5) was detected, which drained directly into the common hepatic duct near the confluence of the cystic duct and the common hepatic duct . No other B5 was visible on the image. Drip-infusion cholecystocholangiography CT (DIC-CT) confirmed the findings of the MRCP . On review of the enhanced CT, no blood vessels around the aberrant B5 could be identified. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed nothing to explain the abdominal symptoms of the patient. She was diagnosed with cholelithiasis and an aberrant B5 draining from the hepatic duct and referred to our department for surgical treatment.
Conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy with four trocars was performed. The HARMONIC ACE®+ ultrasonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, OH, US) was used during the procedure. Initially, the aberrant B5 could not be identified. The cystic artery was divided with the HARMONIC ACE®+, and the cystic duct was severed after double clipping. The serous membrane around the gallbladder was dissected with the HARMONIC ACE®+ and separated bluntly from the gallbladder bed. All procedures were performed as close as possible to the gallbladder to avoid damaging the aberrant B5. Consecutively, a tubular structure, which was assumed to be the aberrant B5, was detected in the gallbladder bed . No signs of injury to the aberrant B5 were visible upon completion of the cholecystectomy, and a subhepatic drain was placed to monitor the abdominal conditions. The operative time was 1 h and 23 min, and blood loss was minimal. No complications occurred after surgery. The subhepatic drain was removed, and oral intake was started on the first postoperative day. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fourth day.