A 73-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the second-line systematic treatment for metastatic PRCC involving mediastinum lymph nodes and lung metastases.
He had undergone a right radical nephrectomy 3 years before and was diagnosed with PRCC type 2, pT3bN0M0 . The first recurrence appeared as a retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis 2 years before, and the lymph node resection was performed. The pathology confirmed metastatic PRCC. The second recurrence appeared as mediastinum lymph nodes and lung metastases 4 months before. Thus, the patient received first-line pazopanib 600 mg/day once daily for several weeks, but hypothyroidism (grade 2) and drug-induced hepatopathy (grade 4) occurred as adverse event and metastatic lesions increased on computed tomography. Based on the course of treatment so far, we chose to start immune checkpoint blockade as the second-line systematic therapy with nivolumab at 3 mg/kg per body weight every 2 weeks intravenously.
The patient’s past medical history included diabetes mellitus and renal calculi. Medications included levothyroxine sodium hydrate, glimepiride, and alogliptin benzoate. His activities of daily living was not limited (Karnofsky Performance Status 100%). IMDC risk classification was a favorable risk at the time of starting the first-line pazopanib therapy. Even before nivolumab therapy, the risk category of the modified IMDC criteria was a favorable risk.
At the time of treatment on day 1, he had no significant symptoms. On day 7, obstructive pneumonia occurred because of increasing mediastinum lymph nodes and treated with sulbactam/ampicillin 6 g/day twice daily for 2 weeks. He received second and third dose of nivolumab on days 30 and 45, respectively. After the third nivolumab administration, the patient began to feel weakness of lower limbs and the symptoms were getting worse. On day 79, he was hospitalized due to the difficulty in walking by himself. Physical examination showed disturbance of lower limb deep sensibility and weakness of lower limb proximal muscle. Cerebrospinal fluid had good clarity, normal glucose level (95 mg/dL), increased lymphocyte-dominated cell number (107/mm3; lymphocyte 99%), increased protein level (253.4 mg/dL), increased IgG level (20.4 mg/dL), and increased myelin basic protein (261.2 pg/mL). Spinal magnetic resonance imaging revealed sporadic T2WI hyperintensities in the thoracic cord below Th2, suggesting myelitis . Nerve conduction study suggested demyelination in nerve roots. Drug lymphocyte stimulation test showed suspicious for positive to nivolumab.
Finally, he was diagnosed as having a myeloradiculoneuropathy caused by nivolumab. He received two cycles of steroid-pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days intravenously) from days 106 and 118 after the first nivolumab administration, respectively. After the treatment, his symptoms gradually improved, and he became able to walk on his own without any side effect of steroid-pulse therapy. Results of the follow-up lumbar puncture showed almost normal findings and abnormal signals below Th2 level on magnetic resonance imaging (T2WI) disappeared .
After only three cycles of nivolumab administration, the mediastinum lymph node metastasis began to shrink without any additional treatment . The size of the metastatic lesion, which was 76 × 38 mm before treatment, was reduced to 56 × 20 mm just after the third administration and 42 × 15 mm at 6 months. Moreover, 2 years after the treatment with nivolumab, the size of lymph node metastasis has further shrunk to less than 10 mm, and lung metastasis has completely disappeared without any new lesions (CR based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1).