A 6-week-old entire female domestic shorthair cat was presented for evaluation of a soft bulge and a palpable skull defect on the forehead since adoption a few days earlier . The physical examination did not reveal any other abnormalities. The only neurological deficit was an absent menace response bilaterally, which was attributed to the young age of the cat and the apparent blindness (see the video in the ), localising the lesion to the occipital cortex. Differential diagnoses included congenital or traumatic MC or MEC. Echography through the cranial defect showed that the protruding tissue contained cerebral cortex and was associated with porencephaly. Therefore, a diagnosis of MEC and porencephaly was achieved. Surgical repair when the cat reached adult size was proposed.
At the age of 4 months, the cat developed generalised tonic–clonic seizures and was initially treated with levetiracetam (20 mg/kg q8h PO gradually increased to 40 mg/kg q8h PO owing to poor seizure control [Keppra oral solution 100 mg/ml; UCB Pharma SA]). Then, when the cat was 6 months old, phenobarbitone (2 mg/kg q12h PO gradually increased to 7.5 mg/kg q12h PO to reach an acceptable serum level and seizure control [Luminaletas 15 mg; Kern Pharma]) was added. At that stage, a CT study was performed under general anaesthesia with a 16-slice helical CT scanner (Brivo CT385; General Electric Healthcare). The CT images confirmed the presence of severe cranioschisis with complete absence of the frontal bone, including the frontal sinuses and part of the parietal bone. Both the meninges and cortical tissue protruded through the defect and porencephaly was also present. The caudal cranial fossa was subjectively small, and the cerebellum appeared flattened dorsoventrally . A three-dimensional printed reconstruction of the cat’s skull helped to adapt a polysulfone tailor-made implant (Beta Implants; Pontevedra) for a perfect fit to cover the bone defect .
Surgical resolution was scheduled for 2 months later when the cat was 8 months old. Intramuscular pethidine (5 mg/kg IM [Dolantina 100 mg/2 ml; Kern Pharma]) and alfaxalone (0.5 mg/kg IM [Alfaxan 10 mg/ml; Dechra]) were used as premedication. Induction was carried out with alfaxalone (0.5 mg/kg IV) and midazolam (0.2 mg/kg IV [Midazolam 15 mg/3 ml; Normon]), and an alfaxalone continuous rate infusion (CRI) was used for anaesthetic maintenance at 10 mg/kg/h. During surgery, a fentanyl (Fentanest Kern Pharma) CRI was administered at 5 µg/kg/h and cefazolin (Cefazolin Normon) at 20 mg/kg every 1.5 h. No anaesthetic complications were noted during the surgery.
For the surgical intervention, the cat was aseptically prepared. The dorsal frontal region of the head was shaved, from the dorsal limit of the nose to the second cervical vertebra, including the lateral canthus of both eyes and the ears. The area was disinfected with 1% povidone-iodine (Braunosan H Plus Braun). The cat was positioned in straight sternal recumbency, with the head placed on a sandbag and firmly fixed to the table. A longitudinal incision was performed along the malformation midline and extended 2 cm rostrally and caudally. The subcutaneous tissue was then carefully dissected to separate the skin from the abnormally thickened duramater, and the MEC was isolated. Intravenous mannitol (0.25 g/kg [Mannitol 20%; Braun]) and dexamethasone (0.05 mg/kg IV [Caliercortin 4 mg/ml Calier]) were administered as preventive treatment in case a subclinical increased intracranial pressure was present, before performing the durectomy to remove the abnormal meninges and expose the protruded cerebral cortex, whose macroscopic appearance was also abnormal. The resected meninges were sent for histopathological analysis. The exposed brain was hard and thickened, and no gyri were identifiable . A 2 × 2 mm wedge biopsy of the protruding brain was also submitted for histopathological study. Part of the cerebrospinal fluid lodged in the porencephalic cavity was drained with a 1 ml syringe until the volume of the protruding brain decreased enough to be enclosed by the tailor-made implant. Four holes were drilled in the implant and another four at the edges of the cranial defect using a 1.5 mm drill bit so that they coincided once the implant had been placed in the desired position. A haemostatic collagen mesh (Lyostyp; Braun) was placed between the brain tissue and the implant to replace the duramater. The implant was anchored to the skull with four 0.6 mm cerclages in the predrilled holes . The skin excess was removed using Metzembaum scissors to achieve a cosmetically adequate appearance . The skin closure was performed in layers.
A postoperative CT revealed an acceptable congruence between the implant and the skull with minimal pneumocephalus .
Postoperative treatment included cefazolin (20 mg/kg q8h IV), dexamethasone (0.05 mg/kg q24h IV), phenobarbitone (6.5 mg/kg q12h IV), levetiracetam (30 mg/kg q8h IV), maropitant (1 mg/kg q24h IV [Cerenia Zoetis]) and a fentanyl CRI at 3 μg/kg/h, which was progressively reduced over the first 24 h and replaced by buprenorphine (10 µg/kg q8h IV [Buprecare Divasa-Farmavic SA DFV Group]). The cat was conscious and ambulatory within 12 h of surgery but showed ataxia and mild obtundation, which gradually improved during hospitalisation. The cat was discharged 3 days later with slight obtundation, mild ataxia and bilateral blindness.
The histopathological and immunohistochemical results showed disorganised nervous tissue and leptomeningeal thickness. The cerebral cortex was deprived of gyri and showed abnormal neural architecture with loss of columnar and laminar organisation, a marked decrease in the number of neuronal cell bodies and microspongiosis of the neuropil. Areas of neuronal pyknosis were observed along with reactive gliosis, astrocytosis, a large number of rod cells and activated macrophages containing cytoplasmic dark material. The subcortical white matter showed loss of eosinophilia and excessive nerve fibre separation. The leptomeninges were accompanied by vascular proliferation and an increase in the fibrous collagen-like component. The duramater was disorganised, with abundant dense collagen bundles and calcification. Inflammation was not a feature . These findings were all consistent with an MEC.
Check-ups were carried out 1 week after surgery, 3 weeks later, then 2 months and 6 months after the intervention. At that time, the cat had partially recovered vision despite an absent menace response bilaterally. Otherwise, the neurological examination was normal, and the cat had no seizures since the surgery 6 months earlier. However, the cat started seizing again when a gradual decrease in levetiracetam was initiated and the treatment was reinstituted.
One year after surgery, the cat was admitted for a conventional ovariohysterectomy that proceeded without complications. At that point, a recheck CT was performed observing that the implant was still in the same position and the pneumocephalus, present in the CT immediately postsurgery, had resolved .
Three years and 7 months after surgery, the cat remained stable with a good quality of life and partial visual capacity, despite bilaterally absent menace response. At the time of final follow-up, 43 months postoperatively, the cat was seizing monthly despite receiving phenobarbitone (6.5 mg/kg q12h) and levetiracetam (30.5 mg/kg q8h).