A 71-year-old white man presented to the Maxillofacial Unit in December 2020 for a specialist surgical consultation. The patient's medical history was positive for lung adenocarcinoma; He had undergone right upper lung lobectomy surgery and mediastinal lymph node sampling in 2019. He also underwent four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy in 2019. During the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) follow-up, the presence of an osteolytic area in the left condyle was highlighted in December 2020 . This lesion featured focal impregnation of the radiopharmaceutical of dubious significance, with a maximum SUV (Standardized Uptake Value) of 3.6. There were no facial or occlusion alterations on inspection, and the mandibular movements were preserved. Furthermore, the patient did not report pain or sensorineural alterations. Computed tomography (CT) showed the presence of a lesion of the left mandibular condyle with partial erosion of the cortical bone ( A–B). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a subtle alteration in the surrounding muscles. A multidisciplinary team was created with maxillofacial surgeons, oncologists, and radiotherapists. It was decided to proceed with tumorectomy and subsequent adjuvant radiotherapy. In January 2021 he underwent a left condilectomy under general anesthesia ( A–B). Surgery was extensive: 1.5–2 cm removal from seemingly healthy margins. Then a condylar implant was inserted to restore function. Histopathological analysis revealed bone localization of lung adenocarcinoma; and positive immunophenotype for TTF1 and CK7. The surgical scar healed well and a follow-up CT scan in 3 months displayed no evidence of tumor recurrence. In May 2021, he underwent Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy every other day for a total of 3000 cGy. In December 2021 RM showed the presence of an expansive solid mass (26 × 23 × 35 mm – AP × LL × SC) in correspondence to the residual condylar region. It presented a homogeneously intermediate signal intensity in both T1w and T2w; a modest alteration of the signal in the neighboring soft tissues was associated (absence of clear signs of the infiltration of the masseter and lateral pterygoid muscles). The patient underwent chemotherapy. The patient, 32 months after surgery, is free from disease.