A 71 year-old male presented for an urgent biopsy of a lesion of Corpus Callosum on a background of clinically diagnosed intra-operative anaphylaxis for the same procedure 4 days prior, which was abandoned. Symptoms of the initial presentation, which brought the patient under the care of the Neurosurgical team, included impaired ability to self-care and mild cognitive dysfunction. Surgical and Medical teams deemed the histo-pathological diagnosis essential due to the need for tailored subsequent medical management including potential urgent administration of chemotherapy and radiation.
The specialised allergy testing was not feasible due to the brief 4 day timeline proposed between the two procedures. Decision was made to proceed with surgery due to the urgent need for the identification of the nature of the lesion.
Both patient and the prior care episode were evaluated. Patient had a background of treated hypertension, with no other underlying illnesses. Prior to this, he had undergone uneventful surgical procedures and anaesthesia.
History, records of the procedure, and tests for mast cell mediators, were reviewed by the attending anaesthetist. During the first care episode patient was given a single dose of midazolam, followed by remifentanil and propofol total intravenous anaesthesia, rocuronium and cephazolin in quick succession. The laryngoscopic view was a Grade 3 Cormack and Lehane, with direct laryngoscopy utilising a Macintosh 4 Blade. CMAC® Blade 4 Videolaryngoscope demonstrated an equivalent Grade 3 Cormack and Lehane view. Following successful airway management, patient developed intractable hypotension, concomitant bronchospasm and was diagnosed with clinical anaphylactic episode. The patient was treated with an adrenaline infusion, procedure was abandoned and he was admitted with an endotracheal tube in situ to Intensive Care Unit where he recovered uneventfully. The patient re-presented 4 days later for a repeat procedure. Specific allergen testing was unavailable and deemed not to be feasible at this point in time.
During the repeat care episode, decision was made to secure the airway via an awake flexible endoscopic intubation prior to administering general anaesthesia. Airway was topicalised generously using a mix of 4% nebulised xylocaine, 10% local anaesthetic sprays to the back of the pharynx, and topical co-phenylcaine nasal spray. In addition to the above, Disposable devilbis atomiser was used to a total of 9 mg.kg− 1 of xylocaine. Remifentanil infusion at the dose of 0.05 mcg.kg− 1.min− 1 was used during the intubation and airway was secured uneventfully through the nose with a flexible Storztm 5.1 mm video fiber-optic bronchoscope. After connecting the breathing circuit, confirmation of CO2 was obtained and patient was administered 250 mg of thiopentone. Remifentanil infusion was increased to 0.2 mcg.kg− 1.min− 1 and maintained at this level through the case. Anaesthesia was maintained with Sevoflurane at a total dose of less than 1 MAC. For infection prophylaxis, 600 mg of clindamycin was administered. Procedure was completed uneventfully, patient extubated and taken to recovery. Using the above technique, the only medication in common between the two episodes of care was remifentanil.