A 25-year-old girl with a previous history of epilepsy presented to Mizan-Tepi University Teaching Hospital, Mizan-Aman, Ethiopia, an emergency department with a chief complaint of abdominal cramp of one-day duration on July 15, 2022, GC. She also had associated symptoms of vomiting of bilious matter, failure to pass feces and flatulence of the same duration. Otherwise, she has no other complaints. Her vital signs were: a heart rate of 120 beats per minutes, BP of 100/70 mmHg, and a temperature of 37.8 ◦C. On general examination, she had signs of moderate dehydration. Her abdomen was grossly distended, it barely moved with respiration, and there was generalized tenderness with involuntary guarding. Additionally, hypertympanic, hyperactive bowel sounds, and a digital rectal examination revealed an empty rectum.
Her emergent laboratory data were as follows: WBC (9.89 × 1000/μL) with an elevated hemoglobin level (17.1 g/dl) and normal platelet count. Serum electrolytes and renal function tests were in the normal range. Emergency abdominal plain radiography was the next step, which showed distended large bowel segments and distal small bowel with visible fecal matter distal to the descending colon with 2 air-fluid levels .
Generalized peritonitis secondary to large bowel obstruction was considered an early diagnosis. Considering history, physical examination, and x-ray findings, after obtaining written consent for a short period of resuscitation, an exploratory laparotomy was performed. Intraoperative findings revealed a synchronous ascending and transverse volvulus. The hepato-colic ligament was absent, and the ascending colon was not fixed with a mobile cecum colon. The patient had a closed loop obstruction with one end at the distal one-third of the transverse colon and the other end at the distal ilium near the ilio-Ceca valve. The ascending colon and the proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon were gangrenous. So the ascending colon was resected along with the transverse colon to perform a standard extended right hemicolectomy and ilio-transverse colon anastomosis. Additionally, around one litre of hemorrhagic fluid was evacuated from the peritoneal cavity. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after seven days.