A 76-year-old Caucasian man with a history of type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 3A, essential hypertension, hypothyroidism, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, prior cerebellar strokes, and prostate cancer (Gleason 10) with widespread metastasis to the bone presented with non-oliguric severe AKI 3 weeks after receiving simultaneous therapy with denosumab (120 mg subcutaneous injection once) and abiraterone (1 g per day orally). The patient had failed prior antineoplastic therapy with leuprolide acetate, bicalutamide, and nilutamide. On admission, his serum creatinine (SCr) was elevated at 5.7 mg/dL from a baseline of 1.2 mg/dL . His active outpatient medications consisted of rosuvastatin (40 mg daily), benazepril, metoprolol tartrate, metformin, warfarin, low-dose prednisone (started concomitantly with abiraterone), and levothyroxine. The patient had been on statin therapy for more than 1 year and the dose had not been recently modified. The patient denied prior episodes of myopathies, rhabdomyolysis, or AKI. His physical exam was unremarkable. Further blood work showed hyperkalemia, mild metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, mild transaminemia (predominantly AST), and creatine kinase (CK) of 44,476 IU/L . Urine studies revealed dipstick proteinuria (100 mg/dL), large dipstick blood, only a few normomorphic erythrocytes, and negative culture. All serologic work-up (ANA, PR3- and MPO-ANCA, anti-GBM antibodies, ENA panel, C3, C4, RF) and viral studies (HBV, HCV, CMV, EBV, Influenza A/B, Parainfluenza, Adenovirus, RSV) were negative or normal. Thyroid function tests were normal. Kidney sonogram and Doppler studies were negative for hydronephrosis and renal vein thrombosis, respectively. On admission, abiraterone therapy was discontinued and no further doses of denosumab were administered. Subsequently, the patient underwent kidney biopsy that was consistent with severe acute tubular injury with presence of myoglobin casts, confirming the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI . The patient responded well to intravenous isotonic fluids and discontinuation of denosumab, abiraterone, and rosuvastatin. CK levels normalized by day 25 of hospitalization and the SCr at the time of hospital discharge was 3.1 mg/dL . After hospital discharge, the patient resumed all prior medications, including rosuvastatin, except for denosumab and abiraterone. His successive antineoplastic therapy consisted of enzalutamide. Kidney function returned to baseline 12 months after discharge and he had no recurrent episodes of rhabdomyolysis.