A 32-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department because of the sudden onset of right hemiplegia, global aphasia, and reduced consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale 9). At admission, her vital signs were normal, artery pressure was 130/60 mmHg, heart rate 65 b.p.m., she had no hypoxia with normal peripheral oxygen saturation, and her body temperature was 36.8°C. The physical examination revealed a quiet holosystolic flow heart murmur grade 2 over the right second intercostal space, without radiation. Laboratory data showed microcytic anaemia due to a known thalassaemia trait; haemoglobin was 9.5 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume was 75.9 fL; white blood count, renal function, hepatic and cardiac enzymes, C reactive protein, and procalcitonin were normal.
She suffered from a severe HUVS form with cardiac valvular involvement. Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome was diagnosed 10 years before, based on recurrent urticarial episodes with hypocomplementemia, associated with arthralgia, and a skin biopsy highlighting a leukocytoclastic vasculitis. After the diagnosis, the patient was treated with azathioprine and subsequently with mycophenolate, followed by steroids per os. Prolonged and high dosage steroid and immunosuppressive treatments exposed her to several systemic infections.
During these years, she had already undergone cardiac surgery twice for a chronic aseptic inflammatory process involving aortic and mitral valves. Indeed, she had been subjected 2 years before admission, at the age of 30 years, to cardiac surgery with aortic valve repair and mitral and tricuspid annuloplasty for severe aortic, mitral, and tricuspid regurgitation; 1 year before, at the age of 31 years, she underwent aortic and mitral valve replacement with biological prostheses for the relapse of aortic and mitral regurgitation. Regular cardiologic follow-up showed normal left ventricular and prosthetic function. Two months before admission, she reported left pyelonephritis from Listeria monocytogenes, treated with meropenem 3 g/day and gentamicin 2 mg/kg/day for 10 days. On this occasion, transthoracic echocardiography was unremarkable. During the month before admission, she complained of remittent fever without other symptoms.
After admission, the patient underwent several instrumental examinations. A brain computed tomography (CT) without contrast medium showed a left frontoparietal haemorrhage 60 mm × 40 mm large, with perilesional oedema and midline shift of 13 mm . A CT angiography evidenced a lobulated vascular dilatation, which suggested a mycotic aneurysm, considering the history of remittent fever. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a paravalvular aortic thickening. A transoesophageal echocardiogram showed an echo lucent space with thickening at the aortic root consistent with an abscess extending around the aortic prosthesis, reaching the first part of the ascending aorta, with signs of internal colliquation, and a maximum thickness of 16 mm ( and Video 1). A CT angiography of the aorta confirmed the diagnosis, showing a collection of fluid density around the aortic root .
Right hemiplegia and global aphasia were caused by septic embolism to the left medium cerebral artery complicated by cerebral haemorrhage. Angiography confirmed a 7 mm sizable mycotic pseudoaneurysm in the M3 tract of the left medium cerebral artery . After a multidisciplinary consult, endovascular treatment was chosen. A super-selective catheterization of the aneurysm allowed the injection of Glubran inside it, a cyanoacrylate-based synthetic glue, obtaining a complete angiographic obliteration. The day after, the patient underwent neurosurgical evacuation of the haemorrhage. Listeria monocytogenes was isolated from blood cultures; it was the agent responsible for aortic infective endocarditis, probably secondary to prolonged immunosuppressive therapy.
The patient responded to antibiotic treatment with ampicillin 12 g/day, levofloxacin 1000 mg/day, and linezolid 1200 mg/day, and a subsequent transoesophageal ultrasound exam showed a reduction of the abscess engagement after 54 days of therapy. At admission, she was taking deltacortene 12.5 mg/day as a maintenance dose. We continued this therapy after the diagnosis of endocarditis to prevent a vasculitis flare-up. During antibiotic therapy, she was afebrile. A progressive neurological improvement occurred during hospitalization. The patient was directed towards a rehabilitation plan, with the purpose to evaluate elective aortic prosthesis replacement after the improvement of general conditions.
Further cardiac surgery would have been necessary, but the operative risk was judged too high. The patient died a few months later for an endocarditis relapse, causing a coronary embolism.
Its clinical complexity makes this case a rarity in rarity, in a disease context that is not yet fully understood.