A 10 year-old boy weighing 40 kilograms was admitted to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit after being found unconscious at home, and was subsequently intubated by an emergency care team. He had a history of asthma starting at the age of 4. Asthmatic episodes in the past were treated with intermittent salbutamol disc inhaler applications.
On admission the patient had a plethysmographic oxygen saturation of 80% on mechanical ventilation with an inspired oxygen fraction of 100%. Initial blood gas analysis (ABL 700 Radiometer Copenhagen) revealed a paCO
2 (partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide) of >256 mm Hg, which was exceeding the cut-off-level of the analyser, and a pH of 6.69. The initial chest X-ray showed hyperinflated lungs and a discrete subcutaneous emphysema at the neck and the upper mediastinum . The patient was sedated with fentanyl 4 µg/kg/h, midazolam 0.5 mg/kg/h and ketamine 2 mg/kg/h and ventilated with a Draeger Evita 4 respirator (Draeger, Luebeck, Germany) using a pressure controlled mode. Initial ventilator settings were plateau pressure 36 cm H
2O, positive endexspiratory pressure (PEEP) 5 cm H
2O, respiratory rate 12/min and I/E ratio 1:3 with 100% inspired oxygen (ratio of inspiration to expiration in mechanical ventilation). This achieved sufficient oxygenation, but the flow pattern display on the respirator revealed massive air-trapping.
Broncholytic therapy was started with prednisolone 2 mg/kg, terbutaline 0.02 mg/kg/h i.v., magnesium sulphate 2 g over 20 min i.v. q6h and inhalation with salbutamol and ipratropium bromide q4h. An antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1.5 g q8h and clarithromycin 300 mg q12h was initiated.
The ventilation management proved to be difficult in this boy. Ventilator settings had to be increased in a stepwise mode to plateau pressures up to 45 cm H
2O and PEEP reduced to 0 cm H
2O in the first two hours. However, neither severe hypercapnia nor air-trapping improved. Then, a combined high and low-frequency ventilation was initiated (VDR4 percussion ventilator, Reiner, Germany) with a percussion frequency of 400/min and a conventional frequency of 10/min. With this regime, paCO
2 could be reduced to 98 mm Hg and pH raised to 7.03. Unfortunately hypercapnia worsened again and mediastinal emphysema was more prominent. 10 h after admission, the blood gas analysis revealed a paCO
2 of >256 mmHg and a pH of 6.79. The respirator was replaced by an anaesthesia machine (Draeger Julian, Luebeck, Germany) and inhalation of 3% sevoflurane was started. Within minutes tidal volume increased from 100 to 320 ml while the plateau pressure could be reduced from 43 to 35 cm H
2O. Other respiratory settings were PEEP 0, respiratory rate 6/min, I:E 1:5 and inspired oxygen fraction 100%. From that time blood gases improved continuously and air-trapping decreased with a paCO
2 falling below 100 mm Hg after 20 hours and a pH exceeding 7.2 after 24 hours. Oxygen fraction could then be reduced to 50%. No buffering was performed throughout the whole treatment. Because blood pressure levels tended to be low (MAP < 60 mm Hg) despite a positive fluid balance, Dobutamine 4 µg/kg/min and Norepinephrine 0.08 µg/kg/min i.v. were administered. The time course of the patient´s blood gases is shown graphically in
.
15 h after admission a fixed dilation of both pupils was observed. A cerebral CT-scan showed no abnormalities like brain swelling or intracranial bleeding. Since there was a risk of a longer hypoxic period, cooling to a core temperature of 34°C was initiated (Arctic Sun cooling system, Medivance, CO, USA) and intracranial pressure monitoring was performed (Codman® ICP monitoring system) revealing normal values.
After 36 h, the situation had significantly improved: sevoflurane, terbutaline and ipratropium bromide could be stopped, magnesium sulphate was reduced and the anaesthesia machine could be replaced by an intensive care respirator. Chest X-rays showed that the subcutaneous and mediastinal emphysema had resolved. Subsequently, magnesium infusions were stopped and prednisolone was tapered. After 48 h, pupil dilation slowly resolved and 2 further days later pupils showed intact light reaction. Catecholamines were stopped and sedation was gradually weaned. On day 5 spontaneous breathing started, intracranial pressure monitoring was terminated and the trachea was extubated after 8 days. The boy was transferred to the regular ward on day 10 without any neurologic impairment and could be discharged in good condition 4 days later.