A 73-year-old woman presented with right focal asymmetric density determined by mammography during a breast cancer screening in December 2021 . Her medical history included ovarian cancer at the age of 48 years and diabetes with HbA1c 7.1% under treatment. She had undergone a simple hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomies, pelvic lymph node dissection, partial omentectomy, and appendicectomy for stage C ovarian cancer at another hospital 25 years previously. Details of the histological type of ovarian cancer determined at that time were not available. She had been treated postoperatively with 5 cycles of cyclophosphamide and cisplatin and remained free of recurrence for the next 10 years. Therefore, follow-up was terminated. Her family history was negative for cancer. Palpation and visual examination revealed no obvious mass in the right breast or right axillary lymphadenopathy. Ultrasonography (US) revealed an upper lateral, 13.5-mm, irregular hypoechoic mass in the right breast , but no obvious lymphadenopathy in the right axilla . The mass was diagnosed as invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast by a US-guided Mammotome biopsy. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast revealed an upper lateral, 12-mm, contrast-enhanced mass with spiculation in the right breast, but no obvious lymph node enlargement . Dedicated breast positron emission tomography (PET) showed significant accumulation with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 2.1 in the right breast . Whole-body PET–computerized tomography (CT) showed significant uptake (SUVmax 1.4) in the right breast , but none in the right axilla to suggest lymph node metastasis , and distant metastasis was not suggested . Right upper lateral breast cancer cT1cN0M0 stage I was diagnosed based on these findings. The patient underwent right mastectomy in January 2022, when we obtained an SLNB specimen. An intraoperative rapid pathological assessment of the node by indigo carmine staining was negative for breast cancer metastasis. The postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on postoperative day 6.
The postoperative pathology results of the right breast revealed invasive ductal carcinoma, tubule forming type, pT1c (11 mm), Ly0, V0, f, nuclear grade 1, histological grade 1 , estrogen receptor (ER) J-score 3b and progesterone receptor (PgR) J-score 2 , human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) score 2 , no amplification of HER2 according to fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), and Ki-67 score, 5% . Breast cancer metastasis was negative in the sentinel lymph node. On the other hand, proliferative cells slightly larger than lymphocytes were evident in a nodular structure within this node , but tingible body macrophages (TBMs) were not evident. Immunostaining revealed diffusely expressed tumor cells CD20 and surrounding small CD3+ and CD5+ lymphocytes. The cells in germinal centers were CD10+ and Bcl-2+ . These findings indicated a diagnosis of Grade 1–2 FL.
Since the breast cancer was pT1cN0M0 Stage IA, we considered that the prognosis of our patient would be determined according to the stage of FL and referred her to a hematologist. Her bone marrow results were negative and stage I FL was confirmed. The treatment plan was observation, and she was prescribed with an aromatase inhibitor as postoperative endocrine therapy for breast cancer. She will remain on aromatase inhibitors for at least 5 years and will be followed up for 10 years after the breast cancer surgery.