A 32-year-old male was admitted to our hospital on July 13, 2018. The patient’s parents were second cousins. His physical and mental development was normal and he frequently consumed kebabs. The patient began to experience repeated fevers in April, 2013. The temperature was typically 38.5 °C in the afternoon and at night, and was accompanied by mandibular pain. The patient underwent osteomyelitis curettage in a local hospital and his brucellosis antibody test was positive (the titer was unknown). The patient was then treated with levofloxacin, cefodizime, and oxytetracycline for three courses (half a month on each course and half a month between courses). He gradually felt pain in the right shoulder joint, left elbow joint, right hip joint, and left knee joint, for which he frequently took analgesic tablets to relieve the pain. In January 2014, the patient was admitted to another hospital due to fever and joint pain. His brucellosis antibody was 1:100 positive, his C-reactive protein (CRP) was 104 mg/L (0–8), and blood routine was normal. A bone marrow puncture showed bone marrow proliferating actively. Positron-emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed bone destruction in the mandible, bilateral humerus, right greater trochanter of femur, and increased fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism (SUVmax = 10.06). The results of PET-CT and clinical examinations indicated that the patient suffered from an infectious disease. The diagnosis was “brucellosis” and the fever was relieved after 3 months of treatment with moxifloxacin + rifampicin + doxycycline. However, joint pain persisted and the brucellosis antibody test remained positive.
In 2015, a left upper limb bone scraping biopsy was performed and diagnosed as “Fibrous dysplasia of bone”. In 2016 and 2017, the patient visited several hospitals to treat the brucellosis; however, his osteoarticular symptoms continued to worsen.
Since 2018, swelling gradually developed, and the patient experienced pain and deformities in his hands and knees, and was unable to walk. Facial rashes appeared with itchiness, but the patient did not use antibiotics. In July 2018, the rashes spread throughout the body , the fever was aggravated, blood hemoglobin (Hb) decreased to 36 g/L, and platelet (PLT) count decreased. Following blood transfusion, the patient attended our hospital.
Following admission in our hospital, the patient’s blood cultures were negative and his standard tube agglutination test (SAT) was 1:400 positive. The blood routine showed that white blood cell (WBC) count was normal, Hb was 43–63 g/L (130–175), and the PLT count was 58–104*10^9 /L (125–350). CRP was 130–200 mg/L (0–5). Blood biochemical examinations revealed that alkaline phosphatase levels were slightly elevated. The T cell enzyme-linked immono-spot assay for tuberculosis was negative. His autoantibody series (including ANA, anti-dsDNA, anti-SM, anti-U1RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-SCL 70, anti JO-1, RO-52, PM-Sd, AMA-M2, AHA, ANUA, anti-ribosomal P protein antibody), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (CCP), and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were also negative. X-ray of the right hand showed that the bone density of all bones was reduced unevenly, the interphalangeal space became narrow, and the soft tissue was slightly swollen. X-ray of the bilateral hip joint showed that the cortex of the left upper femur was slightly thickened, and the density of the medullary cavity was not uniform. X-ray of the bilateral knee joint showed that the joint space was narrowed. Bone ECT showed that the metabolism of the long bones and joints of the four limbs were increased, as was the metabolism of the hands, maxilla and mandible. Chest and abdominal imaging examinations were approximately normal.
To clarify the cause of fever, rashes and severe anemia, we performed bone marrow and skin biopsies. Skin biopsy showed diffuse and dense infiltration in the dermis, which was mainly neutrophil infiltration and nuclear fragmentation, irregular proliferation of the upper epidermis and a superficial scab . The pathological diagnosis was neutrophilic dermatosis. A bone marrow smear showed that the proliferation of the granulocyte system was active, while the proliferation of the erythrocyte system decreased, mainly in late and middle-aged erythrocytes. Occasional, large, multinucleated middle and late erythrocytes were observed, nucleus sprouting and nuclear fragmentation was observed in late erythroblasts, and the sizes of mature red blood cells varied. The ratio of lymphocytes decreased and cell morphology was normal. The patient was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome with single lineage dysplasia (MDS-SLD). In the following genetic examinations, a p.g642 fs insertion mutation in the ASXL1 gene was detected, and his chromosomal examination showed 46,XY,der(12)t(1;12)(q11;p11)[15]/46,XY[5].
The patient was given anti-brucellosis therapy (ceftriaxone + levofloxacin + rifampicin + doxycycline) for 6 months and glucocorticoid therapy. The dosage of methylprednisolone was 60 mg once per day, which was then gradually decreased according to the symptoms. By the end of May 2019, the glucocorticoid had been used for 10 months. The current dose of methylprednisolone is 8 mg per day by oral administration. At present, the patient has no fever, most rashes have been resolved and pigmentation has subsided . The patient’s joint pain in his hands and knees has been relieved; however, the hands and knees remain deformed. The patient also remains unable to stand. The Hb increased to 121 g/L, while the PLT count remained low, at 49*10^9 /L (125–350).