A 69-year-old man presented with progressive visual field loss for 1 month and was referred for RRD. The patient’s medical history included hypertension. On presentation, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Both eyes had mild cortical cataracts (a, b); otherwise, the anterior segment was normal. Fundus examination revealed a break associated with lattice degeneration in the upper temporal side with temporal macula-off retinal detachment in the right eye (c, d). The fundus of the left eye was normal.
Although the patient was older, we selected SB because he only had a single peripheral retinal break. A 27-gauge chandelier-assisted SB was performed under a wide-field viewing system using the NGENUITY 3D® visualization system (Alcon, US). The superior and lateral rectus muscles were sutured with 4-0 silk ties to control the eye. A 27-gauge cannula for chandelier illumination was placed in the superior nasal sclera, and the chandelier light was inserted into the cannula. A retinal break was identified using a wide-angle RESIGHT® viewing system (Zeiss, Germany), and cryopexy was performed by scleral compression with a cryoprobe. For the buckling procedure, the eyeball was rotated with the fixed 4-0 ties (a). A silicone sponge (#506) was placed at 8 and 2 o’clock under the scleral sutures, which were at 1, 10, and 11 o’clock. Subretinal fluid drainage was performed at the 9 o’clock position. All procedures were performed by inserting a chandelier illumination into the cannula. During the surgery, a posterior lens opacity on the superior nasal side was detected (b), which did not affect the surgery. After confirming retinal reattachment, 100% sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) gas (0.5 mL) was injected into the posterior segment.
From the first day postoperation, strong lens opacity was observed, and the patient’s BCVA decreased to 20/400 in the right eye, although the retina was reattached. Lens opacity did not improve; therefore, cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOL) placement in the right eye were performed 2 months after SB. During the cataract surgery, it was confirmed that the posterior capsule on the upper nasal side had ruptured (a). This position suggested that the chandelier light in the previous operation could have caused the damage to the lens. Lens extraction and anterior vitrectomy were performed, and the IOL was fixed using optic capture ( 3b). After surgery, BCVA recovered to 20/40, and retinal detachment did not recur in the right eye (c, d).