A 62 year-old man with a several month history of abdominal pain was referred to The Ohio State University Medical Center in June, 2006. His past medical history was significant for hypertension, arthritis and chronic back pain. On computed tomography scan he was found to have a heterogeneously enhancing solid mass at the junction of the head and body of the pancreas . Based on initial imaging, the differential diagnosis included pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, pancreatic endocrine tumor, solid pseudopapillary tumor, and metastatic carcinoma.
The patient was offered resection for diagnosis and definitive therapy. After undergoing diagnostic laparoscopy to rule out carcinomatosis in the peritoneal cavity, a distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was completed.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged after an uneventful hospital stay.
Gross examination of the resected specimen demonstrated a 4.2 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm solid, well circumscribed, non-encapsulated mass adjacent to the pancreatic duct . The cut surface of the tumor contained thick fibrous bands without hemorrhage or necrosis. The surrounding pancreatic parenchyma was noted to be grossly unremarkable, and surgical margins were negative. On hematoxylin and eosin stain, the architecture of the mass was solid with cells arranged in nests, acini and trabeculae, separated by thick, hypocellular fibrous bands . Rare small cystic areas were seen microscopically (less than 1% of the tumor). The tumor was homogenous and consisted of polygonal cells with centrally placed small, round to ovoid nuclei . No mitoses or cellular atypia were noted. The cells contained abundant clear cytoplasm which was PAS positive and diastase sensitive suggesting the presence of glycogen . No vascular or perineural invasion was seen.
Mucicarmine stain was negative. Immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 19 (CK19), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), α-inhibin and calponin; and negative staining for vimentin, α1-antitrypsin (A1AT), synaptophysin, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), renal cell carcinoma stain (RCC), CD10, S-100 protein, and smooth muscle actin. These findings support the final diagnosis of solid microcystic adenoma.