A 28-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with Sjögren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus at the Department of Dermatology of our hospital in 2006, and oral treatment with 20mg of prednisolone was initiated. She felt right coxalgia with no inducer in 2007, and was diagnosed with ION of the right femoral head at our department, but the pain was transient and remitted. Periodic follow-up was continued thereafter, but pain in her right hip joint over the gluteal region started upon sitting for a prolonged time in November 2011. Because the pain gradually aggravated and she became unable to walk, she revisited our department in August of 2012.
At her revisit to our department, she felt right coxalgia accompanied by dysbasia, and antalgic claudication was noted. Mild tenderness was noted in the Scarpa triangle, and internal rotation was slightly limited in the range of motion of her right hip joint. The anterior impingement sign was positive but the Patrick sign was negative. Based on the modified Harris hip score (HHS), the score of pain on her right side was 10, and the total score was 20. Plain radiography of her bilateral hip joints demonstrated no collapse of the femoral head. The cross-over sign was positive, and the center-edge (CE) and sharp angles were 29° and 54°, respectively, showing mild acetabular dysplasia and pincer femoroacetabular impingement (FAI; Figure ). Computed tomography of her hip joint showed that the α angle was 50°, and an osseous change suggesting a cam lesion was not noted in the femoral neck. No irregular joint surface was noted (Figure ). T1-weighted imaging of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the band sign, which is the characteristic MRI finding of ION of the femoral head. The MRI findings also demonstrated that the patient had type B of the femoral head according to the Nishii et al. classification and stage 1 of the femoral head according to the Association Research Circulation Osseous classification
[,]. On MRI T2 short-tau inversion recovery a high intensity was noted in the acetabular labrum, but no bone marrow edema or hydrarthrosis suggesting collapse was present in the necrotic region of the femoral head (Figure ). A xylocaine test was performed on admission. When 3mL of xylocaine was injected into her right hip joint under fluoroscopy, right coxalgia was alleviated but not completely resolved on the following day, and long-distance walking was difficult due to residual pain while walking.
Based on the findings that severe coxalgia-inducing dysbasia had developed, but the range of necrosis of the femoral head was narrow, inducing no collapse, the anterior impingement sign was positive, the xylocaine test was positive, and a finding suggesting acetabular labral tear was noted on MRI, the patient was diagnosed with labral tear complicating ION of the femoral head. Although mild acetabular dysplasia was present, because the CE angle was greater than 20° and tear and instability of the acetabular labrum were noted on arthroscopy, we performed labral repair with hip arthroscopy in September 2012.With the patient in a supine position, her lower leg was distracted using an operating table with a distraction system. An anterolateral portal was prepared under fluoroscopy, and arthroscopy was initiated. The anterior labrum was not only sagged like a hammock but also accompanied by cartilage delamination, showing the features of labral tear. A mid-anterior portal was prepared without transecting the articular capsule, and two stiches of suture were applied to the acetabular labrum using an anchor suture. No treatment for a pincer or cam lesion was applied. After suture, the fixability of the acetabular labrum was evaluated using a probe, and it was favorable without abnormal mobility. After sufficient irrigation, the skin incision was subcutaneously sutured and surgery was completed (Figure ).Active exercise of her right joint started on the day following surgery, and 0.5 and full weight bearing were permitted at 2 and 3 weeks after surgery, respectively. No pain while walking was noted on the final follow-up at 1 year after surgery; she has resumed normal daily activities. No narrowing of the joint space or collapse of the femoral head was noted on plain radiography of her bilateral hip joints at the final follow-up (Figure ), and the modified HHS had improved to 85 from 20 before surgery.