A 70-year-old man underwent laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with the eTEP technique for an incisional hernia after laparoscopic cholecystectomy . During the procedure, a 4 cm long and 5 cm wide hernia defect was found at the umbilicus. Bilateral retrorectus and preperitoneal dissection were then performed in the caudal direction, incising the bilateral posterior rectus sheaths to the hernia defect. The hernial sac was then dissected, and bilateral retrorectus dissection was continued to the pubis level. After the development of sufficient preperitoneal and bilateral retrorectus spaces, the abdominal and peritoneal defects were closed with 0 non-absorbable barbed and 3–0 absorbable sutures, respectively. However, the posterior rectus sheath could not be re-approximated. Finally, a 20-cm-long and 15-cm-wide self-gripping mesh was placed in the retrorectus space in which grips were on the peritoneum side with no fixation . We confirmed that the upper edge of the mesh reached the cranial margin of the dissection space and the center of the mesh was approximately at the umbilicus. The patient was then discharged on postoperative day three and remained symptom-free.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was taken during the follow-up visit one year after the surgery. It demonstrated herniation of the large bowel into the space between the rectus muscle and the posterior layer . We suspected that the mesh had migrated because it was only 6 cm from the umbilicus to the upper edge of the mesh. Although there was no evidence of bowel obstruction, we also suspected that the peritoneal breakdown occurred, and the large bowel was in contact with the mesh, which could lead its erosion into the large bowel. Because the patient was asymptomatic, we performed elective laparoscopic surgery, which revealed a cavity between the rectus muscle and the posterior layer including the bilateral posterior rectus sheaths, peritoneum, and mesh in the epigastric abdominal wall, confirming the diagnosis of an IH. No adhesion was present between the internal organ and the IH sac, despite slight omental adhesions around the IH defect. We performed eight transmural stitches with 0 nylon thread and closed the orifice to the retrorectus space . The operating time was 116 min, and the amount of bleeding was minimal and hence could not be measured.
There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day two. No hernia recurrence, including IH, occurred after 24 months of follow-up .