A 37-year-old male electrician attended our ophthalmology clinic complaining of painless blurred vision in the paracentral region of his left eye for one month; he also reported 3 episodes of transient obscuration of vision lasting for 10 minutes. He recalled blunt head trauma due a fall 40 days before, but had no history of ophthalmic or systemic disease, use of medications, smoking and high risk sexual behaviour. Family history was unremarkable.
Corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Fundus examination at presentation was normal, but after 4 months revealed a white spot along the superotemporal arcade , in the absence of any other fundus lesions. Systemic examination was normal and his blood pressure was 120/75 mmHg.
A hematologic, rheumatologic and infectious disease workup was performed including complete blood counts, urine analysis, urea, creatinine, fasting blood glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid, antinuclear antibody, C-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, peripheral anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, toxoplasma immunoglobulin M (IgM), serum anti-human immunodeficiency virus, purified protein derivative, sputum specimen for tuberculosis, all with normal results. Cardiologic evaluations by electrocardiography and echocardiography revealed normal findings as well.
Fundus fluorescein angiography was performed and images were consistent with the ophthalmoscopic findings and did not show any other abnormalities. Visual field test using the Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm (SITA) 24-2 standard test demonstrated a scotoma on the pattern deviation plot corresponding to the location of the CWS .
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) employing Spectralis SD-OCT (Heidelberg Engineering Inc., Vista, CA, USA), was also performed at presentation which revealed marked retinal thickening along with increased reflectivity of the nerve fiber layer and inner neurosensory retina in the region of the CWS (A).
After 6 weeks the CWS resolved without any therapeutic intervention. The patient’s complaint of paracentral field defect was improved and subsequent OCT showed retinal thinning in the same area (B).