A 21-year-old girl was referred to our Institute after a genetic diagnosis of H syndrome, due to compound heterozygosity for two pathogenic variants in SLC29A3 gene (c.59_60dupCA,p.Ser21Glnfs*81, inherited from the father, not reported in online databases but resulting in destructed protein structure because of early frameshift and truncation; c.1087 C > T resulting in p.Arg363Trp, inherited from the mother, already reported as associated with H syndrome). She was born after an uneventful pregnancy from healthy unrelated parents. Her medical history was characterized by the development of deformation in the fingers and toes, progressively worsening with clinodactyly, for which she underwent flexor lengthening surgery (last three fingers right hand) at 5 years of age, without clear benefit.
There was no clear clinical sign of arthritis, and the picture was interpreted as arthrogryposis, for which she underwent calcaneal filing. A malformation syndrome was hypothesized. Considering the presence of a mild liver and spleen enlargement, she underwent several examinations, including Nuclear Resonance imaging of abdomen and brain and metabolic analyses to rule out lysosomal storage diseases. She also complained of frequent episodes of lymphadenopathy, sometimes with colliquation, without a clear history of recurrent infections. At 6 years of age, she was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, without typical autoantibodies. In the following months, progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss was also noticed, leading some years later to the use of hearing aids. At 10 years, a slowdown in growth led to the detection of pancreatic insufficiency requiring pancreatic enzyme supplementation. Unfortunately, no rheumatological evaluation was requested before the genetic diagnosis of H syndrome.
At the visit at our clinics, the girl reported difficulty walking, with the inability to walk for more than 5 min due both to knee arthritis and muscle contractures. At physical examination it was noticeable a mild limitation of hips intrarotation. She complained of serious pain at both feet and hands and X-rays showed a deforming arthropathy .
Considering the genetic diagnosis that the girl received 7 years before our visit, together with recent data on the immune pathogenesis of the disease and the potential of immunomodulation, we performed a thorough assessment of immunity and inflammation. The blood examinations showed a mild elevation of Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR, 47 mm/h, normal value < 20) and C-Reactive Protein (CRP, 15.6 mg/L, normal value < 5 mg/mL) with normal levels of immunoglobulins (IgG 1433 mg/dL, IgA 216 mg/dL, IgM 40 mg/dL) and negative results for common autoantibodies. Interferon (IFN) Score (IS) was calculated by real time PCR as the median fold expression of the following interferon stimulated genes (IFI27, IFI44L, IFIT1, ISG15, RSAD2, and SIGLEC1) compared to a pool of controls . The finding of a high IS, (23.7, normal value < 2.2) was consistent with IFN-mediated inflammation. Immunophenotyping revealed near-normal levels of T cells (CD4 442 cells/µL; CD8 412 cells/µL, recent thymic emigrants CD45RA + CD31 + 101 cells /µL) with a defect in memory B cells (CD19 + CD27 + cells 3.81% of CD19 + cells; normal values 4–55%) and mildly elevated percentages of double negative alpha/beta T cells (3.64% of CD3 + cells, normal values < 3%).
Antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, islet cell and thyroid related autoantibodies were all negative. Based on the presence of deforming active arthritis with IFN-mediated inflammation, we injected both knees with triamcinolone hexacetonide and started an antirheumatic treatment with baricitinib (4 mg once in day) and subcutaneous methotrexate (15 mg/week = 10 mg/m2). Even if tocilizumab had reported somehow effective in H syndrome, we chose to administer a JAK inhibitor to contrast IFN in addition to IL-6 related inflammation. Despite some clinical improvement, after 6 months the patient still complained of diffuse arthralgias and muscular pain with difficulty walking, which were paralleled by persistently elevated inflammatory markers (ESR 73 mm/h, CRP 39.6 mg/L, IS 22.3). We wondered if it could be better increasing the dosing of baricitinib on a twice in day regimen or adding a second medication active on the diseased pathway. We thus reviewed recent studies, showing that the defective transport of nucleosides across the membrane of SLC29A3-deficient lysosomes can lead to increased Toll-Like Receptor 7 (TLR7) activation and IFN inflammation [–]. We thus speculated that hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), a conventional treatment in lupus-spectrum arthritis, might contrast the disease-associated inflammation by accumulating in lysosomes and inhibiting TLR7 activation. Five months after the switch from methotrexate to HCQ (400 mg/day = 6.5 mg/Kg), the girl reported a dramatic improvement in her symptoms, with substantial improvement in walking ability and normalization of all inflammatory indexes (CRP decreased to 1.8 mg/L, ESR to 15 mm/h and the IS dropped to 1.4). Physical examination of hips showed a complete range of motion. Immunophenotyping showed a trend increase in memory B cells (CD19 + CD27 + 6% of CD19 + cells). One year after the start of the antirheumatic treatment the girl appears in good condition, with reduced pain and improved functional capacity.