A 4-year-old boy presented with multiple discrete subcutaneous reddish papules and nodules over the entirety of his body. Physical examination revealed splenomegaly and multiple cutaneous hemangiomas. Neither of jaundice, hepatomegaly nor abnormal ascites was noted. The cutaneous hemangiomas resolved nine months after treatment with oral propranolol. Initial blood tests revealed only an elevated serum ammonia level of 85 μg/dL (normal range, 15–51 μg/dL). Complete blood count (CBC) and liver function tests proved normal. In order to investigate the cause of his splenomegaly, Doppler ultrasonography initially detected an anomalous vessel in the liver. An Abdominal CT scan subsequently confirmed a portosystemic shunt connecting the left portal vein to the inferior vena cava (IVC). The Enlarged main portal, splenic and superior mesenteric veins were examined . Also noted were a marked narrowing of the right portal vein and its peripheral branches without color flow. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with a portosystemic shunt or Abernethy malformation type II.
A cavoportogram via a trans-jugular access was performed, revealing a large portal-IVC shunt measuring 15 mm in diameter and 8 mm in length. However, the embolization with a vascular plug could not be done in this case due to an inadequate length of the affected vessels to place the device. Therefore, we decided to proceed with a surgical shunt ligation two weeks later. The intraoperative findings demonstrated a left portal vein-IVC shunt, measuring 15 mm in diameter—the same size as was evaluated with the cavoportogram. The hypoplastic right portal vein was 3 mm in diameter. The shunt was encircled with a vascular sling and temporarily clamped. The portal vein pressures were measured before and after procedures: 15 and 23 mmHg, respectively. The shunt was then completely ligated with a non-absorbable 1-0 silk suture.
The patient had attended follow-up visits over a 12-month postoperative period. Doppler ultrasonography and CT imaging of the liver at 1 month, 2 months and 6 months showed a favorable resolution . Additionally, his serum ammonia level had decreased to less than 15 μg/dL.