A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for surgical intervention due to one liver tumor identified on the abdominal ultrasonography during regular follow-up for chronic hepatitis B. Before presentation, the patient reported to have irregular bowel movement with loose stool passage and weight gain for about two months. She experienced no abdominal pain, fullness or vomiting. When tracing her past history, the patient had undergone cholecystectomy for cholecystitis and received two times of laparotomy in regard to repeated choledocholisthiasis caused by hepatolithiasis about 30 and 20 years ago, respectively. Besides, four of the patient’s seven siblings were diagnosed with hepatitis B-related hepatocellular carcinoma, which had contributed to their death and severe morbidity.
The physical examination was unremarkable. There was no abdominal tenderness, rebounding tenderness and abnormal bowel sounds. Murphy’s sign was also negative. Laboratory studies on admission yield normal blood biochemistry and mild thrombocytopenia (127000 per cubic millimeter). The liver function test showed normal results (AST = 19 U/L, ALT = 16 U/L). No prolonged prothrombin times or partial-thromboplastin times was found. Direct and total bilirubin were not elevated. Enzymes such as gamma-glutamyl transferase or alkaline phosphatase were within normal ranges. The urinalysis was normal, without dark or tea-colored urine. The levels of tumor markers such as AFP, CEA, CA125 and CA19-9 were all within normal limits.Ultrasonography disclosed a heterogeneous cystic lesion about 7.6 cm × 5.5 cm over the lateral segment of left hepatic lobe with dilatation of intrahepatic ducts. Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen demonstrated multiloculated cystic tumor with internal septa in the left lobe of the liver . In addition, non-calcified stones were found in dilated intrahepatic bile duct and common bile duct. Under the impression of cholangiocarcinoma, left lobectomy of liver and choledocholithotomy were performed. The cystic tumor was smoothly removed with clear margin. Grossly, the resected tumor demonstrated multi-cystic and ill-defined appearance beneath the liver capsule . All sections were embedded and examined. Microscopically, a cyst lined by proliferating epithelia composed of papillary proliferation of dysplastic cells with mucin hypersecretion was identified . It was supported by fibromuscular structure where ovary-like stroma was not seen. Furthermore, malignant picture with deregulated growth pattern and perineural invasion was demonstrated in some regions . The cystic tumor was finally diagnosed as a hepatobiliary cystadenocarcinoma without mesenchymal stroma (pT1N0M0).
After total resection of the tumor, the patient was hospitalized for several days. She had no fever, no distention and other morbidities before discharge. Her incision had healed well 3 weeks after discharge. She showed no adverse event related to hepatobiliary disease or the surgery. The follow up MRI three years after operation confirmed no recurrence of malignancy.