A 79-year-old man presented to the emergency department with progressive dyspnoea, orthopnoea, an augmented abdominal perimeter, lower extremity oedema, and weight gain. He had a history of seropositive RA for over 10 years, which manifested as erosive polyarticular arthritis with rheumatoid nodules on the skin. He was being treated with prednisolone (5 mg daily), chloroquine (250 mg daily), sulfasalazine (500 mg three times a day), and leflunomide (20 mg daily) for at least 5 years. Additionally, he was being treated for heart failure involving a preserved ejection fraction (60%) with furosemide (40 mg daily), spironolactone (25 mg daily), and digitalis/drops (six times daily; 0.6 mg/mL) for the last 5 years. Moreover, he was being treated with metformin (850 mg) at his two main meals for diabetes. Furthermore, he was being treated with levothyroxine (125 µg daily) for hypothyroidism. He was currently a heavy smoker.
On examination, he appeared chronically ill and pale, with no signs of respiratory distress. His heart rate (76 b.p.m.), blood pressure (100/60 mmHg), and respiratory rate (16 breaths/min) were normal. He had a raised jugular venous pressure at 45°. His cardiac auscultation was normal; however, pulmonary auscultation revealed bi-basal hypoventilation. Additionally, an abdominal examination revealed ascites, collateral circulation, hepatomegaly, and lower extremity Grade III oedema. Multiple nodules that appeared hard, painless, and mobile were found on his hands, elbows, knees, lower back, and buttocks. There was tenderness with palpation and passive movement pain in his hands, wrists, shoulders, and elbows associated with movement limitation.
Administration of an intra-venous diuretic was initiated, and a positive clinical response was noted. Chest radiography revealed pleural thickening and fibrotic tracts in the left inferior lung base . A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan performed 10 months before the admission showed a single 10 × 11-mm nodule at the anterior segment of the right superior lobule, pleural thickening with fibrotic tracts, and a low-density area of 8 × 6 cm with clear edges in contact with the right heart chambers . Since then, the patient lost to follow-up. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal dimensions and functions of the left chambers, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50–55%. No significant valvular disease was noted. The estimated pulmonary systolic artery pressure was 30 mmHg. Additionally, a mass was noted over the right chambers, which severely restricted diastole . Although there was no E-wave variability during breathing, the inferior vena cava was dilated without collapsibility, raising the possibility of a physiology similar to cardiac tamponade. The N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level was 347 pg/dL (local upper limit of normal, 125 pg/mL).
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed a well-limited intra-pericardial multiloculated mass located anterior to the right chambers . There was flattening of the interventricular septum without variability during the respiratory cycle, making a constrictive physiology unlikely, but the limitation of right ventricle diastole was prominent (, Video S1). The mass appeared hyperintense in T2-weighted images and hypo-intense in unenhanced T1-weighted images, with a thick hyper-enhancing capsule without any intralesional solid or nodular components and no septal contrast uptake . These findings raised the possibility of complex fluid collection associated with an inflammatory pericardial process. The lesion measured 10 × 9 × 6 cm, and there was no mass infiltration or free pericardial effusion.
There was also global pericardial enhancement with mild thickening of the pericardium compatible with pericarditis (4 mm). Additionally, thickened and enhanced pleurae were seen on both sides.
Surgical excision of the mass with pericardial decompression was advised, and patient’s consent was obtained. Intraoperatively, severe thickening of the entire pericardium and a large soft mass were noted. Complete resection of the mass was performed with right and left anterior pericardiectomy. In macroscopic histopathological analysis, the mass appeared multiloculated with solid yellow pseudo-laminated areas that were mixed with irregular dark areas of less consistency. The entire mass showed fibrinoid material . Pericardial samples showed chronic multifocal inflammation and areas with organized fibrinous exudate. There were no areas with chronic lymphoid infiltrates, vasculitis, granulomas, or neoplasia. The histopathological diagnosis was consistent with fibrinoid pericarditis. The patient recovered well and was discharged 18 days after admission without complications and with notable improvements in symptoms and New York Heart Association functional Class II.