A 21-year-old man was transferred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Medical University of Graz when a slow-growing tumour in the left mandible, which had been present for 10 years and could not be diagnosed or treated adequately in his home country. On admission, he had facial asymmetry with adequate mouth opening. The intraoral examination revealed left-sided, hard, expanded buccal and lingual mandibular cortices. Computed tomography showed an 8.5-cm multilocular radiopacity in the left mandibular neck extending to the midline. Despite occupying the soft tissues, the mainly cystic, focal, solid lesion (arrow) was completely covered by thin, non-perforated, pre-existing cortical bone . Laboratory work-up was normal, including endocrine parameters. Of note, the somatomedin C, calcium, and phosphate levels were within their normal ranges. The medical and family histories were non-contributory. Following a preoperative biopsy, he underwent segmental mandibulectomy for reconstruction with a vascularised iliac crest flap. The osseous flap was inserted into the defect and fixed with a plate. The postoperative healing was uneventful. After removing the plate, osseointegrated dental implants were used for dental rehabilitation. No further tumours were seen in the remaining jaw bone during a 7-year follow-up period.
The surgical specimen was 12 cm in its greatest longitudinal diameter and dominated by an 8-cm-diameter, nodular, bone-distending tumour. On cross-sections, the tumour consisted mainly of cystic spaces varying in size and sometimes filled with blood clots; a solid, nodular area measuring 3 cm was seen only at the lingual aspect of the lower part . Microscopically, the cysts were mostly lined with granulation tissue and scar-like fibrous tissue . The actual tumour, corresponding to the solid area, was characterised by many ossicles of different sizes in cellular fibrous stroma . The ossicles were rounded or angular and comprised woven-bone deposits with distinct, sometimes laminated calcifications resembling psammoma bodies . The stromal cells were spindle-shaped or stellate . The tumour was covered peripherally by a thin shell of cortical bone, with no evidence of perforation . The histopathological diagnosis of the preoperative biopsy was JPOF with an associated aneurysmal bone cyst; this was confirmed by examination of the surgical specimen, which had identical microscopic features. Paraffin-embedded tumour tissue was analysed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) using a PCR-based gene panel to detect mutations in the coding regions of 409 genes relevant to tumours, and low-density whole genome sequencing was performed to assess copy number variation. NGS showed a frame-shift mutation of the SETD2 gene, while the copy number was normal .