A 51-year-old male, smoker, with hypertension and diabetes mellitus was referred to our hospital for rest pain in left limb and peripheral cyanosis. Medical history reported several surgical procedures in both legs for popliteal aneurysm treated through femoro-popliteal bypass in great saphenous vein graft, complicated in left limb by thrombosis and redo-surgery treated with new bypass in prosthesis and subsequently using both cephalic veins . No coronary artery disease, cardiac arrhythmias or coagulation alterations were reported.
At admission, his physical examination revealed sinusal heart rate of 80 bpm, blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min and oxygen saturation of 95%.
Ultrasound doppler (US) showed direct flow in common femoral artery (CFA) and deep femoral artery (DFA) with occlusion of superficial femoral (SFA) and popliteal artery; anterior tibial artery (ATA) was patency two centimeters after the origin with atherosclerotic lesion in its distal third, posterior tibial artery (PTA) and interosseous artery were reperfused distally.
An endovascular attempt was excluded due to the length of arterial occlusion and on this basis a surgical approach was chosen.
The treatment consisted of a femoro-ATA bypass. Unfortunately, the vein was of good size (5 mm) for only 20 cm then was absent. In our experience a prosthesis graft below the knee did not guarantee a long term patency particularly after multiple redo-procedures. In this case we preferred a composite bypass, via extra-anatomic, using a 6 mm Dacron prosthesis joined to the proximal common femoral artery and in the distal end to the larger half of the saphenous vein .
The day after, US showed a bypass occlusion and the patient was transferred again to the operating room to have a thrombectomy. To avoid a new large dissection, we chose to re-open on connection vein-prosthesis where it was possible to have a stenosis . After proximal and distal thrombectomy we did a new anastomosis and from collateral of vein, an arterial sheath 4 fr was introduced to have a distal angioplasty of ATA and pedidial artery increasing outflow . The outcome was a complete recanalization of ATA that improved blood flow in posterior tibial artery .
At 24 h from index operation, the patient was asymptomatic in the absence of cyanosis.
Postoperative medical management consisted of antiplatelet therapy (Cardioaspirin 100 mg) plus Coumadin 5 mg from day seven. At six months US showed a direct flow in distal ATA with pedidial pulse .