A 34-year-old female accidently looked at a laser light reflected from the blade of an eyebrow trimmer while applying a 1064-nm Q-switched laser to remove eyebrow tattoos of her guest in a beauty salon without wearing protective goggles. She immediately experienced blurry vision with a central scotoma and distortion in her left eye. The next day, she attended the local ophthalmic clinic. Fundus examination showed some vitreous hemorrhage. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed macular edema and disorganization of the outer retinal layer(A and B). The patient was diagnosed with laser-induced retinopathy and was treated with optic nerve growth factor injection immediately and fluorometholone eyedrops for a week. 7 days after the injury, the OCT showed a full-thickness macular hole (FTMH) with hyper-reflective material within the base of the hole, ellipsoid and retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) layer disruption, macular edema and subpigment epithelial hemorrhage. The average minimum diameter(MD) and base diameter(BD) of the FTMH measured 195 and 998μm respectively (C and D). 2 weeks after the injury, the cystoid edema, FTMH and outer retinal disruption still existed, and the diameter of the hole did not change much(MD = 214μm, BD = 1005μm). The hyper-reflective material in the macula reduced while the subfoveal hyperreflectivity was observed(E and F). 1 month after the accident, the patient turned to our hospital for no visual improvement. The BCVA of her left eye was 20/250 with a manifest refraction of +0.50D-0.75D × 180. Fundus examination showed a macular hole with vitreous hemorrhage(B–D). OCT showed a full-thickness macular defect(MD = 177μm, BD = 979μm) with cystoid macular edema along with disruption of the adjacent ellipsoid zones and RPE layer(A–C). The patient was diagnosed with a traumatic FTMH. The BCVA of the other eye was 20/20 and the fundus examination was normal. After observation for two months, the BCVA of her left eye remained 20/250 and the macular hole did not tend to recover. The MD and BD of the macular hole measured 268μm and 875μm, respectively(E). Therefore, pars plana vitrectomy, internal limiting membrane (ILM) peeling and sterile air injection were successfully performed. Prone positioning for a week was required after the surgery. The macular hole was identified as closed 9 days postoperatively with the resolution of the macular edema, but the ellipsoid layer disruption and subfoveal hyperreflective lesion still existed. 3 months postoperatively, her BCVA improved to 20/100. Fundus examination showed no abnormality(B–D). OCT showed the ellipsoid zone remained uneven(A–C). And the patient still complained of burry vision and a central scotoma.