A 19-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for intermittent abdominal pain and continuous fever which had persisted for a month. She had no obvious medical or familial history. Physical examination revealed no morbid lymph node swelling or skin abnormalities. Blood examination showed normal blood cell counts and no presence of atypical lymphocytes. Biochemical or immunoserum analysis revealed modest inflammation, hypoalbuminemia, slight liver dysfunction, and evidence of past EBV infection (Additional file : Table S1). Although esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed normal findings, colonoscopy revealed a few small ulcers in the terminal ileum (Additional file : Fig. 1). Enhanced computed tomography showed obvious wall thickness of the small intestine, whereas no significant finding was detected by balloon intestinal endoscopy in the distal ileum. However, various types of ulcers surrounded by completely normal mucosa were found on the jejunum and proximal ileum by capsule endoscopy (CE) . Additionally, multiple aphthous and some linear ulcers were observed on the jejunum, whereas circular ulcers and longitudinal ulcers with a cobblestone appearance were detected on the ileum. The possibility of intestinal tuberculosis and infectious gastroenteritis were serologically and culturally excluded. Although there were no histological findings of noncaseating granuloma on her digestive organs, she was strongly suspected with CD based on her age, clinical symptoms, and the morphology of the characteristic ulcers . Consequently, the patient was treated with an elemental diet, mesalamine, and prednisolone for induction therapy. Although this treatment seemed to be partially effective, her symptoms recurred according to the tapering of prednisolone, and she was subsequently switched to adalimumab (ADA). Her clinical symptoms tended to be gradually modest, and the maintenance ADA therapy was effective for some time. The second CE revealed a definite improvement of the intestinal ulcers ; however, 21 months after the initiation of treatment, her intermittent fever and repeated abdominal pain recurred, and re-induction therapy with prednisolone was restarted . She remained stable for 9 months, before complaining of slight abdominal pain. We set a dose escalation of ADA with the addition of azathioprine; this seemed to be effective, and almost all of the ulcers disappeared, except for a few small erosions on the intestine . She next relapsed approximately 10 months later, and ADA was switched to ustekinumab (USK). However, this treatment was not sufficient, and prednisolone was added to USK for clinical improvement. Unfortunately, disease management was difficult regardless of these treatments, and skin ulcers appeared about 50 months after her initial hospital visit . Immunohistology of her skin biopsy revealed proliferation of EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER)-positive atypical lymphocytes . Retrospective assessments of the previous ileal ulcer biopsy before treatment demonstrated many EBER-positive lymphocytes, indicating that she had been in a continuously active EBV infection state . The blood level of EBV-DNA was also clearly positive (1.5 × 104 copy/WBC × 106). Consequently, she was diagnosed with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma (nasal type) related to CAEBV. Advanced-stage malignant lymphoma invading the skin was seen. Then, she was treated with a combination of cyclosporine A and prednisolone for her systemic inflammation related to CAEBV and followed by a systemic chemotherapy for malignant lymphoma. After completing the CHOP chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone), she gradually showed intermediate liver injury as well as cholestasis, based on which she was diagnosed with secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) caused by CAEBV. Though etoposide and methylprednisolone combination therapy transiently improved her liver injury and jaundice, CHOP insufficiently controlled the progression of CAEBV. Hence, the combination therapy of etoposide, cytosine arabinoside, l-asparaginase, methylprednisolone, and prednisolone (ESCAP) was preferred over the CHOP therapy. However, her liver injury and jaundice related to HLH rapidly worsened during the recovery period after the first ESCAP therapy. Unfortunately, her disease progression could not be regulated at all and she finally fell into the stage of multiple organ failure; she died at the age of 23 years, 55 months after her first hospital visit. An autopsy was performed with the consent from her parents. Macroscopic findings showed no evidence of ulcer or stenotic changes on her digestive organs, including the small intestine . Microscopic findings showed no evidence of noncaseating granuloma on digestive organs and a remarkable proliferation of lymphocytes in the intra-mucosal/submucosal space of the small intestine .