A 60-year-old male patient presented to our ENT unit with a complaint of a 30-year-history of right-sided nasal obstruction, anosmia, rhinorrhoea, postnasal drip, and frontal headache, as well as bilateral epiphora for 5 years. He had no history of nasal bleeding or vision disorders. His medical history included GERD, systemic arterial hypertension, left leg deep vein thrombosis, migraine, osteoporosis, and skin melanoma. Nasal endoscopy revealed a large, lobulated tumor with a hard consistency that originated from the nasal septum of the right nasal cavity and extended from the nasal vestibule to the ipsilateral choana.
Computed Tomography (CT) scans showed an oval mass with lobulated margins, parenchymatous density, which displaced the nasal septum to the left, the right nasal wall to the right, the right ethmoid cells superiorly, the unciform process, and the right lamina papyracea superoexternally, which it was in continuity with .
On Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), the tumor appeared uneven intensity, mainly medium-low with hypointense and hyperintense components in T1, mainly low with hyperintense components in T2 and STIR .
A preoperative biopsy was performed under local anesthesia, and the histological examinations correlated the mass with an antrochoanal polyp.
The patient underwent general anesthesia for transnasal endoscopic removal of the tumor. The attachment was suspected to be in the septal region, and therefore, we started disassembling the tumor by using a plasma blade. The insertion was identified and a subperiosteal removal of the septal mucosa was performed. An additional adherence area was found posteroinferiorly at the level of the choanal border, which was eliminated by bipolar forceps. During the surgical procedure, it was necessary to cauterize the septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery . Finally, uncinectomy and media antrostomy were performed, and a nasal packing was placed in the nasal cavity. The packing was removed two days later . The final histology examination, performed by two different pathologists, revealed a homogeneous proliferation of spindle cells that alternated between hypercellular and less cellular areas with collagenized stroma, characterized by occasional mitoses .
The immunohistochemistry testing revealed that neoplastic cells exhibited positivity for vimentin, CD34, and CD99. The diagnosis of SFT was confirmed, and examination of the margin revealed complete removal of the tumor. The patient underwent follow-up examinations at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months and remained free of disease. The patient was discharged and it was recommended to perform saline nasal irrigation. After oncology counselling, adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy was not performed because the margins were free and the histotype had an indolent course. shows preoperative (a) and two years postoperative (b) nasal endoscopy.