A 31-year-old woman, gravida 2 para 0, spontaneously conceived. Ultrasound examination at 12 weeks’ gestation confirmed monochorionic diamniotic triplets including two acardiac fetuses (Fetus 2 and Fetus 3) sharing a single amniotic sac and one normal fetus (“pump fetus” or Fetus 1) in another amniotic sac. The patient’s serology was negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL), and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and she had no diabetes mellitus. The pregnant woman and her partner reported no history of medication, substance abuse, and family history of congenital anomalies. They were extensively counseled by the multidisciplinary team and the woman was followed up with serial fetal ultrasonography. Fetus 2 and Fetus 3 in one amniotic sac were malformed with dysplasia of the spine and lower limbs, and complete absence of the head, heart, and upper limbs.
Due to rapid growth of the acardiac fetuses, after repeated extensive counseling about the predicted poor prognosis of the pump fetus (Fetus 1) during expectant management, intrafetal laser therapy was performed under ultrasound guidance at 15 weeks + 5 days. The18-gauge needle (Hakko Co., Ltd., Japan) was introduced into one of the acardiac fetuses. A 400-µm laser fiber was then passed through the needle and placed close to the pelvic vessels. Intrafetal laser therapy was performed using a NdYAG-laser source (Dornier MedTech, Wessling, Germany) in 5-s bursts at 10 W initial power, which was then doubled in steps to a maximum level of 20 W, thereby resulting in cessation of blood flow in that acardiac fetus. After that, the18-gauge needle was introduced into the other acardiac fetus, and the same procedure was done. Images of increasing magnification showing the acardiac fetuses (F2 and F3) and their reversed blood flow before intrafetal laser therapy are shown in Fig. a. Images of the pump fetus and both acardiac fetuses after intrafetal laser therapy are shown in Fig. b. The woman was followed up closely with fetal ultrasonography and doppler and fetal echocardiography.
The couple refused the chromosome examination in both acardiac fetuses, and amniocentesis was performed in the pump fetus. The result of chromosome microarray analysis in the pump fetus was normal.
At 37 weeks + 4 days, a healthy female baby weighing 2510 g was delivered with Apgar scores of 10 and 10 at the first and fifth minute, respectively, whereas two papyraceous acardiac fetuses weighed 14 and 8 g. Images of the monochorionic-diamniotic placenta and the papyraceous acardiac fetuses are shown in Fig. . The pathological results revealed monochorionic-diamniotic triplet pregnancy with two acardiac fetuses. The baby is now 11 months old and she is in good health.