A 20 year-old Caucasian male presented to our department with incomplete left abducens nerve palsy; neuroradiological examination documented three intracranial space occupying lesions, respectively in the left cavernous sinus, on the right frontal convexity and on the superior aspect of the right petrous pyramid .
He presented with a two year history of diplopia, of subacute onset, due to a left sixth cranial nerve palsy. Neurological examination was otherwise normal at the time; he denied any pain and had no fever. Head CT scan documented a small space-occupying lesion in the left cavernous sinus, with well-defined margins and minimal contrast enhancement . Brain MRI confirmed the lesion in the posterior compartment of the left cavernous sinus: its signal behaviour excluded both fatty and hemorrhagic content of the tumour, excluding the hypothesis of paramagnetic effect related to hemosiderin and blood degradation products . Due to the high complication rate associate with surgery inside the cavernous sinus, specifically with respect to a very high risk of permanent diplopia, his treating doctors chose to manage him conservatively with low dose corticosteroids and surveillance imaging. His diplopia resolved and a new MRI, three months after the previous, documented a minimal volume reduction of the left cavernous sinus mass lesion. Unfortunately the patient experienced bilateral femoral head necrosis secondary to corticosteroid use that resulted in discontinuation of dexamethasone. Three months later a new brain MRI documented minimal growth of the lesion, which was confirmed in subsequent examinations and the patient remained asymptomatic. One year and a half after the first neuroradiological examination, a repeat brain MRI documented a contralateral extraaxial lesion, at the level of the right frontal convexity, with the same radiological features, characterized by hyper-intensity on un-enhanced T1-weighted images ; a smaller extraaxial dural lesion was also evident on the superior aspect of the right petrous pyramid .
At this stage in his care the patient was referred to our department. Neurological examination documented diplopia only in the extreme left gaze. General examination documented patches of bluish discoloration of the sclera at the level of the left eye, which the mother reported to be congenital ; there was no evidence of any associated facial skin or oral mucosal pigmentation. The association of the bluish discoloration of the sclera with the MR signal behaviour (non-hemorrhagic T1-hyper-intensity) of the intracranial lesions raised the suspicion of a melanotic tumour, and our opinion was to offer surgery in order to establish definitive diagnosis; it was decided to remove the frontal lesion, having the least surgical risk. After a right frontal craniotomy diffuse blackening of the dura was evident with a darker grading towards the skull base ; the nodular lesion appeared to partially infiltrate the arachnoid and was totally removed together with portion of the surrounding abnormal dura .
On haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining neoplastic cells appeared round or spindled, without nuclear atypia and with small nucleoli. There were occasional mitoses identified (less than 1x10 HPF). Melanin pigment was present in occasional cells, so we were able to study the nuclear morphology without the need of a melanin bleaching. No necrosis was observed. After immunohistochemistry with anti-HMB45 and anti Melan-A antibodies, a variable but substantial proportion of neoplastic cells appeared immunolabelled (original magnification: X 300). After immunohistochemistry with anti MIB1/Ki67 antibody only a low percentage of neoplastic cells (mean: 3 %) showed nuclear labelling (original magnification: X 250). On the basis of the single small nucleoli, the relatively low number of mitoses, and the relatively low Ki67 index, a diagnosis of intermediate grade melanocytic neoplasm of was made . Moreover, all the histological features we encountered in our case but Ki67 were also compatible with a melanocytoma.
Five days after surgery the patient developed a marked diplopia, pain in the eye and a third cranial nerve palsy. An urgent CT scan documented a minimal enlargement of the cavernous sinus lesion (not shown). Corticosteroid treatment was initiated and three weeks later there was complete resolution of both pain and cranial nerve palsy. Corticosteroids were subsequently tapered and discontinued. The patient underwent 3D-Conformal Radiation Therapy (3D-CRT) of the lesion of the cavernous sinus (total dose 5040 cGy with a daily dose of 180 cGy), with an initial tumour reduction. Three years later, due to a symptomatic growth, the patient underwent surgical debulking of the lesion with resolution of the pre-operative trigeminal neuralgia and persistence of third cranial nerve palsy. Histological examination of the lesion documented features similar to the previously resected lesion, with a proliferative index of 2 %.
He then received four cycles of adjuvant Temozolomide (150–200 mg/mq/die for 5 days q 28); the third and fourth cycle were combined with Low Dose Fractionated Radiation Therapy (LD-FRT) 0.4 Gy twice daily [,], with at least a 6-hour inter-fraction interval, over 5 consecutive days, every 28 days. Subsequent MRI examinations documented progressive disease: we then prescribed cisplatin (30 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15) and fotemustine (40 mg/m2 on days 2, 9, and 16) , concomitant with LD-FRT 0.3 Gy twice daily, with at least a 6-hour inter-fraction interval on days 1–2, 8–9, and 15–16, every 42, with at least a 6-hour inter-fraction interval, over 5 consecutive days, every 28 days. After two cycles MRI documented significant tumour reduction and there was a period of apparent tumour control. Unfortunately, the patient later presented with persistent cough and hypoxia: a total body CT scan documented multiple thoracic space occupying lesions, compatible with metastases. The patient died due to systemic tumour progression seven years after initial presentation.