A 32 year old Hispanic male with no known past medical history presented to his primary care physician with 20 lbs weight loss, without other symptoms. Vital signs revealed blood pressure of 133/76 mm Hg, heart rate of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 17 respirations per minute and oxygen saturation of 98%. Physical exam revealed a thin man in no distress, head and neck exam revealed no orbitopathy with a thyroid gland that was not enlarged, cardiovascular exam revealed a regular rate and rhythm, lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, no abdominal tenderness, neurologic exam showed no tremors or hyperreflexia.
Laboratory results revealed normal complete blood cell count and basic metabolic panel and TSH of < 0.01 mcU/mL that prompted referral to Endocrinology. He denied palpitations, hyperdefecation, tremors, skin changes or anxiety. Further workup revealed a free T4 (fT4) of 3.73 ng/dL and total T3 (TT3) of 291 ng/dL. Methimazole (MMI) 20 mg BID and propranolol 20 mg BID were started. Ultrasound (US) revealed a hypervascular gland with an asymmetric ill-defined hypoechoic enlarged right to mid lower pole nodule measuring 1.2 × 1.6 × 1.5 cm indicative of subacute thyroiditis .
Thyroid uptake and scan revealed uniform enlargement of the right greater than the left thyroid gland, no cold nodules were noted. The 4 h-RAI uptake was 47.2% and the 24-h was 70.2% . Thyroid function tests on MMI were monitored. One week later, fT4 increased to 4.75 ng/dL and TT3 increased to 307 ng/dL with TSI of 8, thyroglobulin of 53 ng/mL and negative thyroglobulin antibody and TPO antibody.
MMI was increased to 20 mg TID and repeat labs in one week showed persistently elevated fT4 of 4.65 ng/dL and TT3 of 290 ng/dL. Prednisone 20 mg was added for suspected component of thyroiditis and one week later fT4 decreased to 3.82 ng/dL and TT3 decreased to 230 ng/dL. This medication regimen was administered for two weeks, however thyroid hormone levels remained elevated fT4 2.73 ng/dL and TT3 202 ng/dL at which time prednisone was discontinued as the inflammatory markers (Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein) were negative. To address this apparent resistance to MMI, cholestyramine 4 g TID was added for one week with no improvement in thyroid tests, fT4 was 2.54 ng/dL and TT3 was 192 ng/dL. Of note, these thyroid hormone levels were measured after being for 2 months on MMI 60 mg daily.
Repeated thyroid US to follow up on the nodule revealed a heterogenous, hypervascular gland with a nodule in the right lobe and isthmus (1.7 × 3.3 × 1.1 cm), spongiform with solid areas and a borderline enlarged right level 2 lymph node with normal morphology. Considering the presence of the nodule and the apparent inefficiency of the anti-thyroid treatment to control the hyperthyroid hormone levels the patient was referred to Endocrine surgery. Due to the nodule having benign features on US (no calcifications, spongiform, absent ill-defined border, and no suspicious lymph node) and not being cold, fine needle aspiration (FNA) was not recommended. In preparation for surgery, he received potassium iodine (KI) for 10 days which resulted in fast normalization of thyroid hormone levels. Total thyroidectomy (TT) was performed with no complications.
Pathology revealed 1.5 cm PTC in the right lower lobe-isthmus with suspicion for extrathyroidal extension into fibroadipose tissue, follicular hyperplasia with dilated follicles, papillary like structures and interfollicular fibrosis consistent with GD, and metastatic PTC in 2 level VI lymph nodes (2/2) with the largest focus of 0.4 cm, no extranodal extension. Immunostaining for BRAF VE1 showed diffuse moderate cytoplasmic expression in tumor cells, which is predictive of BRAF V600E mutation. TSI remained elevated at 5.9 four weeks after surgery. The patient subsequently underwent lymph node mapping that revealed a left lateral level II lymph which measured 1.4 × 0.4 cm. FNA revealed no malignancy. Due to stage I PTC (presumed BRAF V600E mutated), 50 mCi RAI was given. Total body scan revealed three foci of functioning thyroid tissue and regional lymph node metastases. Currently he is doing well awaiting his 6-month follow up scan.
Following approval of the Institutional Review Board, a retrospective chart review of patients with GD was performed. Selected patients were seen at our institution between January 2000 and April 2021. GD was confirmed by either positive antibodies and clinical history of hyperthyroidism or a compatible diagnosis based on thyroid uptake and scan results. If present, PTC was confirmed based on pathology report. Fifty patients met criteria for both diagnoses. Demographic and clinical data was collected. Informed consent was waived as the study was retrospective in nature.
From January 2000 to April 2021, 243 patients with GD underwent TT. Out of the 243, 50 patients (20%) had a diagnosis of both GD and PTC. Clinical and demographic characteristics revealed that 76% patients were < 55 years of age with a mean age at diagnosis of 44.5 years, 82% were female and 46% had positive TSI. 10% of the cases had difficult to treat hyperthyroidism, meaning not responding to average doses of thionamides .
Pathology revealed that most cancers were unifocal (66%), gland had an average weight of 29 g. Out of the 50 cases, 11 samples were tested for BRAF VE1 immunostain and 63% were found to be positive. When looking at size, 72% of PTC were microcarcinomas (< = 1 cm). Based on the AJCC Staging, 78% were Stage I, 22% were Stage II and there were no cases with Stage III or IV. When looking at the evolution and prognosis, so far only 2% of PTC recurred.