A 42-year-old man was referred from department of neurology to the sleep clinic for evaluation of possible sleep apnea. His wife reported witnessed apneic episodes at night frequently awakening by feeling suffocation at sleep. As his past medical history, he had experienced several hospitalizations at neurology department along with several hemiparetic migraine attacks. Attacks were almost in the mornings upon awakening the patient, which he was forced to use analgesics to to relief headache but the headache did not subside completely during day. At the time, he underwent several paraclinical tests including MRI and MRA, which did not have any notable pathological findings. He had undergone several different managements that only had been able to relieve the patient’s symptoms for a while (e.g., sertraline HCL/100mg/daily, valproate sodium/400mg/ daily, ASA/80mg/daily). He had a notable history of substance abuse for about 15 years who was referred to the addiction clinic for methadone maintenance therapy (MMT) (40mg/day) for a limited time but he continued abusing methadone illegally for two years while he was addicted to methadone and gradually raised the dosage.
When he came to sleep clinic, we got a complete history, in addition to the aforementioned recurring symptoms, he declared a history of occasional snoring and his chief complaint was witnessed several episodes of apnea that and frequent awakening by feeling suffocation during sleep. The patient experienced better sleep in a semi-sitting position. The patient did not mention any history of cardio vascular disorders.
In physical examination his Mallampati score was grade 2/4 and neck circumference was 36cm and BMI: 25.4m/kg. He had an ABG test in which PH=7.44, PCO2=44.8mmHg, HCO3=29.2mmol and PO2 was 78mmHg and as he stated, chronic bronchitis caused by heavy cigarette smoking and substance abuse was diagnosed for him. Polysomnography (PSG) was performed with standard technique in our sleep laboratory.
The results of full night standard PSG are as following (
The patient had a total of 537 respiratory events including 504 central apnea events, which resulted in total respiratory disturbance index (RDI) of 115.6 respiratory events per hour and AHI: 115.6/hr and CAI: 108/hr and OBS: 6 (index: 1.3/ hr) of sleep. 7 obstructive apneas, only 1 mixed apnea and 26 obstructive hypopneas. Oxygen desaturation index (ODI) was 82.7/hr, 3% of desaturation event per hour of sleep and minimum oxygen desaturation was 83%.
Total sleep time was 4:38 hours in this study and the sleep efficiency was 96.2%, sleep latency was 7.5 minutes. Analysis of sleep stages distribution revealed that there was a decrease in REM stage, remarkable increase in stage N2 and decreased N3 stage, arousal index was 33 arousals per hour of sleep, the arousals mostly followed the desaturation and respiratory events. Electrocardiography reported normal sinus rhythm (NSR) with an average rate of 58bpm.
Based on the results of polysomnography and history of methadone abuse, the patient was diagnosed as central sleep apnea. Despite of suggestions of the literatures about using adaptive servo-ventilation for CSA, we had no choice but using BiPAP-ST because of limited equipment and patient financial conditions. We prescribed BiPAP-ST after titration study for the patient. The respiratory events were controlled optimally with IPAP:EPAP 17:11cmH2O and backup respiratory rate of 14 per minute.
One month after starting BiPAP-ST he came for a follow up visit at the sleep clinic, he did not complain of any headaches and hemiparetic attacks. He had an optimum compliance for the PAP device and he had used it for the total 30 days more than 4 hours per night. Average usage of device was 6 hours per night and AHI on the first month based on memory card was 20 respiratory events per hour of sleep. On his follow-up visit after 6 months, his compliance was optimum with an AHI of 15 respiratory events per hour of sleep.
He experienced a few episodes of headache with a frequency of one episode per months after 6 months, although he did not have any hemiparetic attacks. He was still compliant on using PAP device and AHI of the patient based on memory card was improved to 10 respiratory events per hour of sleep. When headache was controlled, we started tapering methadone for the patient but has not been successful until now.