A 65-year-old male presented to our hospital with a 30 years history of right flank pain. His pain is a mild and intermittent dull pain, without radiation pain, gross hematuria, fever, urinary frequency or urgency and dysuria. The physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory examinations showed Serum creatinine was 167umol/L (normal range 57-111umol/L), CEA, CA-199, and CA72-4 were normal. Abdominal CT demonstrated significant dilatation of the right renal pelvis and the right upper and mid-ureter with multiple calculi. The walls of the renal pelvis and the upper and mid-ureter were thickened with hyperdense soft tissue lesion. After three negative urinary cytology examinations, the patient underwent ureteroscopic examination, which showed middle ureteral wall was rough and stenosis with soft tissue mass, but biopsy specimens from this area were non-diagnostic. We tried to insert a double J stent to provide drainage but it failed. Then we recommended a right-sided radical nephroureterectomy but the families refused. They strongly required to the treatment of urinary calculi only. Then a right-side percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) was performed. Renal access was achieved using B-US guidance with 22-Fr Amplatz sheath. A large amount of white gelatinous material were found in the renal pelvis and taken out for histopathology examination. The calculi were either removed intact or fragmented using a pneumatic lithoclast. A 20-Fr Foley catheter was kept as a nephrostomy tube and the catheter balloon was injected with 10ml saline and pulled to compress the nephrostomy tract . The histopathological examination showed the tumor cells containing intracellular mucin-filled vacuole displacing the hyperchromatic nucleus to one side suggestive of signet ring cell carcinoma . Immunohistochemical examination showed: CK, CK7, CK20, CEA, CDX2 (+), Villin (small +), Vim, GATA3, P53 (-), Ki-67 (about 60% +).Post-operative PET/CT (18F-FDG8.6mCi as the tracer) showed there was no evidence of further primary malignancy or metastases. Therefore, we considered the tumor as primary upper urinary tract signet ring cell carcinoma. A right-sided RNU with bladder cuff and nephrostomy tract sinus removal were performed subsequently . Histopathology examination found signet-ring cell invaded the renal pelvis, upper ureter and the surrounding adipose tissue through the muscle, the focal nerve and vessels were also involved. Part of the renal pelvis epithelium was presented with obvious intestinal metaplasia and atypical hyperplasia, suggesting the tumor originated from the kidney. Six weeks after the surgery, he received 3 cycles chemotherapy (Gemcitabine 1000mg/m2 on days 1 and 8, every 21 days) as adjuvant therapy. 16 months postoperatively, clinical examinations and CT scans showed normal results without metastasis or localized recurrence.