The patient is now a 21-year-old woman that was diagnosed with ICD-10 F20.0 paranoid schizophrenia at the age of 17. All psychiatric charts were reviewed to establish a comprehensive sequence of relevant medical events. The patient’s general practitioner was contacted and all appointments regarding skin conditions were evaluated. The treating dermatologist was contacted as well and charts were reviewed.
The Patient have no diagnostically confirmed family history of psoriasis. At the age of two the patient had been seen twice by the general practitioner (GP) due to eczema on the eyelids and in the palm of her hands. At the age of five she had another contact with her GP concerning birthmarks and a plantar wart.
The medication history and medical events are summarized in Fig. . At the age of 17 she was admitted to a psychiatric children’s ward for 3 months and diagnosed with schizophrenia. Thereafter, she was followed in a psychiatric outpatient clinic. In the following, the time of the diagnosis is referred to as T0. Antipsychotic treatment with quetiapine was initiated at T0. Routine blood monitoring was performed during treatment start-up and at regular basis afterwards. At T0 plus 2 months treatment with simvastatin was initiated due to dyslipidemia with elevated blood-cholesterol. In the following months the patient experienced unacceptable weight gain. According to the patient, she experienced the first psoriatic lesions about 2 months after the initiation of quetiapine. First contact with the GP concerning possible psoriasis was at T0 plus 4 months with an approximately 2 cm wide skin lesions on the left arm as well as lesions on both elbows and knees. Topical treatment with various agents including Daivobet gel, Locoid cream, and Xamiol gel was commenced by the GP but the psoriasis lesions worsened. At T0 plus 7 months, treatment with quetiapine was discontinued and aripiprazole was initiated at 5 mg/d and gradually increased to 15 mg/d within 2 months. At T0 plus 12 months treatment with melatonin was initiated due to insomnia. Melatonin was discontinued at T0 plus 20 months. At the same time, treatment with sertraline was initiated; the dosage was increased slowly up to 200 mg/d due to anxiety and mild to moderate depressive symptoms. Concomitantly, the dosage of aripiprazole was increased to 25 mg/d. The patient had another contact with her GP, at T0 plus 25 and 28 months, concerning her psoriasis. At T0 plus 30 months the patient wished to discontinue all her pharmacologic treatment due to possible side effects of the treatment. She had experienced emesis and vomiting for several months and had been evaluated by a gastroenterologist without finding any satisfactory physical explanation for the symptoms. Her treating psychiatrist suspected that the gastric symptoms were caused by simvastatin, which was discontinued at T0 plus 30 months. However, the patient was convinced that sertraline and aripiprazole worsened her anxiety symptoms and psoriatic lesions. Therefore, sertraline was discontinued by the patient at T0 plus 30 months. The patient wished to discontinue aripiprazole as well, but due to the risk of psychotic relapse she agreed to slowly tapering of the drug, which was discontinued at T0 plus 35 months. Due to ongoing anxiety and depressive symptoms treatment with venlafaxine was initiated at T0 plus 31 months. Due to the extensive worsening and lack of treatment results the patient was referred to a dermatologist at T0 plus 32 months. Treatment with intensive phototherapy (UVB and Bucky rays) for 3 months gave only minor improvement, even when two more ointments (Diprosalic, Propiosalic) were added. Treatment with melatonin was resumed at T0 plus 34 moths and simvastatin was resumed at T0 plus 38 months.
At T0 plus 39 months, the psoriatic lesions had almost entirely disappeared without any modification of the previously commenced dermatological treatment. The recommenced treatment with simvastatin and melatonin did not worsen the psoriatic lesions in the following period. So far, the patient’s psychiatric state has only been slightly affected by the discontinuation of aripiprazole (mild worsening of hallucinations). All blood tests were normal throughout the course of events.