The 25-year-old Chinese female patient had been amenorrheic for 2 months and was referred to the hospital because of painless vaginal bleeding that had lasted for 15 days. Four years ago she had a missed miscarriage at 9 weeks of gestation, which was managed by surgical curettage. Two years prior to presentation she had delivered a baby by elective cesarean. Twenty days before presenting at the hospital she had been diagnosed as 40 days pregnant based on elevated urinary levels of beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG).
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the First Affiliated Hospital, College of medicine, Zhejiang University. The procedures were conducted according to the principles of the Helsinki Declaration. On presentation the vaginal bleeding was scanty and her serum β-hCG level was 1200 mIU/mL. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed that the uterus measured 106 × 64 × 60 mm. There was an echo-free area above the inner cervical os, measuring 43 × 23 mm, without any blood flow signal, yolk sac or embryo present. A mixed echo mass measuring 29 × 15 mm was detected in the uterine cavity but no blood flow signal could be found in it. The patient was diagnosed as having had a missed miscarriage in the cesarean scar region of the uterus and curettage was performed with ultrasound monitoring. During the procedure, massive bleeding (~600 mL) occurred but this was stopped with an intravenous injection of oxytocin and uterine massage. Chorionic tissue was aspirated and proven as such by histopathology. When the curettage was finished, the uterine cavity was revealed as a clear thin line by ultrasound and was considered normal. Vaginal packing was performed subsequently.At 18 hours after curettage, the serum β-hCG level was 1164 mIU/mL. A cystic lesion with an uneven wall in the lower part of the uterus measuring 71 × 44 × 39 mm was detected with gray-scale ultrasonography . Color Doppler ultrasonography showed a swirl of colors in the cystic lesion , which was connected to an artery via a narrow neck in its posterior wall. The peak velocity in the artery was as high as 215 cm/s .
The patient was examined by interventional radiologists; however, they lacked experience in treating such a giant lesion and thought that repeated treatment might be required. A persistently high serum β-hCG concentration suggested that there were retained chorionic villi present within the pseudoaneurysm. Thus, recanalization of the pseudoaneurysm by rapid recruitment of collateral vessels might occur even after arterial embolization. Repeated uterine curettage immediately after embolization, or methotrexate therapy, might decrease the likelihood of recanalization. Therefore, the patient sought admittance to an advanced institution for embolization treatment. However, while waiting to be admitted, massive bleeding occurred suddenly at day 10 and emergency surgery was performed.During the operation, a 60 × 70 × 50 mm pseudoaneurysm was located in the cesarean scar position . Ideally, the lesion would have been completely resected and the uterus repaired after ligation of the uterine artery feeding the pseudoaneurysm. However, the hemorrhage was immediately life threatening. Therefore, to stop the bleeding quickly and save the patient’s life a hysterectomy was performed. The wall of the pseudoaneurysm was composed of clotted blood, decidual tissue and chorionic tissue.