A 41-year-old Arabic woman presented with the chief complaint of a severe painful left eyelid swelling without any prior systemic or ocular history, apart from an occasional use of nasal corticosteroid spray for allergic rhinitis.
Our ophthalmological examination found in the left eye a visual acuity (VA) limited to light perception, the eyelid was markedly swol1en and erythematous, a severe hemorrhagic chemosis, a proptosis with an ophtalmoplegia and a non-reactive semi-mydriasis. The fundus examination was difficult and it revealed a diffuse retinal whitening, papillary edema, tortuosity of the retinal veins, whitened retinal vessels without cherry-red spot (A). The examination of the right eye was normal.
The intraocular pressure IOP was 12 mmHg in right eye and couldn't be evaluated in the left eye.
Fluorescein angiography of the left eye showed an almost complete absence of retinal and choroidal flow and thus, confirmed the diagnosis of ophthalmic artery occlusion (B). Macular Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed macular retinal thickening with hyper-reflectivity of the inner retinal layers (C). The optical coherence tomography angiography (OCT-A) of the left eye demonstrated extensive areas of capillary non-perfusion in both superficial capillary plexus and deep capillary plexus with large areas of intense hyposignal in the choroid layer (D).
Then, a computed tomography study was performed and objectified a pansinusitis complicated by left orbital cellulitis and a 7.4mm × 29.8 mm subperiosteal abscess (SPA) .
Intravenous antibiotics were promptly delivered combining cefotaxime 1.5 g every 6 hours, vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 hours and a surgical drainage of the SPA was planned in 6 h under general anesthesia because of the visual impairment.
A sub-brown incision was made in the skin. The periosteum was identified at the orbital rim and incised with a 15 steel surgical blade. The subperiostal space was entered and a dissection was carried down posteriorly until the abscess cavity was objectified. The pus was aspired and sent for microbiological exam and culture. A drain was placed for 2 days and the wound was closed in layers.
Oral and topical anti-glaucoma drugs including Timolol 1 drop every 12 hours and Acetazolamide 250mg 4 times per day, were also prescribed.
The bacterial culture of the abscess has shown growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and antibiotic therapy was switched: Ciprofloxacin 200 mg every 12 hours and ceftazidime 2000 mg once a day. A brain magnetic resonance imaging was performed to rule out cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Laboratory studies, including complete blood count and Human Immunodeficiency Virus HIV serology, revealed no cause of immunodeficiency.
At fifteen days follow up, we noted resolution of chemosis and eyelid edema but the visual loss remained. The fundus examination of the left eye revealed reperfusion of the superior retina vessels, presence of sheathed vessels in the inferior retina and diffuse disc pallor. The macular SD-OCT demostrated diffuse retinal thinning with hyper-reflectivity of the inner retinal layers and the OCT-A showed extensive areas of capillary non-perfusion in both superficial capillary plexus and deep capillary plexus.
The patient was recently seen at 3 months of follow up. The visual acuity was always the same. On fundus examination, we noted significant retinal ischemia with fibrosis and optical disc pallor. The SD-OCT peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer RNFL measures confirmed the optic atrophy. The macular OCT-SD demonstrated retinal thinning with posterior vitreous detachment.
Ophthalmological and otorhinolaryngological exams were planned every 3 months.
This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE Criteria .