A girl aged 1 year and 6 months initially presented with an abdominal mass with a maximum diameter of over 15 cm. The mass was located in the central diaphragm and was infiltrating the liver and pericardium with peritoneal dissemination. Ascites cytology showed class V in Papanicolaou’s classification. The patient was diagnosed as alveolar RMS IRS Stage 4, postoperative group IV, and classified in the high risk group. Chemotherapy was started, but the tumor did not shrink sufficiently: with disease progression after the first 2 courses of VAC every 3 weeks, including vincristine (VCR) + actinomycin-D (Act-D) + cyclophosphamide (CPA); and partial response (PR) after 2 courses of ICE, including ifosfamide (IFM) + carboplatin (CBDCA) + etoposide (VP-16). Surgical resection was not possible for broad tumor’s invasion of the surrounding diaphragm and radical photon radiotherapy could not be performed because the liver could not tolerate the definitive treatment dose. Palliative care was initially recommended from local pediatric oncologists, but subsequently the patient and her family visited our hospital to receive PBT, which was started in June 2009 at age 1 year and 11 months. Peritoneal dissemination disappeared after the chemotherapy, but the tumor was still located in the central diaphragm with infiltration of the liver and pericardium, and the maximum diameter was still over 8 cm at the point . One month after the last chemotherapy (ICE), a PBT dose of 54 GyE in 30 fractions was applied over a course of 58 days. The relative biological effectiveness (RBE) of the PBT was assumed to be 1.1. We used the passive scattering method for PBT . During PBT, the patient was sedated with anesthesia and immobilized in a body cast. We used a laser displacement sensor (LDS: KEYENCE LB-300) that was the prototype of AZ-733. Respiratory gating in the expiratory phase was used. A respiratory waveform is obtained using a laser range finder that monitors movement of the abdominal surface, and a gating signal is developed. The phase shifts between the respiratory waveform and the 3D tumor motion are principally in the range 0.0 to 0.3 s, regardless of the organ being measured in the system . The gating signal is applied to the accelerator, and the accelerator is triggered within 0.1 s and delivers proton beams. The CTV encompassed the gross tumor volume with a 5- to 10-mm margin in all directions. An additional 5-mm margin was included on the caudal axes to compensate for uncertainty due to respiration-induced hepatic movements. An additional margin of 10 mm was added to cover the entire CTV by enlarging the multileaf collimator and adjusting the range shifter. Proton beams from 155 to 250 MeV generated through a linear accelerator and synchrotron were spread out and shaped with ridge filters, double-scattering sheets, multicollimators, and a custom-made bolus to ensure that the beams conformed to the treatment planning data. The tumor shrunk during PBT, and the treatment field was reduced to fit the tumor size and to keep the intestinal dose within the 50Gy tolerance level . The tumor showed a good PR (−95 % of the tumor volume) after PBT and the acute toxicity was only Grade 1 radiation hepatitis and dermatitis. After PBT, high dose chemotherapy with VP-16 + CPA + pirarubicine (THP-ADR) + cisplatin (CDDP) + VCR, IFM + VP-16 + Act-D + VCR, and irinotecan (CPT-11) + VCR was continued. The tumor was well controlled for 1 year with regular follow-up MR or CT scans performed every 3 months, but then recurred at the edge of the irradiation field where the irradiation dose was reduced due to the proximity to the intestine . The chemotherapy regimen was changed to low dose VAC, but the tumor volume remained stable. Repeated radiotherapy was considered, but could not be administered due to intestinal tolerance. Therefore, tumor excision with intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) using an electron beam of 20 Gy was conducted in May 2011, at age 3 years and 10 months. After IORT, the tumor was well controlled and a CT image showed only radiation hepatitis without a tumor . However, the patient developed secondary myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) in December 2011, and died of hemophagocytic syndrome after umbilical cord blood transplantation in May 2012.