A 32-year-old woman presented with a 1-month history of back pain. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple liver masses; lung nodules; cervical, abdomen, and pelvic lymphadenopathy; and osteolytic changes. The levels of some tumor markers, including NSE, SCC, SPan-1, CA125, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and IL2-receptor, were elevated. In this case, hCG was thought to have been produced by the tumor because the pregnancy test result was negative. A liver biopsy was performed for the histological diagnosis of cancer, revealing squamous cell carcinoma. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) results were AE1/3 (+), CK7 (focal +), CK20 (focal +), P40 (-), p16 (focal +), ER (-), PgR (-), CK5/6 (focal +), HSA (-), P63 (Very few +), GATA3 (-), PAX8 (-), TTF-1 (-), GCDFP15 (-), mammaglobin (-), uroplakin III (-), SALL4 (-), and hCG-β (-). Although p40 and p63 positive images were scarce, CK5/6 was partially positive, and there was a tendency for keratinization. Thus, a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma was made, and it was suggested that this was an HPV-associated tumor.
The endometrial cytopathology grading was class II. Moreover, no abnormal findings were observed in the cervix, and the cytopathology revealed negative results. Endometrial biopsy, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, and mammography revealed no malignant findings. No malignancy was observed following otolaryngology examination.
The p16-positive status indicated HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma. The results suggested that the candidate primary sites were the head and neck, uterine cervix, anus, vagina, and penis.
Anti-PD-1 antibody monotherapy is effective for cancers of unknown origin. However, there was rapid progression in this case. Thus, we treated the patient with 5-fluorouracil + cisplatin (CDDP), commonly used for squamous cell carcinoma, combined with pembrolizumab, an anti-PD-1 antibody. The pembrolizumab plus 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin therapy has been established as a safe standard therapy for head and neck cancer.
She received pembrolizumab (200 mg/body intravenously every 3 weeks on day 1), CDDP (100 mg/m2 intravenously every 3 weeks on day 1), and 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/m2 as a continuous infusion from days 1−4 every 3 weeks). Her serum lactate dehydrogenase (LD) levels were used to monitor the disease state, as shown in . After commencing treatment, her LD levels decreased rapidly, and her performance status improved from 2 to 1.
When a contrast-enhanced CT examination was performed after two courses, the multiple lung, liver, cervical, abdominal, and pelvic lymph node metastases were markedly reduced. She underwent a second liver biopsy after two courses to collect samples for gene panel testing. A liver biopsy before treatment showed CD8+ T cell infiltration in the tumor , and p16 was positive . A second liver biopsy showed increased tumor necrosis , while the number of tumor-infiltrating CD8 T cells remained the same as in the previous biopsy .