A 30-year-old healthy, nulliparous pregnant woman exhibited an uneventful pregnancy course. She was admitted to the hospital due to onset of labor at 40 weeks of gestation. Labor was reinforced because of weak contractions. She delivered a healthy female newborn (weight: 3478 g; Apgar score at 1 and 5 min: 9 at both times) at 40 weeks and 3 days of gestation.
One day after delivery, she experienced mild dyspnea whilst moving around, with percutaneous saturation of 98% (room air) and a hemoglobin level of 10.3 g/dL. The heart rate occasionally increased up to 125 beats per minute. The assessment of her legs did not show any clinical signs of DVT. Although a massive PTE was not suspected, laboratory tests were performed, which showed an elevated D-dimer level of 85.6 μg/mL. CT revealed no signs of PTE and no signs of DVT present in the legs; however, a right OVT of 12 mm (major axis diameter: 40 mm) and a dilated right ovarian vein of 15 mm were revealed . Considering the risk of PTE from OVT, heparinization (initial dose, 15,000 U/day) was performed by continuous venous infusion, reaching the appropriate range of activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). On the next day, trans-abdominal ultrasound (TAUS) also revealed a right OVT and a dilated right ovarian vein of 14 mm ; the left ovarian vein was 5 mm. Additionally, warfarin (initial dose, 3 mg/day) was administered per os on day 4 after delivery; heparin was ceased on day 8 under appropriate Prothrombin International Normalized Ratio (PT-INR) by administration of warfarin .
After initiating heparin administration, D-dimer levels decreased day by day . However, on day 9 after delivery, D-dimer levels suddenly increased to 40.9 μg/mL despite adequate anticoagulation treatment. CT revealed an extended thrombosis from the right ovarian vein to the IVC; a thrombosis of 7 mm in the right ovarian vein and a thrombosis of 6 mm in IVC (major axis diameter: 48 mm) were detected . Because the size of the thrombosis decreased, and the location of the thrombosis was out of the range for an IVC filter, anticoagulation treatment was continuously administered. On day 10 after delivery, TAUS also revealed an extended thrombosis from the right ovarian vein to IVC , although no symptoms were detected.
Warfarin administration was continued, and D-dimer levels decreased again . The final dose of warfarin was 2 mg/day. On day 15 after delivery, TAUS showed no signs of thrombosis on the right ovarian vein and IVC. Based on the decreased D-dimer levels of 1.7 μg/mL and the absence of signs of thrombosis on TAUS, the patient was discharged from the hospital on day 17 after delivery .
On day 36 after delivery, D-dimer level was 0.1 μg/mL; CT (day 37) and TAUS (day 38) showed no signs of thrombosis in the right ovarian vein and IVC. Thus, warfarin administration was ceased on day 38 after delivery. On day 59 after delivery, thrombophilia test results were as follows: antithrombin-III: 93%; protein-C activity: 148%; protein-S activity: 85%; antiphospholipid antibodies were negative. In addition, both PT-INR and APTT were within normal range and re-elevation of D-dimer was not observed, confirming no ongoing coagulation abnormality in this patient.