A 23-year-old male was admitted with drowsiness, confusion, and nausea/vomiting an hour after suicidal ingestion of one ALP tablet. He had a history of untreated major depressive disorder (MDD) and no family history of other diseases. On admission, the blood pressure (BP), pulse rate (PR), O2 saturation, respiratory rate (RR), temperature, and blood sugar (BS) levels were 92/57 mmHg, 91 bpm, 92%, 18/min, 36.7°C, and 99 mg/dL, respectively. He was intubated and a central venous catheter as well as a nasogastric tube were inserted. He was treated by administration of fluids (1 L normal saline), activated charcoal (0.5 gr/kg), potassium permanganate, sodium bicarbonate (2 mEq/kg), intravenous ondansetron, pantoprazole, calcium gluconate (2 gr q 8h), and magnesium sulfate (2 gr q 12h). The 12-lead electrocardiogram was normal. An initial venous blood gas (VBG) analysis showed respiratory alkalosis which changed to severe metabolic acidosis within 8 h (pH = 7.18, pCO2 = 28.7, HCO3 = 12.5, BE = 16.1). Renal function was mildly reduced (creatinine was 1.4 mg/dL and GFR was 67 ml/min/1.73). His urine toxicology screen was negative for benzodiazepines, opiates, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cannabis, and methadone. displays the on-arrival lab exams.
A brain CT was requested due to confusion; however, it was not done because of the patient's unpredictable condition.
A hypotensive state occurred 3 h after the primary hypotension was managed, mandating increasing administration of norepinephrine infusion (5–15 mic/kg/min) and transfer to the ICU. He developed an atrial fibrillation (AF) rhythm 2 h after being admitted to the ICU and was given amiodarone (150 mg as a starting dose followed by 1 mg/min for 6 h and 0.5 mg/min for 18 h). An echocardiogram was performed 8 h after admission which revealed an ejection fraction of 20% and global hypokinesia which was started to be treated by glucose-insulin-potassium protocol (1–5 unit/kg insulin and 0.5–1 gr/kg glucose) and frequent 1-h checks of vitals and blood glucose (, ).
The lowest recorded blood sugar level and blood pressure during his ICU stay were 66 mg/dL and 91/48 mmHg on the second and third day of hospitalization which were promptly treated. He was admitted to the ICU with GCS of 6/15 which improved to 9/15 by the end of the first day. On day two, his GCS decreased to 5/15 and he developed anisocoria. On the following day, the GCS dropped to 3/15. His pupils were mydriatic and non-reactive to light. An emergency CT on the third day showed diffuse bilateral hypoattenuation in the cerebellar hemispheres, midbrain, thalamus, and globus pallidus nuclei, suggesting ischemic or toxic insult. Tonsillar and transtentorial herniations were also detected in association with mild obstructive hydrocephalus .
EEG study identified severe diffused encephalopathy of non-specific etiology. On the fourth day, the patient experienced bradycardia and was once successfully resuscitated. Later, he was pronounced brain-dead and a potential candidate for organ donation. Seventeen hours later, he re-developed bradycardia and asystole which did not respond to resuscitation and the patient was pronounced dead by the end of the fourth day.