A 28-year-old woman without pre-existing conditions was admitted to the emergency department with repeating presyncopes. She had given birth three weeks before to a healthy daughter, and 3 years before to a healthy boy. She already suffered from frequent premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) during her first pregnancy. Family history did not reveal any hint of genetic heart disease or sudden cardiac death.
The patient, a nurse herself, initially assumed she had orthostatic vertigo. As the symptoms increased, she succeeded to record an episode of tachycardia on her SmartWatch during one of the episodes while shopping. The automatic analysis revealed suspicion of ventricular tachycardia (VT), so the woman sought medical help immediately. After admission, telemetry monitoring revealed further episodes of non-sustained but fast and highly symptomatic, monomorphic VTs, especially during emotional stress and breastfeeding. Resting ECG and treadmill stress test did not reveal any pathology. Echocardiographic left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 68%, TAPSE 21 mm, and dimensions of chambers were normal. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) showed no evidence of oedema, fibrosis, or late enhancement.
In an electrophysiologic (EP) study, programmed atrial stimulation induced atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia——without correlation to the clinical symptoms. VTs or frequent PVCs were absent despite aggressive programmed ventricular pacing manoeuvres. Given a slight clinical improvement under beta-blocker therapy but without clear diagnosis, the young mother urged discharge.
Eleven days later, the patient was readmitted to the emergency department with significantly increased symptoms of up to 10 presyncopes per day and frequent palpitations. Telemetric monitoring showed the previously seen VTs and a clear ECG-symptom-correlation. A second EP test with high-resolution 3D-endocardial mapping of the left ventricle failed to identify a suitable ablation target due to a lack of spontaneous or provoked ventricular arrhythmia. Rare PVCs suggested a left anterolateral epicardial focal origin close to the mitral valve annulus, as indicated in the 12-lead-ECG. An ablation attempt via the coronary sinus was not successful, and an epicardial approach was not pursued due to low periinterventional PVC burden and higher complication risks.
The patient was discharged again on her request, this time equipped with a wearable cardioverter defibrillator vest (WCD). Two weeks later the young mother collapsed while walking with her baby. As she regained consciousness, the baby next to her on the ground after falling out of the stroller, she was able to suppress WCD therapy. The recorded WCD ECGs and telemetry revealed an increased number of PVCs and non-sustained ventricular tachykardias (nsVTs), especially during breastfeeding.
Analysis of all of the patient’s ECGs revealed a correlation between the severity of symptoms and an increase in QT intervals, with the longest QTc observed on admission days and a decrease under intensified beta-blocker therapy during hospitalizations .
The progressive nature of the symptoms, correlation between breastfeeding and tachycardia, absence of structural heart disease and significant QTc prolongation made hormone-induced VT the most likely diagnosis. Having no other therapy options and after weighing risks for mother and child, the patient could be convinced to cease breastfeeding. Clinical improvement was rapidly observed, with a reduction in PVCs and no further episodes of nsVTs. The patient was repeatedly seen in our outpatient clinic over the next 12 months, with no signs of palpitations, or manifest tachycardia. The QTc interval remained constant. Considering possible side effects, the rapid improvement of symptoms after trigger elimination, negative genetics (panel of genetic testing for commonly affected genes in inherited channelopathies/cardiomyopathies genes: CACNA1C, CALM1, CALM2, CALM3, CASQ2, DSG2, DSP, DSG2, DSP, JUP, KCNE1, KCNE2, KCNJ2, RYR2, SCN5A, ABCC9, AKAP9, ANK2, CACNA2D1, CACNB2, CAV3, CDH2, CTNNA2, DES, FLNC, GATA5, GATA6, GJA5, GPD1L, HCN4, KCNA5, KCND3, KCNE5, KCNJ8, KCNQ1, LDB3, LMNA, PKP2, PLP, PPA2, PPKAG2, RAMGRF, SCN10A, SCN2B, SCN3B, SLMAP, SNTA1, TBX5, TECRL, TGFB3, TMEM43, TNNI3, TNNI3K, TNNT2, TRDN, TRPM4, TTN) and patient’s wish we refrained from implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation, although guideline accordance recommending an ICD for secondary prevention in a sustained symptomatic VT with subsequent syncope.