A 73-year-old male, who had been undergoing annual blood tests and abdominal ultrasound for more than 10 years as part of health checkups, was found to have elevated CA 19-9 level (95 U/mL) and a cystic pancreatic lesion. The patient was asymptomatic and had an otherwise normal laboratory examination. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a cystic lesion in the pancreatic tail, and a slightly hyperechoic component was detected in the cystic lesion . Abdominal dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a multicystic mass, 24 mm in diameter, with no solid components observed in the entire lesion . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the intensity varied across the cysts on T2-weighted images and that the intensity was generally low on T1-weighted images . The cystic capsules were enhanced but did not exhibit the same intensity as that of the spleen; furthermore, no solid components were detected in the cystic wall by gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid contrast . On magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, the lesion exhibited high intensity and there were no findings of a connection between the lesion and the main pancreatic duct . Furthermore, on CT and MRI, there were no findings suggesting regional lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis related to the lesion. All potential malignancies except for those originating from the pancreas were ruled out by esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and chest CT.
Re-evaluation of the patient’s serum CA 19-9 level after the completion of imaging studies revealed a rapid increase to 901 U/mL, which declined to 213 U/mL 3 weeks later . Based on the difficulty in ruling out the lesion’s malignant potential, the patient underwent distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy. Intraoperative inspection and manipulation confirmed that the lesion was limited to the pancreas, and there were no findings of distant metastasis and regional lymph node metastasis.
Macroscopic inspection of the resected specimen revealed that the entire lesion consisted of multiple cysts and accessory spleen . Histological examination showed that islets of Langerhans and pancreatic ducts were present around the lesion; therefore, the entire lesion was located within pancreatic parenchyma . The lesion comprised an accessory spleen and multiple cysts containing mucinous material. The accessory spleen comprised red pulp and white pulp, characteristic of a normal spleen, and was present outside the lesion and between the cysts . Most of the cystic walls were lined by stratified squamous epithelium . Regarding immunohistochemistry, both the epithelium and mucin depositions were positive for CA 19-9 . The mucinous material in the cysts exhibited different time courses of biological reaction. In one cyst, the cystic wall had lost stratified squamous epithelium, and foreign-body giant cells and fibroblasts were observed nearby the cystic wall . The organized mucin in the cyst contained cholesterol clefts. These findings suggested that this particular cyst had ruptured due to chronic inflammation. Another cyst comprised organized mucin with a thick, hyalinized mucin outside where the epithelial cells were completely lost . These findings suggested that this particular cyst had been undergoing chronic inflammation for a longer period of time than the aforementioned cyst.
Based on the operative and histopathological findings, the definitive diagnosis was ECIAS. The patient was discharged following an uneventful postoperative course. The CA 19-9 level was confirmed to have declined to below the upper normal limit 4 weeks after the resection.