The patient was a 71-year-old woman undergoing follow-up in the Department of Thoracic Surgery at our hospital for multiple frosted glass shadows suggestive of primary lung carcinoma in both lung fields for one and a half years . On computed tomography, there were no lung nodules suggestive of metastatic tumor. Although there were no apparent changes over time, it was decided to perform surgery for a definitive diagnosis because the patient wished it. Thoracoscopic right middle lobectomy and left upper partial lobectomy were performed 4 and 6 months earlier, respectively.
The size of the resected specimen of the right lung was 13 × 8.5 × 4 cm. In the specimen, there were minimally invasive lung adenocarcinoma with an invasive diameter of 7 mm, adenocarcinoma in situ in two locations, and microscopic metastatic PTC in four locations. The size of the resected specimen of the left lung was 8 × 3 × 3.5 cm. In the specimen, there were a lung adenocarcinoma with an invasive diameter of 9 mm and a metastatic PTC 0.5 mm in size at the same site. In both resected specimens, the cells of metastatic PTC were positive for PAX8 and thyroglobulin. These findings were consistent with PTC . The patient came to our department for a thorough examination for PTC.
The serum thyroid-stimulation hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (fT3), free thyroxine (fT4), and thyroglobulin levels were 2.60 mIU/L, 2.15 pg/ml, 1.60 ng/dl, and 22.8 ng/ml, respectively. Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies were negative.
Ultrasonography was performed to search for the primary lesion and demonstrated an irregular hypoechoic mass of 4 mm and 6 mm in the middle of the right lobe of the thyroid gland. The fine-needle aspiration cytology from the 4 mm lesion revealed PTC . Preoperatively, the patient was diagnosed as cT1a (m) N0 M1 (stage IVB). Total thyroidectomy and prophylactic central node dissection were performed. The pathological diagnosis was PTC (typical type) pT1a (m) N0 .
Postoperative radioiodine therapy was performed five months after the surgery. The patient was administered 100 mCi of 131 iodine (I-131), and the accumulation of I-131 in the thyroid bed was confirmed, though there was no accumulation in the lung field. Subsequently, at seven-month follow-up, the I-131 whole-body scan was negative. The thyroglobulin level during TSH stimulation and three months after RAI were 7.71 and 1.0 ng/ml.