Patient is a 17-year-old male who presents to the adolescent clinic in the southeastern United States for a sports physical examination and well-child visit.
Patient is accompanied by his mother, who is from South America and does not speak English. Patient and mother report that he is “completely healthy with no medical conditions.” He exercises regularly for 90 min daily, encompassing both strength training and cardiovascular fitness.
The patient initially reports no medical history, including when directly asked about cardiac conditions or symptoms of chest pain, shortness of breath, dyspnea at rest or on exertion, palpitations, ascites, or leg edema. However, when physical exam revealed right-sided heart sounds, the patient revealed that he had been diagnosed incidentally at the age of 12 years following an X-ray performed for unrelated abdominal pain. He subsequently had two appointments with a cardiologist in South America with no reported symptoms or complications. Since moving to the United States two years ago, he has not had medical care. He denies history of sinopulmonary infections or decreased olfaction. When asked why the patient and mother did not disclose this diagnosis when queried about cardiac conditions, their answer was that it was not important information since he is healthy and SIT does not affect him; their understanding was that he did not have a disease, just a mirror-image flip and was essentially normal. The patient and his mother were surprised by these questions and were unaware that this condition may be associated with other syndromes or that there may be potential ramifications for his medical treatment in the future.
The patient’s personal and family history were otherwise unremarkable for cardiovascular conditions or sudden deaths.
Physical examination revealed stable vital signs with manual blood pressure 120/74 mmHg (< 95th percentile for age, height and gender), pulse 86 beats per minute, temperature 96.2° F, and body mass index of 24.5 kg/m2. Cardiovascular examination was significant for point of maximal impulse palpated on the right at the 5th intercostal space at the midclavicular line. Rate and rhythm were regular with no murmurs, rubs or gallops. Skin had two benign-appearing dark nevi with well-defined borders (approximately 2-3 mm) along posterior axillary line bilaterally. There were no surgical scars detected. Abdominal examination was significant for inferior border of liver palpated 2 cm beneath left costal margin. There were normal bowel sounds with no rebound or guarding.
Investigations showed borderline decreased high-density cholesterol of 27 mg/dL (23-92 mg/dL), and otherwise unremarkable lipid studies. Complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 16 g/dL. Renal and hepatic function was normal.
Chest X-ray showed dextrocardia with situs inversus . Abdominal radiograph showed stomach on the right upper quadrant . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed heart located in the right chest with cardiac apex pointing to the right. There was atrial situs inversus with atrio-ventricular concordance and ventriculo-arterial concordance. The pulmonary veins drained normally to the right sided morphologic left atrium. The superior and inferior vena cava drained normally to the left sided morphologic right atrium. There was normal valvular structure and function. Abdominal sonogram report from South America mentioned liver on the left, spleen on the right, and mirror image configuration of aorta and inferior vena cava.