A 13-year-old girl presented with a 6-month history of headaches, tinnitus, and dizziness. The symptoms were partly relieved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The attending neurologist requested a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain which showed noncommunicating hydrocephalus secondary to a large pineal region cyst compressing the cerebellum and the cerebral aqueduct. Ophthalmology examination revealed features of papilledema. The child was fully conscious without focal or meningeal signs and symptoms. A brain MRI with contrast enhancement showed an irregular noncontract enhancing cystic lesion of the pineal region .
The cyst pushed the quadrigeminal plate and the aqueduct anteriorly and the cerebellum downward. Its lower-ventral surface adjoined the fourth ventricle, superiorly the walls of the cyst bordered on the bodies of moderately dilated lateral ventricles. Periventricular edema was noted. A diagnosis of arachnoid cyst of the pineal region with sub-compensated occlusive hydrocephalus was made. After multidisciplinary consultation, the patient was scheduled for microsurgical fenestration of the cyst walls and allows communication with the subarachnoid spaces of the posterior fossa to eliminate the mass effect and restore adequate CSF circulation.
The cyst was approached through a midline infratentorialsupracerebellar corridor. On dural opening, a bulging cerebellum compressed by the cyst was noted with many arachnoid adhesions with the surrounding structures. These adhesions were carefully released and the whitish-yellow cyst was visualized .
The cystic fluid was partly cloudy and colorless. A biopsy of the capsule was taken. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) showed decreased cyst size with hyperdense content (interpreted as normal postoperative changes), mild pneumocephalus, and a patent cerebral aqueduct .
Pathohistological results indicated that the lesion was an endodermal cyst. The tissues showed dense and loose fibrous connective tissue lined by a single-layered and pseudostratified ciliated epithelium. Epithelial cells expressed cytokeratin (CK) 7, pan-keratin, and epithelial membrane antigen and were negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein, S100, and CK 20 .
Day 6 postoperative MRI showed a decrease in the cyst size to 10–20% of the preoperative size with a symmetrical reduction in lateral ventricle size .
On day 10 postoperatively, the patient deteriorated with severe headache, vomiting, and developed a CSF leak. Control brain CT showed features of noncommunicating hydrocephalus and a × 2.5 increase in the cyst size compressing the cerebral aqueduct . An urgent endoscopic third ventriculostomy was performed. Postoperative MRI showed regression of the hydrocephalus and increase of the endodermal cyst to about 80% of the original size . The MRI features of the cyst contents were also of interest. On initial presentation, it was similar to CSF on T2, T1, and FLAIR modes. However, the last two images showed a clear hyperintense signal.
On day 4 after the second operation, she was discharged with no neurological deficit. At 1 and 3 months after discharge, the patient was still asymptomatic. Control brain MRIs were essential without change. However, 1-year routine control MRI showed significant changes compared to previous images .
On the superior surface of the cerebellum along the operative corridor of the supracerebellar approach, multiple noncommunicating cysts of various sizes were visualized. The size of the original pineal region cyst had slightly increased. Given the unusual progression of the disease, an enhanced MRI of the entire central nervous system and a brain positron emission tomography-CT with methionine was performed and normal. The patient was managed conservatively with a follow-up MRI done after 1 year and 20 months [ and ]. Of note, there was an increase in the number of new smaller cysts in the parenchyma of the cerebellum, as well as a slow progressive increase in their size with no perceptible mass effect. The pineal region cyst also showed a gradual increase, especially caudally. There are still no secondary changes in the spinal cord.
From the time of discharge, the patient has been asymptomatic and active with no focal neurological deficits. However, the authors are watchfully waiting and following up the patient clinically and radiologically. Should the cysts present with significant mass effect to cause clinical symptoms in the near future, surgical management with a goal of radical resection will be needed.