A 69-year-old man was admitted with worsening rashes due to bullous pemphigoid (BP). He had type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and end-stage kidney disease due to diabetic nephropathy. He had been a continuous smoker for approximately 20 years and had quit 40 years previously. He started hemodialysis 4 years before his admission. Six months before his admission, rash emerged on his trunk and upper limbs after the administration of linagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor, for his diabetes. Based on a skin biopsy, he was diagnosed with DPP-4 inhibitor-associated BP. DPP-4 inhibitor was discontinued and oral corticosteroid treatment was initiated. Because reducing the corticosteroid dose resulted in a worsening of the rash, he required prednisolone (0.25–0.6 mg/kg/day) thereafter.
After his admission, a second skin biopsy was performed after his skin rash relapsed. The second skin biopsy revealed toxic epidermal necrolysis. Immunoglobulin and intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisolone (1.0 mg/kg/day) were added. The dose of prednisolone was gradually tapered to 0.4 mg/kg/day during his hospitalization. On the 3rd day of admission, his arteriovenous fistula could not be used due to the worsening of his rash. A temporary blood access catheter was inserted via his right internal jugular vein to perform maintenance hemodialysis. Before and after admission, his glycoalbumin level was in the range of 22–25%, his blood sugar during admission was approximately 150–200 mg/dL, which indicated that his hyperglycemia was relatively well controlled.
CT showed bilateral deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs at the time of his admission. Enhanced CT was performed on the 28th day to check them, and a nodule was noted in the peripheral region of the right upper lobe . On the 41st day, enlargement of the nodule with newly emerged cavitation was observed. At this time, repeated blood culture tests were consistently positive for Corynebacterium spp.. At this time, his plasma was negative for both (1–3)-β-d-glucan and serum galactomannan antigen. Transthoracic echocardiography showed vegetation on the mitral valve with moderate regurgitation. Bilateral cerebral infarction was evident on brain MRI. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with IE and IE-related systemic embolization involving SPE in the right upper lobe. Intravenous vancomycin was administered.
After 3 weeks of treatment with vancomycin, the nodular lesion in the right upper lobe diminished, whereas a new nodule emerged in the left upper lobe . The nodule presented cavitation and a halo sign, which is a macronodule surrounded by a perimeter of ground-glass opacity . On the 71st day, CT showed rapid growth of a nodule in the left upper lobe . The (1–3)-β-d-glucan level was elevated to > 600 pg/mL and a serum galactomannan antigen test was positive. Aspergillus sp. was detected in his sputum culture. Repeated blood cultures were all negative after starting vancomycin treatment. The aspergillus culture of his sputum was totally negative throughout the course. Despite treatment with micafungin followed by amphotericin B, he died from respiratory failure on the 72nd day of admission.
An autopsy was performed ten hours after his death. In the left lung nodule, Aspergillus hyphae was detected by Grocott staining, which had septum and acute angle branches . Hyphae were found to be invading into vessels and the same finding was seen in other organs, including the thyroid and right ventricle. These findings are fully consistent with typical histopathological features of IPA. On the other hand, Aspergillus hyphae could not be found in the nodule in the right upper lung lobe. A cavity with organized lumen and obstructed vessels was observed. Acute inflammatory cells were partly observed . The vegetation on the mitral valve was replaced by fibrosis without inflammatory cells. These findings indicated that the nodule in the right lung lobe was SPE that had partially recovered.