A 52-year-old man presented in the emergency department of our hospital with a history of typical angina and recurrent electrical storms with an in situ cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) device, implanted 9 years ago.
The patient’s medical records revealed that an emergency coronary angiography had been performed 11 years ago for a transient posterior wall myocardial infarction. Interestingly no culprit lesion was discovered, with simultaneous left ventriculography showing no significant LV-function impairment. Two years later, the patient was readmitted with severe dyspnea and recurrent angina. A repeat coronary angiography could not establish an ischemic cause of the symptoms in the absence of any relevant coronary artery stenosis. Echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle with severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF = 28%). Further investigation with cardiac-MRI, in the absence of any extensive myocardial scarring and specific tissue characteristics, excluded probable ischemic, dilated, hypertrophic, restrictive and arrhythmogenic aetiologies of severely reduced left-ventricular function. The precise pathophysiology governing the heart failure and ventricular remodelling remained in this case obscure. Hence, a provisional diagnosis of idiopathic nonischemic cardiomyopathy was proposed.
In view of continuing symptoms despite optimal heart failure regimen and without further improvement of left ventricular function, a primary prevention strategy with programmed ventricular stimulation was adopted. The patient underwent conventional CRT-D system implantation in the presence of a complete left bundle branch block (LBBB).
Remarkably, the patient was a classic CRT-D responder with the improvement of LVEF up to 42% with no unusual electrical activity over the period. As part of a continuous heart care program, the patient had been attending regularly scheduled cardiology follow-up consultation. The patient showed to date no further deterioration of his cardiac function and had no clinical episodes of VT or shocks; however, he continued to have intermittent angina throughout. None of the further records revealed any ischemic cause of symptoms, except one of the angiograms showing the non-traceability of RCA.
Nine years after the implantation of CRT-D, the patient presented to us experiencing electrical storm for the first time, with a total of 22 malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmic episodes that were recorded in the tachycardia zone . After a few unsuccessful attempts at anti-tachycardiac pacing (ATP), the device delivered a total number of 25 appropriate maximal energy shocks at 38 J following ongoing tachycardia episodes.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) at presentation showed ventricular tachycardia (VT). The patient was treated with 300 mg intravenous amiodarone bolus, which subsequently terminated the electrical storm. Later, 1000 mg/day in three divided doses, oral amiodarone was administered to establish the desired plasma level of the drug. An acute ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) was subsequently excluded in a follow-up 12-lead ECG showing ventricular-paced rhythm without any relevant concordant ST elevation (“negative” Sgarbossa criteria) .
Further physical examination revealed that our patient was highly anxious and dyspneic with an initial fluctuating heart rate of over 200/min and blood pressure of 126/80 mmHg. The patient denied any recent episode of syncope. On pulmonary auscultation, bilateral basal crepitations were audible, which was later confirmed by chest X-ray as bilateral pulmonary congestion. The cardiovascular risk factors associated with the patient were hypertension, history of smoking (around 20 cigarettes/day) and elevated body mass index (BMI = 37).
Initial laboratory test results showed normal levels of serum potassium, magnesium and thyroid stimulating hormone; however, the levels of creatine phosphokinase and creatine phosphokinase (MB) were elevated, i.e. 671 IU/L and 41 IU/L, respectively (optimal range CK 0–174 and CK-MB 0–25 IU/L). High-sensitivity troponin assays revealed a staggering increase from 41 pg/ml to 264 pg/ml within 2 h of the initial presentation (optimal range 0–14 pg/ml). The echocardiography and other laboratory investigations did not support left ventricular hypertrophy, acute deterioration of cardiac function (ejection fraction = 40%), electrolyte disturbances or any other triggering factors as an etiology for arrhythmic storm and acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Based on his history of continued symptoms and increased level of cardiac enzymes, the patient underwent immediate catheterizations. The diagnostic coronary angiogram excluded the presence of any culprit lesion, but revealed a non- significant 30–40% stenotic multivessel coronary disease of left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex (LCX) with normal TIMI III flow pattern. Anatomically, the left main coronary artery was observed to originate from the left aortic sinus. With the conventional angiogram using a right Judkins catheter after several attempts at cannulation, the course of the RCA was not traceable. Hence it was followed by the computed tomographic (CT) coronary angiogram, which revealed an RCA originating from the left coronary sinus with an interarterial course in between the aorta and pulmonary artery leading to dynamic compression with evident decreased luminal diameter at the origin of RCA between the great vessels without any distinct narrowing of the remainder of the RCA .
Based on the initial ECG morphology of VT with a right bundle branch block RBBB-like morphology, an early precordial transition at V3 and predominant S in aVF; the wavefront of VT was therefore thought to exit and activate in the inferior aspect of the left ventricle. Subsequently, we urged for an electrophysiology study, to which the patient did not give consent. Cardiovascular surgical evaluation of the interarterial compression of RCA excluded the need for any immediate surgical intervention due to the lack of concrete evidence of any myocardial ischemia.
Over the next 12 h, the patient’s clinical status improved without any recurrence of arrhythmia. The heart failure regimen was optimized with increased dosage of the β-blocking agent (metoprolol) and ACE inhibitor (ramipril) along with the addition of an aldosterone antagonist (eplerenone). We proposed the new ARNI (Angiotensin receptor- Neprilysin inhibitor) as an alternative to an ACE inhibitor as per the current heart-failure guideline, but the patient denied this therapeutic proposition. After close monitoring for any adverse effects, the patient was finally discharged on a maintenance dose of 200 mg/day of amiodarone.
The patient continued to experience persistent angina at rest, for which he was again hospitalized after 3 weeks. His condition prompted an ischemic evaluation to determine the extent of the myocardial perfusion. Radionuclide imaging using myocardial perfusion scintigraphy (MPS) was performed, which revealed extensive reversible perfusion defect involving the inferior and posterior wall coinciding with myocardial territory supplied by the RCA .
In the absence of any culprit lesion along with MPS based preliminary evidence of delineated ischemic area consistent with the VT exit site on 12-lead ECG, we hypothesised that the ventricular arrhythmia and severe angina episodes could be due to the atypical anatomy of the RCA with an interarterial course. Hence, we referred the case for surgical re-evaluation. After a thorough discussion, the patient was transferred to the cardiothoracic department for surgical unroofing, believing that the ischemia was due to interarterial dynamic compression of RCA. The patient was followed-up for 10 months after surgery; he remained asymptomatic without any further episodes of angina pectoris or electrical storms.