A 60-year-old native Japanese-speaking right-handed man, with 12 years of education, was admitted to an emergency hospital with vertigo and postural instability. He was a French chef. Apart from atrial fibrillation without medication, his medical history was unremarkable. Neurologic examination on admission showed a diplopia, dysarthria, and right cerebellar ataxia. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) on brain (GE Healthcare Japan; Sigma HDxt 1.5T) revealed a new infarction in the right cerebellar hemisphere involving cortex and the medullary core due to the obstructions of the right superior cerebellar artery and the right posterior inferior cerebellar artery . He underwent subtentorial open decompressive craniectomy for brain edema. He was transferred to our rehabilitation hospital on day 35. Neurological assessment revealed gait ataxia and right-sided hemiataxia. The score in the simple test for evaluating hand function (STEF) that was designed to evaluate the speed of manipulating (catching, pinching, and carrying) objects (10 different shapes and sizes) using an upper limb was 62 out of a maximum 100 points for the right hand. Speech was slightly dysarthric. On neurological examination, writing kanji (Japanese morphograms, originally adopted from Chinese characters) words and naming were defective, but the dysgraphia was too pronounced to be explained by hemiataxia. Although no evidence of supratentorial damage was found on MRI (General Electric Company; Sigma Excite 1.5T) , SPECT using 123I-N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP SPECT) perfusion scans (Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation; Symbia E) on day 98 revealed lower levels of perfusion, mainly in the left posterior middle temporal gyrus, left superior and middle temporal gyrus, and right cerebellar hemisphere (the current infarct area), than those observed in normal individuals (normal database findings) . We proposed that hypoperfusion due to crossed cerebellar-cerebral diaschisis is a cause of his poor kanji writing.
ST was started on a daily basis, and the first in-depth neuropsychological investigations were performed 1.5 months after stroke. The language assessments of the Standard Language Test of Aphasia (SLTA), which is a formal neurolinguistic approach administered in Japanese , showed impaired writing, especially for kanji and verbal word fluency tests . Articulation, repetition, oral reading, writing kana (the other type of syllabographic Japanese characters), and reading comprehension were almost normal. During a conversation, a listener was required to speculate and accordingly make a deduction in order to adequately comprehend the patient's response owing to the lack of subjects in his sentences or a frequent and abrupt change of topics. As verbal fluency tasks, we conducted category fluency tasks (semantic generation) and letter fluency tasks (phonological generation) in one minute. We regarded 15 or more word generation as normal. Results of verbal fluency tasks were moderately impaired: the number of words expressed aloud in semantic generation (“transportation” and “cooking tools”) were 7 and 2, and in phonological generation (started with “Sa” and “Ra”) were 4 and 6 at 4 months after the onset. Written kanji skills were also examined in more detail. In Japan, children between the ages of 6 (the 1st grade) and 12 (the 6th grade) are taught a total of 1006 kanji characters in elementary school, and the upper grade students gradually tend to learn more difficult kanji characters. The patient obtained a deficient score of 12/20 on a kanji screening writing test (that consisted of 1 or 2 kanji characters that were taught before the 5th grade) at 4 months after the onset. His dysgraphia in the poor kanji writing constituted difficulty to recall correct letters with morphological, orthographical, or semantical errors, most of which resulted in nonwords . He was able to copy kanji characters in both spontaneous writing and dictation and the types of writing error were the same with both right and left hands. When it comes to the kanji character that he could not write correctly, it was difficult for him to recall it even after we offered hint of some radicals (the building components of kanji) or a part of the character. He also could not explain the shape of kanji characters or the stroke order, which means his letter recognition was impaired. Neurocognitive functions were evaluated by the trail making test and Kohs block design test at 1.5, 6, and 12 months after the onset and the Wechsler adult intelligence scale-III (WAIS-III) at 6 and 12 months after the onset . Except for an attention disorder, the patient did not reveal prefrontal cortex dysfunction such as lack of spontaneity, loss of initiative, or flattened affect.
Since writing kanji words and naming did not improve 4 months after the onset, we performed fNIRS study to identify a task that would be able to recruit blood flow to the hypoperfused area in the left cerebral location. fNIRS is a noninvasive functional brain mapping method that uses near-infrared light. It can measure changes in regional cerebral blood flow induced by neural activity in the cerebral cortex based on absorbance at three wavelengths (780 nm, 805 nm, and 830 nm) according to the Beer-Lambert law. To detect task-related hemoglobin signal changes, a continuous-wave NIRS system (SMARTNIRS, Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan) with 17 light emitter fibers and 16 light detectors was employed, and data were analyzed by LABNIRS (Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan). We determined the locations of the emitter/detector probes and measurement channels. Every channel was expected to measure the changes at the midpoint between two probes and at a depth of 20–30 mm under the scalp. We concluded that No. 10 and No. 13 channels were recording signals from the regions of interest that corresponded to the hypoperfused area in the left posterior middle temporal gyrus; this conclusion was based on a fusion map generated using an image of the patient's head inside the fiber cap-type holder and a left-side SPECT view . During the experiment, this holder was specifically placed for this patient so that it would position the probes at the same location every time. Channels corresponding to the left temporooccipital cortex are shown in . The patient sat on a chair during the experiment. We considered the cortical oxygenated hemoglobin (oxy-Hb) signal increase as a real-time stimulatory response to a task . After a long rest and the stabilization of the oxy-Hb level, we began a test. The operator ordered the patient to start the first task after 20 sec of resting. Before and after the 20 sec tasks, the patient was instructed to clear his mind and not move for 20 sec, and each 20 sec rest-task-rest cycle was repeated 5 times for averaging .
After trying several tests such as word imaging tasks or difficult kanji recalling tasks over a few days, we finally identified a workable picture card task that could increase blood perfusion in the hypoperfused area of the left posterior middle temporal gyrus, where we presumed to be the anatomical location of pure agraphia of kanji . The task was as follows: upon being shown a card that pictured a dish prepared with various ingredients, the patient had to think and name the ingredients of the dish, while remaining motionless. For example, he had to name most vegetables, meat, and spices that he expected to be contained in the dish after seeing a “curry” picture card. We conducted a comparison kanji writing test between one week before and just after the first picture card naming task. These two tests were totally different but the difficulty was intentionally the same. They consisted of 1 or 2 kanji characters which were taught in 3rd and 4th grade, and each pair of the kanji characters had the same number of strokes and the same importance level based on the Japanese pedagogical wordlists. The kanji writing score improved from 5 (one week before) to 8 out of 20 points after the first card naming task. Since the task took about only 5 minutes to perform but seemed to be effective, it was incorporated into the daily ST a few times a week.
The patient was discharged from our hospital on day 204, walking independently with a slight stagger. One year after the stroke, an overall improvement in linguistic and cognitive function was observed . Results on verbal fluency tasks were improved: the number of words expressed aloud in semantic generation (“transportation” and “cooking tools”) were 10 and 8, and in phonological generation (started with “Sa” and “Ra”) were 4 and 9. Spontaneous and dictational writing of kanji letters also resulted in a perfect recovery in the SLTA. And when we reassessed his writing kanji ability using the same kanji screening test that was previously used 4 months after the onset, the correct numbers of kanji characters improved to 14/20 . Since similar types of writing errors persisted, we concluded that his deficiencies in kanji writing slightly remained although he had no difficulty in dysphasia in his regular life. Follow-up MRI did not show any additional damage and previous hypoperfused areas were attenuated on SPECT study after 3 years . Written informed consent was obtained from this individual participant included in the study.