A 29-year old woman, gravida 3, para 2, presented in the 14 4/7 weeks of pregnancy. The current pregnancy was natural conception. She had a history of HG in the first pregnancy. During the current pregnancy, she had been complaining of severe nausea and vomiting for more than a month. In the past 2 weeks, the symptoms became even worse, and she had been unable to eat and drink normally.
Since Jan.7th 2019, the patient was sent to several hospitals successively for treatments. Laboratory tests drawn at the local hospitals were notable for electrolyte abnormalities, elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level, as well as the progressive descent of platelet (PLT) count and hemoglobin (HGB) level. The patient accepted fluid replacement therapy, anti-vomiting therapy and nutritional supplement therapy in the local hospitals. However, the treatments did not work, and the disease continued on its course. Apart from nausea and vomiting, new symptoms occurred suddenly, such as decreased mobility, loss of interest, sleeping too much, apathy, dysarthria, blurred vision, and visual hallucination. Two days later, the patient’s mental state changed from apathy to excitation and appeared psychological changes. On Jan. 8th, the fetal death was diagnosed by obstetric ultrasound.
The patient was transferred to the Emergency Obstetrics and Gynecology Department in our hospital urgently on Jan. 10th. In the emergency room, laboratory tests showed obviously decreased PLT count (41 × 109/L, normal range: 125–350 × 109/L) and HGB level (72 g/L, normal range: 115-150 g/L), increased serum levels of ALT (147U/L, normal range: 7-40U/L) and AST (100U/L, normal range: 13-35U/L). The patient was also accompanied with the hypophosphatemia (0.30mmol/l, normal range: 0.81-1.45mmol/l) and hypokalaemia (3.4mmol/l, normal range: 3.6–5.0mmol/l). The arterial blood gas was not sampled, and the difference between sodium and chloride could not indicate that she had alkalosis or acidemia. There were no obvious changes in the patient’s electrocardiogram, such as long QTc intervals, flatted T wave or U wave were found. She presented with oliguria and redness in urine, as well as other dehydration symptoms, such as thirsty, dry stools, dry skin and dry mouth. Based on the ketone bodies found in the urine evaluation, the patient was deemed to suffer from a starvation ketosis induced by severe dehydration and metabolic derangements. On examination, the patient had no symptom of bleeding and the vital signs were normal. At her height and weight, she had a BMI of 28.3. The patient still had the symptoms of excitation, dysarthria, and visual hallucination, while the blurred vision receded. An ultrasound scan was performed immediately, which confirmed the absence of fetal cardiac activity.
The patient was admitted to the obstetrics department of our hospital. Laboratory tests were monitored minutely and shown in Table . The patient had no history of paralysis, thyrotoxicosis or use of insulin. Because of nausea and vomiting with an inability to tolerate significant food or drink, standardized commercial parenteral nutrition, hypokalaemia correction (1.0 g of potassium chloride in 500ml of 5 % glucose and 0.9 % sodium chloride solution twice a day) and hypophosphatemia correction were performed. In the context of our patient, the altered mental status was attributed to Wernicke encephalopathy (WE), so treatment with thiamine (200 mg intramuscularly twice a day) was provided immediately and the symptoms started to recover remarkably. According to multidisciplinary consultation shown in Table , the patient was diagnosed with intravascular hemolytic anemia. Figure showed the picture of peripheral blood smear.
In order to relieve the patient’s symptoms, we decided to induce labor as soon as possible. On account of the severe symptoms of blood cell destruction and hepatic injury which was indicated by the elevated aminotransferase levels, the method of labor induction was chosen cautiously. And water bag was considered as the best choice, because it could avoid the further damage caused by the drug therapy. On January 11th, the water bag was put in her cervix, and she received two units of red blood cell transfusion after that. On the morning of the next day, the delivery was finished. The patient delivered a 60-gram fetus, whose sex was still not identifiable. The routine was complicated by a retained placenta, which required a dilation and curettage. The patient received another two units of red blood cell and one unit of the platelet transfusion followed by the curettage. The immediate blood routine examination after the blood transfusion showed that HGB level was 77 g/L, and PLT count was 86 × 109/L. On the following day, HGB level maintained stability as 72 g/L, and PLT count increased up to 198 × 109/L.
Based on these clinical symptoms, the significant pathophysiological situation can be attributed to RFS on severe malnourished state due to HG, which led to WE, electrolyte abnormalities and eventually resulted in blood cell destruction. The patient’s vomiting persisted until the day of admission, during the period of labor induction, the vomiting stopped. Meanwhile, after the labor induction and symptomatic supportive treatments, laboratory tests showed a gradual normalization of aminotransferase levels, and the patient’s mental state significantly improved, while the symptoms of blood cell destruction started to recover. The patient discharged four days later, and remained in good health during the follow-up period.