A 67-year-old Japanese woman was transferred to the emergency unit of our hospital for an evaluation of her acute abdominal pain. She had a 2-week history of conservative treatment with antibiotics for an NLC at another hospital .
On examination, the patient’s pulse rate was 80 beats/min, her blood pressure was 136/68 mmHg, and she did not have a fever. Her abdomen was flat but painful. The patient did not complain of nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. She did not exhibit abdominal tenderness or muscular defense on her arrival at the clinic. The laboratory test results did not reveal liver dysfunction, and the patient’s total bilirubin level was 0.8 mg/dL, the prothrombin activity and international normalized ratio were 99% and 1.01, respectively, the creatinine level was 0.63 mg/dL, the platelet count was 313,000 /μL, and the albumin concentration was 3.9/dL. Other blood test results revealed acute inflammation, the absence of anemia, a white blood cell count of 16,350 cells/μL, a hemoglobin level of 13.4 g/dL, and a C-reactive protein level of 0.57 mg/dL. The levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within the normal ranges. There were no findings of neoplastic cysts in the abdominal ultrasound test. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scanning showed a ruptured hepatic cyst without any extravasation, and a moderate amount of ascites fluid around the liver’s surface. The largest cyst was 10.5 cm and it was located on the anterior segment . The cyst’s volume had clearly declined compared with previous CT images. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the cyst did not contain a solid component . Based on the patient’s clinical course and the findings from the investigations, we determined that the ruptured NLC had not induced acute peritonitis; therefore, the patient received the antibiotics therapy (cefmetazole 3 g/day) prior to the surgery and was performed an elective laparoscopic deroofing after the patient’s general condition was assessed.
A laparoscopic deroofing was performed to rupture the NLC and achieve intraperitoneal drainage. Celioscopy was performed through a point below the umbilicus, and four trocars were necessary for the procedure. The 12-degree optical trocar was installed beneath the umbilicus with the 12-mm operator’s trocar in the epigastric region and two 5-mm trocars in the right hypochondrium and right subcostal region for apprehension. Harmonic® shears (Ethicon US, LLC) and a bipolar cautery coagulation device were required. The cyst was on the right lobe and there were adhesions on the transverse colon, omentum, and peritoneum . The cyst was opened and 300 mL of brown and slightly muddled fluid were aspirated. No obvious hematomas, ascitic fluid, nodules, or other specific entities, for example, a malignant tumor, were detected. The culture of the peritoneal fluid showed no bile and no bacterium. The cyst wall was resected at the junction of the cyst and the liver parenchyma using an ultrasonic scalpel . The back wall of the cyst was checked carefully for evidence of a bile leak, and it was incinerated using an inverse-opal-structure electrode while avoiding Glisson’s capsule . The operation time was 133 min, and the total blood loss was 20 mL.
Pathological investigation revealed no evidence of malignancy and Echinococcus species infection. The patient’s postoperative course was stable and there were no complications. She was discharged on postoperative day 6. There have been no recurrences for 8 months.