The patient was a 23 year-old Caucasian female with a history of CF and persistent hemoptysis, preventing her from being able to lie supine. She presented for semi-emergent bronchial artery embolization treatment for her hemoptysis. The patient had undergone coil embolization previously for the same condition at an outside hospital.
Preoperative examination revealed no contraindications to bronchial artery embolization and patient was placed under conscious sedation throughout the procedure. A 5-French Cobra catheter was placed in the descending aorta through the femoral artery using standard Seldinger technique.
The diagnostic portion of the examination via conventional contrast angiography demonstrated tortuous and ectatic vessels from several bronchial arteries perfusing the upper lobe of the right lung, and right bronchial to pulmonary arterial shunting . The fourth intercostal artery was selectively catheterized with a diagnostic catheter and a superselective angiogram demonstrated multiple recanalized coils in the feeding artery . Additionally a prominent spinal artery originating from the bronchial artery was detected .
Conventional particle embolization was attempted, but the indwelling coils prevented complete filling of the tortuous, ectatic vessels distal to the coils and caused reflux of the particles . A decision was then made to embolize this branch with Onyx 18. To facilitate this, the 5-French Cobra catheter was replaced with a Neuron 053® guide catheter (Penumbra, USA), which was positioned into the intercostal artery. A 4 × 11 mm Scepter occlusion balloon microcatheter was then prepared using standard technique and positioned with its tip within the interstices of the coil mass .
The catheter was then purged with Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Following DMSO injection, the balloon was inflated and Onyx 18, using common preparation technique (Guimaraes and Wooster ), was injected under continuous fluoroscopic guidance. Onyx was injected through the existing coil mass until there was filling adequate filling of the feeding pedicle and multiple collateral vessels within the lung . Careful inspection of both roadmap and native (non-subtracted) imaging was performed during slow Onyx injection to ensure adequate penetration into the ectatic vessels without proximal reflux into the parent intercostal artery. The balloon was inflated and Onyx was injected for approximately 14 min. During Onyx injection, the patient reported mild pain that quickly resolved, without further intervention.
At this point, the balloon catheter was deflated by aspirating the balloon port and removed uneventfully. Postembolization arteriography demonstrated no residual flow to the diseased portion of the lung from the targeted feeding pedicle and an Onyx cast filling of numerous branches originating from the fourth intercostal bronchial trunk without casting of the pulmonary arteries.
Next, the right fifth intercostal artery was selected and further diagnostic arteriography was carried out. Although coils were present, a proximal branch could be embolized in the conventional fashion with 700–900 microspheres. Post embolization selective arteriography demonstrated no residual flow from the fifth intercostal artery and appropriate pruning of embolized vessels. The catheters and wires were then removed from the patient and hemostasis was achieved using manual compression. Follow up at 6 and 12 months revealed no evidence of further hemoptysis or other complications. The patient later underwent successful bilateral lung transplantation.