A 57-year-old male patient who weighed 114 kg, with a height and body surface area (BSA) of 5’6” (170 cm) and 2.19 m2, respectively, presented with chest pain and shortness of breath, and was categorised to be under New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III. The patient was referred to our institution for AS evaluation. On admission, the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate were 152/85 mmHg and 71 beats per minute with a regular rhythm, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a stenotic bicuspid aortic valve with a calculated valve area of 1.09 m2 and a mean gradient of 50 mmHg. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 54% without local asynergy. Coronary angiography exhibited a right coronary artery arising from the left coronary sinus without significant stenosis. Cardiac computed tomography (CCT) revealed that the aortic valve annulus, sinus of Valsalva, and sinotubular junction (STJ) were 24, 31, and 29 mm, respectively. The AAORCA originated from the left coronary sinus at a take-off angle of 19°, which is a known risk factor for myocardial ischaemia . Although the patient experienced chest pain during the adenosine triphosphate injection, single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed no ischaemic lesions. Since the possibility of ischaemic complications was low, we performed AVR without revascularisation. The patient underwent a median sternotomy. The bicuspid aortic valve was classified as Sievers type 1a, characterised by a fusion of the right and left coronary cusps with an asymmetric commissural orientation and the right coronary artery originating from the left coronary ostium. Subsequently, the annular stitches were placed in a non-everting mattress fashion with pledgets after the excision of the leaflets and annular debridement of the calcium. Based on the patient’s preferences, we used a biological prosthesis. A 23-mm prosthetic sizer passed through the annulus; however, mild resistance was noted. Therefore, we enlarged the aortic annulus using a Y-incision for AVR since a less than 23-mm prosthetic valve was insufficient for the BSA, and an oversized prosthetic valve could compress the right coronary artery. After root enlargement using a rectangular Hemashield Dacron patch (Boston Scientific Corp, Natick, Mass, USA), we placed a 25-mm Inspiris RESILIA biologic prosthesis (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California, USA) . The postoperative aortic valve gradient was 6 mmHg, and the aortic root and STJ diameter increased; the take-off angle of the right coronary artery increased from 19° to 28° without dynamic compression of the interarterial segment . Finally, the patient was discharged without complications. During the 6-month follow-up, the patient’s weight decreased from 114 to 95 kg with a BSA of 2.06 and NYHA class I.