A 62-year-old female was referred to the Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery of the China–Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, China, in March 2016. The patient presented with a two-month history of a painless and progressively enlarged unilateral mass on the right side of the neck. Clinical examination revealed a submandibular swelling located at the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle on the right side of neck. The female had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. Endoscopic examination, including laryngoscopy, rhinoscopy, and endotoscopy, did not detect any pathology in the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx or larynx. Ultrasonic examination revealed a cystic hypoechoic change, approximately 1.5 cm, in the right submandibular region. MRI of neck revealed a well-defined round mass (~1.5 × 1.7 × 1.6 cm) proximal to the anterolateral side of the right submandibular gland. The mass had a well-distributed intermediate signal at T1WI and a high signal at T2WI, with an obvious enhancement of the peripheral wall in contrast-enhanced T1WI . These images strongly suggested a cervical cystic lesion with the characteristics of a benign mass.
Based on the detailed history, clinical examination and investigations, surgical excision of the lesion was planned. The provisional diagnosis of BCC and treatment options were explained to the patient and informed written consent was obtained for the proposed treatment. The case study and treatment plan was approved by the institutional review board and ethics committee of The China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University.
The mass was excised completely, using a right-neck lateral approach under general anesthesia. During surgery, the lesion was highly pigmented and appeared as a well-defined ovoid cystic mass with little adhesion to marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve. Frozen section analysis indicated a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma with a significant possibility of BC rather than a metastatic lymph node. We, therefore, chose conservative resection of the lesion. Postoperative histopathologic examination was performed by two senior pathologists independently under double-blind conditions. The resected mass appeared to be cystic, overlapped by lymphoid tissues. The internal surface was lined by thin-layered squamous epithelium with severe dysplasia and had characteristic features of BC . Considering the low incidence of BC, PET/CT was performed to differentiate cervical metastasis of unknown primary lesion. The results of the scan showed high FDG uptake in surgical regions with SUVmax 4.0 and homolateral nasopharynx with SUVmax 4.4, without any evidence of distant metastasis , which suggested nasopharyngeal malignancy. For diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma, the patient agreed to undergo nasopharyngeal biopsy twice by two senior otolaryngologists. All histopathologic examinations revealed lymphadenosis. Considering the limited resources of the primary institution, the patient was referred to a specialist hospital, The Cancer Institute & Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. In an outpatient clinic, physical examination was performed and showed a significantly small neoplasm (~3 mm at its largest diameter) in the right lower gingiva. Initial pathological diagnosis of the small neoplasm was conducted using a forceps biopsy technique and revealed a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Following detailed study of the case and investigations, a final diagnosis of gingival carcinoma with neck metastasis was made. Surgery including partial resection of the mandible and modified neck resection (neck level I–V and submental lymph nodes) was performed. Postoperative pathology examination revealed a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the right lower gingiva and two metastatic lymph nodes of the 18 lymph nodes of level II. A month later, recurrence occurred in the right cervical level II and the patient underwent postoperative concurrent chemo-radiotherapy. The patient became cachectic and lived for only six months.