An 86-year-old woman with back pain was referred to our hospital. At the time of presentation, she had no fever and no pain at rest. Roentgenography findings were relatively normal with slight narrowing at L1/2 . She had no known drug allergies. She was administered analgesics and was kept under observation. One month after her first visit to our hospital, her back pain worsened, and her temperature was 37.2 °C. No neurological abnormalities were noted in her lower limbs. Laboratory findings at that time were as follows: C-reactive protein, 11.5 mg/dL (reference, < 0.2 mg/dL); white blood cell count, 7970/mm3 (neutrophils, 87.7%; reference, 4000–8000/mm3); aspartate aminotransferase, 15 IU/L (reference, 13–33 IU/L); alanine aminotransferase, 13 IU/L (reference, 6–30 IU/L); alkaline phosphatase, 291 IU/L (reference, 115–359 IU/L); and creatinine, 1.5 mg/dL (0.4–0.7 mg/dL). Radiographs of the lumbar spine showed collapse of L1 and an absorbable change in the caudal side of L1 . Lumbar MRI confirmed the presence of fluid at the L1/2 disc, edema and destruction of the spinal body of L1/2, and lumbar canal stenosis at the level of L1/2 on fat-saturated T2-weighted images . She was diagnosed with pyogenic spondylitis of the lumbar spine and underwent biopsy of the L1/2 disc. Parvimonas micra, which is a gram-positive anaerobic bacterial species and a resident of the flora of the oral cavity, was identified in the biopsy specimens. Given that the patient was able to tolerate oral medications and the transfer rate of metronidazole to the blood was similar between oral and intravenous administrations, we decided to administer the medications orally. Oral administration of metronidazole (1500 mg/day) was initiated . Forty-four days after starting metronidazole (total intake of 66 g), she complained of tingling in the upper limbs. Cervical spinal disorder was suspected, and cervical spinal MRI demonstrated spinal canal stenosis at C3/4, 5/6, and 6/7. After 4 days, she complained of further symptoms, including sensory disturbance of the tongue, dysarthria, and deglutition disorder. Central nervous system disorder was suspected, and brain MRI was performed. Characteristic brain MRI findings on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) led to the diagnosis of MIE . Metronidazole was discontinued, and her neurological symptoms improved 10 days after discontinuation. On MRI performed 14 days after oral metronidazole discontinuation, most of the abnormal findings of MIE disappeared . Fortunately, follow-up blood tests revealed the absence of inflammatory reactions 5 days before the discontinuation of metronidazole; no antibiotics were administered after discontinuing metronidazole. At 9 weeks after discontinuation of metronidazole, there was no recurrence of pyogenic spondylitis according to the clinical findings or blood sample results.