A 40-year-old female presented with a one-month history of diffuse pruritus that failed to resolve with antihistamines. She developed right upper quadrant abdominal pain and jaundice. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 2.1 × 1.6 cm porta hepatis mass involving the common bile duct (CBD) with ductal dilatation . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed an irregular CBD with stricture of the proximal common hepatic duct at the level of the hepatic duct bifurcation. Biliary decompression was achieved through preoperative stent placement. Imaging studies revealed no evidence of regional lymphadenopathy or distant metastases.
During exploratory laparotomy, palpation of the common bile duct revealed an obvious mass in the common hepatic duct region above the termination of the cystic duct. Neither hepatic dissemination nor regional lymphadenopathy was noted, and the surgeon proceeded to perform a cholecystectomy, choledochectomy, hepaticojejunostomy and reconstruction of the biliary enteric system. Adequate biliary drainage was achieved. Surgical pathology showed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct, measuring 1.6 cm in greatest dimension. Resection margins were negative. Tumor cells infiltrated the fibromuscular layer of the hepatic duct with extension into the surrounding connective tissue, and all lymph nodes were negative. The patient was staged as IB (T2N0M0) cholangiocarcinoma, and was recommended to receive concurrent combined modality therapy consisting of capecitabine 1500 mg twice daily and external beam RT to a total dose of 50.4 Gy delivered in 28 daily fractions of 1.8 Gy. A CT was performed for RT treatment planning, and three-dimensional techniques were used to develop a four-field conformal plan. The 50.4 Gy isodose line displayed on the treatment planning CT represents the borders of the treated volume that received the prescribed dose.
On routine follow-up three months after completing chemoradiation, the patient was asymptomatic and had returned to work full-time. Laboratory values were within normal limits. At this time, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a low attenuation region in the liver with linear margins . The radiation oncologist was consulted to assist in evaluating the radiographic abnormality in order to distinguish post-radiation changes from local recurrence. When compared to the CT obtained for treatment planning , the tomographic changes correspond closely to the radiation prescription isodose line. In order to verify that the imaging abnormality corresponded to the radiation portal, the radiation treatment planning CT and the follow-up diagnostic CT were co-registered using anatomical landmarks to confirm that the low-density region corresponded to the 50.4 Gy isodose line. Subsequently, the patient developed neither clinical hepatic toxicity nor disease recurrence. A CT scan obtained six months later demonstrated nearly complete resolution of the previously observed post-RT hepatic parenchymal changes, with interval loss of hepatic volume and development of surface nodularity consistent with evolving post-RT changes with local fibrosis.