A 38-year-old Caucasian female presented with bilateral upper extremity and lower extremity lesions, which were painful to touch and joint pain in her knees, wrists, and ankles. Patient states that 2 weeks prior to initial visit she started with upper respiratory symptoms including sore throat, cough, congestion, and body aches. She states over the course of 2-3 days her signs and symptoms improved with over the counter medications and she went to Europe on vacation for 10 days. Towards the end of her trip, she started getting joint pain as described above. Two days prior to her clinic visit, she developed the first lesion on her right wrist. No significant past medical history was given. The patient states she was in relatively good health. She had had a pre-employment physical one month prior to her visit, which included TST which was negative. She states that when she was younger she had her tonsils and adenoids removed. Patient denied being on any recent antibiotics or birth control pills. Family history included hypothyroidism, which her mom has. Social history reported no history of tobacco use and social use of alcohol. At time of presentation, patient's vital signs were stable. Ear, nose, and throat exam revealed cobble stoning to the posterior pharynx. No cervical lymphadenopathy was appreciated. Dermatologic examination revealed multiple raised erythematous lesions on the palmer aspect of hands, the forearms, the anterior portion of lower extremities, and the dorsal aspect of the feet. Nodules were tender to palpation and there was decrease range of motion of the bilateral wrists and ankles secondary to pain. Muscle strength was 5/5 bilaterally and reflexes were + 2/4 in the upper extremities and lower extremities bilaterally.
EN was suspected and patient was started on Amoxil 875 mg by mouth twice daily for 10 days along with 800 mg of Motrin every 8 hours for pain. CBC with differential, CMP, TSH, ASO titer, ESR, and CXR were ordered and patient was instructed to follow-up in 1 week. Upon patient follow-up, patient states she had been seen in the local emergency room 3 days prior to visit for worsening joint pain. She stated they had given her some pain medications through her IV and instructed her to follow up with her primary doctor. Labs reviewed with patient showed she had a significant elevation in her ESR at 73 and her ASO and anti-DNase B titers were elevated at 653 and 1710 respectively. CBC showed slight elevation in WBC count at 13.9 and her CMP and TSH were wnl. CXR reviewed showed no acute pulmonary process. Informed patient that inflammatory nodules were most likely result of recent Streptococcal infection and she is on appropriate antibiotics and nodules may take up to 6 to 8 weeks to resolve. Patient was prescribed Sterapred Ds 12 pack and was referred to local primary care doctor for follow up (, and ).