A previously health 58-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history presented with dysuria and obstructive voiding symptoms for 3 month. Digital rectal examination revealed a firm to hard, fixed, pelvic mass compressing the anterior aspect of the anal canal. By laboratory examination, the serum carcino-embryonic antigen (2.3μg/l) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA, 3μg/l) were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large, ill-defined, prostatic mass lesion with circumferential extension into the rectal wall . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan showed a mixed mass of the prostate, with an uneven increase in fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism, considering a malignant tumor . There was no evidence of local or distant metastasis by imaging studies. A needle biopsy of the prostatic mass was performed which showed a slightly pleomorphic spindle cell sarcomatoid tumor with brisk mitoses and multiple tumor necroses, without any specific lineage differentiation by extensive IHC investigations. A diagnosis of spindle cell undifferentiated sarcoma was rendered and the patient was treated by multi-agent chemotherapy combination of etoposide and cisplatin for 2 months. However, a subsequent enhanced MRI showed that the tumor was significantly enlarged with central areas of hemorrhage, necrosis and cystic change . Multiple enlarged bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were also identified. The patient underwent laparoscopically radical prostatectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. Although the mass was densely adherent to the rectum wall, complete gross surgical resection was achieved. Macroscopic examination of the prostatectomy specimen showed a disrupted, 10 × 7 × 5 cm, solid and cystic mass with a fresh, grey white to tan cut-surface and multiple foci of necrosis, involving almost the entire prostate and sparing the seminal vesicle glands . Histologically, lower magnification showed a densely cellular, solid and lobulated tumor, with an overall pushed but multifocal infiltrating border, affecting most part of the prostatic parenchyma . The tumor was composed predominantly of mildly atypical, oval to spindle-shaped cells containing scant eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval to elongated nuclei with small distinct nucleoli, arranged in sheets and fascicles or herringbone-like patterns within a small amount of edematous to myxoid, vascularized stroma . Minor areas of storiform, whirling or morular structures were also noted . Notably, groups of discohesive rhabdoid tumor cells with eccentric nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant globular cytoplasm were observed . There were prominent mitotic figures (up to 10/10 high power fields), multifocal geographic necroses , and foci of lymphovascular invasion. Scattered in the tumor, there were entrapped prostatic ductal structures which occasionally showed basal cell hyperplasia and squamous metaplasia. Eleven pelvic lymph nodes were free of tumor.
By IHC, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for TLE-1 and vimentin and focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen, AE1/3 , Cam5.2, SATB2, and CD34 (all in less than 10% tumor cells). Immunohistochemical stains for SOX10, S100 protein, P63, cytokeratin5/6, NKX3.1, PSA, alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR), progesterone receptor, STAT6, CD117, DOG1, cyclinD1, smooth muscle actin, desmin, myogenin, HMB45, and claudin-4 were all negative in the tumor cells. The expression of SMARCB1/INI-1, SMARCA4/BRG-1, and H3K27me3 was retained and the Ki67 proliferation index was estimated at 50% (Additional file 1). With the suspicion of a primary synovial sarcoma or a BCOR rearranged sarcoma, fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) analyses were performed which revealed negative for rearrangements of both the SYT/SS18 and BCOR loci (18q11.2, SS18/SYT Break Apart Probe Kit; Xp11.4, BCOR Break Apart Probe Kit; Anbiping, China) . A representative formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded block of tumor tissue was selected for somatic mutation analysis by NGS on FoundationOne CDx panel, a hybrid-capture panel that targets 576 cancer-relevant genes. The NGS results were listed in Table . Pathologic mutations were identified in frameshift deletions of ARID1A exon5 p.Leu657Glnfs*18 (c.1970_1971del) and ARID1A exon18 p.Thr1535Argfs *36 (c.4604_4605del). IHC using anti-ARID1A antibody (clone D2A8U, Roche) showed complete loss of expression on the tumor cells . Based upon the combination of morphologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular features, a diagnosis of ARID1A deficient undifferentiated spindle cell and rhabdoid sarcoma of the prostate was rendered. After the surgery, the patient received an alternative combined chemotherapy of doxorubicin and ifosfamide for 5 months. Thereafter, PET-CT scan revealed multiple tumor metastases in the bilateral obturator muscles, sigmoid colon, and rectum. The patient died 9 months after initial presentation.