A 35-year-old-female presented to an obstetrics and gynecology (OB-GYN) clinic with a positive pregnancy test and elevated maternal serum beta-chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) levels. She denied menstrual bleeding, abdominal cramping, nausea, and vomiting. Her last menstrual period was eight weeks before the visit. Vitals were unremarkable. Her uterus had normal size and shape, and an irregular yolk sac shape was noted in a transvaginal ultrasound with a faint cardiac activity detected. The patient’s past medical history included anxiety and mild depression. Clonazepam 0.5 mg was prescribed twice daily as needed for anxiety. She had one term live birth six months before this visit.
The patient was referred to check β-hCG levels and a follow-up ultrasound with a specialist. Transvaginal ultrasound showed suspected molar pregnancy based on an enlarged placenta as well as the mass of cysts only partially covering the uterus . Her first laboratory results showed β-hCG levels of 67,135 mIU/mL, corresponding to the normal range during early pregnancy (7,650-288,000 mIU/mL).
Suction curettage was performed under general anesthesia a week after the detection of the molar pregnancy. Prophylactic doxycycline 200 mg was administered in a single dose one hour before the procedure. A rigid size 8 curette was used and the endometrial material was removed via vacuum aspiration and an experienced surgeon had performed the procedure while under ultrasound guidance. The uterine size at that time was 4.66X3.16 cm. There were no complications and the patient was discharged several hours later. Surgical pathology confirmed a partial molar pregnancy based on the chromosomal and histopathological features (triploid karyotype) and the presence of embryonic tissue. Follow-up bloodwork revealed a steady decline in β-hCG levels: 3 weeks post-D&C 83 mIU/mL; 4 weeks post-D&C 17 mIU/mL; 5 weeks post-D&C 5 mIU/mL. Undetectable levels (<2 mIU/mL) after 6 weeks, consistent with a successful procedure. Follow-ups were done monthly afterward and showed undetectable levels for 2 months at which point the testing was stopped.
Four months post-D&C the patient returned to the OB-GYN clinic complaining of amenorrhea. The diagnostic evaluation started with laboratory testing to rule out secondary amenorrhea (β-hCG levels were still undetectable). Laboratory tests revealed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels of 1.25 mIU/L, prolactin 217 mIU/L, estradiol (E2) 217 pmol/L, luteinizing hormone (LH) 2.0 IU/L, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 4.4 IU/L (all within normal limits).
Following the laboratory tests, a progestin withdrawal test was done with a two-month trial using medroxyprogesterone (Provera®), followed by a three-month trial of estradiol valerate 2 mg and norgestrel 0.5 mg. No withdrawal bleeding was seen on either treatment. This treatment method was chosen to identify if the source of amenorrhea was due to primary ovarian insufficiency or related to fragile X, for which the patient is a carrier. After the estrogen/progestin withdrawal test, an SIS was scheduled but was unsuccessful due to cervical stenosis. The stenosis was partially opened with a dilator during an HSG that was performed a month after the SIS . At the time of HSG, IUAs were spotted. Hysteroscopy was scheduled for a month after the HSG and revealed moderate IUAs and uterine polyps . During the hysteroscopy, there was a successful removal of scar tissues and polyps, as well as a complete dilation of the cervical stenosis . Insertion of an intrauterine Foley catheter with an inflatable balloon tip after the hysteroscopy was placed for seven days to prevent recurrent adhesions by solid barrier technique. Postoperative treatment with ethinyl estradiol 0.03 mg and desogestrel 0.15 mg (Enskyce® ) for 2 months was prescribed to the patient. One-month follow-up after hysteroscopy was done, and a SIS showed no evidence of IUA recurrence . The patient conceived two months after stopping hormonal therapy and proceeded to a pregnancy which resulted in a healthy live birth.