A 47-year-old woman was referred with a 6-month history of a right anterior chest mass. A physical examination showed a palpable firm mass with tenderness in the right anterior chest. Her routine laboratory investigations were within the biological reference range. Enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed a dumbbell-shaped mass with calcification, and its anterior portion was located under the pectoralis minor muscle and the posterior portion projected to the thoracic cavity . Chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an invasive tumor, which was isointense on T1-weighted images and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted images . Aspiration biopsy cytology performed by a previous physician had shown malignancy, and no evidence of distant metastasis was found. Therefore, we planned surgical resection of the tumor with chest reconstruction. The patient was placed in the supine position. We first examined inside the thoracic cavity with thoracoscopy through the seventh intercostal space and found no lung invasion of the tumor. Wide resection, including the middle part of the pectoralis major muscle, the pectoralis minor muscle, and the third and fourth ribs, was performed. A negative margin of the tumor was identified by frozen sections. We used a 2-mm expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) patch (Gore Dualmesh; W.L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) for chest wall reconstruction and covered it with spared skin and breast . The operation time was 3 h and 33 min, and intraoperative blood loss was 64 ml.
The resected specimen was a firm tumor that surrounded the third rib (7.5 cm) . Microscopically, the tumor cells showed an epithelioid appearance with cytoplasmic eosinophilia. The epithelioid cells had large vesicular nuclei and were arranged in sheet-like pattern. In some locations, scattered microcalcification was observed . Immunohistochemical staining showed expression of CD34 and cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) , but no expression of CD31, Sox10, Stat6, and integrase interactor 1 (INI1) in tumor cells. The diagnosis was proximal-type ES in the right chest wall. The French Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre Le Cancer grading system was grade 2.
We started physical therapy on postoperative day 6 for local pain and limitation of shoulder motion. These symptoms improved by physical therapy, and she was discharged on postoperative day 18. Although weakness of the arm and chronic pain had been persistent, she could be reinstated in former factory work. We did not perform postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy. She has remained alive for 1 year and 10 months without recurrence.