A case of a 4-year-old Caucasian man admitted in the Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases in Rome, Italy, due to “fever in returning travellers” was reported. At admission, the patient, a healthy man with benign prostatic hyperplasia only, in his medical history, was in good condition. He reported one week of asthenia, headache, night sweats, loss of appetite and, the day before, high fever with syncope. The patient reported travel to South Korea and, two weeks earlier, to Guinea Conakry without taking any anti-malarial chemoprophylaxis. On admission, blood tests showed thrombocytopenia (platelet count 50.000/mmc), C-reactive protein (CRP) 10.6 mg/dl, procalcitonin (PCT) 1.05 ng/ml, aspartate aminotransferase 103 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 67 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 173U/L, with normal renal function and coagulation. Pan-malarial rapid test was positive for non-falciparum malaria and Plasmodium vivax rapid test was negative, thick and thin blood smear were positive and showed the presence of P. ovale trophozoites, with a 0.001% parasitaemia (40 parasites/µl). Oral chloroquine, 10 mg/kg as initial dose followed by 10 mg/kg on the second day and 5 mg/kg on the third day, was prescribed. In-house nested-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) confirmed the diagnosis of P. ovale excluding mixed infections . Plasmodium ovale wallikeri was identified by using a nested PCR followed by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis (a 245 bp band confirmed P. o. wallikeri) and verified with amplicon sequencing . Blood PCR for Leishmania and Dengue were negative; serology for Leishmania, Schistosoma, Strongyloides, Dengue, Chikungunya, HCV, HBV, HIV, HEV, Widal-Wright reaction for Salmonella and blood cultures were negative. Multiplex Real-Time PCR (Norovirus GII, Rotavirus A, Astrovirus, Norovirus G I, Cryptosporidium spp, Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia, Cyclospora cayetanensis, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Clostridium difficile toxin A/B, Vibrio vulnificus, Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Campylobacter spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, Enterotoxigenic E. coli (It/st), Enteroinvasive E. coli/Shigella. STEC (stx1/stx2), Enteroaggregative E. coli, Salmonella spp., Plesiomonas shigelloides, Sapovirus. Vibrio cholerae STEC-0157:H7, Adenovirus F40/F41) on stool was negative. Posterior-anterior chest X-ray showed bilateral and diffused peribronchovascular thickening and abdominal ultrasound confirmed mild splenomegaly (bipolar diameter 15.5 cm) with homogeneous structure. The day after admission, despite a negative thick smear, the patient’s condition suddenly worsened: he developed dyspnea with a increased respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute, low peripheral oxygen saturation less than 90%, and acute hypoxaemia confirmed by blood gas analysis. Chest auscultation revealed bilateral crackles in both respiratory phases. The patient started oxygen supplementation with 40% fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) Venturi mask with improvement of blood gas analysis: PH: 7.47, pCO2: 31, PO2: 104 mmHg with an arterial oxygen tension (PaO2/FiO2 ratio) of 260. Therefore, antibacterial therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g daily was started. A multiplex Real-Time RT-PCR on sputum was positive for Staphylococcus aureus; sputum cultures, quantiferon TB Gold, nasopharynx swab for SARS-CoV-2 and pneumococcal/legionella urine antigen test were negative. After 24 h arterial blood gas analysis showed a reduced oxygen tension (pO2 72, pCo2 29, PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 180), Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) by using 40%FiO2 Boussignac mask and 5 mmhg positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) was started. A chest and abdomen computed tomography scan with intravenous contrast showed interstitial ground glass opacities involving all right and left lobes with early parenchymal lung consolidation, bilateral pleural and pericardium effusion and in the abdomen there was hypodense area with triangular morphology at splenic site . The findings of the CT scan lay for cardiogenic oedema and triangle splenic infarction. The patient had no abdominal pain. Patient fluid balance was initially positive. Intravenous furosemide (20 mg every 12 h) and piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h), oral doxycycline (100 mg every 12 h), enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneous daily were started. In the following days, the patient gradually improved with decreasing the needs of oxygen until the definitive ending on day 15 since admission. Oral primaquine (30 mg daily for 14 days) was given after confirming a normal level of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity in erythrocytes. The patient was discharged in good clinical condition after 18 days of hospitalization, with normal blood tests. Two weeks later at follow-up visit, blood tests were repeated with unremarkable results and no evidences of sequelae or relapse were reported.