A previously healthy 44-year-old white male presented to the emergency department with severe epigastric pain radiating to the back and frequent vomiting (over ten attacks, first gastric content, then bilious with no blood) for 3 days on 22 June 2020. Four days before the beginning of his abdominal symptoms, the patient received a laboratory diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) after undergoing a nasopharyngeal swab for reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to detect SARS-CoV-2 infection as part of surveillance screening after contacting several COVID-19 patients during his work in a hotel in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, and the patient was asked to self-isolate. However, he presented to our care after 5 days of SARS-COV-2 diagnosis with acute pancreatitis. The patient did not have any respiratory symptoms at that time.
During history taking, the patient denied any respiratory symptoms such as cough or dyspnea. The patient denied smoking, alcohol, or drug intake (illicit or therapeutic except for occasional use of paracetamol for right knee pain). The patient was a middle-class worker who denied exposure to any hazardous substances at his work place. He also denied any previous similar attacks of abdominal pain. There was no family history of similar attacks. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 94/50 mmHg, pulse rate of 112 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 27 breaths per minute, temperature of 37.5 °C, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Abdominal examination revealed marked tenderness in the epigastric region without distension. Neurological examination did not reveal any abnormalities. Intravenous fluid resuscitation was started immediately with a bolus of 1.5 L of lactated Ringer’s.
A repeat nasopharyngeal Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed on the day of admission to the hospital as a part of the local protocols for suspected cases. The results came back positive on 24 June 2020. The patient was then transferred from the medical ward to an isolation center in the same hospital, explicitly dedicated to COVID-19 patients.
An abdominal X-ray was done and was unremarkable. However, abdominal–pelvic ultrasonography revealed mild diffuse enlargement of the pancreatic head with normal gall bladder and biliary tract. Serum amylase was 773, and serum lipase was 286 . The diagnosis of mild acute pancreatitis was confirmed with an abdominal CT scan that revealed mild diffuse enlargement of the pancreas . The patient was managed conservatively for 4 days. For pancreatitis, he was kept NPO for 2 days during which he received 10 ml/kg/hour of lactated Ringer’s; he also received nalbuphine (10–20 mg per day, intramuscular) for analgesia, omeprazole (40 mg once daily, intravenous) for ulcer prophylaxis and cyclizine lactate (50 mg twice daily, intravenous) for vomiting. On the third day, anorexia and vomiting subsided, and the patient was started on oral feeding, which he tolerated well. On the fifth day, the patient was vitally stable and symptom-free and was advised to continue his SARS-CoV-2 treatment from home, including ascorbic acid (1 g per day, oral) and zinc sulfate (220 mg per day, oral). Abdominal ultrasound was repeated on discharge and again showed no gallstones. At 30 days follow-up, the patient was well and did not have any complaints.