In 2010, a 6-month-old girl with bilateral Tessier facial cleft referred to department of pediatric otolaryngology-head and neck surgery of Tabriz-Iran children hospital. First, a thorough investigation for possibility of associated syndromes and anomalies was conducted. The consultation of pediatrician, neurologist, optometrist and cardiologist did not define any associated anomaly describing a known syndrome. All neuroimaging, hearing studies and urogenital evaluations were normal.
She had a left side No.5 Tessier facial cleft, originating in about 10 mm medial to left commissure vermilion extending upward and laterally, making a groove on the cheek and ending at the middle third of lower eye lid, without evidence of ectropion. The medial cantus was properly in its place, but the lateral cantus was lower compared with the right side. Alveolar ridge was involved in association with unilateral complete cleft palate in the same side. Maxilla was split and rotated three dimensionally into lateral, inferior and posterior. Premaxilla was in its proper place; but, lateral alveolar ridge was rotated in the same manner. On her right side, a very mild No.4 Tessier facial cleft started lateral to phylteral column extending superiorly and lateral to right nasal alar, mildly involving alveolar ridge. No involvement of primary and secondary palate was defined .
On the left side, the scar like soft tissue was marked from its high point to vermilion, sparing the commissure. Incisions were made through skin and underlying soft tissue to just above the periosteum. Bonny cleft was lateral to infra orbital foramen, therefore, incision over periosteum and dissection in a sub periosteal plane was made. Soft tissue dissection was made in two planes, one under dermal fat and one in subcutaneous plane, up to two millimeters each side of the incision. All soft tissue and periosteum were drawn medially to obscure the bonny cleft as much as possible and infraorbital neurovascular bundle were preserved laterally. Orbicularis oris muscle dissected bilaterally, preserving the zygomatic complex muscles and sutured to each other. Wet and dry mucosa sutured to each other after reconstructing advancement flaps medially and laterally, using two uni limb Z plasties bilaterally .
On the right side, the same procedure was conducted, which included scar excision, advancing subperiosteal flaps, muscle dissection, reconstructing advancement flaps medially and laterally and one uni limb Z plasty laterally, in conjunction with a back-cut in its upper end to elongate the lateral arm of the incision. Palatoplasty was postponed until the patiant’s10 months of age.
Orbicularis oris function after operation was observed and it was satisfying when the patient cried or laughed. The function of Zygomatic muscles was preserved .