Our case is a 13-year-old Arabian girl who presented to our institution referred from a periphery center with 3 days’ history of colicky abdominal pain, vomiting, and constipation. She did not report any previous episodes of constipation. She was reviewed at our emergency department and was found to have a distended tympanic abdomen that was soft all over with no tenderness. Bowel sounds were sluggish and a digital rectal examination revealed an empty rectum. A plain abdominal film showed a hugely dilated loop of bowel, arising from her pelvis, which had the appearance of a coffee bean . The plain abdominal radiograph confirmed the presence of a sigmoid volvulus. A rectal tube was inserted carefully to decompress the volvulus which succeeded and gave her immediate relief from her symptoms. She was admitted to our pediatric surgical ward and had a nasogastric tube inserted and was started on intravenously administered antibiotics. The next day she was asymptomatic but a contrast enema showed the twist to be evident with an incomplete obstruction . Due to the findings on contrast enema she went for endoscopic decompression of the volvulus under general anesthesia. The twist was causing venous congestion and was successfully reduced . A rectal tube was left in place post endoscopic reduction for 24 hours. She was asymptomatic thereafter but her parents requested discharge and they were granted their wish as they wanted to travel to their country. In her country she was investigated and was advised conservative management and observation. A month after her previous attack, and after she had returned to Bahrain from her native country, she presented with the same signs and symptoms that she had in our institution with the same radiological findings but this time the volvulus could not be decompressed by a rectal tube at the emergency department or by endoscopy . Her parents were advised that she should undergo surgery to which they consented. As this was considered an emergency, her bowel was not prepared. She was taken to an operative room 24 hours after the failed endoscopy reduction. She underwent laparotomy with the finding of the sigmoid occupying her whole abdominal cavity and was found on delivery to be hugely dilated with a 360o twist. There was no evidence of gangrene of the bowel and the rest of her colon was healthy and normal . We performed a sigmoidectomy with primary anastomosis . The resected sigmoid showed no features of ischemia, but evident features of chronic inflammation and abundant ganglia . Postoperatively she had paralytic ileus that resolved after 10 days. Following that she did well and was discharged home on the 12th postoperative day. She is still free of symptoms 1 year after her resection.