A 59-year old female was referred to our EPS center outpatient clinic because of progressive symptoms of bowel obstruction almost 33 months after KTX. The nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain predominantly occurred shortly after eating solid meals. The patient’s medical history included end stage renal disease secondary to polycystic kidney disease. She had a 26-month history of PD before her first KTX and was treated with PD for almost 4 years before undergoing her second transplantation with a kidney from a living donor. During PD treatment she had no signs of ultrafiltration failure and had experienced one uncomplicated peritonitis episode with Staphylococcus aureus.
Her symptoms had started insidiously one year after transplantation while she received a tacrolimus-based immunosuppressive regimen. Diagnostic work-up did not show any signs of inflammation with normal radiological imaging of the abdomen. Almost 23 months after her last transplantation a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed elsewhere, but no macroscopic abnormalities were reported. However, peritoneal biopsies were taken and showed signs of fibrosis without active or chronic infiltration. As the symptoms and weight loss persisted, she was referred to our clinic for a second opinion.
At presentation she had lost 5 kilograms of weight over the last year (BMI 19 kg/m2) and was unable to tolerate solid foods. No abnormalities were found at physical examination, and laboratory tests showed no signs of systemic inflammation (C-reactive protein (CRP) < 1 mg/L, albumin 40 g/L) and adequate graft function (serum creatinine 91 umol/L). A recent abdominal CT scan did not reveal any abnormalities compatible with the diagnosis of EPS although a “feces sign”, consisting of intraluminal feculent material in the small bowel, was observed . Additionally, the CT scan showed a small amount of localized ascites in the abdomen but no other diagnostic signs of EPS like bowel tethering, calcifications, or peritoneal thickening. Despite the absence of typical findings, but the severity of the progressive symptoms we considered the possibility of localized EPS, a condition in which the peritoneum shows encapsulating sclerosis predominantly at the level of the terminal ileum [,]. Surgical exploration was considered as a final diagnostic procedure. During the operation, a classical picture of EPS was found characterized by a thin cocoon-like sclerotic membrane encasing the small bowel . A complete resection of the encapsulating sclerotic membrane and total enterolysis were performed, combined with complete removal of the thickened visceral peritoneal membrane , which lead to restoration of peristalsis durante operationem. Histologic evaluation of the visceral peritoneal membrane was performed, supporting the diagnosis of EPS, and showed dense sclerosis with patchy mononuclear cell infiltration . On the fifth postoperative day, an emergency ileocecal resection with protective loop ileostomy was necessary because of a perforation at the level of the ileocecal junction where a serosal injury had been made during the first operation. The patient recovered soon after surgery, and in an attempt to prevent further recurrences, was prescribed 10 mg twice-daily tamoxifen and 10 mg once daily prednisolone. After five weeks the loop ileostomy was closed and bowel continuity restored, with an uneventful postoperative course. One year after EPS surgery, the patient has gained almost 20 kilograms in body weight and is doing well with a stable graft function and without clinical signs of EPS recurrence.