In July 2018 a 65-year-old woman referred to the emergency department complaining lumbar pain irradiated to the left lower limb which was investigated with plain X-rays ( A, B) and then she was discharged with a sciatica diagnosis and corticosteroid treatment. Three weeks later, she experienced increasing pain in the left groin and knee, making weightbearing impossible on that limb. She arrived at our attention and during the physical examination there was no evidence of neither pulmonary or abdominal symptoms nor fever, the left hip joint range of motion was painfully restricted in all directions. A plain radiograph and a CT scan of the left hip showed osteoarthritic changes at an advanced stage, heterogeneous density of femoral head and suspected signs of fracture ( A, B). Therefore, she was hospitalized for further investigations. First blood exams showed increased WBC (19500/µL) with neutrophilic preponderance (94.3%) and a CRP of 15.11 mg/dL.
In the following days an increase of the body temperature up to 38.7 °C was recorded and multiple blood samples for colture were obtained and the patient started an empiric antimicrobial therapy with intravenous administration of Ciprofloxacin at the dosage of 400 mg every 12 hours. Meanwhile she underwent a hip and lumbar MRI that revealed hip joint edema, intra-articular effusion and altered signal intensity in the femoral head as well as in the acetabulum, neighboring soft tissues and L4 vertebral body.
Five days later microbiological coltures from blood samples showed the presence of Staphylococcus Aureus and a specific antimicrobial therapy was set up adding 2 gr of IV Oxacillin every 4 hours to the Ciprofloxacin. A few days later there was a reduction in WBC count (11500/µL) and in CRP blood levels (13.51 mg/dL).
An additional contrast-enhanced MRI of the lumbar spine and pelvis showed an altered and diffuse signal intensity in the L2-L4 vertebrae and surrounding soft tissues and a fluid collection in the context of psoas muscle as well as in the hip joint demonstrating a pyogenic spondylodiscitis with secondary psoas abscess and hip joint infection ( A, B). Blood exams taken at this time showed a normalization of WBC count (7100/µL) and a further decrease in CRP blood levels (7.94 mg/dL).
Forty days after hospital admission, an abdominal and pelvis CT scan with contrast was performed which still revealed an organized fluid collection in the psoas measuring 21 × 22 × 53 mm, effusion in the left hip with another organized fluid collection posteriorly to the femoral head . It also showed a cranial acetabular breakthrough and femoral head resorption. Additional L2 CT-guided ago-biopsy was performed and revealed only diffuse fibrosis of the vertebral body. The patient remained apiretic and laboratory exams became normal after five weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy, so we decided to shift IV administration to 500 mg of oral Levofloxacin a day; moreover, left hip pain was decreasing though weightbearing was still prohibited.
Three months after admission and specific antibiotic therapy, patient underwent a new pelvis and hip MRI which showed persistent enhancement of the hip while psoas collection was disappeared, allowing to stop antibiotics.
A labelled leukocytes scintigraphy was performed two months later and did not reveal any infection site, so on May 2019, 10 months from the symptoms onset, she underwent preoperative tests including a pelvis and left hip X-ray which showed increased femoral head deformity and cranial acetabular breakthrough following septic osteonecrosis .
On June 2019, once established the absence of S. Aureus in the nasal, inguinal and axillary swab, the patient underwent THA with a cemented “dual-mobility” cup and a cementless stem through direct anterior approach (Profemur Z stem ®, Liberty cup ®, MicroPort Orthopedics, Shanghai, China). Intraoperative findings revealed abundant capsular fibrosis, both femoral head and acetabulum resorption and severe acetabular deformity. Intraoperative samples submitted for coltural examination were thereafter negative and a short-term 24 hours postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis with amoxicillin was administrated.
At 9-months follow-up, there were no clinical, laboratory or radiographic signs of infection in the left hip and lumbar spine and there were no radiographic signs of mobilization of THA loosening .