The patient, a 35-year-old Japanese man with no history of psychiatric illness, contracted COVID-19 despite having received three doses of a coronavirus vaccine. He initially presented with a fever of 38°C, myalgia, and a headache (described as a feeling of heaviness in the back of the head). He visited a clinic near his home, where he tested positive for COVID-19. No antiviral medication was administered, the fever subsided within a few days with antipyretic drugs, and the headache gradually improved. Only mild coughing persisted. After approximately 2 weeks, he resumed work as his home quarantine period concluded. Approximately 1 month after returning to work, the patient's concentration became impaired and he started making noticeable errors at work. In addition, he experienced brief episodes of unconsciousness while working on emails and occasionally lost track of his ongoing activities. As a result, he had to take time off work again. These symptoms did not improve, leading him to the outpatient clinic specializing in COVID-19 sequelae at our hospital. At the time of consultation, there were no physical symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, or fatigue that could be considered COVID-19 sequelae. Blood tests did not reveal abnormal findings such as white blood cell counts or C-reactive protein, and head magnetic resonance imaging showed no abnormal findings suggestive of cognitive impairment, therefore no physical medical treatment was performed and he was referred to a neurologist. There, neurological findings were normal and an electroencephalography was performed, which revealed no abnormalities. Cognitive decline due to COVID-19 sequelae was suspected, prompting his evaluation in our department approximately 5 months after his initial COVID-19 infection. At the time of this visit, physical symptoms such as cough and headache, which were thought to be COVID-19 sequela, had resolved spontaneously. He continued to feel uneasy about being a nuisance at his workplace, which he had felt since the COVID-19 infection, but it was not a pathological condition. He was able to conduct housework and childcare, and even enjoyed watching movies for short periods of time. Therefore, there was no comorbid anxiety or depression, and we considered this cognitive impairment to be brain fog caused by COVID-19 infection rather than a psychiatric disorder. Detailed cognitive function tests were performed for this purpose. He was monitored without the use of medications, and his cognitive function gradually improved. After a 3-month absence from work, he returned to work. Approximately 11 months after his initial COVID-19 infection, the same cognitive function tests were conducted again, revealing improvements in multiple aspects. At the time of writing this report, approximately 18 months had passed since the initial COVID-19 infection, and no relapse or recurrence of symptoms had been observed.