A 58-year-old female patient experienced a persistent cough for over a month after coronavirus disease infection. The patient had no relevant medical history, no history of smoking or alcohol consumption, and no family history of hereditary diseases. Upon admission, her blood pressure was 129/88 mmHg, height was 158 cm, and weight was 54 kg.
The patient underwent low-dose chest CT and abdominal ultrasonography at the outpatient clinic 3 weeks before admission. Low-dose lung screening CT showed a partial solid nodule in the posterior segment of the RUL of the lung. The nodule had a maximum and minimum diameter of 18.5 mm and 14.3 mm, respectively . The margins of the nodule were blurred, with small vacuoles and capillaries crossing. The abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple liver lesions, suspected to be hepatic cysts, with the largest one measuring approximately 7.8 × 6.7 × 7.2 cm in the right hepatic lobe. After admission, further preoperative assessments were completed. Electrocardiography revealed a heart rate of 71 beats per minute, indicative of a sinus rhythm. Pulmonary function testing indicated that the measured forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 2.23 L, with a measured/expected value ratio of 101.6%. The measured maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV) was 79.61 L/min, with a measured/expected value ratio of 89.9%. The measured diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO SB) was 8.06 mmol/min/kPa, with a measured/expected value ratio of 109.7%. Echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction (EF) of 73%, with only mild tricuspid valve regurgitation. Based on the CT images, we noticed PV variations in the RUL . The remaining positive findings included multiple hepatic cysts on abdominal ultrasonography, and mild tricuspid regurgitation on echocardiography.
Considering the location, size, and nature of the pulmonary nodule , the fact that thoracoscopic surgery is less invasive than open surgery , and that segmentectomy preserves more pulmonary function than lobectomy , the initial preoperative planning was involving Da Vinci robot-assisted thoracoscopic resection of the posterior segment of the RUL. This choice was made to minimize the patient’s postoperative symptom burden while effectively addressing the nodule .
We used a fourth-generation Da Vinci robotic system for this surgery. The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. The robot’s 2nd (left) arm utilized bipolar coagulation forceps and entered the chest cavity through an operating port in the right 9th intercostal space. The robot’s 4th (right) arm was equipped with a monopolar coagulation hook and was entered through an operating port in the right 6th intercostal space. The robot’s 3rd arm was a thoracoscope for observation, which entered the chest through an observation port in the right 8th intercostal space. Simultaneously, an auxiliary incision approximately 4–5 cm in length was made approximately 3–4 cm below the front lower edge of the thoracoscopic observation port in the 8th intercostal space. The instruments were inserted through this incision.
During anatomical dissection, we identified variations in the veins of the RUL. Upon careful examination, we found that four of these variant RUL veins drained directly into the superior vena cava, whereas one drained into the left atrium . These variations not only increased the complexity of performing a segmentectomy but also elevated the risk of intraoperative vascular incidents, leading to significant bleeding and postoperative pulmonary congestion. Thus, we decided to change the surgical method to a right upper lobectomy to minimize these risks.
We meticulously dissected and individually ligated the five variant RUL veins. During this process, we also carefully examined and managed the pulmonary arterial branches. These branches were found to be anatomically normal and were dissected with precision to ensure a clear surgical field and minimize the risk of intraoperative complications. Subsequently, we individually addressed the normal arteries and bronchi of the RUL and ultimately successfully removed the entire RUL. After extracting the specimen, we performed an intraoperative frozen-section pathological examination and definitive standard pathological examination of the nodule, confirming the adenocarcinoma diagnosis. Consequently, in accordance with the lymphatic drainage region of the RUL, we systematically cleared the lymph nodes in the 2nd, 4th, 7th, 10th, and 11th groups. The surgery took 80 min, with a minimal estimated blood loss of approximately 50 mL. The patient was awakened from the anesthesia and safely transferred back to the thoracic surgery ward.
Postoperatively, we administered prophylactic antimicrobial therapy using an intravenous infusion of 1 g of cefazolin every 8 h, initialized the afternoon of the second postoperative day. Additionally, we administered 3075AxaIU subcutaneous injections of nadroparin calcium once daily to prevent thrombosis until the fifth postoperative day. During hospitalization, we administered 0.3 g of acetylcysteine for nebulized inhalation twice daily. For pain management, we administered two tablets of sustained-release ibuprofen and codeine phosphate (each tablet containing 0.2 g and 13 mg of ibuprofen and codeine phosphate, respectively) as needed.
On the first postoperative day, a chest radiograph was obtained at the patient’s bedside. It revealed only a small amount of pleural effusion, which was attributed to postoperative changes. The first postoperative complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level of 118 g/L and a white blood cell count of 10.14 × 109/L. The patient’s cardiac monitor and urinary catheter were removed on the morning of the first postoperative day. Remarkably, the patient had already begun ambulation and activity by the afternoon of the first postoperative day to facilitate postoperative recovery.
Due to the presence of a small amount of air leak within the closed chest drainage tube during coughing until the third postoperative day, we conducted a follow-up chest CT scan. CT results showed only a minimal amount of gas and fluid within the pleural cavity, without significant signs of pulmonary congestion or infection . The chest drainage volume was measured every 24 h postoperatively and decreased sequentially to 280, 200, 80, and 80 mL. Consequently, on the fifth postoperative day, we removed the closed chest drainage tube when there was no longer air leak during coughing. After tube removal, the patient did not report any specific discomfort and was discharged on postoperative day six. The definitive standard pathological examination of the resected lung tissue, measuring 10.5 × 8.2 × 1.7 cm and containing a nodule of 1.7 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm, showed no invasion into the visceral pleura. The nodule presented a gray-white and gray-brown appearance on its cut surface, characterized by a solid texture and moderate density. Immunohistochemical analysis yielded the following results: Ckpan (AE1/AE3) was positive, P63 showed partial positivity, TTF-1 and Napsin A were positive, while CK5/6 and TRIM29 were negative. These findings align with a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, predominantly featuring an acinar pattern (approximately 95%) and a lesser extent of a micropapillary pattern (about 5%). The examination of all lymph nodes revealed no metastatic involvement, classifying the tumor as stage IA2 with a pathologic staging of pT1bN0M0.
Since we discovered a variation in the patient’s RUL vein during surgery, we obtained the patient’s consent to conduct a complementary three-dimensional reconstruction postoperatively using preoperative low-dose chest CT imaging data. Although the three-dimensional reconstruction results did indicate the presence of a variation in the RUL vein, the four variant RUL veins observed during surgery were not clearly visualized. The three-dimensional reconstruction of the RUL showed: (i) no variations in the bronchus, pulmonary artery, or their branches; (ii) the variant RUL vein drained into the superior vena cava, whereas the nonvariant vein drained into the left atrium.