We report on a 46-year-old female patient with histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the right lung. The patient underwent pneumonectomy and unilateral lymphadenectomy in December 2001. Because of histologically verified positive resection margins, it was decided to administer 4 cycles of a postoperative polychemotherapy regimen including cisplatin 25 mg/m2and etoposide 120 mg/m2 on day 1, day 2 and day 3 followed by chest irradiation. Due to a prescription error, the patient received 75 mg/m2 cisplatin per day, instead of 25 mg/m2 resulting in a total dose of 225 mg/m2 cisplatin within a 3-day period. The error was not noticed and the patient was discharged. Two days later, the patient presented with severe nausea and vomiting, loss of hearing, tinnitus and was unable to eat and drink. Due to the severity of these side effects, the medical records of the patient were reviewed and the cisplatin overdose was discovered. Supportive treatment including vigorous hydration, electrolyte replacement and antiemetic therapy was started immediately. Total platinum plasma levels which were determined daily showed highly elevated values (2.9 mg platinum per kg plasma). Therefore, plasmapheresis was performed on day 5 and 6 after the last administration of cisplatin to attempt to eliminate the drug. The platinum concentrations were measured by an Agilent 7500c inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany) equipped with a PFA50 microconcentric nebulizer. The plasma samples were mineralisated microwave assisted with a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid (1 ml sample + 2 ml of nitric acid + 0.5 ml of hydrochloric acid + 1.5 ml ultrapure water) in an UltraCLAVE2 (EMLS, Leutkirch, Germany) at 250°C for 30 minutes before measurement. Plasmapheresis was carried out via a catheter placed in the right femoral vein and using a plasma filtration technique with Hemaplex BT 900/A Filters (Dideco, Mirandola, Italy). During each treatment session, 3 liters of plasma were removed and continuously substituted with 1.5 liter of solvent-detergent treated standardized pooled human plasma (Octaplas, Octapharma Vienna, Austria) and 1.5 liter of 5% human albumin (Immuno, Vienna, Austria). Anticoagulation therapy during plasmapheresis consisted of 3000 IU (international units) heparin administered as intravenous bolus and 1000 IU heparin per hour as continuous infusion. The plasma levels of total platinum showed a marked decline after plasma exchange at first, followed by a small rise and then a constant decline afterwards as demonstrated in Figure . After the first plasmapheresis, hearing loss and tinnitus improved gradually as well as renal failure. (The elevated laboratory findings are shown in Table.) Severe myelosuppression required the administration of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, two units of packed and irradiated erythrocytes as well as two units of packed, pooled and irradiated thrombocytes. In order to manage prolonged severe nausea and vomiting which lasted for 12 days, a complex antiemetic regimen including 5HT3-antagonists, dexamethasone, metoclopramide and neuroleptics was given. Finally, we were able to discharge the patient 18 days after onset of the overdose. She recovered completely from all toxicities including hearing loss which was proven clinically and by audiometry except for a subclinical renal impairment remaining from the acute renal failure . Further antineoplastic therapy was continued with 2 cycles of a carboplatin-based regimen followed by chest irradiation. The patient showed no signs of relapse until March 2003, when a single brain metastasis was discovered and removed by surgery. In September 2003, recurrence of multiple brain metastases was detected and the patient died in January 2004 due to repeated progression of these metastases despite several treatment attempts. During the whole course of disease, no other metastatic sites and no late onset toxicities were observed in the patient.