A 65-year-old man presented to the emergency department complaining of feeling unwell, chest pain during exercise, nausea and vomiting for a few days ago. He had recurrent episodes of apnea, palpitation and dizziness since the night before. A review of his past medical history revealed that he was a previous intravenous heroin user who was attending a community methadone substitution program. He was prescribed syrup methadone 240 mg daily. He was not known to have cardiac, respiratory, hepatic or neurological disease. Physical examination was remarkable for normal mental status, blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, pulse of 50 beats/min in sinus rhythm, O2 saturation: 90%, no cardiac murmurs, and no signs of heart failure. Laboratory studies included potassium of 2 mmol/l and magnesium of 1.4 mmol/l, white blood cell: 12,000/ mm3, hemoglobin: 15 g/dl, platelet: 222,000/mm3, blood sugar: 122 mg/dl. We though his hypokalemia was due to prolonged vomiting. His electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus bradycardia and a QTc of 550 ms .
The patient was admitted to the cardiology service for ECG monitoring. Shortly thereafter, the patient experienced an episode of TdP and ventricular fibrillation .
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, defibrillation and Lidocaine administration resulted in a successful return of spontaneous circulation. Lidocaine was an antiarrhythmic agent of choice because it does not prolong QTc anymore in contrast to other antiarrhythmic agents. Potassium and magnesium were administered intravenously to correct hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia. Due to the recurrent episode of TdP temporary pacemaker was inserted, and it was set at rate of 100-120 beats/min to prevent bradycardia. Temporary pace maker (TPM) was removed after 48 h. Methadone was discontinued and substituted with buprenorphine. Over the following 7 days, QTc interval progressively returned to normal limits. Discharge serum potassium and magnesium were 4.5 mmol/l and 2.5 mg/dl respectively. The patient was discharged with buprenorphine and a follow-up at the cardiology clinic, 2 weeks and 1 month later revealed no further cardiac symptoms with a normal ECG. He did not have any electrolyte abnormality at follow-up.