A 60-year-old man was referred to our outpatient department for a 30-month history of generalized bone pain without antecedent trauma. He reported no fevers, chills, vomiting, diarrhoea, or other symptoms. The patient had a history of chronic hepatitis B treated with adefovir dipivoxil (10 mg/d) for 60 months and had no family history of nephrolithiasis or metabolic bone disease.
A whole-body bone scan was performed 18 months later in another hospital because of bone pain. It revealed multiple abnormal areas with increased tracer uptake in the bilateral ribs, bilateral sacroiliac joints, and bilateral tibias, which were consistent with multiple fractures. Serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) and tumour markers were normal. Osteoporosis was diagnosed and treated with alendronate, calcitriol, and calcium carbonate.
The patient’s bone pain was alleviated slightly after 6 months of treatment. Then, he was sent to the haematology department of the hospital mentioned above. Laboratory data are listed in Table . An ultrasound revealed stones in both kidneys and left ureteral stone combined with left hydronephrosis. A further CT scan of the urinary system without contrast revealed high-density images of both renal lower calyces, with left ureteral stone complicated by hydronephrosis on the left kidney, which suggested obstructive nephropathy caused by nephrolithiasis. The total glomerular filtration rate was 41.89 ml/min evaluated by renal dynamic imaging with 99mTc-DTPA (techne-tium-99 m diethylene triamine penta-acetic acid) as exogenous markers. A DXA scan showed that the T-score of the left femoral neck was −2.60. A re-examination of whole-body 18-FDG-PET/CT showed similar findings as the whole body bone scan performed earlier at another institution. To eliminate bone pain and renal dysfunction caused by multiple myeloma, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, and the results were normal. The cause of renal impairment was presumably nephrolithiasis-induced obstructive nephropathy. Consequently, extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy and left double-J ureteral stent insertion were performed to alleviate the nephrolithiasis-induced obstructive nephropathy. Subsequently, alendronate, calcitriol, and calcium carbonate were suspended by the patient for personal reason.
The patient was then referred to our inpatient department because of bone pain for 30 months. At our first examination, the patient weighed 55 kg, and his height was 168 cm, giving a body mass index (BMI) of 19.5 kg/m2. The physical examination showed mild tenderness of the ribs. Laboratory investigations are presented in Table . A renal biopsy showed interstitial nephritis, and the immunohistochemistry test for HBV was negative. Mild-to-moderate interstitial nephritis and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis of the renal tissue were diagnosed by electron microscopy. The diagnosis of nephrolithiasis and osteomalacia due to renal Fanconi syndrome caused by adefovir is based on multiple fractures and an elevated level of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), hypophosphataemia due to hyperphosphaturia and non–anion-gap tubular metabolic acidosis accompanied with glycosuria without hyperglycaemia. Consequently, adefovir was substituted by entecavir (0.5 mg/d) against hepatitis B virus, along with the commencement of supplementation with neutral sodium phosphate (1.5 g/d), potassium citrate (4 g/d, divided into three equal parts), calcium carbonate (elemental calcium 0.6 g/d) and calcitriol (0.5 μg/d) orally for osteomalacia. The patient responded dramatically to the entecavir and supplementation therapy, which has now lasted five years.