A 26-year old male patient, soldier, vaccinated against COVID-19 (two doses of Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, administered in June and July 2021), was admitted to the Temporary Hospital for treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The patient reported dry cough, headache, nausea, muscle pain, weakness, lack of appetite, with symptoms worsening 2 days prior to hospitalization. Medical history revealed no comorbidities, medications and stimulants. Rapid test for qualitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 antigen (SARS-CoV-2 Rapid Antigen Test, SD BIOSENSOR, Roche), performed from nasopharyngeal swabs on the day of admission, was positive.
At admission, the patient was in moderate general condition. His respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation (SpO2) 98% breathing the atmospheric air. Blood pressure was 132/74 mm Hg and heart rate 78 beats per minute (bpm). Physical examination revealed dehydration, sharpened breath sounds on auscultation over the lungs. Lymphopenia was observed in laboratory tests . Chest computed tomography did not demonstrate radiological findings typical for COVID-19 pneumonia. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 79 bpm .
The initial treatment included low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin subcutaneous in a prophylactic dose), inhaled budesonide (800 μg twice a day), fluid therapy, painkillers and antiemetic drugs.
On the second day of hospitalization, and on the fourth day from the onset of symptoms, SpO2 decreased to 92% and gastrointestinal symptoms have worsened. Remdesivir was implemented into treatment, starting with a loading dose of 200 mg first day and followed 100 mg daily for the next 4 days.
In the early morning hours on the fourth day of hospitalization, and after two doses of remdesivir, the patient collapsed returning from the toilet. Physical examination revealed bradycardia (50 bpm) and low blood pressure value (90/46 mmHg). Electrocardiogram confirmed sinus bradycardia with a heart rate of 47 bpm and first-degree atrioventricular block . Laboratory tests showed no significant abnormalities. Cardiac enzyme test results were in normal range. . As the patient remained asymptomatic in the following hours and had an adequate chronotropic response with activity (a heart rate increased to 92 bpm after performing ten squats), the consulting cardiologist did not recommend pacemaker implantation. The decision was made to continue the therapy with remdesivir for up to 5 days total under daily clinical assessment. Dexamethasone (4 mg twice a day) was also added to the treatment. In the subsequent days of hospitalization the patient’s vital signs were constantly monitored 24 h a day and an ECG was performed regularly every day and as needed. The minimal heart rate 33 bpm was confirmed 24 h after the end of the antiviral therapy . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated regular cardiac dimensions, normal systolic and diastolic function of left ventricle as well as ejection fraction. Moderately increased alanine aminotransferase activity was observed in control laboratory tests . Patient’s general condition was slowly improving. The resolution of bradycardia, ECG normalization and an increase in heart rate to 67 bpm were noted 1 week after the end of remdesivir treatment. The patient was discharged from the hospital after 14 days with the recommendation of follow-up at the cardiology outpatient clinic and rehabilitation after COVID-19.