A previously healthy 4-year-old girl presented with an acute paralysis of the right upper limb. The patient was fully vaccinated including vaccination against poliomyelitis. She first complained of pain in the right arm and the next morning developed a weakness in the right arm with torticollis. Clinical findings revealed irritability, poor neck control, and proximal paralysis with areflexia of the right upper limb (MRC score 0/5). Ataxia or cranial nerve dysfunctions was not observed. A mild upper respiratory tract infection with fever was reported approximately 10 days before the episode.
The initial head computed tomography scan was unremarkable. The blood test showed mild inflammatory signs, i.e., sedimentation rate 30 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) < 0.5 mg/L, and normal leukocyte count. Serological tests for Borrelia, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus were all negative.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed 28 red-blood cells/mm3, 250 white-blood cells/mm3, glucose level of 87 mg/dL, and protein level of 35 mg/dL. Both bacteriology and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) panel for meningo-encephalitis in CSF (FilmArray testing for Steptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitidis, herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2, varicella zoster virus, enteroviruses, and Cryptococcus neoformans) returned negative results.
MRI of the brain and spinal cord revealed increased T2 signal intensity of the central gray matter of the cervical cord extending from C2 to C7, along with involvement of the posterior brainstem . This peculiar MRI pattern was strikingly similar to that described in previous outbreaks of viral myelitis caused by enterovirus A71 (EV-A71), EV-D68, and poliomyelitis [–]. More specifically, the restriction of signal abnormalities to the central gray matter along with the lack of supratentorial lesions allowed us to rule out other possible diagnoses, such as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis or neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD).
A nasopharyngeal aspirate identified both EV-D68 and human-herpes virus 6, while a PCR of the stools revealed the presence of EV-A71. The optic fundus was normal, ruling out the diagnosis of NMOSD. The diagnosis of AFM was confirmed using clinical and radiological criteria fulfilled .
The patient was initially treated with high-dose corticosteroids (30 mg/kg/day for 4 days); however, there was no clinical improvement. Second-line treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins (500 mg/kg/day for 4 days) resulted in slight motor improvement.
At 4 days, repeated medullary MRI showed a clear regression of the lesions , and cerebrospinal pleocytosis decreased (41 white-blood cells/mm3 including 97% lymphocytes). In parallel, the patient underwent intensive physiotherapeutical rehabilitation.
At 3 months after disease onset, due to an unelectable F-wave, a motor nerve conduction study suggested a motor involvement in the cubital nerve and electromyography (EMG) showed rare fibrillation potentials in the deltoid (motor unit action potential was not studied due to sedation). Detailed sensory nerve conduction study of the right upper limb was strictly normal.
The patient was discharged after 8 days of hospitalization and was subjected to an intensive rehabilitation program. She partially recovered muscle strength, but 3 years later, proximal paresis of the right arm persisted with atrophy of the shoulder muscles.