A 78-year-old Indian, non-smoker man, presented to out patient department with progressively increasing generalized weakness for two months. He gave history (on leading question) of weight loss (about 2 kg) during this period. There was no history of fever, cough, expectoration, hemoptysis or chest pain. Patient denied any history of joint pain, skin rash, photosensitivity, Raynaud's phenomenon or oral ulcers. There was no history high risk sexual behavior, intravenous drug abuse or blood transfusion. Patient had history of type-2 diabetes mellitus since last 10 years and was taking oral hypoglycemic agents (Metformin SR 850 mg twice daily and Glimiperide 2 mg once a day) with good control of blood sugars. He was also suffering from coronary artery disease for which he was taking his medications (Aspirin 75 mg once a day, Metoprolol SR 25 mg twice daily and Atorvastatin 10 mg once a day at night). There was no history of tuberculosis in the past. Family history was non contributory. Physical examination revealed well built and nourished elderly. He was afebrile with oral temperature of 98.2°F. His pulse was 82/minute and blood pressure was 126/72 mm of Hg. There was no pallor, icterus, peripheral lymphadenopathy, clubbing or bony tenderness. Chest examination revealed reduced expansion in infrascapular region on the right side with dull percussion note and reduced breath sounds in the same region. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. Examination of cardiovascular and nervous system did not reveal any abnormality.
Blood investigations revealed hemoglobin of 13.5 gm/dl, total leukocyte count 5,400/µl with differential counts showing mild eosinophilia (neutrophil 56%, lymphocyte 32%, monocyte 05%, and eosinophils 07%), platelets were 2,24,000/µl and ESR was 110 mm in 1st hour. Serum biochemistry including calcium (10 mg/dl), uric acid (4.0 mg/dl), sodium (141 mg/dl) and potassium (5.0 mg/dl) were normal. Liver function tests showed raised total protein (8.4 gm/dl) and reversed albumin (3.5 gm/dl) and globulins (4.9 gm/dl) ratio. Total bilirubin (0.4 mg/dl), alanine aminotransferase (39 U/L; reference value 30-65 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (26 U/L; reference value 15-37 U/L) and alkaline phosphatase (51 U/L; reference value 50-136 U/L) were normal. Fasting blood sugar was 107 mg/dl. Renal functions tests showed normal blood urea (12 mg/dl) and creatinine (0.9 mg/dl). Lipid profile was also within normal limits. Patient tested for HIV infection by ELISA was negative.
Chest radiograph showed mass lesion in right lower zone and multiple nodules in bilateral lung fields. For further characterization, CT of chest was done. It revealed a large mass with sharp margins in right lower lobe and multiple nodules in both lungs. Multiple nodules of varying sizes were seen in left upper lobe, lingula and apical segment of left lower lobe (, ). It also revealed mild right sided pleural effusion. On the basis of radiological findings, metastatic lung disease from extra thoracic origin, carcinoma lung with metastases were considered as differentials diagnoses. Patient was evaluated for extrathoracic primary site of malignancy. Stool samples for occult blood were negative for three times. Urine did not show any evidence of hematuria. Prostate specific antigen levels were normal. Urine examination was negative for Bence-Jones proteins. Serum electrophoresis revealed M-band and ß-2 microglobulins were raised (1952 µg/l; reference value 510-1470 µg/l) but other tests including bone marrow aspirate and biopsy did not reveal any evidence of plasma cell dyscrasia. Serum LDH was normal.
For the histological diagnosis, CT guided biopsy from the right lung mass was done. Histopathological examination showed fibrocollagenous tissue infiltrated by monomorphic round cells with scanty cytoplasm, high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio, large vesicular nucleus and prominent nucleoli in some of the cells. Frequent mitotic activity and apoptotic bodies were noted. Immunohistochemistry showed the cells to be positive for leukocyte common antigen (LCA) and CD20 (B-cell marker) while being negative for CD3 (T-cell marker), cytokeratin and neuroendocrine markers. Stains for acid fast bacilli and fungus were negative. Thus, a final pathological diagnosis of diffuse large cell B-cell lymphoma was rendered. Patient was evaluated for involvement of other sites by lymphoma. Contrast enhanced CT of abdomen did not revealed any mass lesion. Patient was referred to medical oncology for chemotherapy. However, family declined any treatment. Patient last seen a week back was stable.