A 13-year-old Ugandan boy of Bantu ethnicity was referred to our hospital for vascular and orthopedic surgical attention. He had a history of bleeding from the right thigh and an inability to use his right lower limb for three weeks.
He had been well until three months prior to referral when he developed a high-grade fever associated with severe pain and progressive swelling of his right thigh for about 11 days, but with no history of trauma. He was taken to a local hospital where a considerable amount of pus was drained from his right thigh. A diagnosis of chronic osteomyelitis of the right femur was made, since it was noticed at surgery that the periosteum had been stripped off the bone. He was put on a six-week course of cloxacillin, the pain reduced significantly and the fever eventually disappeared; however, pus discharge from a sinus on the antero-medial aspect of his right thigh persisted. Three weeks prior to referral to our hospital he slipped on a wet floor, fell, and fractured his right femur. He was taken to a traditional bone setter who started manipulating and massaging his right thigh. After four days of traditional treatment he started to bleed profusely and lost consciousness in the process. He was then rushed to the regional referral hospital where he was transfused with two units of blood, the right lower limb was splinted with a long leg plaster of Paris (POP) back slab and compression dressings applied to the thigh. A radiograph taken at the time showed a pathological fracture with a long sequestrum of the right distal half of the femur and minimal involucrum formation. However, no attempt was made to ascertain the source of the bleeding. He spent three weeks in this hospital, where the staff repeatedly transfused him and applied compressive dressings because he kept on bleeding (though not profusely), in the hope that the bleeding would stop. However this never happened, and our patient had to be referred to our national referral hospital. He had no family history of sickle cell disease or any bleeding disorders, and was human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negative.
On physical examination, he was toxic, wasted and had a foul smell around him. He had severe pallor of the mucous membranes, was febrile (39°C) and had pedal pitting edema. The right lower limb was splinted in a POP back slab with a bulky blood-soaked compressive padding of the mid-thigh. The right foot was swollen and pale, capillary refill was more than two seconds, the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses were palpable but very weak.
Full hemogram results were: hemoglobin 5.2g/dL, neutrophils 89 percent, platelets 187×103 cells/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 115mm/hour. Blood culture results were positive for Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to ceftriaxone. Radiography results showed a diaphyseal fracture of the femur.
He was immediately resuscitated and prepared for emergency surgery. In surgery, the POP slab and multiple layers of foul-smelling gauze and cotton were removed. Upon removal of the compressive dressing he started bleeding profusely, therefore pressure was applied to the bleeding area and a pneumatic tourniquet applied. There were numerous maggots, a huge hematoma and necrotic tissue on the antero-medial aspect of the distal right thigh. All necrotic tissue was removed and the wound extended for better exploration. A fracture of the distal femoral shaft was found, with the periosteum having been stripped from more than two-thirds of the bone. The femoral artery was friable, and had a ruptured 4cm dilatation (aneurysm) at the level of the fracture.
The femoral artery was ligated and an above-knee amputation of the right lower limb performed. The amputation stump was left open; delayed primary closure was performed three days later. Post-operatively he was transfused and given intravenous ceftriaxone and gentamycin. He did well post-operatively and his wounds healed well, and he was discharged on crutches after 10 days of hospitalization. He was very grateful for our intervention because we alleviated his pain and saved his life. He is currently undergoing rehabilitation in preparation for fitting with a prosthesis. The aneurysmal tissue was sent for histological examination, with the resulting report stating ‘wall of artery with areas of hyaline degeneration and congested vessels’.