The patient is a 61-year-old woman with BRCA1 gene mutation. Her medical history is significant for Cesarean section and left ovarian cystectomy. She does not have any history of cancer. She presented for prophylactic total laparoscopic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. During the procedure, the surgeon discovered a white nodule on the fimbriated end of the right fallopian tube and sent the right salpingo-oophorectomy specimen for intraoperative consultation. He also noted adhesions between the omentum and the right pelvic sidewall. Otherwise, there were no other in situ or grossly visible abnormalities.
On gross examination, the nodule was solid and firm and measured 0.5 x 0.1 x 0.3 cm. The entire nodule was frozen, and sections showed small, tightly packed tubules and nests of epithelioid cells in a fibrous background notable for many psammoma bodies . The frozen section was interpreted as “epithelioid neoplasm with psammoma bodies, defer to permanents.”
On permanent section, a clearer cytologic assessment showed that the epithelioid cells were relatively small with regular, round nuclei, and even chromatin . There was no significant atypia. Mitoses were inconspicuous. The larger cells appeared similar to signet ring cells with a vacuolated cytoplasm. The psammoma bodies were a striking feature also on permanent section. Thread-like bridging, a typical feature of adenomatoid tumors , was observed in several foci of the lesion .
Ancillary studies were performed. Mucicarmine stain was performed to assess the presence of mucin in the vacuolated cells which was negative. Immunohistochemical (IHC) studies revealed positivity for WT1, calretinin , PAX8 , and D2-40 , and negativity for p53, estrogen-progesterone (ER-PR) receptors of the tumor cells. Epithelial markers including BerEP4/EpCAM, MOC-31, and B72.3 were all negative. The IHC reactions of WT1, calretinin, and D2-40 were positive and supportive of a mesothelial origin of the tumor [, ]. The vacuolated cells shared the same immunophenotype . Based on the histopathology and the IHC reactions, the lesion appeared benign and was diagnosed as adenomatoid tumor with psammoma bodies. The remaining fallopian tube and ovary, which were entirely submitted, did not reveal any other diagnostic abnormalities.