A 57-year-old Finnish male patient presented with a history of high blood pressure and obesity (116 kg, BMI 43) and two gastrointestinal surgeries (no malignancies); otherwise, no chronic illnesses. He had no previous injections of cortisone or administration of fluoroquinolone-type medication, but symptoms were present in the Achilles tendon area bilaterally, which were treated in a conservative manner. No previous imaging [magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and so on]. The ankles were fit to perform sportive activities. The patient was playing badminton and charging the net when he suddenly heard and felt two consecutive snaps from the ankles. He was transferred to the Helsinki University Hospital Emergency Department, and after clinical and radiological evaluations , both ankles were further examined with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The diagnosis was bilateral sleeve avulsion of the Achilles tendon .
Both Achilles tendons were operated on in the same session 3 days after the injury using suture anchors [JuggerKnot (left ankle) and FASTak (right ankle)] with a modified suture bridge style. Four anchors were placed in the figure of a square, but the lower anchors used Krackow sutures to get larger purchase from the tendon. The proximal anchor sutures were pulled through the tendon and used as a more classical style of suture bridge with the tails of lower suture anchors . The postoperative rehabilitation protocol is presented in Table .
The patient filled in Foot and Ankle Outcome Survey (FAOS) questionnaires evaluating preinjury levels (naturally posthumously relying on his memory 2 days after the injury), preoperatively (2 days after the injury/1 day before the operation), and then during every follow-up visit at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months, evaluating both ankles separately . The right side had problems with wound healing and wound revision was performed bedside 3 weeks postoperatively by administering negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT). Both wounds were healed at 12 weeks postoperatively. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was quite satisfied and pain free. At the 1 year follow-up—the final control visit—the patient felt satisfied with the outcome and was symptom free, but was unable to return to running and jumping activities due to fear of re-injury. Otherwise, the rehabilitation was a success and formatted to everyday routine. At this follow-up, our skilled physical therapist/research assistant performed American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) measurement and additional testing. Both ankles were also evaluated with MRIs .
AOFAS score was 100 on the right side and 97 on the left side (hindfoot motion slightly decreased). QoL (quality of life) was limited to 81 because of the changes that the patient chose to make to avoid possible re-injury. FAOS score was 98 in both ankles, and improvements were noted in every subcategory; all of them were better than before the injury .
The patient could do repetitive toe raises up to 38 repetitions on the right and 44 repetitions on the left side. The circumferences of the calves were 45/45 cm, respectively, and 5 cm proximally from the ankle 23/24 cm, respectively. There was no need to change shoes or occupation because of the injury.
After the follow-up visit, the patient was encouraged to increase the workload to get back to the activities that were important for QoL preceding the injury.
The patient was contacted 5 years after the injury. He remained very satisfied with the result and reported no pain or symptoms. He has continued rehabilitation training and perceives his ankles to be in better shape than before the injury. He also lost 8 kg during the rehabilitation period. He is able to play golf and run, but, unfortunately, he has given up badminton.