An 80-year-old woman with persistent abdominal pain for 2 weeks visited a previous hospital and was suspected of having emphysematous cholecystitis. She was referred to our hospital for urgent surgery. Although she reported a complaint of right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness and positive Murphy’s sign, she did not show muscle guarding or rebound tenderness.
Her medical history included chronic hepatitis C after achieving a sustained virological response, myocardial infarction after coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated gallbladder distention and gas accumulation within the gallbladder lumen and wall that had spread to the hepatoduodenal ligament . The focally decreased enhancement of the gallbladder wall was also found, suggestive of gangrenous cholecystitis . Additionally, fluid collection was observed within the hepatoduodenal ligament . Small gallstones were found in the fundus of the gallbladder . Abdominal ultrasound findings supported the diagnosis of gangrenous cholecystitis, showing focal perfusion defects on Doppler imaging.
Laboratory test results on admission were as follows: white blood cell count 9300/μL (range: 4000–9500; neutrophils 7140/μL), hemoglobin 10.5 g/dL (range: 11.5–15.3), platelet count 33.6 × 103/μL (range: 150–400 × 103), creatine 0.77 mg/μL (range: 0.5–1.0), amylase 66 IU/L (range: 65–160), aspartate aminotransferase 20 IU/L (range: 11–35), alanine aminotransferase 25 IU/L (range: 5–35), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 109 IU/L (range: 7–46), alkaline phosphatase 143 IU/L (range: 38–113), total bilirubin 0.8 mg/dL (range: 0.2–1.0), C-reactive protein 5.85 mg/dL (range: 0–0.5), lactate 7.0 mg/dL (range: 4.5–18.0), procalcitonin 0.97 ng/mL (range: < 0.05), carcinoembryonic antigen 2.1 ng/mL (range: < 5.0), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 23.3 U/mL (range: < 37).
Given these findings, the initial diagnosis on admission was gangrenous cholecystitis penetrating the hepatoduodenal ligament. Because two weeks had passed since the symptom onset, she showed no signs of peritonitis, she had controllable inflammation according to blood tests, and she was taking aspirin following CABG surgery, we avoided surgery and selected conservative treatment instead.
We immediately initiated antibiotic therapy and performed percutaneous gallbladder drainage (PTGBD). Biliary cytology was negative (class II). A radiographic contrast study from the PTGBD tube followed by CT revealed an indirect complicated cholecystoduodenal fistula via the hepatoduodenal ligament . The cystic duct and extrahepatic bile duct were not contrasted . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) identified the orifice of the cholecystoduodenal fistula at the lesser curvature and anterior wall of the duodenal bulb . Thick pus was discharged from the orifice . The instillation of indigo carmine from the PTGBD tube confirmed indirect fistula formation between the gallbladder and duodenum .
We next carried out continuous gallbladder irrigation with saline solution to drain the abscess within the fistula. When the local inflammation improved and inflammatory markers were normalized, we ended the irrigation and observed the duodenal fistula using EGD every 7–10 days. Although the size of the fistula hole decreased , it did not close spontaneously. We therefore attempted to close the fistula endoscopically using clips two times; however, the fistula closure was not successful . Therefore, we decided on surgical intervention.
We performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy and fistula closure simultaneously on admission day 57. Under general anesthesia, a laparoscopic procedure was initiated via pneumoperitoneum with an additional three ports based on the French approach of cholecystectomy . Inflammation persisted around the gallbladder . First, adhesiotomy around the gallbladder and between the liver and duodenal bulb was performed. A silicone disc was placed from the subxiphoid port to retract the liver while operating between the liver and duodenal bulb, and a left subcostal port was added to assist the laparoscopic procedures . Next, under endoscopic guidance , we carefully dissected the tissues around the duodenal bulb followed by transecting the fistula. The fistula opening was corroborated by the instillation of indigo carmine from the PTGBD tube . The fistula lad toward the hepatoduodenal ligament . We then performed cholecystectomy using the gallbladder bed-first technique (dome-down approach) . The cystic duct was tightened with Endoloop® (Ethicon Inc, Cincinnati, OH, USA). We were unable to clearly detect the fistula on the gallbladder side during cholecystectomy. Subsequently, fistula closure on the duodenal side was performed with the running suture technique using V-Loc™ (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) . No leakage was observed by air leak testing using endoscopy. Overall, no intraoperative complications were observed. The operative time was 4 h and 15 min, and operative blood loss was 22 ml. She had no postoperative complications and was discharged on postoperative day 15. EGD showed the fistula closure 2 months after surgery .
Macroscopically, the gallbladder contained a couple of small black stones, and its wall was necrotic . The histological diagnosis was the gangrenous cholecystitis with no malignant findings.