An 86-year-old female consulted in our hospital as a result of aggravated lower abdominal pain for 6 days, accompanying with nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. The patient had a past history of hypertension, which was treated with amlodipine besylate tablets. Abdominal examination revealed rebound tenderness at the McBurney’s point, accompanying with normal bowel sounds. Laboratory examination of the patient on admission suggested white blood cell (WBC) count of 20.31*10^9/L and neutrophilic granulocyte percentage (N%) of 94.3%. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed gas in intra- and extra-hepatic portal and mesenteric veins in addition to appendicitis with peripheral peritonitis . Thus, an emergency laparoscopic appendectomy was planned, which was rejected by this patient. Therefore, conservative treatment with antibiotics (Piperacillin Sodium and Tazobactam Sodium for Injection) was applied. The abdominal pain was generalized for the following 4 days; moreover, the signs of diffused peritonitis and borborygmus had gradually disappeared. Nonetheless, no decreases could be seen in inflammatory markers after conservative treatment with antibiotics . Subsequently, repeated abdominal CT scan was conducted, which revealed the absence of gas in intra- and extra-hepatic portal and superior mesenteric veins. However, abdominal CT scan revealed enhanced pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis and dilated small intestine, which had become more and more severe. In addition, the appendicitis with peripheral peritonitis had been always present .
Intestinal necrosis was suspected based on the abdominal signs, as well as changes of laboratory and frequent imaging examination results. An emergency laparotomy was performed on the fifth day of admission. Intra-operative findings had confirmed the diagnosis of suppurated appendix, with about 20 ml purulent secretion around it. Remarkable necrosis, which was about 100 cm, could be observed in the small intestinal wall and mesentery. Besides, an intestinal perforation could be seen in the necrotic bowel. The intestinal perforation was covered by the omentum majus. No obvious intestinal content overflow was seen. The patient had received appendectomy and part of the small intestine was removed. Afterwards, the patient’s postoperative pathology had confirmed the diagnosis of acute gangrenous appendicitis accompanying with periappendicitis and ileum necrosis . Based on the use of antibiotics (Imipenem and Cilastatin Sodium for Injection), the inflammatory markers decreased significantly after surgery . In addition, abdominal CT was performed on the fifth day after the operation, showing that the intra-abdominal condition was improved . Her symptoms were resolved and she was discharged 11 days postoperatively.