A 15-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a 3-week history of severe morning headaches, nausea, vomiting, and diplopia. Examination revealed bilateral Parinaud syndrome, grade 3 papilledema, and visual acuity of 20/40, and right-sided cranial nerve VI palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed non-communicating hydrocephalus, bifocal intracranial tumors, and significant periventricular edema . A 3.7 cm pineal tumor obstructed the aqueduct of Silvius, and a 0.9 cm suprasellar tumor involved the pituitary stalk. Serum tumor markers for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) measured 678 ng/ml and 40 international units(IU)/L, respectively.
The patient underwent third ventriculoscopy and biopsy of the suprasellar tumor via a right frontal burr hole the day after admission. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of AFP and β-hCG were elevated to 76 ng/ml and 67 IU/L, respectively. The suprasellar tumor was histologically determined to be a nongerminomatous germ cell tumor (NGGCT) of mixed origin. Over the following 6 months, the patient underwent 6 cycles of chemotherapy per the Children's Oncology Group ACNS 1123 protocol, with alternating cycles of carboplatin/etoposide and ifosfamide/etoposide, which were complicated by diabetes insipidus. A repeat MRI revealed complete response of the suprasellar mass and a partial response of the pineal tumor, which became more cystic and measured 1.8 cm . CSF markers were normal (AFP = 2 ng/ml, β-hCG < 1 IU/L). Due to the persistence of the pineal tumor following chemotherapy, suggesting it to be a mature teratoma, second look surgery was planned, and microscopic en bloc resection was achieved via a supracerebellar infratentorial approach. Pathology revealed mature teratoma without residual immature germ cell components. The patient was neurologically intact after the surgery. Treatment proceeded with 6 weeks of craniospinal irradiation (CSI) with protons to 36 gray-relative biological effectiveness (GyRBE) followed by a boost to 54 GyRBE for the surgical bed and original sites of the pineal and suprasellar tumors. A follow-up MRI 1 month after completion of treatment revealed no discernable CNS disease.
Nine months following completion of proton therapy, the patient was noted to have an enlarged (2.5 cm) level V right cervical lymph node located outside the prior radiation field. It was initially thought to be reactive. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the node 4 months later showed stable enlargement and a necrotic center . A complete excisional biopsy 1 month later revealed recurrent pure germinoma. A thorough evaluation for additional disease was performed, including MRI of the brain and spine, whole body positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, CSF cytology, and tumor markers, all of which were negative, indicating an isolated extraneural recurrence. AFP and β-hCG were undetectable in both the serum and CSF.
Following consultation with our multi-disciplinary oncology conference, salvage therapy involving HDCT and ASCT followed by focal radiotherapy to the cervical node and adjacent lymphatic levels was planned. The treatment was adopted from work by Adra and colleagues for relapsed GGCTs and utilized two rounds of carboplatin (700 mg/m2) and etoposide (705 mg/m2), with ASCT and a 21-day break following each round. Treatment was complicated by recurrent episodes of diabetes insipidus and hypernatremia, requiring admissions to the pediatric intensive care unit to complete the regimen. He has since been followed closely and currently has no evidence of disease 35 months after diagnosis of recurrence, and 30 months after completing salvage therapy. Currently, the patient is presenting for routine follow-up with oncology and endocrinology services.