A 45-year-old Hispanic man was transported to our hospital after a blow with a dragline weight provoked head flexion. On presentation, he complained of lower-extremity numbness and pain in his back and around his abdomen. An examination revealed no point tenderness to palpation on his cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spine. The strength in the upper and lower extremities was preserved except for bilateral finger flexion weakness (motor grade 3). Hyporeflexia was noticed throughout. His rectal tone was normal. Hyperesthesia in a patchy distribution throughout his upper and lower extremities and patchy pinprick hypoesthesia in the lower extremities were observed. Proprioception was reduced only in his left toe.
A computed tomography scan of his cervical spine showed multilevel degenerative changes that were most severe at C3-4 but no fracture. Magnetic resonance imaging of his cervical spine demonstrated significant spondylotic spinal canal stenosis at the level of C3-4, increased intramedullary T2-weighted signal, and spinal cord atrophy at that level. The paraspinal soft tissues were within normal limits . The radiological picture was indicative of chronic spondylotic cervical myelopathy.
Because the clinical status of our patient was not worrisome, he was assigned to an intermediate hospital bed, and neurological and vital signs were monitored every 2 hours. On 2-hour vital sign controls, his systolic and diastolic blood pressures were above 120mmHg and above 70mmHg, respectively, throughout his stay and his heart rate was within the normal range of 70 to 85 beats per minute. Oxygen saturation was above 90% on 2 liters by nasal cannula. Throughout his hospital stay, our patient complained of intermittent subjective symptoms, such as paresthesias, whole-body pain, and fear of death, but the results of regular 2-hour exams did not show any worsening of the motor exam results. Approximately 8 hours after admission, a urinary catheter was introduced for increasing difficulty with urination. Two hours after placement of the urinary catheter, he was still stable. On the next 2-hour check (4 hours after the catheter placement), he was found in bed unresponsive. Immediate resuscitation was initiated but was not successful.
The autopsy revealed macroscopic signs of spinal cord necrosis extending along the entire cervical spinal cord to the mid-thoracic region . The microscopic examination showed diffusely scattered large eosinophilic degenerating neurons in a background of disintegrating glial tissue consistent with ischemic necrosis.