A 75-year-old woman was referred for treatment of general fatigue, new-onset orthopnoea, and severely reduced exercise capacity (New York Heart Association functional Class III). She had undergone combined aortic (Edwards Perimount Magna 19 mm) and mitral (Edwards Perimount magna 25 mm) surgical valve replacement 6 years ago.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) revealed severe mitral stenosis with a mean transvalvular gradient of 16 mmHg (; , Video S1). The mitral valve area was 0.5 cm2 measured by 3D TOE and 0.73 cm2 according to pressure half time (PHT) (, Video S2). In addition, concomitant moderate to severe mitral regurgitation was found, originating from two PVLs located medial and lateral from the surgical bioprosthesis . Normal function of the surgical aortic valve prosthesis (mean/peak gradient: 14/27 mmHg) as well as normal left ventricular function (ejection fraction: 60%) were documented.
Due to the complexity of the disease, cardiac multi-slice computed tomography (CT) was used for valve sizing, and assessment of the risk of left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. According to CT sizing, a bioprosthetic surface of 400.0 mm, a 3D annulus perimeter of 72.4 mm, a projected annulus perimeter of 71.4 mm, and an internal diameter of 22.4 mm were measured . A 26 mm Edwards Sapien 3 valve was simulated for evaluation of the risk of LVOT obstruction . LVOT area was 457.6 mm2, whereas the neo-LVOT area was 385.2 mm2 with minimal protrusion of the valve into the LVOT. This corresponds to a minimal relative LVOT reduction of 16%, almost excluding the risk of obstruction, Furthermore, the aortic–mitral angle was favourable with a value of 131.8°.
After completion of the pre-procedural workup, a multidisciplinary heart team evaluated the therapeutic recommendation. Risk scores were indicative of high surgical risk [Society of Thoracic Surgery-Predicted Risk Of Mortality (STS-PROM) score 9.6% and EuroSCORE II 10.01%], mainly because of pre-operation, previous stroke, and chronic kidney disease (glomerular filtration rate 36 mL/min). The decision was made to perform a transseptal mitral ViV procedure combined with the treatment of both PVLs using plug implantation via the same access. Written informed consent was obtained for the intervention and the publication.
The intervention was performed under general anaesthesia and TOE-guidance. A 8.5-Fr transseptal sheath and needle (BRK™ Transseptal needle; Abbott/St. Jude Medical) were introduced into the right femoral vein and advanced over a guiding wire into the right atrium. Transseptal puncture was performed at the postero-superior part of the fossa ovalis under TOE-guidance. An Agilis™ NxT Steerable Introducer (Abbott/St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) was used to orientate a multipurpose catheter towards the degenerated bioprosthesis. Subsequently, the prosthesis was crossed and a pre-shaped stiff wire (SAFARI2 Guidewire small curve; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was positioned in the apex of the left ventricle using a pigtail catheter. The sheath was exchanged for a 14-Fr eSheath (Edwards Lifescience). Atrial septostomy was performed using a 40 × 14 mm balloon (XXL Balloon Dilatation Catheter; Boston Scientific). The 26 mm Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve was advanced into the degenerated mitral bioprosthesis using both fluoroscopy- and TOE-guidance to facilitate crossing of the septum . The Sapien 3 valve was then slowly deployed under rapid pacing (160/min) taking care to align both valve inflows . Mean transmitral gradient decreased to 3 mmHg.
For PVL closure, a straight guidewire (EMERALD® Fixed-Core Guidewire; Cordis, Baar, Switzerland) supported by a 4 Fr straight catheter (Heartrail II straight; Terumo, Leuven, Belgium) was used to cross the medial PVL first. After exchange for an 8 French Amplatzer™ Torqvue™ 45° delivery system (Abbott/St. Jude Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA), a 10/5 mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug III (AVP III; Abbott/St. Jude Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA) was implanted reducing PVL to trace (and). In the same way, a second AVP III (8/4 mm) was positioned into the lateral PVL (and). At the end of the intervention overall mitral regurgitation was reduced to trace (, Videos S3 and S4).
No post-procedural complication occurs and the patient was discharged after 5 days under oral anticoagulation and acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day.