A 3-month-old male was seen in our pediatric oncology department because of a growing parotid gland mass. The mass was congenital and was followed by the pediatric oncology team with a prediagnosis of hemangioma. The patient’s magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed an infantile hemangioma in the proliferative phase filling the parapharyngeal space .
The child then received propranolol therapy, but despite this treatment the mass continued to grow, and the child was referred to our department at the age of 10 months. The otorhinolaryngological examination revealed an 8×7-cm mass filling the left parotid region, with normal facial nerve motor functions . Histopathological diagnosis of the mass was provided by an incisional biopsy as sialolipoma.
We planned to perform total excision of the mass with a transparotid approach. The facial nerve was monitored intra-operatively, and surgery was performed under magnification using surgical loops. A standard modified Blair incision was used, flaps were raised , then the facial nerve was identified in a standard fashion using a tragal pointer and posterior belly of the digastric muscle as landmarks.
The main trunk of the facial nerve was found to be unusually elongated before pes anserinus. A soft lobular mass was encountered. A tumor involving the superficial parotid lobe was first dissected, then the deep lobe of the parotid gland and portion of the tumor filling the parapharyngeal space were gently dissected under the facial nerve . A Jackson-Pratt drain was inserted into the wound after the excision of the tumor.
On macroscopic examination, the mass was found to be a lipomatous specimen, 9×8×4 cm in size. The cut surface was consistent with the appearance of a lipoma. Histopathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of a sialolipoma. The lesion was composed of mature adipose tissue mixed with acinar, ductal structures of a normal salivary gland .
The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient’s facial nerve motor functions were well preserved, and he was discharged on the third postoperative day. The patient is still followed, and has no signs of recurrence in his 24th postoperative month.