A 27-year-old female was referred to our hospital on May 16, 1996 and admitted due to a suspected malignant bone tumor in the left distal femur. On May 20, biopsy was performed. Histopathological examination demonstrated osteosarcoma, and preoperative chemotherapy was immediately performed according the chemotherapy protocol of our department for osteosarcoma. On September 25, wide resection was performed, and the affected limb was reconstructed using a tumor prosthesis (Howmedica Modular Reconstruction System: HMRS). Subsequently, postoperative chemotherapy was performed for about 6 months. On May 2007, about 11 years after the operation, she noticed pain in the left thigh during walking. Due to gradual aggravation of the pain, she visited our department on September 6, 2007. X-ray examination revealed fracture at the base of the stem of the femoral component . We planned revision using a tumor prosthesis, and obtained a custom-made femoral component stem (diameter, 12 mm; length, 15 cm). Until the completion of the stem, a knee-ankle-foot orthosis was employed, and crutches were used for walking. The preoperative score of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society was 60%. On November 7, 2007, revision surgery was performed. The wound was exposed using the previous skin incision. Bone formation at the stem base was good. Rectangular fenestration along the stem in the bone was performed in the proximal femur using a chisel, and the stem in the bone was removed. A new stem was inserted, and adequate grafting with Neobone and autogenous bone was performed around the stem. Only the bearing bush and femoral component were replaced with new ones, and the operation was completed . Two weeks after the operation, passive range-of-motion training was initiated. Until 6 weeks after surgery, no weight bearing was performed. Seven weeks after the operation, walking training was initiated using a knee orthosis with gradual weight bearing. The knee orthosis was used until 6 months after the operation. At present, about one year after surgery, good bone formation around the stem is observed on plain X-ray films. Evaluation using The Implant Evaluation System of the International Symposium on Limb Salvage showed excellent results for all items (Bone remodeling, Interface, Anchorage) after as well as before the operation . She can walk without using a cane or orthosis, and the score of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society is 80%.