B.S. a 4-year-old male child was admitted to the pediatric surgical ward at Jordan University Hospital because of two days history of swelling, redness and pain of his scrotum . There was no history of trauma. The pain was moderate, not characteristic of torsion, and not the chief complaint. Oral temperature was 37.8°C and pulse 94/min. Physical examination revealed bilateral red swollen scrotum, moderately hot and tender allowing examination of the testes, which were in normal position and of equal size and not tender. There was a small amount of fluid bilaterally detected on transillumination. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory work up showed Hb. 10.5 gm/dl, Hct. 32%, WBC 12.7 × 103/mm3 and normal serum amylase. Ultrasound examination confirmed the equal sized testes, with normal echogenicity, the presence of small amount of fluid in the scrotum, and the edematous scrotum. On further examination of the scrotum, a streak of redness extended along the midline raphe to the perineum, where a visible wire through an eroded perianal skin was seen . The patient underwent a Thiersch wire insertion for a rectal prolapse one year before. The patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics (Ampicillin, Gentamycin and Metronidazol). It was decided that the Thiersch wire has to be removed in theatre under general anesthesia. While examination under anesthesia the perineum appeared healthy, without signs of inflammation, or suppuration but moderate amount of induration. Rectal exam was normal; there was moderate narrowing and fibrosis at the anal verge. After removal of the wire the tract was intact with minimal discharge, which cleared in few days following wire removal. The sinus tract was very short lived and closed without any problems thereafter.
Culture taken from the site of the wound grew streptococcus fecalis sensitive to the administered antibiotics. The scrotal swelling and redness subsided gradually. The child was discharged without any complications. Follow up was uneventful for both the scrotal redness and swelling as well as the rectal prolapse.