A 23-year-old male patient presented to our institute in November 2016 with discharging sinus in the right axilla for 6 months. He had an alleged history of fall from bike in February 2016 after which he sustained a right pectoralis major muscle avulsion from its humeral attachment. Open repair was done with FiberWire® and endo buttons. In June 2016 (4 months after primary surgery), he developed discharging sinus from axillary region. Discharge was purulent scanty, intermittent, and non-foul smelling. There was no history of fever, weight loss, pain, or restriction of movements. Infection persisted in spite of empirical antibiotics. The wound was not surgically debrided before presentation.
He presented to us 5 months after developing the sinus. There was a well healed scar of the previous surgery, with a small sinus over anterior axillary fold in the superior part of the scar . Discharge was seropurulent and non-foul smelling. There was no tenderness, erythema, or other signs of inflammation around the sinus. Range of motion of shoulder joint was normal and free.
Radiographs showed intramedullar endo buttons in the proximal humerus . MRI of the right chest wall with sinography revealed marginal pus collection in the axillary region measuring 3.2 × 2.0 × 1.2 cm with minimal medial extension into pectoralis major and minor muscles along the superior aspect. Three sinus tracts leading from this collection were found converging into axillary discharging sinus at marker site . Rest of the bones and soft tissues of shoulder and chest wall appeared unremarkable.
Pre-operative consult with infectious disease (ID) specialist was sought. Detailed history was recorded, wound analyzed, and appropriate tissue sampling was recommended to the orthopedic team by the ID specialist. The ID specialist emphasized on the need for extended incubation suspecting slow growth pathogens such as cutibacterium acnes commonly seen infecting surgeries around the shoulder.
Exploration, debridement of anterior axillary abscess with implant removal was planned. Surgical planning included:
Proposed incision – must include the sinus and previous surgical scar Identifying the sinus tracts as delineated on the sinogram Tracing the sinuses to their origin Identifying all the suture materials within the pectoralis major muscle Excising all necrotic tissue and suture materials and send for aerobic, anaerobic, fungal, mycobacterial cultures, and histopathology; Incubate the tissues for an extended period Making an oval window in the humerus at the site on insertion of endo buttons Removing buttons and scraping adjacent medullary canal
Accordingly, a wide V-shaped incision was taken excising all the previous scar and sinus. Dissection was continued along the sinus tract going up to the humerus . The previous avulsion of tendon from the bone was found to be healed. FiberWire® suture and tape were identified and found to be embedded in substance of the lower half of sternal head of pectoralis major with surrounding infected granulation tissue . It was traced toward lateral chest wall leading to walled purulent collection, which was drained and walls excised. Second FiberWire® was then found in clavicular part of muscle which was then traced laterally to the endo button on humeral attachment . Bone window was created in proximal humerus and both endo buttons were removed (, and ). Intramedullary canal was scooped and scraped. FiberWire® and endo buttons were excised en masse along with the infected tissues around them . Samples were sent for histopathology and culture (bacterial, fugal, mycobacterial, and Gene Xpert). Post-operative radiograph showed oval window through which medullary canal was scraped .
The histopathology reported chronic inflammation with occasional suture granulomas. There was no evidence of malignancy or tuberculosis. Extended incubation of deep tissue culture as suggested by ID specialists grew Rapidly growing mycobacteria, a type of non-tuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) 3 weeks after surgery. Patient was started on intravenous amikacin along with oral clarithromycin and linezolid based on antibiotic susceptibility. Wound discharge persisted for almost 5-week post-surgery and stopped 2 weeks after initiation of appropriate antibiotics. Amikacin was given for 1 month and oral antibiotics were continued for 6 months as per international guidelines. Amikacin was stopped once inflammatory markers showed a downward trend and wound showed no evidence of active infection. Audiometry was done before starting Amikacin to rule out any sensory-neural deafness. Patient was advised to report any reduction in hearing during therapy. Blood parameters such as complete blood count, ESR, CRP, and renal function tests were monitored every 15 days to watch for side effects and trend in inflammatory markers. The pectoralis major function was unaffected after surgery and patient returned to normal activities 3 months after debridement. Patient has an infection free follow-up of 4 years .