A 26-year-old African-American woman, primigravida, at 16 weeks 4 days’ gestation, presented to our ED with increasing abdominal pain and a positive home pregnancy test. She admitted that she had not been receiving prenatal care. She also asked for a termination of this pregnancy, if we confirmed that it was “abnormal”.
She described 3 out of 10 (mild) bilateral abdominal pain but denied any vaginal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, headache, fever, chills, dysuria or hematuria. She reported 1 to 2 weeks of severe constipation, but denied any melena or hematochezia. She also denied any history of abnormal pap smears, sexually transmitted diseases, or abnormal menses. At the time of her ED presentation she was not on any medications. She had a one pack week cigarette smoking history but denied any alcohol or other drug use. She reported being sexually active with one partner. She further mentioned that she was at a nearby hospital where pregnancy was confirmed and further testing had been done from where she signed out against medical advice (AMA).
Her vital signs were: blood pressure (BP) 125/67 mmHg, pulse 115/minute, temperature 98.7 °F (37.1 °C), respiratory rate 16/minute, body mass index (BMI) 17.75 kg/m2, and oxygen saturation (SPO2) 99 %.
Her physical examination was only significant for a soft non-distended abdomen, with mild diffuse lower abdominal tenderness maximal in the left lower quadrant of her abdomen. A pelvic examination, including a speculum examination, documented a normal appearing cervix, no active bleeding, and non-tender adnexa; a bimanual examination confirmed her cervix was closed and her uterus was enlarged, approximately 8 weeks in size. In our ED, she was seen by Obstetrics/Gynecology consult service. Diagnostics included initial and interval laboratory testing, as well as imaging studies, which included an ultrasound of the abdomen (transvaginal and transabdominal), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a computed axial tomography (CAT) scan, (see Fig ) of her abdomen. The results were as follows:Initial laboratory results were hemoglobin (Hb) 9.8 (anemia), hematocrit (HCT) 27.2, platelets 148, white blood cell count (WBC) 7.4, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 4, creatinine 0.5, electrolytes were within normal ranges, albumin 2.9, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 33, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.1, prothrombin time (PT) 13.5, beta human chorionic gonadotropin (BHCG) 134,494, fibrinogen 439, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative and RH positive. MRI: intra-abdominal ectopic pregnancy with the placenta connected to the sacral plexus. Ultrasound of the abdomen (transvaginal and transabdominal), (see Fig ) as well as abdominal CAT scans with and without contrast showed uterus measuring 9.0×5.8×8.2 cm; no IUP; live intra-abdominal pregnancy was present within her pelvis, ventral to the uterus and measuring 7.2×12 cm.
She was counselled on termination of the pregnancy due to the gravity of the medical and surgical comorbidities, and she underwent feticide via ultrasound-guided fetal intracardiac potassium chloride injection on the second day after presentation, gestational age corresponding to 16 weeks and 6 days. She received four alternate doses of methotrexate on the third, fifth and seventh day from presentation with interval leucovorin rescue on alternate days and then had an infraumbilical laparotomy for pelvic exploration and planned fetus removal. A laparotomy was initiated and during the procedure it was found that there was extensive vascularity and attachment of the gestational sac to her omentum, mesentery, loops of bowel, lateral pelvic wall, and predominantly her uterine wall. The vascularity was mainly derived from the sacral plexus and the left external iliac artery, and the patient was deemed inoperable due to the high risk of hemorrhage, need for bowel resection, and potential hysterectomy. Consequently, no attempt was made to remove the gestational sac, the placenta was left in situ as well, and the planned fetus removal was deferred to a later date. She was discharged to follow-up at clinic for serial monitoring of her BHCG levels every week, and expectant management. She returned to our ED 11 weeks after feticide with complaints of abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding. A strategic decision was made to bring her to the Operating Room (OR) 2 days later for a second laparotomy, this time with lysis of adhesions, removal of abdominal pregnancy and left salpingo-oophorectomy, which was thought to be the primary site of implantation prior to secondary implantation in her peritoneum. She tolerated the intervention and no adverse or unanticipated event was noted. She was discharged and asked to follow-up with BHCG levels until her levels returned to normal and to return for any further complaints. She adhered to the advice and was counselled not to get pregnant for a year.
Two years later, she presented to our ED with abdominal pain and nausea. Diagnosis was made of a second ectopic pregnancy in her right fallopian tube, with gestational age corresponding to 6 weeks. She received expectant medical management with methotrexate administration: first dose on the day of presentation, second and third doses, 4 and 7 days after the first methotrexate dose was given. Her BHCG levels were monitored and were seen to trend down from 7026 mIU/ml to 5368 and 3739 and complete resolution of this second ectopic pregnancy was noted. She presented with abdominal pain at our ED approximately 8 months after her second ectopic pregnancy. A TVS confirmed a third ectopic pregnancy, at 5 weeks and 5 days of gestation, adjacent to her right ovary. An exploratory laparotomy was performed with right salpingotomy and ectopic removal after she consented to surgery.