A 25-year-old male presented to an outside emergency department (ED) with gradual onset flu-like symptoms, odynophagia, and shortness of breath over the preceding three to four days. Initial physical examination revealed no uvular swelling, oropharyngeal exudate, stridor, wheezing, or respiratory distress. Inflammatory markers were notable for a leukocytosis of 21.5 thousand per cubic millimeter (K/mm3) (reference range 4–11 K/mm3) and an elevated C-reactive protein of 11.8 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (0.0–0.4mg/dL). The initial treating clinician suspected a deep space neck infection and ordered computed topography (CT) imaging of the neck, which demonstrated edematous thickening of the epiglottis and mucosal hyperemia consistent with acute epiglottitis. Given a reported penicillin allergy, the patient received intravenous (IV) clindamycin (600 mg) and was transferred to our academic institution for otolaryngology evaluation.
On arrival, the patient was tachycardic but otherwise hemodynamically stable. Examination was notable only for a muffled voice. The emergency physician (EP) performed an immediate bedside nasopharyngolaryngoscopic (NPL) examination. Given the concern for imminent airway compromise, the EP preloaded a 6-0 endotracheal tube onto the scope. The NPL demonstrated severe swelling of the epiglottis and arytenoids with near complete upper airway obstruction . The EP performed an immediate awake intubation using ketamine (2mg/kilogram [kg] IV). Following intubation, the patient received dexamethasone (10 mg IV), vancomycin (20 mg/kg IV), and ceftriaxone (2 grams IV) and was admitted to the intensive care unit. Prior to administering ceftriaxone, the EP confirmed a remote history of a questionable rash to penicillin. Therefore, the EP deemed the cephalosporin safe and appropriate.
The following lab tests were negative: HIV types 1 and 2 antibody and p24 antigen; hepatitis B viral surface antigen; hepatitis C viral antibody and ribonucleic acid; streptococcus rapid screen; monoscreen; blood, throat, and sputum cultures; and rapid influenza type A and B antigens. A respiratory pathogen panel was negative for other viruses. A nasopharyngeal reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction swab (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX) was positive for COVID-19.
The patient improved clinically and was extubated on hospital day five. The inpatient team discontinued the steroid and antibiotics and discharged the patient home on hospital day seven without complications.