A 10 years and 10 months old girl was admitted into our hospital with a complaint of recurrent wheezing and breathlessness during exercise for several months five years ago. At that time, respiratory tract infection, foreign body aspiration, airway developmental anomalies, cardiovascular diseases, and tumors, assessed by chest computed tomography (CT), CT angiography (CTA), bronchoscopy, and echocardiography, were excluded. The diagnosis of asthma was considered, based on the history of allergic rhinitis, elevated level of serum eosinophil (6.8 × 109/L, reference, 0–0.8 × 109/L), and immunoglobulin E (IgE, 1128 IU/mL; reference: 0–165 IU/mL), a reversible airway obstruction detected by spirometry (resulting in a ≥ 12% increase in the predicted FEV1) and a positive response to the therapy of rapid acting β2-agonist and inhaled glucocorticoids. The child’s adherence to the treatment and adequate performance of the inhalation technique were confirmed. Yet, her asthma was refractory to initial treatment. The symptoms of asthma were gradually brought under control, with the use of double inhaled glucocorticosteroid and leukotriene modifier, over a period of three years, at which time the dosage was gradually decreased. Eight months prior to the current admission, all drugs had been withdrawn, without a relapse of asthma. However, symptoms of allergic rhinitis did not resolve, with intermittent elevation of serum levels of eosinophils persisting. Additionally, the patient complained of recurrent petechia on her lower limbs, occurring on average once per year, over the past three years. Unfortunately, all these signs failed to gain clinicians’ attention and no further examinations were performed.
At this time, she was admitted to our hospital with a one-month history of lower extremity numbness, arthralgia and myalgia of lower limbs with claudication, but without fever, edema, fatigue or weight loss. There was no history of trauma prior to the onset of these symptoms. On admission, the physical examination revealed decreased skin temperature of both lower limbs, swelling of the left calf, subcutaneous nodules and palpable purpura below the knee. Pulse of the dorsal pedis and radial arteries were absolutely absent. No other positive findings were identified. For the auxiliary examination, a peak eosinophilia of 7.33 × 109/L (51.5%, reference: 0–8%) was detected on complete blood analysis. An elevated serum level of IgE (referred to 1710 IU/mL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 34 mm/h (reference: 0–26 mm/h) were observed. The possibility of tuberculosis or parasite infection was not considered as there was no history of probable contact, as well as negative results on the BCG, PPD test and T-SPOT, with no specific parasite antibodies identified (Fascioliasis, Clonorchiasis, Paragonimiasis, Schistosomiasis, Toxoplasma). As well, all other laboratory tests were within normal limits, including urinalysis, hepatic function, renal function, myocardial function, coagulation function, blood gas analysis, serum level of glucose, blood ammonia, lipid panel, C-reaction protein (CRP), autoantibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs, including p-ANCA and c-ANCA) and human leucocyte antigen-B27 (HLA-B27). Marrow cytology inspection suggested a proliferation of granulocytes and an elevated percentage of eosinophil, which excluded the possibility of common blood system diseases. Remarkably, extensive occlusion of the anterior tibial and dorsal pedis arteries were identified, bilaterally, using a vascular ultrasound examination. Electromyogram (EMG) revealed a deficit of both motor and sensory fibers of peripheral nerves, suggestive of a peripheral neuropathy. Combined with the significant history of asthma, eosinophilia> 10%, recurrent petechia, peripheral neuropathy, and the vascular findings, the suspicion of EGPA was strongly raised.
However, since EGPA rarely occurs in children, more comprehensive examinations were carried out to confirm our hypothesis. A change of ground-glass opacities and nodule was found on the middle lobe of the right lung on chest CT imaging . The skin biopsy, obtained from a petechia on the patient’s left lower extremity, demonstrated eosinophilic infiltration and necrotizing vasculitis, characterized by neutrophils and mixed lymphocyte infiltration, striking fibrinoid necrosis, endothelial and muscle cell necrosis in peri-vascularly and the dermis, but absence of granuloma formation. Based on the 1984 Lanham criteria and the 1990 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria , the diagnosis of EGPA was ultimately established. There was no evidence of ear, nose and throat (ENT), ocular, gastrointestinal, and cardiac manifestations. Hydrocortisone (10 mg/kg/d) treatment was initiated for a period of five days, subsequently followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/d). The treatment was sufficient to achieve partial control of her status.
Unfortunately, five days later, the purpura attacked her lower limbs, as well as an ulceration with purulent exudate, sized 3 cm*4 cm in the left leg . She was treated with the antibiotics and debridement for a period of 3 days, but with any remission. New findings were observed on vascular ultrasound, namely, occlusion of the distal portion and of the posterior tibial arteries, and thrombo-arteritis of the radial and ulnar arteries. Systemic CTA identified extensive stenosis and/or occlusion of shank and foot arteries with formation of collateral vessels . For our low recognition and poor awareness of EGPA in children, we failed to perform a comprehensive evaluation for vasculitis and provide the patient with an inadequate therapy of corticosteroid (hydrocortisone) during her initial period of hospitalization. After the overall evaluation of her condition, intravenous methylprednisolone (15 mg/kg/d) was initiated for three days, and then a sequential therapy of oral prednisone (2 mg/kg/d) was continued. Antithrombotic treatment (clopidogrel: 25 mg daily, intracutaneous injection of nadroparin: 88.5 IU /Kg q12h, phentolamine: 5 μg/kg/min) was also initiated. The administration of oral methotrexate (12.5 mg per week) was started on day 7 after the end of the methylprednisolone treatment. Ultimately, control of the vasculitis was achieved and the patient was discharged home after the purpura gradually disappeared and the ulcer healed, with a return to normal levels of peripheral eosinophil count and ESR. Oral medication was prescribed, consisting of prednisone, methotrexate, clopidogrel, folic acid, and beraprost sodium. After a six-month period of stability in the disease status, methotrexate was continued, with tapering of the prednisone, without relapse.