A 13-year-old girl (body mass – 45 kg, heigh – 152 cm, body surface area – 1,38 m2) was referred to our institution with persistent cough as a leading symptom, which started two months ago. No trauma history, no infection, no genetic diseases (Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease) or previous surgical interventions were present. Her physical examination was found to be normal. The blood pressure was measured on the right arm 107/60 mm Hg and on the left arm 105/58 mm Hg. Heart rate was 80 beats per minute and peripheral oxygen saturation at 98%.
Chest x-ray showed asymmetric upper mediastinal mass with a clear outer contour. Echocardiography showed echofree formation with a clear outer contour of 5.0*4.0 cm at the level of the aortic arch, tricuspidal aortic valve. Computed tomography (CT) of aorta visualized distal arch aneurysms up to 5.18*3.63*3.47 cm and up to 4.45*2.20*1.67 cm behind the ostium of the left subclavian artery, ascending aorta – 1,96 cm, aortic root – 2,78 cm, sinotubular junction – 2,37 cm .
The patient was taken to the operating room where a combined surgical approach was utilized. Surgery was performed during a single operative session. Firstly, the left supraclavicular approach was performed. The left subclavian artery was dissected, doubly ligated, and divided. It was then connected to the left common carotid artery by means of a native end-to-side anastomosis using a continuous prolene 6/0 stitch . The skin in this area was closed. After that, the patient underwent a left-sided thoracotomy through the 4th intercostal space where the descending thoracic aorta was carefully and extensively mobilized within the 3rd and 4th pairs of intercostal arteries with no touch of the aneurysm wall . For this reason, 2 pairs of intercostal arteries were transected. A chest drainage tube was inserted in the left hemithorax, and the thoracotomy incision was stitched as well. Then the patient was returned to the supine position on the operative table, and midline sternotomy was performed. After initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass with ascending aorta and right atrium cannulation, the patient was cooled to + 28°C. The aorta was cross-clamped in two separate locations: the first clamp was placed right distally from the brachiocephalic artery, and the second one on the previously prepared segment of the descending thoracic aorta. The pump speed was reduced to 15% according to initial blodflow during CPB, and antegrade cerebral perfusion were started and lasted over 12 min. The aneurysmal sac was punctured, and there was no sign of retrograde blood flow within it. The aneurysm was successfully resected, and the aorta was reconstructed in an end-to-end anastomosis fashion using continuous prolene 5/0 .The transected intercostal arteries were pulled toward health part of the aortic arch during the final stage of surgery. The patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass and transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit.“
Histological evaluation of the wall of the aneurysm in our patient revealed no evidence of any specific changes. On CT of aorta on fourth day after the surgery the brachiocephalic trunk and the left common carotid artery (the left subclavian artery is sutured to the left common carotid artery) were identified . A small hematoma was persisting in the anterior mediastinum on the left.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on the eleventh post-operative day. No complain was recorded at a routine examination one year after the surgery.