A 63-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital for chronic hepatitis C treatment. His initial physical examination results were unremarkable. An initial liver profile included aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 60IU/mL, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 74IU/mL, total bilirubin 1mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 81IU/mL, albumin 5.2g/dL, and a prothrombin time (PT) of 76%. Serum viral load was estimated to 3,545,770IU/mL (6.5log) with a genotype 2a2c. The assessment of liver fibrosis by FibroTest® and FibroScan® revealed a stage F2 of fibrosis. An abdominal ultrasound did not find any signs of portal hypertension or cirrhosis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy did not find any endoscopic signs of portal hypertension. He was started on a course of treatment comprising PEG-interferon α2a (PEGASYS®) 180μg subcutaneously per week and ribavirin 800mg/day in divided doses orally. A rapid virological response was obtained after four weeks.
In the fifth week of treatment, he reported painful paresthesia, tingling, numbness, and weakness of his lower extremities. His neurological symptoms progressed rapidly over the course of one week to the point of losing the ability to ambulate. In addition, our patient also complained of tingling and numbness in the upper extremities involving the fingers and wrists bilaterally. PEGASYS® was discontinued due to an acute onset of weakness of the upper and lower extremities. A neurological examination revealed normal cranial nerves with normal bulk of muscles and tone; but weak muscle strength in the upper extremities as well as in the hips, knees, ankles and toes bilaterally. His tendon reflexes were diminished significantly. A sensory examination revealed decreased light touch, pinprick, and temperature sensation from the feet to mid-calves as well as hands, except for vibratory sense. A clinical diagnosis of acquired acute inflammatory demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy was made. Biochemical screening tests, complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, anti-nuclear antibodies, serum cryoglobulin level, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test and cytomegalovirus (CMV) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) were all normal. The results of an electromyogram (EMG) revealed evidence of predominant motor polyneuropathy with prominent demyelinating features, including motor conduction block, low conduction velocity, and prolonged minimum F wave latency in the bilateral ulnar, median, peroneal, and tibial nerves . Our patient recovered completely after one month of stopping interferon (without stopping ribavirin) and symptomatic treatment. His muscle weakness and paresthesia were markedly improved, with normal strength in all muscle groups; eventually he could walk without difficulty. A further EMG showed a disappearance of neuropathy. Four weeks later, IFN was reintroduced with a gradually increasing dose (90μg for two months, then 120μg for one month followed by 180μg for the two remaining months) without reappearance of neurological symptoms. He has not experienced relapse and his neurological status remained stable. His viral load of hepatitis C was negative at week 24 and six months after stopping treatment. Currently our patient is well and his neurological symptoms have resolved completely with no residual neuromuscular deficits.