A 41 month-old female with a history of prenatally diagnosed giant omphalocele that was repaired at nine months of age following epithelialization of the sac and gradual reduction of the omphalocele. She presented to the emergency room with a three-day history of left upper quadrant abdominal pain, fatigue, one episode of non-bloody, non-bilious emesis and fever to 102 F. Physical examination noted a well-healed abdominal midline scar but did not elicit abdominal tenderness or palpable mass. Abdominal plain film was significant for a mass within the left flank (Figure ). White blood cell count was elevated to 17.54 103 uL, the hematocrit was 31.2 and platelet count was 279 103 uL. A CT scan showed the spleen to be located in the left flank, vertically oriented with the hilum facing laterally (Figure ). There was loss of all parenchymal architecture and a thin rim of capsular enhancement, indicative of global infarction. A thickened and swirled appearance of the splenic hilum was observed with a cuff of fat surrounding the poorly enhancing splenic vessels, consistent with a torsed splenic pedicle. Significant edema was also found around the splenic region. The previously known intestinal malrotation had not changed. The supra hepatic inferior vena cava was markedly displaced anteriorly as is typically noted in with children a history of large omphaloceles. Due to the delayed presentation (3 days following onset of symptoms) and imaging features suggestive of global infarction of the spleen, we discussed the management options with the child’s parents and opted to proceed with non-operative management. Supportive care was provided until the abdominal pain resolved. She was immunized against encapsulated organisms and placed on daily prophylactic penicillin. She was tolerating a regular diet without fever or emesis by the time she was discharged home on hospital day 5. The family was counseled about the risks of overwhelming sepsis in the absence of a functioning spleen and to return for any signs of abdominal pain or worsening symptoms. She was seen in the emergency department 16 days following discharge complaining of abdominal pain but was afebrile. Ultrasonography was consistent with previous findings except the spleen size decreased from 11.3 cm to 9.4 cm. She was discharged home without subsequent hospital admissions. At 19 months follow up the patient reports no further abdominal pain and has tolerated a regular diet. She has maintained penicillin antibiotic prophylaxis without episodes of overwhelming post-splenectomy infections. She has been able to avoid surgery with no adverse effect.