A 76-year-old woman presented to our Department of Ophthalmology complaining of painless vision loss in her left eye 48 hours after she had received her first dose of the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine. The patient was known to have hypothyroidism, but no previous history of cardiovascular disease, hypercoagulable state, malignancy or diabetes.
A nasopharyngeal swab (PCR test) on admission ruled out an ongoing COVID-19 infection. Her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye, but only hand movement in the left eye. Left eye ophthalmologic examination showed a nonreactive mydriasis, and dilated fundus ophthalmoscopy revealed the presence of arterial narrowing and a cherry red spot with central retinal whitening. Optical coherence tomography showed severe macular swelling of the inner retinal layers in the left eye ( A, B). Fluorescein angiography performed the following day confirmed the diagnosis of CRAO evident by a severe delay in the filling of the retinal arteries in the early arterial phase and an obscuring of the background choroidal fluorescence by retinal swelling in the late phase ( A, B).
The patient was, therefore, admitted for inpatient management and was treated with:Ocular massage 500 ml Pentoxifylline i.v. once/day Dorzolamide eye drop 3 times/day as a hypotensive agent. Aspirine 100 mg once/day
The cardiovascular examination including normal ECG and Holter ECG was unremarkable. Complete blood count and other blood tests were within normal limits, without thrombocytopenia . A subsequent cerebral CT and CT-angiography scans did not show any other acute vascular event. Doppler angiography of the carotid artery was performed and showed normal flow without clinically significant plaques, stenoses, occlusions or dissections.
Giant cell arteritis could be excluded by normal values of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR 20, 70 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein (4.9 mg/L.). In addition, patient had no headache, no temporal artery tenderness, and no decreased temporal artery pulse.