A 51-years-old Pakistani male, without any known medical co-morbidity, presented to the emergency department at our institution with a 1 day history of sudden-onset and severe abdominal pain along with abdominal distension. The pain had started after a long drive of 12 - 14 hours. It was initially localized to the right upper quadrant and right lumbar region but had evolved to a more generalized distribution over time. The pain was aggravated on movement and relieved by rest. There were no other associated symptoms. His past surgical history was significant for a repaired left sided inguinal hernia 10 years back.
The patient was in obvious anxiety and distress when first encountered in the emergency room. His vital signs were stable except for an increased pulse of 105 beats per minute. Examination of his respiratory system revealed vesicular breathing with decreased intensity of breath sounds in the right lung base as well as dullness on percussion on the right side of the chest. His abdomen was distended with generalized tenderness on palpation and minimal movement with respiration. No organomegaly was appreciated on the physical examination. His bowel sounds were sluggish.
The laboratory tests done at the time of admission are shown in table . The patient had mild anemia, mildly reduced hematocrit, leukocytosis with neutrophilia and hyponatremia. His serum amylase, lipase and random blood sugar levels were all within normal limits. His abdominal x-ray showed sub-optimal inspiration with minimal right sided pleural effusion. However, there were no signs of intestinal obstruction or pneumoperitoneum noted. Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was done. Gallbladder margins were not very clearly identifiable; there was significant pericholecystic fat stranding with pericholecystic fluid. A circular high density focus in the proximity of gallbladder was identified which was thought to be representing a gallstone. Mild ascites was also present. These features were collectively suggestive f gallbladder perforation. The patient's emergent management included nothing per oral status, regular vitals and input/output charting, insertion of nasogastric tube, administration of intravenous fluids, narcotic analgesics, proton pump inhibitors, metochlopramide, ceftriaxone, metronidazole, and ampicillin.
The patient was then taken to the operating room and a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. It revealed free yellowish green fluid, most likely bilious, in the peritoneum. As the triangle of Calot could not be identified on laparoscopy, the procedure was converted to an open laparotomy. Intra-operative findings included presence of frank bile in the abdomen and a thick walled gall bladder. Dense adhesions of the gall bladder with surrounding structures were observed. A small perforation was visible near the neck of gall bladder in association with a large gall stone. The anatomy of the Calot's triangle was still obscure. A near-total or partial cholecystectomy including the perforated area was performed and a single large gall stone measuring around 2 × 1 cm was retrieved. The peritoneal cavity was washed with copious amounts of normal saline and a drain was placed. The rectus sheath was closed with loop polydioxanon (PDS) but the wound was kept open for healing by delayed primary closure.
Histopathology of the specimen showed full thickness gallbladder wall lined by mucosa with focal ulceration. Rokitansky aschoff sinuses were also seen. A pathological diagnosis of acute on chronic cholecystitis was made.
The patient's hospital course was uneventful. His symptoms significantly improved and he was discharged from the hospital on the third post-operative day. He returned to the clinic after one week when his drain was removed and his wound closed.