A 33-year-old female (G0P0) had attempted pregnancy for more than two years of regular, unprotected sexual intercourse. Her menstruation was regular, with normal ovulation and an anti-Müllerian hormone concentration of 1.03 ng/mL. Her basic endocrine parameters were as follows: follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 10.3 IU/L; luteinizing hormone (LH), 6.5 IU/L; and estradiol (E2), 127 pmol/mL. She had 5–6 antral follicles, experienced moderate dysmenorrhea, and had a CA125 concentration of 23.6 IU/mL. B-mode ultrasound revealed two dense, dot-like echoes of 4.4 × 3.5 and 1.8 × 1.5 cm, respectively, in the right ovary, consistent with chocolate cysts; hysterosalpingography revealed a normal uterus, distal obstruction of the right fallopian tube, and proximal obstruction of the left fallopian tube. The patient had no history of surgery and no known family history of malignancy. Gynecological examination revealed the following: a vulva typical of a nulliparous, sexually active female; smooth vaginal mucosa; no haphalgesic nodules in the posterior fornix; a smooth cervix; an anteverted, normal-sized uterus with fair activity; and in the right adnexa, a cyst the size of a hen’s egg, exhibiting no tenderness. Semen examination of the husband revealed no abnormalities. Karyotype analysis was normal for both the patient and her husband. We diagnosed the patient with primary infertility; an ovarian endometriotic cyst; a pelvic inflammatory disease sequela (bilateral fallopian tube obstruction); and a declined ovarian reserve. Considering her declined ovarian reserve, surgery might have further reduced ovarian function.
We carefully explained the findings to the patient and her husband, and recommended IVF, to accumulate embryos, followed by surgical treatment, as necessary. As a result, the patient received luteal phase support via long-acting agonist treatment, according to our center’s long protocol for ovarian stimulation. To be specific, we injected the patient with 1.5 mg triptorelin acetate. After 20 days, the down-regulation standard was achieved (E2, 98.2 pmol/mL; FSH, 3.23 IU/L; LH, 0.34 IU/L; progesterone, 0.48 pg/mL), and we proposed a change of regimen to Gn. We conducted a re-examination via ultrasound, which revealed that the cyst in the right ovary was approximately the same size as before. As the cyst interfered with antral follicle counting and would interfere with subsequent follicle monitoring, we recommended that the patient receives transvaginal ovarian cyst puncture. We used a 17G ovum aspiration needle to puncture the right ovarian cyst under transvaginal ultrasound guidance, and approximately 12 mL of a dark-brown, viscous liquid was extracted for cytological examination. We observed a small amount of epithelial cells against a background of abundant red blood cells . Its morphology was atypical .
After receiving ethical approval and repeatedly communicating with the patient and her husband, they requested us to initiate IVF-assisted reproduction, to accumulate embryos, before surgical treatment of the cyst. Therefore, we initiated the 10-day COS process by injecting the patient with 300 IU human menopausal Gn. We retrieved eight metaphase-II oocytes, eight two-pronuclear oocytes, and six day-3 embryos, the latter of which were immediately cryopreserved. In the following month, we conducted laparoscopic cystectomy of the right ovarian endometriotic cyst. During surgery, we observed that the right ovary had increased in size to approximately 7 × 6 × 4 cm and contained multiple separated cysts, filled with a chocolate-like liquid. No abnormality was observed in the left adnexa. Postoperative histopathological results suggested a right ovarian endometriotic cyst. Three months after the surgery, frozen embryo transplantation (FET) was performed using two embryos, and an artificial FET cycle with down-regulation was adopted to successfully induce clinical pregnancy.