A female, 16 years old, was presented with epilepsy, developmental delay and cerebellar atrophy.
Weakness of muscles was noticed at age 2 years old. At 1 year of age, she developed clinical seizures. Her seizure types include twitching movements, starting episodes, cluster seizures, and spasms. At a year and a half, there was only partial response to anti-convulsive therapy. Subsequently, global developmental delay was noted by 2 years old of age, there was no speech, and she needed assistance with daily life activities.
She was vigorous in the newborn period and passed her newborn disease screening, began walking around the age of 18 mo.
The patient was the second child of the family (non-consanguineous), her mother was 33 years old. She was born at full term with normal birth parameters, the pregnancy was normal, there was no known teratogenic exposure.
The parents does not have a personal history of seizures, nor is there a family history seizures.
Clinical examination documented the eyes were deep set with nystagmus, a small nose with nasalbridge .
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed commercially at Berrygenomics on the patient and her parents. Sequencing was performed on Illumina Novaseq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, United States), using the Nano WES Human Exome V1.0 (Berrygenomics, Beijing, China) kit with 200 bp paired-end read, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Annotation of variants was performed using GATK , gnomAD , 1000genomes , SIFT , FATHMM , MutationAssessor , OMIM , ClinVar , HGMD .
Sequence analysis of exon 28 and 12 of PIGN, using genomic DNA from the patient and her parents were performed by amplification of a 438 bp and 239 bp fragment containing the putative mutation identified via exome sequencing. The sense primer sequence was 5’-TAAGTCAGTTTCATCACCGTTCTAT-3’ and the antisense primer sequence was 5’-ATTTCCTCTAATGACAAGCAACAC-3’ for exon 28. The sense primer sequence was 5’-TCTAGCAAATGACACTTTTAGAGA-3’, and the antisense primer sequence was 5’-TTCCTTACCACTGAGTTAAGAGG-3’ for exon 12.
Neuropsychological testing demonstrated moderate intellectual disability. Brain imaging showed the progression of mild global cerebral volume loss and cerebellar atrophy. The parents could not provide the results of previous test, including brain magnetic resonance imaging, various metabolic tests.