A 37 years old woman (E) presented with walking difficulties. The first symptoms began 4 years prior to presentation when she noticed walking more slowly. She had no other complaints, denied previous and current use of drugs. Some other members of her family also experienced gait problems. On neurological examination, she had spastic gait, symmetrical proximal weakness of the lower extremities (quadriceps and gluteal muscle), mild spasticity in hamstrings, quadriceps, adductors, gastrocnemius, and soleus. Increased deep tendon reflexes and Babinski sign were present bilaterally. She denied sphincter dysfunction. Her cognition was normal.
Laboratory tests did not reveal any abnormalities in blood count, electrolytes value, coagulation test, renal, hepatic or thyroid functions. C-reactive protein was ‹ 1 mg/L. Vitamin B12 level was normal. The nerve conduction study and evoked visual potentials were normal. Spinal and brain MR showed normal appearance of corpus callosum and did not find any cause of pyramidal syndrome. She was diagnosed with progressive pyramidal syndrome exclusively involving lower extremities. Her initial diagnosis was HSP.
After a written consent was obtained from the patient, the blood was taken for genetic testing. Molecular DNA analysis of the SPAST gene was performed. The Sanger sequencing method revealed mutation in one allele of SPAST gene: c.1390G›T(p.Glu464Term). This variant was not registered in the following genetic public database: HGMD, LOVD, NCBI ClinVar, dbSNP and ExAC. To determine pathogenicity in silico of this variant we used online prediction programs: Mutation Taster , SIFT/Provean , PolyPhen-2 . Also, the blood samples for DNA testing were collected from 7 other available family members. The work was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The same mutation was identified in 3 other probands (A,F,G). The pathogenicity of the novel mutation found in this study was categorized according to the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics . Under this criteria this mutation was classified as pathogenic (Criteria: PVS1, PM1, PM2, PM4).
Patient (A), 56 years old woman, did not complain of any neurological symptoms or gait difficulties but presented with brisk reflexes and bilateral Babinski sign on neurological examination.
Patient F, 57 years old woman, suffered from polio disease when he was 8, with right hemiparesis and full recovery after a few months. At the age of 37, he experienced increasing walking difficulties. He was diagnosed with post-polio syndrome. At the age of 39 he was unable to work as a carpenter.
On neurological examination, he had spastic gait with heel strike progressively shifted forward, and asymmetrical proximal weakness of the lower extremities, more advanced on the right one. Severe spasticity in quadriceps, hamstrings, thigh adductor muscles, gastrocnemius and soleus was also found. Increased deep tendon reflexes in lower limbs and Babinski sign were present bilaterally. He denied sphincter dysfunction. His cognition was normal.
Another family member (G), 51 years old man, started to experience problems in her late thirties. She was admitted to the hospital in 2007. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and laboratory tests did not reveal any abnormalities. The nerve conduction study was normal. The cervical and thoracic MR shoved disc herniation with suspicion of spinal cord suppression on multiple levels. Patient was discharged from the hospital with diagnosis of lower limb spasticity due to disc herniation: Th6/Th7 and Th8/TH9 and qualified for neurosurgery. Before agreeing to the surgery she sought neurosurgery consultation in another clinic. She had another thoracic spine MR, confirming multilevel disc herniation, but the signal of the spine was not changed, therefore she was disqualified from operation. Since that time, she observed slow progression of disability despite constant rehabilitation.
On neurological examination, she had spastic gait, symmetrical weakness of the lower limbs, mild spasticity in hamstrings, quadriceps, adductors, gastrocnemius, and soleus. Increased deep tendon reflexes in lower limbs and Babinski sign were present bilaterally. She did not report any sphincter dysfunction. Her cognition was normal.
The other genotyped family members (B,C,D,H) had no clinical and neurological symptoms and signs, and did not carry the mutation.
Our observational study indicates that novel variant c.1390G›T(p.Glu464Term) in SPAST gene is associated with HSP.
Patient has provided informed consent for publication of the case.