A 33-year-old man visited an outpatient clinic with haematuria and proteinuria. One year later, the patient was diagnosed with IgA nephropathy by a renal biopsy and was treated with diet and medication. At 36 years of age, his began to experience fatigue and weight loss. He was had generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and elevated CRP levels, and his IL-6 level had gradually increased. Chest CT revealed slight enlargement of the mediastinal lymph nodes, centrilobular nodules, thickening of the bronchovascular bundles, and ground-glass opacities. These clinical findings were consistent with MCD. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and HIV screening were negative. His renal function gradually declined over the following decade, resulting in ESRD. At 44 years of age, peritoneal dialysis was started for the treatment of ESRD, and an inguinal lymph node biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis, revealing the typical features of plasma cell-type MCD. Oral prednisolone (PSL) (10 mg/day) was initially administered; however, none of his clinical or laboratory parameters were fully resolved.
At 45 years of age, he was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment including living-donor KTx. To histopathologically determine the primary cause of ESRD (i.e., IgA nephropathy, AA amyloidosis, or other causes) and to make a pathological diagnosis of his interstitial lung disease, renal and lung biopsies, respectively, were performed. Similar to the immunostaining findings of the inguinal lymph nodes, which showed significant deposits of IgA and IL-6 , lung biopsy specimens showed plasma cell proliferation with positive staining for IgA and IL-6 , and renal biopsy specimens showed predominant IgA deposition in the glomerular mesangium . These findings led us to the possible diagnosis of MCD with lung involvement complicated by ESRD associated with IgA nephropathy. Since treatment with oral PSL failed to suppress the disease activity of MCD, the therapeutic regimen was changed to intravenous TCZ (8 mg/kg, every 2 weeks), which successfully controlled his MCD symptoms without the further exacerbation of his lung disease.
At 50 years of age, he had recurrent peritonitis and therefore decided to undergo KTx. Preoperatively, tacrolimus (TAC) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) were administered starting 5 days before transplantation. TAC was administered at 0.1 mg/kg/day, and the trough level was maintained at 8–12 ng/mL for the first few weeks after transplantation. MMF was administered at a dosage of 1000 mg twice daily. In addition, induction with intravenous methylprednisolone (mPSL; 1 dose of 500 mg) and basiliximab (1 dose of 20 mg) therapy was administered on the day of transplantation. Basiliximab was also administered 4 days after transplantation. mPSL was gradually tapered to 40 mg by the end of the first post-transplantation week and switched to an oral formulation. To prevent over-immunosuppression, TCZ was discontinued after transplantation. However, the extension of the interval between TCZ administrations was associated with a slight increase in the patient’s CRP levels, but his constitutional symptoms did not reappear, and after the repeated administration of TCZ (8 mg/kg, every 2 weeks), improvements in his CRP levels were immediately noted .
The patient’s IL-6 levels decreased dramatically after transplantation and are now maintained at 300–500 pg/ml under immunosuppression with a triple-drug regimen (TAC, MMF and mPSL) with TCZ . In addition, the patient experienced increases in albumin, haemoglobin and haematocrit (data not shown), along with normalized CRP and IgG .
On post-operative days 20 and 238, a transplant renal biopsy was performed and showed no rejection or virus infection. To evaluate for the presence of anti-HLA antibodies, a single-antigen bead assay (LABScreen Single Antigen) was performed. DSA was negative both before transplantation and on post-operative day 239.
At present, 17 months after KTx, the patient remains asymptomatic, and the allograft function has been preserved without evidence of rejection. In addition, haematologic follow-up has not demonstrated any significant adverse effects of TCZ (such as dyslipidaemia or myelosuppression) or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection events.