The patient, a Caucasian six-year-old girl, was born at term by nonconsanguineous, healthy parents, with a birth weight of 3.160kg. Her newborn screening test results for cystic fibrosis, performed by immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) measurement, were positive on the third and fifteenth day. Her sweat test showed borderline results of chlorine 44mEq/L and 48mEq/L (normal value (n.v.) <40mEq/L). The genetic analysis of the CFTR gene showed compound heterozygosis of ∆F508-R1438W in cis and Y032C in trans mutations (Table ). In the first year's growth, her respiratory system and respiratory functions were normal. In fact, at the age of six years, her weight was 20kg (35th percentile for age), her body mass index (BMI) was 14.4 (24th percentile for age); at spirometry, her forced vital capacity (FVC) was 90% and forced expiratory volume (FEV)1 92%, and she had always presented with a low amount of fecal elastase-1.
At six years old, the patient was treated for acute abdominal pain, anorexia and fever. She presented with abdominal pain radiating to the back, mild muscular guarding, decreased bowel sounds and mild scleral icterus. Her laboratory examination results showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 51mm/h, increased values of total bilirubin (2.67mg/dL) and direct bilirubin 1.80mg/dL, pancreatic amylase (305U/L, n.v. 0 to 46U/L) and total amylases (465U/L, n.v. 28 to 100U/L) and lipase (310U/L, n.v. 0 to 60U/L). An ultrasound evaluation of the abdomen showed parenchymal hyperechogenity of the pancreas with no images of biliary calculi, or hepatic alterations. Venous rehydration, bowel rest and therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid were successfully performed, with normalization of her symptoms and laboratory parameters within four weeks.
At present, general conditions are good. Her respiratory function is normal on spirometric evaluation, and she is not presenting with bacterial colonization in the respiratory tract. Pancreatic and digestive functions are good: her weight is on the 25th percentile, her height is on the 75th percentile, her pancreatic amylase value and total amylases are within the normal range.