A 56-year-old Asian woman presented with respiratory distress and episodes of apnea at night. During the laryngoscopy, a 1.5×2.0cm tumor was identified in the area of the left arytenoids. The laryngeal inlet was hidden beneath the protruding tumor, but the upper esophageal sphincter was free from the tumor. The upper parapharynx wall of the left vocal cord was protruding toward the pharyngeal cavity (Figure
). The left vocal cord was fixed. The patient had no previous medical or family history except for hypertension. No enlarged lymph nodes were found in the neck during palpation. The remainder of the physical examination, which included ophthalmologic and dermatologic tests, was also negative.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a non-enhancing mass arising from the left side of the arytenoid cartilage and from the parapharynx and extending to the areas of the carotid artery (Figure
). On closer examination of the axial view from the CT image, we were able to observe a mass in the arytenoid cartilage and a mass in the parapharynx existing separately without any linkage at the second cervical section. We suspected a neurogenic tumor originating from the left vagus nerve and superior laryngeal nerve based on the results. Therefore, we planned to remove the mass in the parapharynx with the lateral pharyngotomy approach, in order to excise the mass both in the neck and larynx at the same time, and then advance toward the larynx to remove the mass in the arytenoids. Using the lateral pharyngotomy approach, we found that the cervical mass was 3.5×5.0cm in size with a yellowish color and an ovoid shape. The mass was adherent to the surrounding tissue, resulting in a difficult excision that required removal of tissue surrounding the tumor as well as the tumor itself. We were able to determine that it was a neurogenic tumor due to its linkage to nerves in both the upward and downward directions.
We then examined the mass closely, but it did not connect to the larynx. Thus, we used the lateral pharyngotomy approach for the removal of the parapharynx tumor, and removed the arytenoid tumor using a carbon dioxide (CO2) laser. The size of the larynx tumor was 2.0×1.3cm and it enclosed the arytenoids.
The histological stain was positive for S-100, and an examination revealed soft tissue with multiple nerve fascicles, some of which were enlarged with edematous endoneurium with intermixed collagen and bipolar cells consistent with a diagnosis of plexiform neurofibroma; however, the arytenoid mass was confirmed as a simple neurofibroma (Figure
).
After the pathologic examination, we suspected VRD. In consequence, a close examination was performed but no specific findings were present. The patient complained of a voice disorder postoperatively, and left vocal cord palsy was present on physical examination. We waited and monitored the situation, but the patient showed no improvement; therefore, we conducted an injection laryngoplasty postoperatively, after which the vocal disorder and airway aspiration improved.
Two months later, a direct laryngoscopy showed no tumor growth. To date, two years postoperatively, the patient has had neither respiratory nor feeding difficulties, and her voice is nearly normal (Figure
).