A 26-year-old woman arrived in the emergency room with a chief complaint of palpitations since the past three days. Her complaint had worsened and at the day of presentation she also complained about having shortness of breath and abdominal pain. The woman did not have any history of severe endocrine disorder nor autoimmune diseases. Physical examination revealed profuse sweating, tachycardia with 162 beats per minute (bpm), nausea, hyperreflexia of patellar reflex, mild anxiety, and no prominent lump in the neck. Because the electrocardiography (ECG) revealed supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) rhythm she received cardioversions (150 J). The ECG converted to sinus rhythm, regular, with 120 bpm. Thyroid function tests were then performed that revealed a state of thyroid crisis with high fT4 (>7.77 ng/dL), and low TSH (<0.005 μIU/mL), while no TSH-stimulating antibody testing was available in our center. Complete blood counts showed white blood cells 8400/mm3, hemoglobin 11.5 g/dL, normal limits of coagulation test results, normal liver and renal function test results, and mild hypomagnesemia (1.56 mg/dL). Ultrasonography of the neck showed a non-enlarged thyroid gland with slight edema, a marked increase of vascularization, and no additional lesion was observed. Chest X-ray showed slight cardiomegaly without prominent abnormality in the lungs and it was confirmed with computerized tomography. Results from the rapid antigen test for COVID-19 was positive and confirmed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests. She was then transferred to the intensive isolation room and treated with remdesivir 200 mg iv once/day on the first day, followed with 100 mg iv once/day on day 2–5. She also received thyrozol 20mg once a day, propranolol 40mg three times a day, Vitamin D 5000 units once a day orally and intravenously 1000 mg vitamin C once a day. As her condition was improved, she was shifted to non-intensive isolated room and was discharged from the hospital at day 7. She was then shifted to the non-intensive isolation room and was discharged on the day 7. She was advised to take orally thyrozol and propranolol until the next evaluation at the outpatient clinic. In the follow-up 1 week later, symptoms of hyperthyroidism were resolved and the thyroid function test results improved (normal free T4). There was complete symptom resolution in the following month with maintenance of oral thyrozol 20 mg once a day and propranolol 20 mg three times a day.