A 23-year-old man sustained an MVC and presented to our hospital emergency department with fractures of the left acetabulum, left neck of femur, left shaft femur, right shaft femur, and right shaft tibia.
On arrival, the patient was agitated and in severe pain despite having received an IV morphine injection and being placed in an inflatable anti-shock trouser during his ambulance transport from the accident site to our tertiary trauma center. During the transport, 500 ml of normal saline were administered. After instigating advanced trauma life support, no other cerebral, spinal, neurovascular, or chest trauma could be verified by examination and polytrauma multislice computed tomography (CT). However, the multislice CT revealed a spleen contusion measuring 2 cm in its widest diameter and the patient had superficial abrasions on his left cheek and forehead. His vital signs were heart rate 118 bpm, blood pressure 90/55, respiratory rate 24/min, and temperature 36.5°C. His laboratories showed normocytic normochromic anemia with hemoglobin 8.8 g/dl and a pH of 7.41. The abbreviated injury score was 7, and therefore, the injury severity score amounted to 21.
While in the emergency department, 1 L of normal saline was administered as a bolus followed by two packed red blood cells (RBC) units and two fresh frozen plasma units. Skin traction was applied to the left side and Thomas splint with an above knee back slab was applied to the right side. While still in the ER and in concordance with the abdominal trauma surgeon, it was decided to treat the 2 cm spleen contusion conservatively. The patient was admitted to a surgical intensive care unit (ICU) and remained there till the 1st post-operative day of the final operation.
Radiographs showed fractures of the left acetabulum, left femoral neck (Garden IV) (AO/OTA 31B3), left femoral shaft (AO/OTA 32B3), right femoral shaft (AO/OTA 32A3), and right tibial shaft (AO/OTA 42A1). The multislice CT was reformatted and helped further in delineating the acetabular fracture which was of the associated both columns type (AO/OTA 62C2) .
Four hours after admission after stabilization of the general condition and elevation of the hemoglobin to 10.1 g/dl, the patient was transferred to the operating room. He was positioned supine with the left knee semi-flexed to allow for retrograde intramedullary nailing of the left femoral shaft fracture with (12 mm × 34 cm steel retrograde femoral nail, Auxein Medical Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India). Afterward, he was placed on a traction table, and after closed reduction, stabilization of the left neck femur fracture was performed by a dynamic hip screw (DHS) (135°, 4-hole steel DHS with a 95 mm lag screw, Auxein Medical Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India) together with two cannulated partially threaded 6.5 mm screws. Moreover, one proximal nail locking screw was applied trough the DHS plate to the nail. The retrograde nail was inserted to the level of the lower border of the lesser trochanter. After having applied the distal locking screws, the lateral proximal drill holes were established with the implant-specific proximal aiming device. After a standard lateral approach to the proximal femur, the 4-hole DHS plate was placed so as to allow for proper placement of the lag screw in the neck and simultaneous overlap of the second DHS plate hole over the now apparent predrilled hole of the retrograde nail. Only three screws were applied to the DHS plate as the fourth was streaking the retrograde nail. The operative time was 4 h, and the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 500 ml. The patient received enoxaparin 40 mg/sc qd, ibuprofen 600 mg bds PO, omeprazole 40 mg IV qd, and ceftriaxone 2 g IV qd for the rest of his hospital stay. The patient-controlled analgesia device with 5 mg/ml of morphine with the patient dose of 2 mg and lockout time of 15 min was used during the first 36 h after each surgery.
Five days later, after subsidence of the secondary hit (pH = 7.39, Hb 11.8 g/dl, CRP 59 mg/l, and serum lactate 1.314 mmol/L), the left acetabular fracture was addressed through the ilioinguinal approach and anatomical reduction was achieved by two reconstruction plates. The operative time was 3 h and the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 600 ml. Post-operative laboratories showed a hemoglobin of 9 g/dl, and the patient was given one unit of packed RBCs, elevating the hemoglobin to 9.9 g/dl. Two days later, after stabilization of the general condition, a third operation was performed for the right femoral and tibial shaft fractures. Antegrade closed intramedullary nailing was performed for the right femoral shaft fracture, together with closed intramedullary nailing of the right tibial shaft fracture (12 mm × 36 cm steel femoral interlocking and 11 mm × 33 cm steel tibial interlocking nail, Auxein Medical Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India). The operative time was 3.5 h, and the estimated operative blood loss was 400 ml .
The early post-operative period passed uneventfully. Passive and active hip and knee range of motion (ROM) was allowed after each operation as tolerated, sutures were removed 2 weeks after the operation and all wounds healed uneventfully. In the 8th post-operative week, partial weight-bearing was allowed on two crutches, Harris hip score (HHS) of the left hip was 75, callus formation started to appear at the shaft femurs and the shaft tibia, and both knees achieved full active and passive ROM without significant knee pain. In the 12th post-operative week, partial weight-bearing was continued, and HHS of the left hip increased to 80. In the 16th post-operative week, all fractures were fully united, full weight-bearing was allowed and the HHS was 90. The remaining follow-up period was uneventful, and at 1 year, HHS of the left hip reached 95, in addition, both knees achieved full ROM without knee pain .