The patient was a 16-year-old male. At the age of 1 year, his parents noticed the enlarging of his head, and following investigations revealed an AC in the left frontal lobe and hydrocephalus. He was treated with CP shunting at 2 years of age . Normal development followed and he underwent extension of the peritoneal shunt catheter in another hospital at 15 years of age. Computed tomography (CT) scan performed immediately after the catheter extension surgery demonstrated a decrease in size of the AC and of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) space in bilateral middle cranial fossa and lateral ventricles. However, the tip of the intracranial shunt catheter was found to be shorter compared to catheter used in the initial surgery, as observed on the CT scan. At the age of 16 years, he started experiencing impaired visual acuity without headaches. He visited an ophthalmologist and was treated for optic neuritis of unknown etiology, but the treatment was ineffective. Nine months later, his visual acuity worsened to limited to light perception and he was admitted to our hospital.
Except impaired visual acuity, he did not show any neurological problems. Fundus examination revealed bilateral optic atrophy . CT scan demonstrated slight increase in the size of the AC, lateral ventricles, and dilated CSF spaces in bilateral middle cranial fossa compared to the CT scan performed 9 months previously . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated distention of the CSF space surrounding the optic nerve sheath . CSF pressure with lumbar puncture was elevated to 30 cmH2O. These findings suggest that malfunction of a CP shunt could cause recurrence of an AC and increased ICP. Cisternography with iotrolan revealed a communication between the left frontal AC, CSF spaces in the middle cranial fossa, and basal cisterns . We treated the patient with lumboperitoneal shunting. The size of the CSF space in bilateral middle cranial fossa and that of the AC decreased gradually . The visual acuity improved to a manual value at 10 cm, 6 days after the surgery, but did not recover completely.