A 28-year-old man had been well until 8 months ago, when he visited his physician for a routine health screening. Abdominal sonography revealed a cystic lesion in close proximity to the left adrenal gland. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen confirmed the presence of the cystic lesion with no contrast enhancement (Figure
). The cyst measured 8 × 13 × 12.5 cm and had a linear septum. Although the liver, gallbladder, spleen, and right adrenal gland were normal, the cyst seemed to cause a mass effect on the pancreas and the left kidney. However, no lymphadenopathy was noted. Laparoscopic retroperitoneal exploration was performed, and a 10 × 10 cm cystic lesion was found adhering to the gastric corpus. Unfortunately, attempts to remove the cystic lesion en bloc were not successful, and the lesion ruptured with the fluid contaminating the peritoneal cavity. The cystic lesion was removed grossly, and gross pathological examination showed a ruptured 7 × 6.5 × 4 cm irregular cyst with two cavities. Microscopic examination showed typical gastric mucosa with a smooth muscle component in the wall of the resected cyst with no malignancy (Figure ). Therefore, a gastric duplication cyst was diagnosed based on the images and histology.
Seven months after the surgery, the patient complained of abdominal distension as well as anorexia and dyspnea on exertion. A repeated abdominal CT scan showed a well-defined roundish low-intensity non-enhancing mass measuring 6.7 × 4.7 cm in the left adrenal area, along with massive ascites. On examination, the patient was found to be emaciated with positive shifting dullness. Laboratory examination showed normal liver function. Examination of serum tumor markers revealed that the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) level was 2145 U/L, while the levels of carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA 125) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were 209 U/L and 8.1 U/L, respectively. Peritoneal fluid analysis showed that it was yellow and turbid, and the exudates yielded a positive result in the Rivalta test. The levels of CA 19-9, CA 125, and CEA in the fluid were 12000 U/L, 1427.4 U/L, and 518 U/L, respectively. Acid-fast staining of the ascites yielded negative results. Multiple cytological analyses of the ascites revealed small nests of cells compatible with adenocarcinoma. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis failed to identify the primary lesion. A diagnostic laparoscopy showed multiple white nodules measuring 0.5- 1.5 cm scattered over the surface of liver, greater omentum, and peritoneum (Figure ). Biopsy examination of the omental nodules indicated an adenocarcinoma infiltrating the adipose and fibrous tissues (Figure ). Immunohistochemical staining yielded a positive result for markers of cytokeratin 20 (CK 20), CK 7 and P53, with a Ki-67 index of 40%, and AB-PAS (Alcian blue-periodic acid sthiff) staining was also positive. Thus, peritoneal carcinomatosis was diagnosed but no primary tumor was identified.