A 50-year-old woman with no significant past medical history was diagnosed in 2014 with a lung, bone, and skin metastatic v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) V600E–mutated melanoma and was treated with BRAF/mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase enzyme (MEK) inhibition and zoledronic acid. Four years later, positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) confirmed progressive disease and she was switched to anti–protein cell death protein 1 (PD-1) therapy (three-weekly pembrolizumab 200 mg).
Shortly after the second administration, the patient presented to the emergency department with pleuritic chest pain radiating to the interscapular and cervical region. She was afebrile, haemodynamically stable, and saturating normally. Clinical examination was unremarkable. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm without conduction or ST abnormalities. Blood work showed a moderate C-reactive protein (CRP) rise of 39 mg/L (normal <5 mg/L) without leucocytosis. D-dimers were low. A chest X-ray showed no acute changes. High-sensitive troponin T levels were elevated at 27.9 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L) with serial values 3 h later not increasing (26.3 ng/L). A viral infection was assumed, and she was discharged home.
The following night, she was readmitted because of worsening symptoms, with sharp chest pain in a recumbent position. She now was tachycardic at 109/min. A follow-up ECG showed concave ST elevation in the anterolateral and inferior leads . Pulmonary embolism was excluded with computed tomography angiography, which showed a pericardial effusion and progression of the known metastatic lung nodules and bilateral pleural effusion. A transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal systolic function without regional wall motion abnormalities and confirmed a pericardial effusion without haemodynamic significance. High-sensitive troponin T levels increased to 194 ng/L. Autoimmune work-up showed normal antinuclear antibody levels and a slightly elevated rheumatoid factor at 176 IU/mL (normal <15.9 IU/mL). A nasopharyngeal swab was negative for common respiratory pathogens, and serology for cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and hepatitis A, B, and C was negative. The working diagnosis of immune-related (IR) perimyocarditis was made, and she was started on acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), colchicine 0.5 mg twice daily, and 1 mg/kg of methylprednisolone. Her symptoms resolved within a day and steroids were tapered over the course of 4 weeks. Troponin levels returned to normal.
Upon reduction of the steroid dose below 20 mg, she experienced a relapse of pain without ECG changes. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a thickened pericardium with diffuse hyperintense signal alterations on short-axis T2-weighted short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) images and diffuse contrast uptake on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images, consistent with an acute pericarditis . There was no evidence of myocarditis on MRI. Steroids were increased again.
She experienced several symptomatic flare-ups during steroid tapering , always responding to an increase in methylprednisolone in combination with ASA. After 4 months, steroids were tapered to 4 mg daily and a pembrolizumab rechallenge was attempted. Two weeks later, symptoms recurred, and she was restarted on ASA with increased doses of steroids. After steroid taper, pembrolizumab was restarted for three more cycles. Colchicine was stopped after 6 months. Two weeks after stopping colchicine, her symptoms recurred and steroids, ASA, and colchicine were restarted. A PET–CT showed a complete metabolic remission, and pembrolizumab was not rechallenged. A cardiac MRI after resolution of symptoms showed regression of the pericardial contrast uptake .
Since then, the patient has been in follow-up for 3 years without signs of disease progression. Reducing the methylprednisolone dose below 8 mg daily appeared impossible without relapse pericarditis symptoms.
Her case was presented at a Belgian ImmunoTOXicity (BITOX) board meeting, a meeting between oncologists and organ specialists where complex IR toxicities or comorbidities complicating the initiation of immunotherapy are discussed. Because of the chronicity of the pericardial disease continuing years after cessation of ICI, it was hypothesized that this was an underlying autoimmune pericarditis rendered symptomatic by anti–PD-1 therapy. The frequent relapses are consistent with literature findings on steroid therapy in chronic recurrent pericarditis. Azathioprine treatment was initiated at a dose of 2 mg/kg, and steroids were tapered successfully over 6 months. Azathioprine maintenance treatment is considered for 6 months.