A one-year-old male child presented to the clinic after his parents observed that he did not respond to sound. The child had been delivered by caesarian due to complications such as the cord being around the neck and foetal bradycardia. He cried immediately after birth. There was no history of jaundice or meningitis in the postnatal period. The child had mildly delayed physical developmental milestones. Immunisation status was age appropriate.Audiological testing revealed bilateral absent responses on Otoacoustic Emissions (OAE) and Brainstem Evoked Response Audiometry (BERA). Auditory Steady State Response (ASSR) revealed bilateral profound hearing loss. A High Resolution Computed Tomographic (HRCT) scan of the temporal bone revealed an irregular single cavity on the medial aspect of the internal auditory canal bilaterally. No cochlear turns could be identified. Modiolus was absent .
There was a hypoplastic superior semicircular canal bilaterally. The cavity on the right side appeared larger than the left. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain performed with Constructive Interference in Steady State (CISS) 3D study for evaluation of inner ear structures, revealed an absent vestibulo-cochlear nerve complex on the left side and partial visualization on the right side .
Diagnosis for a common cavity was made. His parents were counseled regarding the possibility of poor auditory response after implantation. The child was vaccinated with pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Hemophilus influenza B vaccine. He was implanted on the right side in September 2006 using the standard postaural incision with posterior tympanotomy approach. Intraoperatively, stapes was found to be hypoplastic, and round window could not be identified.
Nucleus freedom implant CI24RE (ST) with straight electrode array was inserted through a slit like opening made in the prominence of the common cavity, which was seen in the region of the Lateral semicircular canal (LSCC). CSF leak occurred through the opening in the common cavity. Ten stiffening rings remained outside the opening. Intraoperatively, X ray revealed a satisfactory placement of the active electrodes in contact with the outer wall of the common cavity. Post operatively, his recovery was uneventful. Four months later (Jan 2007), the child presented to his paediatrician with fever and vomiting after an attack of upper respiratory tract infection. A diagnosis for meningitits was confirmed after CSF analysis. Streptococcus nonhemolyticus was isolated on CSF culture. As per the antibiotic sensitivity report, the child was administered intravenous linezolid for 28 days and recovered completely. Four months later, in May 2007, the child once again developed symptoms of meningitis and streptococcus pneumoniae, which was isolated on CSF culture. This episode of meningitits was also preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection. The child received intravenous ceftriaxone for 21 days. After recovery, CT Cisternography of the temporal bone did not reveal any demonstrable leak or communication. In August 2007, the child underwent surgical exploration under general anesthesia to look for a fistulous communication. No site of leakage could be identified. Fibrin glue with soft areolar tissue was applied around the electrode array at the cochleostomy site, upon assumption that this was to be the site. Following this procedure, the child was symptom free for 8 months. However, in April 2008, he developed symptoms for meningitis, preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection. CSF analysis revealed raised protein and reduced sugar with a total leucocyte count of 490/ cmm with 78% polymorphs. The child received intravenous ceftriaxone and vancomycin for 7 days. He recovered well and then presented to us for examination.
On otoscopic examination, a clear fluid level was seen behind the intact tympanic membrane on theleft side with his head upright, which disappeared when the child lied in the supine position. Impedance audiometry revealed type B curve bilaterally. CT Cisternography did not reveal any CSF leak. The implanted ear was re-explored under general anesthesia. Intrathecally, 5% sodium fluorescin dye diluted with CSF was injected and after the child spent an hour in the tredelenburg position with increasing end expiratory pressure, a definite leak was seen in the stapes footplate region between the crura suggesting dehiscence in the footplate.
It is important to note that the footplate was not visible because of the obliquely placed and hypoplastic stapes and overhanging facial canal. Attempt was made to plug the leak in the footplate by soft tissue but the space between the crura was too small. The incus was then removed, stapedius tendon cut, and stapes dislocated and removed. Microscopic examination revealed a circular opening in the footplate. Oval window was packed with soft tissue, gelfoam, and fibrin glue. Five years later, the child is doing well and using his implant.