A 40-year-old woman came to the Surgical Oncology Polyclinic with complaints of a lump in her right breast, which had enlarged slowly within 5 years since breastfeeding her second child. The lump does not feel hard, is painful, feels warm, and there is no change in the menstrual cycle. The patient had no history of malignancy and no family history of breast cancer. The patient had no surgical history, no drug history, and no any medical history relevant to breast disease. The patient is Javanese housewife, non-smoker, with BMI about 23.5 kg/m2. On physical examination the breast size is asymmetric, the right is 4× larger than the left with size 10 × 10 × 7 cm , feels soft springy with the consistency of fat, firm boundaries, no tenderness, and skin wounds. The diameter of the right areola is enlarged to 9 cm, there is no nipple discharge. No lumps were found in the armpits. Breast ultrasound examination showed homogeneous solid lesion, oval in shape with firm boundaries, encapsulated in the right breast quadrant . Biopsy examination showed lobulated adipose tissue with minimal connective tissue stroma, the impression of lipoma. The patient declined to undergo a symmetrical mastopexy procedure accompanied by bilateral implants due to financial constraints and an aversion to unnecessary surgery on the healthy breast, which is frequently encountered among female patients in Indonesia. As a solution, we opted for a Wisepatern surgical technique, whereby the remaining tissue is not excised but instead de-epithelialized and inserted into the breast to fill the void left by the tumor's removal. The surgery was performed by an experienced oncology surgeon with over 5 years of experience in oncoplastic breast reconstruction.
The patient's symmetry and measurements were evaluated relative to the healthy side of the contralateral breast, while the patient was seated with arms at their sides. The patient was marked for a traditional Wisepatern skin reduction while standing, as if undergoing a standard breast reduction procedure. Informed consent to the patients, site-marking, and prophylaxis antibiotics were done before the procedure under the anesthesia. Following general anesthesia, an incision was made and the tumor was removed along the previously marked design line with 30 Hz electrosurgical frequency. Once the tumor was completely removed without pedicle reduction, then the patient was seated at a 45-degree angle to match the height of the nipple with the contralateral healthy breast. A minor revision of the initial design was made, and an incision was created accordingly. Residual skin tissue was discovered and de-epithelialization was performed to remove it, but it was not discarded and instead inserted into the breast cavity to create the effect of a mass filling empty areas left after tumor removal . An 18G drain was inserted, and two layers of suturing for subcutaneous and intradermal tissue were performed in stages using 5.0 absorbable thread. The tumor was completely removed measured to be 16,5 × 15,5 × 15 cm, encapsulated with intact yellow-brownish capsule and 1.400 g of mass . The surgery lasted for 3 h, and after the operation, the patient did not require a blood transfusion. The patient received mefenamic acid (500 mg orally three times a day) for postoperative pain relief.
For evaluating the fluid production after 24 h of surgery, the drain was removed, and the fluid found to be 100 ml. On the second day of treatment, the patient was discharged from the hospital . The postoperative period was uneventful, and no complications such as hematoma, incision complications, infections, or neurological issues were observed. There is no any complications relating to surgery and anesthesia. However, marginal epidermal necrosis occurred within the first week, which subsequently improved after the initiation of epidermal growth in the first month. The patient was monitored at the hospital in the 1st, 3rd, and 6th months, and there was no indication of infection at the surgical site (, , ). The patient reported being satisfied with the operation's outcome.