A 59-year-old Chinese male was admitted because of incidental findings of a right atrial mass on transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) during a routine check-up. No medical history has been reported to date. The laboratory results and physical examination findings were unremarkable. TTE revealed an irregular hyperechoic mobile mass (1.2 × 0.9 cm in size) with a stalk arising from the RA adjacent to the aortic root . TTE also revealed thickened leaflets of AV, which was considered to be a degenerative change. No wall motion or other structural valve abnormalities were reported. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) demonstrated no obvious stenosis of the coronary artery.
The right atrial mass was initially diagnosed as myxoma or papillary fibroelastoma.
The patient was scheduled for minimally invasive excision of the right atrial mass via right anterolateral thoracotomy. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) after anesthesia detected an additional mobile mass (1.3 × 0.8 cm in size) on the ventricular side of the non-coronary cusp of the AV . Both right atrial and aortic valvular masses were considered CPFs due to their stippled edge and good mobility with stalks. Considering the high probability of AV preservation in cases of primary surgical indication for CPF based on our experience, we proceeded with the surgery via right anterolateral thoracotomy, without conversion to media sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established through the femoral artery and vein cannulation. A 5 cm right mini-thoracotomy incision was made in the fourth interspace, which started medially to the anterior axillary line. Cardioplegia was achieved by antegrade perfusion of cold blood cardioplegia solution through a Y-shaped cannula. After transverse aortotomy, the tumor was located on the ventricular side of the noncoronary cusp of the AV and was easily excised by shaving its stalk. AV leaflet inspection confirmed their anatomical preservation. The aorta was then closed, and the heart resumed beating automatically. Then the tip of the cannula in the inferior vena cava was laid in the right atrium, 1 cm above the inferior atriocaval junction. No caval veins were snared and after transverse right atriotomy, a vacuum-assisted venous drainage controller was used to maintained the negative pressure ranging from−20 to−30 mmHg, or according to the blood level in the right atrium. The right atrial tumor was successfully excised on a beating heart by shaving its stalk . TEE revealed trivial AV regurgitation and complete excision of the masses. As only still echo images were regular archived, we retrospectively found abnormal thickness of non-coronary cusp of AV on coronary CTA, representing the CPF which was misdiagnosed as degenerative thickening of leaflet . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day six. After a 2-year follow-up, TTE showed no signs of CPF recurrence.
When immersed in water, both tumors showed “the sea anemone” phenomenon, which strongly suggested the presence of CPFs . Both tumors were fixed with formalin, embedded with paraffin and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Histopathological examination demonstrated bundles of papillary projections with a collagenous core surrounded by a single layer of endothelium, and a final diagnosis of multifocal CPFs was made .