A 29-year-old man presented to the emergency department with acute severe bilateral testicular pain radiating to the back. The pain initiated during the night, awakening the patient and prompting medical attention. He described the pain as sharp and continuous, radiating to his lower back bilaterally with no worsening or alleviating factors. The patient had no history of trauma, underlying medical conditions, regular medications, or previous surgical procedures. Abnormal urinary symptoms were also ruled out.
On admission, he was hypotensive (100/60 mmHg) with normal heart rate and normal neurological status. Physical examination revealed mild dehydration, pale mucous membranes, and cool extremities. Peripheral pulse was symmetric in the lower and upper limbs. No heart murmurs, signs of pulmonary congestion or pleural effusion were observed. On abdominal palpation, a lower abdominal mass was noted with mild discomfort. No signs of acute peritonitis were present. Testicular examination was unremarkable.
Anemia (hemoglobin level of 7.6 g/dL and hematocrit of 24%) and acute renal failure (creatinine of 2.8 g/dL, normal blood urea with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 29 mL/min/1.73 m2) were observed. Testicular tumor markers were negative. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a retroperitoneal mass causing bilateral ureterohydronephrosis. All imaging studies were normal.
Even in the setting of acute renal failure, contrast-enhanced multiaxial tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was deemed necessary to establish a definitive diagnosis. It revealed bilateral EIA pseudoaneurysms causing moderate bilateral ureterohydronephrosis with clear signs of contrast leakage from the right EIA pseudoaneurysm into the retroperitoneum, reflecting evidence of an acutely ruptured pseudoaneurysm associated with an ipsilateral retroperitoneal hematoma . These findings supported acute anemia and renal failure.
The patient was blood typed, and saline expansion was performed. A left jugular vein catheter was placed in case of acute deterioration. The on-call vascular surgeon performed a bedside Doppler ultrasound of the iliac arteries revealing a turbulent flow with swirling motion pattern, also known as the “yin-yang sign,” in the right EIA, thus confirming the finding of a ruptured pseudoaneurysm of the right EIA .
Due to the risk of ongoing bleeding, the patient underwent emergency endovascular repair of the bilateral EIA pseudoaneurysms , ruptured on the right side , with the placement of bilateral 8 mm (in diameter) × 50 mm (in length) WALLGRAFT® endoprostheses (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). After angiographic confirmation of successful treatment, with no further bleeding or leakage , open inguinotomy was performed for ureterolysis and drainage of retroperitoneal hematoma.
Immediate post-decompression diuresis was observed, with substantial urine output (12 L) in the first 24 hours after the procedure. Creatinine peaked at 3.2 g/dL on postoperative day 1, and his renal function normalized after 1 week of follow-up. During this period, the patient was closely monitored for his hemodynamic condition and renal function recovery to prevent dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.
Hematoma content and connective tissue removed from the perianeurysmal area were analyzed histopathologically and tested for bacteria and fungi. Serology for community-acquired infectious diseases, inflammatory laboratory tests and other specific rheumatological tests (antinuclear antibodies for systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune tests) were performed, and the patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary panel of experts in the fields of vascular surgery, internal medicine, infectious disease, rheumatology, and urology. Laboratory results were within the normal range, and cultures were negative. The only identifiable risk factor for cardiovascular disease was cocaine addiction (for the past 2 years).