A 63-year-old male patient was admitted to the Division of Cardiology of the Medical University of Vienna due to palpitations. He presented with the medical history of a well-controlled hypertension receiving an antihypertensive therapy of 5 mg of amlodipine per day. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 135/83 mmHg, 98% oxygen saturation on room air, and fast irregular pulses. The surface electrocardiogram (ECG) showed tachycardic episode of AF with a heart rate of 148 b.p.m. that converted spontaneously to normo-frequent sinus rhythm during clinical presentation. Based on the first documented episode of AF, the patient’s individual risk for thromboembolic events was assessed. Since no additional comorbidities were present at the time of admission, the patient’s CHA2DS2-VASc score was 1 (only one point for hypertension) mirroring an annual stroke rate of 0.6–1.3%., According to treatment recommendations, initiation of OAC initiation should be considered and was subsequently evaluated via the patient’s individual net-clinical benefit based on the recently published current opinion statement of the ESC Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy and the ESC Council on Stroke.
The assessment of patients’ individual risk for major bleedings including modifiable risk factors is a key prerequisite for initiation of OAC. To elucidate the individual risk of bleeding events during OAC the HAS-BLED score is recommended as a highly validated tool to estimate the risk of bleeding during OAC. Notably, in patients with a HAS-BLED score of 2 (or greater) an OAC should not be initiated in intermediate thromboembolic risk patients based on an annual bleeding rates of 1.88–3.20% per year, since the risk for bleeding during OAC outweighs the thromboembolic risk. The clinical characteristics of our patient (independently history of hypertension—which is well-controlled) leads to a total score of 0, that refers to a risk for a major bleeding event of 0.59–1.13% per year. Based on the estimated thromboembolic risk for our patient that refers to 0.6–1.3% per year and an associated bleeding risk of 0.59–1.13% per year, a definite decision for or against the initiation of OAC cannot be undertaken when considering the net-clinical benefit of the therapy. Therefore, refinement of the individual risk of stroke is needed.
The current opinion statement of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommends the additional consideration of easily assessable predictive values.
The authors highlighted that the most prominent values associated with thromboembolic risk refer to age > 65 years, Type II diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation (not atrial flutter), and persistence/permanence of atrial fibrillation. Our patient presented with an episode of self-limiting AF, an age below 65 years and without Type II diabetes mellitus (HbA1c: 5.7%).
Additionally, the patient’s clinical presentation (obesity), kidney functioning, and cardiac biomarkers are recommended in terms of thromboembolic risk stratification. In the present case, the patient presented without frailty or obesity and in good physical appearance. Moreover, he reported of no history of nicotine or ethanol abuse. Blood panels and biochemistry showed normal renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate: 97 mL/min) and non-elevated cardiac biomarkers [N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP): 157 ng/mL; troponin T: negative].
The recent consensus statement mentioned that also imaging values (e.g. left atrial volume or diameter) should be considered in terms of personalized risk stratification., Transthoracic echocardiography in our patient revealed normal systolic function, without signs of valve disease or left ventricular hypertrophy and the left atrial volume was calculated with 69 mL.
As an additional scoring tool, the ABC stroke risk score is recommended by both the guidelines of the management of AF and the recently published consensus statement of the ESC.,, Calculating the ABC stroke risk score for our patient, a thromboembolic risk of below 1% was estimated.
Taking the obtained results and patient characteristics into account, the individual thromboembolic risk was considered lower than the associated risk of major bleeding events. Therefore, OAC does not seem to provide a net-clinical benefit in our patient. After a shared decision-making process including the patient’s personal preference, no antithrombotic treatment was started. However, the importance of a well-controlled hypertension and regular follow-ups—including 24 h-ECG analysis to elucidate the AF burden—were emphasized. The initiation of OAC [preferably using a non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant (NOAC)] at the age of 65 years or earlier when developing additional risk factors was agreed. Additionally, in case of progression in the observed frequencies of paroxysmal AF episodes or development of permanent AF, potential opportunities for ablation were discussed with the patient. Within a performed 24-h ECG analysis during a follow-up visit, no arrhythmic episode was detected. Additionally, the patient reported that he was fee of any palpitation. The respective decision-making algorithm provided by the ESC Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy and the ESC Council on Stroke is highlighted as .