A 77-year-old Asian man with diabetes mellitus, arteriosclerosis obliterans, and hypertension developed persistent plantar ulcers after percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) of the right lower extremity, which was performed by his previous physician. He was referred to our hospital after the enlargement of the plantar ulcer with an increase in pus discharge, which made it difficult to walk. Radiography revealed that the metatarsophalangeal joint of the second toe was destroyed and showed osteolytic changes . A biochemical analysis revealed the following: white blood cell (WBC), 9.7109/L; red blood cell (RBC), 4.21012/L; c-reactive protein (CRP), 13.8 mg/L; and hemoglobin (Hb)A1c, 6.8% (National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program; NGSP). Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was detected in the wound. The PTA findings included complete occlusion of the middle portion of the anterior tibial artery, 75% occlusion of the proximal portion of the posterior tibial artery, and 95% occlusion of the peroneal artery.
Because no fever was observed and an immediate incision could be performed, systemic antibiotics were not administered. An extended plantar incision was performed at the pus drainage hole between the first and second metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint to a depth just above the periosteum under local anesthesia. No sequestrectomy or removal of flexor tendons was performed, as is commonly done. After making an extended incision, the patient was instructed to take a daily foot bath in carbonated water (AS care; Asahi Kasei Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 37 °C with a carbon dioxide concentration of 1000–1300 ppm for 15 minutes at home. We also advised him to continue applying povidone–iodine sugar ointment (U-PASTA; Kowa Company, Ltd., Nagoya, Japan) to the wound after the foot bath. After 6 months of biweekly wound examinations, wound closure and bone and joint remodeling were observed, and the therapy was concluded. At 1 year 5 months later, the lesion had not recurred, and radiography demonstrated the regeneration of a joint-like structure in the metatarsophalangeal joint of the second toe, allowing the patient to walk normally : an unexpected event in the course of treating this patient. Since this method uses carbonic acid and sugar, we tentatively called it soda pop therapy.