A 62-year-old Japanese male complained of severe back pain. He had been using candesartan and amlodipine for moderate hypertension. CT revealed bilateral adrenal tumors with multiple metastases in the bones and liver. 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy and CT showed the accumulations of MIBG in the thyroid and tumors with MIBG accumulation in bones , liver , and bilateral adrenal glands . Cardiac ultrasonography incidentally revealed a 28-mm hyperechoic lesion in the left ventricle . Thus, he was diagnosed as metastatic pheochromocytoma.
The patient initially received palliative radiotherapy but was urgently admitted to the intensive care unit for the exacerbation of pain (Day 11). He exhibited significant sweating, a burning sensation, and headache due to the hypertensive crisis . Plasma levels of adrenaline and noradrenaline were very high (1,706 [normal range: 0–80] pg/mL and 10,792 [90–240] pg/mL, respectively). Urinary catecholamine excretion levels of metanephrine and normetanephrine were markedly high (12.0 [0.04–0.20] mg/day and 10.6 [0.09–0.28] mg/day, respectively). Doxazosin and intravenous phentolamine partially attenuated the crisis. An additional treatment with metyrosine (500 mg/day), approved for use in clinical settings in Japan since 2019, markedly ameliorated the crisis.
The patient was transferred to the general ward on Day 10. On Day 12, he developed sudden pain in the left leg, the color of which became purple . Ultrasonography showed the left ventricle without a tumor/thrombus and a thrombus from the common femoral artery to the popliteal artery, suggesting the thrombus in the heart caused thrombosis. CT confirmed the diagnosis. There have been multiple reported cases of pheochromocytoma resulting in arterial embolization. Excess catecholamines have been reported to contribute to hyper-coagulability directly, and we considered that it resulted in femoral artery embolism from the intracardiac thrombus. We initially planned bilateral adrenalectomy as a cytoreduction surgery, which is reported to improve overall survival. However, we had to abandon the operative option due to the deterioration of the patient's general condition. Since left leg necrosis progressed without apparent infection, a half dose of chemotherapy was administered using cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine on Day 16 for disease control rather than amputating the leg. However, on Day 22, the left lower limb was severely infected and amputated . Consciousness disturbance persisted thereafter but gradually improved with the discontinuation of metyrosine on Day 40 .
On Day 80, the results of genetic testing revealed MEN2A with a pathogenic single nucleotide variant at codon 634 of the RET gene (NM_020975.6(RET):c.1900T>C). We screened for variants in SDHB, SDHD, VHL, MAX, and RET in a blood sample using the conventional direct Sanger sequencing method, as previously reported, after receiving written informed consent under our Institutional Review Board (approval #: 19–047). This result allowed us to perform the screening on the patient's children at an early stage. At first, we speculated that multiple metastases were from MTC rather than pheochromocytoma, because pheochromocytoma in MEN2A has been reported to be almost exclusively benign and localized to the adrenal. The elevated serum calcitonin level (130.0 [0.0–9.5] pg/mL) was consistent with this speculation. We were considering treatment with vandetanib, a RET inhibitor, if the liver metastasis was found to be of MTC origin. However, the liver biopsy revealed that metastasis originated from pheochromocytoma . On Day 110, total thyroidectomy was performed, revealing calcitonin-positive MTC with lymph node metastases . The postoperative serum level of calcitonin was normalized (8.2 pg/mL), supporting MTC being localized to the neck (pT1bN1M0), which was consistent with moderately elevated calcitonin level.
The patient received two additional cycles of CVD therapy at 75 and 100% doses and underwent hepatic artery embolization to treat right liver metastases; however, he died of disease progression on Day 221.