Our patient was a 47 year old female with a history of ulcerative colitis, Sjogren’s syndrome, migraines, and fibromyalgia who presented with a 6 month history of left lower extremity paresthesia followed by a 2 month history of progressive headaches, imbalance, ataxia, nausea, vomiting, and diplopia. Neurologic examination revealed severe gait ataxia requiring assistance to stand or walk and nystagmus with lateral gaze. MRI revealed a 3.0 cm heterogeneously enhancing mixed cystic and solid mass centered upon the cerebellar vermis with mild surrounding vasogenic edema and abnormal thickened enhancement of the bilateral vestibular nerves, left facial nerve, and right trigeminal nerve .
The patient was promptly started on steroids, admitted to the hospital, and underwent a midline suboccipital craniotomy for debulking of the large intracerebellar tumor. Upon entering the cystic cavity, grossly purulent material without hemorrhage was noted. Gram stain and cultures were negative for infection. A subtotal resection was achieved and final pathology rendered the diagnosis of primary CNS histiocytic sarcoma (see Fig. ). The H&E section revealed sheets of large neoplastic cells with marked cytological atypia, brisk mitosis with occasional multilobated nuclei, and focal necrosis. Extensive immunohistochemical studies showed the neoplastic cells positive for CD163, CD68, CD45, and Vimentin; negative for CD20, CD3, CD30, s-100, CD1a, CD21, CD23, pancytokeratin, MPO, CD61, CD123, GFAP, and BRAF. Further immunostains for PD-L1 with two different antibody clones (22C3 and 28–8) were also performed and showed more than 50% of the tumor cells were positive with membrane stain .
Post-operative MRI showed a midline posterior occipital craniotomy with subtotal resection of tumor and continued bilateral-enhancement along multiple cranial nerves, concerning for leptomeningeal spread .
A staging PET scan was performed two weeks following surgery suggesting diffuse leptomeningeal spread. A complete spinal MRI confirmed diffuse leptomeningeal spread in the lower thoracic and lumbar spine as well as cauda equina involvement. Due to the convincing evidence on MRI, a CSF analysis was deferred. Standard lab work was within limits, including LDH .
Three weeks following surgery, due to progressive lower back pain, she initiated radiation therapy including whole brain radiotherapy (30.6 Gy in 17 fractions) followed by a posterior fossa boost (5.4 Gy in 3 fractions) and a gross tumor boost (9 Gy in 5 fractions), for a total dose of 45 Gy in 25 fractions to gross disease with simultaneous radiation therapy to the lower thoracic and lumbar spine, receiving 40 Gy in 20 fractions, encompassing the areas of leptomeningeal disease in the spine and cauda equina. Full craniospinal radiotherapy was not performed to limit profound cytopenias that may have prevented further cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Interval follow up MRI showed a partial response with persistent posterior fossa disease but near complete resolution of previous leptomeningeal enhancement. Our plan was to initiate chemotherapy with a primary CNS lymphoma regimen with high CNS penetrating therapeutic agents including high-dose methotrexate, high-dose Ara-C, and thiotepa followed by high-dose chemotherapy with BCNU and thiotepa rescued by autologous stem cell transplantation. The patient was started on high dose intravenous methotrexate (HD-MTX) therapy, but received only one cycle secondary to patient intolerance.
A CT of the chest approximately two weeks after initiation of HD-MTX therapy for left sided rib pain showed new pulmonary nodules and a left sided pleural effusion, suspicious for metastatic disease. Thoracentesis revealed findings consistent with a malignant pleural effusion. The patient was initiated on cladribine (Leustatin).
Within two weeks after the completion of this infusion, the patient developed headaches, somnolence, fever, and nuchal rigidity. Malignant meningitis was suspected and the patient was started on IV antibiotics. Lumbar puncture was recommended but the patient declined. Her mental status significantly improved following antibiotic treatment. Brain MRI showed continued response of the cerebellar residual disease and no new intra-cranial lesions, but an MRI of the cervical spine showed new lesions consistent with metastatic disease in the untreated cervical spinal cord and thoracic vertebrae, including intramedullary involvement. She underwent further radiation therapy targeting C4-C6 and T1-T7 (20 Gy in 5 fractions). The patient rapidly showed improvement in symptoms.
Genomic sequencing of her tumor showed a novel mutation in the platelet-derived growth factor receptor A (p.V608I) and therefore, she was started on Dasatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) with known CNS penetration . Unfortunately, this medication was poorly tolerated because of nausea, diarrhea, and acute pancreatitis so it was discontinued after one week.
The patient was readmitted to the hospital for continued decline in functional status, weakness, and failure to thrive. CT images of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed progressive bilateral pulmonary nodules. An MRI of the spine showed persistent but significantly improved leptomeningeal enhancement. Due to progression of symptoms, worsening systemic disease despite control of CNS disease, and limited systemic options available, the patient chose to enroll in hospice. The patient expired four weeks later, eight months after initial diagnosis.