A 67-year-old French man from south France was admitted to our hospital approximately 1 year ago (February 2015) with fever (39 °C) and confusion. He mentioned increased alcohol consumption. An examination revealed subclavicular and axillary lymph node enlargement. Moreover, he presented cerebellar ataxia, with loss of equilibrium and difficulty walking. Laboratory values revealed elevated C-reactive protein (216 mg/L) and liver enzyme levels (aspartate aminotransferase 100 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 69 IU/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 125 IU/L) and hyponatremia (sodium 123 mEq/L). A liver ultrasound showed hepatomegaly. Computed tomography (CT) scanning was normal and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning did not reveal signs of infection. Treatment with ceftriaxone and levofloxacin was introduced, but his fever did not resolve. A serum sample was sent to our laboratory in Marseille and an immunofluorescence assay (IFA) was positive for C. burnetii; phase I titers for immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgM, and IgA were 400, 200 and 0, respectively, and phase II titers were 400, 200, and 0, respectively. The diagnosis of acute Q fever infection was made and he was treated with 200 mg oral doxycycline daily for 21 days. IgG anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody levels in the serum sample were very high (216 GPLU), and we suspected valvular heart disease and a possible progression to Q fever endocarditis . However, a transesophageal echocardiogram was normal. After 2 months we obtained a second serum sample and phase I IFA titers for IgG, IgM, and IgA were 25,600, 0 and 0, respectively, and phase II titers were 25,600, 0, and 0, respectively. Both serum samples were negative for C. burnetii by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) for the IS1111 and the IS30A spacers . A localized C. burnetii infection was suspected; lymph node biopsies were performed that were negative for C. burnetii by molecular assays. For each sample, we verified the quality of DNA handling and extraction of samples by qPCR for a housekeeping gene encoding beta-actin . The lymph node biopsies were also negative for C. burnetii by immunohistochemical analysis using a monoclonal antibody against C. burnetii with an immunoperoxidase kit . Moreover, the lymph nodes were also tested by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) , which was also negative. To localize the site of the infection we performed PET scanning, which revealed intense fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in his right sternoclavicular joint . A diagnosis of sternoclavicular joint infection by C. burnetii was made, and treatment with 200 mg oral doxycycline daily and 200 mg oral hydroxychloroquine three times daily for 18 months was introduced. After 6 months follow-up, the outcome was favorable, with a four-fold decrease in the phase I and phase II IFA titers for IgG.