Fifty-five years old female was admitted to the Department of Thoracic Surgery in July 2018 with heaviness in the right hypochondrium. In 2010, she underwent radical curative surgery for pT3N0M0 endometrial cancer (hysterosalpingooophorectomy and greater omentum resection). Histological examination depicted an endometrial glandular squamous carcinoma with invasion of the uterine myometrium. The adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy was as follows: 40 Gy for pelvis, 20 Gy for vaginal stump and three courses of cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, 5-fluorouracil (CAF scheme). Annual check-ups have not shown any signs of relapse for seven years. In May 2018, the patient noted a new dull, nagging pain in the right hypochondrium. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a 22 × 56 mm focal liver lesion in the SVIII. Contrast-enhanced MDCT of the chest and abdomen was performed to clarify lesion’s nature, location, and size. The study revealed a large, well-circumscribed tumor in the SVIII of the liver. Positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography was used to determine the lesion’s metabolic activity and exclude distant metastases. The scan visualized a large, hypermetabolic 11.4 × 13.5 × 10.7 cm lesion of the right hemidiaphragm. We hypothesized that the tumor originates from the diaphragm and invades the right liver lobe, deforming its upper contour in a wavy manner. Computed tomography suggested a clear the boundary between the diaphragmatic tumor and liver in the form of the fatty tissue layer. Post-processing with volume rendering depicted this relationship more vividly .
Given the lesion’s size, solitary nature, close contact with the right liver lobe, clear tumor margins without lung involvement, the multidisciplinary team decided to treat the case surgically. The team initiated the video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery procedure with subsequent conversion to the open right lateral thoracotomy through the fifth intercostal space due to lesion’s size. Intraoperative revision revealed a tumor growing from the dome of the diaphragm with clear even contours and without any signs of lung involvement. The diaphragmotomy was performed: the tumor is closely adjacent and connected with the right liver lobe (SVII, SVIII) by loose adhesions without signs of invasion . The tumor was separated from the right liver lobe by sharp dissection. The right diaphragmatic dome resection along with the neoplasm had the minimal resection margin of one centimeter. The gross specimen measured 9.5 × 12.5 cm and was forwarded to the pathologist . We sutured the diaphragmatic defect with local tissues (separate U-shaped seams without tension). The operation concluded by forming right diaphragmatic dome at the seventh intercostal space .
The postoperative period was unremarkable. Physiotherapeutic inhalations with antiseptic solutions were performed to prevent postoperative complications. The pleural drainage was removed, and the patient mobilized on the second day. The follow-up chest radiograph was within the normal limits, right hemidiaphragm located at the seventh intercostal space. Therefore, the patient was discharged on the seventh-day post-operation. On the follow-up chest and abdominal contrast-enhanced CT at six months after the operation, there were no signs of recurrence.
The morphological study showed that the tumor had been an endometrial carcinoma metastasis to the diaphragm.
Immunohistochemistry was as follows:
Estrogen receptor (clone SP1, Cell Marque) - IS +++, 3 points; PS 40%, 4 points; TS = 7 points; Progesterone receptor (clone Y85, Cell Marque) - IS +++, 3 points; PS 40%, 4 points; TS = 7 points .