A 14-year-old male presented with a history of abdominal pain for 1 year, which increased in intensity over the last 2 months. On examination there was sensitivity on the left abdominal quadrant. An ultrasound scan revealed a complex mass evoking an hematoma.
The computed tomography scan (CT scan) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large heterogeneous mesenteric mass on the left flank, measuring 110 × 86 mm, with internal vegetation and superior polar tissular component. It has a very close contact with the colon stomach and lower edge of the pancreas. Neither adenopathy nor other lesions were found. However, there was no evidence of distal metastatic spread. Tumor markers, such as carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9), were normal. Exploratory laparotomy was performed and revealed a large cystic hypervascularized mass depending on the transverse colon and mesocolon .
A wide excision of the lesion was performed with segmental colectomy. No postoperative complications were noted. The patient was discharged from the hospital in good health on the 7th postoperative day.
Pathology examination showed on macroscopy a heterogeneous semi-solid cystic mass of the mesocolon without any involvement of the colic wall. The mass contained extensive hemorrhagic necrosis.
The microscopic examination revealed an undifferentiated tumor infiltrating the colonic wall The tumor was composed of sheets of round small cell tumors divided by fibrous septa. Tumor cells had an ill defined cell borders with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei showed mild pleomorphism, vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli. A high mitotic rate of 25 per 10 high-power fields was detected. Geographic areas of necrosis were seen. In immunohistochemistry the tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for ETV4 and CD99. Keratin AE1/AE3, S100 protein, EMA, CD34, desmin and myogenin were negative. The tumor cells were also negative for lymphoid markers, Dog1 and cyclin B3. Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed a rearrangement of the CIC gene.
The mesenteric lymph nodes were free. The surgical margins of the resection were clean. The final diagnosis was a CIC-rearranged sarcoma. A whole-body bone scan revealed no abnormal increased uptakes and a thoracic CT scan did not detect additional metastases. After an uncomplicated post-operative course, the patient was referred for chemotherapy by vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin and etoposide associated to growth-clony stimulating factors (G-CSF). Nevertheless, the patient developed a neutropenic fever at the first cycle; hence the dose reduction in the next courses. The CT scan at the 4th course revealed a peritoneal progression with nodules in paracolic gutters and the right upper abdomen. The greatest nodule was in the Douglas cul-de-sac and measured 8.5 cm. The patient underwent two courses of temozolamide–irinotecan. He developed peritoneal progression with pleural metastasis (without lung metastasis). He died 2 months later.