A 48-year-old gravida 2 para 1 female presented with progressively growing mass of cesarean scar, regular pain with menstruation for 15 years. She had a caesarean delivery 22 years ago. Seven years after the operation, she noticed a 2cm × 2cm nodule beside the abdominal scar, red, with slight pain during menstruation. The nodule grew rapidly, and the pain became more serious in the previous 2 years. She complained her troubles of severe dysmenorrhea on the first day of the menstrual period, accompanied by abdominal pain and deep pain in the site of uterine scar, with an intensity of six on the pain scale (6/10). There were no gynecological malignancies in her family history, and she had never received hormone therapy.
Physical examination indicated a 13cm mass with multilocular originating from the previous surgical scar without tenderness, red, ulcer with bloody secretions, surrounded by erythema.
Abdomino-pelvic CT scan and MRI confirmed a lobular, peripherally enhancing lesion in the rectus muscle sheath, extending to the skin surface within the abdominal wall, with images suggestive of internal septation. It measured around 12.8cm × 7.7cm along the major transverse, anteroposterior and longitudinal axes, respectively , without any abnormalities in the abdominal cavity.
Laboratory findings: tumor marker CA 125 was 164.7 U/mL (the reference range: 0–35 U/mL); her cancer antigen 19–9, α-fetoprotein, and carcinoembryonic antigen were within the reference range.
A punch biopsy of the mass showed CCC, without benign endometriosis presented (Immunophenotype: CK+, CK7+, CK20-, CD99-, HNF1b+, Napsin A (+)). Suggesting, CCC arising from endometriosis of the abdominal wall.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, and found an irregular, cystic and solid mass deep in the rectus muscle of the midline. Extensive resection of the abdominal wall mass was performed with mesh reconstruction of the abdominal wall. The resected specimen was a lobulated mass with a maximum size of 13cm, accompanied by focal hemorrhage and necrosis. It was composed of microcystic spaces, involving the dermis, subcutaneous and skeletal muscle. The pathologic results of the uterus and bilateral accessories (ovary and fallopian tube) were negative.
Microscopic examination of the tumor showed similar histopathology to the biopsy.
The patient underwent six cycles of cisplatinum-based chemotherapy and adjuvant radiotherapy to the abdomen. Twelve months of follow-up, there was no further evidence of disease by imaging or clinical examination.