A 65-year-old Caucasian woman, lifelong non-smoker with an unremarkable medical history, presented with a 10-month history of progressive breathlessness, dry cough, fatigue, arthralgias, and mild weight loss. A physical examination revealed only the presence of palpable auxiliary lymph nodes bilaterally. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 4.7K/μl, a low lymphocyte count of 0.8K/μl, and an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 42mm/h. Autoantibody profile, C-reactive protein, and angiotensin-converting enzyme were negative. Lung function tests showed an obstructive pattern with a forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) of 66.8%, a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 83.4%, and a mild reduction of carbon monoxide diffusing capacity (DLco), which was 69.7%. Mantoux test was negative.
As revealed by HRCT, a soft tissue density mass at the right hilum was extending into the right upper lobe, surrounding and narrowing the lower part of the trachea, the right main bronchus, and its lobar branches, and encasing the right pulmonary artery. In addition, there were nodules of up to 1cm in dimension with vascular distribution in upper- and mid-lung zones bilaterally, enlarged paratracheal, aortopulmonary, mediastinal, and auxiliary lymph nodes, and pericardial effusion of medium amount . These findings were described as being consistent with bronchogenic carcinoma.
We proceeded with bronchoscopy, which revealed submucosal infiltration and narrowing of the right upper bronchus. The results of cultures, stains, and cytology were negative. Surprisingly, endobronchial biopsies showed non-caseating granulomas.
Faced with a non-specific finding such as granulomatous inflammation in a patient with lobar atelectasis, pericardial effusion, and non-specific constitutional and respiratory symptoms, we proceeded to surgical removal of an auxiliary lymph node and video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) to exclude with certainty the presence of malignancy. Histology of the lung specimen revealed multiple, confluent, well-formed, non-caseating granulomas . The excised lymph node also showed non-caseating granulomas. The results of stains for acid-fast bacteria, fungi, and microorganisms in both specimens were negative.
The histologic features mentioned above were consistent with sarcoidosis, and treatment with high doses of oral steroids was commenced. Clinical and radiological improvement was achieved . Interestingly six months later, while on a maintenance treatment with 10mg of prednisolone, she presented with a right-side pleural effusion. Thoracentesis showed an exudate with 85% lymphocytes. In light of the results of diagnostic tests, other causes of pleural effusion such as infection or malignancy were excluded, and the working diagnosis was sarcoidosis-related pleural effusion. Our patient was treated initially with high doses of oral prednisolone with gradual tapering plus a steroid-sparing agent, methotrexate, and complete regression of the pleural effusion was observed in follow-up visits.