A 52-year-old Nigerian man of the Yoruba ethnic group, presented with severe breathlessness on exertion, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea and bilateral pedal swelling of six weeks duration, having been referred from a private hospital. He was recently diagnosed hypertensive during consultation at the referring hospital, few weeks prior to presentation. He had smoked for 13 pack years and also consumed alcohol heavily (≥60 g/day) for thirty years. There was no history of food or drug allergy and no family history of atopy.
Physical examination revealed an acutely ill looking middle aged man. He was not pale. There was no periorbital or facial swelling. There was no significant peripheral lymphadenopathy. The main findings were in the cardiovascular system examination. The pulse was 106 beats per minute, regular and normal volume; the blood pressure was 145/100 mmHg supine. The apex beat was at the 6th intercostals space, immediately lateral to the mid-clavicular line. Heart sounds SI, S2 and S3 gallop rhythm were heard. Chest examination showed few basal crepitations bilaterally. Fundoscopy revealed a grade 2 hypertensive retinopathy. All other systems were essentially normal. A clinical assessment of Hypertensive Heart Disease in failure was made. Although an in-patient management was offered, the patient however decline. He was managed on an out-patient basis; he was placed on lisinopril 5 mg daily, frusemide 40 mg daily, aspirin 150 mg daily and digoxin 0.25 mg daily.
The patient re-presented at the medical emergency unit of the hospital two days later with swollen lips and lower face of 10 hours duration. There was associated difficulty in swallowing but no stridor or hoarseness of his voice. There was no swelling of any other part of the body. He had neither skin rashes nor pruritus. There was no previous history of similar episode of swollen lips. Other aspects of his medical history did not show any abnormality and were not significant as to the likely cause of his disease state. Physical examination revealed a middle aged man with swollen lips and lower part of the face. The pharynx was also oedematous. He was not dyspnoeic.
The breath sounds were vesicular and there were no rales. The pulse rate was 94 beats per minute and respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute respectively. His blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. All other body system examination were essentially normal. A clinical assessment of lisinopril induced angioedema was made. The lisinopril was immediately discontinued. He was treated with intravenous hydrocortisone 200 mg stat and followed up with tabs prednisolone 10 mg tds and tabs chlorpheniramine 4 mg tds. He was seen at the outpatient unit two days later having recovered fully. The Naranjo probability scale indicated that this adverse drug event was probable.