A 63-year-old white female with a past medical history of hypertension and previous appendectomy presented after 2 months of progressive headaches, with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrating a sellar and suprasellar mass that grew rapidly in 1 month’s time . The patient originally reported holocephalic headaches, with blurry vision and diplopia (more apparent with left lateral gaze). She described the headaches as moderate to severe in intensity, and characterized the pain as varying between sharp and throbbing. In addition, she reported significant fatigue as well as polydipsia and polyuria (awakening five to six times per night to urinate and drink water). The patient was a retired banker and lived at home with her husband and therefore had no social or environmental exposures and had no family history of autoimmune or neurological diseases. She denied any changes in ring/shoe size, muscle weakness, weight gain/loss, abnormal hair growth, chest pain, shortness of breath, difficulty swallowing, language changes, focal weakness, numbness, tingling, or other neurologic or systemic symptoms. At the time of presentation, the patient was taking hydrochlorothiazide–triamterene and ramipril but was not on any immune-modulating medications. She was a former smoker and consumed three to four glasses of wine per week.
On presentation, the patient was afebrile with a normal pulse (69 beats per minute) and normal blood pressure (124/70 mmHg). On physical examination, she was alert, cooperative, and oriented to person, location, and date. She had a visual acuity of 20/25 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left with a partial left-sided cranial nerve VI palsy. She was otherwise neurologically intact. Her neck was supple and nontender, oral mucosa moist, lungs clear to auscultation, heart rate normal and with a regular rhythm, and her skin warm and dry.
Initial outpatient laboratory studies showed an elevated antinuclear antibody (ANA) of 1:160 (normal: negative) and normal inflammatory testing [erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)/C-reactive protein (CRP)]. Laboratory studies showed an 7 am serum cortisol 28.1 μg/dL (slightly elevated), concurrent plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 29 pg/mL (normal), free triiodothyronine (T3) 2.0 pg/m (normal 2.3–4.2 pg/m), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 12.3 mIU/mL, luteinizing hormone (LH) 0.4 IU/L (low), Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I) 154 ng/mL, prolactin of 33.3 ng/mL (normal less than 20.3 ng/mL for a menopausal woman), and IgG4 levels of 57.1 mg/dL (7–89 mg/dL normal). Lumbar puncture was obtained, which showed no organisms, white blood cell count (WBC) of 95 cells/cu mm, red blood cell count (RBC) of 4 cells/cu mm, 54% neutrophils, 42% lymphocytes, 55 mg/dL glucose, 154 mg/dL protein, and IgG 26.7 mg/dL. Repeat laboratory studies 1 month later showed a 7 am cortisol level of 2 ug/dL and free thyroxine (T4) level of 2.9 ug/dL (normal range is 5–12). ACTH, growth hormone (GH), LH, FSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and prolactin levels were within normal limits. Her serum sodium was within normal limits (value), pointing to compensated diabetes insipidus. A water deprivation test was deferred at this time.
An MRI of the brain with and without gadolinium was obtained at initial presentation and showed a 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.4 cm enhancing lesion involving the sella and adjacent structures, including the infundibulum, hypothalamus, and sphenoid sinus . T2 FLAIR also showed edema extending symmetrically along the bilateral hypothalami and fornices . At that time, the patient was managed conservatively with observation. Repeat MRI 1 month later after her symptoms continued to progress showed progression of the lesion, now measuring 3.2 × 2.2 × 2.0 cm with more extension into the bilateral hypothalami and fornices and sphenoid sinus as well as new extension into the clivus with anterior displacement of the optic chiasm . T2 FLAIR demonstrated more extensive edema into the hypothalami and fornices . Notably, there was also diffusion restricting content filling the sphenoid sinus with peripheral enhancement concerning for infection. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast showed no evidence of malignancy. Due to the progression of disease, the patient was transferred to our institution for further workup.
An endoscopic endonasal biopsy was performed 6 weeks after initial presentation. Endoscopically, it was noted that the fluid filling the sphenoid sinus was inspissated. A biopsy of the sphenoid sinus mucosa was evaluated intraoperatively by frozen section, which demonstrated acute and chronic inflammation, necrosis, and possible poorly formed granulomas. This finding raised the possibility of an autoimmune process such as granulomatous vasculitis or a chronic infection. A biopsy of the sellar lesion, which was performed through an infrasellar approach, was also evaluated intraoperatively; cytologic preparations showed predominantly chronic inflammation with occasional multinucleated giant cells. Permanent sections demonstrated an intense chronic inflammatory infiltrate composed predominantly of plasma cells, histiocytes, and lymphocytes . Numerous eosinophils were present, but there were few, if any, neutrophils. Immunohistochemical stains demonstrated abundant IgG-positive plasma cells, more than 40% of which stained positively for IgG4, and a smaller mixed T- and B-cell lymphoid population . The endoscopically sampled tissue fragments did not show histologic evidence of classic storiform fibrosis or obliterative phlebitis. Additional studies were performed to exclude infectious and neoplastic processes. Together, the findings were consistent with a diagnosis of IgG4-related hypophysitis. Notably, the cultures from the inspissated contents of the sphenoid sinus grew normal sinus flora but predominantly Cutibacterium acnes, a microbe that is not normally part of local flora. Notably, the sellar floor was partially dehiscent, and the sellar inflammatory tissue was biopsied very focally just in that area to avoid spread of any infection intracranially. Final pathology did not reveal any organisms, so it is thought that the sinusitis was not due to an infection, but the patient did complete Augmentin 875 mg twice daily for 7 days while we awaited the pathology report.
The patient was treated with levothyroxine (88 μg oral tablet daily) for central hypothyroidism, high-dose prednisone (tapered over 1 year), and rituximab (1 g intravenously every 6 months, planned for 2 years) postoperatively. Repeat MRI 5 days after biopsy showed significant improvement in the sellar and suprasellar enhancing lesion . At the time of discharge 6 days later, her cranial nerve (CN) VI palsy persisted, but her headache and blurry vision had resolved. The patient was followed for 3 months while continuing her prednisone and rituximab, and on her outpatient clinic appointment, the CN VI palsy had resolved. At that time, the imaging showed complete resolution of the abnormal enhancement in and around the hypophysis with a return to normal size of the pituitary gland, and stalk had returned to normal size . She continues to have central hypothyroidism and diabetes insipidus for which she remains on levothyroxine (88 μg oral tablet daily) and desmopressin (0.05 mg in the morning and 0.1 mg in the evening by mouth). At 1 year follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic and had no evidence of pituitary inflammation on her MRI at that time.