A 36-year-old male patient with a history of cerebral contusion and hypertension was brought to an emergency room after waking up with a sudden severe headache. On arrival, the patient was lucid and had no neurological deficit. Head computed tomography showed a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Cerebral angiography (CAG) showed a 9 mm diameter cerebral aneurysm originating from the bifurcation of the left basilar artery and superior cerebellar artery. Coil embolization was performed on the same day. After embolization, although CAG showed a neck remnant in the aneurysm , the patient was discharged, with a score of 0 on the modified Rankin scale. Subsequently, imaging was performed regularly at follow-ups on an outpatient clinic, and regrowth of the neck remnant was suspected; therefore, CAG was performed again 5 years after coil embolization. The remnant expansion was confirmed in connection with coil compaction . As an additional procedure, direct clipping was performed 6 years after embolization, at the age of 42 years. The left subtemporal approach was used to dissect the strong adhesion and approach the cerebral aneurysm. Observation of the aneurysm showed that contrary to the preoperative expectation, part of the coil strongly adhered to or encircled the oculomotor nerve, and it was considered that, even if the oculomotor nerve and aneurysm dome were to be dissected, it would be difficult to achieve sufficient mobility of the cerebral aneurysm due to the presence of the coil . Therefore, the clip had to be applied despite insufficient visualization of the origin of the left posterior cerebral artery (PCA). Postoperatively, CAG was performed while anesthesia was maintained, and it was found that the left PCA could not be visualized; thus, the patient was returned to the operating room for the clip to be applied correctly [ and ]. After surgery, the patient developed mild left oculomotor nerve palsy, although there were no ischemic complications associated with the operation.