In September 2013, a 71-year-old East-Asian male visited our institution with a 5-month history of abdominal pain, nausea, and constipation. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen due to multiple, non-tender masses, with no signs of peritonitis or abdominal wall hernias. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of the patient was “1”. His medical history included a huge, non-tender, deep, rubbery MLS (pT2bN0M0, positive resection margin), with a maximum size of 20 cm at the medial side of the left thigh. The tumor had been treated by excision and postoperative RT at a dose of 63 grays (Gy) delivered in 35 fractions of 1.8 Gy over 7 weeks in 2000. Six year later in 2006, the patient underwent a left pneumonectomy for a MLS metastasizing to the left lung . The removal was radical, with free margins and an intact tumor capsule. Postoperatively, no adjuvant therapy was indicated, and close follow-up was recommended. In August 2009, the patient underwent segmental resection for two peritoneal metastatic nodules (size: 15 × 15 × 11 cm and 14 × 9 × 9 cm, respectively) involving the mesentery and subserosa of the jejunum , and adjuvantly received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with adriamycin and ifosfamide. Since then, one additional segmental resection was performed for a recurrent peritoneal metastatic MLS (size: 13 × 13 × 7 cm) in February 2012 . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) imaging in May 2012 showed a progressive mass in the rectovesical pouch. It caused symptoms of abdominal pain and constipation. The patient received two cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine and docetaxel, followed by two cycles of dacarbazine. Despite this chemotherapy, the rectovesical pouch mass progressed. The patient refused any further chemotherapy. He was referred for salvage RT of his progressive, rectal-shelf mass. The radiation prescribed for the rectal-shelf mass was 40 Gy, to be delivered in 20 fractions of 2 Gy over 4 weeks, between September 2012 and October 2012 . No acute skin or gastrointestinal toxicity was reported. This treatment provided an excellent tumor response, and symptom relief for the patient. The tumor mass slowly regressed over the course of a year.
However, follow-up abdominal CT in September 2013, showed multifocal peritoneal nodules with fatty components within the mesentery of the jejunum, ileum, and ascending colon . The patient refused further salvage chemotherapy, but gave informed consent for treatment with IPRT using HT. A dose of 24 Gy was prescribed, to be delivered in 15 fractions of 1.6 Gy over 3 weeks, followed by a 16 Gy boost dose in 8 fractions of 2 Gy delivered on each residual metastatic peritoneal lesion. The clinical target volume (CTV) was defined as the whole peritoneal cavity, supplemented by the aortocaval and iliac nodes, as described by Duthoy et al. . The following at-risk organs were delineated: the liver, both kidneys, and the spine. An IPRT dose distribution in the transverse and coronal plane is illustrated in Figure . Average doses to the liver, and right and left kidneys were 16.9 Gy, 13.8 Gy, and 14.1 Gy, respectively, which are sufficiently lower than the limiting doses. The second CT scan was used to generate an adaptive HT-based IMRT plan, which recommended a 16 Gy boost in 8 fractions of 2 Gy for residual multifocal peritoneal lesions that had shrunken after IPRT. The residual tumor was defined as the gross tumor volume (GTVboost). For second treatment planning, the GTVboost was equal to the CTVboost. The planning target volume (PTVboost) was made by three-dimensional expansion of the CTVboost with 0.5 cm axial, and 1 cm superior/inferior margins. A RT boost dose distribution in the coronal plane is illustrated in Figure . The patient completed IPRT, followed by tumor boost RT, between September 2013 and October 2013.
Clinical symptoms and treatment-related side effects were monitored weekly during treatment, at the end of treatment, and monthly thereafter. RT was well tolerated, without any side effects, such as bone marrow suppression, nausea, diarrhea, or abdominal cramps. The patient did not experience tumor lysis syndrome. Surveillance by positron emission tomography (PET) scan in December 2013 showed a complete metabolic response of the peritoneal metastatic lesions . Furthermore, the CT scan obtained the same day showed a complete response for 5 nodules and a partial response for the 3 others . The ECOG performance status of the patient remained “0”. The patient, who had initially presented with abdominal pain, nausea, and constipation, obtained the return of peristalsis, normal food intake, and normalization of stools. In a CT scan obtained in March 2014, 5 months post completion of RT, most of the peritoneal metastatic lesions had disappeared, except for two small nodules that had decreased to 1.0 cm and 0.8 cm from 7.2 cm and 2.4 cm in size, respectively . The patient has not developed late hematologic, genitourinary, or gastrointestinal toxicity within the 9 months post RT.