A 34-year-old woman was referred with a persistent productive cough despite completing empirical treatment for presumed infective aetiologies with multiple-broad spectrum antibiotics. As outlined in Fig. , this occurred on a background of ulcerative colitis diagnosed in 1994 (age 15 years) and progressing to surgical management of a panproctocolectomy with subsequent J-Pouch formation in 1995.
Examination did not reveal signs of upper or lower airways disease. Initial laboratory investigations demonstrated the following: white cell count 6.79 × 109/L (neutrophils 5.99 × 109/L, lymphocytes 0.47 × 109/L), C-reactive protein 20 mg/L (normal < 0.5 mg/L), IgG 13.3 g/L (normal 5.8–13.7 g/L), IgM 0.73 g/L (normal 0.30–1.70 g/L). Subsequent serology demonstrated the presence of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) but without PR3 and MPO reactivity. Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were not present. Sputum cultures grew Moraxella catarrhalis transiently in 2013 with no fungi or acid fast bacilli noted. Pulmonary function testing revealed maximum expiratory flow rates, normal lung volumes and gas transfer resulted as (%predicted) FVC 108%, FEV1 99%, FEV1/FVC 90%, TLC 111%, DLCO corrected 98%. A computed tomography of chest revealed a 6 mm right lower lobe sub pleural nodule, which was transient on serial imaging. Initial bronchoscopy was performed prior to our review and showed macroscopic evidence of tracheobronchitis with granularity and purulent inflammation of the bronchial mucosa in the trachea, central and proximal cartilaginous airways with normal appearance of the sub-segmental airways. Histology of bronchoscopy samples showed a dense infiltration of a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate with relative absence of eosinophil was reported on histopathology review of bronchoscopy specimens. A further surveillance bronchoscopy performed in 2016 showed persistent evidence of tracheobronchitis despite patient adherence to a treatment regimen of azathioprine and high dose inhaled corticosteroids.
The patient demonstrated reproducible clinical improvement with oral prednisolone (dose range 0-50 mg daily) and typical symptom relapse on weaning/cessation. This occurred most dramatically in 2015 following a period of management with inhaled high-dose steroids alone and culminated in an acute admission with a Streptococcus pneumonae and Moraxella catarrhalis generated community acquired bilateral lobar pneumonia with type 1 respiratory failure and an exacerbation of tracheobronchitis. Azathioprine was commenced as a steroid sparing agent in late 2015. Repeat bronchoscopy following 4 months of commencement demonstrated persistent low-grade tracheobronchitis despite treatment with azathioprine (100 mg/day) and inhaled fluticasone propionate (3 g/day). A further tracheobronchitis decompensation driven by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) resulted in an inpatient admission in early- 2017. Subsequently a further exacerbation caused by Haemophilus influenzae in mid-2017 resulted in type 1 respiratory failure requiring high acuity inpatient care. Given the burden of disease despite azathioprine, oral prednisolone and high-dose inhaled corticosteroids, Infliximab induction therapy (0, 2, 6 weeks) and subsequent maintenance therapy (8 weekly) at dose 5 mg/kg was commenced in early 2018 in consideration of refractory symptoms requiring chronic use of oral prednisolone despite the combined treatment regimen of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids and azathioprine. Access to Infliximab was funded by the treating facility. Appropriate pre-screening for latent tuberculosis, varicella zoster virus and hepatitis B virus was undertaken. Infusions of infliximab were well tolerated by the patient with no acute or delayed infusion-related infliximab reactions experienced. Repeat bronchoscopy performed approximately 5- months’ post commencement of Infliximab revealed no macroscopic evidence of mucosal irregularities such as oedema, hyperaemia or ulceration to suggest ongoing active tracheobronchitis with an absence of the purulent secretions present on prior bronchoscopy. Infliximab therapy has allowed cessation of oral prednisolone, the gradual weaning regimen of inhaled fluticasone propionate to 1000mcg daily. Clinical stability of the patient has also been achieved with no further exacerbations of tracheobronchitis since commencement of Infliximab and resolution of her productive cough and dyspnoea. As such, maintenance Infliximab therapy has continued in combination with ongoing 3 monthly specialist reviews.