The patient was a 79-year-old Caucasian male with a 7-year history of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and a complaint of abdominal pain. The pain started in the evening of the day before and was accompanied by fever, oral intolerance, nausea, and vomiting. He did not complain of bowel habit changes, although he had a history of chronic constipation. Past medical and surgical history was positive for MDS and cholecystectomy. MDS was controlled with daily thalidomide, deferasirox, dimethicone, pantoprazole, gabapentin, vitamin B12, and folic acid. He also took erythropoietin and rivaroxaban three times a week and filgrastim every fifth day. The family history and habitual history of the patient were unremarkable.
The patient was awake and oriented on admission, yet he was ill, dehydrated, and mildly agitated. He had blood pressure 95/60 mmHg, pulse rate 105/min, respiratory rate 17/min, Temperature 37.9 °C, and O2 Saturation 90% on ambient air. Tenderness of the epigastrium and right upper quadrant of the abdomen was noted, without abdominal distension, rebound tenderness, or guarding. Laboratory results were as mentioned in Table . The patient’s electrocardiogram was unremarkable.
Plain thoracic and abdominopelvic radiographs were normal. In abdominopelvic ultrasonography, mild fluid in subhepatic and inflamed echogenic fat in the upper abdomen and around the pancreas was found, along with duodenal wall thickening. With the impression of pancreatitis, intravenous Ciprofloxacin, Metronidazole, Ondansetron, normal saline, and one unit of packed red blood cells were administered. As the patient did not have a proper urinary output (200ml since urinary catheterization), the computed tomography (CT) scan was performed without intravenous contrast. The abdominopelvic CT scan demonstrated edematous wall thickening of the entire duodenum with water halo and significant adjacent fat stranding and swelling of the pancreas. Pancreatitis was a potential etiology of secondary duodenal wall thickening . However, observing the bulk of the pathologic changes at the duodenum and severe duodenal wall edema also raised the possibility of primary duodenal pathology. Accordingly, a sign of ischemia was suggested, and a contrast-enhanced CT scan was advised to evaluate the related vessels further.
The patient remained hypotensive and oliguric regardless of intravenous fluid resuscitation. Nine hours after admission, norepinephrine was initiated. However, blood pressure remained low and fluctuated during the next five hours, with the minimum being 60/40 mmHg. Despite supportive treatment, the patient’s condition deteriorated to the extent of severe electrolyte imbalance, gasping, severe acidosis (arterial pH = 6.8), and GCS 4/15. Due to the mentioned deterioration, another abdominopelvic CT scan with intravenous contrast was requested at the fourteenth hour of admission. The second CT scan demonstrated a marked decrease in the enhancement of the edematous duodenum and target sign. Since the related visible vessels were patent, microvascular ischemia or necrosis of the duodenum was highly suggested .
The patient was immediately transferred to the operating room in a critical condition. With a midline laparotomy incision, 400 mL serous fluid was drained. Kocher’s maneuver was performed to explore the duodenum and the retroperitoneal structures. Duodenum (D2–D3–D4) was grossly ischemic, the stomach was dilated, and the small bowel distal to the Treitz ligament appeared normal . The Pancreas was normal in view, without any saponification, inflammation, or edema in favor of pancreatitis. Exploration of the superior mesenteric artery and vein did not reveal any pathologic findings. Whipple’s procedure was planned initially. However, the patient’s cardiac arrest during the operation directed the plan to a damage control surgery. The overall operation time was approximately one hour and a half. To do the pyloric exclusion in the shortest time, the pylorus was isolated, and a polyester surgical tape was passed behind that. Tight ligation of the tape around the pylorus temporarily excluded the ischemic duodenum. To achieve a damage control surgery, decompression of the stomach was done by a red (18 French) nasogastric tube . Lastly, an open (corrugated sheet) drain was placed near the duodenum, and the patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit. Despite two hours of supportive therapy, blood pressure remained 40 mmHg/pulse, leading to a cardiac arrest with asystole rhythm and patient expiration. According to the refusal of next of kin to consent, an autopsy was not performed.