The patient is a 49-year-old, 163 cm-tall man, a professor of family medicine, who was teaching at a university hospital when a dysphagia and night cough started to bother him. Although the patient himself would be expected to advise others to first see a family physician for this kind of symptoms, he decided to use specialized care services at the university hospital he was working for in April 2015. Acquainted with the patient, the professor of gastroenterology ordered an immediate oesophagogastroduodenoscopy, which was reported as ‘hiatal insufficiency and antral gastritis’. The gastric biopsy specimen taken during the endoscopy session returned positive for Helicobacter pylori.
The patient was diagnosed as having gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and prescribed a scheme of amoxicillin + clarithromycin + pantoprazole + bismuth subsalicylate. After a few days, he returned to his doctor complaining of medication side effects such as burning in his throat and oesophagus and not being able to swallow the pills. However, being warned of the consequences of non-compliance with the treatment, he kept using the medications as advised. There was no improvement in the initial symptoms at the end of the 14-days treatment. The patient was instructed to continue using pantoprazole 40 mg/day for another three months. However, he discontinued the medication after few weeks due to no apparent benefit.
The patient did not seek any other formal health advice for the next three years. He kept taking pantoprazole for a few days when his symptoms flared up. With time, he was used to his symptoms and learned to manage his condition by lifestyle changes such as eating less, chewing longer than usual, and arranging his sleep position. During an informal discussion with a family physician in June 2017, he was advised to see his family doctor, who took a thorough history, which revealed the following:The patient was reporting rare (once every three-to-four weeks) night coughs for more than 20 years. Initially, the cough was awakening from sleep but usually not reoccurring for a long time. His primary symptoms of the current episode of his disease started at the end of 2014, after a stressful event leading to a loss of his job. The principal symptom was dysphagia and a sense of fullness in his throat, which he described as ‘Having a bread loaf in his oesophagus’. He did not report any retrosternal burning or acid reflux. He usually woke every night with persistent cough attacks lasting 30–40 min. The cough increased in cold weather and sleeping in the supine position. Other exacerbating factors were drinking tea or coffee, consuming too hot or too cold food, as well as swallowing large mouthfuls of food. He was reporting undigested food coming back up into his mouth from the oesophagus, even one-to-two hours after a meal. There was a typical gurgling sound while swallowing, especially when drinking liquids. Recently (two-to-three months) he started to experience saliva oozing from his mouth onto the pillow while asleep. He needed to have a napkin ready to wipe his mouth when awoke. The patient reported a weight loss of 16 kg within the last year, dropping from 74 kg to 58 kg.
His family physician referred the patient to another gastroenterologist with the differential diagnosis of ZD. This time, the endoscopy report was positive for ZD, describing a significant diverticular opening at the left posterior side of the oesophagus, at around 18 cm from the teeth, which initiated a further referral to the department of thoracic surgery. Contrast oesophagoscopy revealed a large ZD.
The patient was admitted to the department of thoracic surgery where he underwent a diverticulectomy with stapling and additional upper oesophageal myotomy. The surgical intervention was done with a left-lateral open surgical approach, after assessing operation conditions with intraoperative oesophagoscopy.
The patient was hospitalized for seven days, with daily follow-up for leakage/infection at the incision site and for integrity of the repair. Oral nutrition was initiated on day five of operation. A control visit was scheduled for one month after discharge. At the control visit, he was free of all symptoms and weighed 60 kg.