A 76-year-old Japanese female had drunk too much alcohol (200 g in ethanol equivalent) for many years without taking enough food. She sometimes felt epigastralgia and palpitation. Her appetite was decreased since last year, and thus her body weight was reduced by 8 kg these 2 years. To clarify the reason for epigastralgia and appetite loss, a gastroscopy was performed, but there were no abnormal findings. After then, since she repeatedly felt palpitation and chest discomfort, she was brought to the emergency room in our institution. In chest X-ray, there was no abnormality. In electro-cardiogram, heart rate was 106/min and frequent ventricular premature beats were observed. Her height, body weight and body mass index (BMI) were 157cm, 48.6kg and 19.6 kg/m2. Table shows laboratory data on admission. Plasma glucose level was as low as 25 mg/dL, and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 4.8%. Insulin and C-peptide levels were very low: insulin, <0.1 μU/mL; C-peptide, 0.1 ng/mL. Ketone body levels, especially 3-hydrobuterate level, were markedly increased: total ketone bodies, 5165.4 μmol/L; acetoacetate, 1087.6 μmol/L; 3-hydroxybuterate, 4077.8 μmol/L. Various endocrine hormone levels were almost within normal range except for moderate increase of cortisol level. In blood gas analysis, severe acidosis was observed (pH 7.141) and anion gap was increased up to 23.5. Lactate level was increased up to 6.27 mmol/L. Liver and renal dysfunction was observed (alanine aminotransferase [ALT], 135 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase [AST] 45 U/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase [γ-GTP] 52 U/L; creatinine, 1.19 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 27 mg/dL). In addition, inflammation markers were elevated: white blood cell, 17, 320/μL (neutrophil, 83.5%), although C-reactive protein (CRP) was not increased. Electrolytes were almost within normal range. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was increased up to 548.1 pg/mL. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed fatty liver, liver cyst, left kidney cyst but did not show any malignancy findings. Hypoglycemia is often induced in subjects using anti-diabetic drugs such as insulin and sulfonylurea, but this subject did not use any anti-diabetic agents. Since insulin level was not increased, we ruled out the possibility of insulinoma and insulin autoimmune syndrome. Also, since cortisol level was not decreased, we ruled out the possibility of adrenal insufficiency. Since we ruled out various diseases which can lead to hypoglycemia and this subject drank too much alcohol for a long period of time without enough food intake, we finally diagnosed this subject as hypoglycemic alcoholic ketoacidosis. After then, we started vitamin B supplementation as well as intravenous glucose administration to prevent possible occurrence of Wernicke encephalopathy and Korsakoff syndrome. After starting glucose administration and vitamin B supplementation, blood glucose level, ketone body level and pH were normalized within a couple of days. Also, subjective symptoms such as palpitation and chest discomfort disappeared completely, and arrhythmia was not detected at all. After recovery from hypoglycemia, there were no abnormalities in Holter electrocardiography and echocardiography. In addition, since we suspected that this subject had alcoholism, we managed her in a private room and started 20 mg of diazepam for the prevention of withdrawal symptom. We gradually decreased its dose and finally stopped it, but withdrawal symptom was not observed throughout the hospitalization period.