In April 2020, a 20-year-old woman with fatigue and shortness of breath hospitalized at our clinic.
Six months prior, she had an abnormal menstrual period and was admitted to another hospital. She had elevated white blood cell (WBC) counts, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. She was diagnosed with PMF by bone marrow aspiration. Biopsy exhibited myelofibrosis (MF) grade 2. Since then, she has been treated with ruxolitinib (10 mg, per oral, twice daily) without regular follow-up. Magnetic resonance and enhancement revealed cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and a large cystic mass in the right ovary. However, no further details regarding cirrhosis and the cystic mass obtained.
The patient had no significant medical history.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history. The rest of the patient’s relatives are very healthy and tall.
On admission, the patient presented with anemia and abdominal swelling, similar to that of a pregnant woman. On physical examination, she was 148 cm tall, which was not consistent with the other family members. She weighed 45 kg and had a body mass index of 20.5. She had a webbed neck, low posterior hairline, epicanthus, and sixth toe on her right foot. She was clinically diagnosed with TS.
The chromosome analysis of the bone marrow cells revealed 45, X/46, XX, confirming the diagnosis of TS. The peripheral blood cell count revealed a WBC count of 1.93 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) count of 38 g/L, and platelet (PLT) count of 84 × 109 /L. Bone marrow aspiration indicated the coexistence of megakaryocytic emperipolesis and immature megakaryocyte cluster formation, while biopsy exhibited MF grade 1. Gene mutation testing revealed MPL and SH2B3 mutations.
Laboratory tests reported a remarkably elevated glutamic oxalacetic transaminase of 77.95 U/L (normal: 13-35 U/L), and glutamic-pyruvic transaminase of 84.1 U/L (normal: 7-40 U/L), while cholesterol and glucose levels were in the normal range . The hepatitis panel, human immunodeficiency virus test, and autoantibody screening results were negative . The carbohydrate antigen level of CA125 was 78.5 U/mL (normal < 35 U/mL). Gonadal hormones such as serum β-HCG and luteinizing hormone were within the normal ranges . However, liver fibrosis markers were significantly elevated , the significantly decreased amount of ferritin, normal ceruloplasmin and ophthalmic testing without ophthalmic signs (Kayser–Fleischer rings) allowed us to exclude the diagnosis of hemochromatosis and Wilson’s disease. No structural defects observed in the heart and major vessels on echocardiography. Abdomen ultrasound showed a huge cystic mass measured as 30 mm × 148 mm on the right ovary, which is considered as a serous cystadenoma.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed splenomegaly (114 mm × 100 mm × 163 mm; Figure ), cirrhosis, and portal hypertension. On the CT scan, an ovarian cystic mass, measuring 236 mm × 143 mm × 255 mm was detected on the right side.