A 21-year-old Japanese woman presented to our clinic with galactorrhea and decreased visual acuity in the left eye. She was a full-term baby and was delivered after an uncomplicated pregnancy. A heart murmur was detected at age 17. She is 165 cm tall and weighs 52 kg. Physical and radiographic examinations showed skeletal malformations of the hands and feet, including hypoplasia of the first digit in all four limbs . Symmetric phalangeal hypoplasia was observed. An atrial septal defect was demonstrated by echocardiography, with no electrocardiographic evidence of a conduction disturbance . No additional clinical or radiologic abnormalities were present. Similar digital and cardiac abnormalities were detected in our patient's father , and a clinical diagnosis of hereditary heart-hand syndrome was made. However, no established heart-hand syndrome was wholly compatible with our patient's phenotype.
The serum prolactin concentration was increased (1751 ng/mL; normal, 1.4 to 14.6), and a large pituitary adenoma was apparent on computed tomography (CT). Our patient underwent trans-sphenoidal surgery, which accomplished removal of about 50 percent of this prolactin-secreting tumor (prolactinoma). However, galactorrhea and hyperprolactinemia (200 ng/mL) persisted. Administration of bromocriptine ameliorated these abnormalities.
Our patient additionally showed stage 1 hypertension (JNC 7, 136/90 mmHg) accompanied by hypokalemia (serum potassium, 2.6 mEq/L). The plasma aldosterone concentration was increased (738.4 pg/mL; normal, 20.0 to 130.0), and plasma renin concentration was decreased (less than 2.0 pg/mL; normal, 2.5 to 21.4). CT disclosed a mass in the right adrenal gland. The tumor was resected and diagnosed histologically as adrenocortical adenoma. Hypertension, hypokalemia, and hyporeninemic hyperaldosteronemia all resolved upon resection, and a diagnosis of aldosterone-producing adenoma was made. No other tumors were found despite extensive imaging studies. The combination of prolactinoma and aldosterone-producing adenoma does not correspond to any known multiple-endocrine-tumor syndrome.
Except with respect to lower-limb abnormalities, the individuals here described closely resembled the HOS phenotype. Considering the possibility of contiguous gene syndrome, mutational analysis concerning the TBX5 gene was performed in our patient. By metaphase chromosomal analysis her karyotype was 46,XX (normal female) and G-banding of the prometaphase chromosome 12 in peripheral lymphocytes was also normal. We next analyzed transcripts of the TBX5 gene in lymphoblast cells (LBC). Only a novel splice-variant of the TBX5 mRNA omitting exon 2 (DDBJ Accession No. ) was expressed in both our patient and normal subjects; direct sequencing of TBX5 cDNA from our patient's LBC disclosed no mutation. Complete gene deletion was unlikely because of absence of allelic loss on 12q24.1 as determined using a polymorphic marker of intron 2 (D12S1646). These various findings argued strongly against a mutation of the TBX5 gene.
Despite no report on identified MEN1 mutations in patients with a prolactinoma and an aldosterone-producing adenoma, the rare combination of tumors might occur in the MEN1 patients. Mutational analysis, however, showed no mutation in the MEN1 gene. She possessed two alleles of polymorphic markers of PYGM and D11S4946, showing no loss of heterozygosity on the MEN1 locus.