About 6 years ago, a 53-year-old woman who was an expert gynecologist presented with severe headaches for which she was admitted to the neurology ward of the hospital where she was working. She complained about three episodes of severe, sudden-onset headaches in the last 2 weeks. Each headache episode started spontaneously, reached its maximum intensity within 1 min, and lasted for 5 to 10 min. The headache was pulsatile starting from the occipital area extending to the frontal region. She also complained about less severe headaches with a shorter duration in the next days, mainly triggered by the Valsalva maneuver. The pain was not positional and did not respond to any analgesics or opioids.
On admission, her physical and neurological examinations including fundoscopic evaluation were normal. Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with and without contrast, Magnetic Resonance Arteriography (MRA) and Magnetic Resonance Venography (MRV) were unremarkable.
A 24-h Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitor (ABPM) recorded a mean blood pressure of 110/70 that reached its peak at 180/120 during her headache attacks. The heart rate was normal.
Hematological tests and 24-h urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) were all normal. Abdominopelvic sonography also reported normal findings. The patient did not consent to a lumbar puncture.
Because of repeated attacks of thunderclap headache and ruling out SAH and other possible causes of TCH, a diagnosis of RCVS was made and IV magnesium and oral verapamil were initiated with careful cardiac monitoring. TCH did not repeat and other milder headache attacks significantly improved and resolved thereafter. The patient was discharged from the hospital with oral verapamil and magnesium. She complained about dizziness and presyncope attacks for 1 month after discharge that resolved spontaneously. Her medications were tapered off gradually and discontinued.
After 2 years of being asymptomatic, she started to experience tachycardia and tachypnea while lying down from a sitting position. She felt cold in her head and developed facial pallor or flashing after experiencing anger, stress, tiredness, or hot temperature. She also experienced dizziness on standing occasionally. One month later, she repeatedly experienced TCH-like attacks. Her maximum blood pressure was 200/140 occasionally at the time of the headache attacks and was normal in between. She underwent physical and neurologic exams, blood and urine sample tests, ABPM, ECG, IOP measurement, trans-Cranial Color Doppler (TCCD), and brain MRI, MRA, and MRV. There was a small hematoma in the right parietal lobe without edema and compression effect that was reported as a hemorrhagic infarct. In brain MRA, segmental arterial spasms were noted and increased velocity of Right Middle Cerebral Artery (RMCA), suggestive of vasospasm, was reported on TCCD. All other test results including those related to collagen vascular diseases were normal.
With a diagnosis of recurrent RCVS, which is a rare condition, oral administration of magnesium 600 mg/day and verapamil 200 mg/day was initiated. Medications improved her signs and symptoms but were not able to resolve them completely. Verapamil was tapered to a dose of 80 mg/day orally within 4 months. In addition, magnesium administration was continued at a dose of 400 mg/d. Two questions were unanswered regarding the patient’s diagnosis: the repeated RCVS attacks, which is quite unusual, and the continuous need for verapamil and magnesium. Two years later, despite receiving the medications, she experienced recurrence of pulsatile headache attacks of short duration (about 10 min) that were less severe than previous bouts. Sedatives were prescribed and she was advised to rest, avoid stress, and sleep well, but none of them could relive the headaches.
Unexpectedly, after 6 months, she developed hypertension and her lab tests revealed high blood sugar. She also developed general skin pruritus and unusual pustules. Further investigations revealed that the urinary metanephrine level was 5 times higher than the normal range, indicated a diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. Additionally, Computerized Tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass in the right adrenal gland. Phenoxybenzamine was initiated to control and reduce her blood pressure in order to prepare the patient for surgery. Fourteen days later, laparoscopic hemi-adrenalectomy was performed, and verapamil was discontinued after the surgery. Thereafter, all the manifestations, including headache attacks and hypertension, resolved completely and all the routine hematological and urine tests, especially blood sugar became normal.