A 28-year-old healthy woman with unremarkable medical history except for mild hypothyreosis developed sudden painless left-sided foot drop during her first pregnancy at 16 weeks of gestation. Lumbar nerve root compression was excluded by MRI. Electroneurographic and electromyographic examination 6 weeks after symptom onset revealed an isolated axonal lesion of the sciatic nerve with predominant affection of the peroneal portion. There was no history of trauma. Family history was negative for neurofibromatosis type 1, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy or other neuromuscular diseases. She was diagnosed as sciatic nerve palsy of unknown origin and was recommended for physiotherapy (strengthening exercises to the left tibialis anterior muscle). Paresis persisted during the further course of her pregnancy. Additional neurologic symptoms did not occur. Sensory deficits were absent. She had an uneventful Caesarean delivery at 40 gestational weeks and gave birth to a healthy girl. Thorough neurologic investigation was performed three weeks later. Follow-up MRI of the lumbar spine was again normal. Routine laboratory parameters were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid examination including immunologic and infectiologic parameters was within normal limits except for a slightly increased protein level (730.4 mg/l). Inflammatory neuropathy was assumed. However, application of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) for 3 days had no beneficial effect at this time. The patient got bracing for her left leg and further physiotherapy was prescribed.
Follow-up examination one year later showed ongoing weakness of the left foot (grade 2/5) and toe extension (grade 3/5) as well as ankle eversion (grade 2/5). Electroneurography demonstrated stable findings with prolonged distal motor latency of the tibialis and peroneus nerve and marked reduction of amplitudes in the peroneus nerve. A causal relation between paresis and pregnancy was considered highly unlikely at that point in time.
Three years after the first presentation at the time of her second pregnancy she reported that the residual paresis of her left leg had gradually worsened again since the 8th week of gestation. Moreover, she had experienced slight weakness of foot extension in the other leg as well. Upon admission at 28 gestational weeks, neurological examination revealed complete palsy of left foot and toe extension as well as ankle eversion and slight weakness of ankle inversion and plantar flexion (grade 4/5). The right leg now also showed paresis of foot and toe extension (grade 4+/5). Sensation was normal. The patient did not report any pain. Motor nerve conduction studies confirmed deterioration with conduction now being absent in the left peroneal nerve. Detailed history taking disclosed a relationship between intermediate worsening of the paresis and the menstrual cycle (deterioration 2–3 days prior to menstruation). MRI of the pelvis (performed without contrast agent because of pregnancy) revealed bilateral fusiform irregular expansion of the sciatic nerves with separation of single nerve fascicles and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images . Compression of the nerves by other anatomical structures could be excluded. Findings were considered compatible with bilateral intraneural perineurioma. To rule out other differential diagnoses numerous laboratory exams were performed including CA-125 and Human Epididymis Protein 4 (HE4) as markers for active endometriosis or ovarial tumors as well as anti-ganglioside and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) autoantibodies indicating immune-mediated neuropathy. Results were unremarkable. Repeated cerebrospinal fluid examination with flow cytometry was normal. Protein level was now within normal limits.
Because therapeutic options during pregnancy were limited and an immunological etiology was still considered, intravenous steroid therapy with 1000 mg methylprednisolone was administered for three consecutive days. It had no beneficial effect. Four weeks later the patient was additionally treated with a dose of 120 g of IVIG over 4 days. After that she reported slight improvement in gait. Standing on tip-toe was again possible. Because of that, IVIG therapy was repeated at the same dose immediately after the uneventful Caesarean section, which was performed at 38 gestational weeks.
On follow-up examination four weeks postpartum, sciatic nerve palsy had improved up to the degree of the residual paresis after her first pregnancy. Right-sided foot drop had resolved completely. Another MRI scan of the pelvis, now performed with contrast agent, showed a stable extent of the bilateral lesions. Uptake of contrast agent was not seen. We suggested performing a nerve biopsy to clarify the entity of the lesion and recommended another clinical, radiological and electrophysiological follow-up examination at three months to the patient. However, she refused any further diagnostics because she was content with her current state.