A 53-year-old man with a history of hypertension presented with an ascending aortic aneurysm and severe aortic regurgitation and underwent a Bentall procedure with a 26 mm conduit and mechanical aortic valve. One year after the operation, a chest computed tomography revealed an aortic root pseudoaneurysm in the mediastinum, measuring 8.8 × 6.4 cm, with mural thrombus inside. Coronary button dehiscence with the formation of a pseudoaneurysm was diagnosed, where the entry point was right next to the reimplantation site of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) . Although the patient remained asymptomatic, and there was no remarkable finding of physical examination, the rapid progression in the size of the pseudoaneurysm is still worrisome. Upon admission, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a huge pseudoaneurysm with the orifice of the LMCA, right next to the aortic valve prosthesis, with systolic pulsatile flow from the aorta into the pseudoaneurysm cavity (; , ). Given his high risk of reoperation, he was referred for transcatheter device occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm and concomitant coronary stenting to prevent the impedance of blood flow of the LMCA.
Under TEE and fluoroscopic guidance, the pseudoaneurysm was selectively engaged with a 7F Judkins right coronary guide catheter, followed by passage of two 0.014 in coronary guidewire into the pseudoaneurysm, while a second 6F Judkins right guide catheter was introduced through contralateral femoral access that was used to engage LMCA, with a 0.014 in coronary guidewire into the distal left anterior descending coronary artery. Sequentially, we used a guide extension to cross the pseudoaneurysm and then introduced an extra-stiﬀ Conﬁda™ Brecker guidewire (Medtronic Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA), and finally, a 7F Judkins right coronary guide catheter was passed into the pseudoaneurysm. The Judkins right guide catheter facilitated a 5F shuttle sheath, for placement of a 6 × 4 mm Amplatzer Duct Occluder II (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA; ). Meanwhile, a drug-eluting stent was standing by in the left anterior descending coronary artery (; , ). Amplatzer Duct Occluder II 6 × 4 mm was deployed at the entry point of coronary button dehiscence under TEE guidance, and immediate thrombus formation was demonstrated (; , and ). Owing to the partial protrusion of the occluder into the LMCA, the drug-eluting stent (Xience Sierra 4.0/15 mm, Abbott, CA, USA) standing by in the left anterior descending artery was pulled back and deployed consecutively (see , ). Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated a patent LMCA following occluder deployment and left main coronary stenting (; , ). Intravascular ultrasounds confirmed the optimization of the drug-eluting stent, patency of the LMCA, and the secure positioning of the occluder . The final fluoroscopy showed well-seated devices (; , ). The patient was discharged after an uneventful hospital course. Post-procedural chest computed tomography and transthoracic echocardiography confirmed thrombosis formation after occluder and stent deployment, with minimal contrast leakage posterior to the aortic root and para-LMCA region ( and ). The patient has remained asymptomatic for 1 year following the procedure. During this time, he underwent chest computed tomography scans every 6 months. The pseudoaneurysm’s size has remained stable, with the presence of mural thrombus inside, and there have been no signs of progression.