A 68-year-old man was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for management of ventilator dependent respiratory failure. While undergoing rehabilitation following a recent protracted hospital course for “failure to thrive,” he suffered an episode of cardiac arrest presumed to be due to aspiration related hypoxia. He was transferred to our hospital due to difficulty being liberated from mechanical ventilation. Despite improvements in cognition and sensorium following his cardiac arrest, he had persistent motor deficits. Upon historical review, his family reported gait instability and substantial functional decline with complaints of progressive weakness over the preceding years. He was briefly evaluated for this four months prior but was noted to have normal motor function (5/5) in the upper and lower extremities. His symptoms at this time were attributed to vascular Parkinsonism in the context of known cerebrovascular disease, however, further diagnostic workup was not obtained. His physical exam upon arrival to our hospital was notable for absent cough and gag reflexes, diminished gross motor strength of proximal hip flexors (2/5) and extensors (2/5) in the bilateral lower extremities and increased tone throughout all extremities. Otherwise, he had grossly normal strength in the distal lower extremities (4/5) and bilateral upper extremities (4/5). He had normal cranial nerve function with preserved sensation to light touch. His outside hospital workup included modestly elevated creatinine kinase (5100 units/liter) and aldolase (58 units/liter) with no prior levels for comparison. Initial arterial blood gas data following his cardiac arrest showed normal arterial partial pressure of oxygen with minimal oxygen supplementation but significant hypercapnia due to a primary respiratory acidosis. Despite ruling out contributory intrinsic lung and cardiac dysfunction, he required persistently high pressure supported ventilation to maintain adequate acid–base status and minimize visible increased work of breathing. With elevated muscle specific enzymes and a history suggesting progressive isolated motor weakness, he was evaluated for myopathic causes of his persistent respiratory failure. Medications were reviewed and longstanding atorvastatin was discontinued. Additional lab work to assess electrolyte disturbances, thyroid function, paraproteinemia and rheumatologic disorders including myositis were all unrevealing. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was unrevealing for occult malignancy and concurrent paraneoplastic serology was also negative. Echocardiography demonstrated normal biventricular size, shape and function without valvular pathology. Pulmonary function testing was not performed due to the fact the patient was hospitalized. Swallowing assessment was not done given endotracheal intubation however he was noted to have normal speech and swallowing function during a speech and language pathologist evaluation three weeks prior. Ultimately, a right quadriceps muscle biopsy was obtained. Subsequent specimens were examined using a Leica DM2500 LED microscope with Leica N Plan 20X/10.40 and N Plan 40X/10.65 objectives and Path4K HDMI 4K C-Mount camera. No downstream processing was utilized. Initial histology demonstrated an increased variation in muscle fiber diameter with many degenerating and regenerating fibers along with a minimal lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate. Electron microscopy identified nemaline bodies within skeletal myofibers. Additionally, he was found to have elevated HMGCR antibodies (IgG 358 chemiluminescent units) in the setting of known high dose atorvastatin use following an ischemic stroke three years prior. However given the consistent histopathologic findings, he was diagnosed with sporadic late-onset nemaline myopathy (SLONM). After excluding plasma cell dyscrasias and HIV, our patient was started on a five-day course of IVIG with intravenous methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg). Due to interval worsening of renal function and sensorium, he was transitioned to lower dose oral prednisone (40 mg) until planned outpatient follow up by a neuromuscular specialist for further evaluation and consideration for further immune modulating therapies. Though the patient was able to tolerate longer durations of pressure support, he remained ventilator dependent at the time of discharge. He subsequently died one-month after discharge at his long-term advanced care facility.