A 48-year-old Caucasian female patient presented with an incidental finding of a solitary pulmonary lesion in a chest X-ray during preoperative work-up for a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for alimentary obesity. Her medical history was unremarkable, except for obesity (body mass index, 42kg/m2) and arterial hypertension.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the expected lesion in the upper left lobe of her lung, with a maximum diameter of 31mm in the axial plane and contrast enhancement at the outer tumor margin . Suspicious hilar or mediastinal lymph nodes were not detected. An 18fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET) scan showed low glucose utilization (standardized uptake value, 4.46) and we did not suspect malignancy. A bronchoscopy with alveolar lavage did not show any intraluminal tumor growth and a histopathological examination revealed regular bronchial epithelial cells. Initially, our patient refused an operation to remove the glomangioma. A chest CT scan three months later showed the tumor had not changed. At this time, our patient agreed to a surgical procedure and we performed a pulmonary wedge resection of her upper left lobe via a mini-thoracotomy. Intraoperative frozen sections revealed no signs of malignancy. Exact classification of the entity was not possible from the frozen sections. There were no postoperative complications and our patient was discharged six days postoperatively.
The histopathological findings presented a classic glomangioma containing highly homogenous glomus cells and partially dilated blood vessels, but no signs of cellular atypia . The tumor measured 33mm in maximal diameter, showed contact with the wall of a large bronchus, and was surrounded by regular alveolar tissue. Immunohistochemical examinations revealed a very low proliferation rate, based on molecular immunology Borstel-1 (MIB-1) being present in less than 1% of the cells, while smooth muscle antigen was positive in the cytoplasm of almost all of the tumor cells. Type IV collagen exhibited a chicken-wire pattern between the cells, which were negative for S-100, CD31, estrogen receptor and pancytokeratin AE1/AE3 staining in the glomus cells.