A 63-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 2-month history of epileptic seizures. A head CT was performed revealing a left frontal large inhomogeneous isohypodense area, with tenuously hyperdense components and numerous focal calcium deposits, probably related to a productive lesion.
The MRI showed a large area of altered signal of uneven appearance with both cortical and white matter involvement, hyperintense on T1-weighted images, related to the known heteroplastic productive lesion. Within the lesion, small postcontrast agent hyperintense spots seemed to be appreciated. The characteristics of the MRI images in accordance with the CT images were suggestive of oligodendroglioma. No other lesions were found on whole body CT. Surgical removal of the lesion and pathological examination was performed.
The lesion appeared as a 5 cm coarse yellowish mass with a hemorrhagic component involving about half of the specimen.
After fixation in 10% buffered formalin, the entire surgical specimen was sampled according to standard procedures and embedded into paraffin. Serial 4-μm thick sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin for conventional histology. Immunohistochemistry was performed on the paraffin sections with the following antibodies: synaptophysin (SP15, Ventana, Arizona, USA), Chromogranin A (LK2H10, Ventana, Arizona, USA), GFAP (EP672Y, Ventana, Arizona, USA), p53 (DO-7, Ventana, Arizona, USA), CD34 (QBEnd/10, Ventana, Arizona, USA), ATRX (D-5, Santa Cruz, Texas, USA), and Ki-67 (30-9, Ventana, Arizona, USA). The reactions were visualized using DAB detection.
Point mutations of IDH1 (codons 105/132), IDH2 (codons 140/172), and e BRAF (codon 600) were searched by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Hypermethylation of the MGMT promoter was verified by Pyrosequencing. The 1p/19q status was investigated with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Microscopically, the lesion was composed by small round cells with slightly hyperchromatic nuclei often surrounded by a clear halo embedded in a fibrillary matrix. Near the degenerative hemorrhagic area, the lesion was hypercellular with scattered large and squared-shape cells, vesicular nuclei, and prominent eosinophilic nucleoli resembling ganglion cells. No anaplastic cells, mitoses, endothelial proliferation, or necrosis could be seen.
The lesion exhibited distinctive immunohistochemical profiles. Larger ganglion-like cells showed expression of synaptophysin and chromogranin-A, but no CD34 expression . Both cells’ components showed that expression of ATRX, p53, and GFAP was positive in almost all the lesion. Ki-67 labeling index was 1.1% in a hotspot of 4069 cells. IDH1 was mutated at codon 132 by DNA genotyping and 1p/19q codeletion was highlighted by FISH examination. MGMT gene was found methylated. Moreover, no BRAF V600E mutation in exon 15 by direct DNA sequencing could be detected.
Finally, the case was diagnosed as oligodendroglioma WHO grade II with ganglioglioma-like maturation, IDH1-mutated, and 1p/19q codeleted.
After 2 months from the surgery (subtotal resection of the tumor), the patient received chemotherapy for 7 months, due to an increasing of the residual lesion on RM and PET scans. The patient is currently alive and asymptomatic.