We describe the case of a 77-year-old Asian man with a 10-year history of moderate-to-severe psoriatic erythroderma . He was treated with an anti-histamine drug and steroid ointment on his psoriasis for a few years but he was not treated with oral steroid agents. His psoriasis worsened. Considering the clinical severity of the features of his skin, he was treated with 14 days of Predonine (prednisolone) 15 mg orally and one treatment of infliximab 300 mg by intravenously administration in August 2013. He was discharged at the end of August 2013 because his skin condition was better and his itching symptom was relieved.
Three days later, he presented with shortness of breathing, general malaise, and anorexia. He was referred to our department of cardiovascular medicine in September 2013. His past medical history showed that he had herpes zoster 6 months earlier. His social history was not significant for alcoholic drinks or tobacco smoking. He denied illicit drug use. His job was a farmer. No particular environment was evident.
On physical examination, he was awake and oriented to time, place, and self. A neurological examination showed no abnormal reflex and no paralysis. His vital signs revealed heart rate of 111/minute, blood pressure of 101/49 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24/minute with an oxygen saturation of 97 % on 3 L/minute nasal oxygen supply. The other physical findings revealed no murmur and no wheezing in his chest and no tenderness in his abdomen. He underwent a series of laboratory tests. His white blood cell (WBC) count was 29,900/mm3 and polymorphonuclear neutrophilic cells were 84 %. His levels of liver and renal function were within normal range. Chest X-rays showed slight cardiac enlargement. An electrocardiogram showed preventricular atrial contraction. Chest computed tomography revealed pleural effusion and cardiac enlargement. The first cardiac echography showed mitral valve vegetation with diffuse hypokinesis of left ventricular wall motion and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated multiple fresh infarctions. He was given empiric therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam administered intravenously 4.5 g twice a day. His blood culture revealed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus infection. His antimicrobial therapy was modified to monotherapy with daptomycin administered intravenously 300 mg/day. Although the regimen was held , his systemic conditions worsened and he was unconscious. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and cardiogenic shock progressed. The following cardiac echography showed no mitral valve vegetation with grade III mitral regurgitation. We speculated vegetation removal from his mitral valve. He died 31 days after readmission from large brain infarction in October 2013. An autopsy showed fresh purulent embolism in his left middle cerebral artery , mitral valve vegetations , and septic micro-embolisms in multiple organs.