A 75-year-old asymptomatic male tested positive for colon cancer on routine screening using the FIT. Screening for colon cancer is performed through a provincial colon cancer screening program, in which average risk individuals between the ages of 50 and 74 receive a fecal immunochemical test (FIT) every 2 years. Individuals with an abnormal FIT test have further workup with colonoscopy through the Diagnostic Assessment Program (DAP) at our hospital. A digital examination revealed no abnormalities in the rectum. A colonoscopy performed on March 25, 2020, showed multiple colonic polyps and a 4-cm carpeting lesion in the rectum and distal sigmoid colon with a firm center (shown in ). The appendicular orifice was normal on colonoscopy (shown in ). The biopsy result for the rectal lesion was conclusive of a malignant lesion. The patient had a previous clinical history of prostate carcinoma that was treated with radiation and hormone therapy.
Staging MRI using the rectal cancer protocol performed on June 8, 2020, revealed a distended, T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense, heterogeneously enhancing the appendix measuring 1.6 cm in diameter and 6.7 cm in length. The appendix demonstrated a posterior course with its tip abutting the right lateral wall of the rectosigmoid (shown in ). A plaque-like intraluminal T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense mass was observed within the rectosigmoid contiguous with the appendix (shown in ). This raised the possibility of an appendiceal tumor invading the rectosigmoid and forming a plaque-like intraluminal rectosigmoid mass.
The posterosuperior wall of the urinary bladder was adherent to the rectosigmoid at the site of tumor infiltration with resultant tenting of the urinary bladder (shown in ). There was no evidence of extraluminal tumor extension or suspicious locoregional lymphadenopathy in the MRI.
Staging CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis performed on June 12, 2020, showed an enlarged appendix measuring up to 1.5 cm in width with irregular thickening of the appendicular wall which was highly concerning for malignancy (shown in ). The tip of the appendix was adherent to the rectosigmoid colon on the right side. There were no suspicious lymph nodes and no CT evidence of metastatic disease.
A low anterior resection with appendectomy and en bloc right hemicolectomy was performed on June 25, 2020. Intraoperative observations revealed significant tumor invasion of the trigone of the urinary bladder. An unsuccessful attempt to dissect the tumor adherent to the urinary bladder required a radical cystectomy with an ileal conduit. Although the patient had a slightly prolonged ileus postoperatively, he was discharged in stable condition after a satisfactory recovery.
Pathological reports confirmed a well-differentiated grade 1 adenocarcinoma, with a maximum dimension of 4.2 cm, arising from the appendix on a background of villous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia. Hematoxylin and eosin stains showed appendiceal adenocarcinoma invading through the appendiceal wall into the rectal muscularis and submucosa. Sectioning showed that the tumor emerged from the appendix, further forming a fistulous tract and invading the muscularis propria and submucosa of the rectosigmoid (shown in ). The overlying rectal mucosa contained a large villous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia. Examination of numerous sections confirmed that the rectal mucosal lesion was, in fact, an incidental villous adenoma located on the underlying appendiceal tumor that invaded the rectal muscularis and submucosa. Surgical resection margins were negative. Tumor invasion into the urinary bladder was not conclusive. The perivesical fat was clear of tumor involvement. No lymphovascular or perineural invasion was observed. Sixteen resected lymph nodes were tested negative for metastatic disease. The tumor corresponded to pT4b N0 disease.
Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor was negative for synaptophysin and chromogranin. CD56 showed focal area staining. Features of neuroendocrine carcinoma were not identified. Immunostains for CDX-2 and CK 20 were positive in keeping with colonic-type adenocarcinoma of the appendix. Pathology and immunohistochemistry confirmed that this was a typical adenocarcinoma arising from the appendix with dirty necrosis in the lumen and desmoplastic response around the tumor. The tumor was positive for the KRAS and PIK3CA gene mutations. The patient received adjuvant capecitabine; however, he tolerated only one cycle and decided not to proceed with the chemotherapy. He did not continue with chemotherapy and is now under observation.
The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ). The timeline for this case report has been described (shown in ).