A 7-month-old male infant was admitted to our clinic with the diagnosis of neonatal severe primary hyperparathyroidism. It was understood from the medical history that the patient was born full-term to a 41-year-old mother via normal vaginal route with a weight of 2.900 g and height of 51 cm, mother and father are consanguineous (cousins), the patient had been hospitalized multiple times due to hypercalcemia, the patient had been diagnosed with neonatal hyperparathyroidism based on the laboratory tests and genetic analysis, the patient had sustained septic episodes multiple times due to prolonged hospitalizations and that surgery was postponed until the patient weighted 5 kg. Blood samples had been previously collected from the parents for genetic tests and both were found to have familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (two copies of the missense mutation pro39ala in both parents).
The weight of the patient was 4.300 g, and the height was 62 cm on admission. He had severe respiratory distress and subcostal retractions. Lung sounds were bilaterally diminished on auscultation, and there were rales and rhonchi. Chest x-ray revealed rib fracture, pneumonic infiltrations in both lungs and an atelectatic area at the apex of the right lung. The patient was intubated and admitted to the intensive care unit. The whole-body x-ray revealed osteopenia and impaired mineralization of periosteal areas .
The patient was on a therapy with phosphate Sandoz and cinacalcet which he did not regularly receive due to his deteriorating clinical condition in the last few days; laboratory tests showed parathormone level of 1.835 pg/ml, calcium was 17.89 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase was elevated (586 U/L) and magnesium (1.36 mg/dL) and phosphorous (1.74 mg/dL) were decreased due to increased bone turnover. Intravenous therapy involving fluids, furosemide, pamidronate, and cinacalcet was commenced. The patient was extubated after two weeks and underwent surgery while he was placed in an oxygen hood. Total parathyroidectomy was performed . The right upper parathyroid gland had a more hyperplasic appearance than the other glands . All parathyroid glands were excised and sent to the laboratory for frozen examination, since intraoperative parathormone monitoring was not available at our clinic. The operation was terminated upon confirming by the frozen examination that all the four parathyroid glands have been successfully removed. Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, hemorrhage, and infection did not occur in the postoperative period.
The parathormone level was found to be 615 pg/mL in blood samples obtained after surgery, and thus cinacalcet therapy was resumed. The elevated parathormone level was considered to be related to an ectopic tissue. However, repeat sestamibi scintigraphy did not reveal an ectopic tissue. A decision was made to perform a second surgical operation. We evaluated the surgical area in detail again during the second operation. However, we could not find any parathyroid gland. We decided to evaluate different ectopic localizations in which we could not show ectopic gland on sestamibi scintigraphy. However, we have not been able to find the parathyroid gland even though we have repeatedly examined these localizations. In such a case, we had two options. Either look at the posterior mediastinum by thoracoscopy or excise the most common site of the ectopic gland and wait for the response to frozen examination. Since the parathyroid gland in the posterior mediastinum is very difficult to be detected by thoracoscopy in infants and will significantly prolong the surgical period, the second option was applied considering the unstable status of the patient. The patient underwent partial left lower pole thyroidectomy (the part associated with the thyrothymic ligament) and excision of thyroid thyrothymic extension. However, when the parathyroid gland could not be seen on frozen examination, it was decided to remove the thymus gland. The ectopic parathyroid gland was very small and was found embedded in the thymus tissue on frozen examination (ectopic and supernumerary intrathymicparathyroid gland) . The parathormone level was 8 pg/mL on postoperative day one, and calcium was 4.49 mg/dL. Emergency calcium replacement therapy was initiated. The parathormone level has fallen to zero in routine blood tests obtained on postoperative day three.
The patient was disconnected from the respirator on day five after the second surgery. However, his oxygen demand continued after extubation due to his chronic disease. The patient was discharged with oral replacement therapy [alfacalcidol and calcium].