In January, 2018, a 58 years old male patient was hospitalized for a tumor of the tongue . As comorbidity factors, a gastric ulcer (1983), vein thrombosis (2016), smoking and alcohol abuse stopped in 2015, were documented. In 2017, the patient was treated by radio-chemotherapy for an invasive carcinoma of the anal canal, stage T3NxM0. At examination, the lingual tumor was localized on the submucosal part of the left side of the tongue and measured 11 × 11 mm at MRI . The patient benefited from a surgical removal of the tumor . The histological analysis of the specimen showed that the bulk of the tumor was localized in the tongue muscle, the upper part of the lesion remaining at 0.5 mm of the basal membrane . The epithelium was normal, without ulceration or intra-epithelial neoplasia. At higher magnification, the tumor corresponded to a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), keratinizing . The stroma presented moderate lymphocytic infiltration. No vascular or peri-neural invasion was seen. Immunophenotyping revealed a strong p16 labeling (100% of the cells) . The tumor was well limited in the periphery and the surgical margins were clear.
Considering the previous diagnosis of carcinoma of the anal canal, the histological features of the two tumors were compared and complementary virological analyses were performed in order to document a possible metastasis to the tongue from the original primary anal tumor. Histologically, anal and lingual tumors corresponded to bona fide SCCs . As compared to the lingual tumor, the keratinization in the anal carcinoma was less pronounced and a poorly differentiated component somewhat reminiscent of a basaloid carcinoma was also present, exhibiting necrotic foci. At the upper part of this anal tumor specimen, there was an ulceration edged by lateral extension of high grade intra-epithelial neoplasia. In addition, on the epithelium, distant from the ulceration, there were condylomatous changes characterized by the presence of irregular nuclei, monocellular dyskeratosis and koilocytes at the surface layer of the epithelium . Immunohistochemistry showed a strong p16 expression (100% of the cells), also observed in the intra-epithelial and condylomatous lesions. HPV detection was performed by PCR using primers specific for HPV16 and HPV18, as well as the consensus GP5/GP6 primers. This analysis found HPV16 DNA in the two tumor specimens and consensus HPV sequences in the anal carcinoma specimen. In situ hybridization was performed using the INFORM HPVIII Family 16 probe (Ventana Medical Systems Tucson, AZ, USA) detecting HPV16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 45, 52, 56, 58, 66 genotypes. This analysis showed the presence of scattered dot signals, located close to the nucleus membrane of the tumor cells in anal and lingual carcinoma , corresponding to the presence of integrated HPV DNA sequences. No signal was found in the surrounding tissue or in the epithelium. The condylomatous lesion in the anal specimen was negative.
The two tumors presented thus substantial histological and viral similarities but these observations could not permit to conclude metastasis originating from anal tumor since similar tumors associated with the same HPV genotype could be developed independently in the two organs. Therefore, we decided to further analyze these two tumors using the CaptHPV assay in separate experiments, in order to see if specific viral signature could help to make the diagnosis more precise. Using this assay, HPV53 and HPV16 genomes were found in the anal carcinoma (5258 and 75,990 reads, respectively, out of 111,644 reads including 3 human one-copy housekeeping genes as a control for the CaptHPV method). Whereas HPV53 DNA sequences corresponded to the full length viral genome, most probably related to viral episomes, HPV16 DNA showed a breakpoint on the E2/E4 ORFs with a deletion of 6 nucleotides. The LCR, E6 E7 L1 and L2 ORFs were conserved. The identified integration mechanism of HPV16 in the tumor cell genome was that of two junctions in a co-linear pattern (2J-Col). Analysis found 55 viral/human hybrid reads allowing the identification of the HPV16 DNA integration in the 4q25 chromosomal band locus with a 178,808 bp deletion in the cell genome corresponding to the deletion of C4orf32 (FAM241A) gene and CCDC34P1, RPS12P8, RPL36AP19 and TUBB8P3 pseudogenes . In the carcinoma of the tongue, molecular analysis disclosed 6110 reads of HPV16, without evidence of HPV53 DNA. The viral pattern was strictly identical to that observed in the anal tumor: conservation of the LCR, E6 E7 L1 and L2 ORFs and breakpoint of the E2/E4 ORF with 6 nucleotides deletion. A total of 131 hybrid reads between HPV16 and the cell genome were found, corresponding exactly to the same locus of integration of viral DNA at the 4q25 site. The 178,808 bp genomic deletion was also found in the lingual tumor. We hypothesized that the absence of HPV53 in the lingual tumor was related to the fact that this genotype was associated with the intra-epithelial neoplasia found in the vicinity of the anal carcinoma, and was not involved in the tumor spread. To confirm this hypothesis, we performed macro-dissection of this intra-epithelial neoplasia and DNA extracted was analyzed using CaptHPV method. This analysis found episomal HPV53 DNA sequences, confirming thus the co-occurrence HPV53-associated intra-epithelial lesion and HPV16-associated invasive carcinoma in the anal tissue specimen.
On the whole, the perfect identity of the molecular features of the HPV16 DNA sequences and integration pattern in the two tumors demonstrates that the tongue tumor is a metastasis of the anal carcinoma.