A healthy young man in his early 30s presented to our emergency department after a high-velocity automobile accident with severe injuries to his right thigh and knee regions. Massive degloving of the anterolateral thigh, skin loss over the knee, necrotizing subcutaneous tissues, severe thigh muscle injuries with discolored vastus medialis, and ruptured extensor quadriceps tendon-patellar complex were present during admission . During the first surgical exploration, injured bulk of vastus medialis muscle did not bleed on cuts nor respond to electrocautery. Under these circumstances, radical debridement of all non-responsive muscles is the current recommendation, which proceeds till we encounter bleeding muscle tissues responding to electrocautery. However, the patient himself opposed radical debridement and insisted on maximum salvage of all his injured soft tissues. Respecting his wishes and after explaining all potential risks while obtaining his consent, a tissue engineered reconstructive approach was instituted.
In this approach, accurate conservative debridement was performed first, carefully excising only the definitely necrosed soft tissues. Clinically, the necrotic tissues were clear from their blackish discoloration and shrivelled appearance. The preserved tissues included doubtful reddish or maroon-colored muscle tissues not bleeding to cuts and not responding to electrocautery. All injured soft-tissue pockets were explored and irrigated with povidone-iodine solution diluted with normal saline. Thereafter, 27 ml of venous blood was obtained and anticoagulated with 3 ml of sodium citrate. Centrifugation for 10 min at 1600 rpm yielded approximately 12 ml of PRP, which was injected in small aliquots throughout the injured muscles and other soft tissues.
Finally, the NPWT dressings were altered by carving out 1 cm3 cup shapes on one surface of the reticulated foam with biopsy punches and scissors . The multifaceted foam surface was then wrapped around the injured muscle mass. Next, we applied short duration, frequent variable, cyclical suction therapy on the damaged soft tissues. Applying the lessons derived from successful preclinical studies, we aimed to maximize revascularization by adapting a cyclical suction method. This method included six cycles of specialized suction implemented over 8 h every day. Each cycle comprised 30 min of high NPWT at 100 mmHg, followed by 60 min breaks when negative pressure returned to 75 mmHg. For the rest 16 h of the day, baseline negative pressure remained at 75 mmHg .
We observed some improvements in the wound condition during the second surgical exploration 4 days later . Further improvements were observed during the third exploration after another 4 days . We located the source of a scanty but persistent discharge to be on an area of the femur, from where vastus medialis had avulsed off during the initial injury (, white arrow). This discharge turned out to be repeatedly culture negative. During the fourth surgical exploration approximately 2 weeks after the injury, all treated soft tissues showed substantial improvements. The preserved bulk of vastus medialis now bled on cuts and responded weakly to electrocautery stimulation. Since all the salvaged muscles and tendons appeared well primed for reconstruction, we repaired the knee joint capsule, injured muscles, and quadriceps tendon-patellar attachments, restoring the anatomical congruity of the extensor patellar mechanism .
For covering the significant knee-thigh wound with exposed quadriceps tendon, we counseled the patient about different types of reconstructions. Once again, he went against the grain of prevalent reconstructive practices and insisted on avoiding flap surgeries. After considering all options, he chose to perform biomaterial application as an alternative to traditional reconstruction. The selected biomaterial, comprising an absorbable polyurethane foam matrix sealed by a non-degradable polyurethane film (biodegradable temporising matrix, PolyNovo Ltd., Australia), covered the sizeable 24 cm × 11 cm wound . The patient had a painless and uneventful post-operative recovery, and got discharged the next day. Physiotherapy started immediately afterward, including supervised weight-bearing with a hinged knee brace. Scanty serous discharge trickling through the matrix was noticed during his weekly change of dressings. Wound swabs from the discharge turned out to be culture negative, though.
Removing the outer film layer of the biomaterial 5 weeks after its application, we found exuberant healthy granulations over most areas of the knee-thigh wound. However, vascularization of a yellowish 3 cm × 1 cm area overlying the quadriceps tendon appeared to be doubtful. It was the same area from where serous discharge used to trickle through earlier . Punch biopsies from both the granulating reddish and the yellowish areas were sent for histopathology. In the reddish areas, fibroblast ingrowth and neoangiogenesis were found in 50% of the studied areas. While in the yellowish part, these changes were seen in 10% areas . Finally, we applied thin split-skin grafts over both the reddish and yellowish areas, and discharged the patient the next day with a plaster backslab. All the skin grafts “took” well within a week, including those on the yellowish areas.
Post-operative physiotherapy ensured a quick return of strength and function of the involved lower extremity. The patient resumed all normal activities and effortlessly performed strenuous office work within the next few weeks. Six months postoperatively, he had a mature, pliable, skin grafted area with complete range of movements of the knee joint . Within 1 year, he regained full strength and function of his injured lower limb, and engaged in active sports, swimming, mountain climbing, and other strenuous activities . A detailed post-operative patient reported outcomes survey on a visual analog scale documented an excellent satisfaction rate .