The patient was a 48-year-old male with oligometastatic renal clear cell carcinoma to the pancreatic body. He presented for the evaluation of atraumatic progressive left arm pain for 2 weeks. Radiographs showed a left pathologic midshaft humeral fracture . Radiotracer uptake of the left humerus was seen on bone scan. We discussed with the patient the risks and benefits of pre-operative embolization. We proceeded with intervention without embolization due to his significant instability at the fracture site, pain, and minimal soft-tissue tumor component [, ]. We discussed with the patient that given his medical history of oligometastatic disease, a biopsy would be beneficial along with fracture stabilization.
The surgical plan was to perform an open biopsy frozen section analysis. If the biopsy was consistent with metastatic carcinoma, we planned for left humerus curettage of the tumor and stabilization of his left pathologic humeral shaft fracture with an intramedullary implant . Due to the hypervascular nature of this tumor histology, multiple points of large-bore peripheral access and an arterial line were placed by the anesthesia team. Given the increased complexity involved with pathologic fracture fixation, a standard humeral intramedullary nail system, humeral plating system, and PBSS were available. The patient was positioned supine on Jackson table, and a 3cm incision was made utilizing a mini-open anterolateral approach to the humeral shaft to take an intra-operative biopsy. The frozen section pathology appeared to be grossly abnormal, consistent with metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. After the frozen section analysis yielded a diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma, curettage of the tumor was performed through the same open biopsy site.
During curettage, significant bleeding was encountered. The patient’s hemodynamics was monitored closely, and the patient was resuscitated appropriately. The patient’s blood loss from the mini-open biopsy was not unexpected, and both the surgical and anesthesia teams were prepared with multiple units of blood ready in the room.
Most large diameter humeral nails are around 10 mm . Given the width of the lytic metastatic lesion in our patient, there was a concern about having no control of bleeding at the fracture site due to the bleeding from dead space that cannot be filled quickly after standard intramedullary rod placement. The use of a plate system in an acute setting is limited by the amount of soft-tissue dissection required to reach the area of concern. An intra-operative decision was made to achieve hemostasis and fracture fixation with an expandable device .
Fluoroscopy was utilized to identify the lateral portion of the proximal humerus distal to the greater tuberosity, which allowed for the protection of the rotator cuff insertion during the approach. An incision was made proximal to the course of the axillary nerve. Careful dissection of the deltoid allowed for access to the proximal humerus. A threaded guidewire was inserted into the proximal humerus. The opening reamer was used to ream the lateral cortex of the proximal humerus for the PBSS implant. A 2.0 mm ball-tipped guidewire was inserted into the proximal humerus using a curved gearshift . This guidewire was inserted across the fracture site and into the distal fracture fragment .
Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral fluoroscopy imaging was taken to ensure that the guidewire was in the bone both proximally and distally. The length of the IlluminOss implant was determined utilizing an external fluoroscopic ruler. To ensure the delivery sheath can be inserted, a minimum internal diameter of 7.0 mm must be achieved using the reamer . A sheath was inserted over the ball-tipped guidewire, ensuring that the sheath went past the fracture site. Ball-tipped guidewire was removed. On the back table, the device was primed with monomer and prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Before delivery to the surgical site, it is essential to cover the device from OR and room lights to maintain its integrity. The balloon was inserted through the sheath . The sheath was then removed . AP and lateral fluoroscopy was utilized to ensure appropriate length, alignment, and rotation of the humerus .
The FDA recommends a minimum canal diameter of 13 mm for the standalone use of the implant or a diameter <13 mm when used in conjunction with plates . In this case, a 22 mm diameter balloon was chosen. The liquid monomer was injected into the balloon until maximum fit and fill were achieved. As the balloon expanded and the monomer filled, there was a noticeable decrease in bleeding due to the tamponade effect ( and ). The light source was activated, delivering 436 NM visible light intramedullary. The cure time for the polymerization process ranges from 300 to 1000 s, depending on the size of the balloon . This process initiated an exothermic reaction, causing the device to eventually set at body temperature . Finally, the balloon was cut following standard manufacturer instructions.
To help provide rotational control, large fragment cortical nonlocking screws were placed utilizing a freehand percutaneous technique with the assistance of fluoroscopy. A single screw was placed lateral to medial in the proximal humerus. A single screw was placed anterior to posterior in the distal humerus. This completed the treatment of humeral shaft fracture with the insertion of an intramedullary implant with locking screws .