A 77-year-old non-Hispanic white female with history of a right carpal tunnel release and no family history of cancer was diagnosed with melanoma of the left ankle and treated with wide local excision. The melanoma recurred and she was started on ipilimumab and nivolumab. After three cycles she developed multiple irAEs including rash, transaminitis, and hypophysitis, all of which were responsive to steroids, as well as retinopathy requiring IVIg. Further anticancer therapy was held as she had a complete response to ipilimumab and nivolumab. She subsequently began to develop nonspecific symptoms of lower back pain. Several months later, she developed left lower extremity weakness and started to use a cane. Soon after, she also developed left foot drop. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed significant spinal stenosis at L4–L5, and she underwent L4–L5 posterior fusion without improvement in her symptoms. Her weakness continued to progress to include her left hand.
Per the initial neurologist’s evaluation, the patient’s mental status and cranial nerves were intact. The motor examination found atrophy in her left calf. Right arm showed intact strength, except for 4+/5 in the deltoid and thumb abduction. In the left arm, strength was intact except for 4/5 in finger extension, 4−/5 in finger abduction, and 4/5 thumb abduction. Right leg strength was intact, except for 4/5 in hip flexion. Left leg exam showed hip flexor strength of 4+/5, left foot dorsiflexion 2/5, left plantarflexion 4+/5, and left foot eversion and inversion 4/5. All modalities of sensory examination and finger–nose–finger testing were within normal limits bilaterally. Reflexes showed absent left ankle reflex, and otherwise 2+. Her gait was steppage, with evident left foot drop.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) showed severe reduction of response amplitudes of the left median and left ulnar motor studies, with relatively less involvement of the right median nerve. Motor responses of the left deep peroneal and tibial nerves were absent, and they were relatively spared on the right. Marked reductions of sensory response amplitudes were noted in the bilateral median and left ulnar nerves. Response amplitudes of the right radial nerve and bilateral sural nerves were normal. Overall, the EMG showed predominantly axonal involvement, and occasional relative slowing of conduction velocities in some of the nerves was felt to be secondary to cold extremity temperature and not indicative of a true demyelinating process. There was also a concern for bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Overall, the EMG and NCS demonstrated asymmetric involvement of multiple individual nerves in different extremities, without a length-dependent pattern , consistent with MM.
Laboratory findings included an elevated hemoglobin (Hgb) A1c, a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test of 1:160, and an antibody to fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 (FGFR-3) titer of 7000 (normal < 3000), which is known to be associated with inflammatory neuropathy. Serologic studies for anti-dsDNA (double-stranded DNA), anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP), anti-Sjögren's Syndrome A (SSA), anti-Sjögren's Syndrome B (SSB), anti-Smith, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and a paraneoplastic panel were all negative. She also tested negative for Treponema pallidum antibody, Lyme antibody, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
The patient’s symptoms, NCS, and EMG findings were consistent with MM, though we considered other diagnoses that could account for an asymmetric, sensorimotor, axonal neuropathy. Neurolymphomatosis (NL) is a dissemination of lymphoma to the peripheral nervous system, which can mimic inflammatory neuropathies such as MM. NL is diagnosed through cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, nerve biopsy, and MRI. In NL, CSF shows cells with lymphocytic predominance as well as protein elevation. Nerve biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosing NL. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and MRI are also helpful, as they can show enlargement or enhancement of nerves or nerve roots . Her nerve biopsy did not show any evidence of NL. Multifocal peripheral neuropathies may also result from metastatic invasion of the nerves, for which we found no evidence and would also be able to detect via nerve biopsy.
The patient was started on IVIg 2 g/kg administered in two doses and methylprednisolone 1 g intravenous for five doses. She showed substantial improvement in her left-sided strength. She was started on a prednisone taper and received additional courses of IVIg. IVIg therapy was interrupted due to a hospitalization, and she noted worsening weakness. Given her lack of sustained response to prednisone and IVIg, she was started on rituximab.
Following treatment with IVIg, repeat NCS/EMG confirmed progression of MM. Sural nerve biopsy showed endoneural fibrosis and scattered endoneural macrophages . There was no evidence of fibrinoid necrosis or active vessel wall inflammation. There was no evidence of granulomas or amyloid on Congo red stain. There were rare scattered perivascular lymphocytes in the epineural connective tissue.
Despite sustained B-cell depletion, the patient developed severely progressive neuropathy with autonomic sequelae of urinary incontinence and constipation. The patient and her family elected to pursue hospice care, and she passed away.