A 12-year-old Ugandan female, referred from a peripheral health center with 2 years history of on-and-off spontaneous progressively worsening epistaxis, associated with an 8/12 history of progressive abdominal distension, and mild pain. The bleeding is preceded by a sharp frontal throbbing headache. Two weeks prior to admission, epistaxis worsened with up to 4 episodes per day with an increase in abdominal distension and pain. In the same period, she developed on-and-off low-grade fevers, associated with severe headaches, palpitations, dizziness, and general malaise. She had had 3 admissions last year for which she was managed for malaria, with no blood transfusion. She is the last born of 6 and had no family history of a similar condition.
Examination revealed moderate anemia, mild jaundiced, and nontender mild submandibular lymphadenopathy. Was pyrexic with an axillary temperature of 38.4°C, tachycardic at 120 beats per minute. Other vitals were unremarkable. She had a non-tender moderately distended abdomen, with a massive hepatosplenomegaly (spleen 8cm below the coastal margin and liver 12 cm below the coastal margin) (see ). Other organ systems were unremarkable.
Investigations revealed pancytopenia (Hemoglobin of 5.9g/dl, White cell count of 2100/µL, platelets of 76,000/µL) (See for details) on a complete blood count. Peripheral blood smear revealed ring forms of plasmodium falciparum and marked thrombocytopenia. Gross hepatosplenomegaly and scanty mesenteric lymphadenopathy were noted on abdominal ultrasonography. A clinical diagnosis of malaria with hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly (HMS) was made with a differential diagnosis of hematological malignancy. Subsequently, a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate were done. Smears were stained with Giemsa (see and ) while trephine biopsy was stained with H&E and these revealed Gaucher cells) which are weakly periodic acid Schiff (PAS) positive (see ). Therefore, a diagnosis of Gaucher’s disease was made although enzyme assay for glucocerebrosidase could not be done due to financial constraints.
She was managed for malaria with 3 doses of intravenous artesunate, dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine, paracetamol, and folic acid. Because of the lack of definitive treatment for Gaucher’s disease, the family was counseled and discharged on tranexamic acid per required need, fansidar two tablets monthly, and to be reviewed once every month. After 6 months of follow-up, splenectomy was done due to worsening hematological parameters. The procedure was successful, the spleen weighed 695g and was firm solid with no infarcts or discrete nodules seen (see and ). Following splenectomy, the subsequent CBCs initially revealed an upsurge in the leukocytes (14,400/µL), platelets (666,000/µL), and near-normal hemoglobin (10.0g/dl) (done on day 2 weeks post-operatively). Five weeks postoperatively, she was still running a leukocytosis (18,700/µL), a normal hemoglobin (11.4g/dl), but had developed a thrombocytopenia (28,000/µL) (see ). She also had developed severe bone pains in the pelvis and thighs with the inability to walk and stand. She also had episodic fevers. Lower limb x-ray revealed early skeletal deformities (Erlenmeyer flask deformity) (see ) involving the metaphysis of the femur. There was no evidence of osteonecrosis on x-ray. Her pain was managed by morphine in addition to physiotherapy. She still attends monthly reviews at pediatric oncology clinic and physiotherapy although the prognosis is still not known. Currently, she is back to school and doing fairly well. To further improve her management, we are now in contact with the International Gaucher Alliance who we hope will be key in the subsequent management of her condition. These events are summarized in the attached timeline figure (see ).