A 25-year-old lady presented to hospital 36 days after giving birth via an uncomplicated lower segment caesarean section. She stated that the scar was well healed since the fifth day post-surgery and she had begun breast feeding. There was no history of nipple trauma or mastitis. She complained of a 15 day history of progressive pain, swelling and decreased range of motion in her right knee. Systemic examination revealed pyrexia of 38.5 degrees Celsius and a tachycardia of 120 beats per minute. Examination of the knee demonstrated a red, hot, swollen, tender joint with minimal range of motion. Radiographs of the knee were unremarkable. The knee was aspirated under aseptic conditions and 35 mls of turbid fluid was collected.
Blood laboratory results were as follows: white cell count 15.8 × 109/L, CRP > 250 and ESR 75. Initial gram stain of the aspirate showed 3+ of white cells but no organisms.
In view of the clinical picture, the patient underwent urgent arthroscopic washout of the knee. It was noted that the synovium was thickened and inflamed, and biopsies were taken. Furthermore, there was a significant amount of pus in the suprapatellar pouch. The knee was washed out with nine litres of normal saline.
Cultures of the pus taken from the knee subsequently grew Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to flucloxacillin. Cytology of the fluid was negative for crystals. The biopsies taken revealed acute synovitis with extensive ulceration of the synovial lining lined by inflammatory exudate composed of fibrin, polymorphs and scattered macrophages.
The patient was given intravenous benzylpenicillin (1.2 g QDS) and flucloxacillin (1 g QDS) post-operatively and the patient clinically improved. She underwent a further arthroscopic washout of the knee three days after the original procedure. It was found at the second operation that there was some pus in the lateral arthroscopy portal wound though no pus within the knee joint itself.
In total, the patient completed a week's course of intravenous antibiotics and four further weeks of oral antibiotics (Penicillin V 500 mg QDS, Flucloxacillin 500 mg QDS). She was seen in the out-patient clinic 11 weeks after her presentation where she was noted to be doing well with an improved range of motion in her knee of 0-80 degrees.