A 5-year-old boy, of Bantu ethnicity, presented with a 1-month history of progressive, non-painful, soft tissue mass in the left palatal ridge, first noted in July 2021. He was otherwise well and had no reported constitutional symptoms, no jaw swelling and no abdominal or central nervous system symptoms. He had been earlier diagnosed with pre-B ALL [high risk owing to a high white blood cell count, according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) criteria] at 3 years of age, for which he was treated at our center according to local protocol (Additional file ) between November 2018 and June 2021, with well-achieved remission [minimal residual disease (MRD) negative], and had started long term surveillance. He did not receive irradiation or hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation during the first-line ALL treatment. His family and psychosocial history were unremarkable, and he had largely enjoyed normal growth, development, and health. A physical examination revealed a bluish–purplish mass in the left palatal ridge and no other significant findings (general or systemic).
A biopsy of the suspicious lesion was taken, and the histology was compatible with KS nodular stage. The hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stained sections, illustrated in Fig. , showed a tumor composed of nodules of spindle-shaped cells with mild atypia and extravasated blood cells and proliferating vascular slits .
An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed multiple enlarged intra-abdominal lymphadenopathies (para-aortic and mesenteric), the largest approximately 2.5 cm in longest diameter. Occult fecal blood was positive. The plain chest radiograph was largely normal .
The complete blood count, coagulation profile, and general chemistry were normal. The serological test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody was negative. HHV8 assay and other immunological tests could not be performed at our center because of the lack of a testing facility. The final pathology diagnosis was iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma. The patient was started on bleomycin (B) 10 IU/m2 3 weekly and vincristine (V) 1.5 mg/m2 weekly (BV) according to local protocol, with complete clinical remission after four cycles of chemotherapy —defined as the disappearance of all clinical manifestations, including tumor-associated edema. The child’s clinical course was monitored by routine physical assessment and basic imaging studies.
The repeat abdominal ultrasonography and chest radiograph were normal, and the fecal occult blood test was negative by the fourth cycle of chemotherapy. He went on to receive a total of six cycles of the BV treatment regimen and continues to be monitored with regular evaluation.