A previously healthy 28-year-old married Indonesian male, employed in the textile industry in Taiwan, presented with one month of progressive bone pain. Initially, he reported posterior neck pain a month ago. About a week before admission, he experienced left-sided chest pain. He sought outpatient care, where Ibuprofen and dexamethasone tablets were administered for three days. Subsequently, he developed discomfort in the right iliac crest region, radiating down his back thigh to the calf. He was later hospitalized due to a one-day fever peaking at 40.6 °C, accompanied by chills. He did not report muscle weakness, numbness, or any urinary or fecal incontinence. Furthermore, he showed no night sweats, cough, or sputum production, and had not experienced trauma or weight loss. The patient had no history of antibiotic or immunosuppressant use, except for a three-day, total 3 mg course of dexamethasone prior to admission. He denied any recent exposure to soil or birds. He had not traveled in the past 3 years. Furthermore, he had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. Additionally, there were no reported instances of intravenous drug use, blood product transfusions, or casual sexual activity in his medical history.
On physical examination, the patient presented as acutely ill, yet remained awake, alert, and oriented to time, place, and person. His vital signs were as follows: oral temperature 40.6 °C, pulse rate 147 beats/min, respiratory rate 21 breaths/min, and blood pressure 110/79 mmHg. Notably, respiratory, cardiac, and abdominal examinations yielded unremarkable findings. Nonetheless, tenderness was noted in the left lateral chest wall and right iliac crest. No redness or swelling was observed. The straight leg raising test was negative, and motor examination revealed normal strength (5/5 power) in both legs. No palpable lymph nodes or signs of oral candidiasis were observed.
Table displays laboratory findings revealing an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 64 mm/h (reference range 0–15), a slightly increased C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 2.82 mg/dL (reference range < 1). SARS-CoV-2 RNA and Influenza antigen tests were negative. White blood cell count: 8.3^3/µL (reference range 3.5–9.1), 71.6% neutrophils (reference range 39.4–72.6%), 11.7% lymphocytes (reference range 21–51%). Hemoglobin: 12.5 g/dL (reference range 14–17). Elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 66 U/L (reference range 11–42). Alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 71 U/L (reference range 34–104). Bilirubin: 0.4 mg/dL (reference range 0.3–1.0). Glucose: 104 mg/dL (reference range < 140). ANA reactivity: positive at ≧ 1:160 (reference range 1:80(-)). Complement C3: 163.4 mg/dL (reference range 87.0–200.0). Complement C4: 46.2 mg/dL (reference range 13.1–50.2). Tumor markers: CA199 8.5 U/mL (reference range ≦ 35.0), CEA 1.5 ng/mL (reference range < 5.0 non-smoker), PSA 1.117 ng/mL (reference range ≦ 4.0). Urinalysis and blood cultures: negative. Results of the serum biochemistry tests were essentially normal. Assessment for an underlying immunodeficiency was negative for HIV and autoantibodies against interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Lumbar puncture (LP) showed clear, colorless cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with an opening pressure of 65 mmH2O. CSF parameters were normal: cell count < 4/µL (reference range, 0–5), glucose 69 mg/dL (reference range, 40–70), and protein 44.3 mg/dL (reference range, 15–45). Cryptococcus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative. India ink staining was not done. CSF and blood cultures were negative for bacterial or fungal growth. Chest X-ray showed increased lung markings in lower lung fields . Lumbar spine X-ray ruled out compression fracture. Sacrum X-ray indicated mild narrowing of the L5-S1 disc. Liver echo indicated splenomegaly of unknown cause. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) of the lower limbs were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the sacrum showed multiple lesions in the bilateral iliac bone and lower L4 vertebral body . A 99mTc whole body bone scan indicated an increased uptake in the left parietal bone, left lower cervical spine, L2, L4, bilateral SI joint, right knee, left ankle, anterolateral left 1st and 3rd ribs, and posterior left 10th rib . Furthermore, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 0.85 cm ovoid solid nodule in the right lower lung and multiple osteolytic bony lesions in the sternum, left 1st and 3rd ribs, and right humeral head . A CT-guided biopsy confirmed Cryptococcus infection in the L4 vertebral body and right iliac bone. Fine-needle aspiration cytology, stained with Grocott’s-Gomori Methenamine silver (GMS), revealed Cryptococcus. Histopathological analysis confirmed a granuloma consistent with Cryptococcosis , and cultures from the aspirate yielded Cryptococcus neoformans at both sites. The patient’s serum Cryptococcal antigen titer of 1:2560 confirmed disseminated Cryptococcosis, suggesting probable involvement in the sternum, left 1st and 3rd ribs, right humeral head, right lower lung, and definitively affecting the L4 spine and both iliac bones. After admission, the patient received IV amoxicillin/clavulanate (1500 mg every 8 h). Persistent fever and bone pain indicated Cryptococcosis, leading to subsequent treatment with IV amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/day) and oral flucytosine (100 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses) for 4 weeks. Upon improvement, the patient was discharged with a one-year prescription for oral fluconazole (400 mg/day). Inflammatory markers, such as ESR and CRP, consistently remained within normal limits, and the patient remained symptom-free post-discharge.