A 29-year-old male presented with progressive lower back pain, left lower-limb radicular pain, lower-limb weakness, and inability to walk associated with intermittent incontinence over a period of 3 months. The patient reported a history of low-grade fever and nighttime sweats. There was a history of IV drug abuse and recent unprotected sexual intercourse. Furthermore, the patient had a recent contact with a person diagnosed with TB. Clinical examination was remarkable for moderate to severe back pain associated with lower-limb weakness (2–3/5 power): right > left, pinprick sensation was decreased on the left side from L2 to S1, joint position sensation was intact, reflexes were decreased (+1), and rectal tone was normal. White blood cell count was normal but inflammatory marker levels were elevated (erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR], 120). Blood culture results were negative. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) and MRI revealed sternoclavicular joint arthritis, left fourth anterior rib infection with a pathological fracture, and multilevel early disc dehydration. Moreover, at the L4/L5 level, there was a 4.5 × 1.2 × 0.8 cm intradural, extramedullary bright T2 and bright Tl signal intensity lesion with low internal T2 signals, which was compressing the filum terminale anteriorly. There was associated underlying bone scalloping. At the same level, there was a partially imaged tubular branching, abnormal bright T2/fluid signal with an epicenter at the neural foramina encircling the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies anteriorly .
Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated, and the patient underwent emergency L4–L5 decompression. The infiltrated bone was weak and brittle, with some sclerotic areas. The ligamentum flavum was thickened and infected. The epidural collection was multilayered and lobulated. Nonpurulent phlegmon was noted. In other areas, there was a white-yellow purulent fluid discharge within a thin encapsulated membrane. Phlegmon/abscess in the epidural space was observed. The abscess perforated the dura and was dissecting intradurally (within the subdural space). The dura was thick and inflamed. In addition, a paraspinal muscle abscess extension noted .
The abscess was grossly removed. Notably, the arachnoid layer was thick, inflamed, and intact. Hemostasis was achieved after adequate decompression and sampling. The dura was sealed using gel foam, along with TachoSil and TISSEL. A drain was inserted. The fascia was closed water-tight using 2.0 Vicryl. The subcutaneous layer was closed using 2.0 Vicryl while the skin was sealed with staples. The patient was shifted to the recovery unit and had no complications.
The tissue cultures were positive for Enterobacter cloacae, Citrobacter koseri, and Staphylococcus epidermidis. The result of the QuantiFERON-TB test was positive. The final surgical pathology revealed a well-formed necrotizing (caseating) granuloma with central necrosis surrounded by epithelioid histiocytes and lymphocytes. Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were negative for Mycobacterium .
IV antibiotics were selected based on the culture report, and anti-TB medications were initiated. Postoperatively, the patient demonstrated a remarkable lower-limb power improvement and back/radicular pain alleviation.