A forty-one-year old female admitted to our hospital with chief complain of Raynaud’s phenomenon for 2 years, and weakness of four extremities for about 2 months. She had morning stiffness of both hands and the symptoms were relieved after 20–30 min of repeated rubbing. No joint pain, fever, oral ulceration, alopecia and rash were noticed. In addition, 2 months before beginning the admission, the patient felt weakness on her both arms and legs, and the weakness aggravated progressively. Difficulties in squatting or standing up, as well as hair combination were noticed. She also complained about muscle tenderness without any difficulty in breathing or swallowing. She was diagnosed as hypothyroid myopathy in a local hospital and levothyroxine was taken. However, her weakness was not improved, accordingly, she was transferred to our department.
The patient’s past medical history was remarkable for left glaucoma with retinal detachment and impaired visual sight in 2015. Besides, she was diagnosed as SWS since childhood. She was also diagnosed as hypothyroidism, and regular levothyroxine replacement was given for several years as well.
Physical examination revealed that the vital sign is stable. 12 cm × 12 cm red patches were visible on her left side, and the boundary was unclear as well. Thyroid nodules and swelling were not palpated. Breathing sounds in both lungs were clear. Proximal muscle strength of her both arms was in level-4 (the UK Medical Research Council criteria), and strength of both proximal legs was in level-3 as well. The distal strengths of her arms and legs were normal, and muscle tenderness was quite obvious in her both arms and legs. Other neurological examinations were not significant.
Laboratory examinations revealed positive anti-nuclear antibody with titer of 1:320 (particle pattern), positive anti-recombinant RO-52 (+++), positive weakly anti-nucleosome antibody (+), and negative anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Level of serum creatine kinase (CK) was 11,183 U/L (normal range: 26–140), and myoglobin was 1916 ng/ml (normal range: 25–58). Other chemical examinations revealed that alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were elevated. Thyroid function was normal with 278 IU/ml (normal range:0–115) of elevated anti- thyroglobulin (TG). Electromyography (EMG) showed typical myopathic findings with predominantly proximal muscle weakness. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed increased anterior chamber of left eye, skin thickening of left facial and abnormal signals of interior wall of left eye, as well as upper and lower recuts. Intracranial brain parenchyma was normal and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was not remarkable as well.
Inflammatory myopathy was diagnosed based on the clinical features and laboratory results. Intravenous methylprednisolone (MP (80 mg/d) was administrated and methotrexate (10 mg/week) was intramuscularly injected. The patient’s muscle strength gradually improved, and CK dramatically decreased to 2800 U/L. After 2 weeks, methylprednisolone was gradually tapered to 40 mg/d. As the CK was quite high, intravenous cyclophosphamide was added with a total amount of 6 g.
The patient was discharged with oral MP tapering and methotrexate (MTX) (7.5 mg/week) for maintenance. She was regularly followed-up at our clinic as well. For about half a year, the muscle strength of her arms and legs returned to normal status, and CK was also within normal range.