A forty-year-old man presented with a posterior column fracture of the acetabulum and ipsilateral inferior ramus of the pubis fracture associated with enterorrhexis of the rectum due to a traffic accident on Mar. 25th, 2006. Emergency repair of the rectum was performed immediately after the injury. During emergency exploration and repair, the pelvic fracture was determined to have no relation to the rectal injury, thus defining the fracture as a closed fracture. The primary acetabular fracture was a 62-A2.3 fracture according to the AO/OTA Classification. After eleven days in stabilized condition, the patient accepted an open reduction and internal fixation surgery through a posterolateral approach in a local hospital. However, the fracture was not reduced after the first surgery. The postoperative radiographic images show that two lock reconstruction plates were planted, but the displaced posterior column fracture was not restored anatomically, and the comminuted posterior wall fracture was not fixed rigidly. On Jan.10th, 2007, the patient presented to our outpatient clinic with increasing hip pain with weight-bearing and severe claudication. On physical examination, the affected limb was 3 cm shortened. Range of motion of the hip was limited to 20° in flexion, 0° in extension, 15° in adduction, and 0° in abduction. The radiographic images , including CT scans and three-dimensional reconstruction, revealed posterior subluxation and mal-union of the posterior column fracture, nonunion and bone defects in the posterior wall, and old impaction and degeneration at the posteroinferior portion of femoral head. Moreover, a massive osseous lesion existed in the posterolateral aspect of acetabulum, partially connected to the posterior column and surrounding the whole posterosuperior hip joint from the roof of the acetabulum to the intertrochanteric line. The osteoarthritic changes, including joint space narrowing, osteophyte formation, and subchondral lesions, were observed in the posterior area of the hip joint. However, more than 50% of the joint space remained, and the CT scan and three-dimensional reconstruction showed no evidence of collapse or necrosis. According to the medical record, no related therapy, including pharmacological or localized irradiation, was used for the prevention of heterotopic ossification.
To establish the diagnosis and relieve symptoms, the patient underwent operative excision of the osseous lesion in the hip and anatomical reconstruction of the posterior acetabular wall using structured iliac crest autograft with a Kocher-Langenbeck approach 9 months after the primary injury. The greater trochanter osteotomy was used to allow better access to the superior acetabulum. The large osseous lesion adhering to the surrounding tissue and bone was removed en bloc after meticulous release . The total weight of heterotopic ossific bone excised was approximately 515 g . The screws and plates from the former operation were removed. The sciatic nerve was identified and carefully preserved during the approach and release. A large defect was noticed after removal of the bony mass , and the joints were unstable on examination. The posterior acetabular wall defect was reconstructed with structured autograft harvested from the largest heterotopic ossific bone using an appropriate-sized acetabular reamer. The size of acetabular reamer was determined by the diameter of the femoral head and the depth of the acetabular fossa measured by radiography. The graft was then placed in the acetabular wall defect and fixed temporarily with two K-wires. A new method called acetabular tridimensional memory alloy fixation system (ATMFS), which has been satisfactorily used for treatment of posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum, was used for internal fixation [-]. The procedure of planting ATMFS was exactly the same as described in the related literature [,]. The two K-wires were then removed, and the wound was washed and closed around a drainage tube.
The drainage tube was removed 2 days after surgery. In the postoperative period, prophylaxis for recurrence of heterotopic ossification (indomethacin 25 mg three times daily) was administered for 6 weeks. Isometric contraction training of the lower limbs was encouraged starting one day after surgery. One week after surgery, the patient was asked to initiate and gradually increase the degree of extension and flexion of the hip while supine. Partial, toe-touch weight bearing with crutches or a walker was allowed four weeks postoperatively. Complete weight bearing on the affected limb was restricted until radiography demonstrated signs of union.
At the final follow-up examination 5 years and 6 months after the reconstructive surgery, the pain was relieved, the patient could walk by himself, the function of the injured joint was similar to the normal side , and the range of motion of the hip was improved, with flexion improved to 120°, extension to 5°, adduction to 30° and abduction to 15°. Radiographs of the hip showed slight recurrence of the ossified mass (Brooker et al. class II, mature), but with a certain distance to the joint. In addition, more than 50% of the joint space was maintained, and the femoral head was mostly congruent with the acetabulum. Although subchondral cysts and minimal signs of arthritis could be observed in the femoral head and acetabulum, no evidence of collapse or necrosis was found either in femoral or acetabular subchondral bone. The modified Merle d’Aubigne and Postel’s clinical outcome evaluation was scored as excellent. The Matta’s radiographic evaluation was scored as good.
The authors clarify that the written informed consent for participation and publication of clinical images was obtained from the patient in our study.