A 23-year-old male patient was referred to our public teaching hospital with two days history of colicky periumbilical abdominal pain, feculent vomiting and obstipation for one day. He had not had prior surgery, was HIV negative and had been generally well prior to this illness. He did however, admit to recurrent right lower quadrant abdominal pain throughout his life which had never been previously investigated. He had no relevant drug, family, psychosocial or genetic history.
Upon examination, he appeared dehydrated, lethargic and in mild respiratory distress. He had a temperature of 36.9 °C, a respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute and a saturation of 82%. He had moderate abdominal distension, visible peristaltic movements as well as peritonitis with rigidity and rebound tenderness. Digital rectal examination and assessment of other systems were unremarkable.
Blood investigations revealed leucocytosis of 13.11/mm3 (4–11/mm3), haemoglobin of 19.9 g/dl (14–17 g/dl), reflecting dehydration. He also had a high urea: 97 mMol/L (2–6.7 mMol/L) and serum sodium was 131 mMol/L (133–146 mMol/L).
An acute abdominal series of x-rays was performed which showed distended loops of small bowel with multiple air fluid levels.
A diagnosis of distal small bowel obstruction was made. The patient was immediately admitted and catheterised; resuscitation was instituted with crystalloids, intravenous antibiotics and nasogastric decompression. Oxygen was administered per face mask and he was taken to the operating room.
At laparotomy, haemorrhagic fluid was noted on peritoneal entry. An axial 360° counter-clockwise volvulus of the midgut from terminal ileum to mid transverse colon was encountered around a very narrow mesenteric base . There was gangrene of the involved intestinal segments which appeared to be grossly distended and the hepatic flexure was noted to be unfixed and mobile (c). The duodenum was normally situated as was the ligament of Treitz. Right hemicolectomy was performed with primary ileocolic anastomosis and peritoneal lavage. The rest of the bowel was normal, the splenic flexure was normally fixed in the left upper quadrant and there was no distal obstruction. The operation was performed by one surgical trainee with 4 years of specialised training and one general surgeon with 3 years’ experience. Post-operatively, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit where broad-spectrum antibiotics were continued. He did not require inotropic support and was extubated on day 3 post-operatively. He resumed oral feeds on day 4 and was eventually discharged 10 days post-operatively. At follow-up in the outpatient’s clinic 1 week later he was having an uneventful recovery with no adverse events. At further review three months later, he had no recurrence of symptoms. The patient and his family were relieved that he had done so well. Histology results confirmed gangrenous loops of bowel with no other histologically evident pathology. There are no plans for continued follow-up.