A 44-year-old Chinese male was admitted to the hospital with persistent diarrhea, abdominal pain, lower limb edema and weight loss for more than one year that had been aggravated for one month.
The patient had loose yellow stools 4 to 5 times a day, and the stool weighed more than 500 g total, without bloody stools or melena. He suffered from this condition and lower limb edema for one year while also experiencing periumbilical abdominal pain, which was moderately paroxysmal colic pain. The patient visited several hospitals and was diagnosed with possible “protein-losing enteropathy” according to “hypoproteinemia” in laboratory tests and “edema and thickening of the small bowel wall” on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). However, the gastrointestinal endoscopy reported a normal view. Probiotics, antibiotics, and digestive enzymes were prescribed to the patient, but his symptoms did not improve. One month before admission, symptoms of abdominal distention, mild abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant, and obvious weight loss (8 kg one month) had developed, without fever or jaundice.
The patient reported no remarkable history of past illness.
The patient drank 500 mL of alcohol and smoked 10 cigarettes a day for 30 years. He reported no remarkable family history.
On physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were stable, with a body temperature of 36.8 °C on admission. No pale or jaundice was observed, and there was no superficial lymphadenopathy. A mass of approximately 4 cm in diameter was palpable in the right part of the distend abdomen. Shifting dullness was positive upon examination. There was no tenderness, no abnormal bowel sounds or rate, and no palpable hepatosplenomegaly or Murphy’s sign. Moderate symmetric edema of both lower limbs was observed.
Laboratory findings on admission indicated mild anemia (hemoglobin, 116 g/L) and hypoproteinemia (albumin, 18.5 g/L). Liver function was mildly elevated (alkaline phosphatase, 290 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT) 87 U/L). Leukocyte, platelet, bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), thyroid function and serum tumor markers were within normal limits, except elevated carbohydrate antigen 125 (517 U/mL). Tests for autoantibody, stool culture, antibody against tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus immunoglobulin M antibody, EBV DNA, and Clostridium difficile toxin detection were negative. In addition, the vitamin B3 Level was 17.1 ng/mL, which was within the normal range. The reticulocyte count was 45.50 × 109/L, and the reticulocyte ratio was 1.12%, and these results were negative. The total bilirubin level was 12.0 μmol/L, the direct bilirubin level was 4.9 μmol/L, the indirect bilirubin level was 7.1 μmol/L, the creatinine level was 63.1 μmol/L, and the glomerular filtration rate was 134.76 mL/min/1.73 m2), which were all within the normal range.
A diagnostic paracentesis was performed, which revealed bloody ascites with increased red blood cells (81500), nucleated cells (657), and protein concentrations (1790 mg/dL). The adenosine deaminase, amylase, LDH, and carcinoembryonic antigen levels in ascites were normal. The smear for acid-fast bacilli and exfoliative cytology were negative.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy in a previous hospital revealed chronic gastritis, while colonoscopy found several small polyps, which were confirmed as tubular adenomas according to pathology. Capsule endoscopy showed segmental hyperemia, edema, and partial atrophy of villi in the jejunum. On the computed tomography enterograph, there was a circular, solid-occupying lesion in the pancreatic head that was 88 mm × 47 mm × 52 mm in size. The jejunal wall was thickened to 34 mm but did not cause intestinal stenosis or obstructive signs. These two lesions had uniform CT density and moderate enhancement . Magnetic resonance (MR) cholangiopancreatography revealed that the pancreatic head mass, together with the biliary duct, was dilated to 18 mm and the gallbladder was enlarged . 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) detected intense FDG uptake within the pancreatic head lesion and jejunal wall thickening (SUVmax = 7.2 and SUVmax = 10.3, respectively) .