This is the case of a 55-year-old woman who was referred to our centre for evaluation of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) diagnosed a few years before, but of uncertain significance in the context of a history of hypertension.
At the current admission, the patient had no cardiovascular symptoms, but recalled rare episodes of painful acroparesthaesia. Her clinical exam showed no pathological signs. In the laboratory work-up, she had slightly elevated levels of creatinine (1.05 mg/dL, eGFR chronic kidney disease (CKD)-EPI 57.8 mL/min/1.73 m2) and slightly elevated high sensitivity troponin I (0.03 ng/mL; N < 0.02). The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, LVH criteria with secondary inverted T waves in lateral leads and a short PR interval (∼100 ms) without a delta wave .
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed concentric LVH (maximum wall thickness of 16 mm), normal left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction, but moderately altered systolic longitudinal function using both myocardial velocities (septal S’ = 6 cm/s) and speckle tracking (LV global longitudinal strain, GLS = −14.3%), with lowest deformation in the basal inferior wall. The right ventricle had normal systolic function but free wall hypertrophy (8 mm) .
As is the case for many cardiomyopathy patients, the key for the aetiologic diagnosis was the family history. We drew a complete pedigree and found out that the patient’s mother was diagnosed with HCM in her seventies and her brother was diagnosed with FD and died shortly after at age 42 years while suffering from chronic renal disease in dialysis stage. As part of family screening her son had been diagnosed with FD 6 years prior, undergoing enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsidase beta ever since. However, our patient was never considered for diagnosis, as she was thought to be just a female carrier and was lost from follow-up in that medical centre.
Contrast enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance (cMR) confirmed the concentric HCM, and also showed late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the infero-lateral wall of the LV .
The patient was tested for FD. Her enzymatic test showed low levels of alpha-galactosidase (AGAL = 1.0 µmol/L/h; N > 1.2), high levels of Lyso globotriaosylceramide (Gb3 7.6 ng/mL; N < 3.5), but the first genetic test result came negative. This unexpected finding turned our attention to the patient's son. He had been diagnosed with FD based on dermatologic signs (angiokeratoma), neurologic symptoms (acroparesthaesia, anhidrosis) and a positive enzymatic test (very low levels AGAL), which is enough for a positive diagnosis in men. At the time of diagnosis no genetic test had been performed. We undertook genetic testing, the result of which first came also negative. However, in the presence of clinical features, family history, and enzymatic tests clearly indicating FD in both mother and son, the genetic test was repeated using exon amplification techniques. This technique helped finding a pathogenic mutation in the GLA gene, c.[1224del66] (a gross deletion of 3’ region of the GLA gene including coding parts of exon 7). The breakpoint was sequenced by Sanger sequencing after long distance polymerase chain reaction (PCR), to provide the exact extent of the deletion.
The patient was started on ERT (agalsidase beta) and evidence-based cardiologic treatment for heart failure with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), high blood pressure, and dyslipidaemia. After a 1.5 year follow-up, FD organ involvement parameters were unchanged for our patient, while her son did not develop new clinical signs or organ changes of FD.