A 65-year-old man presented with skin ulcers on his left waist and abdomen for four weeks secondary to burst blisters. Several patches of edematous erythema and clustered blisters appeared on the left side of his waist and abdomen five weeks ago. After being diagnosed with herpes zoster in the local hospital, he received intravenous Ganciclovir, Xinhuang tablet, and topical treatment with burn cream. As the disease progressed, the initial blisters turned into blood blisters, which burst and caused erosion four weeks ago, so he was given intravenous Cefonicid and traditional Chinese medicine topical treatment. However, the lesions gradually aggravated, forming ulcers of varying sizes, and the pain intensified, so the patient came to the hospital. He had a history of diabetes for 30 years, and his blood sugar was under reasonable control. No apparent abnormalities were found in the systematic physical examination. Dermatological examination showed diffuse dark erythema with clear boundaries on his left waist and abdomen. Deep ulcers of different sizes were densely distributed with steep edges and relatively dry base, while yellow secretions and black scabs could be seen . There was no obvious bleeding after touching.
Laboratory tests revealed the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 62 mm/h (normal 0–15 mm/h), and procalcitonin was 0.05 ng/mL (normal 0–0.05 ng/mL). Fungal dextran, bacterial endotoxin, and aspergillus did not show any abnormality. Bacterial cultures of secretions were negative several consecutive times. Fungal microscopy showed a few pseudohyphae and clusters of spores. Meanwhile, fungal culture of the secretions showed Candida albicans growth ( and ), and further drug sensitivity tests showed that the minimum inhibitory concentrations were voriconazole ≤0.125 μg/mL (S), itraconazole ≤0.125 μg/mL (S), amphotericin ≤1 μg/mL (S), flucytosine ≤4 μg/mL (S), fluconazole ≤8 μg/mL (S). Skin biopsy of the affected skin from the ulcer of the left abdomen revealed epidermal absence and clusters of spores in the superficial dermis. PAS staining was positive .
Finally, the diagnosis of gangrenous herpes zoster with Candida albicans infection was considered, and the patient was given voriconazole 200mg Q12 orally. The ulcer surface became significantly shinier after seven days and recovered after one month, so the drug was discontinued. The follow-up was conducted for five months without recurrence.