A 37-year-old primiparous woman presented at 21-week gestation with sharp epigastric pain and vomiting. She underwent extensive laparotomic myomectomy with a longitudinal incision of the anterior and posterior wall of the uterus for diffuse uterine leiomyomatosis and removal of 49 nodules 9 months before pregnancy that resulted from artificial insemination . She was afebrile and had normal blood pressure and pulse rate. She had epigastric tenderness, and her uterus was soft with no abnormal signs. Abdominal radiography revealed mild air and fluid levels in the small intestine. Sonography showed total placenta previa. She was admitted to our hospital with adhesive small intestinal obstruction and total placenta previa, which could be a postoperative complication of her previous myomectomy. One week of intravenous fluids and bowel rest improved her symptoms, and she was discharged.
She was re-admitted again at 26-week gestation for abnormal genital bleeding due to placenta previa. The patient had no abdominal pain and normal appetite. Three days later, the patient experienced sharp epigastric pain, vomiting, distention, and constipation. Abdominal radiography showed moderate air fluid levels in the small intestine, and she was diagnosed with worsening adhesive small bowel obstruction. Bowel rest and intravenous fluids were started at the same time that tocolysis was needed because of the increasing uterine contraction caused by vomiting. Over the next 72 h, she developed fever with worsening symptoms, in which small intestine obstruction promoted bacterial translocation. Computed tomography (CT) revealed consecutive dilatation of the proximal small intestine and collapsed distal ileum adjacent to the fundus of the uterus without free air . The patient was managed using an intestinal tube and antibiotics. However, her abdominal pain did not resolve, and accordingly, her uterine contraction, genital bleeding, and fever increased. We discussed this with gastroenterologists and thought that it would be better to continue the conservative therapy, without surgical treatment. We inserted the intestinal tube deeper into the adhesion site (total 245 cm in length) at 28-week gestation, and her symptoms, including fever and uterine contraction, gradually resolved. Unexplained oligohydramnios occurred 4 days after fever, but gradually resolved within 10 days as her symptoms improved.
Ultrasonography revealed a clear retroplacental hypoechoic zone, which did not suggest the presence of placenta accreta spectrum (PAS), whereas magnetic resonance imaging showed placental recess (a wedge-shaped contraction of the placental surface and uterine outer rim accompanying a T2 dark band), which is a predictive sign of PAS . Also, the placenta was present on the scar of the previous extensive myomectomy. If PAS is present, hysterectomy must be performed urgently in some cases . However, hysterectomy is difficult to perform when the small intestine is attached to the uterus. Therefore, we scheduled her cesarean section for 32+4-week gestation because (i) fasting and TPN were too long and strong patient psychological stress and (ii) fear of massive bleeding due to placenta previa, which frequently occurs around 34 to 36-week gestation. An intra-aortic balloon occlusion catheter was inserted before a cesarean section to avoid massive hemorrhage in case of PAS. A cesarean section under general anesthesia was performed, and she gave birth to a healthy male weighing 1807 g (46.88 percentile) with an Apgar score of 4 at 1 min and 6 at 5 min. The placenta was spontaneously delivered without manual removal, and uterine hemorrhage was well controlled by prophylactic intrauterine balloon tamponade without inflating the intra-aortic balloon occlusion catheter. The total blood loss was 3100 g, and the patient received a blood transfusion. During laparotomy, there were ileal loops strongly adhered to the uterine scar of the myomectomy, but there was no volvulus of the small intestine. The patient underwent adhesiolysis and enterectomy. The patient recovered uneventfully, without recurrent bowel obstruction.