An 87-year-old female patient with a history of hypertension and diabetes was admitted to our hospital for acute decompensated heart failure. She had been diagnosed with severe aortic stenosis (AS) at another hospital 3 years before admission to our institution and had refused surgical treatment because she was asymptomatic. Subsequently, she has lived alone and has been independent regarding activities of daily living.
She presented to our hospital at midnight with tachypnoea and the following vital parameters: blood pressure, 219/111 mmHg; heart rate, 114 b.p.m.; and oxygen saturation, 89% in room air. Lung and cardiac auscultations demonstrated the presence of coarse crackles in both lung fields and a high-pitched systolic ejection murmur in the right upper sternal edge. She had both a distended internal jugular vein and bilateral pitting pedal oedema.
Laboratory tests revealed a high B-type natriuretic peptide (218.6 pg/mL), no anaemia (haemoglobin (Hgb), 13.7 g/dL; haematocrit (Hct), 40.9%), and a moderately decreased renal function (creatinine (Cre), 1.18 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate 33.1 mL/min/1.73 m2). A mildly enlarged cardiac silhouette with pulmonary congestion and pleural effusion was observed on a chest X-ray. Electrocardiography demonstrated normal sinus rhythm and left ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern ST segment depression in V4–6 leads. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) confirmed severe AS of uncertain AV morphology, with a peak AV velocity of 5.17 m/s, a mean AV pressure gradient of 63 mmHg, and an AV area of 0.56 cm2. Mild aortic regurgitation (AR) was observed. Her left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 63% and her left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDd) was 53 mm.
Diuretic administration (intravenous furosemide, 20 mg daily) and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation relieved her symptoms. After considering the patient’s age, a Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk score of 7.631 for surgical AV replacement, and the patient’s preference to not undergo open-heart surgery, our heart team decided that TAVI was the best option for managing her condition.
A multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) scan demonstrated a severely calcified tricuspid AV. Although the non-coronary and left cusps seemed to be fused in the centre by a ‘calcium bridge’, the commissure area between the fused cusps appeared to normally open. This resulted in the formation of two small and large orifices divided by the calcium bridge . The Agatston calcium score for her AV was 2463.28. Mild calcification of the aortic annulus was detected. The variables of the aortic annulus were as follows: area, 395 mm2; perimeter, 71.4 mm; maximum diameter, 24.0 mm; and minimum diameter, 21.0 mm . The mean diameter of the sinus of Valsalva (SOV) was 26.3 mm, and the heights of the right and left coronary arteries were 14.3 and 12.8 mm, respectively. There was no obstructive coronary disease. The patient’s iliofemoral artery was suitable for transfemoral access. To acquire MDCT images, we used a computed tomography system with 320 detector rows (Aquilion ONE/ViSION; Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan). To reconstruct images and measure morphological parameters, we used the Ziostation2 PLUS, version 2.9.3.0 software (Ziosoft, Tokyo, Japan).
To attain adequate transcatheter heart valve (THV) expansion, the calcium bridge should be managed beforehand. Our TAVI strategy was as follows: first, we passed the wire retrogradely through the small orifice. This was followed by a balloon aortic valvuloplasty (pre-dilatation) from the side once the THV was ready to be deployed. Finally, when expansion was adequate, we deployed a 23-mm-sized Edwards SAPIEN 3 (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) balloon-expandable THV. Regarding the THV type, we selected a balloon-expandable THV that could be quickly deployed, if required. Furthermore, the patient’s SOV diameter was extremely small for the self-expandable THVs that are available in Japan. Although she was at high risk of cerebral infarction because of her significant calcium levels of the cusps, age, and gender, a cerebral protective device was unavailable because such devices are not approved in Japan.
We performed a transfemoral TAVI using transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) guidance with the patient under general anaesthesia. Retrograde AV wire crossing was achieved via the small orifice as confirmed by TOE . The wire was set at the centre of the aortic annulus even after setting the stiff wire in the left ventricle in the perpendicular view. We then performed a pre-dilatation using a 20 mm Nucleus-X balloon (B. Braun Interventional Systems, Bethlehem, PA, USA). Initially, the balloon expanded in an hourglass shape at the level of the aortic annulus. However, after additional inflation to up to 2 atm, we successfully cracked apart the fused calcium bridge between the cusps. After pre-dilatation, the wire route changed and attached to the greater curvature of the aortic annulus (; , Videos and ). The patient’s haemodynamics after the pre-dilatation remained stable without AR worsening. Subsequently, we deployed a 23-mm-sized SAPIEN 3 with a nominal volume of 17 mL. A TOE evaluation revealed residual moderate perivalvular leakage; therefore, post-dilatation with 1 mL more than the nominal volume was applied. Consequently, an optimal depth and adequate expansion with trivial perivalvular leakage were attained .
The post-procedural course was uneventful without any neurological sequelae. MDCT demonstrated a well-expanded THV stent frame and retention of the cracked calcium bridge within both the non-coronary and left SOVs . TTE showed a peak AV velocity of 2.37 m/s, a mean AV pressure gradient of 9 mmHg, an effective orifice area of 2.28 cm2, and trivial paravalvular leakage. Her LVEF was 79% and the LVEDd was 48 mm.
At the 1-year follow-up visit, the patient was well. Repeat TTE revealed a peak AV velocity of 2.21 m/s, a mean AV pressure gradient of 10 mmHg, an effective orifice area of 1.81 cm2, and mild paravalvular leakage. Her LVEF was 77% and the LVEDd was 42 mm.