A 24- year-old previously healthy female was referred to the neurology clinic due to difficulty in walking for a duration of one month. Further clinical evaluation revealed proximal muscle weakness. Her electromyography confirmed the proximal myopathy and her corrected serum calcium was 15 mg/dl (8.5 – 10.3). Due to hypercalcemia, she was referred to the Endocrinology department for further management.
The patient was evaluated for hypercalcemia in the Endocrinology clinic. There was a positive family history of hypercalcemia where her mother was also found to have hypercalcemia. Her initial biochemical evaluation revealed a serum corrected total calcium – 15 mg/dl (8.5 – 10.3), serum phosphate – 2.3 mg/dl (2.5 – 4.5), intact PTH – 118 pg/ml (20 – 80), vitamin D – 15 ng/ml and spot urine calcium to creatinine ratio (spot urine ca/cr) – 2.1 (0.1 – 0.2) without imaging evidence of nephrolithiasis. Dual energy x ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan revealed osteoporosis with distal forearm Z score of – 3.2. Her Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) – chest, abdomen, and neck revealed a well-defined mass posterior to the right lobe of the thyroid, measuring 2.6 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.9 cm in size suggestive of a right parathyroid adenoma and an enhancing lesion in the right maxillary sinus measuring 1.9 cm × 2.3 cm in size . Following these investigations, a presumptive diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism due to the right parathyroid adenoma was made, and she underwent a right focal parathyroidectomy following vitamin D supplementation.
Her pre-incision PTH was 3700 pg/ml with vitamin D levels of 35 ng/ml and post-incision PTH was 30 pg/ml. Her histology revealed a right parathyroid tumour with no definitive vascular invasion with a high mitotic count (4/10 HPF) and high Ki index of 12% but capsular invasion was difficult to comment suggestive of an atypical parathyroid adenoma There was no evidence of fibrous bands, necrosis, or extension to peri-glandular tissue. Resection margin was clear from the tumor and hemosiderin deposition was not identified.
Her follow up was uncomplicated until 10 months following surgery. After 10 months of surgery, she was found to be pregnant at a period of amenorrhoea (POA) of 8/52. Biochemical investigations revealed a serum corrected total calcium of 8.1/dl (8.5 – 10.3), serum phosphate – 2.2 mg/dl (2.5 – 4.5) with intact PTH – 232 pg/ml (20 – 80) and vitamin D level of 18 ng/ml. We continued vitamin D and calcium supplementation in view of normalizing the vitamin D levels.
After 12 months of initial surgery at a POA of 16/52, the patient presented with a rapidly progressive neck lump within a duration of 1 week . Her serum corrected total calcium was 10.8 mg/dl (8.5 – 10.3), serum phosphate – 2.0 mg/dl (2.5 – 4.5), vitamin D – 45 ng/ml and intact PTH was 540 pg/ml (20 – 80). She had an elevated spot urine calcium to creatinine ratio of 1. 5, but no evidence of nephrolithiasis. Since she was pregnant DEXA scan was not done.
An urgent Ultrasound Scan (USS) – neck revealed a well-defined discreate hypoechoic nodule superior to the thyroid isthmus. A non-contrast Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of neck /paranasal sinuses & upper chest showed a well-defined lesion in the subcutaneous tissue plane of the neck at the thyroid isthmus level, but there was no evidence of the previously noted lesion in the right maxillary sinus. She underwent a parathyroid tumour excision, and during the surgery, a 2 × 2 cm lump was noted in the midline from the trachea, up to the subplatysmal plane, but there was no connection with the thyroid gland. The left superior and inferior and right superior parathyroid glands were normal, and they were preserved. Intraoperative pre-incisional PTH was 568 pg/ml with vitamin D level of 45 ng/ml and post-incisional PTH was 68 pg/ml. Her post-operative inward stay was uncomplicated with satisfactory foetal wellbeing. She was discharged with calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Her histology revealed a tumour of 2 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.2 cm in size, encapsulated nodule composed of nests and sheets of tumor cells with round to ovel nuclei, dense chromatin pattern and inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitotic figures are observed (12/10 HPF). Atypical mitoses were not seen. Coagulative tumor necrosis, diffuse sheet like monotonous small cells or broad intra-tumoral fibrous bands were not evident. There were multiple foci of unequivocal vascular invasion at the periphery of the tumor suggestive of parathyroid carcinoma. Perineural invasion was not evident, but there was infiltration of adjacent fatty tissue with capsular invasion . Closest resection margin was 1 mm away from the tumor.
Whole exome sequencing was performed in the proband which revealed a likely pathogenic heterozygous frameshift variant in the CDC73 gene c.584delC | p. Ser195fs (novel variant). Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm the variant identified in the proband. Genetic testing for MEN 1 gene was negative in this patient. Her mother was also found to have primary hyperparathyroidism secondary to parathyroid adenoma and underwent 4 gland exploration. Yet, her histology was suggestive of parathyroid adenoma without atypical features. She was also subjected to Sanger sequencing. However, the mother did not harbour the variant. Sanger images of both are as below .
She was followed up throughout her pregnancy, both clinically and biochemically for hypercalcemia and foetal wellbeing. Her pregnancy was uncomplicated after the second trimester parathyroid surgery, and she underwent an uncomplicated caesarean section at a POA of 37 weeks. She delivered a healthy baby with a birth weight of 2.7 kg and the baby did not develop neonatal hypocalcaemia. Following 3 months of delivery her corrected calcium was 8.9 mg/dl with intact PTH – 68 ng/dl. Currently following 6 months of her delivery corrected calcium is 8.7 mg/dl with intact PTH – 65 ng/dl.