A 16-year-old white male presented for a second opinion regarding out-of-hospital SCA secondary to VF. The index event occurred in the evening when the patient was found in their room making agonal breathing sounds with eyes rolled back and loss of urinary continence. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and emergency medical services applied four automated external defibrillator shocks for documented VF, two epinephrine shots, and midazolam for the seizure-like activity before the return of spontaneous circulation.
Transthoracic echocardiogram during initial hospitalization demonstrated decreased systolic function, but troponin levels were within normal limits. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) revealed a structurally normal heart with no late gadolinium enhancement . The left ventricle dimension at end-diastole was 48 mm (within normal limits). Transient post-arrest QT prolongation and ventricular ectopy were observed on telemetry. The patient underwent Invitae™ genetic testing (150 gene Arrhythmia and Cardiomyopathy Comprehensive Panel®) which identified a heterozygous, maternally inherited frameshift variant annotated as c.1961dup; p.T655Nfs*49 in LMNA. This variant was classified as ‘pathogenic’ following the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guideline criteria-based variant adjudication. In addition to the patient’s 44-year-old mother, his 14-year-old and 10-year-old brothers were variant-positive. This variant had been published as causative for co-dominantly inherited laminopathy with phenotypes ranging from metabolic to cardiac conduction abnormalities. Due to a perceived risk for recurrence, the patient received a single-chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and was discharged on nadolol 20 mg daily. It was suggested that the variant-positive family members consider a prophylactic ICD. Subsequently, the family sought out a second opinion.
The patient and all variant-positive family members had normal chamber dimensions on echocardiogram and no evidence of late gadolinium enhancement on CMRI . The patient had no signs of conduction disease on an electrocardiogram with a PR interval of 114 ms, QRS duration of 84 ms, and QTc of 380 ms . Additionally, the patient and the variant-positive family members showed no overt signs of lipodystrophy. However, a three-lead Holter monitor showed sinus arrhythmia and short-coupled PVCs (≤350 ms) with an overall PVC burden <1%. Induced ventricular arrhythmias were absent during exercise stress testing.
Device interrogation revealed that a few weeks prior, the patient missed a few doses of nadolol and had documented PVC-induced VF with two short-coupled PVCs (a 350 ms followed by a 250 ms PVC) deteriorating to VF with appropriate shock delivery restoring sinus rhythm . Subsequently, the patient underwent an electrophysiology (EP) study. At baseline, occasional PVCs (coupling interval of 350 ms) were observed with a left bundle branch block pattern, late precordial transition, and left superior axis, suspicious for a moderator band exit . A morphology template of this PVC was formed. Endocardial mapping of the right ventricle (RV) was performed with a Saint Jude grid catheter and a NavX mapping system. Atrial extra stimulus while on isoproterenol was consistent with atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) as it induced narrow complex tachycardia with a concentric sequence of retrograde atrial activation. Premature ventricular complexes occurred during withdrawal of atrial pacing. During tachycardia, there was a concentric sequence of retrograde atrial activation and the earliest atrial depolarization was a fast pathway. The septal V–A interval was 70 ms. The earliest PVCs were mapped to an area at the distal portion of the moderator band at the juncture between the moderator band and the RV papillary muscle . A single, double, and triple ventricular extra stimulus protocol was performed with no inducible sustained ventricular arrhythmias with and without isoproterenol. Right ventricular voltage mapping demonstrated normal voltage and electrograms .
Next, a cryoablation was performed since radiofrequency catheters have limited efficacy at the moderator band due to difficulty achieving constant contact. The use of a cryoablation catheter overcomes this limitation by forming an ice crystal that fuses to myocardial tissue which ensures consistent contact during the duration of the cryoapplication. Using an 8 mm Cryocatheter, a pace map along the moderator band revealed the best pace map was at the same location, the junction between the moderator band and the RV papillary muscle. Additionally, a small Purkinje potential was observed on the ablation catheter. As it appeared that this location was around the thick portion of the moderator band muscle, multiple cryo-lesions were placed. Also, slow atrioventricular node pathway ablation was performed. Atrial and ventricular extra stimulus protocols were performed following cryoablation, and there was no ectopy seen with or without isoproterenol. Additionally, both brothers underwent an EP study, AVNRT but neither had PVCs.
The patient returned for follow-up visits at both 3 and 8 months post-ablation without using any medication. During this early follow-up, there have been no ICD therapies and no recordings of any ventricular arrhythmias.