A 52-year-old Hispanic female with a history of type II diabetes mellitus presented with 2 months of occipital headaches, left upper extremity pain, and progressive left hemiparesis. There was no history of recent illnesses, trauma, or an underlying malignancy, but she had undergone posterior cervical surgery for a “mass” in Mexico at age 14. On examination, she demonstrated 4−/5 strength in both the left upper and left lower extremities along with a tender palpable soft-tissue mobile midline mass in the lumbar spine (i.e., consistent with a lipoma), and a well-healed 6 cm posterior transverse incision at the C2 level.
The brain/cervical CT revealed a 2.0 cm lesion at the CMJ. The brain/cervical MR showed an intradural, extramedullary, and posterior mass (2.3 × 2.5 × 2.8 cm) with a cystic component located at the CMJ [ and ]. The MR T1 study without contrast showed that the entire lesion was hypointense with a subtle fluid-fluid level noted on axial images, while the T2 study revealed a hypointense lesion with a cystic component of similar intensity to cerebrospinal fluid [ and ]. Notably, the lesion did not enhance with contrast. This resulted in mild cervicomedullary parenchyma compression but without significant edema, consistent with chronicity. The differential diagnosis for this lesion included: ependymoma, glioma, metastasis, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, or teratoma. Additional evaluation of the entire neuraxis with CT/MR imaging (MRI) documented a type I diastematomyelia from T10 to L4 level, with an osseous bar at L1/L2 [ and ].
A suboccipital craniectomy provided exposure of the cranial/ CMJ allowing for the identification of a plane to expose the tumor . The posterior arch of C1 was removed and widened bilaterally. Following a midline durotomy, a glistening white, fibrous capsule was identified surrounding the lesion that extended laterally into the C1 neural foramen where it was adherent to the C1 nerve root. After the root and capsule were coagulated, sectioned, and sacrificed, the capsule was dissected off the dura. The ventral cyst was then intentionally opened; a milky fluid erupted from inside the cyst, following which the capsule and solid encircling mass were excised. Ultimately, the cyst wall adjacent to the medulla was cut sharply (i.e., avoiding devascularizing the medulla), and the dura was then closed primarily. The intraoperative frozen section identified a nerve root ganglia and nerve root segments (likely C1), small vessels, and collagenous tissue.
Histopathology of the solid lesion demonstrated a mature teratoma comprised of islands of cartilage, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, respiratory epithelium, underlying mucous glands, and collagenous septae with rare psammoma bodies . The cyst contents included scattered erythrocytes, lymphocytes, and cellular debris.
The immediate postoperative brain MRI demonstrated significant decompression of the central canal at the C2 level with subtotal resection of the mass . By the fifth postoperative day, the patient was ambulating without assistance, and her left hemiparesis had improved to a 4+/5 level. She was discharged home. Two weeks later, the patient reported no further occipital headaches, and her left hemiparesis had fully resolved.