A 9-year-old female was initially referred to the senior author (T.G.H.). Her mother was concerned about a fleshy mass appearing on the superotemporal aspect of her left eye . Her mother explained that she thought the patient often awoke with a “puffy eye,” yet it was not until she lifted the upper lid to check for loose eyelashes that she noticed the mass. Upon examination, a suspected moderate epibulbar dermolipoma was seen in the superotemporal bulbar conjunctiva with no hairs or inflammation. The remaining ocular examination was within normal limits, including bilateral 6/4 vision, normal pupils, normal ocular balance, and full motility with no hemifacial asymmetry or microsomia. An MRI prior to referral showed a high fat signal on T1-weighted imaging and was consistent with a diagnosis of suspected epibulbar dermolipoma . The patient was initially managed conservatively.
Two years later, the patient re-presented as it was felt that the mass had grown. It was still not causing any discomfort, with vision remaining 6/4 bilaterally. The lesion, now just visible at rest, appeared to have a small region of conjunctival keratinisation and a small “symblepharon” to the lateral canthus. At this time, it was decided that the patient would be managed with surgical debulking.
Successful surgical debulking was performed under general anaesthesia. Only the keratinised surface epithelium was excised, retaining all non-keratinised conjunctiva. No additional management was required for the small asymptomatic symblepharon. No other abnormalities were noted at the time of surgery, with the excised specimen macroscopically consistent with a typical epibulbar dermolipoma. Subsequent histological examination of the specimen revealed conjunctiva with underlying fibroadipose tissue and a rounded central fibrous nodule with bone containing some dilated thin-walled vessels . The various heterotopic tissue types identified necessitated that the lesion be named an epibulbar complex choristoma, rather than epibulbar dermolipoma. The patient was followed up 1 week and 3 months later with no complications and a successful cosmetic outcome.