A previously healthy 54-year-old woman presented with right flank pain and abdominal distension. Physical examination findings were unremarkable. Blood test showed a decreased level of hemoglobin (9.1g/dl: normal >11.6) and an increased level of lactic dehydrogenase (640 IU/ml; normal <460) and C-reactive protein (0.67mg/l; normal <0.24). Urinalysis demonstrated elevated red blood cells [5–9 cells per HPF] and white blood cells (10–19 cells per HPF).
Abdominal CT revealed a heterogeneously enhancing solid mass in the right kidney with a thrombus extending from the renal vein to the IVC . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a renal tumor with a level II thrombus 4 cm below the hepatic vein . Chest CT and bone scintigraphy findings were unremarkable. These findings were consistent with a preoperative diagnosis of right RCC with an IVC thrombus.
The patient underwent right radical nephrectomy with vena cava thrombectomy. The skin was incised through a chevron incision and a combined upper midline incision. The tumor, IVC, and left renal vein were exposed using a cocker maneuver. Several short hepatic veins were ligated and dissected, and the liver was mobilized. A thrombus found in one of the short hepatic veins was removed . IVC was secured above the thrombus and below the hepatic vein, which was clamped along with the left renal vein. An incision was made in front of the IVC and its right wall was partially attached to remove the tumorous thrombus as a mass with the right renal tumor. Fortunately, no enlarged lymph nodes were identified. Total operation time was 11 h and 6 min. Total blood loss was 1006 ml and 5 units of packed red blood cells were transfused.
Gross examination revealed a gray-to-white well-circumscribed renal mass and clearly encapsulized tumor thrombus. . Histopathologic examination demonstrated spindle-shaped cells with elongated hyperchromatic nuclei and moderate pleomorphism . Immunochemistry showed that the spindle cells were reactive for α-smooth muscle actin and desmin . These findings were consistent with a definitive diagnosis of renal leiomyosarcoma with a tumor thrombus in the IVC. Because surgical extirpation was performed on both the mass and the thrombus, adjuvant therapy was not initiated. However, 5 months after surgery, she presented with multiple pulmonary and hepatic metastases. We offered her the option of systemic treatment, but she chose the best supportive care. She died of the disease 7 months after surgery.