A 63-year-old male with a history of stage IV metastatic esophageal adenocarcinoma
and recent placement of an implanted venous access device three weeks prior
presented to the ED from the infusion clinic at the hospital with a chief complaint
of left-sided arm and leg weakness. The patient had no known cerebral involvement of
metastatic disease. The patient, who was receiving IV fluids for rehydration, noted
left-sided weakness upon attempting to rise to use the restroom. He was emergently
transported to the ED for evaluation. Upon arrival he confirmed the left-sided
weakness without other motor deficit reported. He denied visual disturbance or
headache. He denied numbness or tingling of the face or extremities.
The patient noted that he had been seen in the ED two weeks prior for a similar
presentation of left-sided weakness with urinary incontinence and possible left leg
shaking while receiving chemotherapy via the same port. During the prior evaluation
a stroke team was activated with emergent neurologic consultation. Non-contrast
computed tomography (CT) of the head was negative, but the patient was unable to
undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain due to extreme gastric reflux
as a complication from previous surgery for his esophageal cancer. No head or neck
CTAs were obtained. He was observed overnight, the left-sided weakness was resolved,
and he was subsequently diagnosed with Todd’s paralysis. Levetiracetam was
prescribed, and he had been compliant in taking the medication since the previous
visit.
Upon arrival at the second visit his vital signs included a temperature of
36.5° degrees Celsius, blood pressure of 131/78 millimeters of mercury,
heart rate of 82 beats per minute, respirations at 18 breaths per minute, and an
oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. His blood glucose level was 96
milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 70–105 mg/dL). Physical
examination was significant for no movement of the left arm and no effort against
gravity of the left leg, giving him a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
score of 7. The remainder of the neurologic exam including level of consciousness,
orientation, speech, visual exam, and right-sided strength and coordination were
normal. A stat stroke activation was declared with neurology consultation.
A non-contrast CT of the head was obtained with no acute abnormality. Plain chest
radiograph demonstrated a right-sided port with central line coursing medially,
suggesting a possible arterial course . The patient again was unable to tolerate MRI of the brain. Due
to recurrence of his symptoms and the situational similarities (both episodes
occurring during infusions through his port) CTA imaging of the chest, neck, and
head were obtained to evaluate for vessel stenosis or catheter malposition.
The CTA revealed a right-sided chest port in place appearing to enter the right
subclavian artery with the tip located in the anterior aspect of the aortic arch
( and ). Vascular surgery was consulted to
see the patient. During the patient’s stay in the ED his symptoms improved
within three hours to normal strength on the left side. He subsequently underwent
operative removal of the malpositioned catheter from where it was found to have
initially entered the internal jugular vein, went through the back wall and through
a smaller possibly vertebral vein. The catheter entered arterial circulation through
a vertebral artery and then traveled into the right subclavian artery. The port and
catheter were removed entirely, vascular defects were repaired, and the patient
recovered from the procedure well with no circulatory or neurologic deficit. He was
diagnosed with transient ischemic attack due to infusion through an intra-arterial
catheter and was discharged home on hospital day five.