A 22-year-old woman from sub-Saharan Africa presented to our emergency department after 1 week of dyspnoea, leg swelling, and haemoptysis. Haemoptysis had started as blood-streaked sputum 3–4 weeks before, gradually increasing to multiple daily blood clot expectorations within 2 weeks.
In her past medical history, we highlight a triple valve replacement for rheumatic heart disease at age 16 (19-mm CarboMedics mechanical aortic valve prosthesis; 27-mm CarboMedics mechanical mitral valve prosthesis; 27-mm Magna biological tricuspid valve prosthesis). Her medical history also comprised a right middle cerebral artery stroke at age 17, conditioning left hemiplegia and aphasia at presentation with subsequent full recovery. In addition, she was known for chronic haemolytic anaemia and thalassaemia trait. The patient denied any allergy, and her family history was unremarkable. She was taking vitamin K antagonists for anticoagulation.
Upon presentation, the patient was apyretic and her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg. She was comfortable at rest, New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III. Heart rate was 110 b.p.m. and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. Her physical examination was characterized by prosthetic heart sounds with a 4/6 systolic murmur, diminished breath sounds in lung bases, mild hepatomegaly, moderate bilateral ankle oedema, and mild jugular venous distention.
Electrocardiogram on presentation showed sinus tachycardia at 105 b.p.m. with first-degree atrioventricular block. Arterial blood gas test showed compensated respiratory alkalosis. Lab tests showed mild microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin 11.8 g/dL, reference interval (RI) 12.5–14.0 g/dL) and an International Normalized Ratio of 4.13 (RI 0.80–1.16). Renal function and electrolytes were between normal ranges, while mild liver enzyme alterations were recorded (total bilirubin 3.8 mg/dL, RI 0.20–0.90 mg/dL). Brain natriuretic peptide was 401 pg/mL (RI 10–100 pg/mL). C-reactive protein and procalcitonine were both negative. Chest X-ray showed an enlarged heart with minimal bilateral pleural effusion.
The patient was hospitalized for heart failure and haemoptysis. Daily treatment with intravenous furosemide 40 mg and bisoprolol 1.25 mg was started. Haemoptysis was treated with inhaled tranexamic acid 500 mg twice a day and iced saline lavages. Warfarin was stopped; enoxaparin 6000 IU twice a day was started. Airway bleeding rapidly improved.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scans excluded pneumonia, bronchiectasis, and neoplasms. Pulmonary tuberculosis was ruled out with a negative sputum smear examination and negative molecular tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Echocardiogram during sinus tachycardia showed normally functioning prosthetic aortic and mitral valves, a hyperdynamic left ventricular wall motion with above-normal ejection fraction. Right ventricular longitudinal function was preserved and the biological tricuspid prosthesis showed an increased transvalvular gradient (mean gradient 13 mmHg, ) and a mild-to-moderate regurgitation; pulmonary artery systolic pressure could not be estimated. Inferior vena cava (IVC) was dilated (22 mm) with reduced collapsibility. No echocardiographic finding was suspicious for infective endocarditis. Contrast chest CT scan excluded pulmonary embolism, arteriovenous malformations, and additional scans excluded possible mechanical valve obstruction, such as pannus or thrombi. It also revealed marked systemic venous hypertension, manifesting as dilation of venae cavae, suprahepatic veins, cardiac veins, and of the coronary sinus . It showed also veno-venous shunts, as well as mild ascites and hepatomegaly. Right heart catheterization confirmed increased right heart pressures, severe bioprosthetic tricuspid valve stenosis (mean gradient 9 mmHg), elevated venous pressure in venae cavae, and a mean right atrial pressure of 22 mmHg . The increase in venous pressures due to tricuspid stenosis caused veno-venous shunts, resulting in augmented venous pressure in the azygos vein and in the bronchial circulation, eventually leading to haemoptysis.
Severe symptomatic tricuspid stenosis was referred for surgery. Due to the high operative mortality and morbidity of redo tricuspid valve surgery, pre-operative evaluation was challenging. Eventually, due to the patient’s age and the possible long-term need for reoperation, we opted for a percutaneous approach. The patient underwent transfemoral tricuspid valve-in-valve replacement, using an Edward Sapien 3 (29 mm) bioprosthesis . Early post-procedural echocardiogram showed a normally functioning bioprosthetic tricuspid valve, no paravalvular leakage, a mean transvalvular gradient of 4–5 mmHg , and a slight reduction in IVC diameter (19 mm).
The patient was discharged asymptomatic in NYHA class I. Discharge medications included bisoprolol 1.25 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg, and warfarin. Complete resolution of airway bleeding was recorded. During a follow-up visit at 6 months, the patient denied any airway bleeding but complained of occasional palpitation. Echocardiogram at 6 months showed normally functioning tricuspid valve-in-valve bioprosthesis, mean transvalvular gradient 5 mmHg, no paravalvular leak; IVC diameter 12 mm.