The patient was a 12-year-old boy who lived in Dongfang county, Hainan province, a region located in the tropical area of China, who had never traveled abroad. He reported occasionally swimming in the lake of his hometown and had last did it roughly 1 month before the illness onset. This patient presented to the medical department with severe left parotid pain and a 4.0 × 3.5 cm swelling on the left face suggestive of parotitis. The swelling was soft and fluctuant and it was associated with tenderness, warmth and redness. There was no primary focus of infection found in the adjacent draining area. He had no related symptoms of fever, cough, expectoration or weight loss. The patient had no history of diabetes, renal disease, chronic lung disease or excessive alcohol consumption. He had normal vital signs. After parotid aspiration, he immediately received 2 g of ceftazidime intravenously twice a day together with 80 mg of gentamicin three times a day.
The investigation performed at our hospital revealed white blood cell count of 8.1 × 109/L (69 % neutrophils), red blood cell count of 3.94 × 1012/L, platelet count of 231 × 109/L, hematocrit of 34 %, hemoglobin concentration of 106 g/L, glucose concentration of 6.01 mmol/L, C-reactive protein concentration of 6.3 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated (92 mmHg/1st hour).
For histologic analysis, specimens of necrotic tissue taken during the drainage operation were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde, sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and suppurative inflammation was observed . Pus was aspirated from the abscess for bacteriological examination. Subsequently, samples were inoculated on 5 % sheep blood agar and incubated at 37 °C in air. After 48 h, concentric rounded shaped and creamy white colonies were observed on the blood agar . The isolate proved to be a non-fermenting gram-negative bacillus that was submitted to further identification using the VITEK-2 identification system (BioMérieux, France). VITEK-2 suggested that the isolate was Burkholderia pseudomallei, with an excellent level of identification (>99 %), which was confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The 16S rRNA gene was amplified by PCR using the primers 27F (5-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3) and 1525R (5-AAGGAGGTGATCCAGCC-3) . Sequence similarity searches were performed using the BLAST algorithm implemented in the NCBI database.
Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by broth macrodilution methods. The isolate was susceptible to imipenem (MIC 2 μg/mL) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) (MIC 2 μg/mL). It was resistant to the following antibiotics: ampicillin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), amikacin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), ceftriaxone (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), cefazolin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), nitrofurantoin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), gentamicin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), cefepime (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), levofloxacin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), ceftazidime (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL) and piperacillin/tazobactam (MIC ≥ 32 μg/mL). According to the laboratory data, the therapy was therefore changed to intravenous imipenem and oral TMP-SMZ for 4 weeks. The patient was discharged with an additional treatment of 12 weeks of oral TMP-SMZ.