A 45-year-old Tunisian woman, with no past medical history, was admitted for a pelvic mass. She had no associated history of vomiting, fever, jaundice or weight loss. On physical examination, the patient was anicteric and afebrile. The abdominal palpation found a bloating in the right iliac fossa. Her gynecological examination showed a right pelvic mass in the recto-uterine pouch. Her blood tests were normal. The abdominal ultrasound revealed a suspicious cystic mass of 9 cm in diameter, located at the right side of the uterus. The right ovary was not seen. The thoracic-abdominal pelvic scan showed a heterogeneous right lateral rectal mass of 9 cm.
Tumor markers, including CA 125, alpha fetoprotein, Beta human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) hormone, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA19–9 were tested and found within the normal range. With nonspecific signs and symptoms, wide radiological image findings, an anatomical contiguity, and the absence of a clinical history of a previous hepatic echinococcal cyst, a preoperative diagnosis of pelvic tumor was suggested.
Our patient was scheduled for an exploratory laparotomy. Three cystic masses were observed intra-operatively: the first one was 4.5 cm in diameter and was closely located to the appendix; the second one measured 2 cm in diameter and was attached to the uterovesical pouch; and the third cyst was of 6 cm in diameter, and was detected laterally to the right of the rectum. The rest of the abdominal cavity was normal.
An appendectomy and a complete resection of the cysts were conducted. The frozen section showed the presence of hydatic cysts, which were later confirmed by the histopathological examination. The operation ended with peritoneal cleansing with a hypertonic saline solution. Our patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital on the third postoperative day.
Our patient was then referred to a general surgery department to undergo an appropriate follow-up. We also took the opportunity to integrate her in the breast cancer screening program. Two years after treatment, our patient remained under follow-up and demonstrated no evidence of recurrent hydatidosis.