In May 2016, a 47-year-old Caucasian woman was hospitalized for pain in the left knee resistant to common analgesics. She presented with a past history of epilepsy and gastroesophageal reflux disease. She was a hairdresser, and she smoked more than 20 cigarettes/day. She was married, and she had three healthy children. She had no family history of malignancy. She did not take any particular medication regularly. In 2014, she had undergone radical resection of a squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx (stage pT2, pN1), then received adjuvant radiotherapy. Her follow-up was uneventful until April 2016, when multiple bone metastases from a squamous cell carcinoma were histologically confirmed.
The patient’s oxygen saturation on admission was 96%, and her blood pressure and heart rate were normal at 124/82 mmHg and 95 beats/minute, respectively. Her oral temperature was 36.8 °C. The result of her physical examination was normal except for a bulky, painful lesion of the left knee and a solitary, painless, intramammary lesion of 4 cm in the right upper external quadrant (UEQ), without any skin retraction, associated with multiple fixed right axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes.
The patient’s pH was 7.43, her partial pressure of arterial oxygen was 72 mmHg, and her partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide was 36 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed normocytic normochromic anemia (8.6 g/dl), hypoalbuminemia (26 g/dl), and severe hypercalcemia (3.31 mmol/L, ionized calcium 1.99 mmol/L). The patient’s renal and hepatic function was normal.
Whole-body computed tomography revealed multiple lymph node, peritoneal, splenic, lung, and bone metastases, as well as a solitary breast lesion in the right UEQ . A positron emission tomographic scan documented multiple visceral lymph nodes and bone metastases with a single hypermetabolic lesion of the right breast . Breast ultrasound confirmed the presence of a hypoechogenic tumor lesion of 4 cm in the UEQ that was associated with multiple axillary and infra-/supraclavicular adenopathies .
A percutaneous echo-guided biopsy of the breast lesion was performed. Histology revealed well- to moderately differentiated squamous tumor cells infiltrating the breast tissue without any in situ ductal or lobular component or desmoplastic reaction . Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for anti-p40 and anti-p63 and negative for cytokeratins 7 and 20, hormone receptors, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, confirming the diagnosis of a BM from a squamous cell carcinoma .
Analgesic palliative radiotherapy was performed at the tibial bone metastasis. The patient’s hypercalcemia normalized after intravenous hydration and zoledronic acid administration. Her anemia was treated with a blood transfusion of 2 U of red cell concentrate. Considering the quick worsening of the patient’s clinical condition, best supportive care was initiated, and the patient died of acute respiratory insufficiency in June 2016 before any systemic antitumoral treatment was started.