A 78-year-old Japanese woman who complained of blurred vision in her right eye visited an ophthalmology clinic. Because RRD was suspected, she was referred to a nearby vitreoretinal surgery center. When RRD with choroidal elevation was noted in the center, the ophthalmologist evaluated CD as atypical. She was eventually referred to our hospital in June 2015. Her medical history revealed nothing of note. Ophthalmological findings demonstrated visual acuity of 4/20 in the right eye (OD) and 10/20 in the left eye (OS). The patient’s intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg OD and 16 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination demonstrated clear anterior chambers and senile cortical cataracts in both eyes. Mild pigmented anterior vitreous cells were noted OD. Fundus examination displayed retinal detachment involving the inferior and nasal retina, where a round retinal hole was noted OD . A yellowish flat choroidal elevation was located nasally from the retinal hole. Optical coherence tomography displayed mild subretinal fluid in the macula OD. Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed hyperfluorescence corresponding to retinal detachment without nonperfusion areas in the fundus . Indocyanine green angiography (IA) demonstrated hypofluorescence in the nasal quadrant corresponding to the location of tumor and/or RRD . B-mode echography revealed mild choroidal elevation OD with the height of the tumor less than 2 mm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed marginally high and low intensities with T1 and T2 weighting in the choroidal tumor, whereas relatively low intensities and isointensities were detected in the retinal detachment compared with those in the tumor, respectively . The choroidal tumor was enhanced by gadolinium (Gd) .
The patient was clinically diagnosed with CM complicating RRD. Systemic imaging modalities did not show abnormalities, except in her right eye. She underwent linear accelerator radiation therapy by X-ray (total dosage, 70 Gy) in a nearby hospital because she refused enucleation and other possible treatments. However, because she had severe ocular pain due to a persistent corneal ulcer, she eventually underwent enucleation in October 2015. Histological findings demonstrated typical mixed-type malignant melanoma with a low Ki-67-positive rate. However, liver metastasis developed about 1½ years after the enucleation. The patient was fine without systemic treatments based on her will in December 2017, and she is being observed in a nearby palliative care center.