In December 2019, a 60-year-old man was admitted to the Second Hospital of Nanjing due to persistent lung shadow for 2 years, but without any clinical symptoms. He had received the allograft kidney transplant because of chronic renal failure since 2011. The regular pre-transplant screening reports ever excluded TB or cancer for both the donor and the receipt. Afterwards, the renal function of the patient maintained stable with the combination drug therapy, which was composed of mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg/250 mg per day), cyclosporine (75 mg twice per day), prednisone (5 mg once per day), phoebus, Bailing capsule and valsartan. In December 2017, during the follow-up examination in the kidney transplant hospital, the chest CT found speckle and stripe shadows in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe , and a nodule in the anterior segment of right lower lobe with small cavity shadow inside . Both T-SPOT and purified protein derivative (PPD) tests were positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infection, but detection of MTB from the sputum samples through smear microscopy, culture and real-time PCR was negative. Then, the empirical anti-TB therapy was started. Whereas, this treatment was terminated after 2 weeks since the patient family worried about indefinite diagnosis of TB and side effects.
At admission, physical examination revealed that respiratory, cardiovascular, abdominal and neurological characteristics were normal. Complete blood count test, C-reaction protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, coagulation (D-Dimer), tumor markers, liver and renal function tests were negative. As before, T-SPOT test was positive, but smear microscopy, culture and real-time PCR for MTB were still negative.
Remarkably, chest CT found some changes compared with 2 years ago. In the posterior segment of the right upper lobe, a soft tissue density mass shadow with spiculate boundary appeared . Also, the nodule in the right lower lobe became bigger . According to those radiological findings, the possibility of lung cancer in the upper lobe was considered. 18F-fluorodesoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) CT found that FDG intake increased in both the pulmonary consolidation lesions, with SUVmax 8.2 in the right upper lobe and SUVmax 1.9 in the right lower lobe, respectively . Meanwhile, there was no obvious abnormality for the remaining part of lung, mediastinal lymph nodes, liver and kidney. Taken together, adenocarcinoma was probably considered. A CT-guided percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy was then operated, and the pathological result confirmed lung adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe.
The video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) right upper lobectomy, wedge resection of right lower lobe and lymphadenectomy were operated. The pathological results revealed that both lobes had invasive adenocarcinoma but with different histological subtypes, according to the predominant pattern of the neoplastic cell growth, which was mainly acinar type and solid type for the upper lobe and lower lobe, respectively . To our interest, we observed caseous necrosis along with acinar type adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe . Acid-fast staining for the surgical tissue samples detected MTB in the field . Real-time PCR was also positive for MTB. Therefore, we could make a definite diagnosis that smear-negative TB and adenocarcinoma co-existed in the right upper lobe.
According to TNM classification criteria, the adenocarcinoma in the right lobe was diagnosed with Stage IA, no chemotherapy or radiotherapy was taken further after surgical resection. Since TB infection was complicated in the right upper lobe, anti-TB treatment was still necessary. However, the challenge for TB treatment was how to avoid potential renal toxicity of anti-TB drugs. Considered that the KTR has been taking anti-rejection medication, rifampicin was firstly excluded because it would affect the expression of cytochrome P450 3A4 in the liver and in the small intestine and interfere with the metabolism of anti-rejection drugs . Similarly, pyrazinamide was also excluded as it would lead to hyperuricemia and influence the renal function. The final anti-TB regimen for this patient was isoniazid (0.3 mg, QD, ethambutol (0.75 mg, QD) and moxifloxacin (0.4 mg, QD). After two-week treatment in hospital, the patient was discharged for continuous anti-TB treatment for 9 months in total.
In March 2021, at 6-month follow-up after drug withdrawal, the patient kept healthy without any uncomfortable symptoms. The normal tests for MTB and tumor were all negative, and the renal function was normal.