A 29-year-old man with intermediate-risk AML was treated with a standard chemotherapy regimen of 7 + 3 with idarubicin and cytarabine (day 1). Before receiving chemotherapy, the patient’s electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and abdominal ultrasonography did not show any obvious abnormality, except for a thoracic nodule shown in his chest computed tomography (CT) scan. The patient presented with severe neutropenia (0.05 × 109/L after the first course of induction chemotherapy), and consequently, fluconazole (200 mg, daily, orally, days 1–15) and levofloxacin (500 mg, daily, orally, days 1–5) were empirically given as broad-spectrum antifungal and antibiotic prophylaxis, respectively. A timeline with relevant data and treatment from the patient in the course is shown in . On day 5, the patient developed acute onset of fever to 38.9°C with abdominal pain, and his inflammation indicators increased. However, an abdominal CT scan revealed no abnormalities in the meantime. Possibly due to early empirical antimicrobial therapy, multiple clinical microbiologic assays including β-D-glucan and galactomannan (G and GM) tests, blood cultures, and stool cultures showed no pathogenic evidence. From day 5 to day 19, broad-spectrum antimicrobial coverage with meropenem combined with vancomycin and tigecycline combined with cefoperazone/sulbactam was empirically administrated for poor immunity, suggestive of potential infection of pathogens. However, there was no significant relief from his symptoms. Therefore, the patient’s peripheral blood samples were sent for mNGS to improve the etiological examination on day 13 . Within 48 h after receipt of the samples, the presence of M. indicus was examined by mNGS analysis with 1,482 reads. The anti-infection regimen was changed to Liposomal amphotericin B (LAmB) immediately (escalated from 0.1 mg/kg to 3 mg/kg daily, intravenous injection, days 15–34) with subsequent defervescence. On day 19, an abdominal CT scan showed four low-attenuation liver lesions caused by an invasive microorganism . However, the liver biopsy was not performed immediately owing to thrombocytopenia (20 × 109/L) and leukopenia (0.1 × 109/L).
On day 34, the patient achieved complete remission with a negative measurable residual disease (MRD) result and then was discharged from the hospital with instructions to continue his routine treatment with daily oral posaconazole suspension (200 mg, qid, po, days 28–46). After 4 days, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for the first course of consolidation chemotherapy. On admission, due to the enlarged liver lesions observed by abdominal CT, suggesting aggravation of liver infection, we obtained lesion specimens through an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy for pathogenic examinations and administered LAmB (escalated from 1 mg/kg to 3 mg/kg, daily, intravenous injection) as the antifungal agent. Fluorescence staining observed ribbon-like, folded hyphae. No pathogen was cultured from liver biopsy tissues, but histology revealed non-septate, irregular, branched fungal hyphae and spores. Meanwhile, mNGS detected sequence reads corresponding to M. indicus (4 reads), confirming that mucormycosis also occurred in the liver. The diagnoses of disseminated infections caused by M. indicus, including liver and bloodstream infections, should be clear at this point.
Patients received two homoharringtonine, cytarabine, and G-CSF (HAG) consolidation chemotherapy sessions on days 46 and 86, respectively, during which intravenous LAmB was decreased to 1 mg/kg/day due to reduction of liver abscesses to four and adverse effects of LAmB (severe gastrointestinal reaction, hypokalemia, and hepatic and renal insufficiency). The patient suffered from hypotension (80/42 mm Hg) and fever (39.5°C) caused by septic shock and stopped chemotherapy on the 88th day and received meropenem and linezolid administered for 1 week. Coincident with sending peripheral blood samples for mNGS and culture in an attempt to investigate possible etiology, posaconazole suspension (200 mg, qid, po, days 88–248) and a higher dose of LAmB (2 mg/kg, daily, intravenous injection) were used on day 88 for three additional liver abscesses shown on the abdominal CT scan. After 2 days, the mNGS of peripheral blood showed a negative result, which was consistent with the blood culture result 1 day later. However, the liver abscesses were reduced to four on day 124, implying that antifungal therapy had been effective. Given the inactive hepatic abscesses and leukemia treatment, the patient received venetoclax and azacitidine (VA) and homoharringtonine and cytarabine (HA) chemotherapy on days 134 and 248, respectively. Based on the negative mNGS results of peripheral blood, stable liver lesions, and continuous hepatic and renal insufficiency (AST 55 U/L, ALT 45 U/L, blood urea nitrogen 9.9 mmol/L, creatinine 171 μmol/L, GFR 42 ml/min/1.73 m2), the patient stopped using LAmB intravenously on day 188 but continued with oral posaconazole (changed to tablet, days 248–480) as against fungal infection.
On day 360, the patient received peripheral blood stem cells from an unrelated donor. The chimerism rate was 99.5% at day 30 post-HSCT, which meant complete donor chimerism. The total course of LAmB was 8 months, and the cumulative dose was 20.5 g. The entire course of oral posaconazole was almost 1 year, consisting of the whole transplantation period and 4 months post-HSCT. Until now (day 780), the number of liver abscesses remained at one and remained stable. The major problem after HSCT was renal insufficiency (blood urea nitrogen 8.3 mmol/L, creatinine 168 μmol/L, GFR 43 ml/min/1.73 m2) and grade 1 skin graft-versus-host disease. The liver function returned to normal.