A 24-year-old man presented with a 2.2 cm right renal calculus, which was managed by PCNL. During nephrostomy tube removal on the 6th postoperative day, intense bleeding was observed in the fistula and the catheter.
A 24-year-old man presented with a 2.2 cm right renal calculus, which was managed by PCNL. A 6-F ureteric catheter was introduced transurethrally under general anesthesia. A three-way Foley catheter was then inserted into the bladder. The patient was placed in a prone position, and the middle calyx was punctured under sonographic guidance. Using a guidewire, dilatation was performed with 8-F and 11-F dilators. Finally, a 20-F sheath was positioned, and a holmium laser lithotriptor with continuous irrigation was inserted into the sheath. After the completion of PCNL, a 20-F nephrostomy tube was inserted.
Slight postoperative bleeding, lasting for 5 d, was observed in the nephrostomy tube. No significant change in the hemoglobin level was observed during re-examination. During nephrostomy tube removal on the 6th postoperative day, intense bleeding was observed in the fistula and the catheter; a Vaseline gauze was packed into the fistula. Bladder irrigation was performed immediately. The patient was laid on the bed, and about five minutes later, the bleeding stopped. After about 24 h, extensive bleeding occurred through the catheter again.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had a free personal and family medical history.
After bleeding, the patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, heart rate was 92 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 130/88 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. Extensive bleeding flowed through the catheter.
Blood analysis revealed a 1.3 g/dL drop in the hemoglobin level after the first intense bleeding.
Renal angiography was undertaken immediately; however, an initial selective renal angiogram revealed no evidence of renal vascular injury . Thereafter, upon reviewing the aortogram and previous literature, lumbar arterial branch injury was suspected. After adjusting the catheter’s position several times, a lumbar arteriogram revealed pseudoaneurysm from a peripheral branch in the first right lumbar artery located along the nephrostomy tract . Embolization was then performed using a 4 mm × 14 mm coil. A subsequent angiogram confirmed the successful exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm with a preserved flow in the main trunk of the lumbar artery .
To avoid any missed diagnoses, the second right lumbar arteries were examined by angiography. Surprisingly, an arteriovenous fistula was detected from a peripheral branch in the second right lumbar artery located along the nephrostomy tract . Subsequently, coil embolization was performed with two 4 mm × 14 cm coils. The final angiogram demonstrated successful exclusion of the arteriovenous fistula .