A 14 year old male patient was referred to the Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery at the University Hospital Tuebingen in August 2002. Diagnosed at the age of two he underwent tracheostomy and since had been treated for juvenile onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (JORRP) through multiple surgeries. Papillomas were detectable in the larynx, trachea, and main bronchi and the patient had progressive lung manifestations. At the time of referral the patient had already undergone 116 operations. A total of 16 surgical excisions and laser ablations were performed during the following 5 years. In addition to ablative therapies, the patient was treated with the antiviral drug cidofovir for three years (2004–2007): first intralesionally, later systemically and finally via inhalations.
At the age of 18, he presented with a tracheal stenosis that was treated by balloon dilatation; he was also affected by pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema of his upper body, which was treated by a thoracic drainage. One year later the patient developed symptoms of Leriche’s syndrome caused by thromboembolic occlusion of the aortoiliac bifurcation. An embolectomy was performed. Additional thromboembolic events caused minor infarctions in both kidneys and the spleen. An ischemic stroke in the supply area of the left middle cerebral artery caused aphasia, hemiparesis and facial nerve paresis. Four days later, another thromboembolic crisis led to an occlusion of both femoral arteries. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a suspicious mass in the left cardiac atrium, involving the right pulmonary vein. About one month later a series of thromboembolic events involving the brain, liver, heart, kidneys, aorta, and pelvic arteries occurred. The patient finally died and an autopsy was performed at the Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Tuebingen.
To characterise the patient’s viral infection in more detail, DNA was extracted from surgically removed laryngeal papillomas. Exclusively HPV11 DNA was detected in the specimens and qRT-PCR (see Additional file ) estimated the viral genome copy number as 1.2 × 104 copies/cell. These viral load values are suggestive of a productive infection at the larynx. A full length HPV11 genome was isolated from a laryngeal papilloma and completely sequenced. The genome was 99% identical to the prototype sequence (NCBI number: M14119), with a total of 27 nucleotide deviations. Fifteen of which did not result in amino acid substitutions in the respective proteins. Three mutations, one deletion and three nucleotide insertions occurred in the Long Control Region. The remaining five mutations affected the amino acid sequence of viral proteins , however, the analysis of the protein sequences revealed that these mutations do not occur in conserved or functional domains and most probably do not interfere with the proteins’ activities.
Patient’s blood samples were investigated for the presence of HPV11 . Total DNA was extracted from 200 μl of whole blood, plasma, leukocyte and erythrocyte fractions. HPV11 DNA was only detected in whole blood and the plasma fraction but not in any of the cellular fractions. qRT-PCR determined that 8.85 × 105 viral genome copies/ml were present in the whole blood and 1.55 × 106 viral genome copies/ml were measured within the plasma fraction. These data suggest that most viral genomes were not cell associated, which was supported by the data obtained by measuring the viral load within the filtered plasma fraction (0.2 μm filters), where all possible residual cells were eliminated, and 5.61 × 105 viral genome copies/ml remained. As a way of indirectly demonstrating the presence of viral particles, plasma samples were treated with Benzonase in order to digest all unencapsidated DNA. Benzonase treatment has previously been reported to be both effective and safe for the elimination of free viral DNA from papillomavirus suspensions . Our results indicate that probably no viral particles were present within the patient’s plasma samples .
The patient’s immune-response against HPV was determined in blood samples from August 2005 and April 2007. In 2005 a significant response to the major capsid protein L1 of HPV11 was present with about 3,000 median fluorescence units (MFI) at a dilution of 1:100. The antibody response increased further to 30,000 MFI in the 2007 sample indicating a more than 10-fold increase in titre. No antibodies against HPV11 E6 and E7 were detected.
Post mortem examinations revealed that the patient presented with a papillomatous neoplasia of the trachea and main bronchi with what appeared to be microinvasive growth . Canalicular dissemination within the respiratory tree had occurred. Notably, all pulmonary lobes were affected by multiple confluent well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas with minor foci of keratinisation and focal necrosis, developing on the basis of respiratory papillomas with marked cytological atypias . In the left atrium, a large thrombus was found behind a sessile papillomatous lesion , structurally, cytologically, and immunohistochemically identical to the tracheal and pulmonary respiratory papillomas . Immunohistochemical examination revealed cytokeratin 5 and 6 expression in all neoplastic lesions indicating that the lesion was of epithelial origin . Notably, no lymph node or hematogenous metastases were found.
Molecular biological analyses revealed the presence of HPV DNA in autoptic tissues of lung tumors and left atrial papillomas. In addition, HPV DNA was detected in the left atrial thrombus and the aorto-iliac thromboembolus. HPV-genotyping by nested multiplex PCR revealed strong bands specific for HPV6/11. In order to distinguish between HPV6 and HPV11 DNA, direct sequencing was performed (see Additional file ) demonstrating the exclusive presence of HPV11 in lung tissue and atrial papillomas which was confirmed by LiPa V2 genotyping as an independent method of HPV detection.