A 71-year-old Caucasian male, was referred to our clinic because of high fever (39.2°C). His medical history showed benign esophagus stenosis due to recurrent reflux disease and concomitant candida esophagitis. He did not take regular medication. On presentation the patient had fever and was feeling very ill, without any specific complaints. He did not smoke, drank only alcohol in weekends and had no significant family history. On physical examination the blood pressure was 80/40 mm Hg, pulse rate 115 bpm, respiratory rate 32/min, length 178 cm, weight 78 kg. Further physical examination, including cardiac chest sounds, EKG, lung sounds and abdominal examination was normal. Laboratory results showed elevated C reactive protein (252 mg/l) and a leukocytosis (16.9/nL). A chest x-ray and a regular urinary analysis did not show any infection. A sepsis of unknown origin was concluded and blood cultures were drawn. He was admitted to a nursing ward and treated with ceftriaxon (2 gr intravenous) and gentamycine (240 mg intravenous). The same night, his condition worsened and he was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), because of respiratory failure and hypotension. On physical examination at the ICU he still had high fever (39.1°C), a breathing frequency of 40/minute and a worsening hypotension (mean arterial pressure 51 Mm Hg). It was not possible to hear cardiac sounds and his extremities were cold. He was intubated and after placement of a central line, the initial CVP was 7 cm H2O. Intravenous fluid replacement was started as well as inotropics (dopamine 4.5 μg/kg/min; norepinephrin 0.5 up to 2.3 μg/kg/min; milrinone 0.25 μg/kg/min). The patients' condition worsened quickly and an aystole developed. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was started. An ultrasound of the heart showed a tamponade with pericardial effusion. Pericardial fluids were drained and his hemodynamic situation improved rapidly, although vasopressors could not be completely weaned. The patient improved at first, but within 12 hours his condition worsened again. A new ultrasound of the heart showed again pericardial effusion, in which a small catheter was placed to perform drainage. However, his clinical condition worsened further and he died a few hours later due to hemodynamic shock unresponsive to therapy.
Postmortum examination showed a fistula from the esophagus directly to the pericardium. A white liquid was used to confirm the fistular connection, i.e. within a few seconds it appeared from the esophageal origin in the pericardial space . Post-mortem culture of the pericardial effusion showed candida species.
His family told that he had had complaints of unwell being and atypical thoracic pain since his last esophagoscopy with dilatation of the esophagus stenosis, three months before. Most likely he had been suffering a chronic (candida) mediastinitis since his last esophagus dilatation three months before ICU admission, which had been complicated by fistula formation to the pericardial space, resulting in a cardiac tamponade due to pericardial effusion.