A 2-year-old girl was presented to our hospital with a recurrent vaginal polypoid mass that was initially discovered by her parents 8 months ago, the parents reported that the vaginal mass was intermittently disappearing. The patient did not experience any abnormal vaginal discharge or bleeding and had no impact on bowel or urine function. Furthermore, the patient did not present with any concurrent systemic issues. She was delivered at 40 weeks of gestation through routine spontaneous vaginal delivery, and the pregnancy proceeded without complications.
The patient was considered the second child of a healthy father and mother who suffered from polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), aged 38 and 33 years, respectively, and there was no family history of malignancies or genitourinary anomalies.
Physical examination revealed a painless, reddish, smooth, soft to rubbery polypoid vaginal mass measuring 2.3 × 1.5 cm. The mass originated from the midline of the posterior vaginal wall [Figure ], and the urethral and anal openings appeared normal. Additional examination findings were unremarkable.
Ultrasound and MRI established that the circumscribed ovoid homogeneous mass originated from the distal vagina, measuring 2.3 × 1.5 cm mass without any invasion to the adjacent organs.
Prior to the current presentation, the patient underwent two surgical excisions at a different hospital. The first surgical excision took place one week after the discovery of the mass, while the second excision occurred three months after the initial excision. However, each excision was followed by polyp recurrence after one month.
Cystoscopy and vaginoscopy were performed by a paediatric urologist together with a paediatric surgeon under general anaesthesia, which revealed a pedunculated vaginal mass originating from the midline point of the posterior vaginal wall. Apart from the presence of the mass, the cystoscopy and vaginoscopy findings were normal. The mass was completely surgically excised with a margin of 3 mm around its base, emphasizing the protection of the hymenal ring and the patient recovered uneventfully after the procedure.
Histopathological examination confirmed a fibroepithelial polyp lined by a benign squamous epithelium with an underlying stroma. The stroma showed hypercellular and hypocellular areas containing spindled to ovoid neoplastic cells surrounding the dilated thin-walled vessels (highlighted by CD31 and ERG-1). Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for CD34 and STAT-6 and focally positive for ER and smooth muscle actin (SMA). They were negative for PAN-CK, EMA, P53 (wildtype/non-mutant), Desmin, Myogenin, Myo-D1, SALL-4, inhibin, CD99, BCOR, PAN-TRK, CD31, protein S100, and SOX10. INI-1/SMARCB1 and BRG1/SMARCA4 were retained.
Vaginoscopy was performed after 3 months of follow-up, and there was no evidence of recurrence.