A 69-year-old Caucasian woman with a background of hypercholestrolemia presented with ongoing severe non-radiating central chest pain for the previous 12 hours to our emergency department. Her pain started suddenly 60 minutes after she performed a two-hour dancing session. She had no other symptoms of note. She is an ex-smoker and takes daily aspirin and pravastatin. On presentation, her pulse rate was 60 beats per minute (regular) and her blood pressure was 120/70. The results of a clinical examination were completely normal. An ECG showed ST-segment elevation (not fulfilling the criteria for thrombolysis) in leads I and II and aVF, V5, and V6 .
Immediately, she was started on a loading dose of aspirin and clopidogrel, given glyceryl trinitrate, and commenced on a full dose of enoxaparin. She was admitted to the coronary care unit overnight. Her troponin-T result came back mildly elevated at 0.53 nmol/L. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a moderate-size left ventricular apical aneurysm with moderate to severe apical wall hypokinesia and no evidence of a mural thrombus. The left ventricular function was mildly to moderately reduced; the ejection fraction was 35% to 45%. The right ventricle and all valves were normal.
Unfortunately, there are no invasive cardiac services in our hospital and no 24-hour percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) services in a nearby hospital. So, in the morning (eight hours after presentation), she was transferred to a regional hospital for a coronary angiogram. It showed normal coronary arteries and moderate impairment of the left ventricular function (ejection fraction = 30%). The ventriculogram showed end-systole aneurysmal dilatation (ballooning) of both apical and inferior segments of the left ventricle . A diagnosis of TCM was made.
Investigations for pheochromocytoma were negative, and there was no evidence of myocarditis. She was started on treatment for heart failure-namely ramipril, bisoprolol, and eplerenone-in addition to the medications mentioned above. During her stay in our hospital, she was very stable and did not develop any of the recognized complications of TCM. Ten days later, she was discharged home on the same medications that were started when she was an inpatient. After eight weeks, she was reviewed in the outpatient clinic and a transthoracic echocardiogram was performed. The echocardiogram results were completely normal.