A 67 year-old male living in tropical northern Australia presented with left sided abdominal pain, fever and pyuria. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated abnormal enhancement of the lower pole of his left kidney, thickened pelvic urothelium and perinephric fat stranding. A provisional diagnosis of pyelonephritis was made, and he was empirically treated with intravenous ampicillin and gentamicin. His past medical history was significant for recurrent sinusitis with eosinophilia and positive perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and he was on treatment for eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) with mycophenolate mofetil 750 mg twice daily and prednisone 5 mg daily.
Urine microscopy showed > 100 × 106 leucocytes/L, but no pathogen was isolated. Despite antibiotic therapy he had ongoing fevers and persistent flank pain. On day five, he developed an erythematous, indurated lesion on his left upper thigh, and the following day a similar lesion developed on his anterior abdominal wall, with the appearance of ischemic panniculitis . A repeat CT scan on day 6 demonstrated absent perfusion in the lower pole of the left kidney, consistent with infarction . A skin lesion biopsy was performed 2 days later, and he was commenced on methylprednisolone as treatment for presumed vasculitis. Twenty-four hours later, culture of the skin biopsy demonstrated growth of a fungus with the appearance of an organism of the order Mucorales on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 30° and 37 °C. He was commenced on intravenous (IV) liposomal amphotericin B 8 mg/kg daily for treatment of presumed disseminated mucormycosis, and both skin lesions were extensively debrided. Intraoperatively, panniculitis with necrosis was found to extend to the deep fascia. Histologic examination showed fungal hyphae with angioinvasion and infarction of subcutaneous tissue . In light of this, all immunosuppression was ceased. Four days later the patient underwent a left nephrectomy, and histologic examination of the kidney revealed necrosis with aseptate, branching hyphae consistent with organisms of the order Mucorales .
Fungal microscopy with calcofluor staining following 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) digestion of renal tissue confirmed the presence of wide ribbon-like aseptate fungal hyphae consistent with zygomycete infection. Tissue was cultured on Sabouraud’s dextrose agar which grew a white cottony fungus at 30, 37 and 40 °C on day 3. The isolate was referred to the National Mycology Reference Centre, where the fungus was identified as Saksenaea species (sp.) via sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS1–5.8S-ITS2) region of the ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and Nucleotide Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLASTn) comparison to publicly accessible sequence databases. This demonstrated 93 and 91% sequence similarity to S. trapezispora and S. oblongispora Type material, respectively, in both the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database and the Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute database , and 81% similarity to S. vasiformis using the International Society of Human and Animal Mycology (ISHAM) barcoding database . This was considered insufficient for definitive species identification. Further investigation of the species identification, including the possibility of a novel species, will be conducted. The isolate failed to sporulate after 6 weeks of incubation, despite the use of a range of sporulation-inducing media including Potato Dextrose agar and Tap Water agar at 25 °C and 35 °C; therefore antifungal susceptibility testing could not be performed. The patient received 6 weeks of IV amphotericin; oral posaconazole was added 3 weeks into therapy, though significant improvement had been observed following surgical intervention. Posaconazole was given in the form of delayed release tablets 300 mg, with a 12-h interval between the first two doses and daily dosing thereafter. His treatment course was complicated by acute kidney injury likely secondary to IV liposomal amphotericin requiring dose reduction, and abnormal liver function tests likely secondary to posaconazole. He was discharged home after 57 days in hospital on oral posaconazole treatment. Therapeutic drug monitoring of posaconazole was performed and levels were considered therapeutic between 1.5 and 3.3 mg/L.
Three months following discharge, he represented with dyspnoea, rhinorrhoea and cough. CT demonstrated consolidation in the lower lobe of the left lung and upper lobe opacities with inflammatory change in the sinuses. Bronchoscopy was unremarkable and fungal culture was negative. This presentation was thought to be secondary to a flare of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis in the setting of cessation of his immunosuppression. He received prednisone, which was slowly weaned, and was later switched to mepolizumab (an interleukin-5 inhibitor) for ongoing treatment of EGPA. The patient has received 18 months of posaconazole treatment with no evidence of recurrence of infection, and we remain cautiously optimistic.