Written patient consent was obtained for the report. A 51-year-old woman had been pointed out with a pulmonary cyst on medical checkup since childhood. After a recently detailed examination due to respiratory distress, she was diagnosed to have a large intrathoracic meningocele as a complication of neurofibromatosis type 1. The meningocele (130×146×150 mm) occupied larger than one-third of the left thoracic cavity and compressed the mediastinum . The meningocele was connected to the subarachnoid cavity at the 9th thoracic vertebra level. She was scheduled for a thoracoscopic meningectomy. Before the surgery, the spirometry test showed restrictive ventilatory impairment (volume capacity: 1.92 L, %volume capacity: 66.4%, forced expiratory volume 1: 1.68 L, forced expiratory volume 1%: 85.7%) and her peripheral oxygen saturation was 98% at room air. The surgical procedure could significantly alter intrathecal pressure during surgery and could cause cerebrospinal fluid leakage after surgery. A sudden or persistent decrease in intrathecal pressure can cause intracranial hemorrhage. Therefore, an intrathecal pressure monitoring was planned during and after the surgery using a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage tube.
Anesthesia was induced with propofol 90 mg, remifentanil 0.2 μg/kg/min, and rocuronium 40 mg followed by tracheal intubation using a 35-Fr double-lumen tube and was maintained with sevoflurane 1.5–2%, fentanyl (total dose of 300 μg), and remifentanil 0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min. After the anesthesia induction, she was positioned in the right lateral position and right lung ventilation was performed. A standard CSF drainage tube was inserted approximately 5 cm into the intrathecal space between the 3rd and 4th thoracic vertebra to monitor intrathecal pressure continuously. Heart rate and noninvasive arterial blood pressure were stable throughout the surgery, while the intrathecal pressure was increased and decreased by the surgical procedures as follows. In the early stage of the thoracoscopic procedure, the intrathecal pressure occasionally increased by around 5 cmH2O compared to the control level immediately after the insertion of the drain due to the compression of the thoracic meningocele. Then, a thick intravenous plastic catheter was inserted into the meningocele to aspirate the CSF using a 50-mL syringe. During the careful slow aspiration of the CSF (average rate was approximately 50 mL/min), the intrathecal pressure occasionally decreased by up to 10 cmH2O. When the aspiration was interrupted, the intrathecal pressure rapidly recovered to the baseline. We informed the surgeons of a large pressure difference compared to the baseline and of a rapid pressure change, if necessary. A total of 2000 mL CSF was drained in 40 min. After opening the thoracic meningocele and confirming the connection between the lumen of the meningocele and intrathecal space, the meningocele was resected and the resection site was tightly sutured. Then, the intrathecal pressure became stable at the control level. As postoperative intrathecal pressure was expected to stabilize due to the tight sutures, we determined that postoperative intrathecal pressure monitoring was unnecessary. Accordingly, the CSF drainage tube was removed immediately after the completion of the surgery. She recovered from general anesthesia without remarkable complications, and no intracranial hemorrhage was found on the examination of computed tomography immediately after surgery.
Postoperatively, the patient had a mild headache in the sitting position, which may have been caused by CSF hypovolemia. This headache disappeared on postoperative day 3 without treatments. No major complications including neurological deficits were found until the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4.