An 18-year-old Han Chinese man presented to our hospital with a two-year history of pain and swelling in multiple joints, with facial changes of one year duration.
In the winter of 2008 he began to experience joint pain involving his knees, ankles, hips and the small joints of his hands with obvious swollen knees and ankles. Gradually, he developed difficulty squatting and clenching his fists, as well as lower back pain with morning stiffness. He denied fever, weight loss, eye diseases or inflammatory bowel diseases. He was diagnosed with spondyloarthritides and treated with steroids, salicylazosulfapyridine, loxoprofen sodium and infliximab, but without positive effects. In April 2009, minimal proteinuria and hematuria were found. A kidney biopsy showed immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy with a Lee’s classification of Grade I. He further developed overt facial acne, an oily face with excessive desquamation, furrowing of his facial, scalpel and plantar skin, hyperhidrosis and enlargement of his hands and feet with digital clubbing .
A physical examination found no limitation of his chest expansion or lumbar spine mobility. A serum investigation showed a two-fold elevation of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and a 10-fold elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP); he was negative for rheumatoid factor and positive for human leukocyte antigen B27. An ultrasound of his knees indicated synovitis. Joint effusion showed inflammation with a negative culture result. Radiographs of his hands and feet demonstrated marked clubbing with mushrooming of the tufts . Periostosis was detected in his tibiae and fibulae, limited to the diaphysis, with a monolayer configuration. A sacroiliac computed tomography scan revealed bilateral blur and sclerosis with widened joint gaps.
After admission to our hospital, our patient was diagnosed with pachydermoperiostosis complicated by spondyloarthritides, and given prednisone 50mg/day, methotrexate 15mg/week and salicylazosulfapyridine 2g/day, as well as calcium and alendronic acid 70mg/week. This combined therapy yielded a poor response. He was then administered intravenous zoledronic acid and we performed a synovectomy on both knee joints, with prednisone tapered rapidly over the following two weeks. His symptoms improved remarkably, with an assessment of pain intensity recorded on a 10cm visual analogue scale decreasing from 8 to 1. His ESR and levels of CRP also decreased to normal. Our patient recovered and remains well six months after discharge.