A 70-year-old Thai female visited the advanced general dentistry clinic at the Faculty of Dentistry, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. She was suffering from facial pain on her left side and was diagnosed by a dentist as having trigeminal neuralgia (TN). This diagnosis was made shortly after pain onset, solely based on its character and without any pathologic findings from a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that the patient had undergone 9 years ago. The patient experienced flank pain, and the physician prescribed MRI for the abdominal area only. She experienced a sharp shooting pain, which was triggered by facial movements, such as chewing, speaking, or brushing teeth, and touching certain areas of her face. Bouts of pain lasted from a few seconds to several minutes, and episodes of several attacks lasted days, weeks, months, or longer prior to her visit to the advanced general dentistry clinic at the dentistry clinic at Mahidol University (Additional file :Fig. S1).
Physician designed an occlusal equilibration appliance (OEA) (Additional file : Fig. S1) for treating the patient by inserting the appliance in the mouth for dental occlusal equilibration (deprogram). The patient used this appliance by placing it in the mouth continuously (day and night) and removed it only when eating. After using the appliance for 1 week, the facial pain had not yet disappeared. At the second week, the physician prescribed Arcoxia (etoricoxib) to inhibit cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2). The patient was prescribed 90 mg, 10 tablets, 1 tablet/day after meal for 10 days. After completing the full dosage prescribed, the patient appeared to feel and look better prior to taking medication and was able to eat normally. Physician did not appoint oral rehabilitation owing to lack of team resources and setup. In addition, patient did not follow the physician’s instructions on preventing oral pain by adjusting eating habits. This included abstaining from foods that are hard, crunchy, chewy, or sticky. The physician recommended instead to focus on eating creamy foods or foods that did not require a lot of mouth movement to reduce all actions of the muscle of mastication during the period before the start of oral rehabilitation.