A 73-year-old man with a history of hypertension, diabetes, pneumoconiosis, and chronic obstructive lung disease was diagnosed with squamous cell lung cancer, staged as cT1miN0M0 and stage IA1. The patient was a plumber and heavy smoker with a Brinkman index of 2700. Computed tomography (CT) showed a polypoid nodular shadow in the left superior lingual bronchus . Nuclear tracer accumulation was visualized in a solitary pulmonary nodule on 2-deoxy-2-(18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography. Additionally, FDG accumulation up to the maximum standardized uptake value of 6 was observed in the bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes . Endobronchial treatment, such as photodynamic therapy, was considered, although the patient preferred surgical resection.
Initially, we attempted a left lingual segmentectomy using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. However, as a consequence of pneumoconiosis, we noted intrapulmonary lymph node infiltration into the pulmonary artery. Consequently, we were compelled to convert to open thoracotomy. The left main pulmonary artery was clamped, and lymph node dissection was attempted. There was, however, difficulty in dissecting the lymph nodes that had been extensively involved. Furthermore, we were unable to perform a pulmonary angioplasty and thus performed a left pneumonectomy. The duration of the surgery was 138 min, and the amount of blood loss was approximately 90 g.
The chest drainage tube was removed on postoperative day (POD) 1. Atrial fibrillation (AF) occurred on POD 3, but sinus rhythm was re-established with verapamil. On POD 4, the patient began complaining of left abdominal pain. He experienced rapid increases in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and leukocyte levels, reaching 1129 IU/L and 13,100 cells/mcl, respectively. A thoracoabdominal contrast-enhanced CT (CE-CT) revealed left upper PVST and left RI . To prevent progression of RI, 200 IU/kg of heparin was administered immediately. On POD 5, oral warfarin was initiated. Unfortunately, the patient exhibited poor compliance and response to warfarin, as his prothrombin time was not prolonged sufficiently. Therefore, we decided to change to edoxaban as his renal function was maintained on POD 13. Heparin was discontinued on POD 15. A thoracoabdominal CE-CT performed on POD 19 revealed a reduction in PVST and an improvement of RI . The patient was discharged on POD 20. Infarct lesions or worsening renal function were not observed 3 months after the operation. Administration of edoxaban was ongoing at the time.