A 71-year-old man, originally from North Africa, with a history of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, presented to our emergency department with a 2-month history of nonspecific abdominal symptoms: meteorism (bloating) and a subjective feeling of abdominal enlargement. Diarrhea, loss of appetite, weight loss, persistent fever, night sweats, headaches, anxiety, gastric ulcer disease, or skin rash were not reported. He did not report a neoplasm in the past and he had not undergone an abdominal examination before. He could not recall any episodes of pancreatitis or suffering from gall bladder stones. He had undergone a computed tomography (CT) scan a few days before which showed a tumor in the pancreatic head and he was referred to our clinic. Diabetes mellitus occurred 20 years ago and he was initially treated with orally administered anti-diabetic drugs for more than 12 years. Apart from diabetes and arterial hypertension he had no previous medical or surgical history. He has been treated with two different anti-hypertensives, two diuretics, acetylsalicylic acid, and insulin glargine. He reported an allergy to metformin. He did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol.
On general physical examination, he was conscious and oriented and in fair general condition. He appeared to be in a good nutritional state (height 165 cm, weight 73 kg, body mass index 26.8 kg/m2). His lungs were clear to auscultation and percussion bilaterally. His heart examination was also normal. He had a soft, non-tender abdomen without any palpable masses. Icterus and lymphadenopathy were absent. His vital signs were normal.
A routine laboratory analysis showed the following abnormal values: hemoglobin 12.5 g/dl (13.5–17.5), hematocrit 25% (40–53), mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 78 fl (82–98), uric acid 10.2 mg/dl (< 7.0), creatinine 1.8 mg/dl (< 1.4), and random serum glucose 148 mg/dl. Transaminases and cholestasis parameter were normal. Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 6.9% (52 mmol/mol). The serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cancer antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) were in normal range. Serum pancreatic lipase was slightly elevated (88 U/l, reference range < 65 U/l). The pancreatic elastase in stool was normal. There was no clinical evidence for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
An ultrasound of his abdomen revealed a tumor of the uncinate process of the pancreas. The endoscopic ultrasound showed a mass in the area between the neck and the body of his pancreas, measuring approximately 24 mm in its largest dimension. The tumor compressed his splenic vein; however, there were no signs of infiltration. Contrast-enhanced CT demonstrated an almost 3 cm round, quite well-defined and homogeneous tumor formation in the area between the neck and absent body of his pancreas . The tail of the pancreas was absent as well. The tumor showed a slightly arterial hypervascular enhancement and a central calcification in the shape of a dot. There was no central hypoperfusion or necrosis. The imaging findings were not typically suggestive of exocrine pancreatic carcinoma or pancreatic endocrine tumor. After discussing the case at our interdisciplinary tumor board, we decided to perform a biopsy.
The initial fine-needle aspiration was performed via endoscopic ultrasound. However, the pathological analysis did not detect tumor cells in the aspiration material.
In the next step our patient underwent CT-guided biopsy of the mass. A histopathological examination revealed the typical aspect of a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor with solid aggregates of isomorphic tumor cells. Immunohistochemistry showed intensive cytoplasmic staining for synaptophysin and nuclear staining for Ki-67 in less than 2% of the tumor cells . No gastrin expression could be detected by immunohistochemistry.
Our patient underwent pancreas resection because of the presence of a neuroendocrine tumor. On macroscopic examination, the tumor was 1.8 cm in maximum diameter (TNM staging, pT1). There was no vascular invasion present. None of the three lymph nodes was metastatic (TNM staging, pN0). The active proliferative rate of Ki-67 (a pathological grading marker) was 5%.
Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas usually show the characteristic nested, trabecular, or gyriform pattern known from neuroendocrine neoplasms of other organs. There are, however, architectural and cytological variations in some tumors, including abortive gland formation or oncocytic and clear cell changes.
In our case, the differential diagnosis of the biopsy specimen was focused on a distinction from other epithelial pancreas neoplasms especially the solid variants of acinar cell carcinoma, solid pseudopapillary neoplasm, as well as pancreatoblastoma. The latter tumor types may also exhibit the nesting pattern observed in our case. Therefore, the intensive homogenous staining pattern for synaptophysin in our case provided an important argument for the diagnosis of a neuroendocrine tumor. This diagnosis was further corroborated in the resection specimen by the lack of features defining acinar cell carcinoma (for example, acinar differentiation) or pancreatoblastoma or solid papillary neoplasm (for example, pseudopapillary growth pattern).
Our patient underwent a 68gallium-DOTATOC positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan 4 months later, which did not show increased metabolic uptake. Seven months after pancreas resection his HbA1c increased from 6.9 to 8.7%. This led us to modify his diabetes medication to a combination including insulin glargine, insulin glulisine, and metformin.