A 75-year-old man was admitted for clinical T3N1M0 Stage IIIA primary lung cancer and underwent a right lower lobectomy by thoracotomy. He had paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and was taking an anticoagulant for it, which was discontinued before surgery. The operation went smoothly, but an air leak from the middle lobe was observed at an interlobar pleural defect, where adhesion to the lower lobe was detached. Lung tissue around the pleural defect was thick and hard because of inflammation and fibrosis. Therefore, the defect was closed using 2–0 polypropylene sutures (Prolene®, Ethicon, Bridgewater, NJ, USA). The suture was cut to 1 cm . The postoperative course was uneventful, and intake of the anticoagulant was resumed 3 days after surgery. The patient was discharged 6 days after surgery, and no abnormal signs were confirmed on the chest X-ray at the day of discharge .
However, on postoperative day 11, he developed dyspnoea and was transported to our emergency room. His systolic blood pressure and heart rate were 73 mmHg and 68 beats/minute, respectively. Chest X-ray and contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a haemothorax . Although we could not identify extravasation of the contrast medium on the CT images, the patient was diagnosed with postoperative bleeding and was transferred to an operation room for emergency thoracotomy.
The intrathoracic cavity contained a large amount of clotted blood. The total amount of the clot and blood collected from the thoracic cavity was about 2000 g. After the clotted blood was removed, we discovered arterial bleeding from a pinhole in the parietal pleura anterior to the thoracic vertebra and identified an injured intercostal artery as the source. The pinhole injury was sutured and covered with a fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil®, Takeda Austria GmbH, Linz, Austria). After haemostasis, we detected a suture tip from the initial surgery protruding from the lung. When the lung inflated, the suture tip hits the bleeding point; therefore, we identified that the suture caused damage to the pleura and the artery. Careful observation revealed no other bleeding sites, and the patient was discharged 10 days later.