A 10-year-old Japanese boy presented to his family pediatrician with the complaints of easy fatigue and abdominal pain for 6 mo.
The patient presented to the family pediatrician with facial pallor and severe anemia (Hb: 2.9 g/dL) and was referred to his previous physician for admission. He then received red blood cell transfusion and iron supplementation. Further analysis also showed positive fecal human hemoglobin, indicating anemia due to gastrointestinal bleeding, and the patient was transferred to our institution for further evaluation.
The patient had no previous medical history.
Prior to the patient's birth, the father had been treated with antibiotics for iron deficiency anemia caused by Helicobacter pylori infection.
On physical examination, vital signs were as follows: Temperature, 36.8 °C; blood pressure, 99/60 mmHg; heart rate, 80 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. His height was 122.7 cm (-1.63 standard deviation), and his weight was 24.1 kg (-0.92 standard deviation), with no significant growth disturbance on the growth curve and no other abnormal physical findings other than pale eyelid conjunctiva.
Blood analysis demonstrated low levels of hemoglobin (9.7 g/dL) and albumin (2.9 g/dL), and fecal analysis showed elevated levels of human hemoglobin (2018 ng/mL) and calprotectin (510 μg/g). No elevation of inflammatory markers and no eosinophilia were observed .
Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy showed normal mucosal findings. Small intestinal capsule endoscopy was not performed because of the patency capsule retention in the stomach, and transanal double-balloon enteroscopy (DBE) was performed. DBE showed multiple oblique and circular ulcers with discrete margins at 70-100 cm proximal from the ileocecal valve with slight constriction of the small intestinal lumen .
No histological abnormalities were identified on biopsies conducted by upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy. The ileal biopsy with DBE showed moderate to severe histological eosinophilic infiltration [maximum 80 eosinophils/high-power field (HPF)] and cryptitis within the mucosa . Of the urine prostaglandin metabolites that are elevated in CEAS, the levels in the present patient were as follows: Prostaglandin F2α metabolite, 3.2 (normal range: 3.0-4.0) ng/mg Cre; prostaglandin E2 metabolite, 2.09 (normal range: 2.0-3.0) ng/mg Cre; and prostaglandin D2 metabolite, 8.5 (normal range: 9.0-10) ng/mg Cre, all of which were within the normal ranges[,]. No previously reported mutations in the SLCO2A1 gene or in the targeted gene panels for very early-onset inflammatory bowel disease were identified.