A 67-year-old Pakistani woman of Pathan ethnicity presented with a lump in the left breast to the SKMCH & RC, Lahore, Pakistan, in October 2008. Excision biopsy revealed a grade 3 invasive ductal breast carcinoma measuring 2.8 cm in its greatest dimension (pT2) without evidence of lymph node involvement (pN0). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses showed that the tumor was negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2), MSH2 and MSH6 expression. She reported a prior diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma at age 48, for which she had undergone a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. In the adjuvant setting, she had received radiotherapy at University College Hospital, London, UK.
The index patient (III:14) reported an extensive family history of malignancy . Her sister (III:12), cousin (III:1), and niece (IV:1) were diagnosed with unilateral breast cancer. Another sister (III:10) was diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer. Additionally, six family members had presented with gynecologic malignancies; one sister (III:18) and two nieces (IV:17, IV:20) presented with ovarian cancer; her daughter (IV:23) and two nieces (IV:4, IV:16) were diagnosed with endometrial cancer. Another sister (III:5) and one maternal cousin (III:4) had previously been diagnosed with intestinal cancer, and three descendants (IV:1, IV:3, IV:4) of that sister were affected by colon cancer. The index patient reported several other family members with various malignancies including her mother (II:6) with liver cancer, a brother (III:8) with stomach cancer, one nephew (IV:13) with renal cancer and another (IV:8) with prostate cancer, and one niece (IV:22), one grandniece (V:1) and one grandnephew (V:2) with childhood malignancies including brain tumor, osteoblastoma and leukemia, respectively. The cancer diagnoses of the index patient (III:14), her daughter (IV:23) and one niece (IV:20) were confirmed by review of medical records and/or pathological reports. All other cancer diagnoses were self-reported or reported by other family members.
Given the strong family history of cancer, the patient was referred to SKMCH & RC for genetic counseling and risk assessment and was enrolled in the study after obtaining written informed consent. The study was approved by the ethical review board of SKMCH & RC. Due to the presence of multiple breast and ovarian cancers in this family, the preliminary diagnosis was HBOC syndrome . The patient had previously tested negative for deleterious small-range BRCA1/2 mutations and large genomic rearrangements (M. U. Rashid, unpublished data) using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) analysis followed by DNA sequence analysis of variant fragments and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) as described [, ]. The patient had also tested negative for mutations in CHEK2 and RAD51C , implying the involvement of other gene(s) contributing to disease risk in this family.
This family also fulfilled the recognized criteria for suspected LS : that includes (i) among first degree relatives of a colorectal cancer patient (or in himself) at least 1 colorectal cancer, cancer of the endometrium, small bowel or urinary tract; (ii) at least one of the above cancers diagnosed under age 50; and (iii) familial adenomatous polyposis excluded . The index case was screened for germline mutations in the MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes using DHPLC and DNA sequence analysis as described elsewhere . A novel disease-causative heterozygous nonsense mutation in exon 16 of MSH2, c.2656G > T (p.Glu886*), was identified.
Genetic MSH2 testing was offered to other affected family members. The mutation was also detected in the index patient’s daughter (IV:23) who was diagnosed with endometrial cancer, and one niece (IV:20) affected by ovarian cancer. Her nephew (IV:8), who was diagnosed with prostate cancer, tested negative for this mutation. The mutation was also not identified in 100 healthy female controls.