A previously healthy 20-year-old female patient presented at the emergency department with 4 days history of concurrent severe right-sided pleuritic chest pain and moderate ipsilateral clavicular pain, shortness of breath on exertion, as well as combined right upper limb weakness and bilateral fingertip numbness. No other symptoms were reported. She accounted no recent travel or family history, including neurofibromatosis.
On admission, the ECG and troponins were found to be within normal limits. However, the ensuing chest X-ray (CXR) showed a large oval mass-like density in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe .
The complementary CT scan of the chest with contrast showed a low density 7.2 × 10.5 × 8.3 cm mass in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe with no nodular enhancement, potentially originating at the right T5-T6 neural foramen. A 16 mm thick right pleural effusion was also described . Although nonspecific, the findings suggested the presence of a peripheral nerve sheath tumor such as neurofibroma or schwannoma.
The ensuing MRI with gadolinium demonstrated a large (at least 7.2 × 9.2 × 8.5 cm) T1 isointense and a mild T2 hyperintense (heterogenic) mass relative to the muscle and within the right upper/mid posterior hemithorax. A focal contrast-enhancing protrusion of the right posterior medial aspect of the mass extending into the right T5-6 neural foramen suggested that the mass emanated from the neural foramen . Of note, the bronchoalveolar lavage cultures were found negative for pulmonary pathogens, including acid-fast bacilli, chlamydia, Mycobacterium marinum, Mycobacterium avium, Nocardia, Legionella, yeast, fungus, or viruses.
In view of the patient’s age, concurrent symptomatology, Karnofsky Performance Scale (KPS) of 70 (mainly due to presenting symptoms), size of the lesion, and topoanatomical constraints, we decided to remove the tumor using a right- sided posterolateral thoracotomy followed by a perilesional dissection; the mass was successfully freed from the corresponding posterior rib and transverse process. We then proceeded to follow the pedicle into the right T5-T6 foramen, ultimately achieving “en bloc” tumor resection including the proximal nerve root. No spinal fluid leak or persistent bleeding was noted; the surgical site was closed accordingly and without complications.
The microscopic examination of the collected samples demonstrated a well-circumscribed encapsulated tumor composed of interlacing fascicles of bland spindled cells with alternating areas of hyper- and hypocellularity, thick hyalinized vessels, and occasional areas of nuclear palisading (Verocay bodies). Areas of lipidized/xanthoma cells were also noted. Non-neoplastic nerve structures were found adjacent to the neoplasm. No significant atypia or mitotic activity was seen. Finally, the immunohistochemical staining proved positive for S-100 protein, SOX-10 while negative for p63, PAX-8, neurofilament, and desmin. The findings confirmed the diagnosis of schwannoma .
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit postoperatively; her evolution at the hospital proved uncomplicated with follow-up serial CXRs remaining unremarkable . The patient was discharged 7 days following surgery. A CT scan of the chest 1 month postsurgery showed normal findings [ and ]. In view of her good prognosis, adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was deemed not necessary at this stage. The patient has remained asymptomatic since her discharge from hospital; her KPS is of 100 currently (6 months postsurgery). As expected, she remains on follow-up. Due to the low risk of recurrence after schwannoma resection, repeated CT scan will be scheduled after 12 months postsurgery.