A 21 months old Chinese girl was admitted to hospital due to developmental delay after the 14th months. The girl presented with global developmental delay, regression of language skills, unable to understand words or walk independently, and insomnia with difficulty maintaining sleep. She also had autism-like behaviors such as playing alone, abnormal social interactions, poor eye contact and stereotypic behaviors. Relatively large fleshy hands and rounded face were also noticed. Physical examination showed no other abnormity with normal muscle tension. Her height was 90 cm (+1SD ~ +2SD), weight was 16 kg (> + 3SD), and head circumference was 52 cm (+2SD ~ +3SD).
She was born at 39 weeks of gestation via Caesarean-section, with an Apgar score of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Birth weight was 3.45 kg (<+1SD), birth length was 53 cm (+1SD ~ + 2SD), and head circumference was 37 cm (> + 3SD). According to her mother, patient appeared normal before 12th months old without any history of febrile convulsions or other neurological diseases. Also her height and weight were above + 2 standard deviation (SD) during this time, and she was able to sit up at 7th months old and mumble “mama” or “baba” at 8th months old. She was able to ambulate with assistance and understand simple verbal instructions at 12th months old. However, she started to have mild problems to maintain sleep after 12th months old, followed by autism-like behaviors, absent of speech as a regression of language skills, and play in the corner of house. No family history of any mental disorder or genetic illness was identified, and her 11-year-old sister had no symptoms consistent with PMS.
On her 15th months old, electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed without any abnormal findings. Audiometry, pediatric eye exam and echocardiogram were also unremarkable. A bone age of 3 years by skeletal age assessment. The Complete Blood Count (CBC) test, Complete Chemistry Panel (CMP) (including serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen test, estimated glomerular filtration rate), thyroid function tests urinalysis, myocardial enzyme level (including troponin T, troponin I, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase), serum lactic acid and ammonia were all within normal range. Serum trace metal elements (including copper, zinc, lead and cadmium) were also unremarkable. Serum insulin-like growth factor-1(IGF-1) was 174 ng/ml (normal 55 ~ 327 ng/ml), and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) was 5.07 μg /ml (normal 0.7 ~ 3.6 μg/ml). Chinese version of GDS (Gesell Development Scale) was used as neuropsychological development examination, and Infant development was assessed using the development quotient (DQ) according to the following criteria: normal (DQ ≥ 85), borderline (75 ≤ DQ < 85) and abnormal (DQ < 75). The girl had DQ of 58 for “gross motor”, 63 for “fine motor”, 54 for “language”, 57 for “adaptive behavior” and 66 for “personal-social”. The results showed the girl had global developmental delay.
A course of 5-month physical therapy was initiated. However, no significant clinical progress was observed. Therefore, after obtaining consent from the legal guardians (parents of the patient), genomic DNA was extracted from 2 ml peripheral blood of the patient and sent to the molecular medical Laboratory for whole exome sequencing (Additional file : Document S1. The methods of the whole exome sequencing). Firstly, Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP), Insertion and Deletion (Indel) was analyzed and no suspected variation was detected. Subsequently, copy number variations (CNV) were analyzed based on capture sequencing depth between the patient and normal control. A 33.7Kb-size heterozygous deletion was identified at the region of chr22:51135991–51,169,740 . The deletion region contained the full length of SHANK3 gene, which previous reported related to Phelan McDermid syndrome in the database of the DECIPHER and OMIM . Also, previous reports of heterozygous deletion on the same chr22:51135991–51,169,740 region, which was diagnosed with Phelan McDermid syndrome can be found on the WANFANG Database . In this case, the patient presented with global developmental delay, regression of language skills and autism-like behaviors, met the diagnostic criteria of Phelan McDermid syndrome. Combined with the clinical symptoms and genetic result, the patient can be diagnosed as Phelan McDermid syndrome.
As IGF-1 therapy has not been approved by CFDA for PMS, a consent was obtained from the parents of this patient, after extensive discussion regarding the potential benefits versus risks of subcutaneous rhGH. rhGH treatment was started at 0.075 IU/kg (ChangchunJinsaiGenSci Co., Ltd., GH30IU) once daily by subcutaneous injection for 3 months.
No severe or common adverse events were observed throughout the treatment course, Post- treatment serum IGF-1 was 258 ng/ml, and IGFBP-3 was 5.4 μg /ml. Another neuropsychological development examination was repeated according to the Chinese version of GDS. This patient had DQ of 84 for “gross motor”, 84 for “fine motor”, 78 for “language”, 72 for “adaptive behavior” and 73 for “personal-social”. These results indicated significant improvements in serum IGF-1 and IGFBP-3, and motor skills. Clinically, this patient was also able to communicate with parents by simple one sentence like wants watch cartoon and play outside, get along well with other children, walk up and down two or three stairs independently.