A 65-year-old female was referred to Naga Municipal Hospital because of epigastralgia. During a physical examination, a defined abdominal mass was palpable in the region of the left hypochondrium. Neither anemia nor jaundice was present. Blood analysis showed a white blood cell count of 12.25 × 103/μl. Her tumor marker serum levels were within the normal limits (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 1.3 ng/ml, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9: 10.1 U/ml). A gastrointestinal endoscopic examination was performed and disclosed an ulcerated lesion in the lesser curvature of the gastric corpus at about 7 cm from esophagogastric junction, which squashed and isolated the gastric folds from the rest of the stomach , and an elevated lesion similar to a submucosal tumor (SMT), which was suspected of being an advanced gastric tumor, was detected on the anal side of the ulcerated lesion . The biopsy specimen from the ulcerated lesion indicated a moderately or poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the gastric wall and findings that seemed to indicate abdominal wall invasion .
Open surgery was carried out and revealed that the tumor had infiltrated into the abdominal wall. Therefore, total gastrectomy and resection of the regional lymph node and parts of the abdominal wall were performed. Upon macroscopic examination, the specimens showed an elevated and superficial depressed-type (IIa+IIc type) gastric cancer, and the adjacent tumor had extended into the abdominal wall beyond the gastric serosa . Histopathological examination of the specimens demonstrated moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma without metastasis to the resected lymph nodes and xanthogranuloma consisting of foamy histiocytes, many lymphocytes, plasma cells, and granulocytes which were immunohistochemically positive for CD68 and were non reactive with CAM5.2, AE1/3 and S-100 protein . The xanthogranuloma was located near to the gastric cancer, but was not in contact with it. The patient recovered rapidly and was discharged on postoperative day 16. She has been symptom free ever since.