A 5-month-old boy with a history of recurrent respiratory infection was presented during the past 1 month. He had a recurrent cough. He was presented to a local hospital and was presumptively diagnosed with lung infection, congenital heart defect and proteinuria. After antibiotics treatment and supportive care, he was discharged home. Due to the persistent positive proteinuria, this boy was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. He was born at the 39th week gestation, by cesarean section. The parents denied any family history of congenital defects or genetic diseases. During pregnancy, the imaging examination of his mother of the patient showed no abnormalities. His mother denied the history of exposure to radiation, toxic chemicals, drugs that are toxic to the fetus, contaminated water and air during pregnancy.
On examination, the patient was afebrile without rash. He had left side preauricular pit and branchial fistulae on the right neck . The mitral first sound was a little loud, and the second sound was normal. At the pulmonic area, a continuous, machinery type of murmur was heard, grade II-III.
Laboratory evaluation revealed normal results for complete blood cell count, C-reactive protein, levels of electrolytes, creatinine, and liver enzymes. Urine dipstick protein value was 1 + (reference range, negative), and a 24-h urine collection revealed 180 mg of albumin (reference range, < 150 mg/24 h). An echocardiography showed the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and patent foramen ovale. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed pleural thickening.
The concurrent presence of preauricular recess, bronchial fistula and proteinuria in this patient triggered consideration of the diagnosis of BOR syndrome. However, further testing of this patient's hearing, kidneys was required, and whether this infant have mutated genes was also crucial to the correct diagnosis. In addition, this patient also has an abnormal heart development and genetic analysis may provide additional diagnostic evidence to distinguish BOR syndrome from other disorders.
Subsequent evaluation of auditory brainstem response and distortion product otoacoustic emission were revealed sensorineural hearing impairment. Results of renal ultrasonography showed small kidneys. The kidneys were measured 4.4 cm and 4.1 cm in length (normal for the patient’s age, 5.7 cm). Genetic analysis revealed a microdeletion at chromosome 8q13.2-q13.3 encompassing EYA1 gene . Thus, combining his clinical presentation, laboratory test results and genetic sequencing analysis, this patient was finally diagnosed with BOR syndrome.
For treatment, this infant received transcatheter PDA closure and hearing aid treatment. Proteinuria, renal function and hearing ability are monitoring by nephrologist and otologist every month. The patient is currently being followed up until 3 months after discharge and his condition is stable.