A 36-year-old male non-athlete presented with tiredness and a slight limitation of physical activity during regular follow-up for a structural cardiac disorder. The diagnosis of cardiomyopathy with excessive trabeculation , or according to the old nomenclature of left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC) , was made two years before the current admission according to the morphological criteria valid at that time. The diagnosis was made after imaging studies were performed in this patient who presented with stabbing chest pain and a family history of sudden cardiac arrest in a second-degree relative. At the time of diagnosis, electrocardiographic assessment revealed a paroxysm of atrial fibrillation, for which he was prescribed carvedilol 3.125 µg once daily, acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg once daily, and amiodarone 200 mg. While the patient was adherent to carvedilol treatment, acetylsalicylic acid and amiodarone were discontinued after less than four months of treatment, more than a year before the current admission. At the time of current admission, no loss of consciousness, palpitations, or chest pain were reported. However, the patient confirmed increased sweating and weight loss as the main complaints, along with tiredness. Initial assessment of vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and a pulse rate of 70 beats per min. The patient was afebrile and eupneic. Clinical examination results were otherwise unremarkable. The 24 h continuous electrocardiographic monitoring (cECG) revealed non-sustained ventricular tachycardia . The cECG showed ventricular heterotopy of 310 solitary and 80 pairs of ventricular extrasystoles, as well as 114 paroxysms of NSVT with a heart rate of up to 200 bpm and a duration of up to 20 s (, ). Additionally, 7 solitary supraventricular extrasystoles and 11 paroxysms of ectopic atrial rhythm with a heart rate of up to 140 bpm and a duration of up to 10 min have been reported . Resting ECG showed a normal electrical axis, sinus rhythm of 69 bpm, and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. Exercise stress testing revealed no changes in the ST segment or exercise-induced dysrhythmic changes, except for two premature ventricular complexes during the post-exercise period. Hospital admission was recommended for further diagnostic evaluation and assessment of appropriate treatment, including anticoagulants and ICD.
On admission, echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging were performed to determine the presence of structural deterioration that could be attributed to the observed dysrhythmic changes. Recently performed coronary angiography with no evidence of stenosis or atherosclerosis excluded the ischemic etiology of NSVT. Transthoracic echocardiography using Vivid E95 Cardiac Ultrasound (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) revealed a degenerative aortic and mitral valve with normal overture and kinetics maintained, respectively. Myocardial thickness was normal, but global hypokinesia was described while the interventricular septum and the inferoposterior wall of the myocardium showed decreased contractility. The global ejection fraction of the left ventricle was estimated to be 45%. Additionally, transmitral diastolic flow with a biphasic pattern of abnormal LV relaxation (I/IV grade LV diastolic dysfunction) was noted. Cine cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) steady-state free precession sequences showed a dilated left ventricle with septum hypo-dyskinesia and an ejection fraction of 48%, as well as excessive trabeculation in segments 13, 15, and 16, and a part of segments 7 and 10 with a non-compact to compact myocardium (NC/C) ratio higher than 2.3 in end-diastole . In the late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) sequences with phase-sensitive inversion recovery (PSIR), there were an LGE midwall striae in the basal and midseptums .
Pathological non-compaction, distinguished by an NC/C ratio higher than 2.3 in diastole, was the main morphological criterion used for the validation of LVNC two years before the current admission . The left ventricular ejection fraction was mildly reduced (LVEF 46%), but the mid-ventricular imbibition of the interventricular septum and its insertion in segment 9 in late post-contrast sequences was minimal then . Based on new terminology , the patient most likely has dilated cardiomyopathy with excessive trabeculation of the myocardium, according to increased volume of both ventricles and decreased systolic function of the left ventricle with signs of myocardial fibrosis typical for dilated cardiomyopathy . Differential diagnosis also included status post myocarditis, but pathognomonic imaging signs of acute myocarditis were not detected at relevant time points . The difference in LGE observed between the two CMR imaging time points may suggest disease progression of dilated cardiomyopathy with excessive trabeculation but does not fully explain the observed cECG report.
An unmeasurably low thyrotropin level on admission and previous exposure to amiodarone pointed the diagnostic pathway in the direction of the thyroid gland. Nevertheless, the patient's thyroid gland did not appear enlarged or painful on palpation. Suppressed TSH levels were, however, in accordance with reported excessive sweating, reduced appetite, and a 4 kg weight loss over 2 weeks. The next step was to determine free thyroxine levels and thyroid autoantibody titers to investigate the thyroid disorder further. An elevated free thyroxine level of 39.8 pmol/L (reference interval 12–22 pmol/L) and undetectable titers of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin, thyroid peroxidase, and thyroglobulin antibodies raised the clinical suspicion of type II AIT in a patient with previous exposure to amiodarone. Neck ultrasound was unremarkable, and color flow Doppler sonography did not show increased thyroid vascularity. Moreover, scintigraphic imaging after intravenous injection of 375 MBq 99mTc-sestamibi showed decreased thyroid uptake . These findings were in accordance with the suggested diagnosis, and prednisone was introduced to treatment. Additionally, carvedilol treatment was changed to a combination of propranolol 20 mg and ramipril 2.5 mg. Due to a concomitant paroxysm of atrial fibrillation detected during the hospital stay, dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was administered. Regular follow-up of thyroid hormone levels was performed during the hospital stay.
Patient-reported adherence to treatment was adequate and no adverse or unanticipated events were reported. After only a week of corticosteroid treatment, TSH was 0.01 mIU/L and free thyroxine level dropped to 26 pmol/L . After 2 weeks, the target levels of thyroid hormones were reached, and prednisone treatment was gradually de-escalated until complete discontinuation . Thirty-three days after hospital admission due to NSVT, the cECG determined ventricular heterotopy of 57 solitary, four pairs, and one triplet of ventricular extrasystoles . Additionally, only 8 solitary supraventricular extrasystoles have been reported . At the same time point, follow-up TSH was 6.28 mIU/L (reference interval 0.27–4.20 mIU/L) and free thyroxine was 17.38 pmol/L. Clear improvements in both biochemical and electrocardiographic parameters were observed after immunomodulatory treatment of type II AIT in a patient with cardiomyopathy and excessive trabeculation. Nevertheless, regular endocrinological and cardiological follow-ups are warranted. Finally, patient-reported outcomes at the 10-month follow-up were consistent with the biochemical and electrocardiographic remission after the reported AIT episode.
“When I got admitted to the hospital, I was afraid. I did not know what caused that feeling of tiredness, but I was relieved once the doctors found the correct diagnosis. They explained everything to me, and I was very satisfied with the care during the hospital stay. Now, I am living a bit more cautiously, and I know my limitations. I understand how important it is to take my medications every day and attend regular follow-ups. At this point, I do not have any fears but know where to seek help if it changes. I would be happy to help other doctors learn from my case.”