A 75-year-old Japanese man presented with a 1-month history of epigastric discomfort. He had a medical history of pulmonary tuberculosis treated with antitubercular agents, but his respiratory function tests were normal. On close examination, he was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma with a basaloid carcinoma-like component of the esophagus. The preoperative diagnosis was clinical T3N0M0 stage IIA lower esophageal cancer, according to the Union for International Cancer Control, seventh edition. The patient underwent preoperative chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and cisplatin), but a second preoperative course was canceled because of the deterioration of his renal function to creatinine 1.34 mg/dL after the first course. He underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic esophagectomy in the left lateral position with three-field lymph node dissection and hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery. His thoracic duct was preserved without apparent injury. The surgical time was 394 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 430 ml. Tube feeding was started from the second postoperative day. Thoracic drain fluid increased to 600 ml on postoperative day 5, and its appearance became milky. Pleural effusion triglyceride levels were 111 mg/dl. The patient was diagnosed with chylothorax, and enteral nutrition was discontinued. However, despite total parenteral nutrition (TPN), the chylothorax continued, and pleural effusion increased to > 1500 ml/day. He underwent lymphography for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes on the ninth postoperative day.
We injected patent blue subcutaneously into the left acrotarsium, under local anesthesia. The lymphatic vessels were visualized, and we inserted a 27-gauge needle into one of the lymphatic vessels and injected Lipiodol at 0.1 ml/min. Videofluoroscopy showed lymphatic vessel enhancement up to the pelvis after 5 ml of Lipiodol, and a further 3.5 ml was injected at 0.14 ml/min. Computed tomography (CT) showed enhanced supraclavicular lymphatic vessels , but no lymphatic leakage was detected. No sign of aspiration was observed during lymphography.
The patient developed chills, a fever (39 °C), and hypoxia 2 h after lymphography and was treated with oxygen administration and piperacillin-tazobactam for Lipiodol pulmonary embolism and prevention of secondary pneumonia. His hypoxia improved but intermittent fever continued after 4 days. Though his pleural effusion decreased to 200 ml/day on the 11th postoperative day, his hypoxia deteriorated suddenly on the 14th postoperative day, requiring artificial respiration. Blood gas analysis showed PaO2 85.3 mmHg with FiO2 0.6 and positive end-expiratory pressure 12 cmH2O. CT revealed high-density substance in the lung and bilateral ground-glass opacity . We diagnosed severe ARDS, according to the Berlin definition, and started sivelestat sodium hydrate and lung-protective ventilation with low tidal volumes and prone position. Prednisolone 20 mg was added on the 21st postoperative day to prevent pulmonary fibrosis, without success, and he underwent a tracheotomy on the 28th postoperative day. He was weaned from mechanical ventilation on the 50th day but still required oxygen. He was finally discharged on the 112th day, with domiciliary oxygen therapy for hypoxemia due to pulmonary fibrosis .