The patient complained of general malaise.
A 69-year-old man was referred to our facility with a diagnosis of recurrent HCC. He had undergone right anterior sectionectomy for two tumors in segment 8 at another hospital 10 mo previously. The pathological diagnosis of the two tumors was moderately differentiated HCC and poorly differentiated HCC, respectively, without vascular invasion. The pathological stage was stage III according to the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition.
The patient had undergone appendectomy for appendicitis at 27 years of age.
The patient’s father had experienced lung cancer, and his sister had suffered from breast cancer.
On physical examination, the patient had a temperature of 36.6 °C, heart rate of 76 bpm, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, blood pressure of 143/86 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air of 98%. The patient’s weight was 59 kg. He had no jaundice or anemia in the bulbar conjunctiva. There was an operative scar for an inverted L-shaped incision on the abdomen from the previous liver resection. No ascites and encephalopathy were detected.
The preoperative liver functional reserve was good. Laboratory data revealed serum albumin of 3.5 g/dL, total bilirubin of 0.9 mg/dL, prothrombin time of 93%, and indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min of 5.2%. The Child–Pugh score/ classification was 5/A and the albumin-bilirubin (ALBI) score/modified ALBI grade was -2.19/2b. The alpha fetoprotein value was within the normal range, while the protein-induced vitamin K absence or antagonist II value was elevated at 998 mAU/mL.
A computed tomography scan of the abdomen demonstrated a heterogeneous contrast-enhanced mass of 10 cm in size in segment 7, which had rapidly increased in 5 mo . The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images at 5 mo before the second operation are shown in Figure (A: T1 image; B: T2 image). There was no evidence of the recurrent tumor on these MRI images. A positron emission tomography examination showed elevated standardized uptake volume in the sternum and slight uptake in the liver . The patient was diagnosed as recurrent HCC in segment 7 of the liver with metastasis in the sternum.