A 30-year-old woman presented with a seizure, right scalp paresthesias, a right-sided headache, blurred vision, and nausea. Her neurological examination was unremarkable, however, formal ophthalmological testing demonstrated left homonymous quadrantanopsia. She underwent a non-contrast computed tomography (CT), with results indicating an intracranial neoplasm. Subsequently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with intravenous (IV) gadolinium was obtained, which demonstrated a 6.1 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the posteromedial aspect of the right temporoparietal lobes protruding into the right atrium. It displayed mixed T1 and T2 signal intensity with regions of restricted diffusion. There was mild peritumoral T2 hyperintensity, signifying peritumoral edema. A large area of gradient susceptibility along the posterior aspect of the lesion represented calcifications . The patient underwent a diagnostic cerebral angiogram to rule out a vascular abnormality and to delineate blood supply to the lesion. The angiogram was negative for aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation (AVM) and demonstrated a contrast blush in the region of the lesion.
The patient subsequently underwent a right craniotomy for biopsy and partial resection, with initial pathology described as a low-grade astrocytic tumor. She continued to be symptomatic with headaches and underwent complete resection 2 months later; the macrocalcification was left behind due to tethering of normal brain tissue. Postoperatively, she had persistent resection cavity fluid collections, as well as a trapped right temporal horn. She subsequently underwent cystoperitoneal shunt placement. Postoperatively, she required one proximal revision of her shunt secondary to malfunction, but otherwise remained clinically stable with resolution of her headaches and no additional neurological deficits. Three months after the resection, imaging follow-up demonstrated interval enhancement of the surgical cavity, suggestive of local recurrence. Histologically, the tumor demonstrated epithelioid cells with short cytoplasmic processes arranged in perivascular pseudorosettes. Minimal mitotic activity was observed with PHH3, and no high-grade features were identified. The neoplasm was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), synaptophysin, and Olig2; IDH1 was negative, similar to the staining profiles reported in recent literature . Taken together, the imaging and pathology findings were most consistent with a low-grade astroblastoma. Radiation therapy was undertaken and in the interim repeat imaging demonstrated significant recurrence. Patient was taken for further resection and continued postoperatively with adjuvant radiotherapy. Patient carried a poor prognosis despite continued treatment and decided to transition to palliative treatment and subsequently expired 4 months after the final resection.