This was a 47-year-old female patient who presented with continuous pain in her neck area and the back of her bilateral shoulders for two months before she came to our hospital for consultation. Her past medical history was healthy, except that a pulmonary nodule had occasionally been seen on a low-dose chest computed tomography (CT) scan. Observation was advised on the nodule, as there were no signs of malignancy. She did not have any family history of malignant tumors or any injury before the onset of neck pain. In addition, she did not have any episodes of fever, significant loss of body weight, or poor appetite after the onset of the pain. The neck pain was mechanical in nature. There was no radiating pain to bilateral upper limbs or numbness over the upper and lower limbs. She was treated in the form of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and physical therapy, but the pain persisted and increased in severity over time. On physical examination, a significant reduction in the range of motion of her cervical spine was noted: forward flexion 20 degrees, extension 20 degrees, left and right side bending 25 degrees, and left and right rotation 30 degrees, with marked spasms and tenderness over the paravertebral area. There were no neurological deficits in the upper or lower limbs.
For the laboratory data, the complete blood count test, tumor markers, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were all within normal levels. The cervical spine plain radiography revealed that there was collapse in the C6 vertebral body, with mild malalignment in the lateral view. A pathological fracture was considered . The contrast CT showed obvious bone erosion in the C6 vertebral body, involving almost the whole vertebral body, with destructions of the upper endplate and both anterior and posterior walls, leading to a pathological fracture. However, discs at the adjacent levels were not involved. It was also noted that there was no significant enhancement inside the C6 vertebral body . As both findings of the plain radiography and the CT were unable to provide sufficient information to confirm the patient’s diagnosis, the integrity of the spinal cord, the posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL), the adjacent discs (C5-6 and C6-7), and the paraspinal soft tissues needed to be further assessed; thus, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast of the cervical spine was performed. It revealed diffuse hypointense signal changes on the T1-weighted images , hyperintense signal changes on the T2-weighted images , and T2-weighted images with fat suppression in the C6 vertebral body, with significant contrast-enhanced infiltration signals . The signals of the C5-6 and C6-7 discs were relatively normal. Furthermore, in positron emission tomography-computed tomography, focal hypermetabolism and abnormal uptake signals were seen only in the C6 vertebral body, with an SUVmax value of 11.4 . According to the above clinical and imaging presentations, neoplastic lesions with a pathological fracture of C6 were suspected. Giant cell tumors, LCH, infection, or malignancy, such as primary or metastatic bone tumors, were included in the differential diagnosis. Due to the overlap in the clinical presentations and imaging features of these conditions, the definite diagnoses depended on further investigations, including histopathological and histochemical identification. In addition, tissue cultures of microbes were needed to rule out the possibility of infection.
Open surgery in the form of a C6 corpectomy with instrumented fusion was performed. The procedure included removing nearly the entire vertebral body (corpectomy) of C6 together with the adjacent discs (discectomy). The resulting bone void after corpectomy and discectomy was filled with bone graft for fusion and stabilized by instrumentation, which included the use of a titanium cage, a plate, and four screws of an appropriate size. Intraoperatively, discectomies of C5-6 and C6-7 were performed. Then, the C6 vertebral body was excised in a subtotal manner. It was observed that the bone lesion involved part of the posterior wall of the vertebral body and part of the PLL. Furthermore, adhesion between the PLL and the dural membrane was noted. The excised tissue was then sent for a frozen section, routine pathology, and tissue culture for microbes. The intraoperative report of the frozen section showed scanty sheets of uniform ovoid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm. No distinct pleomorphism, mitosis, or necrosis were noted. Such findings favored neoplastic lesions. However, it could not be concluded from the frozen section whether the condition was benign or malignant. Thus, intraoperatively, the decision was made to proceed with an intralesional resection, and the tumor-like tissues were removed as much as possible. A titanium mesh cage filled with granular cancellous bone allograft was inserted between the C5 and C7 vertebral bodies for fusion . A plate with four screws was applied for fixation. The patient had good recovery in terms of neck and shoulder pain relief on postoperative day one. Postoperative plain radiography showed satisfactory restoration of the cervical spine alignment . The postoperative CT scan showed that the bone lesions in the C6 vertebral body were excised, and the titanium mesh cage with the filling allograft was in good contact with the lower endplate of C5 and the upper endplate of C7 . Gram staining, Acid Fast Bacilli (AFB) smear, aerobic and anaerobic cultures, and fungal cultures were negative. The histology results confirmed the diagnosis of LCH. In the hematoxylin and eosin staining image, tumor cells were characterized by sheets and aggregates in a background of mixed chronic inflammatory cells, particularly eosinophils. The tumor cells were histiocyte-like, with irregular nuclei and abundant cell plasma. Furthermore, there was a positive immunohistochemical reaction of CD68 , Langerin , CD1a , and S-100 .
Considering the lesion was close to the cervical spinal cord, and there was adhesion between the PLL and the dural membrane, the patient underwent RT to the C5 to C7 spine (with photon, 6 MV X-ray, volumetric modulated arc therapy, 30 Gy in 15 fractions, 2 Gy per fraction, 5 fractions per week) at postoperative one month, as advised by the oncologist. The patient was followed up at postoperative two months and six months, and showed good clinical outcomes with no pain in the neck and shoulder and a significantly improved range of motion of the cervical spine at last follow-up: forward flexion 40 degrees, extension 35 degrees, left and right side bending 45 degrees, and left and right rotation 60 degrees. Cervical spine plain radiography was repeated . The cage, plate, and screws were all in position, with acceptable alignment of the cervical spine being restored. There was no evidence of recurrence. The patient had been followed up for half a year, with good recovery in pain at the neck and back of the shoulder.