A 74-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital for gait disturbance and dysphagia. He had been diagnosed with prostate cancer (T2bN0M0) at 70 years old and had been treated by linear accelerator (70 Gy), followed by endocrine therapy. He had had a slightly elevated creatine kinase (CK) level (464 IU/L) in a medical examination when he was 72 years old, but he remained asymptomatic. The patient had noticed difficulty in standing up from a chair and swallowing solid foods 18 months before referral to our hospital. He had a high tendency to fall and had noticed difficulty in climbing the stairs starting from 6 months before referral to our hospital.
The patient’s blood pressure was 132/66 mmHg, his pulse rate was 66 beats/minute and regular, his body temperature was 36.7 °C, and his weight was 49 kg (with a 6-kg weight loss in the past year). His heart and breath sounds were normal. No skin sclerosis or Raynaud’s phenomenon was observed. His higher cerebral function revealed that he was alert and well-oriented. His mental status was normal, and his cranial nervous system appeared to be intact. Muscle atrophy was noted in the proximal parts of his upper and lower extremities, and manual muscle testing showed decreases to level 4 in his proximal upper limbs and level 3 in his proximal lower limbs. His muscle tone and deep tendon reflexes were within normal ranges. No abnormal findings were observed in his sensory, cerebellar, and autonomic nervous systems.
The patient’s hematology examination revealed no abnormal findings. His serum CK, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, aldolase, and myoglobin levels were elevated. His KL-6 level was within normal limits (212 U/L). All of his tumor markers were negative. As for his autoimmune systems, his serum antinuclear antibody (5120-fold) titer was elevated, but his other autoantibodies were negative. Only his anti-U3 RNP antibodies were positive; his myositis-specific autoantibodies and myositis-associated autoantibodies were negative . For assessment, a commercially available line blot test kit (Myositis and Systemic Sclerosis Profile Euroline Blot test kit; Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
The patient’s electrocardiogram showed no remarkable findings. Upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy showed no abnormalities such as reflux esophagitis. A computed tomographic scan showed no interstitial pneumonic or malignant findings. Needle electromyography of the patient’s proximal legs demonstrated myopathic changes without denervation potentials. T2-weighted and short tau inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging scans revealed high signal intensity in both the flexors and extensors of the thigh muscles . Videofluoroscopic examination of the patient’s swallowing showed poor tongue movements in the oral stage and impaired opening of the esophageal muscle, as well as a cricopharyngeal bar on the posterior pharyngeal wall in the pharyngeal stage . In the esophageal stage, no obstruction, retention of the contrast material in the lower esophagus, or impaired opening of the lower esophageal sphincter were observed. Muscle biopsy specimens from the patient’s quadriceps femoris muscle showed round muscle fibers of various sizes, marked proliferation of connective tissue, and edematous changes. No perifascicular atrophy was observed. The main inflammatory cells invading the endomysium were CD8-positive T lymphocytes surrounding major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-positive, non-necrotic muscle fibers. No lymphocyte invasion into the muscle fibers or deposition of complement along the vascular wall was observed .
Oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) therapy was started, and the patient’s muscle strength of upper and lower extremities normalized within 1 month, along with his serum CK, aldolase, and myoglobin levels. Although a videofluoroscopic swallowing examination showed improvement of tongue movements during the oral stage, impaired function of the cricopharyngeal muscle and presence of the cricopharyngeal bar persisted. The patient has been followed on a regimen of prednisolone 5 mg/day for 5 years, and no relapse of the muscle weakness has been observed, except for dysphagia.