A 25-year-old male patient who is otherwise healthy referred to our Sarcoma Multidisciplinary Clinic with the suspicion of a primary bone lesion, as we are the regional center for treatment of benign and aggressive musculoskeletal tumors. He complains of progressive left middle finger swelling. His family first noticed the swelling after an incident of direct trauma to the finger during early childhood. Before that, there were no abnormalities seen by the parents. The swelling was progressive in size until he underwent a local excision procedure, at the age of four years. Despite surgical intervention, the swelling recurred. The swelling was painless but continued to enlarge in size with age, with no restriction of range of motion or neurological symptoms. His main concern was cosmetic as he feels it's causing him a psychological burden: no family history of any genetic disorders, nor any similar musculoskeletal deformities. Physical examination revealed a left middle finger healed scar over the dorsal aspect of the finger; a soft tissue mass can be appreciated distal to the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) with fatty looking lobules and macrodactyly with no signs of inflammation. Full proximal and distal interphalangeal joint range of motion, fingernail neurovascular examination is within normal . No lymphadenopathy, systematic review is unremarkable particularly signs of neurofibromatosis. All blood investigation showed no abnormalities.
Plain X-ray films of the left hand showed a heterogeneous lobulated soft tissue mass on the volar aspect of the middle finger involving mainly the middle and distal phalanges, no arthritic changes in the joints. Furthermore, left hand MRI with IV contrast media showed a distal fatty overgrowth with striation and no capsulation surrounding the middle and distal phalanges of the middle finger, more at the palmer aspect .
The treatment plan was discussed with the patient in the form of left middle finger soft tissue excision with the possibility of a skin graft or local flap coverage with the assistance of the plastic surgery team. With the placement of a tourniquet under general anesthesia, an elliptical incision made including the previous surgery scar crossing the volar aspect of the middle finger . Dissection around the soft tissue mass, the ulnar digital artery identified and preserved, the digital nerve is visualized proximally and found encased into the mass hence was sacrificed. The lipomatous mass was found to be thick with associated fibrous component, it was completely excised, and sent for histopathology examination. At the time of surgery, the plastic surgery team was present in case more advanced soft tissue management techniques were required. Thankfully closure was successful with the aid of a Z-Plasty, and there was no need for coverage by a skin graft. Skin closure by 5.0 Nylon suture done and wound dressing applied. The surgery performed by the author. Distal neurovascular examination within normal. Post-operatively patient was pain-free with good distal capillary refill and discharge home in a stable condition. Advised for limb elevation and keep dry dressing. Stitches removed after two weeks and patient started on range of motion therapy to avoid joint stiffness. He was compliant and tolerated the post-operative plan with no reservations. Pathology report came back with the diagnosis of lipofibromatous hamartoma of the nerve, macrodystrophia lipomatosa of the finger . The patient was on regular follow up in the clinic, and last clinical visit was two years following surgery and showed no tumor recurrence an excellent cosmetic as well as functional result with full finger joints range of motion .