A 49-year-old, right-handed white British, conscious man arrived at the emergency department (ED) in the summer of 2013. He gave a history of waking up the previous day with mild left-sided weakness, affecting both his upper and lower limbs, along with a minor degree of unsteadiness on his feet. At that point, he did not experience any facial weakness, sensory symptoms, seizures or a headache. The left-sided weakness had somewhat improved on the date the patient presented to ED, but he had developed slurred speech that was present since waking up that morning. His past medical history included hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia and type II diabetes mellitus since the age of 42 that was treated with oral hypoglycaemic agents. His regular medications included aspirin, metformin, sitagliptin, dapagliflozin, rosuvastatin, bezafibrate and irbesartan. Social history was unremarkable, with no current or past use of tobacco or alcohol. On admission, his initial recordings included a respiratory rate of 15 breaths per minute, a pulse of 69 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 165/91 mmHg, a temperature of 35.4°C, a capillary blood glucose measurement of 13.6 mmol/L and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15 out of 15 (spontaneous eye opening with 4 out of 4, normal motor responses with 6 out of 6 and normal verbal responses with 5 out of 5). Initial examination at the ED revealed a mild left-sided weakness in both upper and lower limbs with 4 out of 5 in the Medical Research Council (MRC) muscle power grading scale, slight left facial weakness with loss of the nasolabial fold and dysarthria. An urgent non-contrast brain CT was performed that showed a small area of decreased attenuation in the anterior limb of the right internal capsule. This was in keeping with an established lacunar infarct. The symptoms experienced by the patient, the examination findings and the initial imaging results were suggestive of a lacunar ischaemic stroke. Following discussion with the on-call stroke team, the patient was started on aspirin 300 mg once daily and then admitted to the Acute Stroke Unit for further inpatient management.
When reassessed the following morning, the patient was still experiencing left-sided weakness affecting his upper and lower limbs, mild left facial asymmetry on smiling along with loss of the corresponding nasolabial fold and dysarthria that was classified as cerebellar ataxic in nature. He had also developed some elements of dysphonia. In addition, he was noted to have poor left-sided coordination with mild ataxia during the finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin test. Due to the on-going symptoms and the development of new signs, some of which suggested brainstem pathology, the patient had a CT angiogram from the aortic arch up to and including the circle of Willis. This showed that both carotid and vertebral arteries were patent, with the right vertebral artery being dominant. There was a minor narrowing of the intracranial portion of the right vertebral artery without an occlusion or dissection being present, and no evidence of basilar artery thrombosis. Following this investigation, a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed the following day (four days after the original onset of symptoms). The scan showed high signal in the anterior pons on both sides of the midline that was extending posteriorly in the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) axial trace image. This was accompanied by a low signal in the calculated apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, indicating diffusion restriction, in keeping with an acute infarction. Ischaemic changes were also noted in the right caudate head and putamen without any corresponding DWI changes suggestive of an acute infarct. Finally, there were multiple small hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, the thalamus and the subcortical along with the deep white matter that were representative of small vessel disease. The overall appearances from the MRI were suggestive of an acute isolated pontine infarction . Following this scan, the patient was commenced on dual antiplatelet treatment with aspirin and clopidogrel. In addition to the on-going medical and nursing care, the patient received daily input from the physiotherapist, speech and language therapist, occupational therapist, dietician and pharmacist for the duration of his inpatient stay.
At nine days from admission to ED, the patient was transferred to the stroke rehabilitation unit of a local community hospital for continuing stroke specific care. As an inpatient at the community hospital, he received tailored one-to-one physiotherapy input with a total of 13 therapy hours over a period of 22 days. Following discharge, he continued to attend weekly physiotherapy sessions on an outpatient basis and the overall time spent in therapy for six months was close to 20 hours. Approximately 45 days after the patient initially presented to ED, he attended for review and a follow-up brain MRI. At that point, his left-sided weakness and the speech problems had significantly improved. His blood pressure was not elevated (122/84 mmHg) and was generally feeling better. The follow-up MRI revealed no new lesions and the pontine infarct had visibly reduced in size on the T1-weighted, T2-weighted and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences that was radiologically in keeping with a resolving infarct. Currently, the patient has improved sufficiently to return to work.