A 50-year-old man with prior smoking habit and otherwise unremarkable clinical history suffered a massive ischaemic stroke in the left lenticular and right temporoparietal regions causing right hemiparesis and dysarthria. On examination, the cardiac tones were regular with no murmurs and normal breath sounds were heard over all the lung fields. Elevated blood levels of D-dimer (1135 ng/mL, normal reference values < 510 ng/mL) and C-reactive protein (34.7 mg/L, normal reference values < 5.0 mg/L) were found, while the remainder of the laboratory values were within normal range; specifically, haemoglobin was 13.6 g/dL, white blood cells count 9760/mL, and creatinine 0.6 mg/dL. Due to the young age of the patient and no apparent provoked mechanism of thromboembolism, thrombophilia screening was performed and only showed a borderline positivity for Lupus anticoagulant antibodies. Cerebral vascular disease was ruled out by means of magnetic resonance imaging. Transcranic and transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated the presence of a PFO with transient massive (grade 3) right-to-left passage of contrast-enhanced micro-bubbles at basal conditions; moreover, screening venous ultrasound examination of the inferior limbs documented the presence of popliteal vein thrombosis in the right inferior limb 6 days following the stroke event. Due to the absence of haemorrhagic content in the ischaemic cerebral lesion, after neurologist consultation, the patient was started on anticoagulation therapy with low molecular weight heparin; however, the inferior limbs’ venous thrombus was almost unchanged at the control venous ultrasound performed 3 days later. Due to the high risk of stroke recurrences due to paradoxical thromboembolism through the PFO (Risk of Paradoxical Embolism score: 6) should the inferior limbs’ thrombus migrate, after risk/benefit assessment and patient consultation, a Denali™ IVCF was positioned by the interventional radiologist . No episodes of atrial fibrillation were recorded at the in-hospital electrocardiogram monitoring during the 10-day hospitalization for stroke, thus it was not deemed necessary to further assess the potential presence of atrial fibrillation by means of event recorders. After a few months of adequate antithrombotic therapy with warfarin at therapeutic range (target international normalized ratio of 2.0 to 3.0) and deep vein thrombosis resolution, as assessed at the venous ultrasound, the patient was recommended IVCF retrieval and PFO closure, due to the high risk of recurrent ischaemic strokes in this scenario.
On presentation, the patient was eupnoeic and apyretic. He still complained of slight speech disorders and mild right hemiparesis, which had been present since the time of the stroke, albeit slowly ameliorating. Vital signs were within normal limits. Cardiac tones were regular, and no signs of heart failure were noticed. IVCF removal by the interventional radiologist was first attempted but failed, as tip of the IVCF was stuck to the wall of the vessel and it could not be caught and retrieved; nevertheless, the IVCF was still functional after the failed retrieval attempt. However, due to the high thromboembolic risk from deep vein thrombosis originating in body districts other than the lower limbs, after patient consultation and agreement, the PFO closure procedure was endeavoured. After right common femoral vein puncture and sheath positioning, 5000 international units of unfractionated heparin were administered and a guidewire was advanced up to the level of the IVCF and oriented towards the outer part of the IVCF, where the cells are more distant and wider. Careful guidewire positioning and moving allowed successful upward passage of the wire across the VCF ( and Video 1). An 8-Fr 25-mm Amplatzer PFO occluder delivery system was then advanced on the guidewire and gently pushed across the IVCF ( and Video 2) and into the right atrium. Correct Amplatzer PFO occluder positioning was ascertained through fluoroscopy and transoesophageal echocardiography guidance ; the device was then delivered and the catheter safely withdrawn without complications ( and Video 3). Due to the successful procedure of PFO closure and the presence of an IVCF, warfarin was stopped after the procedure and the patient was started on double antiplatelets therapy. The echocardiographic examination demonstrated correct positioning of the Amplatzer device.
The patient was discharged in good clinical status on Day 4 following the procedure, when the neurological centre could readmit him to carry on his rehabilitation programme after the stroke event. At 5 months follow-up the patient was alive and well, with no ischaemic or thromboembolic recurrences.