A 27-year-old woman with known BAV without valvular dysfunction presented in the emergency room with fever, chills, asthenia, and headache that started 5 days prior. She had no current chronic medication, denied intravenous drug abuse, and recent dental interventions.
The patient was haemodynamically stable (blood pressure: 112/70 mmHg), tachycardic (110 b.p.m.), and febrile (38.5°C), without respiratory distress. A holodiastolic murmur II/VI and erythematous skin lesions in fingers and toes were found, without signs of acute heart failure (HF).
Laboratory results showed leucocytosis [13.4 × 109/L; normal range (NR): 4.0–11.0 × 109/L], neutrophilia (12.0 × 109/L; NR: 1.9–7.5 × 109/L), raised reactive C-protein 27.6 mg/dL (NR: <0.5 mg/dL), procalcitonin 0.38 ng/mL (NR: < 0.5), thrombocytopenia (85.0 × 109/L, NR: 150.0–450.0/109/L), TGO 101 U/L (NR: <33 U/L), TGP 60 U/L (NR: <32 U/L), and high sensitivity T troponin 139 ng/L (NR: <14 ng/L). Blood samples for cultures were collected before antibiotic therapy initiation, with posterior isolation of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA).
Electrocardiogram (ECG) presented de novo first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block (PR interval: 335 ms; ).
During admission, she presented sudden onset of left hemiplegia and dysarthria, with brain computed tomography (CT) showing a deep ischaemic lesion in temporal right hemisphere (right middle cerebral artery).
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed, showing a BAV pattern with mobile filiform mass (22 mm of maximum length) in aortic valve with moderate regurgitation, without obstruction (see , ), non-dilated LV, and preserved LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 62% (Simpson biplane).
Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed BAV type 2 without raphe (Schaefer classification), with two mobile vegetations attached to the mitral–aortic intervalvular fibrosa and perforation of the posterior/left cusp (Video 1,2 and ) with moderate regurgitation directed to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. A small connection between the membranous portion of interventricular septum at outflow LV tract (LVOT) and RA was found, with LVOT-RA shunt (Video 3 and see , ; ).
A definite diagnosis of IE was established by the modified Duke criteria. The patient was admitted in the intensive care unit (ICU) for careful monitorization. Empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy was started with ampicillin 12 g/day, ceftriaxone 2 g/day, and flucloxacillin 12 g/day and thereafter adjusted to flucloxacillin 12 g/day (during 31 days before surgery, continued 4 weeks after surgery), rifampicin 900 mg/day (during 24 days before surgery, continued 2 weeks after surgery), and linezolid 12 g/day (during 28 days before surgery, continued 2 weeks after surgery). Routine laboratorial tests and bedside echocardiogram were performed as needed.
At Day 1 after admission, she presented transient complete AV block , with fully recovery after 7 days. An abdominal and pelvic CT scan was performed due to laboratorial abnormalities and abdominal pain, diagnosing systemic embolization to the liver and spleen, with abscess formation and bilateral renal ischaemic lesions ( and ).
Control brain CT showed right petechial non-confluent haemorrhagic transformation , without neurological worsening. Cardiac surgery was deferred during 4 weeks. During hospitalization, the patient recovered from dysarthria and showed a significant improvement of the left hemiparesis.
Until the scheduled surgery, the patient remained haemodynamically stable, without HF signs, preserved LVEF, and without aortic regurgitation worsening. Control blood cultures were negative after 3 weeks of antibiotics.
Thirty-one days after the admission, she underwent aortic valve replacement (AVR) with a bioprosthetic aortic valve (27 mm), as the patient wished. Acquired Gerbode defect was repaired with direct suture using pledgeted prolene on its ventricular face, without post-intervention residual shunt. Aortic valve and pericardium cultures were negative.
After 45 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged to outpatient follow-up consultation at 3 months and 1 year after. In both follow-up consultations, the patient remained asymptomatic, without clinical events, and had a preserved bioprothesis function.