A 20-year-old white woman presented with 4-week history of fever, chills, generalized joint pains, photosensitivity, fatigue, and myalgia. Since a month previously, the patient had complained of morning stiffness lasting more than an hour, as well as progressive shortness of breath in the last 3 days. She reported a recent history of recurrent and fleeting painless oral ulcers over the past month. No gastrointestinal manifestations were observed in the patient, such as abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, sensations of nausea and vomiting, and changes in bowel habits. There was no history of weight loss, night sweats, or specific skin rashes. Additionally, she denied any symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon affecting her extremities. There were no recent reports of neuropsychiatric symptoms exhibited by the patients. She claimed not to be using tobacco, alcohol, or illegal drugs, as well as having a history of any diseases. She was a housewife with no prior contact to anyone exhibiting comparable symptoms. Her family history and recent travel within the past 6 months were not contributing factors. According to national protocol, the patient was current on all required vaccinations.
The patient had spent 3 days in the hospital 2 weeks prior to this administration, at which time she was diagnosed with fever of unknown origin (FUO) and was treated with metronidazole and cefixime. However, despite her management, symptoms did not improve and gradually worsened over the past weeks before current admission.
At the admission, physical examination showed body temperature of 39 °C (axillary), heart rate of 75 beats/min, respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, blood pressure of 110/75 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 97% while breathing ambient air. She appeared acutely ill and weak, but she was alert and oriented, and she responded appropriately to questions. Physical examination also revealed diffused rubbery, soft, and mobile right cervical and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy with a diameter of 2 cm, with no inflammatory signs. On palpation of the abdomen, there was no sign of hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. On oral physical examination, a solitary 2 cm lesion covered by exudates, surrounded by a reddish aura, was observed in the buccal mucosa, without any signs of blistering. During the skin examination, no discernible indications of typical skin lesions, such as a malar rash, were observed. There was no evidence of current acute inflammation in joints. No signs of genital aphthous ulcer were detected.
The results of a complete blood count (CBC) revealed a white blood cell count of 3.1 × 109/L, a hemoglobin level of 9 g/dL, and a platelet count of 320 × 109/L. The serum level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 22 IU/L (normal < 40 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 29 IU/L (normal < 40 IU/L), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 116 IU/L (normal < 206 IU/L). The results of the laboratory analysis showed that the patient’s ESR was 74 mm/hour, CRP was 69 mg/L, and LDH was 1324 IU/L (normal values are between 140 and 280 IU/L). On subsequent analysis, no microorganisms were grown in the patient’s blood and urine cultures.
The HITACHI Roche Cobas C311 chemistry analyzer was used to detect the serologies with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Her Coombs Wright, 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME), perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA) tests were negative by ELISA. Negative results were found in tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis viruses, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV). The blood samples specifically analyzed through the venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test showed negative results. The Tzanck smear performed on the oral ulcer to detect multinucleated giant cells, indicative of herpes simplex virus (HSV), yielded a negative result. She had a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1/1600 with speckled pattern, as well as a positive double-strand DNA antibody (dsDNA) titer of 2211 IU/mL. Upon further examination, the levels of C3 and C4 complements were found to be 73 mg/dL (within the range of 80–160) and 10 mg/dL (within the range of 13–39), respectively. SLE was identified as the underlying medical condition based on criteria established by the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics .
The chest x-ray (CXR) and chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral pleural effusion , prompting the placement of bilateral chest tube . Further examination revealed that the pleural fluid was transudate. An echocardiogram was performed on the patient, and there was evidence of mild pericardial effusion without any endocardial vegetation.
To determine the extent of the lymphadenopathy, additional investigations have been ordered. A neck ultrasonography revealed bilaterally enlarged submandibular and supraclavicular lymph nodes, the largest of which was 2.5 cm in diameter. Although there was no evidence of lymphadenopathy in the abdominopelvic CT scan, a few hypodense lesions in the seventh and sixth segments of the liver were found.
It was decided that a lymph node biopsy from several cervical lymph nodes would be performed under ultrasound guidance. Lymph node histopathologic evaluation revealed preserved structure with follicular hyperplasia (blue arrows), as well as necrotizing lymphadenitis with paracortical coagulative necrosis . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of the samples showed that CD68 and CD4 were both expressed. These findings were consistent with KFD. Furthermore, a liver core biopsy from a hypodense lesion revealed focal lobular hepatocyte necrosis and inflammation with histiocytic and neutrophils.
Finally, the patient was diagnosed with KFD-associated SLE with extranodal involvement (liver) and was given hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and oral corticosteroid (prednisolone) therapy. After 5 days of hospitalization, the patient’s condition was well stabilized with no adverse effects, and she was discharged to outpatient care in good health. After 2 months of treatment, the lymphadenopathies showed a gradual reduction until complete resolution. The patient was observed every 2 months for an average of 6 months, during which time she displayed no symptoms.