The patient is a 62 year old African American male with a medical history significant for complete heart block treated with dual chamber pacemaker implantation in 1996. This was revised in 2007 secondary to a ventricular lead fracture with total left subclavian vein occlusion necessitating lead placement in the right subclavian vein. He initially presented to his primary care physician with a four month history of subjective fevers, chills, night sweats, vomiting, fatigue, decreased energy, and a ten pound weight loss. Physical exam in the office revealed a new systolic murmur consistent with tricuspid regurgitation (TR) and jugular venous distention (JVD). Blood cultures were drawn as an outpatient. One week later, blood cultures were positive for Aggregatibacter aphrophilus, and the patient was told to go to the Emergency Department (ED). In the ED the patient was afebrile, with a heart rate of 70 beats/minute and a blood pressure of 130/76 mmHg. His pulse oximetry was 96% on room air. There was no erythema or tenderness over the pacemaker pocket. A TR murmur and JVD were again noted. No lesions were noted on the skin. Initial laboratory values showed a white blood cell count of 14,200 with a differential of 75% neutrophils, 17% lymphocytes, and 1% monocytes. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 91 mm/hour. A urinalysis was negative. Peripheral blood cultures were also drawn; subsequently the patient was given a dose of 3.375 g intravenous (IV) piperacillin/tazobactam by the ED physician.
The patient was admitted to the general medical floor with a high clinical suspicion of HACEK endocarditis and antibiotics changed to ceftriaxone IV 2 g Q24 hours based on outpatient culture susceptibilities that showed beta lactamase negative strains susceptible to penicillin, ampicillin, amoxicillin, gentamycin, ciprofloxacin, and ceftriaxone. On the night of admission, the patient was febrile with a temperature of 101 degrees F (38.3 C). A stat transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed a 1.2 cm × 0.7 cm vegetation attached to the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve and a smaller vegetation attached to the right ventricular pacemaker lead near the coaptation of the tricuspid valve leaflets . He underwent a pacemaker extraction with removal of his device and all leads. Intraoperatively, lead sites and the pocket were debrided with an antibiotic solution. Tissue and extracted leads were also swabbed and cultured. Following extraction, a temporary jugular pacer was placed and the patient was transferred to the Cardiac Care Unit. On the fifth day after admission cultures confirmed beta lactamase negative Aggregatibacter aphrophilus with the same susceptibilities reported as outpatient blood cultures.
Following lead extraction, the patient remained afebrile and clinically stable. Repeated blood cultures were persistently negative. Echocardiography prior to new device placement showed residual casts on the tricuspid valve and the junction of superior vena cava and right atrium. A new dual chamber permanent pacemaker was then surgically deployed. He remained stable and was discharged five days later with a Hickman® catheter to finish the remaining 28 days of ceftriaxone for a total of 42 days of antibiotics.