Ms. K. is a 41-year-old Caucasian female teacher who has been attending mental health services for almost 6 years and has an established diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. She has previously experienced several episodes of illness and undergone one previous hospitalization with severe depression. Her illness has been stable for the past five years since commencing antipsychotic treatment. For the past four years she has been on a monotherapy with quetiapine. The participant’s race, ethnicity, female sex, and female gender identity were ascertained by self-report.
Her past medical history included brittle type 1 diabetes mellitus (since 1996) without significant complications that was well-managed with an insulin pump therapy, Hashimoto thyroiditis (since 1996) with hypothyroidism (since 2014), arterial hypertension (since 1998), and antiphospholipid syndrome (since 2023). Owing to the presence of multiple autoimmune diseases and brittle type 1 diabetes, the patient has been fully assessed. An immunological examination detected negative anti-21-hydroxylase autoantibodies, negative antiparietal cell antibodies, negative antibodies against extractable nuclear antigen and positive titers of antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase, antithyroid peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin in the serum. There were normal levels of vitamin B12, normal blood count results, and no symptoms of malabsorption. The results confirmed the presence of the immune-mediated diabetes mellitus with autoimmune thyroiditis (Polyglandular Autoimmune Syndrome type IIIA). The patient was single, denied recreational drug use, did not smoke, and only drank alcohol occasionally. She was highly educated. She was employed as a full-time teacher at the local university. There was a family history of type 1 diabetes mellitus, type 2 diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, and coronary artery disease. Family psychiatric history was positive for cyclothymic disorder, impulsive borderline personality disorder, depressive disorders, and alcohol use disorders.
Since January 2019 till January 2023, the patient’s chronic medication therapy included insulin lispro 30-40 IU/day delivered via insulin pump at preset basal rates (40%) and administered in several premeal boluses (60%), levothyroxine 100-125 mcg q.d., bisoprolol 5 mg q.d., and quetiapine SR 200-400 mg q.d. (nightly) . Until 2021 she also had aripiprazole 10-30 mg q.d. Her adherence to therapy was excellent. Her diabetes was well-controlled with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) values near normal range during the past five years. Her most recent laboratory NGSP HbA1c readings were 6.10% (IFCC HbA1c 43 mmol/mol) in June 2022 and 5.77% (40 mmol/mol) in November 2022. Because of the intensive insulin treatment, she self-monitored her blood glucose daily and regularly performed the real-time continuous glucose monitoring using FreeStyle Libre® system to reveal and manage even hidden glucose excursions. The system is minimally invasive and uses a disposable factory-calibrated glucose sensor inserted into the user’s arm. A touchscreen device/reader is then used to scan and retrieve continuously monitored real-time glucose readings. depicts the summary of the continuous glucose monitoring results reflecting the period of consecutive 14 days (October 18-31, 2022) of medicated bipolar disorder. The patient met important glycemic targets, including the time within target range (83%), time above 10.0 mmol/l (7%), and time above 13.9 mmol/l (0%). The average sensor glucose was 6.6 mmol/l, glucose management indicator 6.2% (44 mmol/mol), and glucose variability was 33.8% (defined as percent coefficient of variation). also shows an ambulatory glucose profile, a summary of sensor glucose values from the report period, with median and other percentiles shown as if occurring in a single day. Finally, the provides details on daily glucose profiles with each daily profile representing a midnight-to-midnight period. During this monitoring, the patient’s mood was stable, and she was on bimodal mood-stabilizing monotherapy with quetiapine SR 300 mg q.d. (nightly). Other prescribed drugs included levothyroxine 125 mcg q.d., bisoprolol 5 mg q.d., alpha-lipoic acid 600 mg q.d., and benfotiamine 300 mg q.d. On physical examination, her height was 170 cm, and her weight was 63 kg. The body mass index was 21.8 kg/m². Her body weight was stable over the past three years. Thyroid function tests and the baseline laboratory findings were normal.
In December 2022, her mood deteriorated with a rapid onset of severe depression requiring immediate management plan . At the review, it emerges that the depressive episode was triggered by a newly diagnosed health problem the patient does not wish to be disclosed in this report. The patient is not keen to be admitted to hospital, and her friend volunteers to “keep an eye on her for a few days.” After discussion, she agrees to have her symptoms managed as an outpatient, and she agrees to gradually increase her dose of quetiapine to a therapeutic dose. Over the coming weeks, her low mood improves, and her mental state settles with quetiapine SR 800 mg nightly.
In January 2023, she underwent a common medical procedure that required a three-day inpatient hospital stay. The procedure went uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged and returned home and back to work. Two weeks later, she had an urgent review for not sleeping at all for several nights with extremely increased goal-directed behavior, impaired judgment, increased energy, and reduced appetite. It emerges that the patient had been reducing her quetiapine dose and completely discontinued her antipsychotic medication in mid-January 2023. Upon discussion, she revealed the reason for stopping her long−term psychopharmacological treatment. She admitted she wanted to make a new distracting problem to forget about her current another health issue she is extremely worried about. When asked to rate the helpfulness of her psychiatric medication prior to attempting discontinuation, she indicated that the medication had been extremely helpful. Since she refused any psychopharmacological alternatives to quetiapine for maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, she agreed to continue monitoring symptoms, mood and mental state, and report any signs of relapse as soon as possible .
Over the following six months of unmedicated bipolar disorder, the patient experiences a relatively unstable period alternating between hypomania lasting for several weeks to a less expansive, irritable mood, and a low mood. During the hypomanic episodes her sleep needs decreased to 1-4 hours per night, she was overtalkative, and her workmates expressed concerns that she had been overfamiliar with students. She reported feeling “fundamentally liberated” and accepted to be a little high. She did not report any delusional ideas and denied other psychotic phenomena. Over the coming weeks, her mood gradually normalized. Regarding the somatic comorbidities, following the discontinuation of quetiapine, the patient’s antihypertensive therapy was augmented by the addition of ramipril 5 mg q.d. because of the persisting significantly increased systolic and diastolic blood pressure values. The basal and total doses of insulin increased by 20%. Her follow-up labs were remarkable for significantly elevated NGSP HbA1c 7.26% (IFCC HbA1c 56 mmol/mol) in April 2023 . depicts the summary of the continuous glucose monitoring results reflecting the period of unmedicated bipolar disorder (6-months following the discontinuation of quetiapine). The glycemic control was considerably deteriorated, with parameters being outside the targets. The time within target range decreased to only 59%, time above 10.0 mmol/l increased to 28%, and time above 13.9 mmol/l increased to 10%. The average sensor glucose increased to 9.3 mmol/l, glucose management indicator deteriorated to 7.3% (56 mmol/mol), and glucose variability increased to 37.4%. The details of the ambulatory glucose profile and daily glucose profiles are depicted in as well.
In June 2023, the patient’s mood worsened considerably, approaching moderate depressive episodes. In July 2023 , the patient agreed to commence the psychopharmacotherapy with venlafaxine and quetiapine. Venlafaxine was gradually up titrated to 150 mg daily, and quetiapine SR was up titrated to 400 mg nightly to achieve its antidepressive, antimanic, stabilization, and prophylactic effects. Venlafaxine was discontinued after 23 days because of the onset of hypomanic symptoms at the end of July 2023. The patient continued monotherapy with quetiapine SR 400 mg nightly, and regular follow-up outpatient mental health appointments were scheduled. The follow-up appointments were spent on monitoring quetiapine dose and on reviewing side effects, goals, coping strategies, and progress. Support and psychoeducation were provided. The patient reported improvements in both mood and glucose control with considerably reduced fluctuations.