A 33-year-old Thai man presented at our center with a mass on the left side of his neck for 3 weeks. Our center, Siriraj Hospital (Bangkok, Thailand), is Thailand’s largest national tertiary referral center. Three years earlier, he sought treatment at a private hospital for a low-grade fever and a palpable mass at his chest wall. A physical examination revealed generalized lymphadenopathy, including left posterior cervical, supraclavicular, and suprasternal lymph nodes that varied from 1 to 2 cm in diameter. Aspiration of the suprasternal mass was performed and pus culture was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. He was prescribed orally administered sitafloxacin 100 mg once daily for 1 week. After being treated, the masses significantly decreased in size to the point where they were no longer palpable, and he became afebrile with good appetite.
He re-presented to the same hospital 30 months later with a recurrent suprasternal mass. A biopsy of the mass was performed and the tissue sample was submitted to a private pathology laboratory. The pathologic diagnosis was caseating granuloma, but negative for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and fungi. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterial tuberculosis complex using deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extract from the tissue block was reported as negative. Empirical antibiotics were prescribed and a transient clinical response was observed.
Five months later, he developed a matted left cervical lymph node that measured 3 cm in diameter that was accompanied by a low-grade fever.
He then went to another hospital where he underwent excisional biopsy of the enlarged cervical lymph node. That tissue sample was submitted to a different private pathology laboratory. The pathologic diagnosis was granulomatous lymphadenitis suggestive of TB, but negative for AFB. Due to the high prevalence of TB in Thailand, the physicians at that hospital decided to treat the patient according to a diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis. PCR for Mycobacterial tuberculosis complex using DNA extract from the tissue block was reported as negative. Six days after anti-TB therapy was started, his cervical lymph nodes increased in size. Computed tomography (CT) of his chest revealed the following: (1) an ill-defined enhancing mass measuring 3.6×2.4 cm at the left anterolateral oropharynx; (2) a matted cervical lymph node measuring 1.2×1.9 cm; and, (3) multiple mediastinal lymph nodes varying from 0.7 to 1.8 cm in diameter, with extension to the hilum of his left lung and causing atelectasis of the anterior segment of the upper lobe of his left lung, a small amount of left pleural effusion, and pericardial effusion.
At this point in the evolution of this case, the patient was referred to our center for further investigation and treatment. He and his family worked in their own grocery store and he denied any exposure to TB. At our center, a physical examination revealed the following findings: (1) a matted left cervical lymph node (3 cm in diameter), with signs of inflammation; (2) right supraclavicular lymph node (3 cm in diameter); and, (3) a left tonsillar mass (2 cm in diameter). He had a low-grade fever, but no pallor, jaundice, or hepatosplenomegaly was detected. Investigations included blood tests, pericardiocentesis, and a review of pathologic specimens of suprasternal and cervical lymph nodes that were harvested at previous hospitals. A complete blood count showed hemoglobin 14.6 g/dL, hematocrit 46.4%, white blood cells (WBC) 12.59×109/L with neutrophil predominance, and platelet count 469×109/L. His serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 534 U/L. Anti-HIV was negative. Pericardial fluid profiles showed straw-colored fluid; protein 4.81 g/dl; LDH 2292 U/L; and, cell count 166×109/L with abnormal large cells 89%, consistent with large lymphoma cells . Special stain was negative for AFB, and PCR for TB was negative. A bone marrow examination was negative for malignant lymphoma.
A pathologic review of the two previous lymph node biopsies was performed. The first biopsy was an excision of an enlarged suprasternal lymph node that showed typical features of tuberculous lymphadenitis, with multiple granulomas with caseous necrosis and some Langhans giant cells. The remaining lymph node tissue that was unaffected by granulomatous reaction showed occasional activated lymphoid cells within a background of small lymphoid cells. Few AFB were identified . PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was performed using DNA extract from lymph node tissue left in the paraffin block, and the result was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. Thus, a definite diagnosis of TB was established.
In contrast, the second biopsy of his left cervical lymph node was an incisional biopsy and it was received in multiple tissue fragments. Only one small area of the biopsy showed a few fibrocaseous granulomas, but most of the tissue showed irregular pink areas that resembled necrotic areas when observed at low magnification (×2 or ×4). However, under high magnification (at least ×40), these pink areas contained a large number of abnormal large cells. Immunohistochemistry showed that these large cells were positive for CD30, ALK, CD4, and TIA-1, and the proliferation index by Ki-67 was high (>90%). However, these cells were negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, CD20, CD68, CyclinD1, and BCL2. Special stains were negative for AFB and fungi. In situ hybridization for Epstein–Barr virus-encoded small ribonucleic acid (EBER) study was negative. Given the pathological findings of this second lymph node biopsy, a diagnosis of ALK+ ALCL with focal granulomatous reaction and focal necrosis was made . Our patient received anti-TB drugs, including isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, combined with cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, Oncovin (vincristine), etoposide, and prednisone (CHOEP) regimen every 3 weeks for six cycles as a standard chemotherapy for ALK+ ALCL. He had no adverse events or drug interaction from either anti-TB drugs or chemotherapy. Although this lymphoma subtype was expected to respond well to chemotherapy, he achieved only a stable response, which is defined as a decrease in node size less than 50% compared to initial node size at the end of the course of treatment. Lymphoma subtypes that express CD30 are expected to respond well to brentuximab vedotin, which is an anti-CD30 therapy; however, this drug has not been approved for use in Thailand. As an alternative, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide (ICE) regimen, which is a salvage combination chemotherapy, was given. Our patient then developed severe pneumonia with profound septic shock due to carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and died a few days later. His family did not grant permission for a postmortem examination.
In order to determine any minimal involvement of lymphoma in the first lymph node biopsy and for bone marrow staging, immunostaining was performed for CD30 and ALK protein in both samples. In the first lymph node biopsy, some of the scattered large activated lymphoid cells showed CD30 positivity, but none showed ALK protein expression. In the bone marrow, no CD30+ or ALK+ cells were detected.