A 67-year-old white man presented with worsening shortness of breath and mild productive cough that started approximately 1 week prior to his presentation. His past medical history was remarkable for type II diabetes, hypertension and MDS with excess blast II, with some fibrosis in his bone marrow, for which he received two cycles of 5-azacitidine, with the last cycle delivered 2 weeks prior to his presentation. His home medications included metformin, sitagliptin and bisoprolol. His social history was significant for 15 pack years of cigarette smoking.
An initial assessment of his vital signs revealed hypoxia with oxygen saturation of 80 % at room air, heart rate of 84 beats per minute, and his respiratory rate was 20 per minute. A physical examination was unremarkable except for bilateral basal fine inspiratory crackles. Arterial blood gases showed mild respiratory alkalosis. An initial blood work-up showed hemoglobin of 8.7 g/dl, platelets count of 30×103/mm3, and white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.4×103/mm3. Prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalized ratio (INR), brain natriuretic peptides (BNP), and kidney and liver function test values were within normal limits. An electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram were normal. A chest radiograph showed bilateral interstitial infiltrates.
He was started on dual antibiotics coverage (levofloxacin and piperacillin-tazobactam) for possible pneumonia. However, on the following day, his oxygen requirement increased dramatically; he was put on non-invasive ventilation and transferred to an intensive care unit (ICU). A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest was done at that time which revealed massive multifocal bilateral pulmonary consolidations, some of which were rounded with surrounding ground-glass opacities, as well as pleural effusion. A wide range of differential diagnoses was made at that time, including fungal, viral infection, and bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia (BOOP) .
Subsequently, his antibiotics were upgraded to caspofungin, teicoplanin, Tamiflu (oseltamivir phosphate), meropenem, and levofloxacin. A human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test was performed and was reported as negative. Bronchoalveolar lavage and left-sided pleural fluid tapping was performed. Results of the lavage were negative for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture, fungal stain and culture, herpes simplex virus (HSV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Analysis of his pleural fluid was consistent with a transudative pattern with a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) value of 206 U/L (390 U/L in serum), protein 2.2 g/dl (5.3 in serum), glucose 210 mg/dl, and WBCs 100 with 90 % lymphocytes. His cytology was negative for malignant cells.
His condition did not improve until he was started on methylprednisolone 60 mg administered intravenously twice daily for suspected BOOP. After 7 days of methylprednisolone, his condition improved dramatically and he was successfully transferred to a general medical floor; during his stay at the general medical floor his dose of methylprednisolone was decreased to 40 mg administered intravenously twice daily for 4 days, then 20 mg administered intravenously twice daily for 3 days. He was then discharged home on home oxygen and oral prednisolone which was slowly tapered over 2 weeks.
A follow-up CT scan was performed 2 weeks later and showed a variable response in the previously mentioned multifocal pulmonary consolidations with a background of pulmonary interstitial thickening and ground-glass opacification involving both his lungs. Some foci had improved while others had progressed since the previous examination. In addition, a new opacity appeared on the lower lobe of his right lung with background interstitial thickening.
He was readmitted for a CT-guided Tru-Cut biopsy of the lower lobe of his right lung, which was performed 2 months later; the biopsy showed features of chronic nonspecific inflammation with macrophages consistent with organizing pneumonia .
CMV and HSV immune stains were negative as well as Giemsa stain for fungal infections.
He was discharged home with oxygen support with a presumptive diagnosis of drug-induced ILD secondary to 5-azacitidine.