A 30-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology department with a 3-month history of swollen eyelids margins and dryness of the eyes. She had previously been diagnosed with dry eye disease at other institutions and treated with artificial tears without improvement. The patient also described development of multiple verrucous papules on the dorsa of her hands starting 4 months prior to presentation, with a subsequent diagnosis of atopic dermatitis at the dermatology department. In addition, the patient noted lip swelling starting 3 months prior to presentation and excessive pigmentation of the neck, axillae, and groin starting 6 weeks prior to presentation. She also described a feeling of discomfort in the upper abdominal region and unexplained weight loss over the prior 3 months. The patient denied a family history of cancer, history of drug use, history of hoarseness, or a personal medical history of obesity, diabetes, or other endocrine disorders.
Physical examination identified cervical lymphadenopathy; excessive pigmentation on the neck, axillae, and groin; and filiform papillomas on the eyelid margins , gums, lips , hands, and axillae. Corrected distance visual acuity was 20/20. The remainder of the anterior and posterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Tear break-up time was found to be 3 s. In vivo confocal microscopy images were obtained using the Heidelberg Retina Tomograph III/Rostock Corneal Module (Heidelberg Engineering, Dossenheim, Germany) confocal microscope. The images demonstrated conjunctival cell proliferation and central vascular structure . Mean corpuscular volume levels (84.4 fL) were normal. Tumor marker evaluations were also performed, and carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, carbohydrate antigen 125, squamous cell carcinoma-associated antigen, cytokeratin 19 fragment, neuron-specific enolase, carbohydrate antigen 72–4, tissue polypeptide antigen, carbohydrate antigen 242, and tumor supplied group of factors were positive. Ultrasonography revealed diffuse thyroid lesions and pancreatic hypoechoic nodules. Computed tomography imaging revealed left kidney and bilateral adrenal gland complex cystic-solid masses suggestive of neoplastic masses, with evidence of metastatic spread.
The patient was treated with lubricant tear drops and topical steroids and referred to the oncology department. Lip and axillae biopsies revealed papillary structure. Stomach lesion was biopsies. The Haemotoxylin and Eosin staining was performed and the sections show gastric mucosa with invasive adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell , glandular formation, and consistent with mixed-type gastric carcinoma by the Lauren classification system. Biopsies of the pancreatic and thyroid lesions revealed pancreatic adenocarcinoma and thyroid cancer. After these evaluations, the patient was subsequently diagnosed with malignant acanthosis nigricans associated with metastasis of gastric adenocarcinoma. Her condition deteriorated rapidly, and she died 4 months later due to cancer progression.