An 83-year-old woman who fell on her right elbow in the hospital, presented to our department with complaints of right shoulder pain. The patient had been undergoing conservative treatment for a massive rotator cuff tear and rupture of the long head of the biceps tendon 5 years previously. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) taken 2 years prior to the trauma showed a complete tear and retraction of the supraspinatus tendon and a rupture of the long head of the biceps tendon . In addition, the patient had been diagnosed by a nephrologist as having anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated microscopic polyangiitis 2 months prior to the trauma, and was treated with oral prednisolone for 2 months. Physical examination findings at the time of the trauma demonstrated difficulty in moving the right shoulder due to pain. The humeral head was palpable posterior to the acromion. There were no findings suggestive of nerve or vascular injury. X-ray radiography images revealed that the right humeral head was dislocated upwards and posterior to the acromion . A closed reduction was performed by traction and adduction of the upper extremity, and by pushing the coracoid process. Reduction was easily performed, and X-ray radiography images after the reduction revealed that the dislocation had been reduced . An MRI 1 week after the shoulder dislocation showed the newly ruptured deltoid posterior fibers and infraspinatus tendon, in addition to a supraspinatus tear and a biceps tendon rupture, and fluid retention in the posterosuperior shoulder . Following the closed reduction, the shoulder joint was held in external rotation at 30 degrees with an external rotation orthosis for 6 weeks. However, re-dislocation was observed at an early stage following the removal of the orthosis . While reduction was performed as required, dislocation frequently recurs due to movement such as changing clothes. Although surgical treatment was recommended, the patient and her family refused it; therefore, conservative treatment was continued. At 3 months following the trauma, while the right shoulder pain had subsided, the range of motion was limited to forward elevation of 20 degrees, and the patient was having difficulty eating with her right hand.