A 52-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with rapidly progressive shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain over a period of 3 days, along with reduced exercise tolerance, orthopnoea, and recent weight loss of 4 kg over the past 3 months. She had a past medical history of gallstone pancreatitis and bilateral breast implants. She took Creon, with no other regular medications. The patient was fully independent, with previously good exercise tolerance prior to the weeks leading up to her admission. On initial clinical examination, there was tachycardia with a heart rate of 128 and raised jugular venous pressure (JVP) to 8 cm, with normal heart sounds and bi-basal crepitations on auscultation of the lung fields. She was tachypnoeic with a respiratory rate of 24; however, there was no hypoxia. She had bilateral pedal oedema and had moderate ascites on abdominal examination. Serial high sensitivity troponin-T levels were elevated at 120 and 138 ng/L (normal range <14 ng/L) 5 h apart. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia at 110 beats per minute (b.p.m.). Chest X-ray showed a small right-sided pleural effusion. Given her breathlessness and pleuritic chest pain, pulmonary embolus was suspected. Therefore, she underwent an urgent computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA).
Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram demonstrated segmental pulmonary emboli in the right lower lobe in conjunction with a moderate global pericardial effusion and a large amorphous myocardial mass invading both ventricles . Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a grossly abnormal myocardium with extensive infiltration, along with potential masses in the basal right ventricular (RV) free wall and the posterior wall of the left ventricle (LV). There was suspicion of infiltration affecting the lateral wall of the LV, the septum, and the free wall of the RV. There was marked increase in the wall thickness of both the left and right ventricles, with globally impaired function . Her left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was calculated at 38% using modified Simpson’s method. The echocardiogram was highly suspicious of malignancy. A global pericardial effusion was present measuring 19 mm in depth. There was no evidence of cardiac tamponade clinically or on echocardiography, with no RV or right atrium (RA) collapse. Global longitudinal strain (GLS) was not calculated at this time. The patient was treated with intravenous (IV) diuretics and therapeutic dose of dalteparin, to optimize her clinical state prior to further investigations.
She was unable to tolerate the cardiac MRI on day 7, due to her orthopnoea caused by pulmonary congestion.
Biopsy of peripheral nodes was not possible, as ultrasound of the neck, along with CT of the abdomen and pelvis, did not reveal any malignant lymph nodes. The patient underwent bone marrow biopsy which was mostly unremarkable. It demonstrated a hypercellular, reactive bone marrow along with a left shift granulopoiesis and no evident dysplasia. The lymphocytes were predominantly T-cells, with no increase in CD34 + blast cells. No blast cells were seen; therefore, there was no suggestion of haematological malignancy.
The patient underwent endomyocardial biopsy. Eight punch biopsies were taken from the right ventricle; not a single ventricular ectopic beat occurred during the procedure. This was felt to reflect extensive cardiac involvement and lack of viable myocardial tissue where the biopsies were attempted. The histological tissue obtained demonstrated heavy infiltration of the myocardium by neoplastic lymphocytes, moderate pleomorphism, and apoptosis. Further, immunohistopathological analysis showed strong diffuse expression of CD56 and CD33—two transmembrane receptors expressed specifically on cells of the myeloid lineage. PAX5, CC20, MUM1, CD2, CD3, CD30, CD138, CD34, TdT, HHV8, EBER, CD14, and CD123 were not expressed. Given the absence of blast cells on bone marrow biopsy, this was interpreted as a primary cardiac myeloid sarcoma. This was managed with high-dose steroids and anthracycline chemotherapy comprising two cycles of a high-dose daunorubicin and cytarabine regime. This treatment was tolerated very well by the patient, the only complication being one episode of peripherally inserted central cannula infection requiring IV antibiotics.
A repeat echocardiogram 1 month after the initial imaging demonstrated disappearance of the masses and restoration of ventricular function with a LVEF of 56% using modified Simpson’s method . The patient’s symptoms also improved rapidly, reporting significant improvement in breathlessness and exercise tolerance.
A cardiac MRI was performed in week 5, after she had improved on steroids and anthracycline chemotherapy, to look for any evidence of sub-clinical infiltration. This demonstrated concentric LV thickening. There were no regional wall motion abnormalities and no valvular abnormalities. The RV was of normal size and function. There was probable subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement, most notably in the mid-chamber and at the apex. The LVEF was 54%.
Repeat echocardiograms at 2 and 4 months showed stable appearances of the heart, with no evidence of disease reoccurrence or decline in cardiac function.