A 56-year-old male with early satiety for 2 mouths was admitted to our hospital. There was no history of weight loss, without relevant past and family history. An 18*25 cm oval tumor with medium texture was palpable below the left costal margin during the physical examination.
The routine biochemical and hematogical parameters were within normal limits, and tumour markers including CA-125, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA19–9 levels were nothing special. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (GI) revealed a tumor arising from the greater curvature of gastric body and extending into the lumen . Contrast enhanced CT scans of the abdomen showed a marked enhancement of polypoid mass protruding into the gastric lumen, a large poorly enhancing oval mass in the left abdomen and a heterogeneous round-like tumor adjacent to the left psoas . Axial plain CT revealed the intro-abdominal tumor with CT values ranging from − 78 HU (consistent with fatty tissue) to 27 HU (related to the pancreas), with a mean CT value as 2 HU. However, the retroperitoneal tumor had CT values ranging from − 57 HU (consistent with fatty tissue) to 18 HU (related to the blood), with a mean CT value as 10 HU. The patient was diagnosed with coexistence of a gastric GIST, intro-abdominal and retroperitoneal tumors preoperatively.
A surgical operation was performed. Intraoperatively, a huge oval lobulated oozing soft mass (about 18.0*25.0*15.0 cm) originating from the descending colon mesentery was identified. A tumor (about 2.5*2.0*2.0 cm) at the greater curvature of gastric body and a tumor (about 5.0*4.0*2.5 cm) close to the left psoas were detected. Adjacent to the anterior wall of the abdominal aorta, the intro-abdominal tumor was surrounded by the small bowel and left hemicolon. The round-like lobulated retroperitoneal tumor was found among the left psoas, left iliac vessels, sigmoid colon and intro-abdominal tumor. The tumors were well-circumscribed from the surrounding organs and without signs of infiltrating tumor growth. Furthermore, the tumors were not related to the adjacent major vessels, without the detection of distant metastasis or nodal involvement. Wedge resection for gastric tumor, complete resection for intro-abdominal and retroperitoneal tumors were performed.
In histopathological examination, the intro-abdominal tumor was a myxoid liposarcoma and the retroperitoneal mass shared the same pathological type with the tumor .
Further histopathological examination of the gastric carcinoma indicated a GIST of the low-risk category (mitotic index < 5 mitoses/50 high-power fields) . Immunohistochemistry displayed strong staining for c-Kit/CD117, Dog-1 and CD34, while expression of SMA and Desmin was negative . Furthermore, mutations in KIT exons and PDGFRA exons were evaluated in the sample, but, nothing special was found.
Nested reverse transcription-polymeras-ase chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique was employed to detect the FUS-CHOP mRNA expression in the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded lipsarcoma samples. Type II FUS-CHOP mRNA was successfully detected in the retroperitoneal liposarcoma . The postoperative course was uneventful. Adjuvant radiotherapy was targeted to the former liposarcoma bed: Dosage in total, 50 Gy; single dose, 1.6 Gy. The patient received CT scans twice a year, displaying no evidence of tumor recurrence in a follow up period of 15 months.