A 78-year-old male patient presented to our outpatient clinic with a complaint of numbness and pain on the left site of the mandible. The patient stated that he had been suffering from this numbness for 1to 2 months. In the medical anamnesis, it was discovered that patient suffered from prostate CA 5 years previous, and since then he had visited his doctor periodically for an annual examination. In the examinations and on the basis of tests carried out at the hospital 1 year previous, it was stated that no CA relapse traces were detected. The patient had visited his dentist 2 months previous for pain and numbness of the left molar region. He stated that after root canal treatment, his dentist extracted the second left molar due to calcification of the canal and also due to pain and numbness. After extraction, the numbness and pain of the patient worsened; two weeks later, a panoramic radiograph was taken by his dentist, who did not perform any treatment other than to advise follow-up .The patient presented to our clinic one and a half months later for further evaluation of his condition. Initially, a panoramic radiograph was taken. A moth-eaten shaped radiolucence was observed in the posterior mandible extending along the temporomandibular joint area. No pathologic findings were detected in other areas . After this initial appearance, in order to examine the lesion in detail, a decision was made to perform cone beam computed tomography (Newtom 3G, CBCT, QR Verona, Italy) with three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction to obtain a more precise location and definition of the pathologic features. In the 0.4 mm CBCT sections, a moth-eaten shaped radiolucent lesion extending from the molar region was observed. The lesion was also involved in the mandibular canal at the level of the lingula mandibula . Panoramic reconstructions and 3D CBCT images showed severe moth-eaten shaped erosion in relation to the mandibular nerve .
On consideration of the patient anamnesis and radiographs, a biopsy was planned for definitive diagnosis. The specimen showed that the bone marrow was filled with prostate cancer cells. The expression of prostate-specific antigen (PSA), cytokeratins (CKs) 7 and 20 was assessed by immunohistochemistry. The specimen showed a heterogeneous expression of PSA. CK stains of the specimen demonstrated a marker status of CK7 (-), and CK20 (-). Moreover, P504S/α-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase (AMACR) was used to as positive tissue marker to confirm the final diagnosis. A prostate carcinoma with metastasis was detected. The patient was sent for medical consultation. In the blood tests that were performed, gamma glutamine transferase was found to be over 295 iu/l, cea 817 ng/ml, and ca-15 600 U/ml. As a result, the patient was diagnosed as having recurrent prostate carcinoma, along with metastatic focuses that were detected at the femoral head, vertebra and shoulder head. No operation was planned because of severe metastasis of the CA throughout the body. No further follow-up was achieved. The patient died after 6 months due to the severe metastasis throughout his body.