A 16-year-old girl presented with fever in the last 10 days and severe respiratory distress and bilateral diffuse crepitation. A history of recent-onset generalized weakness, poor feeding, and weight loss was present. At presentation, she was emaciated with a weight of 27 kg and body mass index of 11.44 kg/m2 (<third centile). Owing to the critical nature of her presentation, she required intensive care and ventilatory support.
As the blood counts suggested bacterial infection, she was started on ceftriaxone and vancomycin while awaiting culture results. Arterial blood gas showed respiratory acidosis with hypoxia. Other blood parameters, including serology for human immunodeficiency virus, were normal. Chest X-ray showed multiple flocculent opacities in bilateral lung fields.
Pulmonology consultation was carried out. High-resolution computed tomography chest showed multiple bilateral nodular opacities characteristic of fungal pneumonia . There was also right lower lobe collapse, air bronchogram, peribronchial interstitial thickening, and mild pleural effusion. Fluconazole was added, and the child started to show improvement.
Repeat chest X-ray, 48h after admission, showed significant clearing of the pneumonia. Cultures grew Candida albicans susceptible to fluconazole as well as Acinetobacter baumannii, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensitive to tigecycline. Gradual improvement was observed with the escalation of antibiotic, and she was weaned off ventilator within 72h.
Following extubation, the child’s voice was hoarse; she had difficulty in swallowing and could be fed only via orogastric feeding tube. A bilateral palatal palsy was noted. No other cranial nerve involvement was observed, and jaw jerk was normal. No evidence of Horner syndrome or dysautonomia was noted. However, she had persistent generalized limb weakness with diminished deep tendon reflexes and decreased pain and temperature sensations over all limbs. Bladder and bowel sphincters were intact. laryngoscopy showed left vocal cord palsy.
On the basis of the aforementioned findings, postinfectious polyneuritis was suspected, and a nerve conduction velocity was carried out, which was within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain and spinal cord showed a holocord multiseptate syrinx extending from medulla to filum terminale . An enhancing intramedullary lesion was observed in the conus medullaris region (L1-L2) along with a lipoma at filum terminale .
Laminectomy with decompression and excision of the space-occupying lesion was performed. As the vascular lesion was found to be adherent to the cord, only partial excision could be performed and after surgery, radiotherapy was started. Histopathology examination showed cuboid to elongated tumor cells arranged in papillary pattern with myxomatous stroma and fine nuclear chromatin, suggestive of myxopapillary ependymoma–conus medullaris, WHO (World Health Organization) Grade I.
Her voice, gag reflex, and limb weakness improved within few days, and oral feeds were gradually built up. At first follow-up a month after radiotherapy, the child had gained 7 kg weight, and her demeanor had markedly improved. A repeat MRI, conducted 6 months after radiotherapy, showed resolution of the syringobulbia and cord syrinx without any recurrence of tumor. The child was doing well over 1-year follow-up.