A 53-years-old Japanese woman with ascites and a pelvic tumor was transferred to the Maruyama Memorial General Hospital on the suspicion of ovarian malignancy. A trans-vaginal ultrasound examination confirmed a large ascites volume and approximately 10-cm single ovarian cystic tumor with a mural nodule. The serum level of CA19–9 was 37 IU/L and that of CA125 was increased markedly at 333 IU/L. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed ascites and an approximately 10-cm single cystic tumor with a 4-cm mural nodule. T1- and T2-weighted MRI revealed a high-intensity cystic area. In addition, the T1-weighted and fat-suppressed MRI showed the high-intensity cystic area. Therefore, we expected the cyst to contain blood. Moreover, gadorinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI revealed an enhanced mural nodule . Interestingly, the mural nodule crossed the cyst wall into the cavity and onto the surface, which is an extremely rare finding and may be the characteristic of this tumor type. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a large ascites volume and tumor dissemination throughout the pelvis . On the basis of these examinations, we suspected a malignant tumor. The patient underwent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with hysterectomy, omentectomy, resection of disseminated lesions and optimal debulking of the tumor. Lymph node biopsy was omitted because of the suggestion of enhanced CT image findings and palpation during surgery. The content of the left ovarian cyst was chocolate-like. We identified a mural nodule of approximately 4-cm size on the cyst wall . The histopathological examination revealed columnar tumor cells on the cyst wall. Eosinophilic epithelial cells suggestive of papillary hyperplasia and squamous metaplasia were identified on the endometriosis tissues. The cells showing dysplasia were categorized as borderline malignant. The cyst showed positivity for estrogen receptor and vimentin antibodies, and it was negative for WT-1; therefore, the immunohistochemical staining led to the diagnosis of ovarian seromucinous borderline malignancy . The mural nodule contained dense hyperplastic polymorphic and eosinophilic undifferentiated cells. The mural nodule was positive for CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, and vimentin and was identified as an anaplastic carcinoma by immunohistochemistry . A nodule present in the omentum showed the same pathological findings as the mural nodule and was thus diagnosed as a metastasis from the anaplastic carcinoma. The disseminated lesion was < 2 cm in size. We classified the ascites as class I by cytodiagonosis and diagnosed the patient as having an anaplastic carcinoma in the left ovarian seromucinous cystic tumor of borderline malignancy, with a FIGO stage IIIB. She underwent 6 courses of pacritaxel and carboplatin. After 3 years, the patient is still alive without any clinical findings of tumor recurrence.