A 60-year old male with a history of recurrent nephrolithiasis requiring lithotripsy, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and mild chronic kidney disease presented to urgent care with a one-week history of rapidly increasing confusion, weakness, and gait abnormalities, with a preceding one-month history of headache and malaise. Further questioning also revealed nausea, decreased appetite, constipation and abdominal pain.
His initial bloodwork revealed an elevated corrected calcium of 4.79 mmol/L (normal 2.10–2.60 mmol/L), phosphate of 1.83 mmol/L (0.81–1.45 mmol/L), creatinine of 364 μmol/L (44–106 μmol/L; baseline creatinine ~ 130–150 µmol/L) with eGFR of 14.9 mL/min (> 60 mL/min), and markedly elevated PTH of 2043 ng/L (17–60 ng/L). Therefore, the diagnosis of severe primary hyperparathyroidism was established. Despite his history of recurrent nephrolithiasis, there was no previous documentation of serum calcium or parathyroid hormone levels in the patient’s provincial record.
Ultrasound (US) showed a mixed solid and cystic mass located posterior to the right thyroid lobe measuring 4.6 × 3.8 × 2.5 cm in diameter, with prominent vascularity, raising suspicion for parathyroid carcinoma . Computed tomography (CT) neck also described a 3.0 × 3.3 × 4.8 cm cystic, peripherally enhancing right paratracheal mass, with loss of soft tissue plane between the mass and adjacent tracheal tissue . The technetium sestamibi scintigraphy was non-localizing and did not show increased uptake in the region of the neck mass seen on CT and US .
The patient was admitted to the hospital under the Internal Medicine service and managed initially with aggressive fluid resuscitation, denosumab, and calcitonin. His calcium level continued to rise, with levels ranging from 5.14 to 5.26 mmol/L. His condition deteriorated, and he developed nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, hypernatremia, volume overload, and hypoxemia. He was transferred to intensive care 3 days post-admission for intubation, monitoring and continuous renal replacement therapy. Cinacalcet and pamidronate were added for hypercalcemia management.
The patient’s hypercalcemia did not adequately respond to maximal medical management so he underwent parathyroidectomy on post-admission day 5. Neck exploration revealed a fibrotic, inflamed parathyroid gland that was adherent to, but not invading, surrounding tissues. It was ultimately removed intact, without having to resect any of the surrounding structures. Pathologic examination described a 20 g parathyroid gland, measuring 5 × 3.3 × 1.8 cm. It was described as a blood-filled cyst. The gland was infarcted and surrounded by a fibrous, thickened capsule . The final pathologic diagnosis was an atypical hypercellular parathyroid adenoma , with capsular irregularities but no invasive features or cytologic atypia.
Calcium levels improved immediately following surgery, and calcium supplementation and alfacalcidol were eventually required. Unfortunately, the patient suffered a complicated course in hospital, with ongoing renal failure and development of atrial fibrillation, ventilator-associated pneumonia, and internal jugular venous thrombosis requiring heparin infusion. He ultimately died from complications related to his anticoagulation therapy.