A 28-year-old woman with familial heterozygous AT III deficiency was referred to our institution for right calf pain and swelling of 1 week duration. The patient’s sister and mother, both of whom are known to have inherited AT III deficiency by genotypic examination, both have a history of DVT and PE. However, no further details regarding the genetic profile of the patient and her relatives were available. There was no history of oral contraception use or other precipitating factors for the development of DVT and PE.
The patient’s vital signs upon admission were as follows: heart rate of 90 b.p.m., blood pressure of 120/75 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of 98% at room air.
Physical examination revealed prominent S2 heart sounds at the pulmonic area. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm but with an incomplete right bundle branch block. D-dimer levels are routinely assessed in the emergency department as part of the chest pain protocol despite its low positive predictive value for PE especially in patients with high clinical probability of the disease. For this patient, her D-dimer serum levels were measured and revealed to be 27.25 mg/L (normal range: 0.00–0.50 mg/L). Residual AT III activity was measured to be at 58% (normal range: 83–118%), whereas protein C and protein S plasma levels were both found to be within the normal range. No anti-beta-2-glycoprotein, antiphospholipid, antiprothrombin, or anticardiolipin antibodies were detected in this patient. Echocardiography revealed a floating thrombus within the inferior vena cava measuring 7 cm × 1 cm, extending to the perirenal region with a low echocardiographic probability of pulmonary hypertension (tricuspid regurgitation Vmax 1.98 m/s; normal interventricular septal motion; no pulmonary artery dilatation). Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, pelvis, and lower limbs revealed bilateral subsegmental PE and deep vein thrombosis of the right leg extending into the inferior vena cava up to the left renal vein. Based on the family history and clinical findings, the patient was diagnosed with PE and DVT in the setting of an inherited heterozygous AT III deficiency.
The 2014 Guidelines released by the European Society of Cardiology for the diagnosis and management of acute PE recommend providing haemodynamic and respiratory support, anticoagulation therapy, thrombolytic treatment, surgical embolectomy, percutaneous catheter-directed treatment, and venous filters for treating the acute phase of PE. After a thorough assessment, haemodynamic and respiratory support was deemed unnecessary for this patient. Furthermore, due to the absence of clinical evidence pointing to cardiogenic shock, thrombolytic treatment, surgical embolectomy, and percutaneous catheter-directed treatment were not considered as first-line therapies for this patient. Placement of an inferior vena cava filter was not considered since there were no absolute contraindications to the administration of anticoagulant drugs and because PE did not recur after the administration of appropriate anticoagulation treatment. Because of the patient’s low AT III activity, achievement of adequate anticoagulation would have taken too much time with the use of heparin, fondaparinux, or vitamin K antagonist therapies.
After the patient was admitted and written informed consent was obtained using our institutional consent form, now archived in her medical records, she was administered rivaroxaban 30 mg daily (15 mg tablets taken twice a day) for 3 weeks, after which the dose was reduced to 20 mg once a day according to clinical trials.
Because the patient’s condition was classified as Class I according to the PE severity index, she was discharged after 1 week but was maintained on treatment with rivaroxaban 20 mg once a day.
Ten days after treatment, repeat echocardiographic examination revealed complete resolution of the thrombus located in inferior vena cava . Because the treatment of this patient deviated from traditional practices, a repeat CT scan of the chest was performed and documented complete disappearance of the PE .
The patient received regular follow-up examinations for 1 year after discharge, with repeat echocardiography and compression venous ultrasonography performed every third month; during this time, the patient was maintained on 20 mg of rivaroxaban daily. No recurrence of PE or DVT was found. The patient was then advised to have an annual check-up with a cardiologist.