A 14-year-old female patient reported shortness of breath, dizziness, and fatigue after minimal physical activity. Based on the combination of echocardiography (ECHO), cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and chest computed tomography, she was diagnosed PAH at a local hospital. Since the disease etiology was unestablished, an immediate pharmacological intervention was not initiated; however, she was supported with oxygen and other symptomatic treatment.
After 4 months, when admitted at our hospital, her blood pressure was 124/84 mmHg, a New York Heart Association functional class III. She was a non-smoker and teetotaler, never abused addictive drugs nor had other PVOD associated risk factors such as chemotherapy with alkylating agents or exposure to organic solvents [, ]. And, she had no other physical or psychological illness. Her uncle died of unknown reason at early age, and rest of the family had no history of lung or heart diseases. Her physical examination revealed an accentuated pulmonary component of the second heart sound, tricuspid systolic murmur, and increased breath sound. Her arterial blood gas test indicated 60 and 29 mmHg of PaO2 and PaCO2, respectively. The concentration of NT-proBNP was 437 ng/mL with normal renal function. The results of coagulation function, thyroid function, HIV, tuberculosis test, rheumatic factor, antinuclear antibody, antiphospholipid antibody, and anti-vasculitis antibody were within the normal range.
Her ECHO results estimated an elevated right ventricular systolic pressure (80 mmHg), thickened right ventricular anterior wall, dilated right ventricle and right atria, and a normal left ventricle. Chest computed tomography artery (CTA) reported the presence of triad features (subpleural thickened septal lines, ground-glass nodules/opacities, mediastinal lymphadenopathy) and a dilated pulmonary main trunk , while the right heart catheterization at rest suggested a PAH phenotype . Because of her weak physical stature, a lung biopsy was not performed.
In China, congenital heart disease (CHD) predominantly causes pediatric PAH and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) associated PAH is higher in CHD-PAH . When a PDA-PAH patient develops Eisenmenger syndrome, the elevated pulmonary pressures reverse the shunt from right-to-left making the ECHO assessment difficult . However, our patient had no history of activity restriction or signs of differential cyanosis and clubbing in the upper and lower limbs; therefore, PDA-PAH could be ruled out.
Connective tissue disease (CTD) is the third PAH predisposal factor in China, especially in the young females . Among CTD-PAH, systemic scleroderma (SSc) is prevalent in western countries, while systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in Asia . Further, the CTA triad features could be observed in SSc-related PAH . However, our patient showed no signs of SSc- or SLE-PAH or no evidence of respective lab tests (rheumatic factor, antinuclear antibody, antiphospholipid antibody); hence, CHD-PAH was also ruled out.
Interestingly, at least 10% of idiopathic PAH patients fulfill the criteria for PVOD . Mutations in EIF2AK4 gene drive the etiology of hereditary PVOD and also account for 10–25% of sporadic phenotype . Although the PVOD specific bi-basal crackles and digital clubbing was absent, she presented a distinct CTA triad features. Since these radiological changes were insufficient to differentiate PVOD from other PAH types, a genetic testing by whole exome sequencing was performed, which identified a novel EIF2AK4 mutation at c.4833_4836dup(p.Q1613Kfs*10) . This mutation led to a frame shift and the subsequent introduction of a premature stop codon at exon 38, disrupting the expression of this protein.
Lung transplantation is the only curative therapy for PVOD . Although she was immediately referred for lung transplantation, she died, before it was scheduled counting the total illness duration to 6 months since first symptom. The timeline of disease process for this patient was showed in the .