An 84-year-old woman with a medical history of AF, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cerebral infarction and who was receiving rivaroxaban (15 mg/day) experienced frequent falls in her residential facility due to delirium. She then developed a consciousness disorder on awakening. She was transferred to our hospital with a diagnosis of the right ASDH . The Glasgow Coma Scale score was 6. Her pupils were equal and round, and reactive to light and movement. Plasma fibrinogen concentration at admission (332 mg/dL) was within the normal range; however, D-dimer concentration was elevated (6.78 µg/mL). The Prothrombin Time-International Normalized Ration (1.16) was not prolonged. AA (400 mg) was intravenously administered 16 h after the last rivaroxaban oral administration, followed by a continuous infusion of 4 mg/min for 120 min. The patient subsequently underwent surgery. Stable hemostasis was achieved during the surgery, resulting in blood loss of 100 mL. Although AF persisted during surgery, no hypotensive events occurred, and mean blood pressure was always above 65 mmHg. An immediate postoperative computed tomography (CT) scan revealed complete ASDH removal ; however, the patient had poor postoperative arousal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple fresh cerebral infarctions day after the surgery [ and ]. Magnetic resonance angiography showed no injury or stenosis of carotid and vertebral arteries [ and ]. Postoperative blood tests showed that D-dimer concentration peaked at 4.78 µg/mL and there was no evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. On the day of the onset of cerebral infarction, transthoracic echocardiography was performed, which revealed no intracardiac thrombus and no evidence of the right-to-left shunt. Lower limb venous ultrasound demonstrated no venous thrombus in her both legs. These infarctions were considered cardiogenic cerebral embolisms and rivaroxaban was resumed on the same day. Two months later, she was transferred to a long-term care hospital with a modified Rankin Scale of 5.