A 69-year-old woman with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus and steroid-dependent asthma arrived at the Emergency Department in a deep coma. She lived alone but maintained daily contact with her son by phone. On the day of her admission, her son did not receive a response to his phone call and called the police to break into her house.
On physical examination, her Glasgow Coma Scale was E1V1M1, blood pressure was 151/87 mmHg, heart rate was 98 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and body temperature was 37.2 °C. Arterial blood analysis revealed metabolic acidosis and oxygen desaturation . Blood biochemistry revealed hyperglycemia with hyperosmolality, ketoacidosis, elevated lactate, and pre-renal azotemia . There was leukocytosis with a left shift, indicating the patient had sepsis. Urinary analysis also revealed ketonuria. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a small hypodense region in the left corona radiata, suggestive of an ischemic stroke . The chest X-ray (CXR) revealed right middle lobe pneumonia . The electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed diffuse cortical dysfunction but no epileptiform discharges. Kernig’s sign and Brudzinski’s sign were negative. The blood culture 3 days after admission revealed Streptococcus intermedius bacteremia which was sensitive to erythromycin, penicillin, vancomycin, linezolid, clindamycin, ceftriaxone, levofloxacin and cefepime. (The minimum inhibitory concentration of penicillin was 0.064 μg/mL) The blood culture showed no fungal growth. Sputum cultures were negative for bacteria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and fungus . She was provided with empiric ceftriaxone on admission, insulin therapy, high-dose hydrocortisone (100 mg every 12 h) for possibly iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency, and fluid replacement. Her pneumonia rapidly progressed, and on Day 4, her chest CT showed a 5.2-cm cavity containing some small ball-like lesions and a slight pericardial effusion . The hydrocortisone dosage was tapered because of her poorly controlled pneumonia. She remained comatose on Day 7. As her bilaterally symmetrical sensory and motor dysfunctions were not compatible with left corona radiata infarction, and she did not recover her consciousness as expected, brain MRI was performed which showed multiple contrast-enhanced cystic lesions with brain edema and eccentrically located hyperdense lesions within the lesions in the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brain stem . In addition, abnormal fluid accumulation in the dependent portion of the bilateral lateral ventricle was observed , suggesting pyogenic ventriculitis. As the patient was still comatose, we were unable to determine whether she had a history of possible exposure to Taenia solium. The stool analysis showed no parasites. Her son recalled that she had traveled to Vietnam 3 months previously, where she may have eaten raw pork dishes. Therefore, a provisional diagnosis was made of Taenia solium infection with neurocysticercosis. The family refused a brain biopsy. Lumbar puncture on Day 9 revealed increased protein level; however, the intracranial pressure was not increased . The CSF studies were negative for bacteria, tuberculosis, cryptococcus, aspergillosis, viruses, and malignant cells . The CSF specimens were sent to another medical center for parasite testing, but the results were negative. Albendazole and praziquantel were administered, after resuming high-dose corticosteroid and intravenous anti-epileptic agents for 3 days to prevent seizures. After 2 days of this therapeutic scheme, her consciousness dramatically improved to E3V5M6 and she disclosed that she had eaten raw pork dishes while in Vietnam and had experienced persistent fever, malaise, and headache during the previous 2 months.
However, her fever persisted, and we had difficulty with attaining glycemic control. Her right middle lobe cavity was surgically removed on Day 14 to facilitate glycemic control . The histology revealed a chronic abscess, surrounded by a thick fibrous wall and some necrotic debris, and focal septate fungal hyphae in the lumen, which were positive on Gomori methenamine silver stain, suggestive of aspergillosis . The culture of the surgical lung specimens revealed Aspergillus growth. On Day 17, she started a 2-week course of oral voriconazole. On day 17, her consciousness returned to E4V5M6, and a follow-up brain MRI revealed some regression. After 43 days of hospitalization with 1 month of cysticidal therapy, she regained full consciousness, but her lower limb weakness did not improve. Bedside physical therapy for reconditioning rehabilitation to improve muscle endurance and strength, posture training, endurance training and strengthening training were administered for 3 weeks. She was then discharged to a nursing home near her son’s house, where she continued rehabilitation.