A 70-year-old woman with no history presented to a local hospital with transient right hemiparesis 1 month earlier, where computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed an intracranial isodense tumor (30 mm in diameter) with no calcification on the left frontal convexity, being referred to our hospital. On admission, the patient was afebrile and had no neurological deficits. On brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the tumor appeared hypointense on T1-weighted images , and hyperintense on T2-weighted images without peritumoral edema. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images demonstrated a homogenously enhanced extra-axial tumor with peritumoral leptomeningeal enhancement . A whole spine MRI revealed no findings suggestive of meningeal dissemination. A whole-body contrast-enhanced CT showed a mass lesion in the left mammary gland, which was diagnosed as breast cancer by a needle biopsy. Positron emission tomography-CT revealed no mass lesions in the other organs. Blood laboratory examinations were within normal ranges including tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and 125); white blood cell counts, 6800/μL; C-reactive protein, 0.09 mg/dL; and soluble interleukin-2 receptor, 342 U/mL. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses disclosed a total protein level of 68 mg/dL, a glucose level of 45 mg/mL, and cell counts of 178 mononuclear cells/mm3 and 70 polymorphonuclear cells/mm3, but the cytology revealed no tumor cells. Both blood and CSF cultures were negative.
As a differential diagnosis, a solitary dural metastasis of breast cancer could not be ruled out, and close follow-ups were continued. As simple focal seizures of the right upper extremity developed, 1000 mg/day (500mg twice) of levetiracetam was administered. One-month post-admission MRI revealed that the tumor size was unchanged, but peritumoral leptomeningeal gadolinium enhancement was significantly expanded [-]. Because focal seizures could not be controlled even by 3000 mg/day (1500 mg twice) of oral levetiracetam administration, tumor removal was performed. After the left frontal craniotomy, no lesions were revealed on the epidural space. When the dura mater was incised and turned over, a soft and reddish tumor was exposed . Peritumoral subarachnoid space was filled with yellowish semisolid substances . Most of the tumor was excised, but the semisolid substances in the subarachnoid space were only biopsied to avoid brain damage due to the removal . Postoperatively, seizures resolved, and 1-week postsurgery MRI revealed remarkable attenuation of the leptomeningeal enhancement [, upper panel]. CSF findings also improved to a total protein level of 68 mg/dL and cell counts of 4 mononuclear cells/mm3 and 2 polymorphonuclear cells/mm3. Serum markers of autoimmune diseases including IgG1 to IgG4, myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), proteinase 3-ANCA, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, anti-thyroglobulin antibody, anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, and viral antibodies for herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Bass virus were measured, and only an anti-CCP antibody level was high (1000 U/mL). However, the patient had no symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and did not meet the criteria, being followed up. The patient was discharged with no neurological deficits and underwent resection of the breast cancer 3 months later. The patient has passed more than 3 years without recurrence of seizures, leptomeningitis [, lower panel], meningioma, and breast cancer.
The convexity dural-based tumor consisted of angiomatous components with numerous small to medium-sized vascular channels , and microcystic components with microcysts and cobweb-like background , associated with some meningothelial cells. The tumor had neither malignant findings such as increased mitotic activity, nuclear atypia and brain invasion, nor inflammatory cell infiltration into the tumor. In the border zone between the convexity dural-based tumor and the dura mater, however, there were inflammatory infiltrates and formation of some lymph follicles . Infiltration of numerous neutrophils and fibrinous exudates was also observed in the subarachnoid space .
Immunohistochemical study was performed using the Bench Mark ULTRA auto-stainer (Ventana, Tucson, AZ, USA) and the used antibodies were listed in . Tumor cells were positive for vimentin and slightly positive for epithelial membrane antigen , and vascular endothelial cells were positive for CD34 . Glial fibrillary acidic protein was negative, and MIB-1 index was <1% in the convexity dural-based tumor. Based on the above findings, a histological diagnosis of angiomatous meningioma (CNS WHO Grade 1) was made for the tumor.
On the other hand, inflammatory cells infiltrating into the border zone between the tumor and the dura mater were positive for CD3 (T-cell-associated antigen; ) and CD20 (B-cell-associated antigen; ), and negative for CD15 (neutrophil-associated antigen; ); and those around lymph follicles were positive for CD68 (histocyte-associated antigen; ) and CD138 (plasma cell-associated antigen; ). IgG-positive cells were abundant , of which only 10% were IgG4 positive . In contrast, almost all inflammatory cells infiltrating into the subarachnoid space were positive for CD15 , while almost no cells were positive for CD68 , CD45 (lymphocyte-associated antigen; ), CD20 , and CD138 . Thus, the findings indicated that there were no inflammatory cells within the tumor itself, but the tumor was associated with peritumoral infiltration of inflammatory cells: lymphocytes mainly infiltrated into the border zone between the tumor and the dura mater, and neutrophils infiltrated into the peritumoral subarachnoid space with fibrinous exudates.