In a 55-year-old female patient (Patient 1, see Table ), a sweat test was performed due to recurrent pneumothoraces and bilateral bronchiectasis with mucoid impaction apparent in thoracic computed tomography (CT). Sweat test showed borderline values of sweat chloride two times (52 and 41 mmol/L); therefore, genetic testing for mutations in the CFTR gene was initiated. Indeed, two mutations, F508del and R117H-7T, were detected. Pulmonary function testing revealed a severe obstructive ventilation disorder with a FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 sec) of 27% predicted and respiratory failure with the need for oxygen therapy. Indications of the presence of a liver or pancreas involvement in the context of the underlying disease were not found. The repeatedly determined pancreatic elastase was in normal range (> 200 μg/g). In sputum samples, P. aeruginosa was cultured several times. Serologically, antibodies (Elastase and Exotoxin A) against P. aeruginosa were significantly increased as an indication of chronic respiratory tract infection. The patient reports a long history of disease with shortness of breath, productive cough and recurrent pulmonary infections with frequent antibiotic therapies until the final diagnosis was made. She had used bronchodilators (short- and long-acting beta 2-sympathomimetic agents) and inhaled corticosteroids for many years assuming she suffers from a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) although she was non-smoking and was not exposed to occupational hazards. Due to severe obstructive pulmonary disease the patient has been repeatedly treated with systemic corticosteroids in the past.
In addition to pulmonary involvement, the patient also had a long-standing affection of the paranasal sinuses. Due to chronic infection of the respiratory tract with P. aeruginosa, we initiated an inhalative antibiotic therapy with tobramycin 300 mg twice a day and later changed to colistin 2 MIU twice a day because of an increase of bronchial obstruction. Hypertonic saline 3% and Dornase alfa were introduced for improving airway clearance. Furthermore, with help of the respiratory therapists, the patient learned airway clearance techniques (ACT) to perform this independently. At that time, nearly monthly hospitalization was necessary as the clinical condition worsened.
After diagnosis of the index patient, her twin sister (Patient 2, see Table ) was introduced to us for further diagnostics. Here, too, a borderline sweat test was found (sweat chloride 44 mmol/L). A repeated sweat test showed a nearly normal value (33 mmol/L). Subsequent genetic testing also revealed a compound heterozygosity for F508del and R117H-7T.
This patient had markedly less symptoms such as cough and shortness of breath. Also, no recurrent pulmonary infections were reported. However, chronic nasal congestions and recurrent sinusoidal infections were reported. A CT-scan of the upper respiratory tract revealed chronic pansinusitis with accentuation of the maxillary sinus. The patient has undergone sinus surgery multiple times in the past. In addition, the patient reported to suffer from allergic bronchial asthma, especially in spring. In this regard, there exists an on-demand therapy with an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta-agonist bronchodilator.
Pulmonary function showed only a moderate obstructive ventilation disorder (FEV1 = 74%pred.). A CT-scan of the chest revealed bronchiectasis in both upper lobes and a consolidation in middle lobe. In repeated sputum samples, Staphylococcus aureus was detected. Serologically, the reciprocal antibody-titres against P. aeruginosa were all negative. Notes on exocrine or endocrine pancreatic insufficiency or liver involvement were not documented.
Both patients grew up together under the same conditions and in the same area. Both were non-smokers and were not exposed to any substances harmful to the lungs, privately and professionally. There was no family history. Because of the severity of the lung disease, Patient 1 was unable to do any work and was retired while her twin sister was doing a full-time job.
After diagnosis, both patients were placed on ivacaftor. Initially, the drug was well tolerated by both. Patient 2 showed two to three times elevated liver enzymes (ASAT, ALAT) shortly after administration of ivacaftor 150 mg twice a day, which is why we were forced to reduce the dose of ivacaftor. At half the dose, a normalization of the liver function was recognized. Patient 1 initially complained of a bronchial tightness, which could not be detected any more after approximately 14 days under symptomatic therapy.
After initiation of ivacaftor therapy, the pulmonarily more affected Patient 1 did not show improvement in lung function (see Fig. ). A clinical response of the ivacaftor therapy could be documented by reduction of exacerbation rate, weight gain (+ 6 Kg), improved airway secretion mobilization, a reduction of hospitalization rate and a lower need for antibiotic therapy. Due to the lack of pulmonary response of standard and potentiator-therapy, we decided to list the patient for lung transplantation. Ivacaftor therapy was continued because of its stabilizing effect on the disease state. A sweat test repeated after 6 months now shows a normal value of sweat chloride (20 mmol/L).
The pulmonarily less affected twin sister showed improvement in lung function with an increase in FEV1 and FVC after initiation of therapy (see Fig. ). In the repetition of the sweat test, a normal value could be determined (19 mmol/L), as with the sister, even under half the dose of ivacaftor. The existing chronic paranasal sinus complaints were also declining. In addition, the patient reported an improved daily workload. Inpatient treatment was not necessary before or after treatment initiation with ivacaftor.