A 27-year-old, previously healthy Caucasian woman who was 15+1 weeks into her first pregnancy presented to the emergency room with stabbing right-upper-quadrant abdominal pain of a few days’ duration. The pain did not increase depending on respiration or posture. An abdominal ultrasound confirmed an intact singleton pregnancy, and the findings were otherwise unremarkable. Laboratory tests revealed mild leukocytosis and slightly elevated liver enzymes but no proteinuria . The patient was discharged home with a prescription for acetaminophen. However, the pain increased and was accompanied by nausea and vomiting, prompting another visit to the emergency room the following week. The patient was afebrile (36.5 °C) and normotensive (135/86 mmHg). Her heart rate was 69/minute, and there were no signs of heart failure. Her right upper abdomen was tender with no guarding. The remaining physical including the neurological examination was normal. Again, laboratory analyses showed mild leukocytosis and an increase in liver enzymes and C-reactive protein . The patient was admitted for further diagnostic workup. Her past medical history, including the gynecological and obstetric history, was quite unremarkable, except for an appendectomy. In particular, she and her next of kin had no arterial or venous thromboembolism or rheumatic disease prior. She developed urticaria in response to mefenamic acid, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. Before becoming pregnant, she did not take any medication, but she smoked 10 cigarettes per day. A multivitamin drug including folic acid and iron was prescribed at the beginning of pregnancy. She did not consume alcohol or illicit drugs. The patient was married and worked as a retail assistant.
Inflammation markers and liver enzymes continued to increase over the next few days. Normocytic, normochromic anemia without signs of hemolysis (positive direct antiglobulin test [anti-IgG and anti-C3d] but normal haptoglobin and bilirubin concentrations) and mild-to-moderate thrombopenia emerged. Coagulation studies showed marked prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) to over 100 seconds; however, the prothrombin time was normal, and the fibrinogen concentration increased . There were no bleeding signs clinically. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy combined with endosonography ruled out cholecystitis, cholecysto- and choledocholithiasis, and a dilated biliary tract. Abdominal MRI showed nonspecific alterations in the right liver lobe, possibly corresponding to infection or infarction, splenomegaly, and peripancreatic lymphadenopathy. No valvular lesions were detected by transthoracic echocardiography. No infection with hepatitis A, B, C, D, or E viruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), herpes simplex virus (HSV), parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus (CMV), or Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) was found.
At this time, cholangitis complicated by liver abscess formation was considered the most likely diagnosis of the febrile patient (39.1 °C), and antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanate 2.2 g intravenously tid was initiated, and after 3 days escalated to piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g intravenously tid for a total of 10 days. The vitality of the fetus had been confirmed daily. However, hydrops fetalis and intrauterine growth retardation were detected by ultrasound on the third day after admission.
Increasing abdominal pain required treatment with opioids: oxycodone 10 mg plus naloxone 5 mg orally tid and morphine 2 mg intravenously prn. Anemia and thrombocytopenia worsened, and inflammatory markers and liver enzymes increased . Miscarriage occurred on the fourth day of hospitalization, corresponding to 15+4 gestational weeks, and labor was induced with sulprostone 240 µg/hour intravenous. After expulsion, the patient received a loading dose of 5 g magnesium sulfate intravenous, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion of 16 g magnesium sulfate per day for seizure prophylaxis, since preeclampsia was considered possible at this time. The growth-retarded fetus had no morphological abnormalities otherwise. Transabdominal chorionic villus sampling, which had been performed the preceding day, did not reveal fetal chromosomal aberrations.
Histopathological examination of the placenta, in part removed by curettage, showed a maternal intervillous circulatory disorder with infarctions extending to 15% of its volume. Petechial bleeding was seen on the liver by diagnostic laparoscopy, and a CT scan documented worsening of the liver lesions, including periportal edema . Moreover, small bilateral pleural effusions were present.
Additional blood coagulation tests showed the presence of lupus anticoagulant (dilute Russel viper venom time [dRVVT] ratio of 3.3 [normal range < 1.3]), and anti-cardiolipin IgG and IgM antibodies increased to 55 U/ml and 61 U/ml (normal < 40 U/ml), respectively. Anti-β2 glycoprotein IgM antibodies were elevated as well (35 U/ml, normal < 10 U/ml). Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) or autoantibodies relevant for autoimmune hepatitis were not present.