An 11-year-old male Rwandan, a known patient of multiple hereditary exostoses (MHE), presented to our hospital with a 6-month history of unrelenting bone pain despite treatment with NSAIDs; he later developed (two weeks prior to admission) a dull persistent aching pain and swelling of his left lower thigh that was worse at night and unresponsive to morphine. His parents noticed that he had also lost weight and appetite. There was no history of trauma or a fall. He was diagnosed with MHE at age 3 and had been living a relatively normal life and attending school. None of his siblings or any other member of his family had MHE. His past surgical history was unremarkable. On general examination, he was well nourished, had mild pallor of the mucus membranes, no jaundice, lymphadenopathy, or skin rash. All the other parameters were normal. Examination of the musculoskeletal system revealed normal stature except for the curving deformity of the left leg. There were multiple palpable bony swellings bilaterally on the upper humeri and lower femurs. The lesion on the left distal femur was markedly enlarged and tender, with induration, reddening, and limited range of motion of his knee joint . Repeat X-rays confirmed the presence of bony outgrowths (exostoses) on the medial and lateral aspects of the distal femurs bilaterally and left metaphyseal widening common in this condition as had been previously identified when he was diagnosed at age 3, and further investigations of the left distal femur swelling with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a distinct enhancing lesion in the distal aspect of the left thigh at the site of intense swelling and pain. MRI showed a lesion with hypointense signals on T1WI sequences and has heterogeneous signal intensities with moderate and heterogeneous enhancement on T1WI postcontrast study and on T2WI sequences; the lesion had heterogeneous signal intensities . At surgery, there was a necrotic lesion, and excision biopsy at the site of the left distal femur exostosis was taken . Hematological evaluation was normal except for a mild leukocytosis. The results of the serum biochemical tests were also normal. We did not do genotyping for EXT-1 and EXT-2 due to lack of facilities.
Histopathological examination revealed a characteristic fibrous cartilaginous cap with a broad base (1.293 mm thick), covering a layer of normal appearing marrow and bone below which was a tumor-forming osteoid, an osteoblastic tumor as evidenced by presence of numerous bone spicules of varying maturity. There was also marked cellular atypia, grossly pleomorphic osteoblasts in the marrow with frequent mitoses. These features were those of a high-grade osteoblastic osteosarcoma. In conclusion, histopathological revealed an osteochondroma with an underlying high-grade osteoblastic osteosarcoma involving the marrow cavity .
For staging purposes, CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were done to investigate any presence of metastatic lesions . There were no metastatic deposits in the lungs, abdomen, and pelvis, and this was confirmed with PET scan in India where the patient was referred for specialized bone tumor treatment including limb salvage therapy. He was reevaluated, and the diagnosis of MHE and osteoblastic osteosarcoma confirmed. Whole body PET scan showed metabolically active disease in the distal left femur 8.6 × 8.1 × 16 cms in dimension with features consistent with osteosarcoma, multiple hereditary exostoses with evidence of skip lesions, loco-regional lymph node involvement, and no distant metastases. Histopathological review confirmed the earlier diagnosis of osteochondroma with osteoblastic osteosarcoma. The conclusion was that the patient had clinically localized disease. The following treatment plan was proposed and instituted: initiation with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by limp salvaging surgery and finally adjuvant chemotherapy. He received doxorubicin 35.5 mgs/m2 per day (day 1 and day 2), cisplatin 60 mgs/m2 for 7 days (days 1 and 2), methotrexate 12 gms/m2 per day, etoposide 100 mgs/m2/day for 5 days, and ifosfamide 2.8 gms/m2/day for 5 days followed by Ifosfamide 3 gms/m2/day for 3 days and subsequently pegylated Interferon-α2b 0.5 mcg/kg - 1mcg/kg. He completed a total of six cycles of chemoimmunotherapy.
Our patient is still alive and back at school with no evidence of disease after 11 months of treatment and follow-up and continues to be followed up by the oncologist.