A 54-year-old male, alcohol and tobacco user, was admitted with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus associated with the clinical symptoms of high-grade dysphagia and weight loss of 20 kg. Routine staging was done by computerized tomography (CT)-scan of the thorax and abdomen, ultrasonography, positron emission tomography (PET) scan, esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy and bronchoscopy. Functional evaluation was done by electrocardiogram (ECG), cardiac ultrasonography and spiroergometry.
The CT-scan of the thorax and the mediastinum showed a tumor of the middle third of the esophagus with a suspicion of tumor infiltration of the thoracic aorta and the left main bronchus. However, infiltration of the main bronchus could be excluded by bronchoscopy. Infiltration of the thoracic aorta could also be excluded by MRI-angiography. The CT-scan of the abdomen and the abdominal ultrasound showed no signs of tumor spread. The PET-scan demonstrated a pathological tracer uptake at the level of the middle third of the esophagus with no signs of distal metastasis. Esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy showed a tumor stenosis of 7 cm length, from 30 to 37 cm, and a diameter of 4 – 6 mm, further there was an intraluminal obstruction about more than 50 % which was additional confirmed by an esophagogram.
Transthoracic esophagectomy and 2-field lymphadenectomy was carried out as reported in literature [,]. Intraoperative frozen section showed no residual tumor at the lateral, distal and proximal margins. The mediastinal lymph nodes showed no signs of tumor infiltration. Reconstruction was done by orthotopic gastric pull-up and hand-sewn side to end collar esophago-gastrostomy. In order to perform postoperative early feeding a naso-jejunal catheter was introduced and placed distal to the duodeno-jejunal fold.
During the digital placement of the naso-jejunal feeding catheter a submucosal jejunal nodule with a diameter of 1 cm was detected about 40 cm distal to the duodeno-jejunal fold. The nodule was completely resected by jejunotomy. Intraoperative frozen section showed a submucosal metastasis of the esophagus. Further evaluation of the small intestine and the complete abdominal cavity showed no signs of metastasis.
Finally histopathological work-up of the specimens confirmed the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus and a solitary submucosal jejunal metastasis. Furthermore, the submucosal jejunal metastasis was associated with local submucosal venous and lymphatic infiltration . In immunhistochemical tests the tumor cells showed reaction to CEA and CK 5–6. The definitive staging was T3, N0, M1, L1, G3, R0.
The further course of the patient was uneventful and he could be discharged on the 14th postoperative day. As this was stage IV squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus adjuvant chemotherapy was not offered to the patient . However, a follow-up protocol was initiated with CT-scans every 3-month for the first year.