A 28 year old, healthy Thai male, employed in Israel as an agricultural worker, presented to the emergency room with complaints of nausea, vomiting and diffuse abdominal pain starting 3 days earlier. Past medical history was unremarkable and without mention of recent illness. On presentation, the patient was well oriented in no severe distress, physical examination was notable for epigastric tenderness with guarding. Heart rate was 116 beats/minute, blood pressure 94/59 mm/Hg and a temperature of 37.4°C. The patient was admitted to the surgical department for evaluation. A chest and abdomen CT revealed marked liver enlargement with fatty change, and minimal amounts of pleural and pericardial fluid. No surgical etiology was recognized and due to laboratory findings of renal failure (Creatinine 3.88 mg/dl BUN 119.7 mg/dl), the patient was transferred to the medical department.
Shortly after arrival, the patient's condition deteriorated rapidly to a state of agitation and shock and he was transferred to the intensive care unit. On arrival blood pressure measured 79/45 mm/Hg, pulse 170 beats/minute with episodes of SVT. In addition, the patient developed dyspnea, with a respiratory rate of 48 breaths/minute and anuria. Core temperature measured 33.1°C. Examination revealed marked peripheral cyanosis, distended jugular veins with cool extremities. Air entry to both lungs was reduced and palpation of the abdomen was noted for tenderness and an enlarged liver. Laboratory analysis showed lactic acidosis (pH 7.22, lactate 129 mg/dl), renal failure (creatinine 2.11 mg/dl), and rhabdomyolysis (CPK 3,205 IU/l). Liver function tests and coagulation indices were also disturbed ( total bilirubin 2.74, direct bilirubin 1.03 mg/dl, AST 1169 IU/l, ALT 890 IU/l, LDH 1743 IU/l, INR 1.7, factor V level 18%,). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was within normal limits. Factor V levels continued to decline to a nadir of 5%. The above laboratory results, in combination with encephalopathy, indicated fulminant hepatic failure accompanied by multi-system organ failure.
The patient failed a trial of positive pressure ventilation and was subsequently intubated and ventilated mechanically. A Swan-Ganz catheter was inserted and fluid resuscitation started, steroids and vasopressors were given. Echocardiography was used to rule out pericardial tamponade; normal ventricular and valvular function was demonstrated. Continuous hemodiafiltration was started and switched to standard hemodialysis a week later. A tracheotomy was later performed due to the need for prolonged ventilation. Blood, urine, sputum and peritoneal fluid aspirate were cultured and gram and Ziell-Nielsen stained. Empiric antibiotic therapy was then started. Culture results were negative. Serologic testing for acute or chronic infection with viral hepatitis types A, B and C, HIV, Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus returned negative. Further serologic testing for Ricketsia conorii, Coxiella burnetii were also negative. A thick film smear for blood-borne parasites and stool collection for ova and parasites were negative. Due to a high osmolar gap, levels of methanol, ethylene glycol and acetyl salicylic acid were checked and no traces were found.
A health bureau inspector was sent to the residence of the patient and found a stock of canned food the patient consumed almost exclusively for a period of months. Specimens were examined at the ministry of health. AFB1 was found at a level of 19.6 ppb (allowed level < 5 ppb). The patient's condition gradually improved on supportive treatment. Vasopressors were stopped and dialysis discontinued after blood pressure, renal function and CPK values returned to normal. Liver function tests improved markedly. After 21 days of mechanical ventilation the patient was weaned and the tracheotomy closed on the 36th day. The patient was returned to the medical department for observation and physiotherapy. No apparent sequels were observed other than mild residual hypertension. The patient was discharged on day 45.