A 59-year-old man with no comorbidities was referred to our centre with a peri-prosthetic joint infection of the knee. Patient initially underwent index TKA for uncomplicated varus deformity of the knee at an outside hospital. Patient had a sinus tract and persistent wound discharge for 30 days post-surgery, when he presented to our institute for which he was confirmed to have periprosthetic joint infection as per MSIS criteria . Patient was planned for 2-stage revision TKA, and Stage-1 revision was performed with implant removal and placement of an antibiotic cement spacer . The second stage surgery was performed after eradication of infection 8-weeks later, with the implantation of a Total Condylar III prosthesis (DePuy Johnson and Johnson, Warsaw, Ind) with femoral and tibial extension stems .
The patient had a painless, stable and well-functioning joint for two-and-a-half years after revision surgery. Two-and-a-half years post-revision, patient presented to us with pain, knee effusions and complaints of instability. The pain was insidious in onset and gradually progressive in severity, and classically presented as start-up pain. On examination, he had a varus thrust gait, joint effusion with medial joint line tenderness, along with a palpable “clicking” sensation during passive range of motion of the knee.
Radiographs during intermediate (1 year) follow-up appeared normal except for a slightly undersized femoral stem, without evidence of component loosening . Plain radiographs of the knee at 2.5 years follow-up showed complete disengagement and migration of the modular femoral locking bolt into the knee joint cavity, along with osteolysis around the femoral component and extension stem .
Prosthetic joint infection was ruled out with normal C-reactive protein (CRP), Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) as per MSIS criteria.
Re-revision TKA surgery was planned with a diagnosis of aseptic loosening secondary to modular femoral implant failure. The knee joint was exposed through medial para-patellar approach. The distal femur screw was found lying freely in the joint cavity , disengaged from the femoral component . The polyethylene insert showed some delamination No metallosis or synovitis was noted. The femoral component was grossly loose and the extension stem could be easily extracted without any instrumentation. The tibial component was well fixed and did not necessitate revision. The cement mantle of the femoral component and in the medullary canal was removed and the femur prepared for re-implantation with new prosthesis and new wider diameter femur stem (Size 3 TC-3 Modular femur with cemented extension stem). The bone loss did not necessitate the use of femoral sleeves. The immediate post-operative X-ray is shown in .
Patient was mobilized immediately post-surgery and was allowed to bear full weight on the first post-operative day. The immediate post-operative period and early follow-up was uneventful without wound healing complications. At final follow-up of 21 months (1 year, 9 months) patient is walking without pain or instability, with 0-100 degrees active knee ROM.