A 91-year-old Caucasian female with a history of CLL diagnosed 14 years ago, hypothyroidism, glaucoma, and severe osteoarthritis of spine presented to ER, 24 hrs after receiving first chemotherapy for her CLL with chlorambucil in the setting of recent worsening of lymphocytosis, anemia, and exertional dyspnea, with complaints of nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy. There was no diarrhea, abdomen pain, fever, and chills. She had completed a course of Bactrim for UTI a week ago. There were no recent changes in home medications. Vital signs were within normal limits, and systemic physical examination was unremarkable except for dry mucous membrane in ER. She received a liter of normal saline bolus and was started on maintenance normal saline at 75 ml/hr. She started to feel short of breath and wheezy while in ER. Her oxygen saturation dropped to 85% on room air, which was treated with bronchodilators. Upon initial workup, she was found to have leukocytosis of 210 × 103 cells/μL with 96% lymphocytes, along with chronic anemia with hemoglobin of 8.1 and hematocrit of 28. Her electrolytes and renal function were normal with Na of 137 meq/L, K of 4.6 meq/L, BUN of 15 mg/dL, and Cr of 0.8 mg/dL. CXR was unremarkable. Liver function tests were within normal limits. Uric acid was 2.8 mg/dL, and phosphorus was 2.9 mg/dL. The patient got progressively short of breath overnight after admission and was hypoxic. She was, therefore, evaluated for pulmonary embolism based on her risk profile. CTA chest was negative for pulmonary embolism. This revealed diffuse centrilobular emphysematous changes and bibasilar atelectasis. Patient's care was escalated to intensive care, and noninvasive ventilation was initiated. Repeat basic metabolic panel this time revealed K of 6.6 meq/L. Rest of labs including creatinine were essentially within normal limits. The basic metabolic panel was repeated again in 3 hrs, which revealed K of 8.5. EKG did not demonstrate peaked T waves, prolonged QRS interval, or evidence of heart block. She was treated with intravenous calcium gluconate, albuterol nebulization, IV insulin, IV dextrose, IV Lasix, and sodium polystyrene. Her K remained persistently high in 8 meq/dl most of the day despite medical management. When her K rose to 9.1 overnight, a decision was made to proceed to emergent dialysis. Interestingly, her creatinine remained stable throughout, and she was not oliguric. She received 4 hrs of hemodialysis with 2 K bath. Immediately after dialysis, she had a run of supraventricular tachycardia with a heart rate of 130, which did not improve with adenosine. Her potassium by arterial blood gas was 3.0 meq/dL, and K on basic metabolic panel was 3.1 an hour after hemodialysis. Potassium was supplemented intravenously, and she was also loaded with digoxin following which she converted to sinus rhythm. She sustained a demand ischemia with troponins going up to 10 after this event. No cardiac catheterization or ischemic workup was done, as she was asymptomatic after resolution of SVT. Her plasma K was between 3.5 and 4.7 for next six days prior to discharge home from hospital.