A 71-year-old male, non-smoker, with a previous history of cardiac ischemia was admitted for a THA. The patient was positioned in the supine position on a traction table. Surgery was performed under general anaesthesia through the Direct Anterior Approach. The patient received a fully hydroxyapatite-coated uncemented stem (Corail®; Depuy Orthopaedics Inc, Warsaw, USA), an uncemented cup (Pinnacle®; Depuy Orthopaedics Inc, Warsaw, USA), and a ceramic-highly-crosslinked polyethylene bearing surface . The operation was uneventful and within usual time limits (55mn). At the end of the operation, before skin closure, 40 ml of a multimodal drug cocktail solution containing 60 mg of 0.5% levobupivacain (Chirocaine®, Abott, Rungis Cedex, France), 30 mg of ketorolac (30 mg/ml; Toradol®, Roche), and 0.1 mg of epinephrine (0,1 mg/ml; Adrenalin®, NM Pharma) was injected for perioperative pain control. The mixture was infiltrated into soft tissues as follows: 5 mL anteriorly to the rectus femoris muscle, 5 mL to the anterior capsule, 5 mL to tensor fascia lata, 5 mL to the postero-superior capsule, 10 mL to the anterior subcutaneous border, and 10 mL to the posterior subcutaneous border. Low molecular weight heparin was used to prevent deep venous thrombosis (enoxaparin SC 40 mg daily). On day 5 postoperatively, the patient presented with fever and abdominal pain and was diagnosed with acute diverticulitis. He was treated initially with an antibiotic regimen of intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g 1x/day and metronidazole 500 mg 3x/day for two days. Ceftriaxone treatment was stopped and he was started on ciprofloxacin PO 500 mg 2x/day and metronidazole was continued PO at the same doses for an additional 6 days. On day 8 postoperatively, while under the latter treatment for acute diverticulitis, the patient developed an extensive humid necrosis of the skin incision, about 6 × 9 cm in diameter, which was associated with a very mild subcutaneous hematoma . The patient was apyretic. There was a local erythema surrounding the incision site without any purulent discharge. There was no acute increase in his inflammatory parameters with a white blood cell count (WBC) at 20G/l and C-reactive protein at 60 mg/l. An aspiration of the hip joint with synovial fluid analysis was conducted. The bacterial culture of synovial and blood were negative and the WBC count within the joint fluid was 4650 cells/µl. A broad range bacterial PCR analysis was also negative. Based on these evaluations, the possibility of a joint infection was excluded. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) angiography showed patent iliac and femoral vessels without significant stenosis.
Considering the presence of a large skin necrosis and the high risk of infection of the underlying hip joint, we decided to perform a single-staged surgical debridement and reconstruction of the skin and soft tissue defect using a pedicled fasciocutaneous anterolateral thigh flap (ALT) of about 15 × 6 cm . Surgical reconstruction was performed 12 days after the index procedure. The donor site was closed primarily and a suction drainage was placed. A doppler ultrasonographic control of the flap was regularly performed during the first two days and confirmed it was well vascularised. Despite initial favourable evolution, the patient presented a wound dehiscence two weeks later at the donor site without any infection and he underwent a revision surgery during which the ALT flap was mobilised and an additional skin flap was used for a tension free closure . He received broad spectrum prophylactic intravenous antibiotic therapy with Piperacilline-Tazobactam 4.5 g 3x/day and Vancomycine 1 g 2x/day for twelve days. Thereafter, the surgical incisions healed well with no further complications and he began walking with support 1 week after. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital unit. The skin maintained a satisfactory appearance at 2 months and 1 year . One year after the operation, hip range of motion was 90-0-0 (flexion/extension), 30-0-20 (external/internal rotation), 30-0-10 (abduction/adduction) and the patient was walking with no support. X-ray of the pelvis and hip joint showed a normal prosthesis without any signs of loosening, bone destruction or displaced prosthetic parts.