A 45-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history and no prior surgeries has been consistently experiencing painless gross hematuria and discharge of blood clots following ejaculation since June 2020. He did not complain of hematospermia. Three months following the symptom onset, he received a medical examination at a urology clinic due to the presence of gross hematuria and urinary retention. Magnetic resonance imaging and cystourethroscopy could not confirm the cause of hematuria. Subsequently, for approximately 9 months, he remained unaware of hematuria cases.
In June 2021, the patient was referred to our clinic due to a recurrence of gross hematuria and urinary retention after ejaculation. His physical vital signs were within normal ranges, and both his abdominal and external genital areas were normal. The diameter of the urethral opening was also within the normal range. Laboratory analyses of midstream urine, as well as biochemical, hematological, and coagulation parameters, yielded normal results. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and computed tomography scans showed no abnormalities. We performed a procedure wherein we artificially induced an erection by injecting alprostadil alfadex into the corpus cavernosum after securing the base of the penis. Subsequently, cystourethroscopy was performed. The examination revealed the presence of a 6-mm isolated sessile lesion with varicose veins between the distal end of the verumontanum and the 6 o'clock position of the external sphincter . No lesions were detected within the bladder. As the patient's symptoms had resolved at this point, no treatment was administered.
In January 2023, the patient was re-examined due to the recurrence of gross hematuria after erections. Cystourethroscopy conducted after inducing an artificial erection yielded results consistent with the previous observation. However, a transrectal power Doppler sonography revealed a strong blood flow near the apex of the prostate gland. In March 2023, we excised the lesion while the patient was under general anesthesia. Artificially inducing an erection enabled us to clearly identify an enlarged vascular lesion with varicose veins between the verumontanum and external sphincter . Transurethral resection was performed, extending the excision close to the verumontanum . Following the surgery, a Foley catheter was retained for 4 days. Histopathological examination revealed that structures comprised an anastomosis network of vascular spaces of varying sizes, lined with endothelial cells and filled with blood. This observation aligned with the characteristics of urethral hemangioma . No signs of malignancy were detected. At the follow-up visit after 1 month, the patient was asymptomatic (no hematuria after ejaculation), and cystoscopy did not detect any new lesions.