We describe a 36-year-old female who presented to the outpatient clinic with a left thyroid nodule. Initial labs were requested at the first visit, and they included thyroid function assessment and serum prolactin assessment. Thyroid function was assessed via measurement of the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and was found to be 0.78 uIU/ml which is within the normal reference range (0.35–4.9 uIU/ml). Serum prolactin was found to be elevated with a level of 27.34 ng/ml which is above the reference range (5.18–26.53 ng/ml). The patient had no previous personal history of hyperparathyroidism but no any other co-morbidities and had no family history of any similar presentation. Fine needle aspiration (FNAC) from the prominent left thyroid nodule, grossly three syringes contained 0.1 ml hemorrhagic fluid where seen, and cytology was suspicious for a follicular neoplasm of Hürthle cell type. A preoperative ultrasound of the thyroid was performed and showed a left paratracheal infra-thyroid lesion which raised suspicion of for a left parathyroid adenoma, given the history of hyperparathyroidism associated. Both a Tc-99m-MIBI parathyroid scan (a and c) and Tc-99m thyroid scan (b and d) were performed. A left total thyroidectomy was performed (a) first, then subsequently the parathyroid adenoma was localized. For localization of the parathyroid adenoma, first the recurrent laryngeal nerve was identified and dissected through its course starting from berry's ligament down to the superior mediastinum (b). The parathyroid was deep down in the mediastinum so it was pulled upward and then ligated from its pedicle (c). Intra-operative parathyroid hormone decreased by >50 % from 531.5 pg/ml iPTH Stat to 39.8 pg/ml iPTH Stat which is diagnostic for proper localization. Two specimens were sent for histopathological evaluation. The first specimen was from the left inferior parathyroid excision. Gross evaluation showed fibrofatty tissue and cut sections showed capsulated brownish nodules. Histopathological evaluation confirmed the diagnosis of parathyroid adenoma (a). The second specimen was from the total thyroidectomy. Gross evaluation was done on two separate thyroid lobes. Grossly, both lobes showed ill-defined whitish nodules. Histopathological evaluation revealed that the presence of papillary microcarcinoma of a size of 0.8 cm and pathologic staging to be pT1a, pNx, pMx.