An eighteen-year-old woman was brought to the Emergency Department (ED) of a tertiary level hospital in a largely agricultural region of Nepal with an alleged history of chlorpyriphos poisoning. She had injected herself with the compound. At the time of presentation, it was uncertain whether the patient gave herself an intravenous, subcutaneous, or intramuscular dose of chlorpyriphos. However, as a professional paramedic it is likely that she was attempting intravenous administration since she had the expertise and access to syringes and needles.
The exposure reportedly occurred 24 hours prior to presentation, during an attempted suicide. She had presented with a few episodes of vomiting and lacrimation at the rural hospital. Her initial management for the poisoning was done with atropine and pralidoxime (2-PAM). Nasogastric suction and Foley catheterisation was done at the rural district hospital. Intravenous access was secured. She was then referred for higher level of intensive care to a tertiary care centre.
On presentation to our hospital she was alert, well oriented, and cooperative, with a Glasgow coma score of 15. Her vital signs were stable (Pulse: 76 beats per minute, BP: 110/70 mmHg, RR: 14 breaths per minute, Temperature: 99°F, SPO2: 98% on room air). Pupils were of normal size and reactive to light bilaterally. Plantar reflexes and deep tendon reflexes were normal bilaterally. There were no fasciculations. Examination of the chest showed bilateral equal air entry with no crepitation or wheezing. As she had minimal features of OP poisoning, atropine was not continued as a treatment.
Investigations at admission showed normal renal function, liver function, and normal serum levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.40, PO2: 95 mmHg and PCO2 of 37 mmHg. Her cholinesterase levels were not assayed due to unavailability of the test at our facility. After 12 hours of symptom-free interval, she developed swelling at the OP injection site . Her total leukocyte count was measured, which resulted as 26,400/cu mm, with 77% neutrophils and 23% lymphocytes. The injection site was warm to touch and erythematous, but without fluctuance. Radiographic analysis with an ultrasound was done to rule out an abscess, foreign bodies, or subcutaneous air. Even though there was no fever, a diagnosis of cellulitis, combined with irritant dermatitis due to the hydrocarbon component of the OP solvents, was suspected. The patient was given intravenous antibiotics antibiotics to cover a broad spectrum of microbial agents (cloxacillin and metronidazole) as well as oral Ibuprofen for pain.
After seven days of treatment, the patient developed worsening swelling and increased pain. Her motor function as measured via the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale on the involved hand was 3/5 in comparison to the uninvolved contralateral limb (4/5). She also developed fever recorded up to 101°F. Her daily total leucocyte counts had no decreasing trends despite antibiotic treatment, which triggered evaluation for an abscess at the injection site. Ultrasound-guided aspiration of the lesion was done, and 5 mL of pus was aspirated followed by incision and debridement. Her clinical course after that was uneventful. She was discharged after 12 days of hospitalization.
Following her clinical recovery, she was evaluated by psychiatrists and it was revealed that injection of poison was an impulsive act due to familial disputes. Follow up visit was planned after 1 week of daily dressing changes and oral antibiotics at home.