A fit and well 59-year-old man presented with headaches and fevers of 2 weeks duration to hospital. The headaches were a pressure-like sensation, of gradual onset, radiating to the jaw with maximal tenderness in the temporal region. There was no associated photophobia or neck stiffness. He was pyrexial on assessment. A provisional diagnosis of giant cell arteritis (GCA) was made and he was commenced on prednisolone 40 mg daily to await a temporal artery biopsy.
Six days later, he represented with chest pain to hospital. It was of 5 days duration, sharp in character, radiated to the jaw and shoulder and was worse on lying flat. There was no exertional tendency to the pain. There was no associated shortness of breath.
The fever and headaches were ongoing. Recent unintentional weight loss was reported.
A 12 lead ECG showed sinus rhythm, PR depression and ST-segment elevation across all leads . A clinical diagnosis of acute pericarditis was made.
Chest X-ray showed bilateral blunting of the costophrenic angles. Laboratory results showed elevated white cells (WCC) at 17.1 × 109/L2–10 and a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) at 149 mg/L (<5). Two separate blood cultures from admission were negative. He had normal renal and liver function tests. High sensitivity troponin T was slightly elevated at 24 ng/L (<14 ng/L).
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no acute abnormality.
The patient was treated with Ibuprofen 400 mg three times a day and the previously commenced prednisolone was reduced to 20 mg daily.
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a small pericardial effusion measured at 1.2 cm posterior to the left ventricle (LV) and 0.6 cm behind the right atrium (RA) with no associated haemodynamic compromise. Left ventricular systolic function was normal and ejection fraction measured at >55%. No thrombus was seen.
A computed tomography (CT) Chest–Abdomen–Pelvis was performed to investigate for malignancy due to pyrexia and weight loss. This investigation showed a 30 × 13 × 50 mm lesion in the pericardial space lateral to the RA. On CT this was thought to be a mass of unclear aetiology.
A contrast enhanced cardiac MRI was arranged . It showed a thickened pericardium with pericardial enhancement on late gadolinium enhancement. Short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging showed pericardial oedema. There was myocardial oedema in the right atrium and basal inferior wall of the right ventricle on STIR imaging. A soft tissue mass was seen around the posterior wall of the RA. It had higher signal than tissue on T2 and STIR images. No blood supply was seen on perfusion imaging.
The overall appearance was of myopericarditis and a right atrial mural thrombus. Anticoagulation was not commenced. This decision was based on the MRI appearances of the thrombus; that it did not appear mobile and appeared attached to the atrial free wall. Colchicine 500 μg twice daily was added to Ibuprofen and Prednisolone after the cardiac MRI findings.
The cardiac MRI was repeated after 1 week to assess for change. The patient continued to be intermittently pyrexial and complain of chest pains and headache. There was no improvement in the myopericardial inflammation in comparison to the previous MRI.
Two weeks after admission, inflammatory markers remained high; WCC 21.9 × 109/L and CRP 183 mg/L and five fevers had been observed. At this time, two sets of peripheral blood cultures grew Listeria monocytogenes. It was a fully sensitive organism. On review by the infectious diseases team, a lumbar puncture was not performed as there were no signs of meningism. After consultation with microbiology, he was treated with IV amoxicillin 2 g three times daily for 2 weeks and then 2 weeks of oral linezolid 600 mg twice daily. Ibuprofen and colchicine were continued. Investigations for immunosuppression (HIV, Epstein-Barr Virus, hepatic cirrhosis, immunoglobulins, blood film, cancer) were negative.
The patient improved clinically and biochemically when started on antibiotics. WCC was 13.9 × 109/L and CRP 3 mg/L on completion of IV antibiotics and no further fevers were recorded. He was discharged home to complete the 2 weeks of linezolid.
A follow-up cardiac MRI was performed after completing antibiotics (6 weeks after admission). This showed improvement of myopericardial inflammation and right atrial mural thrombus had entirely resolved.
The patient recovered well from myopericarditis and has reached end of follow-up.