A 48-year-old Asian male with a history of eczema, exercise-induced asthma, and rhinoconjunctivitis was referred due to concern for new onset cow’s milk allergy. He works as a physician in a hospital/office-based setting and has no known history of Immunoglobulin E (IgE) mediated food allergy (including cow’s milk and tree nut/peanut). His eczema is mild, involving the hands which typically flares in the winter with excess handwashing and a dry/cold environment.
He presented with four episodes of allergic/anaphylactic reactions within 20 min after eating ice cream. The first two reactions were after eating ice cream cake which brought on immediate respiratory symptoms including shortness of breath, chest tightness and wheeze. His third and fourth reactions were similar and occurred after eating nut-free ice cream with immediate onset oral pruritus, oropharyngeal swelling and asthmatic symptoms (shortness of breath, chest tightness and wheeze). His respiratory symptoms were responsive to salbutamol and symptoms resolved over the course of 1–2 h.
On questioning, during the initial consultation, the patient realized he had taken a lactase enzyme supplement prior to each reaction. Non-medical ingredients in the supplement included: included dextrose, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose (50 mg), calcium stearate, and natural mint flavour. He had mild gastrointestinal upset in the past with ice cream so took the supplement as a diagnostic trial. The patient had not consumed lactase enzyme supplements prior to his first reaction however he does handle the lactase enzyme supplements for his son who is lactose intolerant. The patient continued to consume cow’s milk products including ice cream with no issue. He also continued to tolerate tree nuts and peanut which can commonly cross-contaminate ice cream. He consumes peppermint/mint in various forms without issue.
The patient was tested with a saline slurry made from a lactase supplement used prior to his reactions, revealing a positive wheal and flare reaction (6 mm in diameter). Histamine and saline controls were appropriate. Based on a compatible clinical history and skin testing we diagnosed the patient with a supplemental lactase allergy.
We recommended avoidance of lactase supplements, which the patient was agreeable to since lactose intolerance wasn’t a significant issue for him. He has been avoiding lactase supplements since with no further allergic reactions.