A 30-year-old Saudi man visited the emergency room with an erection that had lasted more than 4 hours. The erection was painful, and preliminary examination established that he was experiencing ischemic priapism. Moreover, the patient described having a history of priapism dating back to the age of 7.
The diagnosis in this case was based on physical examination and patient history. The patient reported severe pain and persistent erection. The patient was already aware of the condition and reported having last experienced the condition at the age of 26 years 4 years ago. The patient acknowledged having received aspiration and irrigation the first time he experienced the condition, followed by the use of different approaches to control the condition. When diagnosing priapism, physical observation of an unintentionally erect penis for a disproportionate duration is the most direct basis for the diagnosis. Typically, a diagnosis process will proceed with the acquisition of patient clinical history, physical examination, and consideration of other characteristics that define the clinical presentation of the condition . Based on the results of the diagnosis, a treatment plan is often developed. When making a diagnosis, the practitioner is concerned with differentiating between ischemic and nonischemic priapism . This is because the former represents a urological emergency, whereas the latter does not. In some cases, radiological and laboratory examinations may be conducted. In this patient’s case, no radiological or laboratory tests were conducted.
The clinical history of the patient and the physical examination of the penis are vital in delineating the features of the condition’s presentation. Practitioners should inquire about the presence of pain, duration of the condition, prior episodes, use and observed success of the used pain-relieving maneuvers, existing causal conditions, and the clinical treatment that was previously used . The clinical practitioner should also establish whether the patient has been using any erotogenic therapies from prescription or nonprescription sources. It is important to establish the erectile function status of the patient before priapism episodes . The presence of pain is indicative of ischemic priapism, and physical inspection may involve palpation of the penis to get information about the extent of rigidity. In nonischemic priapism cases, the presentation is characterized by a partially erect, tumescent, nontender corpora cavernosa. Perineal, abdominal, and rectal examinations may be vital in determining signs of trauma . When laboratory testing has been incorporated into the diagnosis, a number of procedures are conducted, including a complete blood count to determine whether there is an acute infection or hematologic abnormality present in the body . The presence of sickle cells in cases of priapism may be symbolized by the reticulocyte count and hemoglobin electrophoresis . Such tests are a standard practice recommended to all male patients who attend clinics with the presentation of priapism. However, when the priapism is obviously acknowledged as in this patient’s case, the focus shifts to developing a treatment plan for the patient.
Typically, the treatment approaches for priapism are based on the diagnostic category and differ depending on whether the condition is ischemic or nonischemic. In most cases, ischemic priapism is managed through the elimination of the ischemic effects of the compartment syndrome that are present in the penis . For major episodes as in this patient’s case, initial intervention often tends to involve penile aspiration, which may be combined with the drainage of blood. These approaches serve as a vital first step in relieving pain and counteracting local acidotic and anoxic metabolic derangements . The practitioner at this point can take samples for cavernous blood gas testing. When the patient was 7 years old, he had gone to the emergency room many times regarding priapism, especially in the night, and his blood had a combination of aspiration and irrigation from around the penis, then was discharged . The recurrence of the condition at the age of 26 received a different management approach because the managing doctor first advised him to take walks and go up and down the stairs. After the condition persisted, the doctor prescribed sildenafil citrate, a prescription that would then be changed to cyproterone acetate 50 mg twice daily.
For the management of the condition in this patient, first-line therapy was invoked whereby penile aspiration in combination with an extracavernous α-agonist injection was conducted. A preceding dorsal nerve block was performed for anesthetic purposes. Once the patient’s condition stabilized, a dose of cyproterone acetate 50 mg daily for the next three weeks was recommended. The recommended dosage was based on existing literature on the treatment of ischemic priapism in the general population .
The patient was immediately stabilized, and the use of a tablet of cyproterone acetate 50 mg daily for 1 week was recommended. Follow-up was done after 1 week, when the patient reported that the condition had subsided. He was then asked to reduce the dosage to one tablet per week. The next follow-up was done after a two months, where the patient stated that the condition only reappeared after he stopped using the medication 3 weeks after consistent use of the medication for the first month. However, after going through the dosage consistently for 1 week, the condition disappeared. It has been 1 year since the condition was last reported. It is worth mentioning that the use of the medication has not affected the patient’s sexual activity; he reported having sex twice per week. However, the patient admits that he is always afraid that the condition may recur.