A 41-year-old male patient attended the Neuropsychiatry Department of Ali Abad Teaching Hospital, Kabul, Afghanistan with rapidly progressive dementia, akinetic mutism, and difficulty walking and speaking. Due to his difficulty speaking and mutism, he was unable to provide additional information. Per his son, his problem began with forgetfulness, disorganized behavior, and disorganized speech 7 months earlier which progressed rapidly and was accompanied by aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, and akinetic mutism in the last 2 months. Throughout this period, he was admitted to different governmental and private hospitals under different conditions, including herpes encephalitis, schizophrenia, and frontotemporal dementia, and had received several medicines but his condition deteriorated quickly day by day. Nothing significant was found in his past medical, drug, and family history. In the years before the onset of the current illness, he had not had any operations including eye operations or stitching of wounds. He had not received an organ or tissue transplant, including a corneal or bone marrow transplant. He had not received a blood transfusion (blood components or plasma products), transfusion of albumin, or immunoglobulin. No blood relatives of the patient died with dementia or are alive with dementia. He had no history of traveling outside of Afghanistan.
On general physical examination, the patient seemed awake and likely aware. His vital signs were normal, and no abnormality was found in the examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems. On neurologic examination, hypertonia, hyperreflexia, frontal ataxia, bradykinesia, gait apraxia, and aphasia were noted. Routine lab investigations including full blood count, fasting plasma glucose, serum electrolytes, liver function test, renal function test Vitamin B12 level, and thyroid function test were within normal ranges. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal cells, protein, and glucose.
A report of the MRI which was done 6 months before when he was suspected of suffering from herpes simplex encephalitis showed mild volume loss, flair high signal and patchy diffusion restriction in bilateral frontotemporal lobes. Based on clinical features and rapid symptoms progression the likely diagnosis of CJD was suspected. Follow-up MRI and electroencephalography (EEG) were advised. Follow-up MRI revealed features of diffuse cortical injury of both cerebral hemispheres evident by diffusion restriction also involving bilateral corpus striatum on Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) ; diffuse cortical injury evident by diffusion restriction on Susceptibility Weighted Imaging (SWI) ; Diffuse cortical hyperintensity on Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) ; with evidence of cerebral volume loss on T2 WI . EEG showed lateralized periodic theta slow waves on the right side.
According to the centers for disease control and prevention (CDC), diagnostic criteria for CJD , and the diagnosis of probable sporadic CJD was established. Supportive care and the following symptomatic treatment protocol were planned: donepezil 5 mg initially and increased up to 10 mg gradually; memantine 5 mg initially and increased up to 20 mg gradually; quetiapine 25 mg daily. After a 1-month follow up the patient’s condition deteriorated significantly and become completely bedridden and incontinent. The patient died after an illness duration of approximately 13 months.