A 49-year-old Japanese woman on renal dialysis had a 4-month history of tinnitus and hearing loss. Computed tomography (CT) showed a high-density 35-mm diameter tumor in the pineal region and obstructive hydrocephalus . The tumor was heterogeneously hyperintense on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and low- and iso-mixed intense on T2-weighted images. On T2* images, it contained very low intensity areas suggestive of hemorrhagic components . No other intracranial lesions including lesions underlying her acoustic symptoms were identified. Her chronic renal failure ruled out enhanced imaging studies. On the basis of our neuroimaging findings, we made a preoperative diagnosis of pineal parenchymal tumor with hemorrhagic components and melanoma.
We used the left occipital transtentorial approach with the patient in the three-quarter prone position. To reduce occipital lobe retraction, an operated side-down approach was used. The incision extended from the inion along the midline and then was curved in a horseshoe fashion back behind the ear. The craniotomy was performed to visualize the transverse and sagittal sinuses through extent in the operative field by rongeur or airdrill. Then, a catheter was placed in the left lateral ventricle. The dura mater was opened with two triangular flaps based on the superior sagittal sinus and the transverse sinus. The incision of the tentorium was made at an angle of 15° to the straight sinus, starting from a point, 15 mm lateral and 15 mm anterior to the junction of straight and transverse sinus, extending upto the tentorial free edge, and then the lateral flap was reflected laterally. After the dense arachnoid over the quadrigeminal cistern was opened, a dark red, easily bleeding solid tumor was found in the pineal region . We successfully dissected the feeders arising from posterior choroidal arteries, removed the tumor subtotally. After 2 weeks later from first operation, endoscopic third ventriculostomy was performed due to persistent hydrocephalus. Her preoperative complaints of hearing disturbance and tinnitus gradually improved after two operations.
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed the tumor to be composed of anaplastic spindle-shaped and epithelioid cells arranged in nests, fascicles, or sheets; they contained variable amounts of cytoplasmic melanin and manifested significant cellular pleomorphism, nuclear atypia, and mitosis (3/10 high-power fields; HPFs).The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for HMB45, Melan-A, and S100 protein. Additionally, the MIB-1 index was 17.4 ± 3.0% .
After surgery, the patient was treated with 36 Gy of whole-brain- and 18 Gy of extended local boost irradiation. Her coexisting renal failure ruled out chemotherapy. A whole-body 18-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan showed no abnormally increased uptake . Meticulous examination of her skin and mucosa by dermatologists found no lesions suggestive of melanoma.
The most recent MRI scans acquired 56 weeks after her initial treatment showed no evidence of recurrence or metastatic lesions .