A 60-year-old man presented to the Department of Nephrology, complaining of severe edema in the lower limbs.
The patient reported that his symptoms had started 3 d prior, accompanied by a decrease of 24 h urine output (estimated to about 800 mL/d). He had self-administered furosemide but achieved no relief of his symptoms, and noted that the edema was gradually increasing.
The patient denied any relevant previous medical history. During the physical examination, we found a symmetrical soft mass on the neck, which produced no pain. The patient reported that the neck mass had appeared 2 years prior and had gradually increased in size over time; he stated that he had not received any particular treatment for it. However, he specified that in the past month the mass had grown in a much more significant manner than before.
The patient had a > 10-year history of severe alcoholism (about 200 mL liquor per day). He reported that in the past month his alcohol consumption had increased significantly, due to work failures. His family history was unremarkable.
The patient was of medium size, with body mass index of 26.22 kg/m2. Both lower extremities had moderate to severe pitting edema, with normal skin temperature and without ulcers or inflammatory exudation. The skin and mucous membranes showed no signs of jaundice or cyanosis. Rash, liver palms and spider moles were also not present. However, there were subcutaneous masses around the neck, located symmetrically; these were soft, immovable, without tenderness, and with clear boundaries . There were no signs of moon face, hirsutism, or purple striae. The liver and spleen were not palpated under the rib and shifting dullness was negative. The remaining physical examinations showed no obvious abnormalities.
Serum test results showed elevated liver enzymes (including aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, and alkaline phosphatase), decreased serum total proteins and albumin, increased blood uric acid, and markers of impaired renal function. Blood routine findings suggested moderate anemia. Tests for coagulation indices, tumor markers, immunoglobulin light chains, thyroid hormones and autoimmune antibodies revealed no abnormalities. Liver fibrosis indices showed increased levels .
Two-dimensional ultrasound examination showed chronic liver damage and peritoneal effusion. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan also showed peritoneal effusion, and was negative for splenomegaly and portal vein expansion. The imaging findings, considered along with the patient’s long-term drinking history, indicated acute exacerbation of CALD. The clinical appearance of symmetrically subcutaneous masses around the neck was compatible with the characteristics of type I MD, which was confirmed by the two dimensional ultrasound and CT .
To further screen out other possible causes of liver damage, we measured viral hepatitis- related antigens and antibodies. The results showed that the patient was negative for hepatitis. The blood vessel color Doppler ultrasound results for both lower extremities were unremarkable.