A 2-year-old female was referred to Beijing Children’s Hospital with chief complaints of fever and jaundice. The patient had experienced fever with chills for 7 days with a peak body temperature of 39.6 °C. Blood samples were taken at the local clinic, which demonstrated a significant elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP, 127.6 mg/L) and white blood cells count (WBC, 38.23 × 10^9/L). Physical examination was performed at our center, which showed remarkable tenderness at the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Laboratory data from blood samples demonstrated the significant elevation of CRP (> 160 mg/L), WBC (52.73 × 10^9/L), ALT (86.9 U/L), AST (91.1 U/L), ALP (1116 U/L), γ-GT (1334.9 U/L), TBil (128.15 µmol/L), DBil (115.93 µmol/L), PT (15.3 S) and APTT (46.2 S) were prolonged, but serum ammonia and amylase were normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed dilation of the common bile duct and intrahepatic bile ducts, with a 0.6 × 0.2 cm bile stone in the common bile duct. MRCP showed pancreas divisum, dilated bile duct and pancreaticobiliary maljunction with the common channel located 1 cm away from the duodenal wall . Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a reversed relationship between the superior mesenteric artery and the superior mesenteric vein, which is a sign of intestinal malrotation . Ertapenem (INVANZ®) for biliary tract infections was administered intravenously for 2 weeks until the laboratory data were normal. Thereafter, laparoscopic resection of the extrahepatic bile duct, Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy and Ladd’s procedure was scheduled.
Operative details: After general anesthesia was induced. In supine position, an umbilical cannula for a 3-dimension telescope was inserted, CO2 pneumoperitoneum pressure and flow rate were ranged from 10 to 12 mmHg and 2.0 to 2.5 L/min, after which three other trocars for instruments were inserted through the right hypochondrial region, right lumbar region at midclavicular line, and left lumbar region at midclavicular line of the abdomen. Inspection of the peritoneal cavity revealed that the duodenojejunal flexure lay to the right of the midline, the cecum was displaced from its usual position in the right lower quadrant to the right epigastrium, with peritoneal folds (Ladd’s bands) crossing from the cecum to duodenum and gallbladder . A Ladd’s procedure (division of peritoneal bands and prophylactic appendectomy) was performed . After lysing the Ladd’s bands, the fusiform dilation of the common bile duct was inspected. Resection of gallbladder and bile ducts was performed until the left and right hepatic duct openings were identified . The umbilical incision was then extended, and a reversed Roux-en-Y anastomosis was performed extra-abdominally, which was 15 cm away from the duodenojejunal flexure with a Roux limb of approximately 20 cm . The bowel was returned to the peritoneal cavity through the umbilical incision, and pneumoperitoneum was reestablished. A hepaticojejunostomy was done laparoscopically, the defect of the mesentery was sutured. Last, a drainage tube was placed underneath the porta hepatis.
Cefoperazone/sulbactam (SULPERAZONE®) and metronidazole (FLAGYL®) were administered intravenously after the operation. The nasogastric tube was withdrawn 5 days after surgery, and the patient was allowed to drink water. The drainage tube was removed 1 week after the operation and a low-fat diet started. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after the operation with no symptoms or abnormalities in laboratory data. There were two follow-up visits 2 months and 12 months after the surgery. Complete blood count, serum biochemistry and coagulation profile remained normal. Abdominal ultrasonography showed no bowel obstruction, evidence of adhesions or volvulus of the midgut. MRCP showed no dilated intrahepatic bile ducts, obstructed biliary-enteric anastomosis or leaks .