An 81-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with mild abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. She had a history of open appendectomy and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. She had received conservative therapy for small bowel obstruction twice in the previous year. Thus, adhesive intestinal obstruction was suspected at admission. A physical examination showed a slightly distended abdomen with diffuse and mild abdominal tenderness. A hematological examination showed elevated inflammatory markers (white blood cell, 17,000/µl; C-reactive protein, 0.63 mg/dl). Abdominal X-ray showed air fluid level of the small intestine. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) demonstrated stenosis and the wall thickness of the terminal ileum and intestinal distention of the proximal small intestine, which was the site that had been affected in the first bowel obstruction event one year previously . Colonoscopy performed 18 months previously at another hospital showed no abnormalities in the colon or rectum. Based on the above findings, recurrence of the small bowel obstruction at the terminal ileum due to adhesion was suspected. Transnasal decompression was attempted as an initial treatment. X-ray with contrast medium revealed stenosis of the ileum . We planned to perform laparoscopic surgery to treat small bowel obstruction. During laparoscopic surgery, no adhesion of the small intestine was observed in the abdominal cavity and telangiectasia was pointed out on the serosa of the terminal ileum. This lesion was palpable as an elastic hard mass when gently grasping it with laparoscopic forceps. . Threfore, partial resection of the intestine was performed. Macroscopic observation of the excised specimen revealed a thickened wall and circumferential ulceration with scarring in the stenotic segment . A histopathological examination showed active inflammation and fibrotic change with lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltration in the intestinal mucosa, lamina propria and subserosa . In addition, a thickened venous wall, stenosis, and obstruction of the venous lumen in the subserosa were observed . Elastica van Gieson staining confirmed the presence of elastic fiber at the site of the thickened venous intima . The wall structure of the veins was similar to that of the arteries, while there were no findings of arteritis. Phlebitis and phlebosclerosis were not observed. These findings were consistent with IMHMV. Retrospectively, we recognized that preoperative CECT showed dilation and winding change of the peripheral veins in the ileocecal region with edematous wall thickening, which supported the diagnosis of IMHMV . The patient had no postoperative complications and left the hospital on the seventh postoperative day. At two years and 8 months after the operation, the patient was well without any additional medication.