A 55-year-old woman presented with the history of left hemicranial headache for the last 2 weeks followed by ptosis of the left eye upper eyelid 5 days before presentation. On examination, she was afebrile, conscious and oriented. The pulse rate was 80 and the blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. No signs of meningeal irritation were present; Left sided oculomotor, trochlear and abducens nerve palsies were present on evaluation of ocular muscles; pupil was spared. Sensory loss in the distribution of ophthalmic subdivision of trigeminal nerve was detected. There was no proptosis or chemosis; visual acuity was 20/20. Respective cranial nerves on the right side and the rest of the neurological examinations were normal. Biomicroscopy and funduscopy were unremarkable. Blood investigation including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, total leukocyte count, hemoglobin, and blood sugar were within normal range. Liver, thyroid and kidney function tests were normal. Serum for antinuclear antibodies was negative; lumbar puncture did not reveal any cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) abnormality. MRI of brain was performed with a 1.5 Tesla MR system applying T1-weighted (T1W) sequence before and after intravenous administration of gadolinium; T2W sequence was applied as routine 5 mm thick sequence in axial and coronal planes and as 1 mm thick axial constructive interference steady state (CISS) sequence. T2W sequence showed hypointense signal intensity lesion in the left cavernous sinus lateral to internal carotid artery ; the lesion was isointense on T1W sequence. Axial CISS image showed the left cavernous sinus lesion as a hypointense signal intensity mass extending towards orbital apex and superior orbital fissure . Postcontrast T1W image showed homogenous enhancement of the lesion in cavernous sinus extending towards the orbital apex [Figures and ]. Patient was put on steroid therapy, initially intravenous methylprednisolone (160 mg) for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg) for 8 weeks with gradual tapering. Patient reported significant relief of pain after 2 days; ophthalmoplegia responded gradually and resolved after 6 weeks when the neuro-ophthalmologic examination was normal. Repeat MRI was normal and consequently the diagnosis of THS was confirmed.