A 56-year-old male with history of multiple myeloma status post-bone marrow transplant on suppressive therapy, hypertension, and peripheral neuropathy presented to the emergency department (ED) after a syncopal episode, where he was found in the bathtub by his family with his eyes rolled back. Upon initial examination, the patient complained of mild chest pain. Upon arrival to the ED, the patient was found to be tachycardic with a pulse of 108 beats per minute, tachypneic with 24 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 95/68 millimeters mercury, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. An electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated ST elevations in V1 through V3 with reciprocal changes in the inferior leads .
High-sensitivity troponins were obtained and were elevated to 0.20 nanograms (ng) per milliliter (mL) (reference range: normal <0.04 ng/mL). The patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory where he underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), which did not reveal severe coronary artery disease but did show hyperdynamic left ventricle with an ejection fraction >70% on ventriculography, tachycardia, and low left ventricular end-diastolic pressure indicating low filling pressures with suspicion for reduced preload. This was concerning for hypovolemia or pulmonary embolus.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest was obtained showing submassive PE as well as right ventricular strain with a right ventricle to left ventricle ratio of 1.2 suggestive of cor pulmonale .
It was later reported after cardiac catheterization that the patient had had increased bilateral leg swelling and discomfort as well as dyspnea on exertion for several weeks preceding his presentation to the ED, which he attributed to his neuropathy following chemotherapy. The patient was started on a continuous heparin infusion, and repeat ECG demonstrated resolution of anterior ischemic changes. Venous duplex ultrasound of the bilateral lower extremities was obtained on hospital day two and demonstrated a partially occlusive venous thrombus in the left popliteal, peroneal, and posterior tibial veins. The patient underwent catheter-assisted thrombolysis on hospital day three. He was started on apixaban 10 milligrams (mg) twice daily for the first week, followed by 5 mg twice daily, and discharged home in stable condition.