Our patient was an 86-year old Caucasian female with multiple comorbidities. Past medical history included arterial hypertension, heart failure (New York Heart Association class III, stage C), obesity, hypercholesterolemia and hyperuricemia. There was no relevant family history.
She was referred to Surgical Consultation due to a peri-umbilical cutaneous ulceration.
She had a long-standing large umbilical hernia but with no previous episodes of incarceration or occlusive symptoms. She noticed a skin lesion adjacent to the umbilicus in the past 2 months with rapid growth and ulceration. She denied any digestive or constitutional symptoms.
Physical examination revealed an exophytic cutaneous tumor with approximately 8 cm in diameter . There was also a large non-reducible umbilical hernia, containing bowel loops and an associated palpable mass within the hernia sac apparently continuous with the cutaneous growth. This hernial mass was painless, firm and adherent to superficial structures and to the abdominal wall, with no pulsatility or fluctuation. There were no other palpable intra-abdominal masses, organomegaly or adenopathy. Examination was otherwise normal.
Further investigation with colonoscopy revealed transverse colon cancer; endoscopic biopsy of the tumor and skin punch biopsy confirmed adenocarcinoma of the colon. Thoracic and abdomino-pelvic computed tomography showed a tumoral mass within the umbilical hernia, with cutaneous infiltration and enlarged regional lymph nodes, but without distant metastasis—cT4bN0M0.
Initially considered for neoadjuvant therapy, rapid local disease progression led to colocutaneous fistulization with total fecal diversion (approximately 1 month), resulting in weight loss and significant quality of life impairment mainly due to colostomy appliance difficulties. The multiple therapeutic options were thoroughly discussed with the patient and family and surgery was decided.
We performed an extended right hemicolectomy with en bloc excision of the hernia sac and infiltrating cutaneous mass . There were no apparent macroscopic intra-abdominal secondary lesions, namely liver or peritoneal metastasis. Considering local conditions and the patients’ co-morbidities we opted for a primary ileocolic side-to-side anastomosis. The remaining rectus sheath was closed primarily without tension, and local advancement skin flaps were necessary for cutaneous closure. Histology revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the colon with direct invasion of the abdominal wall and skin. Lymphovascular invasion was present and four lymph node metastasis were identified (out of 12)—stage IIIC (pT4bN2aMx).
Unfortunately, patient status deteriorated after the 4th post-operative day (POD), with cardiovascular shock and progressive multiple organ failure which led to death on the 7th POD. Although no specific imaging evaluation was performed to exclude the possibility of anastomotic dehiscence, clinical and analytical parameters did not favor this diagnosis.
This case report was reported according to CARE guidelines .