A 6-year-old Arab girl presented to the hospital with abdominal pain for the past month with abdominal enlargement. The patient was already diagnosed with Caroli disease when she was born. She was treated with medications in addition to a routine liver check-up every 3 months since she was born until now. Besides that, she has an atrial septal defect (ASD) discovered at the age of 8 months. She had an exploratory laparotomy with liver biopsy when she was 15 days old, which confirmed the diagnosis of Caroli disease, in addition to the removal of extra fingers at the age of 2 years due to polydactyly (six fingers on each limb). The patient is being treated with ursodeoxycholic acid 250 mg twice every day, ergocalciferol (sterogyl) injection every 3 months, vitamin K injection every 15 days, spironolactone 25 mg twice a day, propranolol 10 mg once a day since last year, and multivitamins once a day. The family history is remarkable; she has two deceased sisters. The first one died at the age of 1 month and had univentricular heart, unknown hepatic lesion, and polydactyly, and the second one died at the age of 1.5 years and had ASD and biliary atresia with Kasai procedure at the age of 2 months. There are no gastrointestinal or hematological diseases to be mentioned in the family. In addition, the parents are cousins. The mother declared that the child was thriving well except for starting to walk at the age of 3 years.
The patient’s physical examination showed brown facies, icterus in the sclera and the skin, mild pallor, hirsutism, white nails, and clubbing of the fingers and toes. The abdomen showed an enlargement and no ascites was found . The percussion of the abdomen was regular except for dullness over the spleen. The palpation showed splenomegaly measuring 10 cm in the mid-clavicle line. The auscultation revealed rough respiratory sounds and a systolic murmur rated 2 out of 6. Full neurological examination including motor function, sensation, reflexes, balance and coordination, cranial nerves, autonomic nervous system, and mental status was normal. Vital signs were measured on admission: (heart rate 95 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, temperature 37 °C).
The investigations started with laboratory tests . Complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear showed pancytopenia. However, the bone marrow biopsy was normal. Esophagoscopy used to be done every 3 months for the past year. In the last one, fourth-grade non-bleeding varices were found. The abdominal ultrasound demonstrated multiple septated cystic formations within the liver containing turbid liquid. It also showed splenomegaly that measured 18 cm. The portal vein diameter was 7 mm, and the splenic vein measured 6 mm. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast showed intrahepatic cystic formations in the right and left lobes . The greatest one measured 7 × 9.5 cm. These cysts have a tubular appearance and connect to the bile ducts inside the liver, which is consistent with Caroli disease. The liver borders are irregular with a cirrhotic look. There is a generalized enlargement of the spleen measuring 17 cm . The kidney, the bladder, and the pancreas are normal. The cardiac ultrasound showed a secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) measuring 11 mm with left-to-right shunting and mild right heart dilatation. The pulmonary flow was 1.8 mm/second. Ejection fraction (EF) was 74%. In addition, no genetic study was carried out of the patient and her deceased siblings previously. The final diagnosis for the recent condition was splenomegaly with hypersplenism.
The patient was scheduled for splenectomy after receiving the pneumococcus, meningococcus, Haemophilus influenza and influenza vaccines. Splenectomy was done through a laparotomy without any complications. The pathology report of the spleen was congestion and splenic hyperplasia. She has been followed for 1 week in the hospital. Her blood test on day 7 came back as the following: hemoglobin 12.8 g/dl, MCV 90 fl, platelets 157.000/mm3, white blood count (WBC) 8500/mm3, total bilirubin 17.6 mg/dl, direct bilirubin 14.4 mg/dl, alanine transaminase (ALT) 112 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 148 U/L. The patient presented the next month with fever and abdominal pain. Ultrasound and CT scan identified hepatic abscesses and biliary fistula. The patient was treated with antibiotics and drainage tube guided by ultrasound, after that, the symptoms resolved and the patient was discharged. The month after that, she also came in with fever, and a culture of the drainage showed Klebsiella and E. coli. She was treated with linezolid, tazocin, metronidazole, amikacin, and colistin. The drainage tube was also pulled out. Her symptoms resolved and lab tests returned normal.