A 25-year-old young male came to our emergency department (ED) in a conscious, anxious state from a nearby town with a history of roadside trauma, a head-on collision while driving a car without wearing the seatbelt, one hour back. The patient complained of a headache, chest pain, and had a bleeding wound on the forehead. On general examination, the patient was conscious, oriented, cooperative, and slight restless, with a pale look. His blood pressure (BP) was 90/60 mmHg, pulse rate (PR) 120/min, blood oxygen saturation 92%, respiratory rate (RR) 20/min, and capillary refill time was 2 seconds. There was no history of loss of consciousness, seizure, vomiting, or ear bleed.
A- Airway: It was patent and cervical spine protected; B- Breathing: There is not any distress and oxygen delivered via face mask; C- Circulation: Patient had hypotension and tachycardia, so one-liter bolus of normal saline administered intravenously; D- Disability: He was alert, moving all limbs; E- Exposure: reddish-blue discoloration over the epigastrium was seen, tenderness, and guarding present were also present.
Head: There was a lacerated bleeding wound (2cm × 1cm × scalp deep) on the forehead with pain and tenderness; Neck: There was not any tenderness and his power was 5/5 in all the four limbs; Chest: It was clear to auscultation bilaterally. there was tenderness in the lower chest. Heart sounds of S1S2 were audible, and there were no additional sounds; Abdomen: There were multiple small round reddish-blue bruises in the epigastrium of diameter 2 cm, with underlying tenderness, guarding, and rigidity; Back: log roll examination was performed. No abnormalities detected; Limbs: there was an abrasion 2cm ×1cm on right hand.
Following differential diagnosis of the state of shock in the ED were considered: neurogenic shock, head injury due to rapid deceleration impact during a head-on collision; spinal shock, cervical spine injury due to rapid deceleration impact during a head-on collision; hemorrhagic shock, due to blunt chest trauma due to steering wheel impact injury.
Blood Glucose = 136 mg/dl; arterial blood gases: pH = 7.35, pO2 = 110, pCO2 = 35, HCO3 = 18; Hb = 11 gm%; Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia; bedside echocardiography showed no regional wall motion abnormalities, no tamponade, ejection fraction (EF) = 60%. Portable chest X-ray and pelvis X-ray showed no abnormalities. The whole body computed tomography (CT) trauma protocol was followed in view of the trauma with hypotension, that consists of a non-contrast head CT followed by a multi-detector CT that includes an intravenous, contrast-enhanced scan of the chest, abdomen, up to the pelvis. The findings of the whole body CT scan were as follows: no significant abnormality detected on noncontrast CT of the head and face, and whole-spine and contrast-enhanced chest CT; Whereas contrast-enhanced CT of abdomen showed hypodense linear area within the head and body of the pancreas with free fluid in the peri-pancreatic region and also in adjacent retroperitoneum space suggestive of pancreatic transection with retroperitoneal hematoma .
Given the above findings, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) by the gastrointestinal (GI) surgery team for close observation and monitoring. He was managed conservatively on intravenous fluids, antibiotics, analgesics, and vasopressors. The forehead wound was sutured, and it healed well. He showed gradual improvement and was shifted to the ward after two days. He was discharged after five days in a hemodynamically stable and afebrile condition, on a normal diet.