A 28-year-old female patient was presented with a newly onset of headache, nausea, and right-sided hemiparesis. No other symptoms nor neurological deficits were presented. The patient was 21 week pregnant. Patient had a history of grand mal epilepsy attacks and was on antiepileptic therapy since age of 12 till the age of 18; during that period, no neuroradiological scanning was performed. At the admission, carbamazepine therapy was prescribed by the neurologist. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed cystic mass in the left frontal region; due to pregnancy intravenous contrast was not applied .
Patient underwent small left frontal osteoplastic craniotomy, evacuation of the cyst and the tumor biopsy under local anesthesia. Surgery went without any complications. Patient recovered uneventfully. Tissue samples acquired during the surgical procedure underwent pathohistological analysis. Since the pathohistological characteristics were challenging to interpret, both domestic and respectable foreign institutions were contacted and participated in analysis. Three types of tumor cells were noted; the most remarkable features are large polymorphic bizarre cells with large nuclei and atypical mitotic figures, followed by cells with empty vacuoles and small astrocytic like neoplastic cells in an epithelioid pattern. Parts of tumor consisted some reticulin network. A few pre-necrotic areas, collections of perivascular lymphocytes and areas with a slightly larger glial spindle cells were described. Microvascular proliferation was not observed. The tumor was strongly positive for SMI31 and 32 and SMI113, beta catenin, mainly on cellular membrane, as well as all neurofilament markers. Proliferation index was positive in 3–5% of the small cells, while in large, bizarre cells was around 30%. In addition, absence of the BRAF V600E mutation was showed. According to the WHO classification tumor tissue corresponded to an anaplastic PXA Grade III .
The patient, her husband and family were informed about diagnosis and treatment methods, including both chemo and radiotherapy, as well as the risk and anticipated complications that might happen during pregnancy. It was stated by the patient and her husband that they would like to carry on with the current pregnancy. New MRI was performed . Two weeks after initial biopsy, open surgery along with gross total tumor removal was performed. Surgery went without complications and no neurological deficits were found postoperatively. Tissue samples acquired during the surgical procedure underwent pathohistological analysis revealing the same diagnosis, PXA.
Six months later, after childbirth, control MRI revealed a supratentorial recurrent tumor mass in left frontal region with the cystic part in the superior frontal gyrus. After the administration of intravenous contrast, the mass showed heterogeneous enhancement . Patient underwent frontoparietal osteoplastic re-craniotomy and the tumor mass was completely removed. Surgery went without complications. A control MRI revealed a satisfactory finding, without any signs of ischemia, hemorrhage, or residual tumor. Patient recovered uneventfully. Tissue samples acquired during the surgical procedure underwent pathohistological analysis. In the tumor tissue taken from 4 cm below the cortex, polymorphic atypical glial cells with high mitotic activity and microvascular proliferation were described. Tumor tissue from the paraventricular frontal left area showed anaplastic astroglial cells with high mitotic activity and proliferation index higher than 50%. According to the WHO classification tumor tissue corresponded to a glioblastoma WHO Grade IV .
An oncologist was consulted. According to protocol for the treatment of primary glioma patient was referred to fractionated external beam radiation therapy of the whole brain (60 Gy) and temozolomide therapy. Furthermore, chemotherapy was administered. Two months after mentioned therapy, patient was further treated with monochemotherapy (temozolomide).
A year later, control MRI revealed postoperative cavity with pathological area of contrast accumulation in the posterior part, neuroradiologically described as probably residue of the tumor. No significant changes comparing to the previous MRI were found. Same findings were described yet on another control MRI after 6 months. Two year after initial diagnosis was established, patient, according to her husband’s claims, became disoriented and disturbed. She complained on a headache in frontal region. No significant neurological deficit was found. Computerized tomography scan showed hypodense zones in both, left and right, frontal region and in the left temporal region and narrowed lateral and third ventricles. MRI revealed expansive neoplastic masses in the right frontal region, left frontal region with rectal and orbital gyri and pericallosal area affected and in the left temporal region, along with necrotic zones . Neurosurgical treatment was no indicated. Antiedematous therapy was prescribed, and further follow-up by oncologist was recommended. Unfortunately, during oncological treatment, patient died.