A 32-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital complaining of fever, arthralgia and buttock pain. His birth history was unremarkable. He had a past history of bronchial asthma and gastric ulcer without constipation. On admission, his temperature was 40.0°C. An abdominal examination showed no tenderness, no distention and no palpable mass. A neurological examination showed no contributory factors. The anal location and tonus were normal. A digital rectal examination demonstrated mild rectal stenosis with local warmth and tenderness in the posterior wall of his rectum.
Laboratory studies revealed a white blood cell count of 18,000 cells/μL and C-reactive protein of 26.11mg/dL. Results of a urine analysis were normal. Computed tomography (CT) showed a scimitar-shaped deformity of his sacrum. An 8cm presacral mass containing air displaced his rectum ventrally and appeared to continue to his spinal canal through the anterior wall of his sacrum . Sigmoidoscopy showed extramural compression on the posterior of his rectum . We therefore diagnosed our patient with CS with a presacral abscess.
Immediate attention was given by draining the perianal abscess. The eruption of yellowish purulent fluid and keratinous debris were observed, and an infected epidermoid cyst was suspected. The pus yielded a culture of Streptococcus anginosus and Bacteroides fragilis. We treated him with antibiotics and his symptoms improved within a few days.
Later, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the presacral mass with the same imaging characteristics as an infected epidermoid cyst . Myelography and postmyelography CT showed no apparent communication between the presacral mass and the thecal sac . Results of an analysis of his cerebrospinal fluid were normal, and culture of the fluid identified no organisms. A radical operation was performed three months after abscess drainage. An exploration using a posterior sagittal approach demonstrated a silvery white epidermoid tumor occupying the presacral space. Purulent fluid was not observed. The tumor was poorly circumscribed and firmly adhered to surrounding tissues containing S3 sacral nerve roots and dura . The tissues were sharply dissected and excised without injuring the nerves. His rectum was intact.
Histopathology confirmed our diagnosis of an infected epidermoid cyst. The cystic wall consisted of stratified squamous epithelium. Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 10 days after surgery. The HLXB9 mutation was not evaluated because he declined a gene test. On a follow-up appointment at four years and six months, our patient was doing well without any neurological deficit and with normal defecation.