A 23-year-old Caucasian man presented to an orthopedic surgeon with a history of left shoulder weakness of about eight weeks' duration. He complained of pain and inability to lift even minimal weight, such as a glass of water, following an appendectomy. The patient had experienced severe acute pain in the left shoulder and scapula on the third day following his operation; however, he had not paid much attention to it, as the pain gradually subsided within the next two weeks, during which time he was hospitalized for ten days post-operatively for high fever. Following his discharge from the hospital, he noticed left shoulder weakness with an inability to lift even small weights; therefore, he visited an orthopedic surgeon.
His orthopedic clinical examination revealed that he had obvious atrophy of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles , as well as 2 of 5 muscle strength scores on flexion resistance and external rotation resistance. At his initial presentation to the orthopedic surgeon, an X-ray of the shoulder showed no pathology. On the basis of the clinical examination, the patient was referred for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the detection of possible suprascapular nerve neuropathy secondary to suspected nerve compression by a ganglion cyst.
Routine MRI of the shoulder was done using a 3-Tesla scanner three months following the patient's the initial symptoms. A series of T2-weighted/turbo spin echo fat suppression oblique coronal, oblique sagittal, axial T2-weighted/turbo spin echo oblique sagittal, proton density fat suppression, and T2-weighted/gradient echo axial imaging slices through the left shoulder were obtained using a phased array dedicated shoulder coil. These MRI scans showed diffuse high signal intensity within the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles on the T2-weighted/turbo spin echo fat suppression images and early signs of minimal fatty infiltration consistent with denervation changes. In addition, no compression of the suprascapular nerve in the suprascapular or spinoglenoid notch and no denervation changes of the teres minor muscle or subscapularis muscle were seen. The MRI findings are presented in Figures and . Following these MRI findings, the patient was referred for electromyography (EMG). EMG showed active denervation effects in the supraspinatus muscle and more prominent denervation effects in the left infraspinatus muscle, which were compatible with damage to the suprascapular nerve, especially the part supplying the infraspinatus muscle. The nerve conduction to the left arm was within normal limits. An MRI examination at the patient's six-month follow-up appointment showed persistent fatty infiltration and loss of muscle volume in both muscles, together with exacerbation within the infraspinatus muscle, supporting our previous findings as well as the EMG results .