We present the case of a 34-year-old gravida 3, para 2 patient who underwent an elective cesarean section despite having an easy pregnancy. She had a previous caesarean section and was known for having a placenta previa grade 3 with a transverse lie of the fetus. An abdominal ultrasound showed the placenta was posterior, with major previa covering the OS of the cervix. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study on admission showed a posterior placenta previa type III and engorged posterior uterine wall vessels, suggesting underlying uterine wall varicosities. The patient did not have any other comorbidities. The patient was regularly followed in antenatal clinics and was started on dexamethasone for fetal lung maturity. There were no major events during the antenatal period, and she did not have an antepartum hemorrhage. The patient had been scheduled for elective LSCS. She received a combined spinal epidural uneventfully. The surgery proceeded until the fetus was delivered, then suddenly, the patient became unresponsive with no peripheral pulse and in asystole. According to the acute cardiac life support (ACLS), protocol, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was started immediately. Adrenaline, calcium gluconate, and sodium bicarbonate were administered along with high-quality CPR, and the return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was restored in 3 minutes. The patient was successfully intubated, ventilated, and revived. The ROTEM® study showed profound DIC with a straight line, and details of coagulation and DIC parameters are described in . The patient was administered blood, blood products, and fibrinogen. POCUS showed several AFE emboli in the inferior vena cava (IVC), a few bigger and multiple smaller amniotic fluid particles ( and ), and a dilated right ventricle (RV) with multiple amniotic fluid particles . In combination with the clinical picture, POCUS, hypoxia, and the DIC pattern, these are strongly suggestive of an AFE as the diagnosis. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for postoperative monitoring and stabilization. The fetus was pink and cried well, with an Apgar score of 10.
An urgent bedside echocardiogram performed in the ICU showed normal global systolic left ventricle function, with an ejection fraction of 55% and no regional wall motion abnormality, a severely dilated RV, moderately reduced RV function, and interventricular septal motion that was suggestive of RV pressure overload. The pulmonary artery pressure was mildly increased, and the right atrium was dilated. In the ICU, the patient’s vital signs were not stable, with tachycardia (135 beats/minute) and a blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg (millimeters of mercury) with noradrenaline support. The oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 92%–94%. The patient remained intubated, ventilated, and sedated; a chest x-ray revealed remarkable hepatic congestion with an increased cardiac index . During his ICU stay, the patient developed acute kidney injury after cardiac arrest, requiring three hemodialysis sessions. Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) showed pulmonary embolism and bilateral ovarian (mostly due to embolization of larger amniotic fluid particles seen on POCUS initially) vein embolism on day 3 ( and ), requiring heparin anticoagulation and supportive care. By day 6, she was awake and off vasopressors. On the seventh ICU day, the patient was extubated successfully without any neurological consequences. The patient was transferred to the ward after spending 13 days in the ICU. She had an uneventful stay in the hospital and was discharged on the 20th day.