A 97-year-old man in good age-corresponding condition had fallen from a standing height. At the time of his initial visit at our hospital, the CT scans indicated a multifragmentary endplate fracture involving the posterior edge of the L2 vertebral body as well as a considerable narrowing of the spinal channel (Magerl Classification type A3-3.1 ). Initially, the patient denied surgical intervention. At this time, no neurological deficit was detected. Because of severe pain and a progressive weakness of the lower limbs - grade C according to the modified Frankel/ASIA score - the patient attended our department again on the following day. The follow-up CT scan revealed a progression of the vertebral compression and an increased bulging of the dorsal wall into the spinal cord space .
Because of the patient’s good age-corresponding condition, it was decided to perform a posterior decompression by distraction and lordosation using an augmented pedicle screw instrumentation with non-absorbable bone cement. In a one-step procedure, an additional balloon-assisted kyphoplasty was performed in order to support the anterior column (see below: Safe Surgical Technique). The operative time was 72 min. Intraoperatively, there was no complication. A 48-hour monitoring which was carried out after the surgical intervention at the intensive care unit was uneventful. The monitoring in the ICU was only due to the advanced age of the patient and was outside the normal treatment guidelines. No sensomotoric deficit was detected during the wholein-patient-stay-grade E according to the modified Frankel/ASIA score . The day after the surgical procedure, the patient was started with doing exercises, including having dinner while sitting upright in his bed. During his physical therapy, the patient was fairly pain-free (VAS = 3), and moved around using a walking frame. Ten days after the surgery, the patient was discharged. Due to the poor bone quality, that had been discovered during the insertion of the pedicle screws, and the obvious senile osteoporosis, we started with an oral anti-osteoporosis therapy with the application of bisphosphonate 75 mg/week, calcium 1000 mg/d and cholecalciferol 500 mg/d, with the advice that it should be continued after the patient had been sent home.
At 12 months follow-up the patient is completely remobilized and had regained his pre-injury level of activity. He is able to walk over a distance of 2 km without any pain. He is taking part in his normal social life and is living in complete independence without any need of support . CT-scans showed no secondary dislocation of the screws and no signs of instability in the kyphoplasted vertebra.
The surgery was performed under general anaesthesia. The patient was placed prone on a radiolucent table. A partial reduction of the kyphotic deformity was obtained under image intensifier control. For dorsal instrumentation, the Synthes USS system (Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) was used. Four Schanz pedicle screws (diameter of 6 mm, thread length of 45 mm) were placed transpedicularly on both sides into the body of the non-fractured vertebrae cephalad and caudad to the fractured vertebra, through the use of a standard longitudinal midline incision. Afterwards, the screws were removed and the prepared non-absorbable cement (KyphX® HV-R™, Kyphon Inc., Sunnyvale, USA) was applied into the non-fractured vertebra with a trokar in order to ensure a greater stability of the screws in the osteoporotic bone. After the cement had completely hardened, the screws were connected with two titanium rods with a length of 7.4 cm. Further fracture reduction was obtained through the use of distraction tools in order to restore anatomic alignment under the control of an image intensifier. The fragments may have occurred as a result of ligamentotaxis. The fracture fragments were neither exposed or directly manipulated, nor was any kind of open reduction, decompression laminectomy or laminotomy performed. After that, the kyphoplasty of the fractured first lumbar vertebra was carried out with the KyphX-balloon system (Kyphon, Sunnyvale, California, USA). At first, the pedicle finder was used in order to open both pedicles of the fractured vertebra and to create a transpedicular pathway within the fractured vertebral body. This opening of the pedicles was carried out under image intensifier guidance. Next, two trokars with a diameter of 4.2 mm were inserted in the pre-drilled pedicle pathways. The trokars were used as guidance for the two 20 mm kyphoplasty balloons. Under image intensifier monitoring, both were inflated up to 150 psi and 4 ccm. During this procedure, the dorsal wall of the vertebral body was carefully observed in order to avoid its dislocation into the spinal cord space. After the normal vertebral height had been restored with the kyphoplasty balloons, the newly-formed cavity was carefully filled with non-absorbable cement (KyphX® HV-R™, Kyphon INC., Sunnyvale, USA) under biplanar control. The wound cavity was flushed and haemostasis was achieved. The intraoperative blood loss amounted to 200 ml. The patient did not require any intra-/or postoperative transfusion of blood products.