A 45-year-old man presented with a history of high-grade fever of 7-day duration. He was evaluated at a general hospital, and was noted to have NS1 IgM positive serology for Dengue infection and low platelet counts. Patient was diagnosed as DHF in view of severe thrombocytopenia and was managed accordingly with resuscitative measures. On the 7th day of the fever, the patient developed severe headache, multiple episodes of vomiting, and altered sensorium. Electrocardiograph (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia and computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed sellar and suprasellar hemorrhagic lesion with obstruction of the foramen of Monro, leading to hydrocephalus . The patient was referred to our tertiary neurosurgical center for further management. At presentation, he was drowsy, disoriented, but obeying to commands. The pupils were equal in size and reacting to light. Visual acuity and complete neurological status could not be tested due to the patient's altered sensorium.
The management issues in this patient were treatment of hydrocephalus and the surgical management of PA in the setting of severe thrombocytopenia. The patient's platelet count at admission was 27000/mm3. Serial platelet transfusions were instituted. While his hematological dysfunction was being corrected, patient deteriorated in sensorium (E1M4V2), was immediately intubated, and a right frontal external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was under high pressure. Patient did not improve in sensorium following EVD and repeat CT brain showed persistent left lateral ventriculomegaly. A left frontal EVD was placed. Following bilateral EVD placement, patient improved in sensorium to drowsy, obeying, and disoriented status.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a sellar suprasellar lesion extending into the third ventricle up to the foramen of Monro. The lesion was T1 isointense, T2 hyperintense with areas of T2 hypointensity, and was heterogeneously enhancing on contrast [Figure –]. On susceptibility-weighted images (SWI), intratumoral hemorrhage was clearly documented . Hormonal profile revealed normal serum hormonal levels (Growth Hormone (GH) = 0.48 ng/mL; Luteinizing Hormone (LH) = 4.05 IU/L; Prolactin (PRL) = 5.42 ng/mL; Cortisol = 42.94 nmol/L; Follicle Stimulating Hormone = 2.68 IU/L; T3 = 0.573 ng/dL; Thyroxine (T4) = 6.02 micro-g/dL; Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) = 1.060 mIU/L). Following multiple platelet transfusions, the platelet count was raised to 143,000/mm3, patient was hemodynamically stable and was planned for surgery. He underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal decompression of the pituitary adenoma. After entering sella and opening the dura, a gush of blood was noted. The tumor was decompressed carefully and hemostasis was obtained. Postoperative CT brain showed small residual tumor.
Histopathology sections showed fragments of an endocrine neoplasm composed of sheets, lobules, and papillaroid clusters of round-to-polyhedral cells having moderate amphophilic cytoplasm and a regular round-to-oval nucleus [Figure and ]. Intratumoral hemorrhage was evident. Increased vascularity with delicate branching vessels was noted. The tumor was ACTH-positive and negative for all other IHC markers [Figure and ].
The patient had a stormy postoperative course. He developed diabetes insipidus with serially rising sodium levels and high urine output. The intravascular volume status was monitored with central venous pressure (CVP) recordings. Patient was managed with hypotonic fluids and subcutaneous pitressin (5 units BD and 5 units in excess if urine output for two consecutive hours was more than 250 ml). The patient was managed with strict hourly input-output monitoring and eighth hourly electrolyte levels. This intensive CVP, input-output, and electrolyte level monitoring was essential in the setting of hypothalamic–hypophyseal dysfunction (in view of pituitary apoplexy) and increased vascular permeability (in view of DHF). On postoperative day 4, the patient regained consciousness. Sequential EVDs were removed with serial CTs not showing evidence of ventriculomegaly after EVD blockade. On discharge, the patient was conscious with visual acuity of 6/36 in both eyes, and fundus examination showing bilateral temporal pallor. At 6-month follow-up, the patient is doing well with only residual bitemporal hemianopia and MRI brain revealed minimal residual lesion [Figure and ]. He has been started on hormonal supplementation in view of hypothyroidism, hypocortisolism, and hypogonadism.