A 50-year-old man (height, 165 cm; weight, 66 kg) who complained of numb hands and experienced unsteadiness while walking was diagnosed with C3–C4 intervertebral disc herniation and C3–C6 OALL. He was scheduled to undergo C3–C6 anterior cervical osteophyte resection, C3–C4 anterior discectomy, spinal canal decompression combined with interbody fusion, internal fixation, and C4–C5/C5–C6 artificial cervical disc replacement. The patient had a 30-year history of smoking and had never undergone a surgery. The preoperative evaluation showed an American Society of Anesthesiologists class II and a normal airway. The inter-incisor distance was 48 mm, which was measured using a ruler with the patient sitting in the neutral position with his mouth maximally open. The thyromental distance was 60 mm, which was measured between the prominence of the thyroid cartilage and the bony point of the chin with the head maximally extended on the neck. The patient exhibited a Mallampati Class II airway. He did not present with any limitation in neck movements (the range of neck motion included the “chin-to-chest” distance and the full extension of the head), esophageal and airway obstruction, or hoarseness. A lateral cervical spine radiograph showed a “beak-like” osteophyte in front of the C4 vertebra, which protruded forward significantly . In addition, a lateral magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the cervical spine showed that the “beak-like” osteophyte compressed the esophagus and airway, while the protruding C3–C4 disc compressed the spinal cord . Although there was no clinical evidences nor signs, the patient’s image finding revealed that he would have a difficult airway (at the time of ventilation and/or intubation). The patient refused our suggested awake intubation, and, therefore, we chose succinylcholine for rapid induction to prevent intubation failure and wake the patient up in time. Moreover, we prepared a fiber-bronchoscope, video laryngoscope, and small-sized endotracheal tube. The patient provided written consent for publication of this report.
After entering the operating room, the patient was carefully placed in the sniffing position and the cervical hyperextension position without any discomfort. His vital signs were normal. After pre-oxygenation and gradual induction of anesthesia through inhalation of sevoflurane, the patient was deeply sedated with spontaneous breathing. No airway obstruction (airway obstruction score [AOS], 1) was observed, and mask ventilation was easy (Han’s Mask ventilation score, 2). After spraying the throat with 2% lidocaine and administering succinylcholine and propofol, we performed direct laryngoscopy using a Macintosh blade (“adult large” size, 150 mm), which facilitated a Cormack-Lehane grade IV view. Vision was obscured by a mass approximately 1 cm in diameter in the posterior pharyngeal wall with a smooth mucosal surface. The Airtraq® video laryngoscope (Prodol Meditec, Bizkaia, Spain) was subsequently used and provided a Cormack-Lehane grade II view. Finally, successful intubation was achieved, although only the posterior margin of the glottic structure was visualized.
The location of the 7.5# enforced endotracheal tube was confirmed by a normal ETCO2, and symmetrical breathing sounds were heard from the lungs. The catheter depth was 22 cm from the central incisor. The endotracheal tube reached across the “beak-like” osteophyte in front of the C4–C5 vertebrae in the preoperative cervical spine radiograph . The “beak-like” osteophyte appeared resected in the postoperative cervical spine radiograph . The operation was successfully completed and lasted approximately 4 h. Then, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with the endotracheal tube retained in case of airway obstruction induced by postoperative laryngeal and tracheal edema. He was extubated after 1 day and discharged without any complications after 11 days of treatment. At the time of discharge, there was no numbness in the hands or walking instability. Moreover, there were no complications during a 12-month follow-up period after the surgery.