An 11-year-old girl was seen in A&E after spraining her left ankle while ice skating. Examination and plain radiographs showed no obvious injury and she was discharged home. She represented 3 days later, unable to weight bear on the left leg and was reviewed in fracture clinic. She was diagnosed with a soft-tissue injury, provided with a functional walking boot, for follow-up 2 weeks later.
On follow-up of her left ankle, she had both lateral and medial malleolar tenderness, ankle swelling, and decreased range of movement. She was neurovascularly intact. Repeat plain films demonstrated periosteal reaction at the left distal tibia . She continued with the walking boot and referred for physiotherapy.
A month following, she developed swelling and blue discoloration in the right leg; lower limb duplex confirmed a right-sided DVT. Hematological review and subsequent thrombophilia screen were deemed normal and she was started on dalteparin for 6 months. A repeat duplex scan a month later showed acute iliofemoral DVT bilaterally extending to the distal inferior vena cava.
The patient was reviewed in fracture clinic, 6 weeks from the initial injury. Plain films confirmed established periosteal reactions in the left distal tibia . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed associated osteonecrosis of the left distal tibia .
A repeat MRI 6 weeks later showed progression of bony changes with patchy osteoporosis throughout all the joints in the left hind foot and mid foot. There was marked edema in the head of the talus and navicular. It was noted that there was a possible new area of osteonecrosis in the head of the talus. Radiographic follow-up, 3 months post the initial injury demonstrated evidence of patchy necrosis and early closure of the medial growth plate. By her 6-month follow-up, the patient was essentially symptom free.
Hematologists on follow-up reviewed all previous hematological tests. A diagnosis of antithrombin deficiency was made, with the treatment of lifelong anticoagulation. There is continued vascular surgery input for the lower limb edema and long and short saphenous varices which are currently treated with compression stockings. Our patient has continued orthopedic input for clinical and radiographic surveillance to monitor for an angular deformity and leg length discrepancy. On the patient’s 2nd year of follow-up, the patient had noted no difference in her leg length and had an anatomical leg length discrepancy of 15 mm . In summary, our patient has a 15 mm anatomical discrepancy and left leg and abdominal varicosities with a diagnosis of anti-thrombin deficiency.