A 71-year-old male patient without relevant pre-existing conditions was admitted to our hospital due to altered bowel habit and hematochezia. Abdomen computed tomography (CT) revealed rectal wall thickening and swollen lymph nodes around the rectum . Tumor markers were within normal range. Subsequent colonoscopy showed a 2.0 cm × 3.0 cm irregular uplifted neoplasm in the rectum 3 cm from the anal verge . Transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) instead of Miles surgery was then performed at the urging of the patient. Microscopic analysis exhibited a tubulovillous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia on the surface, and a component of poorly differentiated SCNEC with typical morphological and immunohistochemical characteristics (positive for synaptophysin and CD56, but negative for chromogranin A) limited to the submucosa. Resection margins were free of tumor cells. No chemotherapy was performed after the surgery.
The patient was hospitalized again with hematochezia 6 months later. Abdomen CT showed an inhomogeneous enhanced mass on the left side of rectum which was more pronounced than before . Colonoscopy showed a bulge of 1.5 cm in diameter near the anastomotic stoma. Then, Dixon operation was carried out. Macroscopically , the mass had a tan-white to gray cut surface and invaded the perirectal adipose tissue. Microscopically , a solid and perivascular papillary growth pattern with extensive necrosis was observed. Most areas showed distinct squamous appearance with keratin pearl formation and immunohistochemical expression of p40, but not of synaptophysin. Meanwhile, clusters of tumor cells, which were characterized by scant basophilic cytoplasm and “salt and pepper” chromatin, were positive for synaptophysin but negative for p40. Ki-67 index was ~40% and ~90% for SCC and SCNEC, respectively. All tumor cells exhibited positive expression of β-catenin (cytoplasmic and nuclear) and CDX2. SATB2 was positive in SCNEC but not in SCC. In summary, a mixed SCNEC and SCC of the rectum was diagnosed, and only one regional lymph node metastasis with SCNEC was detected.
CT showed multiple liver metastases in the following month. The patient was discharged from the hospital before his first cycle of chemotherapy (etoposide, oxaliplatin plus bevacizumab) was completed. Poor appetite and elevated serum NSE level were observed during follow-up. The patient died of ketoacidosis 1 year after initial diagnosis of the tumor.