A 34-year-old previously healthy female presented with an 8-day history of fever and body aches, with a maximum body temperature increase at 38.5 °C. After administration of compound paracetamol, her symptoms did not improve. On the previous day, the symptoms were aggravated, with a reduced level of consciousness and a blunted response to conversation. Physical examination showed a body temperature of 39 °C. Petechiae and ecchymoses were scattered throughout her skin, and numerous blood scabs were observed in the mouth. She opened her eyes when saying her name and had slurred speech; the muscle strength of both lower limbs was level 3; muscle tension was moderate; abdominal wall reflex was present; bilateral knee and tendon reflex hyperactivity were present; lethargy was present; Gordon was positive; other pathological signs were not elicited; and meningeal irritation and bilateral Babinski’s signs were negative (GCS E3, V3, M4).
Abnormal indicators of peripheral blood analysis are shown in Table . The patient presented with schistocytes on a peripheral blood smear. Other blood biochemical tests (such as EB virus DNA, brucella, haemorrhagic fever and rheumatism) were normal. She underwent bone marrow biopsy, which showed an increased number of megakaryocytes. Cranial MRI showed a focal high-signal lesion involving the centrum semiovale, corona radiata and splenium of the corpus callosum (SCC) on diffusion-weighted and T2-weighted images . It takes into account reversible splenial lesion syndrome (RESLES type II). The chest, abdomen and pelvic CT did not have any abnormal phenomena. Initial clinic diagnosis included TTP, rhabdomyolysis, and anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome. The patient was immediately placed in the intensive care unit and treated with plasmapheresis, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), and supplemented with fluid supplementation, correction of hyponatraemia, haemostasis, promotion of platelet production, meropenem anti-infection, acyclovir antiviral treatment, fibrinogen supplementation (cryoprecipitate infusion), plasma infusion, liver protection, etc. The clinical symptoms soon remitted, and she was discharged on day 20 after onset. After 2 weeks, the patient had no neurologic sequelae, and a follow-up MRI revealed significant regression of the lesion in the SCC .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for her data to be used anonymously for teaching and research purposes.