A 30-year-old male, known with a long-segment oesophageal stricture two months after corrosive ingestion, underwent an urgent gastroscopy for an upper gastrointestinal bleed. During the procedure he was noted to have massive bleeding from the oesophagus and an AOF was suspected.
The patient initially presented to our institution five days after accidentally consuming a corrosive substance, later identified as drain cleaner (sodium hydroxide). He was dared to consume the substance at a party and was unaware that it contained a corrosive. Except for a mild tachycardia, vital signs and routine blood work on initial admission were normal. He had an inflamed oropharyngeal mucosa and careful early upper gastrointestinal endoscopy indicated a severe corrosive injury with extensive necrosis of almost the entire oesophageal mucosa, but with viable visible underlying oesophageal muscle (Zargar grade IIb). He also had a milder gastric injury, with superficial focal ulceration but no necrosis, limited to the gastric antrum (Zargar grade IIa). With no features of full thickness gastric or oesophageal necrosis, an endoscopic nasojejunal feeding tube was placed and he was admitted for continued observations and nutritional support.
Contrast swallow examination on day nine post injury confirmed the extensive oesophageal injury with irregular mucosa and already showed early long-segment stricturing. The feeding tube was removed fourteen days later after successful early cautious serial bougie dilatation to 14 mm. He was discharged home three days later tolerating a soft diet.
At his two-weekly review, he again complained of near-complete dysphagia. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with fluoroscopy now confirmed an established high-grade, long oesophageal stricture extending from 25 cm from the front incisors to the oesophagogastric junction. Due to the risk of perforation associated with pneumatic or repeat bougie dilatation, a more gradual dilatation with temporary stenting was opted for. Two overlapping 120 mm × 20 mm fully covered self-expanding metal stents were placed (Taewoong Medical Company, Gojeong, South Korea). He remained well after this, tolerating a soft diet at home.
He returned three weeks later reporting a single episode of haematemesis, but was haemodynamically and generally well. He did not complain of dysphagia. Gastroscopy was again performed, which revealed both stents in-situ and patent. However, the most proximal stent had migrated distally by some 2 cm with an area of stricturing above this. The scope was passed beyond this with complete endoscopic examination down to the second part of the duodenum revealing no signs of gastrointestinal bleeding or pathology. On pulling back the proximal stent to cover the area of developing stricturing, brisk bleeding occurred which was controlled after placement of a third oesophageal stent.
The patient was previously healthy, with no known prior medical or surgical history.
There was no other relevant personal history or family history of note. Other than social alcohol use he denied any other substance use.
After the bleeding from the suspected AOF was temporised, his vital signs showed a blood pressure of 105/67 mmHg, a heart rate of 150 beats/minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute with oxygen saturation of 97% on room air and a normal Glascow Coma Scale of 15/15. His general examination was normal with no signs of pallor or other abnormalities.
Full blood count showed a formal haemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL and a mild leukocytosis of 11.59 × 109/L. Urea, creatinine and electrolytes were normal.
On suspicion of an AOF, an urgent computerised tomographic angiogram (CTA) was performed, which confirmed the fistula in the region of the proximal thoracic oesophagus with an aberrant right-sided aortic arch .