A 55-year-old gentleman presented with acute, bilateral, throbbing frontal headache, with an intensity 9/10, starting 3 days prior to admission and progressively worsening despite acetaminophen. It was associated with photophobia, but not with fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, syncope, seizures, or focal neurological symptoms. His past medical history was significant for metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, with a resected posterior left parietal lobe brain metastasis a year prior, followed by stereotactic radiosurgery and 11 cycles of intravenous (IV) pembrolizumab, 200 mg every 3 weeks, resulting in partial response to the immunotherapy. His last dose was 3 weeks prior to admission, when pembrolizumab was stopped when he developed grade 4 autoimmune hepatitis (with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) greater than 1000 IU/L) and he was treated with a course of oral steroids.
On presentation, his vital signs and systemic physical exam were unremarkable. Neurologic examination revealed intact cranial nerves and motor and sensory exams. He did not have neck stiffness or signs of meningeal irritation. Head computed tomography scan without contrast ruled out acute intracranial pathology. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis demonstrated elevated opening pressure of 22 mmHg, 11 nucleated cells (30% lymphocytes and 58% monocytes), elevated protein concentration of 75 mg/dL, normal glucose levels, and negative cytology for neoplastic cells. He was started on antibiotics, which were subsequently discontinued after infectious workup, including blood and CSF cultures, returned negative. CSF viral panel, fungal culture, and India ink preparation were also negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging with and without gadolinium revealed nonspecific enhancement in the region of tumor resection, without leptomeningeal enhancement or evidence of tumor recurrence.
The patient's headache persisted despite opioids but significantly improved after IV dexamethasone (initial dose of 10 mg then 6 mg every 6 hours), and one day after initiation of steroids, the headache completely resolved. Given the negative infectious workup and responsiveness to steroids, as well as recent irAE (hepatitis), he was diagnosed with grade 3 aseptic meningitis (due to severe symptoms but non-life-threatening presentation) as an irAE from pembrolizumab. He was discharged on oral dexamethasone 6 mg every 6 hours to complete a taper course as outpatient. On 6-month follow-up, the patient remained stable clinically and staging scans showed no more evidence of active disease. Due to the multisystemic adverse events experienced by this patient (initially hepatitis followed by aseptic meningitis), associated with continuous response to therapy achieving complete response despite being off pembrolizumab, decision was made to discontinue pembrolizumab.