An 11-hour-old Nigerian boyof Yoruba ethnicity, first of a discordant twin delivered at home by a 27-year-old woman, para 3 + 0, 4 alive, under the supervision of a community nurse, was brought to our Hospital because of a progressively increasing abdominal swelling. Prior to presentation, he had two episodes of non-bilious and non-projectile vomiting. Antenatal care was supervised at a community clinic. Delivery was at 37 weeks 6 days menstrual age and the labour lasted for about 8 hours. Both babies cried spontaneously at birth and required no resuscitation. However, the boy had increasing abdominal distension overtime, vomited on attempted feeding and soon begins to have apnoea. These were the reasons for his referral to our centre.
At presentation, he was dyspoeic (60 cycles per min.), tachycardic (140 beats per min.) and hypothermic (35 °C). The abdomen was grossly distended, tensed and shining. Umbilical cord was tied with thread but appear clean. Bowel sounds were hypoactive. The abdominal girth increased from 35 cm to 41 cm within four hours of admission. The head circumference was 31.3 cm. The chest was clinically clear. He weighed 2.5 kg while the second twin weighs 2.7 kg.
Laboratory work ups, which included full blood count, blood culture and serum chemistry were all within normal range.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a thick-walled cystic mass occupying nearly the entire abdomen. It has brightly echogenic internal echoes, layering and calcifications . The mass displaces the liver into the chest. The bowel loops were peripherally displaced and contains excess gas. Their calibers were sonographically normal. The small bowel loops were not more than 27 mm at any point where accessible for measurement. There was no ascites. Based on these sonographic findings, meconium cyst was suspected. The plain abdominal radiographic findings, of fluid level in a giant central lucency having a circumscribed thick-rim opacity, internal calcifications and peripherally displacing bowel loops was complimentary . The ribs were splayed and both hemidiaphragms were elevated to the level of the 6th rib posteriorly.
Exploratory laparotomy revealed a giant meconium cyst , terminal ileal atresia with defective mesentry (type IIIa atresia) and there was about 4cm blind stump of distal ileum attached to the colon. The treatment options were discussed with the family and it was felt better to proceed to a bowel resection with ileocolic anastomosis. The operation was successful and the patient did well postoperatively and was discharged five days later.