The patient was a 29-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2, nullipara. She had no significant medical history other than two spontaneous miscarriages. She had been diagnosed with a unicornuate uterus with a non-communicating rudimentary horn by hysterosalpingography (HSG) and MRI after a miscarriage at 28 years of age . She presented to the obstetrics and gynecology clinic with the chief complaint of a 10-day delay in expected menstruation, along with a positive urine pregnancy test. She was considered to be at 5 weeks and 3 days of gestation according to her last menstrual period. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed no gestational sac in the unicornuate uterus, but an 18 mm-gestational sac was observed in what appeared to be a non-communicating rudimentary horn. At 6 weeks and 2 days of gestation, the patient was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. She had no symptoms of genital bleeding or abdominal pain. On visual examination using a vaginal speculum, there was a single cervix with erosion and a moderate amount of white discharge. Bimanual internal examination was not performed because of the risk of rupture of the ectopic pregnancy. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed no gestational sac in the left unicornuate uterus, and a 21 mm-gestational sac with a positive fetal heartbeat in the right non-communicating rudimentary horn . Consequently, a diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy in a non-communicating rudimentary horn was made. The patient and her husband were informed that it would be difficult to continue the pregnancy and that surgical removal of the pregnancy site was necessary. The patient was admitted for treatment at 7 weeks and 1 day of gestation. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed a fetal heartbeat positive 9 mm fetus in a 27 mm-gestational sac in the right rudimentary horn , and color Doppler detected multiple blood flow signals around the gestational sac, which were clearly increased compared to the left unicornuate uterus. MRI revealed evidence of right rudimentary horn pregnancy consistent with the transvaginal ultrasonography findings; the right rudimentary horn was enlarged, and its cavity demonstrated a high signal in T2-weighted image, which was thought to correspond to the gestational sac. The corpus luteum cyst was in the right ovary, and the left unicornuate uterus showed a thickened endometrium . The serum level of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was 104,619 mIU/ml. Considering the abundant blood flow around the pregnancy site and the risk of bleeding during surgery, we planned to perform surgery after performing a therapeutic abortion with local injection of MTX into the pregnancy site.
The patient was admitted to the hospital at 7 weeks and 2 days of gestation, and received a local MTX injection at the site of pregnancy. Under transvaginal ultrasound guidance, a 20-gauge needle (oocyte aspiration needle, OPU-NP20G325B, KITAZATO CORPORATION, Tokyo, Japan) was used to puncture the gestational sac in the right rudimentary horn, and 8 ml of fluid was aspirated. The fetus was then punctured to confirm that the fetal heartbeat was negative. Subsequently, 100 mg of MTX dissolved in 4 ml saline was injected topically into the chorionic area, the needle was removed, and color Doppler was used to confirm the blood flow signal from the puncture site. Since bleeding from the uterine puncture site into the abdominal cavity was suspected, the puncture site was compressed with an ultrasound probe to stop bleeding. The time taken for these procedures was 10 min.
After MTX treatment, the pregnancy site was closely observed by transvaginal ultrasound, and serum hCG levels were closely measured. A transient hCG elevation was observed after MTX treatment, but the hCG level subsequently decreased; on postoperative day 30, the hCG level dropped to 1587 mIU/ml . Color Doppler showed that the blood flow signals from around the gestational sac in the right rudimentary horn were clearly decreased compared to those before the treatment.
Laparoscopic resection of the right rudimentary horn 48 days after the MTX treatment was performed. We created a 12-mm trocar port in the umbilicus for 10 mm straight optics, and three 5-mm trocar ports in the lower abdomen for laparoscopic trocar port placement. Observation of the abdominal cavity revealed no ascites, bleeding, or adhesions. The right pregnant rudimentary horn was enlarged and more than twice the size of the left unicornuate uterus . The attachment between the right rudimentary horn and the left unicornuate uterus was several centimeters in size . A 21-gauge needle was inserted through the abdominal wall into the site of the right rudimentary horn directly, and diluted Pitressin (0.1 U/ml, 20 units diluted in 200 mL saline) was injected to decrease the bleeding. An ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic Ace, Ethicon, Tokyo, Japan) was placed inside the pregnant right uterine wall, exposing and enucleating the gestational sac portion, with minimal bleeding . The rudimentary horn and right fallopian tube were resected from the site of attachment to the left uterus. After resecting the right rudimentary horn, a balloon catheter was placed in the left uterine lumen. An indigo carmine solution was injected to confirm communication with the right rudimentary horn. Although leakage of the indigo carmine solution was observed into the muscular layer of the resected uterus, when we attempted to insert a sonde through the indigo carmine seepage site, we could not find an obvious communicating channel to the left uterus . The resection site was Z-sutured using biodegradable poly-p-dioxanone (PDS-II, Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Tokyo, Japan). A peritoneal endometriosis lesion was electrocauterized, and a submucosal myoma was enucleated. Finally, the surgery was completed with the application of a regenerated cellulose adhesion barrier (Interceed, Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Tokyo, Japan) to cover the right rudimentary horn resection site. The operative time was 123 min, and the amount of blood loss was 15 ml. Histopathological findings revealed degenerated chorionic and decidual tissues in the excised gestational sac.
No postoperative complications were observed, and the patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day. The serum hCG levels decreased steadily; on postoperative day 17, the hCG level was 3.3 mIU/ml. Menstruation resumed 26 days after the operation, and a spontaneous normal pregnancy occurred 6 months after the surgery. The gestational course was uneventful, and a baby girl was born by elective cesarean section at 38w0d, weighing 2546 g with an APGAR score of 8 at 1 min. During surgery, no thinning of the myometrium or adhesions at the site of resection of the right rudimentary horn were observed.