The patient, a 41-year-old female, was admitted to the hospital with fever for more than half a month after a physical examination revealed an occupying liver lesion. The patient's physical examination revealed liver occupancy but no special treatment was done. Subsequently, she was seen in the hospital because of a review that revealed a larger swelling and a fever that developed half a month ago. The patient's past history was unremarkable, with no history of hepatitis B or C, and there, were no significant positive signs on abdominal physical examination. After admission to the hospital to complete blood and imaging tests, our blood test results showed: White Blood Cells(WBC):11.02*109/L, Alpha fetal Protein (AFP):0.820 ng/ml, Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA):0.91 ng/ml, Carbohydrate antigen125 (CA125): 22.19 U/ml, Carbohydrate antigen199CA199:1.69 U/ml, Calcitonin original (PCT): 0.12 ng/ml, C-reactive protein(CRP): 182.12 mg/L. The patient's liver function was basically normal, no bacterial growth was found in the blood bacterial culture and no fungus was found in the fecal and urine microscopy. Our enhancement MRI showed an abnormal signal in the right lobe of the liver, considering spindle cell tumor or tumor of mesenchymal origin . We evaluated and staged the tumor by chest CT and abdominal MRI, and no signs of distant metastasis were seen. Combining with the patient's clinical manifestations, physical examination and ancillary examinations, the hepatic malignant tumor could not be distinguished from other benign tumors of the liver. Finally, after team discussion, we proceeded to perform right hemicolectomy. The postoperative pathology of this patient was diagnosed as inflammatory myofibroblastoma and the immunohistochemistry was: ALK-1(−), CD23(−), CD21(−), CD30(−), CD34 (endothelial+), EMA(scattered+), SMA(−), Vim(+), Ki-67(15%) . The patient was finally diagnosed hepatic inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor.
The patient was discharged in good general condition, the laboratory parameters were normal and we recommended regular follow-up in the outpatient clinic.
The last outpatient follow-up was in April 2022 , and the patient had normal tumor markers. Ultrasound and MRI showed no signs of recurrence. During the follow-up period, the patient was compliant and was able to attend regular outpatient appointments without adverse events.