A 68-year-old man without major past medical history was diagnosed with GC of the antrum and pylorus and was referred to our department for surgical resection . He was a heavy smoker, smoking one pack of cigarettes per day from 21 years of age, with occasional alcohol intake. The patient underwent distal LG and Roux-en-Y (RY) reconstruction. The duodenum was divided using a 60-mm tri-staple linear stapling device (Signia™ stapling system). Although DS reinforcement, like manual oversewing, was not performed, a drainage tube was inserted near the DS for information. The histopathological result revealed an adenocarcinoma with lymphoid stroma, L, Less/Post/Ant, type 3, pT2(MP), INFc, Ly0, V1a, pPM0 (66 mm), and pDM0 (16 mm), pN0. On postoperative day 1, the level of amylase from the drain was not highly elevated, and we postulated pancreatic fistula were not present . On postoperative day 3, bile-stained discharge was observed from the drain. Computed tomography (CT) revealed leakage of oral contrast media into the abdominal cavity, which we first considered gastrojejunal anastomosis failure or DSL . A nasogastric tube was inserted, and antibiotics were initiated as a conservative therapy. However, worsening abdominal pain and increased inflammatory markers in laboratory tests were observed. On postoperative day 6, CT revealed increased ascites; therefore, we considered conservative treatment a failure. An urgent reoperation was performed because of severe abdominal pain and suspected peritonitis, and DSL was confirmed. Laparotomy revealed the DS had raptured at the end of the staple line, leaving a hole of approximately 10 mm diameter . The DS was firmly closed after peritoneal lavage. On postoperative day 12, bile-stained fluid was again observed in the drain near the DS, and DSL recurrence was suspected. Subsequently, the drain near the DSL was changed to a 6.5-mm multichannel drain for therapeutic drainage. On postoperative day 13, bloody discharge was observed from the drain; the re-study of CT revealed hemorrhage from the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. Urgent percutaneous coil embolization of the artery was performed, resulting in successful hemostasis. As for the DSL, a pigtail catheter was inserted near the DSL under CT guidance for additional drainage. Subsequently, trans-tubular peritoneal lavage was performed, and intravenous infusion of octreotide (300 μg/day) was started; however, the amount of fluid from the DSL did not decrease.
On the 15th primary postoperative day, an ileal decompression tube, initially used for cases of ileus, was inserted near the DS using DBE for retrograde drainage . Fluoroscopic X-ray imaging during the procedure did not show obvious DSL. After ileal tube insertion, the volume of drainage fluid from other percutaneous drains near the DSL gradually decreased .
On the 20th primary postoperative day, the drain contrast imaging revealed no signs of DSL, and trans-tubular peritoneal lavage was terminated.
On the 24th primary postoperative day, CT revealed shrinkage of the abscess cavity.
Finally, on the 47th primary postoperative day, the drain catheters were removed, and the patient was discharged. DSL or GC recurrence was not observed after 1 year and 9 months of follow-up.