An 18-year-old female patient presented to our outpatient department with pain in her left knee of 3 years duration. There was a history of fall 3 years ago. She felt pain while walking and while standing up from squatting position. The patient gave no history of locking episodes. On clinical examination, there was no obvious swelling over her left knee. There was no tenderness around the knee except for tenderness over the medial joint line. The patient complained of pain during terminal flexion. There was no laxity in the knee. McMurray test was positive for the medial meniscus. Rest of the examination of the knee was unremarkable.
The patient had already been treated with physiotherapy and occasional analgesics. We decided to image the left knee. The radiographs of the knee revealed no abnormality . We performed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the knee and expected it to show a medial meniscal tear. Initial reporting by the radiologist confirmed a medial meniscal tear without a mention of it being discoid. However, because the body of the meniscus was seen in 4 consecutive sagittal sections of the MRI scan ( and ), we suspected a discoid medial meniscus and got the scan reported again. This time, the radiologist reported it as a torn discoid medial meniscus. We decided to perform arthroscopic partial meniscectomy and meniscoplasty for the patient.
Arthroscopy confirmed a discoid medial meniscus occupying the entire medial tibial plateau . The anterior part of the discoid meniscus was attached along the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) . However, no obvious tear could be visualized . We then trimmed the lateral edge of the meniscus lying toward the intercondylar region which revealed a large cleavage tear completely restricted to the interstitial part . We resected the upper and lower flaps till a stable peripheral semilunar rim of meniscus was obtained . Postoperatively, the patient was started on a physiotherapy protocol to preserve range of motion and muscle strength. Weight bearing was started after pain due to surgery subsided. 2 weeks postoperatively, the patient attained full range of motion and was pain-free even on terminal flexion.