A 58-year-old male patient presented to us with chief complain of pain in the right shoulder for 2 months with difficulty in raising the arm. Pain is localized to shoulder joint that aggravates with exertion and relieved with rest and medication. He had a history of trivial injury 2 months back. Pain was not relived with physiotherapy and medication.
On examination, there was not any sign of infection such as redness, swelling, or increased local temperature. Shoulder had not witnessed any previous fracture or surgery. Clinical sign for rotator cuff tear was positive. He had flexion 0°–80°, abduction 0°–15°, external rotation 0°–10°, and internal rotation 0°–15°. There was no visible muscle wasting around shoulder or scapula. At the time of presentation, the visual analog score was six. On investigation, his plain radiograph was normal other than minimal proximal migration of humeral head. MRI detected a full thickness tear of supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendon with proximal migration of humerus head and break in Maloney line .
After all pre-operative preparations, mini open rotator cuff repair was done with two metallic suture anchor and two PEEK foot print suture anchor . Suture removal was done 14 days following the operation and was uneventful. Nearly 3 weeks after operation, the patient complained of pain and mild rise of local temperature over shoulder. Clinical signs were normal other than mild warm at stich site compared to nearby skin. VAS score was five at this point of time with normal neutrophil and leucocyte count. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein (CRP) both positive with borderline procalcitonin test. We administered cefuroxime 500 mg twice daily for 7 days empirically. The patient improved clinically but his VAS score was 5 only. In 10 weeks from operation, his ESR decreased, but CRP was positive with normal neutrophil and leukocyte count. VAS score did not improve from a score of five. Nearly 3 months after operation, he presented with redness and serous discharge from stich site . We immediately underwent an incision and drainage presuming all is not well. On incision, we found nearby muscles and soft-tissue healthy with collection of some pale-yellow semisolid substance near the screw site. At times, we were confused with tubercular affection. Sample was sent for routine culture sensitivity, grams stain, and cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CBNAAT) for tuberculosis; all the test result was negative other than presence of pus cells in smear . Empirically, broad-spectrum antibiotic was administered. The patient was better than before but there was serous discharge from the stitch margin. We planned for a thorough debridement and nearly 4 months after first operation, we did another debridement under general anesthesia. We found similar straw color semisolid in consistency material near the screw site. Nearby, muscles were red, healthy, and contractile to stimulation. All the visible sutures and PEEK screw were removed . Sample again sent for routine culture sensitivity, grams stain and CBNAAT; all the tests were negative other than increase number of WBC. Fortunately, patients improved from his symptoms and wound healed normally . Patients present VAS score reduced to one at 6 months from the first surgery and 2 months from second surgery. There is marginal improvement of shoulder movement, no pain, and no rise of local temperature at 4 months following second surgery. At 25 months of follow-up, shoulder function is excellent without sign of local inflammation or recurrence of similar symptoms with VAS score one or less .