In August 2016, a 60-year-old Caucasian man was referred from a secondary care center to the University Hospital of Innsbruck, Austria, with the following symptoms: fatigue, weight loss of about 5 kg in the previous 6–9 months, unclear hepatopathy, and kidney failure. Physical examination at admission showed hepatomegaly but no other pathological findings.
His medical history included hypothyroidism caused by autoimmune thyroiditis and arterial hypertonia but no previous report of liver or kidney disease. He presented with an excellent Karnofsky performance status of 100% (according to Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 0).
The laboratory parameters at admission are listed in Table . A complete blood count and serum electrolyte results were within the normal ranges. Serological tests for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative.
Quantitative immunoglobulin (Ig) assay of the blood revealed an elevation of IgG with 2600 mg/dL (670–1840 mg/dL) and reduced values of IgA with 55 mg/dL (103–595 mg/dL) and IgM with 20 mg/dL (36–238 mg/dL). Serum immunofixation confirmed IgG gammopathy with lambda light chain and Bence–Jones lambda expression. Immunofixation of the urine revealed excretion of lambda light chain and Bence–Jones lambda.
Abdominal sonography showed hepatomegaly, minor amounts of ascites, and signs of diffuse renal parenchymal damage. Because cardiac involvement was suspected owing to the slightly elevated high-sensitivity troponin T, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and echocardiography were performed. The MRI suggested cardiac involvement, whereas the echocardiography repeatedly showed normal cardiac function. Therefore, no myocardial biopsy was carried out. The first bone computed tomography (CT) scan revealed scattered bilateral osteolytic lesions along the ribs.
A bone marrow biopsy revealed an infiltration of clonal IgG lambda-expressing plasma cells with a cellularity of 20%. Cytometry analysis showed the following: 7% clonal plasma cells (all tested markers are listed in detail in Table ). Cytogenetic testing demonstrated a deletion in 13q in 98% and translocation in (4;14) in 89.8% .
Hepatic venous pressure gradient measurement with a trans-jugular liver biopsy and gastroscopy revealed a clinically significant portal hypertension (pressure gradient of 30 mmHg) with small esophageal varices. The A liver biopsy confirmed extensive deposition of AL amyloid of lambda light chain type .
A kidney biopsy was not performed.
Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with MM Durie–Salmon stage IIB (ISS III, R-Revised ISS [R-ISS] III) with the leading disease of systemic AL amyloidosis (Mayo Sscore III). The systemic AL amyloidosis manifested itself as an advanced disease with end-stage liver and kidney disease as well as a suspected heart involvement (as per the MRI) without functional impairment.
Therefore, treatment with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone (CyBorD) was started, following a standard protocol for systemic AL amyloidosis . At the same time, kidney function deteriorated further, which resulted in end-stage kidney disease requiring dialysis.
The first two chemotherapy treatment cycles resulted in a very good partial remission (VGPR). During the third cycle, the patient developed jaundice and his liver function rapidly worsened, culminating in acute liver failure in November 2016. Immediate intensive care treatment rescued the patient, but owing to the clinical situation the hematologic treatment could not be continued.
After development of progressive hepatic encephalopathy, acute liver failure was stated. As a consequence, an interdisciplinary team of clinicians decided to list the patient for high urgency liver and kidney transplantation with a Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score of 39 (exact laboratory values are listed in Table ).
Ten days after enrolment on the high-urgency waiting list, simultaneous liver and kidney transplantation was performed in December 2016 and triple immunosuppression was started with tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisolone.
The histology of the explanted liver confirmed hepatic amyloidosis but also revealed signs of major toxic damage, likely caused by chemotherapy. Although a sinusoidal pattern is more common in AL amyloidosis and a vascular pattern in amyloid A amyloidosis, distribution patterns of amyloid deposition revealed an overlap of both .
Two months after solid-dual organ transplantation (kidney and liver), hematopoietic SCM and apheresis were performed using a standard protocol of SCM and subsequent ASCT after reduced-dose Melphalan conditioning chemotherapy (140 mg/m2) . During the ASCT treatment process, immunosuppression with tacrolimus and prednisolone was reduced, whereas the mycophenolate dose remained unchanged.
The following course proceeded without any further complications and a complete hematologic remission was achieved (M-gradient beneath limit of detection and β-2-microglobuline consistently falling; Table ).
Without any rational explanation, a bone CT scan performed in November 2017 could not confirm the initially found osteolytic lesions. Owing to increasing cholestasis parameters (bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, γ-glutamyltransferase) in December 2017, endoscopic retrograde cholangiography was performed. An anastomosis stenosis (AS) and a non-anastomosis stenosis (NAS) were found and were repeatedly treated with balloon dilatation and plastic stents.
At the most recent follow-up, over 3 years after simultaneously diagnosed extended AL amyloidosis and the first diagnosis of MM, the patient demonstrated the following response: a complete hematologic remission without a detectable M-gradient in serum electrophoresis and negative immune fixation, good liver function, and slightly impaired renal function under immunosuppression with tacrolimus (exact parameters are listed in Table ). Finally, an AS and a NAS were treated with balloon dilatation and placement of two plastic stents, which are now permanently removed. The patient reported having an excellent quality of life. He returned to work in his profession and is able to participate in hiking trips with his family.