A 35-year-old male with a 4-year history of tonic–clonic seizures presented to the emergency room with new-onset headaches, vomiting, and bilateral paresthesias in the hands. Past medical history was significant for congenital glaucoma and a previous left OCH, removed at age 7 via a lateral orbitotomy. His neurologic exam was significant for sluggishly reactive left pupil in addition to mild abducens palsy, esotropia, and mild ptosis of the left eye, consistent with a cranial nerve III and VI palsy. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and limited to counting fingers with the left eye at baseline. Neuroimaging revealed a 15-mm hemorrhagic mass in the left temporo-occipital region consistent with a CCM and a significant residual left OCH measuring approximately 30 mm [Figure -]. Given the poor control of seizures despite medication and the epileptogenic potential of the CCM, the patient expressed interest in surgical resection of the left temporo-occipital lesion, but wished to continue with observation of the orbital hemangioma. Benefits and risks of surgical removal of the CCM, with an emphasis on the proximity of the lesion to Meyer's loop and potential for loss of vision, were discussed in full, and the patient consented to the procedure. The mass was successfully resected by left temporal craniotomy without complication. The postoperative visual field deficits were unchanged. Histopathologic evaluation confirmed the diagnosis of CCM. During biannual follow-up examinations, the patient reported resolution of seizures and successful tapering of his seizure medications. Annual MRI demonstrated stable postsurgical changes. However, at the 3-year follow-up, the patient presented with complaints of supraorbital fullness and an associated sensation of increased ocular pressure of the left orbit. Given these new ophthalmic symptoms, he was referred for oculoplastic ophthalmologic evaluation. Interval MRI demonstrated that the left orbital mass had increased in size, consistent with recurrence of the left orbital tumor that was resected 30 years before . On examination, his visual acuity in the right eye was 20/20 and in the left eye was limited to counting fingers at 4 feet. Both pupils were reactive to light and accommodation, albeit sluggish in the left eye with a relative afferent pupillary defect. Ocular alignment was notable for a sensory exotropia in the left eye. Examinations of extraocular motility, anterior segment, and dilated fundus of the right eye were all within normal limits. There was notable hypoglobus and severe limitation on supraduction of the left eye. Anterior segment examination of the left eye was significant for blepharoptosis, central corneal haze, and a mild posterior subcapsular cataract. The dilated fundus examination of the left eye revealed marked disc pallor consistent with optic nerve atrophy and retinal vessel dilatation. The patient requested surgical removal of the supraorbital tumor due to the progression of ocular abnormalities and tumor growth. Given the anatomic location of the orbital tumor, the decision was made to perform a left lateral orbitotomy for the removal of the presumed recurrent cavernous hemangioma.
Following induction of generalized anesthesia, the ophthalmology team made an incision at the upper lid crease and proceeded to dissect superiorly in the plane between the orbicularis muscle and orbital septum . The superior and lateral orbital rims were then exposed and the periosteum was reflected off the bone. The previous osteotomy sites were identified and an inferior osteotomy was created at the previous surgical site (at the zygomatic arch) using an oscillating saw. A superior marginotomy was then created at the superior orbital rim, medial to the supraorbital notch. The oscillating saw and the craniotome were used to remove the extended bone flap in a single piece of bone. The cutting burr was employed to further conservatively thin the bone in the lateral orbital rim. The branch of the middle meningeal artery anterior to the superior orbital fissure was identified and cauterized. The subperiosteal dissection was continued to the orbital apex to expose the orbital mass in the superior orbit.
Subsequently, the neurosurgical team bluntly dissected around the lesion, which appeared to be most consistent with a recurrent cavernous hemangioma. The feeding arteries to the lesion were cauterized and cut sharply. The lesion was biopsied and submitted to pathology for frozen and permanent section. The remainder of the lesion was then removed en bloc as two specimens. The superior aspect was dissected first followed by the medial and lateral aspects, while the inferior and deep aspects were the final portions to be removed. There were no subsequent post-procedural complications, with visual acuity remaining unchanged from preoperative status. Histopathologic review confirmed the working diagnosis of recurrent OCH . At his 2-week follow-up, the patient reported complete resolution of supraorbital discomfort. However, he continued to note ptosis of the left eye. Examination demonstrated a diffuse limitation of the extraocular movements secondary to edema, a well-healed upper eyelid incision, and complete ptosis of the left upper eyelid with mild upper lid edema. Six weeks following orbitotomy, visual acuity, ocular motility, and anterior segment examination findings remained stable compared with preoperative status. Over the course of the next several months, the degree of left upper lid ptosis continued to improve, ultimately returning to baseline 6 months postoperatively. At his most recent follow-up examination, 5 years after resection of the intraparenchymal cavernous malformation and 2 years after resection of the orbital hemangioma, the patient's clinical status remains stable. MRI showed typical postsurgical changes at each operative site with no new abnormal signal or enhancement suggestive of recurrence, additional lesions, or hemorrhage [Figure –].