A 45-year-old woman presented with a painful swelling on the left side of her jaw of 5 months duration. The swelling had recently started to grow rapidly. There were no associated sensory symptoms. In addition, a few teeth adjacent to the swelling had become loose, carious and had fallen off. Local physical examination showed a 4.0 × 3.2 × 3.0 cm, tender, firm, irregular lump that appeared to arise from the left mandible. Intra orally, the tumor could be seen as a pink, bulging and fleshy mass. Two lymph nodes were palpable, one in left submaxillary region measuring approximately 1 × 1 cm and the other in the left cervical region and was barely palpable. Remainder of the physical examination was not contributory and no other swelling was noticed. Orthopantomogram (OPG) of the jaw showed a radiolucent lesion with irregular margins, centered in and destroying a portion of the left mandibular body . The teeth adjacent to the mass were carious and some were missing. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the oral cavity and neck was advised but was not done due to financial reasons. A clinical diagnosis of ameloblastoma with suspicion of lymph node involvement was given.
An incisional biopsy of the lesion was submitted for pathologic evaluation. Microscopic examination of the tissue showed a neoplasm composed of epithelial cells arranged in irregular nests separated by fibrovascular septa. The cells adjacent to the fibrovascular septa were cuboidal to columnar with high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio and eosinophilic cytoplasm, while those in the center of the nests were larger and polygonal, with abundant clear cytoplasm . Each cell had a single nucleus with fine chromatin and prominent eosinophilic nucleolus. The cells at the periphery of the nests occasionally demonstrated nuclear palisading away from the basement membrane, i.e., reverse nuclear polarity . These peripheral cells also showed occasional mitoses. The central areas of the nests and fibrous septae showed infiltration by neutrophils. The cells were immunoreactive for pan-cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, and S-100 protein; they did not stain for vimentin, smooth muscle actin, and HMB-45. The abundant, clear cytoplasm of the cells was strongly positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) . This PAS positivity was diastase sensitive indicating intracytoplasmic glycogen . A diagnosis of clear cell odontogenic carcinoma was entertained. Fine needle aspiration from the submaxillary node was done but was inconclusive.
The patient was referred to a specialty cancer hospital where she underwent left hemimandibulectomy with ipsilateral functional neck dissection (level1 to level 5). The reconstruction was done using ipsilateral 12th rib and the soft tissue coverage was given by pectoralis major flap. Postoperative histopathological examination showed tumor morphology similar to incisional biopsy and 1/11 lymph nodes (submaxillary) was positive for the tumor metastasis without any extranodal spread. The tumor was extending into the soft tissue and the left bony margin was positive for the tumor cells. Due to the positive margin, the patient was referred for adjuvant radiotherapy for which she refused to give consent. At the time of discharge the patient was accepting soft diet and the suture line on the neck and chest were healthy. Subsequent to the discharge, the patient was lost to follow-up only to reappear after 8 months and at that time had no signs of local or regional spread. Since then patient is again lost to follow-up.