On January 8th, 2021, a 58-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University due to recurrent cough and expectoration for 2 years and a significant deterioration in corresponding symptoms a month ago.
Medical history showed that on March 8th, 2020, at a local hospital, his chest CT revealed multiple abnormal density shadows in both lungs, indicating possible fungal infection. His left heel was punctured by an iron nail on a mushroom farm 3 years ago . The wound remained unhealed with recurrent ulcer. Wound secretions from skin lesions were cultured and Candida albicans was identified. Gram-positive cocci and fungal spores were found using sputum smear microscopy. Fungal infection of the left heel accompanied by intrapulmonary dissemination was considered and fluconazole anti-fungal treatment was performed. Six months later, his symptoms of cough and expectoration were not significantly relieved, and chest CT result was worse than before . And then, the anti-fungal agent was changed into voriconazole. The patient experienced pain in the right lower abdomen with obvious tenderness during coughing on December 25th, 2020. He went to the local hospital for further check. Multiple infectious lesions in the liver, liver abscess from some lesions, splenomegaly, and low density shadow of spleen were found using abdominal ultrasonography, indicating that there may be infections.
Accordingly, he was referred to our hospital. On admission, except for low fever, his vital signs were basically normal with body temperature at 37.8 °C, blood pressure at 109/84 mmHg, heart rate at 101 beat/min, and respiration rate at 23 time/min. No obvious abnormalities in lungs, soft abdomen, tenderness in the right lower abdomen, positive percussion pain in the liver area, and palpable spleen under the ribs were found through physical examination. An ulceration with an area of 4 cm × 5 cm was observed on his left heel. There were dark necrosis area surrounding the wound and bloody pus discharged from the center. Blood routine was basically normal with white blood cell counts of 7.10 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 128.00 g/L, and platelet counts of 1.71 × 1011/L. Lower albumin level (31.80 g/L) and no significant abnormalities in liver and kidney functions were found. For inflammatory indicators, higher C-reactive protein (CRP) level (43.77 mg/L), higher erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level (56.00 mm/h), and no obvious increase in procalcitonin level (0.18 ng/mL) were observed. Cryptococcus capsular antigen test, G test, and GM test were all negative. Gram-positive cocci and gram-negative bacilli were found by sputum smear microscopy, while mycete and tubercle bacillus were not detected. Blood cultures were negative. For the tumor indicators, neuron-specific enolase (60.65 ng/mL) and ferritin (437.80 ng/mL) increased.
He was preliminarily diagnosed as pulmonary fungal infection and suspected liver abscess after admission. Voriconazole was used for anti-infective treatment. Because he was unresponsive to anti-fungal therapy for 8 months, malignancy could not be ruled out. Lung and wound tissue biopsies were performed, and samples were sent for PACEseq metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) analysis (Hugobiotech, Beijing, China). Meanwhile, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple abnormal signals in both lungs, liver, thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, and multiple small and medium-sized lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum . Chest CT plain scan plus enhanced scan indicated multiple nodules and clumpy high-density shadows in both lungs with blurred boundaries, and cloudy fuzzy shadows in the surrounding areas . After enhancement, mild consolidation was observed and multiple cavities were visible inside. The above results of imageology indicated possible fungal infection. However, no pathogens were detected in lung biopsy tissues by mNGS. Accordingly, both pathological (tissue biopsy of both lungs and unhealed plantar puncture wound) and immunohistochemical results supported the diagnosis of malignant melanoma . The liver and thoracolumbar lesions might be considered as results of melanoma metastases. However, he rejected our recommendation to perform liver biopsy. With consultation to the oncology department, it was concluded that his melanoma was accompanied by systemic metastases and immunotherapy might be feasible. However, considering the poor prognosis and the high cost, the patient and his family abandoned treatments and requested discharge after thorough considerations.