A 40-year-old man was admitted to hospital exhibiting fatigue, weight loss of 10 kg, and dyspnea on effort. Physical examination showed severe emaciation (body mass index 15.1) and remarkably decayed teeth. He could not walk due to malnutrition. Laboratory data showed glucose tolerance failure (HbA1c 14.3%, blood glucose level 527 mg/dL) and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 2.4 g/dL). C-reactive protein level was 0.25 mg/dL, and white blood cell count was 5000 mm3. Computed tomography showed bilateral pneumothorax and pleural effusion . Thoracentesis revealed a cream-colored purulent pleural effusion from both sides of the pleural cavity. A diagnosis was made of bilateral empyema with bilateral fistulae due to a ruptured lung abscess and antibiotics (sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium) was introduced. He was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. Chest drainage tubes were inserted into both sides of the pleural cavity. Bacterial culture of the right-side pleural effusion showed streptococcal species but no pathogenic species were found in the left pleural effusion. Antibiotics was stopped because laboratory data showed probable antibiotics-induced liver damage. Intensive insulin therapy and dietary therapy (energy control meal, 1600 kcal/day) were introduced for diabetes mellitus treatment.
Seven days after the patient was admitted to our hospital, we performed the first operation under thoracoscopy. The operation was started on the right side because the air leakage was predominant on that side. In the right pleural cavity, the infected pleura was white and thick, and visceral pleural crater-shaped fistulae were observed. The infected fluid and material were removed, and the pleural space was cleansed with saline. On the right side, two fistulae were observed, one in the right lateral basal segment (S9) and the other in right posterior basal segment (S10) . The sizes of the fistulae were approximately 2 cm and 3 cm, respectively. During a water-sealing test, the water reversed though the double-lumen endobronchial tube, so water-sealing test was not repeated in order to prevent lung damage induced by washing the pleural cavity. The S9 fistula was directly sutured using 3–0 absorbable, monofilament sutures; however, the S10 fistula was a relatively large fistula and difficult to close under thoracoscopy being located near the costophrenic angles. In addition, the surrounding tissue was fragile because of inflammation, and there was a possibility that suturing this tissue would cause further air leakage. A chest drainage tube was placed in the right pleural cavity locating the tip of catheter near the S10 fistula. Washing of the pleural cavity, removal of the infected pleural tissue, and drainage of the left side were sequentially performed. On the left side, a crater-like fistula, approximately 1.5 cm in size, was present in the left posterior basal segment (S10) and given its deep cavitied shape, the fistula was deemed to be difficult to close with direct suturing. Therefore, free intercostal muscle tissue, located around the thoracoscopic port and measuring about 2 cm, was harvested. We filled and plugged the fistula using the flap . Then, the free intercostal muscle flap and lung tissue around the fistula were sutured together using 3–0 absorbable, monofilament thread . By the end of the operation, the chest drainage unit showed air leakage only within the right pleural cavity.
Postoperative CT showed almost full expansion of the left lung and a bronchopleural fistula of the right B10 bronchus . With the patient under conscious sedation (midazolam), forceps were used to insert endobronchial Watanabe spigots into the right B10b and B10c bronchi , following which, the air leakage of the right pleural cavity tended to decease but was refractory. Therefore, a second operation for closure of the right S10 bronchopleural fistula was carried out 14 days after the first operation. At that time, the patient’s general condition had improved due to insulin therapy, dietary therapy and rehabilitation and he was able to walk with walking frame. The right ninth rib was removed, and a pedicled ninth and tenth intercostal muscle flap was created. The pedicled intercostal muscle flap was superimposed over the S10 fistula with anchor sutures . Antibiotics (meropenem) was administered for seven days following the second operation. After the second operation, the air leakage stopped completely, and the right lung expanded fully . Right pleural effusion was culture negative, so the chest drainage tube was removed seven days after the second operation. Further rehabilitation, dietary therapy and insulin therapy were continued after the second operation. His body weight increased from 40.7 kg at the time of admission to 47.1 kg. The patient was transferred to another hospital for continuation of rehabilitation.