A 42-year-old female patient reported a mass in her right breast that had been present for a year. One year prior, she noticed an egg-sized painless mass in her right breast. The patient did not have any serious concerns or seek treatment. Despite initial indifference, the tumor continued to grow. Two months prior, the patient observed a significant increase in mass, approximately one fist size. Slight tenderness associated with the mass was observed. Therefore, the patient visited our hospital for treatment. She had experienced ulcerative colitis three years ago which was alleviated after treatment with mesalazine and bifid triple viable enteric-coated capsules.
Physical examination revealed an 8 × 7 cm mass located in the patient 's right breast. The mass was hard, mobile, tender, and circumscribed. No depression, ulceration or orange peel-like changes were found in the skin. No obvious masses were palpable on the left breast. No nipple discharge was observed on either side. The axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes were unswollen.
Laboratory tests revealed elevated levels of CA125 at 45.1 U/ml, LDH at 442.8 U/L, PRL at 1534.09 mIU/L, and TSH at 7.4058 µIU/ml, respectively. Mammography revealed a mass in the right breast, measuring 93 × 76 mm, with a clear boundary and uniform inner density. Enhanced MR imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) on a 3.0 T scanner revealed an 85 × 57 × 82 mm tumor with uneven signals, predominantly low signals on T1-weighted images, and high signals on T2-weighted images. Diffusion was limited. After enhancement, the mass showed continuous enhancement with annular enhancement in the arterial phase (Breast Imaging Reporting and BI-RADS: 4 B). Ultrasonography of the breast revealed a solid cystic nodule measuring 73 × 53 mm with a clear boundary and a regular shape in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast. The blood flow signals were visible in the solid portion . Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland showed an echogenic nodule measuring 9 × 6 mm in the lower part of the right lobe, with a distinct border and a regular shape. Additionally, a 30 × 20 mm hyperechoic nodule with a clear boundary and regular shape was observed in the lower part of the left lobe. No enlarged lymph nodes were detected on either side. An ultrasound scan of other organs, including the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and spleen, revealed no abnormalities. An ultrasound-guided breast biopsy was performed to determine the nature of the breast mass. Pathological examination of the biopsy samples indicated a poorly differentiated malignant tumor with necrosis . One week later, the patient underwent modified radical mastectomy for right breast cancer under general anesthesia.
Grossly, the size of the tumor was 6 × 4.5 × 3.3 cm, most of which were cystic and contained necrosis. Microscopic examination of surgical specimens revealed that the tumor was predominantly composed of sarcomatoid spindle cells with severe atypia. A wide range of necrosis was observed in the central region of the tumor. The remaining tumor cells were observed in the necrotic area, with these cells tending to grow around the blood vessels. Tumor cells far from the vascular area formed a large area of coagulation necrosis. The tumor cells were diffusely distributed, arranged in bundles and flakes, disorderly, and locally woven. Atypia of the tumor cells was evident with large nuclei, deeply stained chromatin, more mitotic figures and no visible nucleoli. Only a few tumor cells were arranged in solid strip shapes, similar to the morphological characteristics of ductal carcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for P63, Vimentin, P53, and CKpan, whereas CK8/18, CD34, desmin, S-100, SMA, HMB-45, Melan-A, and estrogen receptor were negative. There was no overexpression of CerbB-2. Approximately 3% of the tumor cells exhibited weak-to-moderate progesterone receptor expression. The Ki-67 proliferation index was approximately 90% . The pathological diagnosis was non-keratinizing SCC of the right breast with a negative margin. No tumor metastasis was observed in 46 right axillary lymph nodes or six right subclavian lymph nodes. The patient underwent gynecological and otorhinolaryngological examinations, and no tumors were found in the cervix or nasopharynx.
After surgery, the patient underwent chemotherapy with a combination of docetaxel 115 mg and carboplatin 550 mg for eight cycles. The patient subsequently received seven cycles of radiotherapy (30 Gy/15 F 50 Gy/25 F). Three years after the operation, ultrasound examination revealed a 4 × 4 mm hypoechoic nodule in the middle of the right thyroid gland and a 36 × 17 × 21 mm mixed echoic nodule in the lower pole of the left gland, which were larger than before . The thyroglobulin antibody level was as high as 281.83 IU/mL, while the anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody level was as high as 968.37 IU/mL. The patient was re-hospitalized for surgical treatment, and the left substernal and right parts of the thyroid gland were removed. Postoperative pathological examination revealed a microinvasive follicular carcinoma in the left thyroid and an adenomatous hyperplastic nodule in the right thyroid. Twenty months after thyroid surgery, the patient came to the hospital for re-examination, and no evidence of breast or thyroid tumor recurrence was found. She had been treated with gayoule tablets for hypothyroidism for a long time, and no adverse reactions were observed during treatment. The patients were satisfied with the treatment and care.