A 38-year-old woman of Eastern European descent was admitted to the emergency department of a peripheral hospital for headache, dizziness, nausea and vomiting. She had a history of migraine and she had taken NSAIDs in the previous days to mitigate the headache. She was a secundipara with two vaginal deliveries, and had no further medical history.
On presentation she was hypertensive (170 over 130 mmHg) and tachycardic (130 bpm); peripheral blood oxygen saturation was low for her age at 90% in room air, and her tympanic temperature was 36.7 °C. She was rapidly approaching respiratory fatigue, with generalized cyanosis, accessory muscle recruitment and orthopnea. Peripheral pulses were noted to be barely palpable bilaterally. On echocardiography, global systolic function was depressed, with an ejection fraction of 0.25. Electrocardiogram showed mild ST-segment elevation in V5 and V6. The patient was initially hypervigilant and anxious, but her mental status deteriorated to the point that she was tracheally intubated to secure airway patency; there were no focal neurological deficits.
She was transferred to the ICU of the tertiary medical center, the University Hospital of Parma.
The main finding during secondary examination was a severely impaired systolic function (ejection fraction 0.12, calculated using a modified Simpson’s rule). As systolic BP reached values above 220 mmHg, sodium nitroprusside and labetalol were started in continuous infusion to lower BP and HR, respectively, and a pulmonary artery catheter was inserted. Thermodilution confirmed the diagnosis of cardiogenic shock due to severely increased peripheral vascular resistance.
Because of the patient’s unremarkable medical history and abruptness of the crisis, a total body CT scan was requested in search of a diagnosis. The brain scan was negative; lungs were remarkable for diffuse ground glass infiltrates; finally, a 11.4-cm adrenal mass occupying the superior cap of the left kidney was found. It had cystic and solid components . There were also areas of increased bone density in the the inferior endplates of the D12, L1 and L3 vertebrae.
Urine analysis confirmed the hypothesis that norepinephrine levels were particularly elevated with respect to epinephrine. The patient then underwent a [123I]-MIBG to formalize the diagnosis of left-sided adrenal pheochromocytoma extending to the ipsilateral kidney.
The patient was extubated on the 4th day of admission, but she required noninvasive CPAP ventilation to maintain adequate oxygenation and avert respiratory muscle fatigue, despite her left ventricular ejection fraction having increased to 0.42. Her ICU stay was complicated by right lower lobe VAP which prolonged weaning from ventilation and delayed surgery, in order to complete a full course of vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam. Intravenous vasoactive drugs were weaned over 2 weeks and substituted with doxazosin 4 mg tid, bisoprolol 5 mg and amlodipine 10 mg daily. Blood pressure was stabilized but persistently elevated, around 150/95 mmHg, with HR closer to the lower normal range.
Since [123I]-MIBG scans have inferior sensitivity for pheochromocytoma metastases and the disease was high-grade, a confirmatory [18F]-DOPA PET scan was also performed as soon as the patient was extubated. Both studies showed no uptake by the vertebral lesions, whereas the primary tumor had consistently increased signal.
Once pneumonia resolved and hemodynamics were confirmed stable, some 20 days after admission, the patient was transferred to an internal medicine ward and a MDT was assembled to take charge of the patient. A radiologist, a urologist, an endocrinologist and an anesthesiologist convened to offer open resection of the malignancy, to include nephrectomy because of the apparent invasion, under general anesthesia with epidural analgesia. It was convened that the combined results of the functional and morphological imaging studies did not warrant a vertebral biopsy, particularly in such a high-risk patient, and active monitoring was proposed. Our patient then consented to surgery with planned postoperative surgical ICU admission.
In the preoperative holding area, an epidural catheter was sited at the T10–T11 interspace and loaded with 10 μg of sufentanil, a potent short-acting opioid; the anesthesiologist opted to reserve LA administration until hypertensive crises developed. Monitoring included radial and pulmonary artery catheters, the latter to better assess systemic vascular resistances and systemic oxygen delivery vs consumption in case of hypotension after tumor resection.
As expected, a hypertensive crisis developed during tumor isolation, and it was managed with continuous infusions of sodium nitroprusside and esmolol, as well as generous lidocaine boluses (up to 80 mg every 10–15 min) via the epidural catheter, to induce pharmacological sympathectomy with vasodilation in the lower half of the body. During such management, cardiac systolic function remained at the lower end of the normal range, as did mixed venous saturation, which was never below 70%.
A left subcostal incision was chosen, which provided the surgeons with optimal exposure, confirming its usefulness in the excision of larger adrenal masses. Left kidney invasion was confirmed upon direct inspection. The renal vein was ligated first in order to block incretion of catecholamines, followed by the artery. The tumor’s size and the inflammatory reaction around it complicated cleavage, which took more time than expected; resection en bloc with the kidney was nevertheless completed in 100 min, with an estimated blood loss of 550 ml.
Hydrocortisone (200 mg daily in continuous infusion after an intraoperative 100-mg loading dose) was selected to transition the patient during the expected transient acute adrenal insufficiency, in the first 48 h. Hypotension developed as soon as the renal vein was ligated, and required norepinephrine infusion in addition to discontinuation of the previous short-acting vasoactive drugs. One additional 100-mg hydrocortisone bolus was also given during surgery.
The patient was transferred to the surgical ICU for monitoring. She was weaned from ventilation and extubated shortly after admission. Norepinephrine was also gradually discontinued within the first 18 h. Doxazosin and amlodipine were withheld the same day, whereas bisoprolol was tapered off over 3 days. Hydrocortisone was tapered to 100 mg/day and replaced with same-dose oral cortisone; total cortisol and ACTH levels were monitored to guide therapy and maintained within normal ranges. On postoperative day 1, slightly elevated serum troponin I and urine dopamine concentrations were detected; in light of the overall satisfactory clinical condition, this was attributed to the mineralocorticoid activity of the exogenous steroids. On postoperative day 2 the patient was transferred to the Urology floor. Her stay there was unremarkable, and she was discharged home in good conditions 4 days later. One month later, urinary metanephrine and particularly normetanephrine levels were half the preoperative values, yet still elevated (~ 900 μg/24 h), but there were no associated signs or symptoms; cortical hormones were within the normal range throughout the whole postoperative period.
Histopathology findings were adrenal pheochromocytoma and chronic pyelonephritis, which had resembled malignant invasion in imaging studies and during surgery. Immunohystochemistry analyses were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and neuron-specific enolase. Final PASS was 10. The score is compatible with high risk of malignant behavior. In the absence of obvious metastases and of recurrent signs or symptoms, the MDT opted to offer close follow-up and to withhold further treatment.
Two years after diagnosis and surgery, the patient has discontinued all drugs and enjoys a disease-free life. Metabolic tests were normalized since the first follow-up, 6 months after surgery. She was tested for genetic variants of lactate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase and for mutations associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2; results were negative. She is being followed up with urine cathecolamine tests twice a year, and surveillance magnetic resonance imaging every other year.