An otherwise healthy 11-year-old boy presented by his family to the ER department suffering from disturbance in the level of consciousness with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 6/15 (E2, V2, M2). There has been no history suggestive of seizures. On examination, a 10 cm open wound in the left side of his forehead was evident with a skull bone defect seen beneath it through which brain tissue can be visualized. A sort of a medium-sized metallic hook used to fix tents to the ground was penetrating and anchored to the wound and the skull defect . Both pupils were equal, medium sized, and reactive to light. No asymmetry in his limbs movements could be detected. The head injury was a result of an assault. After stabilization in the emergency department, a plain skull radiograph was performed and showed the metallic hook penetrating the frontal bone and extending to the central skull base zone . Computed tomography (CT) scan illustrated hematoma along the injury tract with no associated intraventricular hemorrhage or remote intracerebral hemorrhage considering the limitations exerted by the metal artifact. The midline frontal bone was broken and depressed reaching the left orbital roof .
The decision was to intervene surgically aiming for (1) evacuation of the injury tract hematoma with achieving hemostasis, (2) elevation of the depressed frontal bone fracture with removal of any scattered accessible bony spicules, (3) cleaning and debridement of the soft tissue wound, and (4) closure in layers with the best achievable cosmetic outcome. Therefore, intraoperatively, the scalp wound was extended to perform a craniotomy centered around the hook entry site, exposing the underlying dura which was lacerated at the site of hook penetration, this was followed by cautious retrieval of the hook from within the brain under direct vision where it has been found to have a trajectory from the paramedian right frontal lobe to the contralateral posterior basal left frontal lobe sliding over the medial part of the sphenoid ridge for few millimeters into the anterior left temporal lobe . Generous wound debridement and excision of the devitalized brain tissue where appropriate was carried out followed by irrigation with antibiotic-mixed saline and meticulous hemostasis. Dura defect closure was done using a periosteal graft. The skin loss was not extensive and closure in layers was readily achievable. Postoperatively, the patient was shifted to the ICU, with gradual daily improvement of his conscious level. Six days after surgery, he has regained his conscious completely to a GCS of 15/15 without any motor or cranial nerve deficits apart from a slight complaint of blurring vision in the left eye . He was shifted to the inpatient ward for observation then discharged home after 4 days. During the whole length of his hospital stay, he was kept on broad-spectrum antibiotics as well as antiepileptic medications. There have been neither signs of meningitis or surgical site infection during his admission period nor did he develop any seizures. At his last follow-up visit 6 months after the surgery, he was clinically intact regarding gross motor and cranial nerves’ function. He has been referred to a specialized pediatric hospital for further ophthalmology and neurocognitive assessment.