A 68-year-old man experienced intermittent left abdominal pain for 3 months. On physical examination, he was afebrile, and superficial lymph node swelling was not detected. The serum level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor was elevated (6020 U/ml). There was no abnormality in the complete blood count or other biochemical examinations. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan and Ga-scintigraphy revealed multiple nodules in the retroperitoneum and mesentery . Hepatosplenomegaly and ascites were absent. An open biopsy revealed multiple nodules, up to 4 cm in the maximal length, involving the mesenteric lymph nodes. He did not elect to be treated with chemotherapy and was given best supportive care. After 25 months of follow-up, he died.
Imprints of biopsied tissue specimens stained with Papanicolaou and May-Giemsa were used for cytological examination. Then, the biopsied tissue specimens were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, and paraffin-embedded tissue sections were used for histological examination. On cytological findings, pleomorphic and epithelioid large mononuclear and multinuclear neoplastic cells were intermingled in an inflammatory background including frequent eosinophils . Nuclei were large and round to oval in shape, and they had some nucleoli. Often, emperipolesis of small lymphocytes was noted. On histological findings, neoplastic cells diffusely proliferated in the whole lymph node and infiltrated over the lymph node capsule . The normal architecture of the lymph node was completely affected. The tumor was composed of large (usually > 20 μm) neoplastic cells that were round to oval or spindle in shape and mononuclear or multinucleated with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm . There were 1.1 mitoses/high-power field (HPF) on average and emperipolesis with small lymphocytes penetrating neoplastic cells in the same pattern noted in some previous reports [, ]. Reactive cells, such as small lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, benign histiocytes, and numerous eosinophils, infiltrated the neoplastic tissue. The maximum number of eosinophils infiltrating the tumor was 108 cells/HPF (hot spot) . Spindle neoplastic cells were prone to present around no or scant eosinophilic infiltration areas showing fibrosis and lymphatic vessel proliferation. On the other hand, polygonal neoplastic cells were prone to present around relatively large eosinophilic infiltration areas without fibrosis or lymphatic vessel proliferation .
On immunohistochemical findings, neoplastic cells were positive for histiocytic markers such as CD68; CD163; LN5; and homologous to lymphotoxin, inducible expression, competes with herpes simplex virus (HSV) glycoprotein D for binding to HSV entry mediator, a receptor expressed on T lymphocytes (LIGHT, also known as CD258/TNFSF14 [M2b macrophage]), as well as PD-L1 (CD274), BRAF V600E, and eotaxin-2 . Some tumor cells were positive for lysozyme, LN2, LN3, and DC-SIGN . Conversely, neoplastic cells were also negative for eotaxin-3 (CCL26) and other macrophage (heme oxygenase 1 [Mox macrophage], CD205 [DEC205], and CD208 [DC-LAMP]), Langerhans cell, follicular dendritic cell, epithelial cell, lymphocyte, melanoma, neuroendocrine, and mesenchymal cell markers. The Ki-67 labeling index was 31.6%. Numerous eosinophils were positive for eotaxin-3. The results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of paraffin-embedded tissues showed a monoclonal band of TCRγ gene rearrangement, but a clonal band of IgH gene rearrangement was not detected. The BRAF V600E mutation was not detected by the i-densy IS5320 system (Arkray Inc., Kyoto, Japan) .