A 35-year-old Turkish man who had fallen on his flexed right knee while walking on ice was referred to our hospital. He suffered from pain and inability to move his right knee. Physical examination revealed prominent swelling and tenderness over the right patella. Plain radiographs showed comminuted displaced inferior pole fracture of the patella . His extremity was immobilized initially through a cast brace, and he was then operated under general anesthesia on the following day. During the operation, it was found out that the patellar fracture could not be reduced and repaired. Because of this, a partial patellectomy was performed and his patellar tendon was sutured to the patella with No. 2 polydioxanone (PDS) sutures and augmented with a cerclage wire . A long leg cast was then applied and we advised our patient to move using two crutches and bear no weight for three weeks. At the end of the third week, he was started on active and passive ranges of motion exercises of the knee.
On his follow-up visit after six weeks, he was already able to flex his right knee by about 100°. After that period, however, he started to experience a gradual decrease in knee movement. Two months after the operation, the active flexion of his knee was only 60°. A lateral radiograph of his right knee showed extensive ossifications at the resected part of the patella and calcifications in the patellar tendon . Excision of the ossifications and implant removal were thus planned. During that period, he felt a sudden pain over the tibial tubercle of his right leg while he was descending the stairs. He was unable to extend his right knee.
Plain radiographs revealed the presence of patella alta. As a result, another operation was performed. It was then discovered that the patellar tendon with ossification throughout its length was avulsed from the tibial tubercle. The cerclage wire from the previous surgery was removed and ossifications were excised. Patellar tendon was fixed to the tibial tubercle with four suture anchors . After three weeks of knee immobilization with a long leg cast, a gradually increasing range of knee motion rehabilitation was applied. Full weight-bearing was allowed after six weeks. At the end of the fifth postoperative year, the range of motion of his right knee was 90° flexion and full extension without any pain .