A 31-year-old male patient, previously fit and active, presented to the local emergency department with coryzal symptoms and syncope whilst walking upstairs. At clinical examination, heart sounds were deemed unremarkable and the chest clear on auscultation. A 12-lead ECG showed new onset rate-controlled AF. Blood tests revealed lymphopenia (0.7 × 109/L) and a raised C-reactive protein of 45 mg/L with normal electrolyte levels and thyroid function. The patient was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and discharged home with an outpatient cardiology clinic appointment. At cardiology review, both stroke risk (CHA2DS2-VASc score 0) and bleeding risk (HAS-BLED score 0) were low and the patient was initiated on oral anticoagulation with rivaroxaban 20 mg daily before elective electrical cardioversion 8 weeks later. Symptoms subsequently resolved, and after 4 weeks anticoagulation was stopped and the patient was discharged with a diagnosis of AF in the context of an upper respiratory tract viral illness. The patient’s underlying congenital cardiac malformation remained undiagnosed at this point. Two years later, the patient represented to his general practitioner with a 6-month history of fatigue, breathlessness, and reduced exercise tolerance. Laboratory tests revealed a raised N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide of 992 ng/L (0–400 ng/L), prompting a re-referral to the local cardiologist. Physical examination at cardiology assessment revealed resting oxygen saturations of 96% on air, no signs of cardiovascular decompensation, right ventricular lift, exaggeration of the pulmonary component of the second heart sound, and a soft flow murmur at the left sternal edge with no audible diastolic murmurs. A 12-lead ECG showed a recurrence of AF . The patient was initiated on oral anticoagulation with rivaroxaban 20 mg daily and bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a membranous structure within the left atrium , dividing the chamber into two parts, with a small communication (12 mm) in the membrane and continuous blood flow across it, with a peak gradient of 15 mmHg and mean gradient of 6 mmHg suggestive of moderate obstruction. The proximal high-pressure chamber within the left atrium was dilated and received drainage from all pulmonary veins. There was also a small ASD between the high-pressure chamber and the right atrium, and a PFO between the distal low-pressure chamber and the right atrium. The left ventricle was normal in size and function [ejection fraction (EF) 56%]. The right ventricle was normal in size with mild systolic impairment [tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) 13 mm] and an estimated systolic pressure of 30 mmHg. Cardiac computed tomography revealed normal coronary artery anatomy without disease and confirmed normal pulmonary venous drainage. The patient was referred to an adult congenital heart disease centre and 4 months later underwent corrective surgery; resection of the fibromuscular membrane, resection and oversewing of the left atrial appendage, closure of the ASD, and Cox-maze surgical cryo- and radiofrequency ablation. A post-operative ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm. A subsequent TTE revealed no residual membrane in the left atrium , laminar flow within the left atrial cavity, no residual ASD or PFO, normal left ventricular size and systolic function (EF 68%), mildly dilated right ventricle with impaired longitudinal function (TAPSE 10 mm) but preserved radial function, mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation with estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 38 mmHg, and no pericardial effusion. The patient was discharged home in sinus rhythm. At 3-month follow-up, the patient had remained in sinus rhythm, felt improved and had returned to baseline functional status. He will discontinue anticoagulation at 6 months from surgery.