Seventy-five years old frail, insulin-dependent diabetic, hypertensive female with chronic kidney disease Stage III was symptomatic with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III dyspnoea. She had tricuspid aortic valve, severe AS with maximum, and mean gradient of 110 and 65 mmHg and an effective orifice area of 0.6 cm2. Coronary evaluation revealed calcified significant distal LM and ostial left anterior descending (LAD) and borderline right coronary artery (RCA) lesions. The left ventricular systolic ejection fraction (LVEF) was 60%. With a Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) risk score of 16 and EUROSCORE risk of in-hospital mortality of 8.25%, she was considered high risk for surgical management. A detailed computed tomography angiogram was performed for the evaluation of a possible TAVR. It showed valve morphology and peripheral vasculature suitable for transfemoral TAVR and thus, she was offered an option of PCI to LM and LAD with RA and a transfemoral TAVR. As the patient was planned for both PCI and TAVR, she was loaded with Aspirin 300 mg and Clopidogrel 300 mg a day prior to the procedure.
We obtained a 7 French (Fr) access in the left femoral artery for the PCI. A 7 Fr extra backup left guide catheter was used to engage LM ostium. After crossing the lesion with Sion BlueTM (Asahi Intecc) guidewire, it was exchanged with RA wire over a microcatheter. A 1.5 mm burr was used for RA of LM to LAD (for Medina 1,1,0 lesion) . Following RA, the lesion was predilated with 3.0 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon and stented with a 3.5 mm × 24 mm SYNERGYTM everolimus-eluting stent (Boston Scientific). Proximal optimization of stent in LM was performed with a 4.5 mm NC balloon. There was good expansion at distal LM and ostial LAD without any significant carina/plaque shift towards left circumflex . Total fluoroscopy time was 8 min, and contrast used was only 30 mL for PCI. As the patient tolerated the procedure well with minimal contrast, we decided to go ahead with transfemoral TAVR using the right groyne as the access. Two suture based Perclose ProGlide™ devices (Abbot Vascular) were pre-deployed at 10 and 2'o clock position in the right femoral artery and a 14 Fr expandable PythonTM (Meril Life Sciences) sheath was inserted under fluoroscopic guidance upto the right iliac artery. Native aortic valve was dilated with a 16 mm MammothTM balloon (Meril Life Sciences) over the AmplatzTM super-stiff wire (Boston Scientific) followed by deployment of 21 mm balloon-expandable MyvalTM (Meril Life Sciences) . Transoesophageal echocardiography showed perfect positioning and function of the valve with no paravalvular regurgitation. Right groin access was successfully closed with two pre-deployed ProGlides™. The procedure was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on Day 3 after confirmation of no new renal dysfunction or access site vascular complications. She was continued on dual antiplatelets (Aspirin and Clopidogrel) for another 6 months without any oral anticoagulants. At a follow-up of 6 months, she is doing well and is in NYHA Class I.