In November 2005, a 60-year-old French man living in La Réunion experienced an acute influenza-like illness with diffuse arthralgia affecting bilaterally the distal inter-phalangeal joints of the fingers and the toes with hand tenosynovitis. His past medical history was unremarkable with no family history of inflammatory rheumatism.
Serology demonstrated the presence of anti-CHIKV IgM and confirmed the diagnosis of CHIKV infection. During the following months, the patient had persisting inflammatory arthralgia and joint stiffness which were not improved by symptomatic treatment. One year later, he developed refractory tenosynovitis in the wrists.
On February 15, 2007, the patient returned to France and consulted in our department. He complained of persistent symmetrical inflammatory arthritis of the wrists with fixed oedema of the two hands predominating on the right. Hand synovitis of the extensors and the flexors of wrists and fingers were noted. Lymphocyte immunophenotyping showed an increased CD4 T-cell count at 1,18 × 109/L (63.5%) and an activated CD45/CD3 (-) T-cell count at 0.209 × 109/L (11.3%), and CD45/CD3 (+) at 0,119 × 109/L (6.4%). Serum immunoglobulin was normal, as were the C3 and C4 complement fractions. No markers of autoimmunity were found, notably anti-citrullin peptide antibodies, antinuclear antibodies or cryoglobulinemia. The HLA B27 gene was positive and HLA system class II genotyping revealed an HLA-DRB1.03.11 genotype.
At the time of the consultation, serologic status for CHIKV antibodies was reevaluated using IgM-capture and an IgG-capture enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay with inactivated cell-culture-ground chikungunya virus and mouse anti-chikungunya hyperimmune ascitic fluid (Institut Pasteur, Lyon, France). Persistent specific anti-CHIKV IgM was detected in this late stage serum sample, collected 18 months after the infection, with optical density (OD) values of 1.47 for IgG and 0.81 for IgM. Testing for CHIKV RNA was negative . Radiography of the hands and wrists showed a subchondral defect of the 2nd and 3rd right proximal interphalangeal finger joints as well as of the 3rd, 4th and 5th left distal interphalangeal joints. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hands and wrists revealed marked bilateral periostal inflammation and oedematous carpitis , with carpis synovitis (1C) and bone destruction in the left hand (1D) accompanied by intra-articular swelling (1D). Bone scintigraphy revealed diffuse inflammation of several joints, prominent in the right wrist (3rd metacarpo-phalangeal joint) and the left ankle (1F), as well as evolutive enthesopathy of the left calcaneum. Methotrexate (MTX) was initiated at the dose of 17.5 mg/week and four months later, dramatic improvement was observed in both the number and state of swollen and tender joints and in tendon involvement. At this time, MRI of the hands, wrists and feet showed reduced progression of erosion and a decrease in radiographic inflammation and oedematous damage compared to before treatment. Clinical and radiological improvement was maintained over 15 months. At this end-point, CHIKV antibody serology showed persistence of both specific IgM and IgG, with OD values of 0.60 and 0.32, respectively.
T cell function was assessed using proliferation assays and ELISPOT quantification of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production by T cells. No proliferative response or IFN-γ production could be detected in response to CHIKV antigens derived from an in-house preparation of β-propionolactone-inactivated virus (French Armed Forces Institute of Tropical Medicine, Marseilles, France). T cell viability was ascertained by concurrent detection in the same assays of T cells responding to candidin and herpes simplex virus-1 antigens tested as controls.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) from the patient and from three healthy control individuals were isolated and analysed at a transcriptomic level using real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect mRNA species encoding inflammatory mediators (RT2 Profiler™ PCR Array Human Inflammatory Cytokine and Receptors, SuperArray, Frederick, USA). Each PCR used the same quantity of total RNA from each cell culture and the absence of a signal after 35 PCR cycles was taken as the threshold for the mRNA not being detectable. These PCR analyses were completed by measurement of cytokine levels in the serum and in the 48 h PBL-derived supernatant. These analyses were performed on samples obtained before treatment initiation and at the four-month follow-up.
At baseline, characteristic up regulation of mRNAs encoding pro-inflammatory mediators, including TNF-α, LTA, CRP, IL-1A and IL-17C was observed in PBL from the patient . In addition, these cells expressed high levels of mRNAs encoding chemokines (IL-8, CCL1, CCL7, CCL8, CCL16, CCL24, CCL26, and CXCL5) or their receptors (XCR1, CCR2, CCR6, CCR8, and CCR9). In contrast, the expression of genes encoding CD40 Ligand (CD40L), IFN-α, IL-22, CXCL2 and CXCL14 was not detected. High levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10 were detected in the supernatant following 48 h incubation of PBLs in culture medium alone, while comparatively low levels of IFN-γ and TNF-α were found. On the contrary, IFN-α, IL-4 or IL-5 were not detected in cell supernatant .
Four months following initiation of treatment, the expression of most of the above mRNAs was attenuated, and expression of CD40L, IFN-α and IL-22 remained undetectable. At this time, cytokine levels measured in the cell culture supernatant were markedly decreased and surface CD40L expression on peripheral blood cells could not be detected (data not shown).