A 30-year-old male (body mass index, 28.8 kg/m2) presented to our emergency department, 6 h after fall from ground into a 1-m height hole, with an isolated struck injury of the right flexed knee while he was drunk. According to his parents’ description, he walked for a short distance. He complained acute pain in his right knee when admitted.
In the immediate physical examination of the patient, the right knee level showed clear evidence of acute ischemia, with signs of paleness, coldness, anesthesia, hemorrhagic bullae. There was severe swelling and ecchymosis in popliteal fossa and around the leg, and there was significant calf tenderness and pedal edema. Tibialis posterior, dorsalis pedis, and popliteal arterial pulses were not felt, and capillary refill and pinprick bleeding were delayed. There was severe pain with passive stretch of the muscles when the toes or foot are plantar flexed.
Radiograph was taken which showed minimally displaced tibial plateau two columns fracture with no evidence of knee dislocation, but significant soft tissue swelling . After consultation with vascular surgeon, we believed that there was a high probability of popliteal artery injury. The patient was sent to operation immediately.
Emergency surgery was performed to salvage the ischemic limb at 6.5 h after injury. The patient was placed in the supine position under general anesthesia. Knee ligaments examinations did not reveal any pathological finding. Closed reduction was performed and fixed using 2 femoral lateral-medial Scanz pins and 2 tibial anterior-to-posterior Scanz pins, and the external fixator was connected with the use of rods and clamps . Because the patient developed compartment syndrome, compartment release was performed through double-incision fasciotomy and the wounds were covered by vacuum-assisted closure . While exploring the popliteal artery of the right knee, popliteal artery trunk was found transected and thus end-to-end repair was done by a vascular surgery team. Slightly decreased dorsalis pedis arterial pulses were recovered immediately postoperatively. The patient was transfused 2 units of blood for hematocrit < 26%.
Twelve hours after surgery, the anticoagulant was started. Heparin intravenous infusion was given for 5 days and rivaroxaban for 3 months. Debridement was performed again 2 days after the first operation, and the devitalized peroneus longus was removed. Fasciotomy wound was closed on the 14th day after surgery. The patient refused to be treated with internal fixation and was discharged after 4 weeks of inpatient treatment with satisfactory distal limb perfusion. Follow-up was carried out in the outpatient department. The external fixator was removed and knee mobilization started at 12 weeks. Without strict rehabilitation schedule, the patient recovered very well although foot drop had not been improved. The neurological examination was checked and common peroneal nerve injury was excluded. During the post-operation follow-up, no complication was developed in the wound. At the 1 year follow up, the patient acquired good stability of his right knee with full range of motion. During the whole treatment process, the patient was very satisfied with the treatment and recovery.