The patient was a 34-year-old female who had a history of rhabdomyosarcoma of the parapharyngeal space (received radiation alone at the age of 10 years; specific radiation details unknown). There is no family or psychosocial medical history. The patient reported a sore throat around X-1. In year X, her sore throat worsened, and she consulted a family otorhinolaryngologist. During this visit, irregular mucous membrane of the nasopharynx was identified. Subsequently, she sought evaluation at a university hospital, where a tissue biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of nasopharyngeal cancer and she was referred to our center for further treatment.
Upon initial assessment nasal endoscopy revealed mucosal irregularities from the posterior wall of the nasopharynx to the right and left lateral walls and canopy (a). The hematochemical findings were within normal ranges except for elevated LDH levels. CT showed no obvious neoplastic lesions in the nasopharynx (b). MRI was consistent with CT findings (c). However, PET/CT showed abnormal accumulation (SUVmax:15.6) localized in the nasopharynx, with no distant metastases (d). Based on the above findings, she was diagnosed with nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, specifically, radiation-induced nasopharyngeal carcinoma (SCC, cT1N0M0, Stage I).
The Raystation software was utilized to create treatment plans. The simulation confirmed the need for four irradiation sites with a 30 mm frontal diffuser to cover the tumor . Sarotarocan sodium (640 mg/m2) was administered the day before laser irradiation. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. Neraton tubes inserted through both nasal passages. The soft palate repositioned anteriorly and cephalad to provide a working space. The lesion was irradiated with a 20 mm frontal diffuser, deviating from the planned 30 mm, owing to sufficient coverage.
Postoperatively, the initial local pain alleviated with analgesics. The patient was stable upon return to the room. However, on the first postoperative day (6:00 a.m.), the nurse noted sluggish patient response and reduced blood oxygen saturation. A nasal endoscopy diagnosed an airway emergency due to upper airway edema and emergency bedside tracheostomy was performed due to difficulties with oral intubation (a). Consciousness and oxygenation improved promptly post the procedure. The tracheal cannula replaced with retina on the third postoperative day. On the sixth postoperative day, the light patch test revealed no symptoms of hypersensitivity to sunlight, and the light shielding was removed. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12 with a tracheostomy and the retina in place, with the exception of nasopharyngeal crusting (b). The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, and attached as supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).