A 27-year-old Japanese woman with unremarkable medical and family history was impregnated through in vitro fertilization. At 40 weeks of gestation, she was admitted to an obstetric clinic for premature rupture of the membranes and vaginal delivery by induced labor. After delivery, a large mass emerged through the vaginal passage with the placenta, and the placenta was removed. Uterine inversion was diagnosed, and manual repositioning of the uterus was performed with oxytocin administration. However, because hemorrhage persisted, she was referred to our hospital 4 hours postpartum.
On admission, she had lost over 4000 mL of blood, was unconscious, and her blood pressure could not be measured. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels of 3.4 g/dl, 18.2 × 104/μl, and 131 mg/dl, respectively. We started rapid blood transfusion, intubated her, administered oxygen, and diagnosed uterine inversion by vaginal examination and abdominal ultrasonography . Although we successfully replaced the inverted uterus using the Johnson maneuver followed by internal bimanual compression, the uterus was markedly atonic and the hemorrhage increased. Balloon tamponade was performed to stop the hemorrhage and reduce the risk of recurrence. However, hemorrhage persisted at a rate of 350 mL/min. She went into cardiopulmonary arrest and was resuscitated after 11 minutes. She presented with a pulse rate of 140 beats per minute (bpm) and a blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels of 5.3 g/dl, 3.9 × 104/μl, and 116 mg/dl, respectively. To stop the hemorrhage immediately, uterine artery embolization was performed instead of hysterectomy because of disseminated intravascular coagulation, and the hemorrhage stopped. She presented with a pulse rate of 100 bpm and a blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels of 9.5 g/dl, 6.8 × 104 /μl, and 147 mg/dl, respectively. She required transfusion of 38 units of fresh frozen plasma and 22 units of packed red blood cell concentrate. When the balloon was removed one day later, bleeding increased again, and she experienced a hemorrhage of 500 ml in 2 hours. Therefore, a hysterectomy was performed, and her condition stabilized. She presented with a pulse rate of 80 bpm and a blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels of 8.6 g/dl, 8.6 × 104 /μl, and 297 mg/dl, respectively. Subsequently, computed tomography revealed brain edema and a fogging effect in the cortico-medullary junction, and she was diagnosed with postresuscitation encephalopathy. Her cerebral activity potential could not be confirmed, and communication with her is difficult, although she opens her eyes spontaneously and responds slightly to painful stimulation.
Placental and uterine histopathological examination revealed placenta accreta on part of the uterine fundus (because of no decidua) and necrosis in the fundus and on the surface of the surrounding muscle layer.