A 45-year old Sinhalese woman from Galle district in Southern Province of Sri Lanka presented to our hospital with a 2 week history of intermittent fever and severely painful left hip for 3 days duration. She had a history autoimmune hepatitis for 6 months, for which she had been on azathioprine 50 mg daily, and poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus for 11 years.
Fever was intermittent, initially low grade and later high grade, which abated with sweating, but not associated with chills and rigors. She also had mild sore throat and cough with constitutional symptoms. She was initially managed with oral co-amoxyclav as for possible upper respiratory tract infection by her family doctor. However, her fever continued and around 3 days prior to the admission, she has noticed severe pain in her left hip joint which has caused her to be increasingly bedbound and restricted left hip movement. Apart from these symptoms, she did not have involvement of other joints or haemoptysis. There was no previous history of tuberculosis or close contact with a patient with tuberculosis. She was a field officer, and had no exposure to soil; however, she occasionally had engaged in gardening.
On examination, she was ill looking and had a temperature of 40 °C. Examination revealed severely restricted movements of left hip. The joint was mildly warm to touch but there was no obvious swelling over it. Initial laboratory investigations revealed raised peripheral white cell count of 12.4 × 109/L with 82% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, hemoglobin of 9.1 g/dL and a normal platelet count. Both erythrocyte sedimentation rate (65 mm/1st h) and C-reactive protein (86 mg/dL) were elevated. Initial radiograph of left hip joint was normal, but subsequent x-ray which was taken 1 week later showed a narrow joint space and destruction of femoral head . Ultra sound scan of hip revealed small effusion with echogenic particles. MRI of hip was also suggestive of septic arthritis .
After taking blood cultures, she was commenced on empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone IV 1 g 12 hourly and vancomycin IV 1 g 12 hourly. Despite antibiotic therapy, high fever spikes were continued and the clinical condition deteriorated. Repeated blood cultures and urine cultures revealed negative results. Joint fluid aspiration was failed since there was only a minimal amount of fluid. Further investigations including Mantoux test and sputum for acid fast bacilli (AFB) and mycobacterial culture were negative. Transthoracic 2D-echocardiogram did not show vegetations. Chest x-ray, ultrasound scan of abdomen and subsequently contrast CT scan of chest and abdomen did not reveal any significant abnormality such as visceral lymphadenopathy or abscesses. Autoimmune panel including ANA, ANCAs and serology for other less common infective causes like HIV, toxoplasmosis, and brucellosis were also negative.
Due to her immunosuppressive state and unresponsiveness to empirical antibiotic regimen, possibility of uncommon infective conditions was considered at this stage. One of the conditions that we considered was melioidosis since it is known to cause isolated septic arthritis in susceptible patients. Since the blood cultures were repeatedly negative, we performed antibodies to B. pseudomallei, which came positive with a titre of 1/10240 by Indirect Haemagglutination Assay (IHA). The presumptive diagnosis of melioidosis was made based on clinical and microbiological grounds. Definitive treatment was started with intravenous imipenem 1000 mg 6 hourly and oral co-trimoxazole (1920 mg 12 hourly). The patient responded well to the above treatment with fever settling within 72 h of starting treatment. While in the ward, she had intensive physiotherapy to improve mobilisation. At the end of 3 weeks, inflammatory markers came down to normal range and she was discharged on oral cotrimoxazole for another 10 weeks with a plan to have weekly reviews with full blood count and CRP.