The case involves a 64-year-old male scientist with a diagnosis of moderate-to-severe aortic stenosis (AS) and mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation, but no signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure, and no history of myocardial infarction (MI), or coronary artery disease (CAD). The patient had normal blood pressure and was taking no medications. His AS was monitored by serial echocardiograms (Doppler and two-dimensional), the last of which showed a mean transvalvular gradient of 40 mm Hg and a LV end-systolic dimension of 47 mm. The last cardiology evaluation noted that the patient was fairly active but "may be beginning to get mildly symptomatic." He started to notice chest pressure during certain exertion which was promptly relieved by rest and "could be angina." The patient was told that he should not go jogging, that he was near the point where he should consider AVR, but that the AVR "was not urgent". Two months later, the patient became very distressed and angry seeing a family member hurt by outrageous, unlawful conduct. Within about one hour of this stressful event, while engaging in a sedentary activity, he suddenly experienced severe shortness of breath and began to cough up frothy pink sputum. First responders and emergency physicians were informed that the patient had AS and was just extremely upset. In the ambulance, the patient received oxygen, morphine sulfate (10 mg), furosemide (100 mg) and sublingual nitroglycerin. On presentation in the emergency department (ED) about two hours after the extraordinary mental distress began, the patient was alert, had chest rales, a pulse of 123 beats/min, a blood pressure of 121/73 mm Hg, and a respiratory rate of 28-32. His chest X-ray indicated pulmonary edema. During the first 25 minutes in the ED, as he received more nitroglycerin (as paste twice to the chest), another 2 mg morphine sulfate, 2 mg midazolam, and was intubated for ventilation, vigorous diuresis occurred and the patient's initially normal blood pressure plummeted to <70 mm Hg, systolic. At that point, the ECG also showed that the patient had developed atrial fibrillation (AF) with a rapid ventricular rate of 124 beats/min. The patient was started on i.v. dopamine (10 ug/kg/min through most of the next hour). His heart rate increased to148 beats/min, and blood pressure rose to 80-100 mm Hg but then fell again. Several attempts of cardioversion with shocks of 100, 200 and 300 joules, respectively, (7.5 mg valium i.v. for sedation) were begun only 40 minutes after AF was identified, and the patient's condition had worsened considerably. Subsequent administration of digoxin (0.25 mg i.v.) and procainamide (1 g i.v. over 20 min) slowed the ventricular rate to 125 beats/min and raised the blood pressure only briefly to 96/62 mm Hg. Cardioversion attempts (1 × 300 J and 3 × 360 J after 2 × 2.5 mg i.v. additional valium) were continued, but the patient remained in AF with ventricular tachycardia of 120 beats/min and worsening hypotension (BP, 36/30 mm Hg). After a fourth 360 J shock no palpable pulse was noted. After 25 min of CPR including four ampoules of epinephrine, each followed by a further shock of 360 J, which resulted in no rhythm, ventricular fibrillation and agonal rhythm, all resuscitation attempts were terminated. The medical chart summary was that the patient had died from a massive AMI. Yet, cardiac enzymes were negative and the autopsy confirmed aortic stenosis as the cause of death with a bicuspid, heavily calcified aortic valve, left ventricular hypertrophy and moderate dilation, focal pulmonary hemorrhages, primarily mild CAD, no evidence of a recent MI, nor any other major abnormalities.