The patient in this clinical case was a 53-year-old woman who was admitted to our hospital with severe respiratory failure. She had been diagnosed with HIV/hepatitis C virus (HCV) co-infection in 2000 as well as with PAH in 2002. In addition, she had ESRD and had been undergoing high-flux hemodialysis sessions since 2014 (vascular access: venous-arterial fistula; dialyzer: Revaclear® 400, capillary 101 dialyzer, membrane area 1.8 m2; Bicart® Gambro bicarbonate cartridge; blood flow: 350 mL/min; dialysate flow: 500 mL/min). The patient was undergoing 3 dialysis sessions per week and each session lasted approximately 4 h.
In January 2018, the patient was receiving cART with lopinavir/ritonavir (400/100 mg twice daily) plus raltegravir (400 mg twice daily), as well as bosentan (125 mg twice daily) plus tadalafil (20 mg once daily) for PAH. At that time, treatment with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir was indicated for HCV. To avoid drug interactions with HCV drugs, cART was switched to raltegravir (400 mg twice daily) plus rilpivirine (25 mg once daily), and bosentan and tadalafil were temporarily discontinued. In April 2018, after completing 8 weeks of HCV treatment, bosentan and tadalafil were reintroduced at the same doses as before HCV treatment, and rilpivirine was replaced by darunavir/cobicistat (800/150 mg once daily).
From April 2018 to September 2018 the patient had several episodes of congestive heart failure, which were satisfactory managed with medical treatment. Nevertheless, in September 2018 the patient presented with severe respiratory failure and clinical signs compatible with decompensated heart failure, and she had to be hospitalized. On her admission, the patient underwent daily hemodialysis sessions, and the negative fluid balance in each session was increased. However, the response to hemodialysis was poorer than expected, suggesting additional determinants of her clinical situation. In addition, during the admission, virologic failure was evidenced by an HIV-1 RNA load in plasma of 5424 copies/mL, with HIV evolution and development of new drug resistance mutations in the integrase gene (N155H) not present in previous genotypes. After ruling out other conditions, bosentan toxicity—probably because excessive exposure to bosentan due to drug interactions between bosentan and darunavir/cobicistat was considered. Bosentan was therefore replaced by ambrisentan with the intention of avoiding drug-drug interactions with cART. Additionally, cART was optimized, and the regimen was changed to darunavir/ritonavir (800/100 mg once daily) plus etravirine (200 mg twice daily) and dolutegravir (50 mg twice daily). Thereafter, the patient experienced progressive improvement in her clinical condition, HIV RNA in plasma was re-suppressed (< 40 copies/ml), and she was finally discharged to resume her usual hemodialysis program (3 sessions per week).
To evaluate the effect of hemodialysis on ambrisentan plasma concentrations, paired samples of blood entering (‘in’) and leaving (‘out’) the dialyzer and of the resulting dialysate were collected during one dialysis session. Blood samples were collected into heparin-lithium-containing 4-ml tubes 12.2 h after last ambrisentan dose. Plasma was isolated by centrifugation (3200 g for 15 min), and stored at − 80 °C until analysis. Dialysate (20 ml) was directly collected from the dialysate port of the dialyzer. Ambrisentan concentrations in both plasma and dialysate were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a validated method , and the hemodialysis extraction ratio (ER) for ambrisentan was calculated following standard procedures . The patient gave and signed an informed consent before sampling took place.
The effect of hemodialysis on ambrisentan concentrations was evaluated during one hemodialysis session. Pre- and postdialyzer total ambrisentan concentrations were 42.8 ng/mL and 42.5 ng/mL, respectively, with negligible ambrisentan concentrations in dialysate (3.92 ng/mL). The hemodialysis extraction ratio was only 2.0%. At the end of the dialysis session (26.3 h after dosing), total ambrisentan concentrations in plasma were 35.6 ng/ml.