A 64-year-old male patient without any cerebrovascular risk factors was admitted to our hospital with a headache and right lower extremity weakness that lasted for two days.
The patient had a history of toothache, smoking, and alcohol consumption.
Until hospitalization, the patient was not burdened with any significant cardiovascular comorbidity.
The patient had no pertinent family history of heart disease or other illnesses.
The results of a physical examination showed right lower extremity weakness (4-/5 strength) and dystaxia.
Routine laboratory tests revealed significant leucocytosis (12.36 × 109/L) and an elevated eosinophil count (6.89 × 109/L, 55.7% of leukocytes) in the peripheral blood. The results of a blood clotting test, urine and stool routine examination, virus screening, liver and renal function examination, and immunological function examination were normal. The antinuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and tumor markers were also negative. Molecular genetic analysis of fusion gene mutation (Fip1-like 1-platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha) was also negative. Bone marrow aspirate results were compatible with HES, showing no sign of myelodysplasia, hemoparasite, or atypical cells. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed that the levels of white blood cells, proteins, and glucose were normal. Acid-fast staining and India ink staining of cerebrospinal fluid were negative. Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed that the T wave was inverted and the concentration of troponin I (0.644 ng/mL) was significantly elevated. The clinical history and examination results of this patient showed no sign of parasitic infection, neoplasm, vasculitis, or allergy.
A CT scan of the chest was normal. Abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple hepatic cysts. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected bilateral and multiple acute infarcts in the border zones, which were located in the cortical and subcortical areas . CTA of the head and neck revealed multiple and localized mild instances of stenosis in the left common carotid artery bifurcation, bilateral vertebral arteries (V5 segment), and posterior cerebral artery (P2 segment) . Cardiac echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 69% with mitral and tricuspid mild regurgitation. Coronary CTA showed multiple non-calcified, mixed plaques and luminal stenoses in the left circumflex artery, left anterior descending artery, and right coronary artery . The results of cardiac examination supported the diagnosis of non-ST-elevated MI.