A 52-year-old female homemaker presented with difficulty in walking since childhood and pain in left hip which aggravated for the past 2–3 years. The patient had a painful limp on presentation. The pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, dull aching type, with no diurnal variation, aggravated on movements and walking for long duration and partly relieved on rest. There was deep tenderness on the greater trochanter which was broadened and thickened. Thomas test and Trendelenburg test were positive. There were adduction of 10°, abduction of 40°, and rotations of 5° each. There was fixed flexion deformity of 10° with a further flexion of 80° possible with limb length discrepancy of 4 cm. Anteroposterior pelvis with hips radiographs and computerized tomography scan confirmed a left-sided hypoplastic bony anatomy characterized by shallow acetabula, insufficient coverage of the femoral head, deficient anterior acetabular wall, and excessive anteversion . After thorough discussion with the patient and planning, two staged procedure was planned. In the first stage, a Girdlestone excision arthroplasty with posterior approach, adductor tenotomy was performed, globular soft-tissue release along with adhesions was done, true and false acetabulum were visualized . The patient was then kept on a skeletal traction with weight increments (up to 15 kg) for a period of 3 weeks, and about 3 cm of femur lowering was achieved at the end of 3 weeks clinically . During this period of bed rest with skeletal traction, the patient was managed with antibiotics and deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis preoperative sizing of the acetabular cup and femoral head with the help of 3D-printed pelvis was achieved and in the second stage, an uncemented total hip was performed using posterior approach performed (acetabular cup 42 mm, femoral head 22 mm with 2-mm neck length, femoral stem 85 mm, screw 20 mm × 6.5 mm, and screw 25 mm × 6.5 mm). Physiotherapy was started the following day and full weight bearing with crutches was started on day 2 of post-operative period. The patient achieved 100° of hip flexion with knees flexed, 20° of extension, and 20° of abduction; walks comfortably with mild quadriceps lag at 2-year follow-up; and was evaluated with Harris hip score.