A 69-year-old female presented to our Dermatology and Venereology Clinic with a significant complaint of extensive scar tissue on her back. According to the patient, the scar tissue was first noticed 18 years ago when it was the size of a peanut. After a year of injection therapy with a local physician, there was some improvement in the thickness of the lesion. However, the patient noticed that the scar tissue regrew and increased in size. Despite further injection therapies, the lesion continued to grow over time. Two weeks before her consultation, the patient reported the itch worsened, prompting her to seek medical care at our clinic.
During the physical examination, we observed several keloidal lesions on both the left and right scapula, with the largest lesion measured 8.5 × 5.5 × 1 cm . To assess the patient’s scarring we used the Vancouver scar scale (VSS) and the patient and observer scar assessment scale (POSAS). The initial VSS score was 11 and POSAS for observer component score was 49, with patient component score was 50. During procedure, patient is required to scale the pain of injection with numeric pain rating scale (NPRS).
We treated the lesions with a combination of TA (40 mg/mL) and 5-FU (50 mg/mL) intralesional injection using NFI (Thesera®) at a dose of 0.1 mL/cm2 . The injection site was marked with 1 cm2 squares. The NFI injector body was set at 10, and a mixture of 0.5 mL TA (40 mg/mL), 4 mL 5-FU (50 mg/mL), and 0.5 mL 2% lidocaine was inserted into the head ampule for approximately 0.1 mL. The nozzle was pressed against the lesion, and the tip of the NFI was pressed until the mixture solution was discharged. This process was repeated until all the marked areas were covered. This procedure was repeated twice a week. Patient scaled NPRS as 1 for every procedure.
Over a period of 68 days, the procedure was repeated four times. Throughout this time, there was a noticeable improvement in the lesion, as it began to flatten for 0.5 cm . In addition, VSS score decreased to 10, while the POSAS score decreased to 43 for the observer component and 37 for the patient component. The patient was also reported that the current procedure was less painful compared to the prior technique with conventional intralesional injection.