A 40-year-old man presented to the Rheumatology Department on October 8, 2021, with the main complaints of 4-year pulmonary nodules and 3-year repeated haemoptysis.
On October 8, 2021, the patient was admitted for recurrent haemoptysis without apparent cause.
Four years before admission (January 2017), the patient visited a local hospital for trauma (specific unknown). Pulmonary computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules and mass shadows, inflammatory flaked shadows, and significantly thickened pleura. Lung biopsy pathology showed granulomatous inflammatory flaked necrosis. Pulmonary tumours were excluded according to immunohistochemical findings. At follow-up, pulmonary CT demonstrated more pulmonary nodules and flaked shadows.
On June 2017, the patient visited a tertiary hospital in Beijing, China due to low fever, joint pain, and maculopapular rash. Laboratory examination showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 47 mm/h; C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 18.6 mg/L; rheumatoid factor (RF) level of 225 IU/mL; normal levels of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-ENA antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, and IgG), complement, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies; and C-ANCA and PR3-ANCA positivity. AAV was considered. Immunosuppression was obtained using methylprednisolone (80 mg/d) plus CTX 0.2 g qod. In addition, human immunoglobulins (20 g/d) were administered for 5 d with satisfactory results. Some pulmonary lesions disappeared, while the inflammatory indicators remained at a high level. After discharge from the hospital, the patient’s maintenance regimen consisted of oral prednisone 20 mg/d combined with CTX 0.2 g qod.
On July 2018, the patient returned to the tertiary hospital for cough and haemoptysis. He was positive for C-ANCA and exhibited significantly increased inflammatory levels, and more pulmonary nodules and mass shadows. According to the 2017 European League against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for granulomatosis with polyangiitis, GPA was diagnosed. Anti-inflammatory methylprednisolone 40 mg/d and oral CTX (150 mg for one day and 100 mg for two consecutive days) were administered. The symptoms improved, while he had intermittent cough and shortness of breath after activity.
On August 13, 2018, the patient visited our hospital with the main complaint of cough with yellow sputum. Laboratory examination revealed a WBC count of 11.8 × 109/L, neutrophil count of 7.6 × 109/L, and lymphocyte count of 2.6 × 109/L. Analysis of lymphocyte subsets showed the following results: B lymphocyte antigen (CD3-CD19+) 102/μL, CD4 875/μL, CD8 1300/μL, and CD4/CD8 0.67. In addition, the patient exhibited C-ANCA positivity, PR3-ANCA 94.86 nmol/L (< 20 nmol/L), ESR 55 mm/h (normal, < 15.0), CRP 14.1 mg/L (normal, < 0.5), interleukin-6 (IL-6) 17.11 pg/mL (normal, < 7.0), and normal procalcitonin (PCT). Negative results were obtained for the sputum culture, serum G ((1-3)-β-d-glucan), galactomannan (GM), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) virus, and T-spot tests. Nine respiratory pathogen antibody IgM tests, namely, tests for Legionella pneumophila, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Rickettsia Q fever, influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and adenovirus, were normal. On pulmonary CT, multiple patchy shadows, nodular higher-density shadows, multiple cavities, heterogeneous wall thickness, and air crescent signs and flat lipids in some lesions were observed . After Respiratory Department consultation, the possibility of lung infection (bacteria + fungi) was considered. Pneumocystis infection could not be ruled out. CTX was discontinued, and the glucocorticoid doses were reduced. In addition, moxifloxacin (antibacterial), voriconazole (antifungal), and prophylactic anti-Pneumocystis jiroveci treatments were administered for 2 wk with improved symptoms and decreased inflammatory levels. After discharge, CTX 100 mg was administered on alternate days, with a cumulative dose of 28 g. During the outpatient follow-up, the inflammatory marker levels were within the normal range, and the pulmonary lesions increasingly disappeared. However, the G test was positive twice, while the GM was negative. The vasculitis was considered to be controlled, but the pulmonary fungal infection persisted. Dose reduction was obtained, and methylprednisolone 6 mg/d was administered. CTX was replaced with Tripterygium wilfordii (TW) for immunosuppression. Oral antifungal agents were concurrently administered and discontinued within one year.
On March 19, 2019, September 5, 2019, November 23, 2019, and June 12, 2020, the patient visited the Rheumatology Department of our hospital for fever, fatigue, and systemic muscle soreness. Laboratory examination revealed increased CRP and ESR levels, IL-6 33.43 pg/mL, and normal PCT. EBV DNA was 5.09E + 4 copies/mL. Negative results were obtained for the pathological examination of tracheal lavage fluid, and TORCH test analysis of lymphocyte subsets revealed B lymphocytes (CD3-CD19+) 62/µL and CD4/CD8 0.6. On pulmonary CT, there were new and larger bilateral pulmonary nodules . Anti-infectious moxifloxacin and antiviral peramivir were successively applied. The body temperature was normal, while the sensation of fatigue was retained. Elevation of the PR3-ANCA titre was examined, suggesting vasculitis activity. Since the patient had a low level of B lymphocytes and a history of deep mould infection, rituximab was not recommended. Therefore, the treatment plan was changed to a glucocorticoid dose increase combined with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). The patient's fatigue symptoms improved. PR3-ANCA and inflammatory marker levels decreased.
On September 15, 2020, the patient was treated at the Rheumatology Department of our hospital again for fatigue, muscle soreness at the extremities and joints, cough with yellow sputum, and shortness of breath. He exhibited CRP 51.09 mg/L, ESR 84 mm/h, C-ANCA positivity, PR3-ANCA (++), and G-test, GM-test, cryptococcal antigen, and TORCH test negativity. Pulmonary CT demonstrated more bilateral pulmonary nodules and cavities and some larger nodular lesions. Renal CT showed a space-occupying lesion in the right middle kidney. Puncture pathology of the space-occupying lesion revealed fibrous tissue proliferation with infiltration of tissue cells, plasma cells, and lymphocytes, focal necrosis, and no IGG4-positive plasma cell infiltration . Vasculitis activity with the involvement of the kidney was considered. Referring to the literature, we noted that the level of circulating B lymphocyte factor increases in patients with AAV. Given the role of the B lymphocyte factor in the onset of AAV, the patient was treated with methylprednisolone 40 mg/d combined with MMF 500 mg bid and belimumab 840 mg (I.V.). The symptoms improved, but the fatigue and soreness at the extremities relapsed due to the dose reduction of glucocorticoids.
On March 21, 2021, the patient was admitted to our hospital for haemoptysis. Pulmonary CTA manifestations were normal, while the air crescent sign was observed on CT. The haemoptysis was then considered a result of pulmonary infection. MMF and belimumab were discontinued. Anti-infectious moxifloxacin was administered. There was no evidence of recurrence while reducing the use of glucocorticoids, and more pulmonary lesions disappeared. After discharge, the patient was treated with belimumab 840 mg (I.V.) once every month for a total of 8 times. Then, renal CT was performed and revealed a space-occupying lesion in the right middle kidney, which was larger than before . In the meantime, the pulmonary nodules and cavities were similar. The patient experienced repeated elevation of inflammatory indicators, with a poorly controlled disease. The IL-6 Level during the treatment was high, ranging between 32 pg/mL and 49 pg/mL. Referring to the literature, tocilizumab 640 mg (I.V., once monthly) was administered. After dose reduction of the glucocorticoids, there was no evidence of recurrence of fatigue or muscle soreness at the extremities and joints. In addition, the right middle kidney-occupying lesion was smaller , and the ESR recovered to normal .
The patient had no previous underlying diseases, such as hypertension, nor a bad habit of smoking. He denied any family history of rheumatic diseases.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.8 °C; blood pressure, 130/70 mmHg; heart rate, 90 beats per min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths per min. In addition, heart, lung, and abdominal examinations showed no remarkable changes.
Second-generation gene sequencing revealed growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
Arteriography demonstrated more and thickened bilateral bronchial arterial branches.