A male neonate was born by vaginal delivery at 39+3 weeks of gestation to a 30-year-old gravida 2 and para 2 mother. The newborn had a birth weight of 3260 g (30th percentile), a length of 51 cm (59th percentile) and a head circumference of 34 cm (25th percentile). Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Clinical examination at birth was normal, abdomen was palpable and the rectum was permeable. Mother’s prenatal routine TORCH serology screens were negative for HIV, hepatitis B and C, VDRL/TPHA; negative IgM antibodies and positive IgG antibodies for Rubella, Toxoplasma and CMV were detected in the first trimester. Further investigations up to 34 weeks revealed a reactivation for CMV (both positive IgG and IgM antibodies) with a high CMV IgG avidity, speaking for a maternal secondary CMV infection.
Prenatal ultrasound scannings at 34 and 37 weeks of gestation revealed dilatation of the small intestine. A fetal echocardiography at 21st week gestation showed a structurally normal heart.
At birth the neonate showed clinical and radiological evidence of intestinal obstruction: meconium passed only after evacuative nursing procedures; stooling pattern was irregular; gastric residuals were bile-stained; radiological bowel gas pattern and barium enema were consistent with intestinal obstruction. The blood investigations revealed mildly raised C-reactive protein levels (1,2 mg/dL; normal value <0,5). Haemoglobin, white cell count, platelets, liver enzymes were within normal limits. Blood and urine cultures for bacteria were negative. Urine was screened for cytomegalovirus on day one confirming congenital CMV infection (>2.700.000 copies/ml). CMV DNA was detected (6343 copies/ml) by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) in blood sample on day ten. Patient was managed with nasogastric decompression; enteral feeding was discontinued. Laparatomy performed on day 10 revealed a complete intestinal malrotation and contextually gastrointestinal biopsy samples of the appendix confirmed the diagnosis of CMV gastrointestinal disease. Actually, PCR on tissue samples revealed 1096 CMV-genome copies/mg. Postoperative management was regular and the neonate made a good recovery. Serial abdomen and head ultrasound examination showed no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly or ventriculomegaly, except for echogenic periventricular foci next to the third ventricle consistent with calcification.
Intravenous ganciclovir was initiated on day 17 at a dose of 6 mg/kg twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by oral valgancyclovir at a dose of 16 mg/kg twice daily for 6 month.
Follow-up included fortnightly viral load, liver enzymes, creatinine and blood urea nitrogen monitoring. Urine viral load fell from >27 million copies/ml on day one to 121,000 copies/ml on day 37. Blood viral load was 6343 copies per millilitre on day 10, and, after 22 days of antiviral therapy, was no more detected. Serology for CMV showed positive IgG and negative IgM antibodies. Biochemistry was normal. No adverse effects from the treatment were seen and the baby remained asymptomatic. Neurological status remained normal. Serial ophthalmologic examination ruled out CMV chorioretinitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 8 weeks of age showed thinned corpus callosum and enlarged cisterna magna. Visual and hearing screenings with evocative visual potentials and otoacustic emissions were negative. At 2 month the infant showed good thriving, weighing 4800 g and with a head circumference of 37 cm. Neurologic examination was normal for age.