In December 2018, a 61-year-old woman presented herself to the emergency unit with severe epigastric pain since three hours and tachycardia. Physical examination revealed a painfull palpation of the epigastric area and right hypochondrium, as well as a mild rebound tenderness in the epigastric area. A blood test showed a mild raise of the inflammatory markers.
Her current daily medication consisted of pantoprazole 20 mg, paroxetine 20 mg, nortriptyline 50 mg and lormetazepam 4 mg.
She had a medical history of depression, diabetes type II, obestity, osteoporosis, cholecystectomy, tabacco and alcohol abusus. Furthermore, the medical history mentioned a bulbar ulcer. The bulbar ulcer dated from earlier than the digital medical file (earlier than 2002), probably due to NSAID use after a total hip prosthesis. Starting from 2002, there were no signs of an ulcer with a negative endoscopy in november 2011. She underwent a laparascopic short gastric bypass in 2013. During the surgery in 2013, a biliopancreatic limb length of 40 cm and a alimentary limb length of 150 cm was performed. The gastric pouch was constructed with three staplers of 60 mm. The gastro-enterostomy measured 40 mm and was formed by a linear stapler. Chronic diarrhea was present since 2017. In September 2018, gastroscopy and sigmoidoscopy were performed due to melena. Gastroscopy showed an ulcer at the gastrojejunal anastomosis. Sigmoidoscopy was normal. The dose of pantoprazole was increased temporarily to 40 mg twice a day, followed by a maintenance dose of 40 mg a day. In October 2018, the patient was hospitalised at the department of gastroenterology for iron deficiency anemia. A new gastroscopy showed no ulcers or other lesions and a normal anastomosis was visualised. Pantoprazole was decreased to 20 mg a day. One month later, the patient was hospitalised again due to weight loss and hypoalbuminemia with edema. A coloscopy was planned.
Computed tomography at the time of arrival at the emergency unit showed the presence of intra-abdominal free air, including air bubbles around the gastrojejunal anastomosis.
A laparascopic exploration revealed turbid fluid in the upper abdomen. The transverse colon was fixated to the dorsal side of the gastrojejunal anastomosis. Further dissection showed a perforation in a gastrojejunocolic fistula. As a result, a defect of 2.5 cm was found in the transverse colon, as well as in the gastrojejunal anastomosis . The defect in the transverse colon was repaired by separate stitches using 0 Vicryl. A running suture 2–0 Vicryl was used to repair the defect in the gastrojejunal anastomosis . A nasogastric tube was left in place. Further inspection of the alimentary limb, biliopancreatic limb, the entero-enterostomy, small intestine common channel and colon was normal. One drain was placed in the pouch of Douglas and one drain was placed under the left hemidiaphragm.
Postoperatively, prophylactic amoxicillin/clavulanic acid was administered intravenously. However, the patient developed a pneumonia, which was treated with intravenous piperacilline/tazobactam. No other postoperative complications occured. The dose of pantoprazole was increased to 40 mg twice a day. Low molecular weight heparines were administered as thrombosis prophylaxis.
However, 6 weeks later, the patient presented herself again to the emergency unit of another hospital with anorexia since 4 days, mild epigastric pain, tachycardia and elevated inflammatory markers. Computed tomography showed free air and fluid in the abdomen and a defect in the gastrojejunal anastomosis.
A laparascopy comfirmed a dehiscence of the gastrojejunal anastomosis, partly covered by the large biliopancreatic stump. There were no visible signs of ischemia at the site of dehiscence. The transverse colon which was repaired in December 2018, was still intact. No other lesions were found. In order to restore the anastomosis, a conversion to a laparotomy was performed. The gastric pouch was stapled with a linear stapler to maintain only vital tissue. The large biliopancreatic stump was shortened by using a linear stapler, followed by an additional running suture 3–0 Monocryl. The mesenteric defect was closed using 0 Ethibond. Subsequently, the gastrojejunal anastomosis was revised by performing a circular stapled gastrojejunal anastomosis, followed by additional separate stitches 3–0 Monocryl. The anvil of the stapler was introduced into the gastric pouch through the opened stump of the alimentary limb. Subsequently, the stump of the alimentary limb was closed by a linear stapler, followed by an additional running suture 3–0 Monocryl. Methylene blue test showed no leakage. At the end of the surgery, the alimentary limb length measured 70 cm. A nasogastric tube was left in place. One drain was placed under the left hemidiaphragm and one drain was placed with the tip nearby the gastrojejunal anastomosis.
Postoperatively, prophylactic piperacilline/tazobactam was administered intravenously during 7 days. Pantoprazole 40 mg twice a day was continued. Low molecular weight heparines were administered as thrombosis prophylaxis. Upper gastrointestinal tract radiography showed a good passage of contrast fluid. There were no signs of leakage. The postoperative stay was free of complications. Pathology report of the biopsies retrieved during this surgery mentioned following results. The gastric pouch showed mucosal and submucosal ischemia and granulation tissue without signs of malignancy. Biopsies of the biliopancreatic limb length and the alimentary limb showed mucosal and submucosal ischemia without signs of malignancy.
The patient was not present at the follow-up consultation abdominal surgery. Nevertheless, during the latest internal medicine consultation in context of osteoporosis in July 2022, no abdominal problems were mentioned by the patient.