A 61-year old woman presented to her primary care doctor complaining of chest pain. She had a past medical history of hypothyroidism and 6 years earlier was diagnosed with stage IIIC papillary carcinoma of the right ovary, for which she underwent surgery and chemotherapy. Imaging and laboratory testing confirmed recurrence of ovarian carcinoma, and she again underwent surgery and was placed on chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. There was a good therapeutic response to this therapy; her CA-125 levels normalized, and she became clinically asymptomatic.
Prior to her cancer, the patient had a long history of depressive symptoms treated with a variety of antidepressants. She reported mild depressive symptoms associated with recurrent headaches following a hysterectomy at age 35. She had been treated with several antidepressants with partial benefit, including nortriptyline, citalopram, paroxetine, trazodone, and venlafaxine. It is noted that the patient had a family history of depression and anxiety in her mother, who did not respond well to treatment with antidepressants. The patient was first diagnosed with a major depressive episode after her initial cancer diagnosis, which was followed by the deaths of both of her parents. She was treated with sertraline for several years with benefit, but had further headaches and discontinued the sertraline for 4 years. At the time of her cancer recurrence, she experienced an acute worsening of her depression and the new onset of severe anxiety. Additional stressors included her concerns about illnesses that her grandson and best friend were experiencing. At this time (after cancer recurrence), she was diagnosed by her psychiatrist with recurrent MDD and generalized anxiety disorder. She was treated with escitalopram 20 mg/day, augmented with buspirone 30 mg/day (4 months after starting escitalopram), as well as lorazepam 0.25 mg as needed for anxiety. Despite these therapies, she continued to experience significant depression and anxiety.
Nine months after her cancer recurrence and following normalization of her CA-125 levels, and 6 months after starting escitalopram, the patient was started on maintenance oral chemotherapy with niraparib 300 mg at bedtime. The patient reported a dramatic response in her mood after initiating treatment with niraparib, and she awoke the next morning feeling no depression or anxiety. She was very surprised to feel so good, as she had not experienced a day free of depression and anxiety since her cancer recurrence. This mood improvement persisted for approximately 2 weeks.
Unfortunately, the patient developed side effects to niraparib, including insomnia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia. One month after initiation, niraparib was held for 2 weeks due to the thrombocytopenia. During this 2 week period, the patient described a worsening of her mood, particularly her anxiety. Niraparib was then restarted at a decreased dose of 200 mg/day. The patient again experienced a dramatic improvement in mood and anxiety—an effect that lasted for 10 days.
Niraparib was temporarily held again 2 months later due to neutropenia, and was later restarted at the dose of 100 mg/day. Again the patient described experiencing a large improvement in her depression and especially in her anxiety when the niraparib was restarted. Again on this occasion, the improvement lasted about 10 days. Eventually, due to thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, niraparib dosing was lowered to 100 mg every other day.
The patient’s psychiatric medication regimen was adjusted during the same time period she was being treated with niraparib. While on niraparib, the patient was able to decrease her lorazepam usage down from 0.25–0.50 mg per day to 0.25–0.50 mg once a week. Several weeks after the niraparib was begun, the patient was weaned off escitalopram and buspirone due to lack of efficacy, and she was begun on desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and mirtazapine 45 mg/day. Five months later, she was weaned off mirtazapine but stayed on desvenlafaxine 50 mg. The patient reported only partial benefit from these antidepressant medications, in contrast to the complete, albeit temporary, symptomatic resolution she initially experienced with niraparib.
For this report, the patient was interviewed by board-certified psychiatrist coauthor MNM approximately 10 months after her initial treatment with niraparib. MNM conducted a psychiatric interview and administered three self-report evaluations (Patient Health Questionnaire, PHQ-9; Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 item, GAD7; Mood Disorder Questionnaire, MDQ). At the time of the interview, the patient’s cancer continued to be in remission. As a result of the interview and self-assessments, it was determined that her mood continued to be mildly dysphoric and anxious but was overall stable on 50 mg desvenlafaxine daily and 100 mg of niraparib every other day. There was no evidence of hypomania or mania in the MDQ, and also no evidence of bipolar disorder in the patient’s history.