A 69-year-old Chinese female patient presented to our hospital complaining of a recent accidental self-detected mass on the left side of her neck. She had no other obvious symptoms, including local pain, fever, hoarseness, or dysphagia, and also denied personal history of thyroid disease and relevant family history. The palpable, firm, non-tender, and well-defined mass on the left thyroid was enlarged at stage 2 with the ability to move with swallowing during the physical examination. No axillary, supraclavicular, or subclavian lymph node lesion were found. Neck ultrasonography showed a 19 mm × 12 mm × 5 mm nodule with heterogeneous echo and clear boundary located within an enlarged left thyroid lobe . Laboratory evaluation showed the levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) normal at 2.66 mIU/L, triiodothyronine (T3) at 1.73 nmol/L, thyroxine (T4) at 104.8 nmol/L, free thyroxine (FT4) at 1.73 nmol/L, free triiodothyronine (FT3) at 104.8 nmol/L, respectively, antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (A-TPO) at 106.1 IUmol/mL, anti-thyroid microsome anti-body (ATMA) at 382.9 IU/mL, and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TGAB) at 990 IU/mL. Routine blood examination, serum amylase, glucose, and liver and kidney function were all within the normal range. Further abdominal computed tomography (CT) and general chest x-ray revealed no evidence of other abnormalities.
Given the suspicion for thyroid carcinoma, she underwent left unilateral thyroidectomy. Intraoperatively, the tumor was located on the dorsal side of the left central pole of the thyroid gland, and clearly originated inside the thyroid. No obvious adhesion of the trachea and cricothyroid muscle was observed. Macroscopically, the mass measured approximately 35 mm × 20 mm × 18 mm in size and was obtained from the thyroid lobe. The cutting surface was solid and revealed a grayish brown, heterogeneous texture. Areas of necrosis and hemorrhage were not obvious. Histopathological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining showed the tumor as multinodular and well circumscribed that in areas interlaced with the surrounding thyroid gland. The tumor was composed of mononuclear cells and multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells. The nuclear morphology of mononuclear cells was similar to those of osteoclast multinucleated giant cells, and osteoclast giant cells were evenly distributed in the nodules . Monocytes exhibited minimal pleomorphism in tumors, and mitosis was rare in our case, ranging from 1 to 2 per 10 high-power fields (HPFs). The osteoclastic cells were mainly found in oval-to-round monocytes. The number of nuclei in the multinucleated cells ranged from 3 to more than 50. In addition, these cells tended to cluster at the site of erythrocyte extravasation.
On immunohistochemical analysis, these tumor cells were positive for CD68 and vimentin. The multicellular cells showed a higher expression of CD68 than that of monocytes . The mononuclear cells were positive for synaptophysin (SYN), while negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, and calcitonin. Cytokeratin AE1/AE3, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S-100, and HMB45 were negative in the tumor cells. The Ki-67 labeling index ranged from 10% to 30%. Since there was no evidence of skeletal disease, we made a diagnosis of primary thyroid GCT-ST on the basis of the histological and immunohistochemical features.
The patient was admitted to Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center with recurrence of left thyroid tumor 3 month later, and total thyroidectomy was performed. The tumor was diagnosed as primary GCT-ST of the thyroid and p-T1N0M0GX Stage IA. The postoperative process was satisfactory, and the patient was completely asymptomatic, without hypocalcemia or nerve damage. The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy, and remained well without local recurrence or metastasis during 12 months of follow-up.