Our case is of a 0-day-old Japanese baby girl. Fetal bradyarrhythmia was noted during a prenatal checkup of the mother at 23 weeks 3 days of gestation. A fetal ultrasound scan revealed fetal rhythm abnormality, with a fetal heart rate (HR) of 50–60 beats per minute and a high degree of bradycardia . Thus, maternal beta-stimulants and steroids were started. The mother was admitted to the hospital at 36 weeks 1 day of gestation for maternal and fetal management. Preoperative examination revealed that the mother was positive for SS-A/Ro antibodies (3000 U/mL) and negative for SS-B/La antibodies; thus, immunological mechanisms were assumed to be the cause of the cardiac abnormalities. A fetal ultrasound examination at 36 weeks 5 days of gestation revealed the following: estimated fetal weight of 1995 g, cardiothoracic area ratio of 34%, atrial rate of 136 beats per minute, ventricular rate of 66 beats per minute, moderate pulmonary atresia, and short-circuited right and left ductus arteriosus with patency. After a joint preoperative conference with the departments of anesthesiology, pediatric cardiovascular surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics, and the operating room nurses and midwives, a cesarean section was performed under spinal subarachnoid and epidural anesthesia at 37 weeks 1 day of gestation. The delivery room was staffed by an anesthesiologist, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, and nurses. The infant was scheduled for immediate epicardial pacing lead placement in the adjacent room. The first goal was to start pacing in the shortest possible time, then to secure rooms in the operating theaters next to each other. The fetus was carefully kept warm by wiping the fetal sebum thoroughly. Intravenous lines were inserted, and if difficult to secure, an umbilical catheter was placed. Percutaneous pacing was performed, but priority was given to disinfection and surgical procedures. If the right ventricle was difficult to secure owing to poor threshold in epicardial pacing, transvenous pacing would be performed. Ex utero intrapartum treatment was not available at our facility owing to the lack of experience to perform it. The infant was scheduled for immediate epicardial pacing lead placement in the adjacent room. She weighed 1764 g, cried, and had muscle tone; however, the fetal HR decreased to 40 beats per minute and generalized cyanosis appeared; bag-mask ventilation was started immediately. Subsequently, tracheal intubation was performed by a neonatologist, and sevoflurane, rocuronium, fentanyl, and atropine were administered before the surgery began. Although percutaneous pacing was started, the HR did not improve and the pulse rate was half of the pacing settings. There was no response to atropine, and isoproterenol was prepared but not used because the respiratory–circulatory dynamic (though relatively unstable) was maintained. The epicardial pacing lead was attached, and the setting was adjusted to the DDD mode (170 beats per minute, atrial output 2.0 mA, and ventricular output 2.0 mA). The operation time was 89 minutes, and the anesthesia time was 127 minutes. Figure shows the anesthesia record until the epicardial pacing lead was attached. The pacing threshold gradually increased after the operation, and a permanent pacemaker implantation was performed on day 72; the patient was discharged on day 91.