A 25-day-old preterm male infant (34 weeks of gestational age) was referred to our hospital with a one-month history of an abdominal mass. Antenatal ultrasonography revealed an abdominal mass in the fetus one month prior. After birth, the infant experienced abdominal distension and underwent abdominal US examinations. The abdominal lesion was considered as a teratoma at a local hospital.
After admission to our hospital, the physical examination revealed a 5 cm × 4 cm palpable abdominal mass with no concomitant symptoms. The results of the laboratory workup were normal, except the total bilirubin (TBIL) level was 98.7 μmol/L (reference range, 5.0–28.0 μmol/L), the direct bilirubin (DBIL) level was 17.9 μmol/L (reference range, < 8.8 μmol/L), the indirect bilirubin (IBIL) level was 80.0 μmol/L (reference range, < 20 μmol/L), the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was> 1210 ng/ml (the 95% interval of normal serum AFP for 22–28 days premature infant is 1164–118,850 ng/ml ), and the neuron-specific enolase (NSE) level was 21.48 ng/ml (reference range, < 15 ng/ml). Echocardiography revealed a patent foramen ovale. Chest radiography revealed no abnormalities.
To obtain the precise diagnosis, differentiate the lesion from teratoma and other abdominal tumors, and clarify the blood supply and the relationship with the surrounding vessels before surgery, detailed, specialized imaging examinations were needed. The infant underwent abdominal multimode US examinations, including grayscale high-frequency US, color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) and CEUS technology, which used 0.03 ml/kg SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy) with intravenous bolus injection.
The initial grayscale US revealed a 5.5 cm × 5.0 cm mass in the right upper abdomen of the infant, with a heterogeneous, complex cystic and solid texture. The shape of the solid component of the mass appeared as a fetus with a head and body parts and with multiple separated, small hyperechoic spots highly organized as a vertebral, column-like structure. The lesion had a clear border and regular shape and was surrounded by a well-defined membranous capsule . CDFI revealed an abdominal aorta-like vessel in the fetal-like solid component of the lesion, which had an arterial spectrum with a high peak systolic velocity of 58.4 cm/s . Furthermore, an umbilical vessel-like structure was observed on CDFI of the lesion, which was close to the right upper abdominal wall of the infant . CEUS clearly showed and further confirmed the abdominal aorta-like structure, with approximately 2 mm in diameter limb branch vessel-like structures and an umbilical vessel-like structure that was approximately 3 mm in diameter, which was the largest feeding vessel of the mass and was connected to the abdominal aorta of the patient . A plain CT scan detected a 5.6 cm × 4.6 cm heterogeneous retroperitoneal mass with a hyperattenuating axial skeleton, which corresponded with the hyperechoic vertebral column-like structure on US . No other positive findings were observed for the liver, gall bladder, pancreas, spleen or kidney on US or CT. Moreover, to avoid a potential bleeding risk by damaging the umbilical vessel-like structure during laparotomy, the structure was positioned and clearly marked on the neonatal surface skin of the abdominal wall under US guidance before surgery.
Given the US findings, an abdominal “humanoid” FIF was diagnosed. The patient underwent laparotomy for mass resection. During the operation, a well-encapsulated, complex cystic and solid retroperitoneal mass approximately 6 cm in diameter was found. A “humanoid” FIF was found in the mass, surrounded by clear, yellow, cystic fluid . The umbilical vessel-like structure of the FIF was connected to the superior mesenteric artery of the infant, supplying blood to the FIF. The mass was removed en bloc, and the superior mesenteric artery of the patient was repaired. The intraoperative findings supported the diagnosis of FIF, and postoperative histology confirmed it. The premature patient successfully recovered soon after the surgery without any postoperative complications. At the two-year follow-up visit, US showed no recurrence, and the laboratory workup showed normal serum levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) and AFP.