A 6-year-old boy, not known to have any medical illness, presented to our hospital complaining of painless redness and swelling of the left upper eyelid with proptosis that had developed over two weeks. Upon examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right and left eyes were 20/20 and 20/30 respectively. Intraocular pressure (IOP) of both eyes was 12 mmHg, and the left eye showed mild upper lid swelling, proptosis with restricted extraocular (EOM) movement in all gaze directions. Examination of the anterior segment shows mild chemosis with hyperaemia, clear cornea and normal fundus .
A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast revealed a left orbital soft tissue mass measuring 3.7 × 1.7 cm. The isodense mass in the muscle displaced the superior rectus and left globe downwards and anteriorly. The mass showed heterogeneous enhancement. There was bone erosion to the superior left orbital bone ridge (roof) extending to the brain .
Under general anaesthesia, a biopsy was performed through the infrabrow region using a subperiosteal approach to the midsuperior orbit. The histopathologic analysis revealed large, variably sized vessels infiltrating between muscular fibres .
A diagnosis of a capillary-type intramuscular haemangioma of the superior rectus muscle was made. The patient received one dose of intralesional triamcinolone acetate (TA) (40 mg /ml). The lesion regressed, proptosis resolved, and full extraocular movement was restored, with normal BCVA and IOP.
Few months later, the patient came back complaining of the same symptoms in the same eye. Upon examination of the left eye the BCVA was 20/40, the IOP was 14 mmHg, and there was complete restriction of EOM. Another dose of TA was given, but there was no improvement. A CT scan of the orbit showed the tumour had recurred; it was accompanied by bone destruction and an intracranial extension that involved the sphenoid sinus. Furthermore, following the administration of contrast, CT revealed strong enhancement of the tumour . The patient was referred to neurosurgery for a complete surgical excision of the tumour. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow up after referring to neurosurgery department.