The patient was a 16-year-old male high school freshman. He was 180 cm tall, weighed 112 kg, and was obese, with body mass index of 34.6 kg/m2. He had no history of treatment or family history of hip disease, including developmental dysplasia of the hip. He had no other notable underlying medical conditions. One month ago, right hip joint pain appeared after table tennis club activity, and the pain did not improve, for which he presented to our department. The range of passive motion of the hip joint was as follows: right flexion, 80°; left flexion, 100°; right abduction, 30°; left abduction, 30°; right adduction, 10°; left adduction, 10°; right internal rotation, 0°; left internal rotation, 10°; right external rotation, 40°; and left external rotation, 40°. The patient had pain on deep flexion of the right hip joint, a negative FABER test, and a positive FADIR test. X-ray images showed a depressed deformity of the right femoral head loading portion. The center-edge angle (CE angle) was 10° on the right and 21° on the left, and the teardrop distance was 12 mm on the right and 8 mm on the left; he had bilateral acetabular dysplasia . Computed tomography (CT) images showed a depression at the load-bearing portion of the femoral head opposite to the acetabular rim . Magnetic resonance imaging showed low-intensity signal on T1-weighted images and high-intensity signal on T2-weighted images , for which a subchondral fatigue fracture with femoral head depression was diagnosed. Transposition osteotomy of the acetabulum was performed in this case. In the left lower lateral recumbent position, a U-shaped skin incision was developed on the lateral side of the hip joint. The greater trochanter was detached and translated to approach the external plate of the iliac crest. After the pubic osteotomy, the iliac bone was osteotomized to the internal plate and the bone fragment was rotated anterolaterally. Intraoperative fluoroscopic images showed leveling of the loading portion and medialization of the femoral head. The mobile fragment was fixed with two 6.5 mm-diameter poly-L-lactic acid screws. The detached greater trochanter was fixed with two 6.5 mm-diameter titanium screws. Post-operative X-ray image showed a CE angle of 30° and improved hip coverage. After 5 weeks of non-weight-bearing on the right lower extremity, one-third partial weight-bearing was permitted, half partial weight-bearing after 7 weeks, and full weight-bearing at 9 weeks postoperatively. The depressed portion of the femoral head showed gradual remodeling, and the patient returned to sports 6 months after surgery. Two years after surgery, CT images before removal of the titanium screw showed that the depressed portion of the femoral head had almost completely remodeled . At the last observation 2 years and 5 months after surgery, X-ray image showed no osteoarthritis . There was no pain or limitation of range of motion in the right hip joint, which did not interfere with daily life or sports.