A 55-year-old Japanese man with a history of anxiety disorder was admitted to our hospital because of moderate headache and visual loss. On the morning before admission in spring, he had visited a river in the mountains to experience Takigyo for the first time. He was very nervous before stepping into the river. Soon after stepping under the cold waterfall (with water falling from a height of approximately 3 m), he developed a moderate headache beginning at the back of his neck. He described his headache as reaching maximum intensity within 1 min, graded 6 out of 10 on a notional analogue severity scale. Although he stepped out of the waterfall after approximately 3 min, his headache persisted. Furthermore, he became aware of gradual visual loss. On the day of admission, he went to his primary care physician complaining of his unusual condition. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain suggested acute ischemic stroke, and he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He had a history of anxiety disorder treated with alprazolam 0.4 mg and sulpiride 150 mg daily. There was no prior history of head trauma, cerebral disabilities, or any vascular risk factors including diabetes, dyslipidemia, or hypertension. He had no allergies to any medications or food. He had smoked approximately 50–60 cigarettes a day for 35 years and drank alcohol occasionally.
On examination, his vital signs showed the following: body temperature, 36.1°C; blood pressure, 140/78 mmHg; heart rate, 78 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 14 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 97% on ambient room air. Neurological examination showed double vision and homonymous left lower quadrantanopia. A stiff neck and the Kernig sign were absent. There were no abnormalities with sensation or strength throughout, with normal reflexes. Laboratory analysis of complete blood count, electrolyte and creatinine levels, liver function, and coagulation tests were normal. Results of testing for anticardiolipin antibodies, antinuclear bodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examinations on day 2 revealed a protein level of 38 mg/dL, a glucose level of 63 mg/dL, and a leukocyte count of 9/μL. Electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm. A brain computed tomography scan showed no abnormality. Brain MRI studies were carried out on the day of admission at a previous clinic. Diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI), T2-weighted sequences, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging showed slightly high signal intensity at a symmetrical lesion in the right occipital lobe under the cerebral cortex consistent with ischemic stroke . Moreover, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps showed slightly high signal intensity in the same lesion. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) findings were almost normal, excluding the left persistent trigeminal artery. Because the initial presentation and investigations suggested acute ischemic stroke, we administered argatroban as antithrombotic therapy.
On the day after admission, follow-up brain MRI showed no abnormalities in the right occipital lobe under the cortex. However, MRA showed multifocal segmental stenosis in the bilateral anterior cerebral artery and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) . Therefore, we suspected RCVS and treated with nifedipine 20 mg daily instead of argatroban.
On day 10 after admission, although his visual loss and headache had completely normalized, follow-up brain MRA revealed remarkable diffuse segmental stenosis in the bilateral middle cerebral arteries and bilateral PCA . He was discharged on day 14 without recurrence and was followed up as an outpatient. Magnetic resonance angiography on day 46 showed improvement in the diffuse segmental cerebral arterial stenosis . We diagnosed him with RCVS based on diagnostic criteria . He continued to take nifedipine 20 mg daily to prevent vasoconstriction.