A 49-year-old nulliparous woman presented with vaginal bleeding for the last 3 weeks. Speculum examination revealed a spherical mass protruding through the external cervical os. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a 3.4-cm-sized submucosal fibroid mass below the uterine cervix. She had a history of intestinal BD with recently worsening symptoms and received 1500 mg of mesalazine twice a day and 5 mg of oral prednisolone once a day. She denied symptoms other than vaginal bleeding. Previous hematologic disorders had not been reported, and the patient’s surgical history was unremarkable. The initial complete blood count revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.6 g/dL, hematocrit 31.9%, MCV 96.1/FL) and thrombocytopenia (130 × 103/μL). The total white blood cell count was 5430/μL, without a differential count.
The patient underwent hysteroscopic mass resection. Histologically, the normal architecture of the uterine cervix was effaced by tumor cells, although some non-neoplastic endocervical glands maintained their normal structure. The tumor comprised relatively monomorphic cells with scant cytoplasm and hyperchromatic oval nuclei. The tumor cells exhibited diffuse membranous positivity for leukocyte common antigen and cluster of differentiation 56 (CD56) during immunohistochemical staining, whereas normal endocervical glands were negative for both markers. Some tumor cells were positive for CD68, a marker associated with the myeloid lineage, but were negative for myeloperoxidase (MPO) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase. The final pathological diagnosis was MS .
Her peripheral blood smear was performed after pathological diagnosis and revealed normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 8.7 g/dL) and thrombocytopenia (89 × 103/μL). The white blood cell count was adequate (3330/μL), and the differential count revealed segmented neutrophils (59%), lymphocytes (34%), and monocytes (7%).
Subsequent bone marrow aspiration and biopsy revealed approximately 10% hypocellular bone marrow with 2.2% blasts, dysgranulopoiesis, and myelofibrosis. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal karyotype, and next-generation sequencing and fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed negativity for genetic mutations of AML. The diagnosis was unclassifiable MDS with MS of the uterine cervix.