A 60-year-old male was referred to the hospital because of a right upper quadrant mass and abnormal liver function test results. He had no significant medical history.
Abnormal laboratory findings included elevated AST: 406 U/l, ALT: 397 U/l, total bilirubin: 1.01 mg/dl, direct bilirubin: 0.61 mg/dl, ALP: 4380 U/l, γ-GTP: 1548 U/l, and amylase: 509 U/l. The serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 8.6 ng/ml, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9): 261 U/ml, SPan-1: 100 U/ml, and DUPAN-2: 750 U/ml were elevated, but soluble interleukin-2 receptor concentration was normal (310 U/ml).
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a well-demarked heterogeneously solid mass with a diameter of 8 cm in the head of the pancreas. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) imaging of the abdomen confirmed a 7 × 9 × 7 cm diameter exophytic mass in the head of the pancreas. The tumor was hypodense in the arterial phase, and then became weakly but uniformly hyperdense in the delayed phase. There was biliary stricture, disruption of the main pancreatic duct, and obstructive pancreatitis, but no obvious infiltration of the surrounding organs or major blood vessels or enlarged lymph nodes . The mass was hypointense on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), hyperintense on T2-weighted images, and diffusely hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images (DWI) . MR cholangio-pancreatography showed dilatation of intra- and extra-hepatic bile ducts and the pancreatic duct owing to tumor obstruction .[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (FDG-PET) showed heterogeneous accumulation in the pancreatic head tumor (SUV max = 7.65). Abnormal accumulation suggesting distant metastasis or lymph node metastasis was not observed . These findings were atypical for a pancreatic ductal carcinoma. Trans-duodenal tumor biopsy by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) was performed. Cytological examination showed a single pattern of atypical cells with increased chromatin granularity. Histopathological examination showed proliferating short spindle-shaped cells, relatively large N/C ratio, and scattered mitotic figures. Immunostaining was positive for cluster of differentiation (CD) 34 and CD56, partially positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and negative for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2), CD117, DOG1, S-100, smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, and CD31.
These findings suggested the possible diagnosis as SFT, extra-gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), and neuroendocrine carcinoma, but the diagnosis was not confirmed because of limited amount of specimen and CD56 positive tumor. The EUS-FNA results indicated that the possibility of malignant lymphoma was low. Therefore, surgical resection was the therapy of choice for this large pancreatic head tumor. The patient underwent subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy with D2 lymph node dissection. Intraoperative findings did not show ascites, peritoneal dissemination, or distant metastasis. A solid tumor measuring approximately 8 cm was found in the head of the pancreas, and the body of the pancreas showed obstructive pancreatitis. The tumor was firmly adherent to the surrounding tissues, such as the gallbladder, inferior vena cava, and mesentery owing to an inflammatory reaction. The inferior vena cava, superior mesenteric artery, and common hepatic artery were safely preserved by careful separation from the tumor. However, the border between the superior mesenteric vein and the tumor was partly unclear, and partial resection was required. The resected tumor was a yellowish-white, well-circumscribed mass measuring 8 × 8 × 6 cm and was located in the pancreatic head . A prominent lesion was observed in the duodenum, which was considered to be tumor invasion .
Pathological examination of the resected specimen demonstrated proliferating spindle-shaped cells involving normal pancreatic tissue, and it was considered that most of the cells were excreting and some were invasive . Fibrosis accompanied by hyalinization was observed at the margin of the tumor, and there were necrotic foci inside the tumor. Twelve mitotic figures were observed in 10 HPFs . In addition, venous infiltration and duodenal infiltration were observed on the duodenal side in contact with the main lesion, suggesting a highly malignant tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the resected tumor revealed that the tumor cells expressed positive results for CD34 , vimentin, and Bcl-2 , focally positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and weakly positive for STAT6 . The tumor cells were negative for CD117, DOG1, SMA, desmin, S-100, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A. On the basis of the histology and immunostaining profile, the tumor was diagnosed as a malignant SFT of the pancreas.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful except for gastric stasis, which was treated with conservative management. The patient was discharged 22 days after surgery, and he remains free of recurrent disease after 12 months of follow-up without adjuvant therapy.