A 29-year-old woman visited a general practitioner (GP) with the complaint of abdominal pain in the right lower abdomen. Blood sample showed high inflammatory reaction (WBC 15800, CRP 2.4) and abdominal ultrasound showed an enlarged appendix. During the interview, the patient denied pregnancy, urinalysis showed no abnormal findings, and urinary hCG was negative. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with acute appendicitis and treated with antibiotics. After treatment, her abdominal pain disappeared, and laboratory test results indicated that inflammation had decreased. However, she was found to be severely anemic (hemoglobin [Hb] level, 6.5 g/dl). Therefore, she was started on oral iron supplements, and her anemia subsequently improved (Hb level, 9.6 g/dl). To determine the cause of her anemia, the GP referred her to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
At the time of presentation to our hospital, her vital signs were stable and physical examination revealed no signs of liver disease. There was no physical evidence of subcutaneous hemorrhage or hemangioma on her body. She underwent a thorough examination at our hospital. Her anemia was found to have been caused by an iron deficiency. The results of her gynecological tests were normal. However, computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the thickening of the cecal wall and enlargement of the regional lymph nodes . A lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a 2-cm raised mass-like lesion in the cecum showing easy bleeding . This lesion was pathologically identified as an inflammatory granuloma. There were no other abnormalities discovered in the colon. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy results were normal. Therefore, the cause of the anemia was determined as bleeding from a lesion in the cecum. Because the lesion in the cecum was easily hemorrhagic, leading to worsening of the patient’s anemia, surgical resection was selected as the primary treatment plan. Therefore, she was admitted to our hospital, and on day 3, she underwent laparoscopic ileocecal resection. Intraoperative findings revealed significant dilatation of the veins on the serous surface of the terminal ileum and enlargement of numerous lymph nodes , but there were no obvious findings on the serosal surface of the cecum where the lesion was located. Successful resection and primary anastomosis was achieved. The operation lasted for 241 min and 41 g of blood loss. Moreover, macroscopic examination of excised specimen revealed a single 2.5-cm polyp with adjacent mucosal edema, and hemorrhage was observed .
Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a spongy structure comprising many small papillary fibrous tissues lined by a typical monolayer endothelium . Vascular malformations, dilated veins, and thrombi were also observed in the tissues near the lesion. As per immunohistochemical analysis, the cells of the endothelium monolayer expressed CD31, CD34 but not D2-40 or AE1/AE3 (data not shown). Moreover, Ki-67 immunostaining did not show diffuse or highly positive cell proliferation suspicious for malignancy, and the Ki-67 labeling index was less than 1% . Based on these findings, the lesion was identified as an IPEH in the cecum. Moreover, the patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and there was no evidence of recurrence during the 1.3 years of follow-up.