A 26-year-old-female presented with a painless, slowly growing mass over 6 months at the left submandibular area. She reported no increased swelling of the mass or pain during eating. Her speech and swallowing were normal. She had taken two courses of antibiotics from other hospitals, but her symptoms persisted. There was no previous history of surgery or trauma to the oral cavity or neck. Clinical examination revealed a well-defined, firm, non-tender mass size 4 × 4 cm in the left submandibular area. Bimanual palpation of the left submandibular gland showed no stone or pus from the Wharton’s duct. Oral cavity examination revealed swelling in the left floor of mouth with normal tongue movement. We scheduled her for MRI imaging and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) for further investigation. The MRI showed a well-defined hypointense T1 and hyperintense T2-weighted image cystic lesion at the left sublingual space above the mylohyoid muscle that extended to the left submandibular and left parapharyngeal space displacing the left submandibular gland downward . The preliminary report of needle aspiration at the submandibular area was an epidermoid inclusion cyst. The most likely diagnosis was a lateral sublingual epidermoid cyst. The patient was scheduled for surgical treatment. For a better cosmetic result, we chose an intraoral approach with the informed consent of the possibility of conversion to an extraoral approach if the intraoral approach was unsuccessful . The patient underwent nasotracheal intubation. The left Wharton’s duct was cannulated with a lacrimal probe to prevent injury. An incision was made in the mucosa along the floor of the mouth. Because the sublingual gland obscured the view of the posterior Wharton’s duct, lingual nerve, and underlying cyst, the gland was excised to provide the necessary exposure. We then carefully separated the cyst from the mylohyoid and hyoglossus muscles by blunt dissection while preserving the lingual nerve and Wharton’s duct. The cyst was removed with an intact capsule . The floor of the mouth was closed in layer with 3/0 Vicryl. During the postoperative period, the patient had only mild swelling at the floor of the mouth and intact tongue movement. She resumed a soft diet on the first postoperative day. The surgical specimen was a soft yellowish-tan cystic mass, measured 6.5 × 3.2 × 2.5 cm. with yellow keratin content. Histologic examination showed a benign stratified squamous epithelium-lined cyst with no evidence of adnexal structure consistent with the epidermoid cyst . The patient recovered and remained disease-free after two years of follow-up.