The parents of an 11-year-old Italian Caucasian girl requested she be evaluated for a suspected anxiety disorder. Our patient had been found to have 47(XXX) syndrome after a prenatal investigation (amniocentesis due to the relatively high maternal age). She was born full term after a normal pregnancy; no problems were reported during the perinatal or the neonatal period. Her parents described her psychomotor development as normal. She went to kindergarten by the age of three without any significant difficulty. She attended primary school with no apparent problems for the first four years, and then learning difficulties increasingly began to be reported. Her parents also referred to a significant difficulty in making and maintaining friends. They suspected she may have a specific learning disorder, since a cousin of our patient was dyslexic.
When we first saw her she was attending the first year of the 'scuola secondaria di primo grado' (VIth grade); her parents described mainly difficulties in writing, a high level of performance anxiety and lack of self-confidence. They also mentioned the occurrence of occasional tic bouts, which they considered as a manifestation of anxiety.
She seemed at first to be scared by the clinical examination, and she felt embarrassed by her appearance, although she had no dysmorphic features and her auxologic parameters were in the normal ranges (height: 75th percentile, weight: 50th percentile). Results of her general physical examination were normal, with the exception of a partial dental malposition and signs of nail biting. Her neurological examination was almost normal as well, but multiple motor tics (simple and complex) involving her head, arms and mouth, and vocal tics, were evident. They tended to become almost continuous when she was asked to perform quick calculations or any other cognitive task subjectively considered difficult.
Although our patient considered tics to be 'not important' and refused to list involuntary movements she experienced, she admitted that they were 'annoying' in social situations. During the evaluation, the following tics were seen: eye blinking (both unilateral and bilateral), grimacing of the mouth, throwing back of the head, quick flexions or extension of one or both arms, knuckle popping, throat clearing, sniffling, and coughing. Most motor tics were partially masked by added voluntary movements to resemble 'normal', although always not fully appropriate, activities.
To better understand the reasons leading to her academic difficulties, a neuropsychological evaluation was proposed. She was very shy with therapists and doctors of either sex; her lack of self-confidence was evident and manifested as requests for supplementary explanations about the cognitive tasks she was asked to perform. The number of tics was noted to increase during evaluation, especially when she needed to find or adapt cognitive strategies on her own to successfully complete tasks. Details of the neuropsychological evaluation are given in Table ; the tests are among those routinely used in Italy and recommended by the Italian Society of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry (SINPIA). Spontaneous writing was not adequate for her school level in terms of orthography or in terms of text structure.
In short, our patient showed a mild mental retardation with a relatively higher performance level. Minor difficulties in reading and writing were noted, and her reading comprehension was below average. Her mathematical abilities were severely compromised.
Our patient showed an important deficit of planning strategies, including the visual-constructional praxis, visuomotor integration and short-term spatial memory. The tendency to act without considering rules (shown by her performance in the Tower of London test) can be read as an alteration in inhibitory function, which is a rather typical feature of TS . Impairment in visual working memory tasks has been reported in patients with TS as well, but our findings do not allow us to exclude the effect of comorbidities .