An 87-year-old Japanese man with atrial fibrillation and left internal carotid artery stenosis presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of hiccups.
Approximately 3 weeks prior to his presentation, he was treated for subcortical bleeding in the left occipital lobe due to amyloid angiopathy. During the treatment for the subcortical bleeding, the patient discontinued apixaban for atrial fibrillation and aspirin and experienced acute right back pain that was not treated. The accurate date of the onset of back pain is uncertain. Five days before his hiccup presentation, the patient was discharged from the hospital, and the apixaban and aspirin were resumed; 2 days prior to his presentation, he developed hiccups. Due to the hiccups, he could not sleep and was taken to the emergency room. He had no history of renal diseases and never worried about prolonged hiccups. He drank a glass of beer for over 60 years and had smoked two packs per day of cigarettes but quit about 30 years ago.
Upon his presentation to the emergency room, his blood pressure was 131/65 mmHg, pulse was 94/minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. No physical abnormalities were noted on examination. His serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 1366 U/l) and C-reactive protein (CRP; 15.53 mg/dl) levels were elevated. Urine tests revealed occult hematuria and proteinuria. On hospital day 1, the patient was referred to the internal medicine department. Although we did a physical examination, he only complained of right costovertebral angle tenderness. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple poorly enhanced areas and a cortical rim sign in the right kidney , which suggested renal infarction.
From the CT findings, which revealed fat stranding from the kidney to the diaphragm, it was hypothesized that inflammation from the right kidney infarction stimulated the diaphragm, inducing prolonged hiccups in reference to previous studies . There were no other findings which could explain the cause of the hiccups. The patient’s typical doses of apixaban (5 mg/day) and aspirin (20.25 mg/day) were continued. Hangeshashinto was administered to as a symptomatic treatment. He was also administered ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 hours) due to the possibility of a urinary tract infection. The patient’s LDH had improved by hospital day 2 (922 U/l), and the patient’s hiccups continued, though their frequency decreased. On hospital day 4, the patient’s LDH (579 U/l) and CRP (5.91 mg/dl) were further improved. His urine and blood cultures were negative, and the ceftriaxone was discontinued. After a gradual decrease in the frequency of the hiccups, they disappeared on hospital day 8. The patient underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to investigate the cause of the hiccups. Ulcerative scarring was noted on endoscopy, and a small, old infarction was noted in the left parietal lobe on MRI . The patient was discharged on hospital day 11 and continued apixaban (5 mg/day) and aspirin (20.25 mg/day). After discharge from the hospital, he returned to his family physician, and we did not receive notification of any consequences from or recurrence of hiccups.