A 54-year-old man with no significant medical history, except for a 25-year history of smoking (10/day), presented with epigastric pain and sought medical attention at a clinic. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an irregular ulcerative lesion, prompting a referral to our institution for further evaluation. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed at our hospital revealed a type 2 tumor in the posterior wall of the lower gastric body. Biopsy confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma. At the time of diagnosis, blood testing revealed a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of less than 1.0 and CA19-9 was under 0.1 U/ml, which indicated no elevation of tumor markers. Genetic tests, such as tumor mutation burden (TMB) and mismatch repair (MMR) genetic mutation were not conducted. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated irregular wall thickening in the lower part of the gastric body with associated contrast enhancement. The tumor partially extended to the posterior aspect, and was accompanied by an increase in the surrounding fat tissue concentration, suggesting a depth of infiltration beyond the subserosa (SS). In addition, multiple enlarged lymph nodes were noted in the lesser curvature, raising the suspicion of lymph node metastases. No obvious distant metastases or peritoneal dissemination were observed. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with GC, classified as clinical stage III (T3N1M0). The patient underwent laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection and Billroth I reconstruction without any other incurable factors. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged 10 days postoperatively. Pathological examination classified the tumor as stage II (pT3N0M0).
Following surgery, the patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy and was followed-up regularly by walk-in check-up without evidence of recurrence. However, during the first year after surgery, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor on the efferent side of the remaining stomach . A biopsy was performed and adenocarcinoma was detected in the pathological examination. Some tumor infiltrating lymphocytes are also observed in Fig. B. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 2.5 cm low-density area in segments 6 and 7 of the liver . Fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG–PET) showed abnormal uptake only at the site of the liver metastasis . The patient was diagnosed with remnant gastric cancer classified as clinical stage IVB (T3N0M1(HEP)). Blood testing revealed a CEA level of 1.6 ng/ml and a CA19-9 level of under 0.1 U/ml, which still indicated no elevation of tumor markers. Histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen indicated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, HER2 status was negative and positive expression of PD-L1 (combined positive score [CPS] ≥5).
The patient commenced first-line chemotherapy with a regimen comprising TS-1 (tegafur 120 mg/day for 14 days), oxaliplatin (250 mg/body/day), and nivolumab (360 mg/body/day). After completing four cycles of this therapy, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a trend of tumor reduction in the gastric remnant , while contrast-enhanced CT demonstrated a reduction in the size of the liver metastasis to approximately 1 cm . No new metastatic lesions were observed, and the patient's overall condition remained favorable.
Given these positive treatment outcomes and the absence of new metastatic lesions, we decided to proceed with conversion surgery. The patient underwent laparoscopic partial hepatectomy and total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction for remnant gastric cancer and liver metastasis. The surgical procedure lasted for 8 h and 27 min, with a blood loss of 15 ml. No significant issues were encountered during surgery, and the patient was discharged 7 days postoperatively. Figure A shows a specimen of resected remnant GC and Fig. B shows a resected liver with metastasis. Macroscopically, there were findings suggestive of malignancy, however, pathological examination of the resected specimens revealed no malignant findings at the primary tumor site or liver metastasis , confirming pCR.
Postoperatively, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 (tegafur 120 mg/day) for 1 year, and remained recurrence-free for 18 months following surgery.