A 20 months old Saudi Boy presented to the pediatric neurology clinic with two weeks history of inability to walk properly as per his mother’s description. His standing and walking were interrupted with backward twisting and flexion of the left arm and left leg with the whole body seems to be in a forward flexion, his right arm having short flexion that do not sustain these movements would ultimately flowed by a backward fall; Video . For the last two weeks he was not able to return to his normal standing and walking.
Back to his perinatal history; he was a product of full-term uneventful pregnancy to apparently heathy parents with significant obstetric history as his mother had previous three abortions with no living siblings. His father died 6 months prior to presentation in a road traffic accident which added more to the tragedy of the family.
Regarding his past medial history, it was noncontributory with no previous hospitalizations or surgeries.
Developmentally, he was up to his age. He started sitting, standing and waking at proper age and his abnormal posture and gait were just noticed two weeks prior presentation. His fine motor development was appropriate, and he was able to use his hands appropriately in transferring things between them and he could use the spoon. His speech was also matching to his age.
His physical examination at the time of initial evaluation at rest the child was is fully conscious with full orientation, no clear cranial nerve affection. His four limbs had normal tone power and reflexes.
Twenty-four hours video EEG recording revealed no convulsive movements and no epileptogenic activities. His MRI brain without contrast showed normal brain structure and myelination. Inner ear functions were also assessed by specialist with no abnormalities detected.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was requested. More than 20,000 genes of the patient’s DNA were enriched and sequenced. Filtering of the exome data targeted recessive, X-linked, and dominantly inherited diseases.
WES identified the heterozygous variant c.344A > G, p.(Tyr115Cys) in SGCE which lead to an amino acid exchange . Ten out of the 10 bioinformatic in silico program predict a pathogenic effect for this variant .
Allele frequency of this variant in the general population has not been documented. Considering the available information, the variant was classified as pathogenic. This variant causes autosomal dominant myoclonic-dystonia-11 (DYT11; OMIM#159900) .
The condition was explained to the mother and she was tested to the same mutation detected in her child which came out to be negative.
Management plan and follow up:
The abnormal movements are remarkably initiated with his intention to start walking so initial thinking was the possibility of paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD).
Based on the chance that sodium pump inhibitors like phenytoin and carbamazepine might help in PKD, we started our patient on oral carbamazepine at an initial dose of 10 mg per kilogram per day which was doubled after a week time.
The patient was reviewed in the clinic after three weeks of implementing carbamazepine therapy with nearly complete resolution of the dystonia and was able to walk properly; Video .
Unfortunately, the mother was concerned by the side effect of the prolonged use of carbamazepine. She ignored medical advice and went to a local herbal and religious Sheik who advised her to stop the medication.
The patient had a complete relapse of his symptoms after withdrawal of carbamazepine. The child was readmitted, and carbamazepine was resumed.
On regular follow up over a period of 4 years, the child-maintained response on 20 mg/kg/day of carbamazepine therapy with minimal fine motor tremor in both hands without relapses.
The main concern of the mother was; for how long her child would continue on this medication? Would it be safe to wean him off carbamazepine?
The family on January 2020 decided to wean off the carbamazepine over one month and fortunately, there was no relapse so far.