An 89-year-old Japanese man with a follicular adenoma of the left thyroid gland was admitted to the Oita University Hospital (Oita, Japan) with a 2-day history of fever and left neck pain. The patient was diagnosed with the adenoma, approximately three years prior to admission, and his thyroid function was normal five months prior. The patient had a history of congestive heart failure and chronic renal disease. On admission, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: body temperature 38.4 °C; blood pressure, 103/53 mmHg; pulse rate, 89 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 22 beats/min. Physical examination revealed swelling and pain on the left side of the neck. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (17,520/μL), elevated levels of C-reactive protein (26.5 mg/dL) and free thyroxine 4 (FT4; 1.72 ng/dL), low levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; 0.062 μIU/mL) and iron (18 μg/dL), low unsaturated iron-binding capacity (101 μg/dL), low transferrin saturation (15%), and a high B-type natriuretic peptide level (1200 pg/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed low-attenuation areas with peripheral enhancement in the left thyroid gland (58 mm × 59 mm) . The patient was diagnosed with thyroid abscess and thyrotoxicosis. Incision and drainage were subsequently performed, and piperacillin-tazobactam administration was initiated after collecting blood, drainage fluid, and stool samples. On day 2, Y. enterocolitica was identified in blood and drainage fluid cultures by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) (score value, 2.127) . The minimum inhibitory concentrations of the strain, as determined using a dry plate (Eiken, Tokyo, Japan) for the broth microdilution method and analyses by an image analyzer (Koden IA40MIC-i; Koden, Tokyo, Japan), were as follows: ampicillin, 32 μg/mL; ampicillin-sulbactam, 16 μg/mL; cefmetazole, 32 μg/mL; cefotaxime, 4 μg/mL; piperacillin-tazobactam, < 1 μg/mL; meropenem, < 0.12 μg/mL; gentamicin, < 0.25 μg/mL; ciprofloxacin, < 0.5 μg/mL; and levofloxacin, < 0.25 μg/mL. The patient’s stool culture was negative on day five, and they showed defervescence on day seven. The treatment regimen was changed to levofloxacin on day 18, and continued for a total of 42 days. Wound closure was performed on day 31, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on day 35. On day 37, thyroid function was normal (TSH level, 1.34 μIU/mL; FT4 level, 1.5 ng/dL). The Y. enterocolitica isolate was further characterized using an O-antigen serotyping scheme, biotyping (esculin, lipase, indole, xylose, and trehalose tests), and 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing to evaluate the pathogenicity. The O-antigen serotyping test is performed by slide agglutination using commercial antisera O:3, O:5, O:8, and O:9 for Y. enterocolitica (Denka Seiken, Tokyo, Japan). Biotyping test revealed esculin (negative), lipase (negative), indole (positive), xylose (positive) and trehalose (positive). DNA was extracted using the DNA extraction method with the Cica Geneus DNA extraction kit (Kanto Chemical, Tokyo, Japan). 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing was performed using the primers 518F (5′-CCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATAC-3′) and 800R (5′- TACCAGGGTATCTAATCC − 3′). Nucleotide sequencing was performed using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing kit and a SeqStudio Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, California, USA). A basic local alignment search tool for the query sequence resulted in the final identification of the bacterium as Y. enterocolitica subsp. palearctica, which had a 97.8% 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequence similarity (1343 of 1373 nucleotides) to Y. enterocolitica subsp. palearctica strain (GenBank accession numbers: CP002246.1). The final diagnosis was thyroid abscess with thyrotoxicosis and bacteremia caused by Y. enterocolitica subsp. palearctica belonging to the serogroup O:9 (biotype 2).