A 36-year-old free working male presented with pain on the right hip in April 2018.
Positron emission computed tomography (CT) was performed, demonstrating probable bone
metastasis and surrounding soft tissue masses in the pelvis and the upper lobe of the right lung
. Emission CT of the
bone was performed, which revealed bone metastasis. Pelvic puncture of the soft tissue
masses in the posterior superior acetabulum and the iliac crest indicated poorly
differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of
mucinous adenocarcinoma, with some cells being signet-ringoid, cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (+), CK19
(+), thyroid transcription factor-1 (−), anaplastic lymphoma kinase-CST (−), CK20 (−),
caudal-related homeodomain transcription 2 (CDX2) (−), and Napsin A (−). Pathological
consultation at the Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center indicated that the tumors were
derived from the digestive tract. However, following gastroscopic and colonoscopic
examination, the primary site remained unknown. The patient was subjected to immune-related
gene testing. The results showed programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1) positivity (25%),
the tumor mutational burden (10.48%), and mutation abundance of exon 5 in TP53 (49.49%).
Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with CUP.
In May 2018, the patient received palliative care to alleviate the pain and special
conformal radiotherapy with DT40GY/20F for the bone metastasis and surrounding soft tissue
mass . Subsequently,
in June 2018, he received chemotherapy with the XELOX regimen (i.e., capecitabine 1500 mg in
the morning and 2000 mg in the evening per os, d1–14+oxaliplatin
130 mg/m2 intravenous d1). The selection of the regimen was based on
recommendations pertaining to first-line chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced tumors of
the digestive tract.
During the treatment period, the pain in the left ilium intensified. Conformal radiotherapy
with DT40GY/20F to the site was initiated on June 15, 2018. The size of the mass on the
chest wall was 15 × 15 mm , and the mass in the lung increased in size . These findings indicated a progressive
disease. A biopsy of the mass of the chest wall was performed to identify the primary
lesion. Based on the morphology with H&E staining, ×40 and H&E staining, ×100 , the pathological analysis
indicated the presence of poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma, solid type
(signet-ring cell). Immunohistochemistry results excluded mesothelium and mammary gland
sources. Based on clinical endoscopy and other tests, the digestive tract was excluded as
the source of the cancer. It was considered that the tumor originated in the lung.
Subsequently, the patient received second-line chemotherapy (paclitaxel 200 mg d1–8 plus
cisplatin 30 mg d1–3) for two cycles on July 3, 2018 and July 31, 2018. The levels of tumor
marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) progressively
declined .
From September 8, 2018, the patient was treated with immunotherapy (nivolumab
[Bristol-Myers Squibb, Opdivo, Brooklyn, NY, USA] 100 mg/m2) every 2 weeks.
Nivolumab was approved by the China Food and Drug Administration on June 15, 2018.
Meanwhile, chemotherapy was used continually, and suspended after six cycles. Subsequently,
the patient continued to receive treatment with immunotherapy. The levels of CEA,
cytokeratin, and CA199 progressively decreased. In addition, the size of the masses in the
lung and pelvis was also reduced . The observed changes in tumor markers were consistent with the
therapeutic efficacy and tumor load .
According to the follow-ups performed between October 2018 and April 2019, the patient had
been able to conduct normal daily life activities, with a markedly improved quality of life
and absence of additional abnormalities.
However, the patient presented with recurrent cough and hemoptysis on April 18, 2019. Lung
CT imaging revealed the presence of new tissues . These new tissues detected in the right
main bronchus were removed using an endoscope . The size of the largest new tissue was 3
× 1 cm, and the pathological diagnosis suggested hemorrhage and fibrous exudation . The new tissues were
detected through a second respiratory endoscopy suggested the presence of malignant
epithelial tumors of the salivary gland type, based on the morphology of H&E staining,
×40 and H&E
staining, ×100 . The
immunohistochemistry results showed CD117(+/−), DOG-1(−), CK7(+), CK5/6(−), P63(−), CEA
minority (+), thyroid transcription factor-1(−), Napsin A (−), CR (−), P40(−), P53 mutant,
smooth muscle actin (+), S-100(−), and Ki-67(+) (approximately 50%). The masses did not show
significant change in the lung CT image . These findings indicated progressive disease. After consultation
with the Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, the use of local radiotherapy was
suggested after discontinuation of immunotherapy. In June 2019, the patient received
radiotherapy with DT45GY/15F for the lesions in the right lung, and mediastinal and hilar
lymph nodes. The treatment alleviated the patient’s cough and hemoptysis did not recur. Two
weeks later, it was observed that the mass in the lung had decreased in size . However, interstitial
inflammation occurred after DT36Gy/12F radiotherapy . Radiotherapy was discontinued and
anti-infective and anti-inflammatory treatments were administered. The inflammation in the
lung was resolved . In
the end, this patient died from recurrent pneumonia in December 2019.