A 17-year-old male patient was referred to our clinic for recurrent right knee pain with snapping that occurred during active extension and prevented the patient from completely extending his knee. However, when the knee was in a relaxed position, it could be extended fully by another person. The patient reported no recent traumatic events or previous surgeries. Physical examination showed a positive sign in the MPP test , which was conducted with the patient in the supine position and with the knee extended. Using the thumb, force was applied to press the inferomedial portion of the patellofemoral joint, inserting the medial plica between the medial femoral condyle and the patella. While maintaining this force, the knee was flexed at 90°. The MPP test was defined as positive when the patient experienced pain with the knee in extension and eliminated or markedly diminished pain with the knee in 90° of flexion. In the present case, the pain subsided when the knee was in hyperextension. A tender band was palpable approximately a fingerbreadth medial from the patella, while rolling over the medial femoral condyle was palpable with the knee in motion (the rolling over sign). Preoperative MRI was performed, which revealed a hypertrophic MPP along with an abnormal notch in the articular surface of the medial femoral condyle .
Arthroscopic surgery was performed. An MPP with a tight and hypertrophic margin was observed . The position and possible impingement of the plica were observed during knee motion and checked using an arthroscopic probe. An abnormal notch in the articular surface of the medial femoral condyle was observed beneath the MPP . The plica was excised at the zone of contact with the patella and medial femoral condyle . The cartilage was assessed using probe palpation, which revealed no pathological lesions. Full range of motion of the knee joint and full weight-bearing were allowed immediately after surgery. One day after the surgery, postoperative MRI confirmed MPP excision , and histologic examination using a light microscope (Olympus BX53, Japan) was performed. Histological findings revealed generalized fibrosis with stroma, as well as infiltration of inflammatory cells into fibrous tissues covered with synovial membrane cells .
Before surgery, the patient presented with pain (visual analogue scale [VAS] score: 5) in the medial margin of the patella and complained of palpable snapping during knee flexion and extension. The patient visited the clinic 2 weeks after the surgery and was satisfied with the improvement in his pain (VAS score: 0).