We report a 30-year-old male with XLA who was hospitalized for 35 days due to severe COVID-19 during the first wave of the pandemic; he received convalescent plasma and developed a strong SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cell response. The patient has been confirmed to have a hemizygote mutation, c. [763C > T], of nonsense in the gene encoding Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), resulting in the absence of mature B-cells and panhypogammaglobulinemia. The patient is on regular Ig-replacement therapy (170 mg/kg/week) and has minor bronchiectasis in the lower right lobe, normal spirometry and diffusion capacity. Upon admission he presented with one-week history of high fever, dry cough, and dyspnea. Treatment with oxygen, paracetamol, cefotaxime, doxycycline and low molecular heparin was immediately initiated. Positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR in sputum confirmed the diagnosis of COVID-19 at time of admission. Moreover, S. pneumonia and H. influenza were isolated in sputum culture. Chest computed tomography showed extensive bilateral infiltrates of ground-glass appearance and even consolidations . Fever persisted and his condition deteriorated during day 14–21 with severe fatigue, highly elevated plasma levels of CRP, interleukin-6 and ferritin, and decreased lymphocyte counts . HFNO was given day 12–19 to maintain oxygen saturation above 94%. The patient did not receive any corticosteroids or antiviral therapy, since it was not part of the treatment regimen in Sweden at that time. Extended immune phenotyping of peripheral lymphocytes at day 34, showed an increase in the frequencies of helper T-cells and cytotoxic T-cells expressing the activation marker HLA-DR and the checkpoint molecule PD-1, and a shift towards central memory cells within the cytotoxic T-cell compartment . We hypothesized that SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies may be vital for viral clearance and to mitigate the inflammatory response. Plasma transfusions are considered safe, and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were not available, hence CC-plasma therapy was initiated at day 35. The patient was administered 300 mL AB0-matched CC-plasma on two consecutive days without any transfusion-related adverse reactions. At this time, the fever had already started to decline, but after the plasma transfusions the patient became afebrile for the first time in 40 days . The fatigue diminished and he was mobilized and discharged on day 42. Nasopharyngeal sample was still PCR-positive for SARS-CoV-2 at this time point, but negative in a sample collected at day 49 .
SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cells was detected by a flow-cytometric assay for specific cell-mediated immune-response in activated whole blood . Detailed information about cellular assays and immune phenotyping is available in Additional file : Supplementary Methods. Higher numbers of CD4 and CD8 T-cells, specific for SARS-CoV-2 spike- (S) or nucleocapsid (N) protein peptide-pools, were detected in peripheral blood of the patient compared to a seropositive individual that had tested PCR positive for SARS-CoV-2 with moderate COVID-19 and seropositive CC-plasma donors with mild COVID-19 . High frequencies of circulating SARS-CoV-2 specific CD4 and CD8 T-cells were detected in peripheral blood of the patient more than 200 days after recovery of COVID-19 (results not shown). In addition, functional SARS-CoV-2-specific memory T-cell responses were assessed in peripheral blood lymphocytes collected at day 34, prior to plasma transfusion, and at day 113 after disease onset. Interferon-γ producing cells were detected after stimulation with S- and N-peptides at both time-points . Only sporadic cytomegaly virus (CMV)-specific cells were detected at day 34, however after recovery of COVID-19 the number of CMV-specific cells were increased . After discharge, the patient received prophylactic treatment with 200 mL CC-plasma day 59 and 91. The prophylactic administration of CC-plasma was discontinued based on the robust SARS-CoV-2T-cell response detected in peripheral blood collected day 91. On day 113, peripheral blood T-cell phenotypes were restored with activation levels similar to before the onset of COVID-19 .