A right-handed, 25-year-old man without any medical history such as febrile seizures, head trauma or intellectual disability had presented with focal impaired awareness seizure (FIAS) with unnatural posturing of the left upper limb at 24 years old. Perampanel (4 mg/day) was unable to control seizures. MRI revealed a small “popcorn” lesion of mixed signal intensity with hypointense rim in the left amygdala on T2-weighted imaging , representing a finding consistent with cavernous malformation. PET of the brain using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed low FDG uptake in the left medial temporal lobe, representing the same site as the lesion on MRI. However, this FDG-PET finding was unclear . Neuropsychological assessment revealed slight impairment of language function (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-fourth edition: full scale, 101; verbal comprehension, 83; perpetual reasoning, 124; working memory, 100; processing speed, 90; Wechsler Memory Scale-revised: verbal memory, 80; visual memory, 94; general memory, 81; attention/concentration, 103; delayed recall, 75). The language-dominant hemisphere was the left side according to the Wada test. These findings suggested the epileptic focus was on the left side.
Long-term (48-h) video EEG with scalp electrodes was performed after discontinuing perampanel and 5 seizures were recorded. The seizure began with a “head rush” sensation, followed by impaired awareness with unusual posturing of the left upper extremity. One of the 5 seizures showed a left dystonic posture , although 2 seizures showed left tonic posturing with finger opening and the other 2 seizures were not visible on video. After approximately 10 seconds, the patient recovered consciousness and unnatural posturing remitted. No oroalimentary or manual automatisms were observed throughout the examination. Ictal scalp EEG started with periodic sharp waves in the right temporal area, gradually increasing in amplitude . During interictal periods, sharp waves were observed only in the right temporal region, while no interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) were observed in the left temporal region. Because of the left dystonic posturing and scalp EEG findings as described above, the seizure onset zone was suspected to be the right temporal lobe, although the tumor was present on the left side.
Due to the discordance between imaging and scalp EEG, we conducted stereotactic electroencephalography (SEEG) with three targets, in bilateral hippocampi and the right amygdala, before focus resection surgery . In our institution, depth electrodes (Unique Medical Co., Komae, Japan) were implanted by neuronavigation-guided frameless SEEG . We used the VarioGuide system (Brainlab AG, Munich, Germany) under the Curve™ neuronavigation system (Brainlab AG). No complications such as intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral edema, infection, and electrode misplacement were observed. Intracranial EEG displayed low-voltage fast activity (LVFA) and direct current (DC) shift starting from the left hippocampus near the tumor before he felt the head rush sensation and pushed the mark-on button signaling seizure onset. The ictal wave slowly increased in amplitude, decreased in frequency, and spread into the right hippocampus earlier than into the left temporal neocortex. After the propagation of LVFA to the right hippocampus, the patient experienced impaired awareness and tonic posturing was apparent with the left upper extremity. During interictal periods, spike waves were frequently observed in the left hippocampus. Although IEDs were also found in the right hippocampus, the frequency of IEDs in the right hippocampus was less than one-tenth of that in the left. Based on these findings from intracranial EEG, we considered that the seizure onset zone was located in the left temporal lobe causing focal aware seizure (FAS) and that ictal waves spread rapidly to the right hippocampus and caused FIAS with left-sided tonic or dystonic posturing. The right temporal lobe was therefore assumed to be the symptomatogenic zone for FIAS.
We eventually diagnosed this patient with left cavernous malformation-associated temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) and performed resection of the cavernous malformation and left amygdala under a transcortical approach. MRI after surgery confirmed complete removal of the cavernous malformation . The pathological result was benign hemangioma and no abnormalities were evident in the temporal lobe or amygdala. No postoperative complications were observed, including memory disorders and aphasia. As of the time of writing, 3 months postoperatively, the patient has achieved freedom from seizures.