A 4-year-old Caucasian boy was referred to our clinic with a complaint of an extensive lesion inside his mouth.
Extra-oral examination revealed that his cheeks appeared to be slightly swollen. The patient was unable to close his mouth due to interior swelling.Intra-oral examination revealed an extensive exophytic, sessile, firm lesion with areas of ulcerated surface and a pink-to-red coloration that covered almost all the upper and lower teeth . The lesion was painless but was interfering with masticatory function. The mother mentioned that the patient was 8 weeks premature, was 2.2 kg at birth, had not been breast-fed, and was always at the lower limit of the growth curve. At 4 years old, the patient weighed 18 kg and was 107 cm tall. The patient’s mother related that she had to take growth hormones for many years until she reached adulthood. According to her, no other member of the patient’s family had any kind of gingival growth.
Laboratory tests performed before the initial biopsy included hemogram, immunoglobulins, growth hormone (GH), parathormone and glycosaminoglycan levels, and tissue plasminogen activity. The results were normal and the patient was not under any kind of medication.
Establishing a clinical differential diagnosis was a complex process. Osteosarcoma, peripheral ossifying fibroma, idiopathic gingival fibromatosis, hereditary gingival fibromatosis, plasminogen deficiency, mucopolysaccharidosis II, ligneous conjunctivitis, exostosis, and Gardner syndrome were checked for.Occlusal, panoramic, and periapical radiographs showed external radiopaque extensive lesion in a pattern of explosive mineralization restricted to the gingiva, without affecting the bone .An incisional biopsy was performed, and the histological analysis revealed a local atrophic stratified squamous epithelium or ulceration area overlying fibrovascular connective tissue with strips of calcified material . The lesion had a high cellularity and a formation of bone located mostly at the periphery . Occasionally, cementum-like calcifications were observed . No sign of cellular atypia could be found. With the histopatological diagnosis of a peripheral ossifying fibroma-like lesion and under general anesthesia, the remaining mass was removed, including the periosteum. In addition, the patient was given educational instructions, motivation, fluoride applications, and professional removal of dental plaque.Eight months later, the patient returned and a complete recurrence of the lesion was observed . He underwent another surgery and the specimen was sent for a histopathological study with a diagnosis of recurrent peripheral ossifying fibroma-like lesion. One year after the second surgery, he had a third recurrence and was operated on again . The patient was forwarded for evaluation with a geneticist to verify the possibility of any syndrome associated with the gingival growth, but no genetic alteration was found.Two years later, he had a fourth recurrence, and, 5 months after the removal of this lesion, he had a fifth recurrence. When he was 11 years old, he had a complete recurrence that covered all of his upper and lower teeth . Presently, the patient is 13 years-old and the multicentric gingival growth is again present in his mouth . During a period of 9 years, the lesion recurred about 30 times, showing the same clinical, radiographic, and histopathological aspects .
The histological pattern of the lesions removed were the same in all recurrences. Usually full mouth gingivectomies were performed by conventional approach using Kirkland and orban periodontal knives, electro-section or electro-coagulation methods under local anesthesia. The surgeries were performed in quadrants taking care to remove the involved periodontal ligament and periosteum. As an adjuvant for treatment, corticosteroid infiltration or trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peeling were used in association with some removals, but no alteration in the development of new recurrences was noted.