A 32-year-old male complaining of increasing pain in the left anterior chest wall and occasional numbness of fingers was referred to a local tertiary hospital for further diagnosis when a routine chest x-ray showed a large tumor in the left chest cavity. He had no notable past medical history and no smoking history. On admission, other physical examinations revealed no abnormalities. Chest CT and 3D reconstruction showed a well-circumscribed fusiform lesion with a multi-component structure, measuring 17 × 6 × 4 cm in the left second rib protruding into the chest cavity and out to deep space below pectoralis minor muscle. No pleural effusion and metastasis were noted . Laboratory parameters, pulmonary function, and echocardiogram testing were unremarkable. The patient was initially scheduled for an open procedure in another institution but ultimately referred to us, stating his intention to have this operation done minimally invasively, fearing the scar and lengthy recovery of an open thoracotomy.
After routine preparation, the patient underwent robotic-assisted trans-thoracic second rib resection. Briefly, after single lumen intubation with selective endobronchial blocking, the patient was placed in a right lateral decubitus position (with the left arm in an anti-flex-abduction position). The camera port was placed in the mid-axillary line in the eighth intercostal space, and two robot arms were placed in the fourth intercostal space at the anterior axillary line and eighth intercostal space just below the tip of the scapula . The Da Vinci surgical system was brought in from the head of the table. Single lung ventilation was achieved by endobronchial block tube, and 8 cm H2O CO2 was insufflated through the camera port to facilitate fume circulation. A 40/30 mm retractor was used after making a 3 cm incision anteriorly to introduce arm 2 and surgical drill. The parietal pleura was opened 3 cm away from either end of the tumor using electrocautery. Periosteum at both ends were cauterized and peeled off the rib at least 3 cm from the tumor. A pneumatic surgical drill with a blunt tip was used to transect the rib anteriorly and posteriorly . Sterilized normal saline was constantly dripped on the drill to prevent overheating. Dissection was continued to free the tumor from its attachments to surrounding structures. Unlike rib resection in treating TOS, the exposure became extremely difficult due to the rib tumor’s bulkiness . The assistant had to constantly apply opposing traction using thoracoscopic instruments to ensure exposure and identification of structures. In this case, the tumor protruded outwards to the deep fascia layer of the axilla anteriorly, the layer beneath the pectoralis minor. Extreme care was taken to ensure the protection of important structures while resecting the tumor in an en-bloc fashion. After saline lavage, a 28 Fr chest tube was placed through the camera port. The operation took 135 min, and the estimated blood loss was 50 ml. The specimen was measured 17 cm in length, 5 cm in widest diameter, with 3 cm of normal bone on either side. Postoperative pathology showed: fibrous dysplasia of the rib .
The postoperative course was uncomplicated, and the chest tube was removed on the 2nd postoperative day, patient was discharged with minimal discomfort, no paresthesia, and normal function of the left arm on the third postoperative day.
At four weeks of outpatient follow-up, the patient reported no pain, respiratory complaints, or uncomplicated wound healing. Clinical examination revealed no brachial plexus neuropathy, Horner’s syndrome, or winged scapula.