A 25-year-old male presented to our hospital with a one-month history of bloody stool. He denied any tobacco or alcohol use. His serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 21.0 ng/mL (normal < 2.5).The colonoscopy examination revealed a circumferential rectal lesion at 7 cm from the anal verge . An endoscopic biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of poor differentiated adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining for mismatch repair proteins MSH6 (BD Transduction Laboratory; clone 44, 1:1000 dilution), MSH2 (Calbiochem, Oncogene Sciences; clone FE11, 1:100 dilution), MLH1 (BD Biosciences Pharmingen; clone G168–15, 1:100dilution) and PMS2 (BD Pharmingen; clone A16–4, 1:500 dilution) was performed as described previously . And the results showed proficient mismatch repair (pMMR) for this patient . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis revealed heterogeneously enhancing irregular circumferential mural wall thickness involving the mesorectal fat measuring 5 cm in its length with enlarged perirectal lymph nodes . The computed tomography findings of the chest were negative. Based on the above findings, he was diagnosed with rectal cancer (cT3N2M0). The patient was originally planned to receive standard preoperative 5-FU-based CRT. However, he refused any radiotherapy concerning the increased risk of radiation-induced infertility and received 4 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with mFOLFOX6 regimen that consisted of oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 intravenously, leucovorin 400 mg/m2 intravenously followed by fluorouracil 400 mg/m2 intravenously and fluorouracil 2.4 g/m2 by 48 h continuous intravenous infusion. The patient experienced only grade I gastrointestinal and hematological toxicities, after which he underwent re-staging with CT or MRI scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Re-examination of pelvic MRI 4 weeks after diagnosis revealed evidence of tumor regression . Consequently, the patient received laparoscopic TME for rectal cancer, and histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed chronic ulcerative lesions but no evidence of residual adenocarcinoma cells , consistent with the concept of a complete response according to the AJCC TRG system. All 13 lymph nodes resected were negative (ypN0). Another 8 cycles of mFOLFOX6 adjuvant therapy was given following surgery. His CT scans showed no evidence of recurrence3 and 6 months after operation, and CEA is normal. No evident recurrence has been found in the patient for 12 months.
Given the significant tumor response, we next performed next-generation sequencing (NGS) using DNA from the endoscopic specimen as described . DNA sample was extracted from the endoscopic specimen and peripheral blood samples (DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). After quality control, DNA sequencing libraries were prepared according to the protocols recommended in the Illumina TruSeq DNA Library Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Libraries were hybridized to custom-designed biotinylated oligonucleotide probes (Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, USA) covering ~ 1.1 Mbp of sequence. DNA sequencing was carried out with the HiSeq CN500 Sequencing System (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). After removing the terminal adaptor sequences and low-quality data, the reads were mapped to the reference human genome. GATK (, The Genome Analysis Toolkit) and MuTect were used to call small insertions and deletions (indels) and single nucleotide variants in the somatic DNA by filtering peripheral blood sequencing data. Out of our expectation, a total of 159 somatic mutations were identified with TP53 p.R213* as the mutation with the highest allele frequency (53.3%). Moreover, KRAS p.G12D mutation was also detected at the allele frequency of 51.4%. Intriguingly, presence of BRCA2 somatic mutation (c.2231C > A p.S744*) was observed. The number of somatic mutations detected on NGS (interrogating 1.2 mb of the genome) is quantified and that value extrapolated to the whole exom. TMB was measured in mutations per megabase (Mb) and classified into high (20 mut/Mb), intermediate (6–19 mut/Mb) and low (< 6 mut/Mb). Consequently, the tumor mutation burden of our patient was described as high (22 mut/Mb).