A 53-year old African American man with a past medical history of untreated asthma and polysubstance use presented to our hospital with a 3-day history of shortness of breath, subjective fevers, and chills. He also reported generalized lethargy and diffuse muscle fatigue without muscle pain. The patient denied any sick contacts or recent travel. He endorsed regular use of tobacco, cocaine, alcohol, and cannabis up until hospital admission, with no increase in quantity in the preceding days. On further history, he also noted that he recently moved into a new home that required him to clean a basement bathtub filled with dirty standing water. It was shortly after this activity that the patient recalled developing fatigue, which then progressed to his presenting complaints.
On admission, the patient was afebrile (97.2 ℉), tachycardiac (heart rate 130) and tachypneic (respiratory rate of 22). Shortly after admission, he developed a fever to 102 ℉ (38.9 ℃). His oxygen saturations ranged from 86 to 88% on room air, improving to 94–96% with 2L of supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula. He was lethargic but arousable and appeared disheveled and dehydrated. Cardiac auscultation was unremarkable without any pathological murmurs. Auscultation of the lungs revealed bilateral wheezes with decreased breath sounds and crackles throughout the left posterior lung zone. No jugular venous distention or lower limb swelling were appreciated. Abdominal exam was unremarkable with no distension, guarding, rebound, rigidity or tenderness. Neurological exam showed 4/5 strength in his upper and lower extremities with intact movement, reflexes, and sensation.
Laboratory tests on admission revealed a white cell count of 12.1 × 109/L with 80% PMNs and 17% bands, hemoglobin concentration of 15.5 g/dL, procalcitonin of 34.3 ng/mL, sodium of 128 mmol/L, potassium of 3.9 mmol/L, calcium of 8.1 mmol/L, glucose of 246 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 75 mg/dL, creatinine of 3.32 mg/dL (baseline 0.7 mg/dL), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 496 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 1393 U/L, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 412 U/L. Urinalysis showed large blood with 2–3 red blood cells on reflex microscopy. Urine toxicology was positive for cannabinoids and cocaine. Serum creatine kinase level resulted as > 25, 000 U/L. Chest X-ray demonstrated left lower lobe consolidation . Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia.
The patient was diagnosed with sepsis due to community acquired pneumonia, complicated by hypoxemic respiratory failure, and acute kidney injury likely due to rhabdomyolysis. Legionella infection was considered high on the differential given his hyponatremia, high LDH, elevated hepatic transaminases, confusion, and potential exposure to contaminated water source. He was promptly started on intravenous fluids at 125 cc/hour as well as antibiotic therapy consisting of IV azithromycin (500 mg daily) and IV ceftriaxone (1 g daily).
On hospital days 2–3, infectious studies resulted and demonstrated no growth on sputum culture and a negative Streptococcus pneumoniae urinary antigen test. The Legionella pneumophila urinary antigen test was positive. Respiratory viral panel was negative for all pathogens, including SARS-COV-2. Blood culture showed no growth throughout the hospitalization. Ceftriaxone was discontinued and the azithromycin course was extended for a total of 14 days (PO azithromycin 500 mg daily).
While the patient’s white blood cell count, serum creatinine, creatine kinase, AST and ALTs steadily downtrended from the time of admission , he continued to be febrile, tachycardic, tachypneic, and hypoxic through day 4 of hospitalization. A thorough evaluation for secondary infections or complications related to Legionella pneumonia was unrevealing. The patient finally started clinically improving day 5 and onwards. He did not require invasive ventilation or hemodialysis. On hospital day 10, renal function returned to baseline and the patient was no longer requiring oxygen. He was discharged home with instructions to complete the course of azithromycin. As of one year post discharge, the patient has not had recurrence of rhabdomyolysis.