Our patient was a 31-year-old Iranian woman with amenorrhea and infertility due to an infantile uterus and atrophic ovaries associated with contracting mumps at a young age. She ultimately successfully carried a baby to term after a uterine growth treatment. The patient had contracted mumps when she was 3 years old and was diagnosed with oophoritis when she was 8 years of age. She had had no menses before treatment and had a body mass index (the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) of 23.3. Her initial reason for undergoing treatment was that she wished to conceive a child and carry it to term.
The patient received a donor oocyte that was fertilized with the sperm of her husband. She had a successful low-risk pregnancy after the second embryo transfer.
During her low-dose (LD) contraceptive treatment, the patient experienced slow but steady uterine growth. Her uterus measured 31 × 14 mm when she was 19 years old , which was 4 years into her LD contraceptive treatment. At 24 and 29 years of age, her uterus measured 47 × 13 mm and 50 × 17 mm, respectively. At the end of the LD contraceptive treatment, when she was 31 years old, her uterus had grown to 52 × 15 mm. Drospil (oral contraceptive tablets containing 3 mg of drospirenone and 0.03 mg of ethinyl estradiol; Koushan Pharmed, Iran, Tehran) was administered when the patient was 31 years of age, and this treatment lasted 3 months. During this time, her uterus grew a substantial amount . The subject’s uterus grew from 52 × 15 mm to 65 × 28 mm after the Drospil treatment.
The patient underwent LD contraceptive treatment from age 19 until she was 31 years of age. During this period, the size of her uterus was constantly monitored, which revealed constant yet slow uterine growth. This LD contraceptive treatment is routine and serves as a hormone replacement therapy to prevent premature menopause side effects and is a standard agent for menstrual period creation. At age 31, Drospil treatment was initiated and administered for 3 months, which led to substantial uterine growth and menses. After her uterus had reached a mature size, the patient was referred to an assisted reproductive technology clinic.
After her LD contraceptive treatment, the patient experienced only a small amount of withdrawal bleeding. During the Drospil treatment, the patient started experiencing menses with massive withdrawal bleeding. Additionally, the endometrial lining, at the 14 days menstrual cycle day, thickened from 2 mm before the Drospil treatment to 6 mm after the Drospil treatment.
The Drospil treatment lasted a total of 3 months, after which the patient’s uterus size and function were deemed to be mature. After this treatment, a healthy low-risk pregnancy was carried to term.