A 41-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital owing to ureteral avulsion caused by URS.
The patient, with left proximal ureteral calculus and associated mild hydronephrosis, underwent a left 8/9.8-Fr semirigid URS and laser lithotripsy at an outside clinic. The stone was completely fragmented. On withdrawal of the scope, the operator felt the impacted scope in the ureter, and ureteral avulsion occurred. The patient reportedly had an avulsion at the upper ureter and was finally transferred to our hospital for definitive management after refusals by several hospitals.
The patient was a hepatitis B carrier and had a history of multiple uterine leiomyomas; however, she did not have any surgical history.
The patient’s personal and family history was unremarkable.
The patient presented with body weakness but was clinically stable, with a blood pressure of 129/83 mmHg and heart rate of 93 bpm at admission. She was 156 cm tall and 53 kg in weight, with a body mass index of 22 kg/m2.
Laboratory test results revealed anemia, with a hemoglobin level of 79 g/L. The results for the other tested parameters were normal or with little clinical significance.
Computed tomography urography (CTU) was performed, confirming complete avulsion at the proximal ureter just below the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) .
Management options were discussed with the patient and her husband, including ureteral reconstruction using a Boari flap, ileal ureteral substitution, renal autotransplantation, and nephrectomy as the last resort, and the patient was informed that the final decision had to be made in the operating room. The patient was brought to the operating room and placed in a supine position. A midline incision was performed, followed by mobilization of the descending colon and exposure of the retroperitoneum. The perirenal hematoma was cleared, and a ureteral stump was identified just below the UPJ above the lower pole level. Additionally, the distal ureter was “missing” at the entire left retroperitoneum, and full-length ureteral avulsion was confirmed.