A 51-year-old male visited us complaining of right hip pain in June 2011. He had undergone bilateral THA more than 10 years prior. X-rays revealed wear of the acetabular linings of both hips, and severe osteolysis of the proximal femora and acetabula . Preoperative laboratory data revealed no sign of infection; we thus revised the right hip on June 24, 2011. During operation, we found that the acetabular cup was firmly fixed; we thus replaced the acetabular polyethylene lining and the alumina ceramic head. The femoral stem was loose so a DePuy Solution stem (diameter 12 mm) was placed after removing the old stem. The DePuy stem is a distally fixed, extensively porous-coated cylindrical revision femoral stem . We grafted alloallergic cancellated bone onto the acetabular side; we did not graft the proximal femoral bone defect. On April 11, 2013, we revised the left hip. Again, we found that the acetabular cup was firmly fixed and the femoral stem loose. We grafted alloallergic cancellated bone onto the acetabular side, replaced the acetabular polyethylene lining and the alumina ceramic head, and again used a DePuy Solution stem (diameter 12 mm) for femoral revision . However, on June 122,014, the patient returned to hospital complaining of left hip pain and an inability to move after changing his sitting posture. Blood tests revealed a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and a C-reactive protein level of 56.8 mg/L. A stem fracture was evident on X-rays . We revised the left hip 11 days later; the cup and acetabular polyethylene lining were satisfactory. We replaced the femoral head and used a 14-mm-diameter DePuy Solution stem to revise the femoral side. Allograft bone augmentation of the proximal femur followed by cerclage wiring was performed . However, the patient returned again in September 2017 with a right femoral prosthetic fracture . We replaced the femoral head and the acetabular polyethylene lining, and used a 14-mm-diameter Wagner SL stem (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA) to revise the right hip. We performed allograft bone augmentation of the proximal femur followed by cerclage wiring .