An 11-year old boy came to our attention, presenting with acute onset of simple and complex motor tics, oral tics, obsessions and compulsions (fear of contamination, aggressive behaviour, superstitions, repetitive compulsions, religious compulsions, etc.), irritability and anxiety. A deterioration in writing (micrographia) was also observed.
The boy had been delivered at term after an uneventful pregnancy, and developmental milestones were reached at normal ages. Birth weight was 3.200 g emotional and social development within normal range. At 6 years of age, the parents noticed a subtle beginning of tic disorders, which slowly disappeared.
In regard to family history, the patient’s father suffered from OCD and tics during childhood, while his mother suffered from thyroid cancer, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and depression.
The boy suffered from recurrent familial streptococcal infection, celiac disease was also diagnosed.
Due to elevated Antistreptococcal (ASO) (650 UI nv 0–200) and antiDNAse titres (950 UI nv 0–300), associated with positive swab test for streptococcal infection during exarcebation together with the abrupt onset of clinical presentation, a diagnosis of PANDAS syndrome was made. The boy underwent treatment with antibiotics (oral amoxicillin), followed by prophylaxis with penicillin (1.200,000 UI every 21 days). From 2016 until 2017, the patient received prophylactic treatment, and an adenotonsillectomy was performed in 2016. The patient’s clinical condition was stable, with slight improvement in accordance with the relapsing-remitting course.
During the period of observation, the boy does not show a complete remission of the symptoms, that worsened during infection sometimes associated with positive swab test for streptococcocal infection; also ASO and antiDNAse titres remain elevated (530 UI and 900 UI respectively).
The boy underwent a full neuropsychological evaluation, including the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)(6–18 years), Conners’ Parent Rating Scales Long Version (CPRS-R:L) Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) and Child Yale-Brown Obsession and Compulsion Scale (CY-BOCS).
The results of EEG and MRI scans were normal, with no basal ganglia alterations and a normal cortical structure.
Due to poor response to prophylaxis with penicillin, PMT was performed with the parents and child, followed by individual sets of EMDR.
The work with EDMR was initially focused on acute episodes related to tics. The installation of resources favoured the transition from an external to internal focus, with the creation of new coping strategies that were more adaptive than previous ones.
Before EDMR treatment, the boy was assessed according to the YGTSS and CY-BOCS, and then re-examined with the same scales after a 6-month follow-up period. The scores are presented in Table .
The boy showed great improvement in motor and vocal tics following treatment, in addition to a marked reduction in obsessions and compulsions. At present, after 2 years of follow-up, he has completed EMDR treatment with great clinical improvement. No more tics or obsessive compulsion disorders were noticed. He is not currently receiving prophylactic treatment. In addition, ASO and antiDNAse titres are within normal ranges.
In the present case, treatment with EMDR was proposed, with the aim of reforming the patient’s unfavourable experiences and improving his coping strategies.
The EMDR procedure consists of eight stages. The 8 stages consist of:Phase 1 - History taking: obtain background information, identify suitability for EMDR treatment. and identify processing targets from events in client’s life according to standardized three-pronged protocol; Phase 2 - Preparation: prepare appropriate clients for EMDR processing of targets; Phase 3 - Assessment: access the target for EMDR processing by stimulating primary aspects of the memory; Phase 4 - Desensitization: process experiences toward an adaptive resolution (no distress); Phase 5 - Installation: Increase connections to positive cognitive networks; Phase 6 - Body Scan: Complete processing of any residual disturbance associated with the target; Phase 7 - Closure: Ensure client stability at the completion of an EMDR session and between sessions; Phase 8 - Reassessment: Ensure maintenance of therapeutic outcomes and stability of client. (Shapiro 2014).
After taking the patient’s history, explaining EMDR and identifying the most distressing seizure-related memories (i.e., target selection), the target image(s) are processed consecutively. The therapist asks the patient to keep the disturbing target memory and aspects related to it in mind, while simultaneously performing a distractive task introduced by the therapist. The child is asked to follow the therapist’s finger, making saccadic movements at a rate of about two stimuli per second for approximately 30 s. In the case of problems with eye movements, auditory bilateral stimulation or tactile stimulation is used. The child is then asked to briefly report what comes to mind (associations). The procedure is repeated until the original target is no longer disturbing, and dysfunctional cognitions regarding the trauma have become functional .
Upon completion of the eight phases, we proceeded with the Installation of the Resources and with the Future Model, where the patient is asked to project themselves into the future problematic situations and imagine using the new resources installed.
Parent management training is a training and information course (training) which is focussed on the parents. In recent years, our clinical knowledge concerning behavioural disorders during development has increased, and interventions have moved toward integrated clinical interventions that involve the parent(s) as an active part of the treatment. Parent training aims to establish an active collaboration of parents through appropriate training and training procedures. It is based on the theory of social learning, and has been implemented for uncooperative, oppositional children with behavioural disorders or attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder . Currently, PMT is suggested as one of a large number of treatments that can be applied during the child’s development.
Parent training is applicable in all circumstances in which parents have to face an educational task with problematic children. The general objectives of the intervention involve informing parents about the manifestations of the disorder, the symptoms, and the vicious circuits that maintain them, thereby promoting acceptance of the diagnosis and collaboration between parent and child.
Parents are trained through the teaching of educational methods on functional analysis of behaviour in order to increase the educational skills best suited to the child. The aim is to improve the style of family communication, especially between parents and children.