An 81-year-old man complained of frequent diarrhea more than 10 times per day without bleeding and abdominal pain. The patient’s symptom started 1 year after the start of palliative chemotherapy with S-1 plus bevacizumab. The diarrhea worsened progressively, and we suspected S-1-induced AE. However, despite the termination of treatment for 1 mo, severe diarrhea did not improve; therefore, a careful investigation was conducted into the cause of the serious adverse event (SAE).
The patient was diagnosed with descending colon cancer and underwent laparoscopic left hemicolectomy without any complications at 5 years prior to this report. However, he was later pathologically diagnosed with high-risk stage 2 descending colon cancer with venous and lymph duct invasion for which he received tegafur-uracil plus leucovorin for 6 mo as an adjuvant chemotherapy. At 3 years and 6 mo after the operation, the cancer relapsed with peritoneal dissemination in front of the left kidney. Stereotactic CyberKnife radiosurgery targeting the limited margin of the recurrent tumor resulting in tumor shrinkage, and the patient went onto palliative chemotherapy with S-1 plus bevacizumab for the remaining tumors.
He underwent surgery for appendicitis in his 20s and received Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy for gastric ulcer in his 80s.
The patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, heart rate was 86 beats per min, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per min, blood pressure was 122/71 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. In clinical abdominal examination, his abdomen was soft, flat with spontaneous pain and tenderness in the left lower quadrant.
Laboratory test results were almost normal. Blood analysis revealed that hemoglobin and hematocrit were slightly decreased at 12.2 g/dL and 37.0%, respectively, with normal leukocyte and platelet count. Prothrombin percentage activity was slightly decreased at 71% with normal activated partial thromboplastin time and d-dimers were slightly increased at 0.9 μg/mL. Serum C-reactive protein was slightly increased at 1.58 mg/dL (normal range < 0.3 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 21 mm/h. The blood biochemistries were almost normal. Urine analysis revealed mild proteinuria at 50 mg/dL. Chest X-ray was normal and electrocardiogram showed QT prolongation without clinical importance.
Colonoscopy showed abnormal colonic edematous mucosa with multiple ulcers stretching from the sigmoid colon (distal to the anastomotic site) to the rectosigmoid colon . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans revealed edematous change from the sigmoid colon to the rectum and a 1.8 cm × 1.3 cm aneurysm adjacent to the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) . Multidetector CT (MDCT) angiography showed the arteriovenous fistula with nidus involving the branches of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and IMV . An elective angiography of the IMA confirmed the existence of an IMAVF and defined several shunting points of the fistula from the branch of the IMA .