A 38-year-old white female, without previous cardiac pathology, was being monitored and treated for chronic HCV hepatitis, genotype I virus. She was started on a combination treatment with peginterferon alpha 2a (180 μg weekly) and ribavirin (1000 mg daily, according to her body weight). The patient had complete early virologic response (HCV-RNA was undetectable at 12 weeks of treatment). In the first seven months of treatment no severe side effects (hematologic, endocrine, ophthalmic or autoimmune) were observed.
In the 7th month of treatment the patient accused chest pain, dry cough, fatigue, dyspnea, without fever and she presented herself to the emergency room.
On physical examination we found: tachypnea (22-24/min), tachycardia (96/min), a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg with pulmonary and abdominal examination within the normal limits. Cardiac examination revealed a third heart sound over the precordium as well as muffled cardiac sounds. The pulmonary X-ray was normal and the ECG showed no specific repolarisation abnormalities. Trans-thoracic cardiac ultrasonography revealed a pericardial effusion without tamponade. Laboratory data revealed: mild leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia (which didn't need reduction of interferon or ribavirin doses), minor biological inflammatory syndrome (CRP - 17 mg/l). The hepatic enzymes were normal, HCV-RNA was undetectable, serological tests for viruses and bacteria which could have explained the pericarditis were negative: ECHO, Coxsackie, adenovirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, EBV, CMV, HIV, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Rickettsia spp, Legionella pneumophila, Borrelia burgdorferii. Serological tests for viruses remained negative for the following 2 weeks. Quantiferon TB gold was negative. The patient didn't receive antimycobacterial medication. The ASO titer was in the normal range. Autoimmune tests were performed, with negative anti-nuclear factor, anti-DNA antibodies, p ANCA, c ANCA, anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies and negative cryoglobulinemia. Thyroid function tests were normal, and anti tyreo-peroxidase antibodies were absent.
The antiviral medication was stopped and the patient received ibuprofen. The symptoms disappeared and the pericardial effusion resolved in 15 days.
Because the patient was infected with genotype 1 virus and detection of HCV-RNA at 4 weeks of treatment was not performed (in order to confirm a rapid virological response), the antiviral treatment was restarted only with pegylated interferon. After the first dose of interferon administration symptoms reappeared. The echocardiography showed an increase of pericardial fluid (at 24 hours after interferon administration). The antiviral medication was stopped again with rapid recovery.
Six months after discontinuation of treatment, the HCV-RNA was undetectable (the patient had sustained virologic response).
The correlation of pericarditis with interferon administration was appreciated, for the presented case using the Naranjo ADR probability scale, which summed up 9 points, indicating a very probable association .