A 40-year-old woman had around 10-year history of intermittent headaches, the frequency of which had been especially increased in recent months. After incidental detection of a mass in her right adrenal gland by abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, she was admitted to our hospital. She had dystopia canthorum, blue iris, and left sensorineural hearing loss and WS was diagnosed when she was around 5 years old. She had no muscle weakness nor anomaly of her limbs. There was no relevant family history. Laboratory findings including hormonal data are shown in Table . Urinary catecholamine and metanephrine levels were markedly elevated, as shown in Table . Twenty-four-hour blood pressure profile revealed a hypertensive spike associated with the headaches. Abdominal CT showed a heterogeneous mass enlarged to 62 × 35 mm in size with a cystic component in her right adrenal gland . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneous mass with cystic component with moderately intensity in T2-weighted image the same size as in the CT image . 123I-MIBG showed increased uptake in approximately the same area as the right adrenal gland mass . After blood pressure was controlled with Doxazosin, right adrenalectomy was performed. Two weeks after the operation, her symptoms had disappeared and urinary catecholamine and metanephrine levels were normalized.
Whole exon genome sequence revealed germline heterozygous mutation of c.A175T (p.Ile59Phe) in PAX3 gene and somatic heterozygous mutation of c.1893_1898del (p. Asp631_Leu633delinsGlu) in RET gene in her pheochromocytoma. These mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The mutation in RET gene detected in the pheochromocytoma was not detected in her normal adrenal gland, which we used as a negative control in analysis of RNA expression. The germline mutation in PAX3 gene was not detected in her mother nor younger brother.
A histological examination of the resected tumor confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. The tumor showed characteristic Zellballen architecture. The tumor cells have larger nucleus and more chromaffin granules than normal chromaffin cells. Immunostaining for S-100 protein demonstrates the sustentacular framework surrounding the tumor cells. Immunostaining for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 proteins were positive in tumor cells. The MIB-1 index was 1%.
RNA expression levels of RET gene with other pheochromocytoma-related genes and UPR markers, Bip/GRP78, CHOP, ATF4, and ATF6, in her pheochromocytoma relative to her normal adrenal gland were analyzed by real time PCR (RT-PCR). RNA was extracted, reverse transcribed, and quantified as we previously reported . Gene expression levels were normalized to β-Actin . Primers used for RT-PCR are shown in Table . RET mRNA expressions in the patient’s pheochromocytoma were increased 139 times more than in her normal adrenal gland . Furthermore, its UPR markers were unexpectedly increased around 1.49–3.61 times more in her pheochromocytoma than her normal adrenal gland .