A 23-year-old male developed fever and complained of palpitations on the second post-operative day of an uneventful laparoscopic appendectomy for acute appendicitis. The patient denied any chest pain, shortness of breath, presyncopal symptoms or urinary complaints. On examination, his temperature was 102.3 F, pulse rate 120/min, respiratory rate 19/min and a blood pressure of 104.70 mmHg.
The operative site was clean. Chest examination revealed minimal crackles over the left lower base. Rest of the physical examination was normal. A bed side 12-lead ECG revealed sinus tachycardia with ST segment elevation in lead V1 to V3 with incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB). The differential diagnosis at this time was acute myocardial infarction, acute pericarditis and BS. Cardiac markers were negative (Troponin level I <0.06 ng/ml and CK-MB 0.7 ng/ml). Complete blood count, electrolytes, blood sugar, blood urea nitrogen and D-dimer were within normal limits.
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed structurally and functionally normal heart. A chest x-ray was essentially normal. A computerized tomography (CT) of the chest showed minimal atelectasis of the left lower lobe. CT of the abdomen and pelvis was unremarkable. Repeat cardiac enzymes obtained 6 hours later were normal.
The fever subsided the following day and repeat ECG showed normal sinus rhythm with complete resolution of ST-segment elevation and partial RBBB. Considering the possibility of acute coronary syndrome, the patient was given 325 mg of aspirin and transferred to Coronary Care Unit (CCU). After cardiac enzymes came out to be normal, aspirin was discontinued.
As the Brugada pattern ECG was unmasked only during febrile episode, and there were no high-risk factors, the patient was classified as having low- to intermediate- risk for arrhythmia. Therefore, he was discharged on the fifth post-op day with the knowledge about the condition and prompt management of fever. At four-weeks and three months of follow-up, the clinical condition and the ECG of the patient was unremarkable.