A 70-year-old Asian male presents to the emergency room with a 2-week history of productive cough and fever. Temperature usually as high as 102°F occurred mostly at night time with associated chills. Cough was productive of whitish sputum without blood. He had seen his primary care doctor as an outpatient and was prescribed 5 days of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for presumed community-acquired pneumonia. His history is significant for HIV diagnosed about 8 months ago with CD4 lymphocytes count of 121 cells/mm3 and an HIV viral load of 109,720 copies/mL. At that time, he was started on atovaquone for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia prophylaxis. He has been on dolutegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide with his most recent CD4 lymphocyte counts above 200 and HIV viral load 20. Physical examination was positive for splenomegaly but otherwise unremarkable. His blood tests showed hemoglobin of 6.5 g/dL and platelet 81,000 × 106. Chest X-ray showed no infiltrates. The patient was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells (pRBCs) with improvement of hemoglobin level; however, the hemoglobin level kept declining, and needing repeated pRBCs transfusion. Platelet levels plummeted to the 20s also requiring platelet transfusions. Stool occult blood was repeatedly negative. Blood cultures were negative, but the patient kept spiking fever intermittently (100–105°F). A CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the chest, abdomen and pelvis, and hepatosplenomegaly. Further testing revealed a ferritin of 7953 ng/mL, IL-2 receptor alpha interleukin 8592, EBV PCR <100 copies/mL, and CMV PCR neg. Bone marrow biopsy of the posterior iliac crest was consistent with hemophagocytosis . An excisional biopsy of an axillary lymph node showed HHV-8 associated multicentric Castleman disease with plasmablastic aggregates and Kaposi sarcoma on CD 138 stain . The patient continues HAART and was started on dexamethasone and etoposide therapy. Unfortunately, patient's condition continued to deteriorate, and family decided to get a palliative consult and place the patient on comfort care until the patient expired.