Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.
An otherwise healthy 63-year-old man (166.7 cm/54 kg) with left inguinal hernia was planned to undergo an ambulatory open herniorrhaphy. General anesthesia combined with local infiltration was planned, according to the rule of the hospital for ambulatory herniorrhaphy.
Premedication was not given. Standard monitors were attached to the patient on entering the operating room. Anesthesia was induced with 140 mg of propofol, and 50 mcg of fentanyl after the venous access was established. The airway was secured with supraglottic airway after muscle relaxation had been acquired with 0.9 mg/kg of rocuronium. Anesthesia was maintained with 5% desflurane, and mechanical ventilation by pressure control was maintained throughout the surgery. The local anesthetic mixture was made from 10 mL of 0.75% ropivacaine and 10 mL of 1% lidocaine with adrenaline 1:200,000. The surgeon administered 5 mL of the mixture into the subcutaneous tissue before the incision, 3 mL between Camper’s fascia and Scarpa’s fascia, and 2 mL into the inguinal canal. The rest of the mixture (10 mL) was administered with intense pressure between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles at the end of the surgery before skin closure. Another 50 mcg of fentanyl was administered intraoperatively, and 0.5 mg of droperidol was administered before emergence. Surgery was performed with only slight changes in heart rate and blood pressure. The muscle relaxation was reversed with 200 mg of Sugammadex at the end of the surgery. The patient was extubated after stable spontaneous respiration, and good emergence was confirmed. The patient seemed to be able to perform the adduction and abduction of his shoulders, and the extension and flexion of his elbows, hips, knees, and ankles at this point. The duration of the surgery was 45 mins, and anesthetic time was 70 mins. The patient was transferred to the postanesthetic care unit without trouble.
The patient condition was observed 1 h after the transfer. The mental status was alert with E4V5M6 at Glasgow coma scale. He experienced no postoperative nausea and vomiting. There was a slight dull pain around the surgical wound, which soon resolved after 1000 mg of rescue acetaminophen. He was able to drink clear water without nausea or aspiration. Although the patient was able to walk to the restroom with the drip stand and void without trouble, he complained of discomfort in his left thigh. The physical examination revealed that we had not recognized that he could adduct his left hip joint poorly with grade 1 at the manual muscle test (MMT) without any apparent sensory deficit in the left leg. His leg flexion, knee extension, and the sensation of the lateral and medial thigh were normally maintained. Three hours after the surgery, the adduction of the hip recovered to MMT 3. However, the patient could not perform ipsilateral leg flexion nor knee extension against moderate pressure (MMT 4), and there was slight hypoesthesia in the lateral thigh. Seven hours after the surgery, both the muscle weakness and hypoesthesia completely resolved. The patient had not experienced any pain after the first rescue. The patient strongly wished to discharge from the hospital and discharged without trouble.