A-45-year old lady presented with melena for 20 days, she had two attacks of massive hematemesis before admission. The patient had no history of any medication intake before this presentation. The patient had history of renal cell carcinoma which was operated by right nephrectomy before 10 years.
At admission the pulse rate was 120 beats/minutes and the blood pressure was 95/60 mm Hg. Resuscitation was done in the form of 2 peripheral intravenous lines and 2 liter of Ringer’s lactate solution, the patient received 9 units of fresh whole blood and 15 units of fresh frozen plasma.
Upper GIT endoscopy was done, biopsy was not taken because of the risk of bleeding, .
Decision for surgery was done, during laparotomy and duodenotomy, there was a soft irregular 3*5 cm mass with areas of hemorrhage arising from the wall of the duodenum, complete excision was done and sent for frozen section examination which showed a benign lesion, .
The duodenum was closed transversely and the patient was discharged in the 5th postoperative day with no complications.
The histopathology report after the first surgery revealed a benign inflammatory lesion or a possibility of polyp.
Two months later she presented with melena and anemia. She received 6 units of blood.
Upper gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) endoscopy was done which showed recurrence of the mass, the patient was sent for CT-scan of the abdomen which showed a 7*4 cm mass with extension to the head of the pancreas, .
Decision for pancreaticoduodenectomy was done. During surgery a firm mass was found in the region of the head of pancreas found, pancreaticoduodenectomy was done and the sample was sent for histopathological examination which revealed a vascular mass lined by endothelial cells with intervening epithelioid spindle cells, there was no evidence of nuclear atypia, the tissue stained positively for CD 34, FL1, and pancreatin and stained negatively for CD117, S100, desmin and chromogranin A. These features were consistent of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the head of the pancreas, all the resection margins were free from the tumor, .
The patient was discharged 7 days after surgery with no complications. Follow up was done for 2 years after the surgery with no recurrence of the tumor.