A 50-year-old Caucasian alcoholic man presented to the emergency department with generalized weakness lasting 10 days and a history of weight loss. He had no other complaints. His history was significant for excessive alcohol intake and cachexia. At the emergency department, the patient was weak but alert, appeared ill and was very pale. The clinical exam revealed: a temperature of 35.9°C, blood pressure 60/38 mm Hg; a heart rate of 95 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute, bilateral ankle edema, buccal candidiasis, and a faint systolic murmur. The neurological exam was normal, except for psychomotor slowing and a fine tremor. Laboratory results showed: hemoglobin 42 g/l, platelet count 23 G/l, WBC 4.9 G/l (normally distributed), C-reactive protein 21 mg/l (N < 5), hypoalbuminaemia and cholestasis. Other laboratory tests were normal. A chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly and pulmonary vascular redistribution with bilateral pleural fluid accumulation. Computed tomography (CT) imaging excluded aortic dissection, massive pulmonary embolism, pericardial fluid and retroperitoneal hematoma. After blood, urine and pleural fluid had been collected for culture, he was empirically treated intravenously with amoxicillin/clavulanate 2.2 g four times a day and ciprofloxacin 200 mg twice a day for presumed septic shock. A transthoracic echocardiography, that was performed because of the systolic murmur and the hemodynamic instability, showed evidence of tricuspid valvular involvement with several large vegetations of approximately 2.5 cm in diameter, severe valvular regurgitation, and a reduced ejection fraction (45%) . As no pathogen could be isolated from blood cultures after 60 hours of incubation, we considered all agents of culture-negative endocarditis as possible etiology. Investigations for HACEK microorganisms, and serologic studies for Bartonella spp., Brucella spp. and Coxiella burnetti were negative; PCR of the blood and pleural fluid for Tropheryma whipplei was positive. The PCR technique described by Meibach et al. in 2003 was used . Having diagnosed Tropheryma whipplei right heart endocarditis, we switched the antibiotic regimen to ceftriaxone 2 g once daily. Favorable clinical changes kept him from requiring surgery, and he returned home after 25 days with a combined treatment of doxycycline 100 mg twice a day, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 160/800 mg three times a day for a minimum of one year. The blood levels of doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine were measured every other month and doses adapted to therapeutic levels (doxycycline: > 5 μg/ml, hydroxychloroquine 1 +/- 0.2 mg/l). At a one-year follow-up he had completely recovered, gained weight and all his laboratory values were back to normal. A control echography performed after one year confirmed the treatment success.