A 59 year-old, previously healthy Caucasian male presented with scrotal and penile pain for six days, and brownish-black discoloration of the scrotum. His past medical and surgical history was non-contributory and he did not take any medications. There was no history of trauma or sepsis in the genital area, and there were no symptoms of dysuria or hematuria. A review of systems was unremarkable. On examination, the patient was alert and oriented, but appeared unwell. He was also febrile (38.3°C), tachycardic (heart rate 116/min), and normotensive (blood pressure 136/79). His lower abdomen was erythematous with palpable subcutaneous emphysema extending to the umbilicus. His penile shaft was swollen and tender, and his scrotum was necrotic. Bloodwork revealed a white cell count of 17 × 109/L, hyponatremia (125 mmol/L), hypochloremia (86 mmol/L), and elevated serum lactate (3.1 mmol/L). The patient’s international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.6, and his serum alanine-aminotransferase (ALT), and serum aspartate-aminotransferase (AST) were elevated at 127 U/L, and 66 U/L respectively. Blood glucose and serum creatinine were within normal limits.
Intravenous treatment with vancomycin (1 g every 12 h), and piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h) was initiated. The patient was urgently taken to the operating room and underwent extensive debridement of his scrotum, penile shaft, and anterior abdomen, while preserving the testes and abdominal muscles. A small abscess cavity communicating with the necrotizing infection was identified in the right buttock and debrided. A suprapubic catheter was placed for urinary diversion, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. After 48 hours, he underwent a transverse colostomy to divert stool from his perineum, and skin grafting to close his anterior abdominal wounds and penile shaft. His testes were tunnelled into his thighs, and after sixteen days in hospital, he was discharged home.
A swab from the scrotal tissue was taken during the initial operation, and was streaked on blood agar plates, resulting in a monoculture of uniformly-sized beta-haemolytic colonies. From this, the bacteria was isolated and subjected to matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) to identify the organism as Streptococcus anginosus group (score = 2.3), although the software (Biotyper software version 3.0) was unable to distinguish the species. Susceptibility testing was performed by the Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method , and the organism was sensitive to ceftriaxone, clindamycin, erythromycin, penicillin, and vancomycin. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing of the 16S rRNA amplicon from DNA isolated from overnight cultures of two isolated colonies identified the isolate as Streptococcus dysgalatiae subspecies equisimilis. This was further confirmed by sequencing the emm amplicon and performing a BLAST search on the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) streptococcal emm sequence database : the isolate was identified as group G Streptococcus emm type stG643.0. Further PCR amplification experiments (Additional file : Figure S1) did not detect any of the 11 known streptococcal superantigen genes , when compared to genomic DNA preparations of S. pyogenes serotypes MGAS5005 , SF370 , MGAS8232 , and MGAS315 , which served as positive controls. In addition, proliferation assays confirmed the absence of Group A streptococcal superantigen activity in the isolate (Addition file : Figure S2). Briefly, supernatants from overnight cultures of the isolate were added to fresh, gradient-purified human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs; 2.0 × 105 cells/well) in 96-well plates. After 3 days, 3H-thymidine was added for 18 h to measure proliferation. Supernatant from S. pyogenes strain MGAS5005 served as a positive control.
We also used the London Health Sciences Centre (LHSC) microbiology database to retrospectively review patients with invasive S. anginosus group or SDSE infections at LHSC (a tertiary-care centre in Southwestern Ontario that serves a regional population of 435 000) between August 1, 2011 and August 31, 2012. The review was conducted according to the Helsinki Declaration, and approved by the Research Ethics Board of Western University (approval number 103036). Incidences were calculated using Statistics Canada census data from 2011 . We identified 17 cases of invasive S. anginosus group infections (3.9 cases per 100,000 population), and 14 cases of invasive SDSE infections (3.2 cases per 100,000 population; Table ). When testing antibiotic susceptibility by the disc diffusion method , all SDSE isolates were sensitive to penicillin, whereas 6% of S. anginosus group isolates were resistant. Two SDSE isolates (14%) were resistant to clindamycin and one (7%) was resistant to erythromycin .