A 48-year-old Asian male suddenly developed fever, tachycardia, and hypotension 9 d after CVC insertion. In addition, the right neck was swollen, with redness, tenderness, and warmth.
The patient presented to the emergency room of a local hospital with sudden onset headache and coma for 4 h. Emergency decompressive craniotomy was performed at the local hospital, and a CVC was inserted through the right subclavian vein without ultrasound assistance for fluid resuscitation during anesthesia. Further, CVC catheter tip position was not assessed by chest X-ray after the operation. Two days later, the patient was transferred to the ICU of our tertiary teaching hospital for further critical care. Seven days after admission to ICU (9 d after CVC insertion), his right neck was severely swollen, red, warm, and sensitive to touch.
The patient had a 7-year history of poorly controlled hypertension and did not have diabetes.
The patient was a farmer with no history of smoking, alcohol, or drug abuse.
On physical examination, the patient presented with acute fever (39 °C), hypotension (80/60 mmHg), tachycardia (140 bpm), and slightly elevated respiratory rate (22 breaths/min). These findings combined with other laboratory and imaging results indicated septic shock. In addition, CVC-BSI was suspected given the severe neck swelling and hypotension.
Laboratory studies prior to and after the onset of the right neck swelling and hypotension were obtained and are summarized in Table . After the onset of neck symptoms, blood analysis revealed leukocytosis (13.69 × 109/L) and elevated inflammatory markers including C-reactive protein (75.9 mg/L) and procalcitonin (5.8 ng/mL). In addition, alanine aminotransferase (82 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase (179 U/L) were elevated. Alternatively, renal function parameters were normal. Arterial blood gas measures were as follows: pH, 7.30; PaCO2, 33 mmHg; PaO2, 108 mmHg; lactate, 3.8 mmol/L; HCO3-, 16.8 mmol/L.
Computed tomography scans were not obtained immediately at presentation due to the critical status of the patient. Rather, we conducted urgent POCUS using a portable machine (Mindray M9, Shenzhen, China) to assess the clinical status at the bedside, which demonstrated normal blood flow in the right internal carotid artery but thrombosis and dilatation of the right internal jugular vein (IJV) without detectable blood flow . Also, ultrasonography revealed that the misplaced CVC had been placed into the IJV rather than into the ideal position of superior vena cava (SVC) through the right subclavian vein approach and was surrounded by gas bubbles, manifesting as hyperechoic lines with dirty shadowing and comet-tail artifacts . The patient’s hypotension was improved by fluid resuscitation. A subsequent CT scan was performed afterwards on the same day and also confirmed air bubbles surrounding the CVC in the right neck , and septic emphysematous thrombophlebitis induced by a misplaced CVC and septic shock was definitively diagnosed. The responsible CVC was removed immediately after paired peripheral venous blood and CVC blood sampling for aerobic and anaerobic culture to identify potential causative pathogens.