An 85 years old farmer, male, came to the Affiliated Eye Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine on August 8, 2020 due to vision loss in the right eye for one year. This patient was admitted to be the inpatient as “age-related cataract”, and then the routine preoperative examination, antibiotic eye drops and pranoprofen eye drops were employed. Two days later, cataract phacoemulsification surgery combined with intraocular lens implantation for cataract was performed. The lacrimal passage was washed routinely prior to the operation, and 0.5% povidone-iodine and Sodium Lactate Ringer’s Solution were used to flush the conjunctival sac during the operation. The phacoemulsification cataract surgery was performed successfully. When the incision was watertight, it was found that the worm moved out from the conjunctival sac of the upper eyelid (as shown in Fig. and video). The worm was milky white, translucent, slender and cylindrical, with a length of approximate 12 mm. The worm was then taken out with ophthalmic forceps and put into sterile normal saline. The upper and lower conjunctival sacs were carefully examined under the operating microscope, and no worm was found. The conjunctival sac was washed carefully with a large amount of Sodium Lactate Ringer’s Solution. Tobramycin and dexamethasone eye ointment were used to cover the eyes and return to the ward. The worm was sent to the Eye Institute of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine for identification. After identification, the worm was regarded as the male thelazia callipaeda. The head is blunt and round, the tail end curls to the abdomen, and the long copulation spines protrudes from the cloaca . After questioning the patient’s medical history, the patient admitted whose foreign body sensation was often found in the right eye in recent 2 months, but no medical treatment. There was no obvious foreign body sensation in the left eye, and no history of breeding animals occurred on him.
After operation, antibiotics eye drops, pranoprofen eye drops, and tobramycin dexamethasone eye drops 4 times per day were further applied. On day 1 after operation, the visual acuity was 20/20, intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg, conjunctival hyperemia, cornea was transparent, anterior chamber was moderate depth, atrial flash was (+), and IOL was in normal position. For 5 consecutive days, the conjunctival sac and anterior segment of the operated eyes were carefully examined under the slit lamp, and no abnormality was found. B ultrasound examination showed that the vitreous bodies of both eyes were turbid, and no abnormal strong echo was found . The foreign body sensation disappeared after the operation. One week later after the operation, the patient was discharged and reexamined one week later. The result indicated that no thelazia was found in conjunctival sac of both upper and lower eyelids (as shown in Figs. ).