A 9-year-old male neutered domestic longhair cat was presented with a 3 week history of lethargy and pain of unknown origin. Physical examination was unremarkable and neurological examination revealed alert mentation, markedly low head carriage and hypometria in all limbs, with mild ambulatory monoparesis of the right thoracic limb. Cranial nerves and spinal reflexes were normal. There were mild proprioceptive deficits in the right thoracic limb and severe hyperesthesia was elicited upon cranial cervical palpation. A right C1–C5 myelopathy was suspected, but a brainstem lesion lateralised to the right could not be ruled out. The main differential diagnoses considered included neoplastic (primary or metastatic), degenerative (intervertebral disc disease), and inflammatory or infectious conditions. Haematology and serum biochemistry were unremarkable.
The cat received pre-anaesthetic intramuscular doses of dexmedetomidine (0.005 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg) and ketamine (1 mg/kg). Intravenous (IV) alfaxalone was used as the induction agent (0.8 mg/kg) and anaesthesia was maintained with isoflurane (1–2%) and oxygen 100% (1–2 l/min) after intubation.
MRI of the cervical area and brain was performed using a 1.5 Tesla magnet (Philips Intera). All slices were 3 mm thick. Turbo spin echo T1-weighted (T1W), fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) were acquired in the transverse plane. Turbo spin echo T2-weighted (T2W) images were acquired in transverse, sagittal and dorsal planes. T1W images after IV administration of gadoteridol (0.1 mmol/kg [Prohance; Bracco Diagnostics]) were acquired in sagittal, dorsal and transverse planes.
MRI revealed a single large (4.8 cm × 1.7 cm × 2.7 cm) space-occupying mass of extra-axial origin, centred slightly left of midline over an obliterated cribriform plate ( and ). The mass had a lobular appearance . Rostrally, the mass showed extensive nasal invasion, crossing the septum to involve the dorsal nasal passages of both sides, more extensively on the left, and invading the rostral portion of the left frontal sinus. The residual volume of the left frontal sinus contained an accumulation of fluid. There was no orbital involvement. Despite extensive infiltration of the nasal cavity, the periosteal surfaces of the cranial bones appeared smooth and the tumour margins were well defined. Within the cranium, the mass showed a broad base, with destruction of the cribriform plate and marked intracranial expansion, producing a mass effect. The lesion was isointense on T1W images compared with the grey matter, predominantly hypointense with some hyperintense areas on T2W and FLAIR images, and was markedly contrast enhancing. A dural tail bordering the intracranial portion of the mass at its rostral aspect on the left was visible on T1W post-contrast sequences . A focal area of thickening of the right frontal bone adjacent to the region of meningeal enhancement was suspected to represent an area of hyperostosis. There were moderate perilesional oedema and marked caudal displacement of the brain with midline shift towards the right, resulting in transtentorial and cerebellar herniation . All ventricles of the brain were moderately and asymmetrically dilated, indicative of an obstructive hydrocephalus. Also, a linear T2W hyperintense lesion throughout the mid-cervical and thoracic spinal cord, consistent with syringomyelia, was observed . The imaging findings were consistent with an expansile neoplastic process centred on the cribriform plate. The main differential diagnoses included olfactory neuroblastoma, lymphoma and soft tissue sarcoma. However, meningioma was also considered owing to the presence of a dural tail sign and local hyperostosis.
Given the extensive nature of the lesion and the poor prognosis, euthanasia was discussed with the owners, but they elected to continue with further investigations owing to the lack of intracranial signs prior to the anaesthesia. Methadone was administered (0.1 mg/kg IV) and nasal biopsies were collected from both nasal cavities blindly using forceps, and were submitted for histopathological analysis in 10% neutral buffered formalin saline.
The cat’s vital signs remained stable throughout the anaesthetic procedure (heart rate 120 beats per min [bpm], mean arterial pressure >70 mmHg). After recovery from anaesthesia, the cat exhibited bradycardia (100 bpm), hypertension (systolic blood pressure 178 mmHg, oscillometric method) and anisocoria. An increase in intracranial pressure was suspected. Intravenous (IV) mannitol (1 g/kg) and an IV anti-inflammatory dose of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg) were administered. The cat subsequently recovered, but experienced an epileptic seizure 24 h later. The cat was euthanased at the owners’ request; consent for a post-mortem examination was not given.
The biopsies of the nasal cavity revealed infiltration and replacement of the nasal mucosa and turbinates by irregular sheets, intertwining bundles and whorls of spindle-shaped-to-occasionally-polygonal cells. Foci of mineralisation were present within the lesion. The infiltrating cells had large, ovoid nuclei, reticulate-to-clumped chromatin, prominent eosinophilic nucleoli and hyaline, granular or vacuolated eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct borders. Mitotic figures were uncommon (<1 mitosis per 10 high-power fields) and occasional apoptotic cells were visible. There were small numbers of neutrophils in some areas . Findings were consistent with a transitional (mixed) meningioma.