A 42-year-old woman presented with slowly progressive weakness and dysesthesia of her left arm after decompressive craniectomy. Neurological examination revealed a slight, distal paresis with increased tendon reflexes, dysesthesia of her left arm, and reduced fine motor skills of the left hand. She suffered from a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) due to a spontaneously ruptured aneurysm of the right middle cerebral artery 4 months ago. A right fronto-temporo-parietal craniectomy with evacuation of the hematoma and coiling of the aneurysm had been performed as initial treatment, and the bone flap had not been replaced. Initial postsurgical left hemiparesis completely disappeared, but late sensorimotor disturbances of the left arm continuously worsened over the last three weeks. The skin of the right temporoparietal region was markedly sunken due to the large skull defect.
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain were unremarkable except for minor focal gliosis. There were no signs of ischemia or edema, new hemorrhage, coil extrusion, brain shift, or disturbed CSF circulation. Three consecutive electroencephalograms did not show epileptiform discharges, an extra- and transcranial Doppler ultrasonography was unrevealing.
A secondary neurological deterioration was diagnosed due to SSFS.
After replacement of the bone flap the sensorimotor deficits of her left arm continuously improved within a period of 10 to 14 days. At the follow-up examination four weeks after cranioplasty, the patient reported a complete recovery. Only slightly increased tendon reflexes of the left arm were still present.
Brain perfusion immediately before and four weeks after cranioplastic repair was assessed by T2*-weighted MR-perfusion imaging (Philips Intera 1.5-T MR system, TR 17, TE 8, flip angle 7, EPI factor 17, FOV 220 mm, 22 slices, slice thickness 6, matrix 128) with a double dose of Gadovist-1.0 (0.2 ml/kg body weight, 5 ml/s). Perfusion maps were calculated on a Philips ViewForum workstation from regions of interest (ROI) drawn over the entire left and right hemisphere for each slice, respectively. For objective comparison of perfusion parameters between the two consecutive time points, relative cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV), and mean transit time (MTT) of the right hemisphere compared to normal left side were calculated.
Before cranioplasty brain perfusion in the right hemisphere was lower compared to the left side. Perfusion maps demonstrated a focal deficit particularly in the compressed central cortical region beneath the skinflap . Right hemispheric perfusion improved after cranioplastic repair , relative blood flow and blood volume increased and mean transit time decreased (rCBF 0.76 vs. 0.86; rCBV 0.81 vs. 0.91; rMTT 1.21 vs. 0.92; before vs. after cranioplasty, respectively).