The patient was a 17-year-old unbooked primigravida who was uncertain of her date but was said to be 9 months pregnant at the time of her presentation to the Médecins Sans Frontières France (MSF-F) Emergency Obstetrics, Neonatal, and Vesico-Vaginal Fistula (VVF) Care Center in Jahun, Jigawa State, Northern Nigeria. She presented as a referral from a primary health care center (PHCC) approximately 100 km from Jahun town. We obtained approval from the Jigawa State Ministry of Health Ethics Committee to report these unusual complications of labor in a primigravida.
She was apparently well when she went into spontaneous labor 3 days prior to the presentation. The labor was under the supervision of a traditional birth attendant at home for 2 days. She had oral traditional medicaments, fundal pressure, and later a “gishiri cut” (traditional genital mutilation) while at home. On the second day, the labor pain became relentless with the involvement of the whole abdomen that necessitated her presentation to a close-by PHCC. She had oxytocin augmentation with 10 IU given as intramuscular injection and 20 IU via an intravenous fluid at the PHCC; nonetheless, her condition deteriorated with associated high-grade fever, inability to void urine, vomiting, vaginal bleeding, chest pain, and difficulty in breathing before her referral to MSF-F a day after her presentation to the PHCC.
She attained menarche at the age of 15 and had a regular menstrual pattern. She had no known comorbidity, no antecedent abdominopelvic surgery, no abdominal trauma, no history signifying previous pelvic inflammatory disease, and no history suggestive of urinary tract pathology. She was married to a 22-year-old petty trader, had no formal education, nor was she gainfully employed.
At presentation, she was acutely ill-looking, febrile (axillary temperature 39°C), dehydrated, pale but anicteric. She had a height of 1.51m. Her pulse rate was 130 per minute, regular with moderate volume; her blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, and the heart sounds were I and II only. Her respiratory rate was 36 cycles per minute but lung fields were clinically clear. The abdomen was grossly distended with Bandl’s ring and symphysio-fundal height of 41 cm. There was generalized tenderness with crepitus and guarding over the anterior abdominal wall. Fetal parts were freely felt; singleton fetus, longitudinal lie, and cephalic presentation with a descent of 3/5th. Fetal heart sounds were absent. Pelvic examination revealed a foul smelling, blood stained vulva, and vagina. There was a glaring gishiri cut. The cervix was edematous but fully dilated with offensive watery discharge. There was marked carput formation and pelvic assessment affirmed an inadequate pelvis. An indwelling urethral catheter we passed drained scanty bloody urine. A diagnosis of a ruptured uterus with urinary bladder involvement secondary to prolonged obstructed labor and sepsis in a primigravida was made.
She was resuscitated with intravenous normal saline, intravenous antibiotic, and analgesics. Her full blood count result showed leukocytosis with a packed cell volume of 26%. She had normal electrolyte but elevated urea and creatinine levels that normalized following her resuscitation. The HIV and hepatitis B surface antigen tests were negative and the random blood glucose with liver function test were normal. She was prepared for exploratory laparotomy. The findings at the surgery included thick foul smelling liquor and a fresh stillborn male baby weighing 3.85 kg. There was a ragged lower uterine segment rupture that extended down to the uterine cervix with posterior urinary bladder rupture measuring 8 cm and the urethral catheter balloon visible outside the bladder . Other pelvic and abdominal organs were normal. She had uterine and urinary bladder repair in double layers ( and ). Abdomen was lavaged with normal saline, cleaned, and wall sutured in layers. The estimated blood loss was 450 mL and she had two units of whole blood transfused. A nasogastric tube was passed and left in situ for 24 hours. She had sitz bath for the genital mutilation and was discharged home on the 12th day postoperation on hematinics after the removal of the urinary catheter. Her overall postoperative recovery period was uneventful. At her consecutive follow-up, the wound had healed completely; she was continent of urine, had no lower urinary tract symptoms, and was thereupon commenced on family planning.