A 4-year and 8-month-old Caucasian boy presented to the Montreal Children's Hospital with rapid growth over the preceding 2 years. Born at term with a weight of 4.7 kg (>95th percentile), he had grown steadily along the 90th percentile for length up to 24 months of age and was above the median for weight and head circumference. He had undergone a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy at the age of 3 years and 10 months. He complained of intermittent headaches over the preceding 8 months, was otherwise asymptomatic, and took no medications. His family history was unremarkable for any endocrinopathies; his midparental height was 174.5 cm. On examination, he appeared older than his stated age, was prepubertal, and had coarse facial features, which had developed over the previous 3 years. His height was 129.7 cm (Z = +4.89), and his weight was 35.5 kg (Z = +5.57) (WHO Growth Charts for Canada; Ref. ) (A).
Laboratory investigations revealed elevated serum concentrations of PRL (185 μg/L; normal, <18 μg/L [8043 pmol/L; normal, <788 pmol/L]; Access II; Beckman Coulter), IGF-1 (74.5 μg/L; normal for age, 6.4–36.9 μg/L [9.78 nmol/L, 0.8–4.8]; Immulite), and a fasting GH of > 35.0 μg/L (Access II; Beckman Coulter) (B). GH suppressed only to 29.0 μg/L after standard oral glucose load (normal, <1.0). His clinical and biochemical diagnosis was pituitary gigantism with hyperprolactinemia. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a homogeneous sellar mass measuring 18 × 15 × 13 mm with mild suprasellar extension without optic chiasm or cavernous sinus invasion (, C and D). Surgical debulking was performed via transfrontal craniotomy. Histological examination of the tissue confirmed the absence of adenoma and demonstrated a hyperplastic pituitary with enlarged cords of GH and PRL cells (, G–J). Cells with ultrastructural features resembling mammosomatotrophs were also identified. Genetic analysis was negative for germline AIP, PRKAR1A, DICER1, MEN1, and CDKN1B mutations and for GNAS mutations in both leukocyte and pituitary tissue-derived DNA. Plasma GHRH (Inter Science Institute) levels were normal on two separate samples. His bone age was 5 years.
Postoperatively, his hormone levels remained elevated; the hyperplastic tissue re-expanded rapidly in the fossa (, E and F), and his growth continued at an accelerated pace (, A and B). His management was challenging. Dopamine agonists proved unsuccessful in suppressing GH hypersecretion; bromocriptine was initiated for the first 3 months but was later replaced with cabergoline (0.25–0.5 mg/wk) to control PRL levels. Long-acting somatostatin analog therapy induced a slight drop in GH but not in IGF-1 levels. Because the patient refused monthly injections (initially Sandostatin LAR and then Somatuline Autogel), after about 9 months, treatment was switched to continuous sc infusion of short-acting octreotide at doses ranging from 120–320 μg/d. The combination of somatostatin analog and cabergoline was insufficient to normalize GH or IGF-1 levels. The addition of the GH receptor antagonist pegvisomant (30–105 mg/wk) normalized IGF-1 and induced a plateau in his growth; the pituitary volume remained stable with this treatment combination (F). Around the age of 7.5 years, the parents wished to reduce the dose of pegvisomant and short-acting octreotide therapy to allow controlled growth. They felt that he was destined to be a tall boy; thereafter his growth followed parallel to the 97th height percentile (A), and his IGF-1 remained within the normal range.
Currently, at the age of 11 years, he remains well; his growth velocity is normal. He is on oral cabergoline 125 μg thrice weekly, short-acting sc octreotide 222 μg/24 h, and sc pegvisomant 20 mg twice weekly.
After the recent description of germline Xq26.3 microduplication in young children with acrogigantism , likely due to the duplicated GPR101 gene within this region, we tested the patient's leukocyte-, saliva-, and buccal cell-derived DNA using a comparative genomic hybridization array (BlueGnome CytoChip ISCA 8 × 60k v2.0; Illumina) and copy number variation droplet digital PCR for GPR101 (Taqman assays Hs01818174_cn and Hs01730605_cn; Life Technologies) without evidence of Xq26.3 microduplications or GPR101 duplication, although his clinical phenotype was identical to the previously published patients. We therefore tested DNA isolated from the hyperplastic pituitary tissue and found duplicated dosage of GPR101 . DNA extracted from a forearm skin biopsy also showed the microduplication, suggesting that he is mosaic for this mutation.
Ethics approval was granted from the Montreal Children's Hospital Research Ethics Board. Informed consent was obtained for all genetic analyses from the parents of this boy and for publication of this case report.