An otherwise previously healthy 77-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our university medical center with an approximately 4-month history of progressive right hip joint pain. She had a progressive stage of dysplastic hip osteoarthritis on both sides without any other congenital disease, blood disease, or rheumatoid arthritis. At the age of 64, she underwent right-side THA (Natural-Hip™ System #2, APR® cup size of 51mm; Sulzer Medica, Austin, TX, USA) at our institution . At the age of 73, she underwent left-side THA with a different assembly (S-ROM® hip stem, Pinnacle acetabular cup; DePuy Orthopaedics Inc., Warsaw, IN, USA) at another institution. Soon after the left-side THA, she developed atrial fibrillation and was treated with an anticoagulant (warfarin 1.5mg/day). About 5 months after the initiation of anticoagulant therapy, she suffered a serious fall, causing massive subcutaneous and pelvic girdle hematomas, predominantly on the medial side of the right thigh, but plain radiographs in the emergency orthopedic department showed no fracture, osteolytic lesion, or abnormal findings related to the THA . One year after the accident, asymptomatic osteolytic lesion in the innominate bone (around the arcuate line) on the right pelvis was diagnosed on the basis of the findings of a routine follow-up examination. Two years later (4 months before admission to our university medical center), she complained of pain of a progressive nature in her right hip during walking. Plain radiographs showed a large osteolytic lesion in the right acetabulum without migration of the acetabular cup or screws.
On admission to our hospital, our patient was on oral warfarin (1.5mg/day) for atrial fibrillation but was otherwise in good disease-free condition, apart from the bilateral THA. She had a slightly limited range of movement on her right side, but her hip muscle strength on a manual muscle test was normal bilaterally: Harris hip score was 68 out of 100 points. Palpation of the right iliac and psoas muscles did not elicit any pain. Blood test results were unremarkable: leukocyte count of 5.8×109/L, erythrocyte count of 439×109/L, hemoglobin of 12.7g/dL, hematocrit of 40.4%, platelet count of 181×109/L, prothrombin time of 18.4 seconds, prothrombin activity of 36.3%, activated partial thromboplastin time of 46.0 seconds, and C-reactive protein of 0.12mg/dL. Blood cultures were negative for bacteria and viruses.
Plain radiographs taken on admission showed a massive osteolytic lesion , and magnetic resonance imaging indicated that the lesion was 5.0×6.0cm in size and neighbored the right iliac bone between the iliac muscle and ilium. The lesion was a mass of low signal intensity and appeared to extend to the extraperitoneal inner pelvic cavity and compress the bladder toward the contralateral side. High-resolution coronal computed tomography (CT) images showed that the screw tip had penetrated the iliac bone from the superior exterior margin of the acetabulum in contiguity to the low-density area while the screw tip remained outside the low-signal-density mass . The lesion was negative on both 99m-technetium-methylene diphosphonate bone scanning and 67-gallium citrate scintigraphy. Three-dimensional magnetic resonance angiography (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) demonstrated deviation of the external iliac artery and vein but no link (feeder or drainer) between the low-density mass and the internal iliac artery and vein or their branches . These findings were highly suggestive of a chronic expanding retroperitoneal hematoma that was located between the iliac and internal obturator muscle, grossly about 5.0×6.0×10.0cm in size, and without contiguity to the major vessels. Warfarin was discontinued and was replaced with heparin (13,000U/day) in preparation for surgery.
Surgical treatment was planned in a single session at two stages: anterior midline transperitoneal approach (first stage) to resect the low-density lesion followed by posterolateral acetabular implant re-settlement. The anterior transperitoneal midline approach was followed by a retroperitoneal incision to identify the internal and external iliac arteries and veins and their branches. The granulomatous lesion was identified posterolateral to the external iliac artery and vein but without any venous networks or major connection to the vasculature . The lesion was covered with a dense granular wall that contained a large old hematoma (blood clot) and that widely extended to the area of foramen obturatorium inferiorly and iliac crest superolaterally . The hematoma was drained completely, and part of the acetabular cup was identified through the empty lesion of the iliac and acetabular bones.
After the left-side decubitus position was changed, the posterolateral address (second stage) was undertaken to explore the acetabular implant. The acetabular cup and three screws were easily removed. The inner cavity of the original acetabulum in the pelvic cavity contained the hematoma-like mass. A massive bone defect was observed at the base of the acetabulum, but the remaining acetabular structure provided enough support for the large cup. The acetabular bone defect was covered by a mesh (hydroxyapatite and poly-L-lactic acid, Super-Fixorb®; DePuy Orthopaedics Inc.) impacted with allogenic morcerized bone and this was followed by settlement of a 60mm inner diameter Trident® acetabular cup and outer liner X3 (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). A histological examination revealed minimal inflammatory macrophage infiltration but no metallosis. The post-operative course was uneventful, and our patient resumed daily activities soon after surgery .