A 72-year-old Japanese woman presented with complaints of epigastric pain and nausea. The pain had started 3 days before admission and gradually worsened. Laboratory testing showed a high level of serum amylase (AMY) 838 IU/l and pancreatic amylase (P-AMY) 778 IU/l. CA 19-9 was elevated to 86.4 U/ml, but other tumor markers were normal. Computed tomography (CT) scanning showed inflammation localized in the pancreatic head and dilatation of the main pancreatic duct (MPD) . In addition, a cystic lesion with a slightly high density area was observed by CT in the pancreatic head.
Transabdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) were performed. Both ultrasonography and MRCP demonstrated a 14 mm cystic lesion in the pancreatic head. They showed the dilatation of the MPD from the body to the tail of her pancreas. We could not identify a connection between the cystic lesion and the MPD. EUS showed the cystic lesion more clearly than other modalities. EUS revealed that the cystic lesion consisted of both solid and cystic lesions. The solid area was shown as a hypoechoic and heterogeneous tumor, and the cystic area was shown as an anechoic lesion. The EUS also showed that the MPD was dilated to 5 mm, and it was cut off around the mass in the pancreatic head. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed > 12-mm-long stenosis of the MPD in the pancreatic head. The stenosis prevented a brush for cytology passing the stricture, and it was not possible to obtain a cytology specimen.
We performed EUS-FNA . An echoendoscope (GF-UCT260, Olympus; Tokyo, Japan) with a 22-gauge needle was used to obtain cytological material: EchoTip ProCore® HD Ultrasound Needle (ECHO-HD-22-C; Cook Medical, USA). We carried out two fine-needle aspiration (FNA) punctures, moving ten times in each puncture. We aspirated the solid area of the tumor, and then the cells were histologically revealed as pleomorphic atypical cells. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3 and CK CAM5.2, which confirmed they were epithelial cells. Based on these findings, we diagnosed the tumor as an ACP.
Our patient’s abdominal pain and the elevation of pancreatic enzyme improved . CT images suggested tumor invasion to the front of her pancreas. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT and gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)- enhanced MRI showed no obvious metastasis. We performed a subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, and no major complications occurred. On macroscopic examination, the tumor consisted of a yellow nodular mass with a cystic lesion, as had been shown by EUS. The cystic lesion was pathologically confirmed as a pancreatic duct with some blood pooling. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed spindle cells, pleomorphic cells, and multinuclear osteoclast-like giant cells (OCGCs), which are characteristic of ACP .
The resection was completed with a clear margin. The final diagnosis was ACP according to Japan Pancreas Society (JPS) classification, staged pathologically T3(pS+)N0 M0, pStageIIA, according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM staging system. After discharge from our hospital, she began oral tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1) intake as adjuvant chemotherapy. Due to anorexia and diarrhea as adverse effects, however, the S-1 administration was discontinued after 2 weeks. Although she declined gemcitabine therapy as an alternative, she has shown no evidence of recurrence 6 months after the resection.