A 6-week old African-American male presented for an ophthalmologic evaluation for a right corneal opacity noted at birth by a neonatologist . He was born at 38 weeks gestation by spontaneous, unassisted vaginal delivery, and at the time of delivery the mother had a yeast infection and chlamydia, which were being treated. Family history was significant for adult-onset glaucoma in the maternal grandmother. The history of maternal infection and family history were felt to be non-contributory toward the condition. Referral to the ophthalmology clinic was delayed due to social issues. On examination, the patient blinked in response to light in the left eye but had questionable light perception in the right eye. Portable slit lamp examination of the right eye showed central corneal thinning with an opacity over the pupil. The anterior chamber and lens were poorly visualized due to the opacity. The fundus examination was limited, however there was a minimally intact red reflex after dilation. Examination of the left eye was normal.
Examination under anesthesia was conducted at seven weeks of age. Intraocular pressures obtained by Tono-pen (Tono-Pen XT applanation tonometer, Reichert Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA) were 11 mm Hg in the right eye and 10 mm Hg in the left eye. Anterior segment examination of the right eye showed circumferential posterior embryotoxon and a dense central leukoma. The iris appeared to be slightly atrophic around the pupillary border, and the lens was mostly clear except for cortical vacuoles in the periphery. A slit-lamp examination of the right cornea showed posterior central thinning. Pachymetry of the right eye was obtained superiorly (693 microns), temporally (696 microns), and paracentrally in the superior portion of the leukoma (1073 microns). Attempts to obtain pachymetry over the corneal thinning were not successful due to poor applanation. Pachymetry of the left eye was 656 microns centrally. Examination of the left eye was unremarkable except for posterior embryotoxon seen in the infratemporal quadrant and two clusters of peripheral cortical vacuoles in the lens. Echography showed normal posterior poles bilaterally. Tests for herpes simplex virus and chlamydia were negative per the external records from the obstetrician. AS-OCT of the right eye revealed central corneal thinning with a central Descemet’s detachment and no corneo-lenticular adhesion . The diagnosis of posterior keratoconus was made and the patient underwent optical iridectomy of the right eye. After optical iridectomy, both anatomic and visual development success were obtained as a red reflex was established and the patient developed fixation behavior.