The patient was a 52-year-old man who complained of intermittent fever, sweating, thirst, polyuria, anorexia, abdominal distension and dizziness for 20 d. Three days before he presented to us, and impaired liver function and bilateral adrenal masses were found in a local hospital.
His symptoms persisted for 20 d prior to his arrival at the local hospital. He subsequently underwent extensive examinations which indicated a low blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg. His blood biochemical tests demonstrated elevated aminotransferase levels, and the abdominal ultrasound revealed hypoechoic bilateral adrenal gland masses. Symptomatic treatment resulted in no relief.
The patient was diagnosed with hypertension a year ago, with the highest blood pressure of 135/105 mmHg, and he had never been treated systematically. Family history of the patient was negative.
On admission, he was hypovolemic, with a blood pressure of 88/68 mmHg, a pulse rate of 122 beats/min and a temperature of 37.6ºC. No superficial lymphadenopathy was noted. Although physical hypothermia was effective, intermittent fever persisted. After admission for a week, he developed rashes on his chest, back, and abdomen.
On admission, his blood biochemical tests were indicative of impaired liver function, with significant elevation of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, glutamyl transferase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase levels. Routine blood tests showed a significantly decreased platelet count and slightly elevated red and white blood cell counts. The coagulation function test showed a marked elevation in plasma fibrinogen and D-dimer levels. Moreover, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and β2-microglobulin were elevated significantly. The results are shown in Table .
We also evaluated the function of the pituitary-target gland axes. The plasma adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol values at 0 AM, 8 AM, and 4 PM, are shown in Table . Despite the cortisol level decline, the ACTH levels failed to increase via a feedback mechanism. In addition, the diurnal rhythm of cortisol and ACTH were disturbed. The results of the thyroid and gonadal function tests are shown in Table . The serum total thyroxine, free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, and thyroid stimulating hormone values, were all lower than normal ranges. Hormones in the pituitary-gonadal axis, including testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle stimulating hormone, were also markedly lower. The 24-h urinary catecholamine and vanillylmandelic acid levels were within the normal range.
Computed tomography (CT) of the urinary system showed bilateral adrenal gland space occupying lesions with retroperitoneal lymphadenectases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary gland revealed a space occupying lesion in the hypothalamus with an enlarged pituitary stalk. 18Fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) images showed lesions with high metabolism in both adrenal glands, the sellar area, left supraclavicular lymph nodes, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, left tonsil, and the left testis . Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy showed normal bilateral adrenal glands uptake.
A biopsy of the left supraclavicular lymph nodes was carried out subsequently and the result showed lymphoid hyperplasia. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated lesion positivity for Bcl-2, Bcl-6, CD 20, PAX-5 and MUM-1, and negativity for CD10 ; the levels of C-myc and Ki-67 were 70% and 80%, respectively.
According to the results of pituitary-target gland hormone measurement, the patient was diagnosed with anterior pituitary hypofunction. After hydrocortisone replacement therapy, posterior pituitary hypofuntion appeared.