A 16-year-old Black male presented to our ED at a 710-bed academic institution with two days of auditory hallucinations and epigastric abdominal pain. The patient had a history of psychosis and had required an inpatient psychiatric hospitalization for both auditory and visual hallucinations at the age of 12. He did not experience hallucinations at baseline and was doing well in school. The patient’s family had a significant history of mental illness: the patient’s uncle at the time was institutionalized in a psychiatric hospital, and the patient’s brother, later diagnosed with schizophrenia, had presented similarly with auditory hallucinations at the age of 13. For the prior two years, the patient had repeated episodes of upper abdominal pain that were associated with nausea and vomiting. He was followed by a pediatric gastroenterologist and had undergone both a colonoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy just three months prior with no remarkable findings. On review of external charts, we learned he had presented to varying EDs on 12 separate occasions for abdominal pain and had been prescribed multiple antibiotics for presumed colitis on several occasions.
Upon arrival, the patient was afebrile (36.6°C) with a heart rate of 81 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 128/83 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and an oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Physical exam was notable for a soft, non-distended abdomen with epigastric pain that was not replicated by palpation. He had no focal neurological deficits. He appeared anxious and tearful but was organized in thought. Although he reported auditory hallucinations, he did not actively seem to be responding to internal stimuli.
Screening tests typical for psychiatric patients at our ED were ordered, including a nine-panel urine drug screen, a complete blood count, serum chemistries, liver function tests, an ethanol level, and a urinalysis. The ethanol level was not elevated, and the urine drug screen was unremarkable. An elevated total bilirubin of 2.0 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 0.3–1.0 mg/dL) was detected while all other lab values were within the normal range. The patient was subsequently placed in a monitored psychiatric room and referred out to inpatient psychiatric facilities.
After 24 hours, the patient was evaluated by a different emergency physician. Given the patient’s continued abdominal pain, an abdominal ultrasound was ordered, which demonstrated no sonographic abnormality. After reviewing the patient’s medical history and being concerned about the possibility of porphyria, the physician ordered a spot urine porphyria assay. No amber or light-sensitive collection tubes were available in the hospital; consequently, the sample was collected in a test tube wrapped in foil. The hospital laboratory subsequently sent the specimen to an outside facility for analysis. The patient was sent to an inpatient psychiatric facility the following day.
The urine porphyria assay results were available five days after initial collection and were as follows: urine uroporphyrins of 24 micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) (reference range: 0–2.0 mcg/dL), urine pentacarboylporphyrins of 5 mcg/dL (0–2.0 mcg/dL), urine heptacaroxylporphyrins of 8 mcg/dL (0–2.0 mcg/dL), urine coproporphyrin I of 46 mcg/dL (0–2.0 mcg/dL), and urine coproporphyrin III of 134 mcg/dL (0–2.0 mcg/dL). Given the notable elevations, the emergency physician contacted the patient’s primary care physician for further follow-up, as the phones of the patient’s family had been disconnected. On review of external records, it was found that the patient had three more ED visits for abdominal pain during the following four months.