A 21-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our service as a glaucoma suspect due to the anomalous appearance of the optic nerve in both eyes. The patient had no visual complaints and no systemic pathologies were identified.
The patient denied any previous ocular pathology and surgeries. There was no family history of ocular diseases. On examination she had normal nasal bridge, logMAR best-corrected visual acuity was 0.0 in both eyes. Amsler grid was normal in both eyes. Anterior segment biomicroscopy, extrinsic ocular motility and pupillary light reflex were normal. Goldmann applanation tonometry was 12 mmHg in both eyes. Gonioscopic exam with Posner goniolens revealed open angles in both eyes.
Dilated fundus examination and retinography (Topcon TRC-50DX, Japan) revealed a localized depression in the temporal region of right and left eye . The left eye revealed a sharply delimited, glistening white, bowl-shaped excavation occupying an enlarged optic disc . The excavation was decentered inferiorly, with the inferior neuroretinal rim almost absent; while the superior neuroretinal rim was relatively spared. We also observe a focal pit-like excavations in the temporal quadrant of the disc and macular folds on the internal limiting membrane in the left eye . Visual fields were obtained using the Humphrey Field Analyzer II, model 750i (Zeiss) with 24–2 SITA Standard strategy. Exam of both eyes showed enlargement of the blind spot on the left eye with no decreased retinal sensitivity in the central points of the visual field . Axial length obtained using ocular biometry (IOL Master 700, Zeiss) was 25,02 mm in the right eye and 24,15 mm in the left eye.
Macular spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Spectralis; Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) showed no signs of retinoschisis in the right eye. However, left eye showed intraretinal hyporreflective area, separating the neurosensory retina into two layers in the temporal perimacular region, suggesting a retinoschisis . After 2 year of follow-up, macular OCT showed no enlargement of the area of retinoschisis with central macular thickness remaining stable. The patient remained asymptomatic with unchanged visual acuity. Since the prevalence of cerebral abnormalities are relatively common in patients with optic disc coloboma, we performed magnetic resonance imaging but found no cerebral abnormalities .
We also examined the only sibling (brother) and her parents (father and mother) and none of them presented any abnormality at the ophthalmological examination.