Our patient is a 21-year-old Mexican mestizo woman with a family history of SLE (her father had the diagnosis), who at age 4 developed malar rash, fever, anemia, fatigue, and malaise. She was hospitalized, received a SLE diagnosis, and began taking corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, with constant disease flares throughout her early years. At 6 years of age, she developed an episode of septic monoarthritis in her right knee, requiring surgical drainage and antibiotics. Speech and attention problems were noted at this age, along with irritability, apathy, and lack of concentration at school. At 8 years of age, she began experiencing seizures that consisted of a visceral aura (butterflies in the stomach, as referred by the patient), fixed gaze, altered consciousness, oral and buccal automatisms, somnolence, and amnesia of the event at the postictal phase. These seizures occurred once a week approximately and were diagnosed as focal impaired awareness seizures, originating from the left medial temporal lobe. Anticonvulsants provided good control of the seizures until age 15 when these seizures became treatment-resistant.
At age 19 she was received in our hospital with a 3-week evolution symptomatology of generalized fatigue, localized pain, hyperthermia, pruritus, and hyperemia of her right lower extremity. Deep vein thrombosis was diagnosed with Doppler ultrasound, from the right popliteal vein through the right femoral vein, and laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin (Hb) of 4.83 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 54.6 fL, mean corpuscular Hb (MCH) of 15.1 pg, and reticulocyte count of 5.6%. A lupus anticoagulant test was positive and she was diagnosed as having secondary APS and microcytic hypochromic anemia, requiring anticoagulants and blood transfusions for her treatment. She was prescribed hydroxychloroquine, prednisone, azathioprine, warfarin, calcium, and vitamin D supplements at discharge. The neurological treatment of her seizures consisted of levetiracetam, lamotrigine, magnesium valproate, and phenobarbital.
She then developed a severe major depressive episode as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) ; characterized by anhedonia, abulia, mixed insomnia, depressed mood, and suicidal thoughts; behavioral disturbances were noted including mainly impulsiveness and irritability. During this period, she performed two suicide attempts, the second and more severe occurred 5 months after APS diagnosis, when she ingested lamotrigine and magnesium valproate in an unknown quantity. She was admitted to the emergency room of our hospital with altered consciousness, nausea, dizziness, and weakness. She presented seizures 36 hours after stabilization with the same semiology as mentioned above; despite treatment, the seizures worsened and developed into status epilepticus, and she had to be transferred to our intensive care unit for mechanical intubation and sedation. Electroencephalogram studies showed interictal activity of focal seizures arising from the left frontotemporal region, with secondary generalization. At discharge, rheumatologic and neurologic follow-up was scheduled, and she was referred to the psychiatry department. She had not had a psychiatric or cognitive evaluation before.
During assessment at our clinic, she denied a history of alcohol or drug abuse, but presented with labile affect and emotional dysregulation, symptoms like abulia, mixed insomnia, impulsiveness, suicidal thoughts, and irritability were noted as the most disabling. Psychotic or manic symptoms were not present at the time of evaluation, so these diagnostic spectrums were ruled out. At physical examination, she had normal vital signs: blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, heart rate 87 beats per minute, respiratory rate 14 per minute, and temperature 36.8 °C. She had a normal height and weight of 1.46 m and 47.5 kg respectively, with a body mass index (BMI) of 22.30. A neurologic examination showed normal motor and sensitive findings; a cranial nerve examination was normal too. She did not present paresis of any extremities. Isolated hyperreflexia of lower extremities was noted (+++), glabellar and right palmomental reflex were present, and there were no other signs or symptoms of upper/lower motor neuron disease. Seizure symptomatology was still active, but with a better response than previously in her treatment course (one seizure every 2/3 weeks, approximately).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and revealed neuroanatomical structural changes most noticeable in the left cerebral hemisphere, including generalized cortical atrophy with skull thickening and ipsilateral widening of sulci, ventricles, and cisternal spaces; hypotrophy of the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe structures was also noted . She was cognitively evaluated, scoring 15/30 points in the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test and 20/30 points in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). In the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV (WAIS-IV) she received a total intelligence quotient of 65 (extremely low scoring range), which together with her academic history and current coping abilities indicated a moderate intellectual disability according to DSM-5 criteria . In subscale analysis, she had a Processing Speed Index (PSI) of 77, Verbal Comprehension Index (VCI) of 70, and the most affected areas of the test were Perceptual Reasoning Index (PRI) with a score of 66, and Working Memory Index (WMI) with a score of 55, both of them in an extremely low score range .
Because of residual depressive symptoms at the time of evaluation, she was prescribed citalopram 20 mg per day, and behavioral interventions to improve conduct symptoms. She had mild improvement in her psychiatric symptomatology with these measures, but depressive symptoms did not evolve into a full recurrent major depressive episode, irritability and impulsiveness were controlled, and her adherence to treatment improved in all her psychiatric, neurologic, and rheumatologic treatments and follow-up visits. The last pharmacological regimen included citalopram, lamotrigine, and topiramate (for depressive symptoms and seizure control) and hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, warfarin, prednisone, and vitamin D (for SLE and APS), with partial treatment response to these medications as shown by persistent hematologic manifestations. Despite the absence of gastrointestinal bleeding as evidenced by repeated negative fecal immunochemical tests results, she has suffered several episodes of microcytic hypochromic anemia.