The patient is a 40-year-old male patient with moderate obesity complaining of pain and swelling in the left retrocalcaneal region. X-ray and USG of ankle were taken and diagnosed having Haglund’s bump with retrocalcaneal bursitis, calcification in tendon is ruled out by USG. He was given 6 months of conservative treatment, but there was no improvement. His American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score was 64 and Fowler- Philip angle is 71 . Surgical intervention was planned.
Surgical technique: The patient in spinal anesthesia is placed in lateral decubitus position. Tourniquet is placed in the thigh and the other limb is flexed at hip and knee so that it will not interfere with the procedure. The limb is scrubbed and draped, tourniquet inflated. Bony landmarks and the portals are marked.
With the ankle in the neutral position, a line was drawn from the tip of the lateral malleolus to the Achilles tendon, parallel to the foot sole. The posterolateral portal was situated just above the line, in front of the Achilles tendon . A small vertical skin incision is given, blunt trocar was used to reach the retrocalcaneal space and is replaced with 30° 4 mm arthroscope (directing towards 1st web space).
Then, an accessory lateral portal is created by giving a stab incision below the posterolateral portal using a needle as a guide so as to reach the posterolateral corner ofthe calcaneum. A stab incision is given, spread with mosquito forceps while entering the retrocalcaneal space. The bursa is shaved with a shaver tip facing away from the Achilles tendon. The medial and lateral corners of the Haglund’s bump are viewed after the bursa is shaved off. An osteotome is passed through the accessory lateral portal and the Haglund’s bump is removed and is confirmed on fluoroscopy and by plantar flexing the ankle to see whether the sufficient amount has been removed or not. The sharp edges are smoothened using an acromioniser ( and 5). The skin is closed using non-absorbable sutures, and pressure dressing is applied, tourniquet is released .
The patient started full ankle range of movements and weight-bearing as tolerated from the 1st post-operative day (P.O.D). He was discharged on the 2nd P.O.D after primary dressing and suture removal was done on the 12th P.O.D. Patient started full weight-bearing from the 13th P.O.D. His post-operative X-ray showed reduction in Fowler-Phillip angle from 71 to 45 . We did not encounter any complications during intraoperative and post-operative follow-up period. He was followed on the 1st, 3rd, and 6 months postoperation and his AOFAS score improved from 64 to 98 at 6-month follow up. Patient is pleased as there was no swelling in the retrocalcaneal region with minimal scar tissue formation and early rehabilitation.