A ten-year-old boy with the diagnosis of glycogen-storage disease and obesity was admitted to the emergency room with complaints of vomiting, decreased level of consciousness, imbalance on walking. Additionally there was history of ear pain and discharge for the last several days. On neurological examination, the patient was ataxic. He had no fever or neck stiffness on physical examination. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell of 10,600/µl (normal range 4000–10,000), C-reactive protein of 10.2 mg/dl (normal range 0–5), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 80 mm/h (<20 mm/h) and normal biochemistry values. The peripheral blood cultures were obtained before the antimicrobial treatment and incubated at Bact Alert (Biomerièux, France) device for both aerobe and anaerobic cultures and they remained sterile. His cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed mastoiditis on the right side and 39 × 34 mm abscess formation with surrounding edema on the right cerebellar hemisphere . Echocardiography of the patient was performed and any congenital or acquired heart disease was not detected. The patient underwent surgery to drain by puncture of the cystic portion of the abscess, microbiological samples were obtained and empirical antibiotic treatment with vancomycin and piperacillin–tazobactam were started. On gram-stain gram-positive cocci were seen. One day later Vitek MS identified the microorganism as S. intermedius and reliability was 99.9 %. The e-test (Biomerièux, France) used to describe antimicrobiological susceptibility showed that S. intermedius which was susceptible to penicilin, ampicillin, ceftriaxone and cefuroxime. Postoperative cranial MRI examination showed that the lesion regressed 10 × 10 mm with a reduction in the edema . On the second week of the treatment, the antibiotics were switched to vancomycin and meropenem because of the relapsing fever and possible healthcare associated infections. The therapy was continued for 6 weeks. A final MRI (after completing antibiotherapy) showed resolution of the cerebellar abscess. The child’s clinical condition improved and he was discharged without any sequelae.