The mother of the patient was a 26-year-old, married, Gravida 3 Para 2 (two healthy children 5 and 3 years old, uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal deliveries at term) who presented to an urban clinic in Madang, PNG, in April 2012 for routine antenatal booking of a planned pregnancy at 21+5 weeks’ gestation by dates.
The mother gave informed written consent to join a randomised controlled trial that took place at the clinic at the time. The purpose of the trial was to examine the effect of intermittent preventive therapy in pregnancy (IPTp) with azithromycin and sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) on reducing the proportion of babies born with low birthweight [,], and women were followed up until delivery. As part of the study, participants were offered an ultrasound examination (USS) by a research clinician (Logiqbook XP, General Electric Medical Systems, Little Chalfont, UK). The main purpose of the scan was to corroborate clinical history and examination data by providing an additional, more accurate estimate of gestational age (to detect preterm births) and to screen for twin pregnancies. Scans were performed during a separate research ultrasound clinic visit within a week of enrollment into the study.
Upon presentation the mother was well and had no complaints. There was no past medical and family history of note. She was a non-smoker, had not consumed alcohol during this pregnancy, and had a normal body mass index (20.1 kg/m2). She reported regular fetal movements since 19 weeks’ gestation. Observations taken on the day were normal for gestation (blood pressure 88/54, heart rate: 86 beats per minute, temperature 36.5°C). On abdominal palpation the fundal height was 23 cms. A fetal heart rate of 144 beats per minute was observed, fetal lie was longitudinal and presentation was cephalic. She was mildly anaemic (haemoglobin = 9.6 g/dL) (Hemocue, Quest Diagnostics, Madison, USA) and was given dietary advice. She received IPTp with azithromycin 1g twice daily for two days and a single dose of SP of 1500/75 mg as per trial protocol.
The mother underwent three ultrasound scans (USS) in total: the first ultrasound examination was performed by a research clinician two days after initial presentation at 22+0 weeks, at which time the fetal abnormality was detected. The mother was withdrawn from study treatments and referred to the hospital clinical team. The research clinician conducted a further ultrasound examination at 24+1 weeks, which was followed by a third USS was performed at 24+3 weeks’ gestation at hospital.
All scans confirmed a single fetus with a normal fetal heart rate (152 – 158 beats per minute), a large and distended fetal bladder (megacystis), anhydramnios, and compressed fetal abdominal and thoracic contents . In view of the observed abnormalities only head circumference, biparietal diameter and femur length measurements were included on first scan to estimate gestational age (EGA): using standard charts , the EGA was 22+1, which was in agreement with gestational age by dates. During the same ultrasound examination the distended bladder measured 4.6 × 3.6 × 4.8 cms. The keyhole sign was not observed, fetal sex could not be determined but there was evidence of concomitant ureteric dilatation (not shown). Umbilical artery flow indices were abnormal for gestational age on Doppler performed at second scan: the systolic:diastolic ratio (2.37), resistance index (0.55) and pulsatility index (0.77) were all below the 5th percentile using standard reference charts [-]. These indicators of a low placental vascular resistance have not been confirmed as predictors of fetal outcome , and Doppler findings were not used in clinical decision making.
The mother was admitted to hospital at 24+3 weeks’ gestation for further assessment and a provisional diagnosis of megacystis and anhydramnios secondary to urethral obstruction or atresia was made. The mother (partner unavailable) was informed of the likely poor prognosis. She was counselled about strategies for further care, which included conservative management and termination of pregnancy using misoprostol, as well as palliative treatment versus resuscitation at delivery. The mother opted for non-interventional management and neonatal resuscitation if signs of life were present at birth. She was discharged and outpatient follow-up by both study and hospital clinicians was arranged.
The mother returned for one more antenatal visit at 26+5 weeks’ gestation during which she was provided with IPTp (SP as per national protocol), and iron and folic acid supplements and albendazole to treat her worsening anaemia (haemoglobin = 7.6 g/dL). Observations remained within normal range (35.8°C, blood pressure 98/51, heart rate 65, respiratory rate 20), and the fundal height was 25 cms.
The mother presented to the Provincial General Hospital in spontaneous labour at 34 weeks’ gestation. On arrival fetal lie was longitudinal, presentation was cephalic and on baseline vaginal examination her cervix was 2cms dilated, fully effaced and membranes were intact. The fetal heart rate was 168 beats per minute. Maternal observations were normal (temperature 36.3°C, blood pressure 107/66, pulse 74, respiratory rate 20). Shortly after arrival she entered the active phase of first stage of labour and after five hours the cervix was fully dilated. The timing of rupture of membranes was not documented, and absence of liquor was noted at full dilatation. She delivered an infant weighing 2010 g (head circumference 290 mms, abdominal circumference 310 mms, length 440 mms) after 20 mins of second stage labour. At birth the patient had a pulse rate <100 beats per minute, an irregular respiratory rate of approximately 30 breaths per minute, and a poor response to stimulation (documented Apgar scores 3/1 and 5/5). Neonatal resuscitation was attempted by midwivery staff, oral suction was performed, and ventilatory support for the patient was provided using a bag-valve mask supplied with oxygen at a flow rate of 0.5 L/min. Despite these efforts the patient became increasingly apnoeic and cyanotic. Attending midwives were unable to pass a nasal oxygen catheter. A decision for conservative management was made after 20 minutes of resuscitation. The infant died two hours after delivery. On physical examination of the newborn performed by a research clinician multiple abnormalities were noted: the abdomen was distended, of prune-like appearance (wrinkled, lose skin) and anterior abdominal wall musculature was absent ; the male genitalia were severely abnormal, with notable absence of the urethral meatus, penile aplasia, and a small scrotum with cryptorchidism ; the chest was significantly small, consistent with lung hypoplasia secondary to anhydramnios ; and the nasal passages were either stenotic or atretic, although choanal atresia could not be confirmed. No other abnormalities were observed. Facilities for detailed postmortem examination were unavailable. Since the patient was taking part in a clinical trial assessing the safety of SP and azithromycin in second and third trimester of pregnancy, this case underwent an in-depth review by the trial’s safety team: in view of the diagnosis of PBS and its onset in early fetal development, as well as the short interval between drug administration and detection by ultrasound, a study drug-linked congenital abnormality was excluded. Clinical findings and images were discussed with an external consultant neonatologist (SR) who supported a diagnosis of PBS. The parents subsequently received further counseling from both hospital and study doctors, and the mother was discharged the following day.