A 67-year-old male presented with bilateral radicular lower back pain and neurogenic claudication (i.e., occurring within <5 min of ambulation) for 20 years. He also had pain in both his hands and feet. On physical examination, he had multiple hard, nodular swellings consistent with tophi in his hands and feet, including 0.5 cm tophi involving both big toes and the right little toe, a large 1.4 cm tophus involving the right middle finger, a 1 cm tophus on the right ring, and a 0.8 cm tophus at the right wrist [ a-c]. There were also numerous 0.5 cm tophi noted involving the inter-phalangeal joints of the left hand . On examination, he had midline/paracentral tenderness over the L4 and L5 vertebrae, bilaterally decreased ankle reflexes and diminished L4-S1 sensation to pin appreciation. Laboratory studies showed hyperuricemia (i.e., initial uric acid level of 10.6 mg/dL), normal antinuclear antibody profile, and slightly elevated rheumatoid factor level at 16.17 IU/mL. (i.e., Reference range <14 IU/mL).
Axial and sagittal MR imaging views showed disc desiccation at multiple levels with disc space narrowing and Type II endplate changes at the L3/4 and L4/5 levels. At L3/4, L4/5, and L5/S1, there was significant bilateral lateral recess stenosis attributed to central disc bulges, and marked facet hypertrophy/reactive arthrosis and thickening of the yellow ligament. Added hyperintensities were also noted bilaterally adjacent to the spinous processes of L3 through L5 [ and ]. The patient was referred for surgery and to rheumatology for additional medical management with anti-gout medications.
He underwent a decompressive laminectomy from L3 to L5 with medial facetectomy/foraminotomy and bilateral excision of tophi involving the spinous process and around the bilateral facet joints under spinal anesthesia. Intraoperatively, thickened yellow ligament and hypertrophied facet joints and spinous processes were removed along with multiple tophaceous nodules . The patient was discharged on the same day, and later the bilateral leg pain and claudication improved significantly. He was then referred to rheumatology.