The patient was a 13-year-old adolescent female who reported having a sensation of dysphagia when eating solid foods. The symptoms had been present for approximately 2 years, and the patient had no sore throat, hoarseness, dyspnea, or hemoptysis. By chance, the patient found a mass at the base of her tongue after inserting her fingers into her mouth. She had no past medical history. On physical examination, in addition to the raised mass at the base of the tongue, we found a mass just above the hyoid bone, approximately 2 cm in diameter, with poorly defined boundaries and poor mobility. No definite thyroid was found by palpation in the normal thyroid anatomy area, and no abnormal enlarged lymph nodes were found in the anterior neck and bilateral neck. Initially, the mass at the base of the tongue was the differentially diagnosed as lingual ectopic thyroid, hemangioma, or other possibilities, while the mass around the hyoid bone was diagnosed as a thyroglossal duct cyst, and surgery was recommended.
The patient underwent a series of tests after hospitalization. CDU found a hypoechoic nodule of 2.3 cm × 1.7 cm × 2.1 cm in size, slightly to the right of the deep surface of the tongue base, with a honeycomb shape . As a result, an ectopic thyroid was considered. Moreover, a mixed echogenic nodule of approximately 2.0 cm × 1.9 cm × 2.3 cm in size was found on the deep surface of the mouth floor. Its boundary was unclear, shape was irregular, it was connected to the tongue base mass, and its boundary with the surrounding muscle tissue was unclear . A very low echogenic region of 1.4 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.8 cm was observed in this nodule, suggesting the possibility of an ectopic thyroid with an ETC nodule. There were no abnormal swollen lymph nodes in the bilateral neck. No thyroid tissue was detected in the normal thyroid region. The findings of contrast-enhanced CT scan of the neck were similar to those of CDU . Thyroid function: free triiodinated thyroxine 3.13 pg/ml, free thyroxine 0.83 ng/dl, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 5.76 mIU/L, thyroglobulin 37.3 ng/ml, anti-thyroglobulin antibody < 5.00 IU/ml, anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody 2.37 IU/ml, parathyroid hormone 70.40 pg/ml, serum calcium < 0.50 pg/ml. Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, and other auxiliary examinations found no specific abnormalities. Furthermore, we performed FNAB of thyroid nodules guided by CDU, and the results showed papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).
Subsequently, we performed a local extended resection of the thyroid carcinoma but preserved the normal thyroid tissue at the base of the tongue. Bilateral cervical IA and adjacent subhyoid lymph node dissection were performed through a small anterior cervical incision. During surgery, we found that the ETC nodule was wrapped by ectopic thyroid tissue on the floor of the mouth and connected with ectopic thyroid tissue at the base of the tongue . No parathyroid glands were found during the surgery. Postoperative pathology showed that the nodules in the ectopic thyroid tissue at the mouth floor were PTC , and 1 of 12 lymph nodes had metastasis. Parathyroid hormone measurements were performed on postoperative days 1 and 3, and the results were normal. The patient recovered well without neck bleeding, facial numbness, or convulsions, and was discharged on the fifth day after surgery. Levothyroxine tablet replacement therapy was started 7 days after surgery. Thyrotropin suppression and radioiodine-131 therapy were not performed.
To date, the patient has been followed up for 36 months, and the thyroid function and TSH are in the normal range. No tumor recurrence or suspicious lymph node metastasis was found by CDU of the neck, and there was no significant change in ectopic thyroid tissue at the base of the tongue. The patient reported being very satisfied with the therapeutic effect.