A 24-year old male patient visited the emergency department of a tertiary hospital for increased drowsiness and fever. The patient had a history of Cushing’s syndrome and had been on long-term steroid replacement therapy after resection of a functioning adrenal adenoma 4 years ago. Multiple cerebral infarcts were revealed on brain magnetic resonance imaging . He was treated with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and mechanical thrombectomy of the left middle cerebral artery. To identify the source of the cerebral embolism, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed and a large, 4 cm sized, highly mobile mass adjacent to the mitral valve was revealed. After cerebral intervention, the patient presented recurrent fever and hypotension. Based on the patient’s grossly Cushing’s features, long history of steroid usage, fever and hypotension, the cardiologist in the referral hospital highly suspected an IE. For treatment with minimally invasive cardiac surgery, they transferred the patient to our hospital. Upon arrival, he experienced drowsiness and aphasia and his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was recorded at 12/15 (eyes 3, verbal 4, motor 5). The patient presented stable vital signs except mild fever of 37.1 °C. Lab results showed neutrophil-dominant leukocytosis and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 15.19. On account of the potential systemic effects of tPA and risk of hemorrhagic transformation in the area of cerebral infarction, surgery was deferred for 48 h. He was managed with intravenous antibiotics. For further evaluation, we tried transesophageal echocardiography, but the patient’s unclear mentality interfered with the test.
During surgery, intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed that the mass was not attached to the mitral valve but to the interatrial septum . The mass was found obstructing the mitral inflow, leading to functional mitral stenosis . We considered the possibility that the mass might be a tumor (possibly CM) rather than a vegetation due to IE. A 6-cm right mini-thoracotomy was performed along the fourth intercostal space, and a cannula was inserted through the right femoral artery and vein (17 Fr and 23 Fr, Edwards Lifescience, Irvine, CA, USA). After aortic cross-clamping with the Glauber clamp (Cardiomedical GmbH, Langenhagen, Germany), cardioplegic arrest was induced with antegrade cold blood cardioplegia. Through the left atriotomy, complete excision of the mass with its stalk and adjacent endocardium was achieved. The mass was 7 cm in size, friable, and multi-lobulated . Cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic cross-clamping took 35 and 17 min, respectively. After surgery, mitral valve stenosis or regurgitation was not observed. The patient was extubated 6 h postoperatively and transferred to the ward the next day. Postoperative TTE showed no remnant mass in the left atrium and an intact interatrial septum. The drowsiness and aphasia gradually improved. He was transferred to the Department of Neurology for further management of his neurological sequelae. Pathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of a myxoma. Carney complex (CNC) was suspected because of the history of endocrine neoplasm and CM. Genetic analysis confirmed the presence of a mutation in the PPKAR1A gene. Therefore, he was finally diagnosed with CNC presenting with CM and systemic embolism.