A 50 year-old woman was admitted in our hospital for abdominal pain and massive vaginal haemorrhage. She was at day 9 post-partum, following a non-complicated elective caesarean section after unsuccessful birth induction. This event occurred after a 41 weeks normal gestation resulting from oocyte donation for infertility due to physiological ovarian aging. At admission, blood pressure was maintained at 129/91 mmHg despite massive bleeding. Haemoglobin was 93 g/L with a normal thrombocyte count. She rapidly underwent two uterine curettages followed by embolization of uterine arteries. Treatment also included amines, oxytocine, sulprostone, 2 g of tranexamic acid (TXA), 5 units of packed red blood cells (RBC), 1 unit of platelets, 2 units of frozen plasma and 2 g of fibrinogen for consumption coagulopathy. At Intensive Care Unit admission, serum creatinine was increased to 116 μmol/L and platelet count was decreased to 102 G/L. Due to persistent uncontrolled bleeding, she underwent total hysterectomy, with the administration of 7 additional RBCs and 500 mcg of TXA. Total blood loss was estimated to 2700 mL. Anatomopathological analysis of surgical tissues excluded signs of endometritis. In the recovery room, she developed symptomatic high blood pressure associated with blurred vision, dizziness, headache and hyperreflexia necessitating intravenous labetalol. Despite bleeding control and coagulation markers’ normalization, haemoglobin, platelet count and kidney function continued to worsen, subsequently leading to AKI stage 3 associated with dysmorphic microhematuria and proteinuria up to 2 g/day with the need of replacement therapy. Blood tests showed numerous schizocytes (49‰) with undetectable haptoglobin (< 0.1 g/L) and massive lactate dehydrogenase (LDH 1340 UI/L) levels, clearly defining signs of TMA. Disseminated intravascular coagulation was reasonably ruled out due to a normal fibrinogen level. ADAMTS-13 activity was normal at 38%, although the essay was performed just after the administration of the 2 initial fresh frozen plasma packs. C3 was reduced to 0.63 g/L with markedly increased serum sC5b-9 and Bb factors, respectively to 637 ng/ml (normal range 127–303 ng/mL) and 5.95 μg/mL (normal range < 1.65 μg/mL). Moreover, a serum C3 splitting activity was found giving rise to C3c. Factor H (FH) was normal and Factor I (FI) was slightly but not significantly reduced to 36.2 μg/mL (normal range 38–58 μg/mL), probably due to consumption. No anti-FH antibody was detected . The marked activation of complement alternative and terminal pathways prompted us to start anti-C5 therapy, i.e. intravenous eculizumab 900 mg, once weekly, with the required antibiotic prophylaxis and meningococcal vaccination. Interestingly, sC5b-9 normalized within 12 h after the first dose of eculizumab, factor Bb and C3 after seven days, platelet count after nine days and haptoglobin after 3 weeks. The clinical picture improved rapidly with blood pressure control after 48 h and diuresis resumed after three days. Weekly eculizumab was continued aiming a CH50 below 10%. The patient received a total of six doses of eculizumab over two months, until haemodialysis could be discontinued . Using Next-Generation Sequencing, no complement genetic abnormality in favour of p-aHUS was detected. Two years after admission, the patient was doing well. Serum creatinine was 82 μmol/l, corresponding to an estimated GFR of 71 ml/min/1.73 m2 (CKD-EPI Cystatine C), without proteinuria nor haematuria.