A 44-year-old Chinese man with no history of hypertension or diabetes who had received allogeneic stem cell transplantation for 8 months was admitted to our hospital for a progressive decrease in visual acuity in his left eye. The patient had diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and had received an allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplant after chemotherapy. His blood tested positive for CMV during the treatment period, but no ocular symptoms were present.
However, the patient developed ocular symptoms at 8 months after receiving the transplant. Hence, he received his first ocular examination in the ophthalmology department. We determined that the patient had an uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) of 20/500 and a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/40 in both eyes using the Snellen visual acuity chart. Slit-lamp examination showed that there was no significant abnormality in his anterior segment, except for increased lens density. However, endoscopy revealed blebs, sheets of necrosis, and a white vascular sheath anteriorly in the patient's left eye. Based on the patient’s previous history, we further refined the fundus photography, OCT, and FFA + ICGA . He had no significant abnormalities in the macular area, according to OCT. At the same time, his left eye had degenerated in the superior temporal area because of haemorrhage, and the white vascular sheath was not close to the macula according to fundus photography. The extent of the lesion involved the superior macular temporal vessels. It crossed the equator and approached the ora serrata. We found a fluorescence leak in the lesional region by the FFA + ICGA exam. No significant abnormalities were observed in his right eye. We suspected the presence of CMV retinitis in the patient’s left eye based on the medical history and ophthalmologic examination.
Consequently, we extracted the patient’s anterior chamber aqueous fluid for viral nucleic acid and antibody testing. It showed a nucleic acid copy number of 1.55 × 104 and an antibody quantity of 16.25 U/ml per ml of CMV, which was well above the normal reference range. Meanwhile, nucleic acid tests for other viruses, including HSV, EBV, VZV, and HHV-6, were negative. These results made the diagnosis of CMV retinitis in the patient's left eye fairly clear. On May 18, May 25, June 1 and June 8, 2021, the patient received intravitreal injections of 4 mg ganciclovir. The extent of the fundus lesions and vascular white sheaths was reduced after the first three treatments .
Nonetheless, the patient complained of a sharp vision loss in his left eye for two hours after the fourth therapy. The BCVA of his left eye suddenly dropped to 20/1000, and we immediately performed OCT, FFA, and fundus photography on his left eye . The OCT results suggested cystoid macular oedema in the left eye, which seemed to have accumulated only in the outer five layers of the retina and appeared as a vertical dense signal strip below the fovea. The FFA finding revealed a fluorescence leak in the macula and paramacular (temporal to the fovea). However, the result of fundus photography showed no indication of the progression of the original lesion. These findings suggested that paramacular vasculitis might be the aetiology of cystoid macular oedema. However, according to the OCT image, the place where the vasculitis occurred was not the most obvious place for leakage, and there was no clear evidence for a CMV aetiology. Next, we repeated the anterior puncture and aspirated the patient's intraocular fluid. The sample of the ocular fluid was negative for the CMV nucleic acid assay. We then monitored the patient and found a marked improvement in cystoid macular oedema by that afternoon. The cystoid macular oedema had largely disappeared with minimal sub-RPE fluid by the next day. During the following days, the macular oedema continually improved, and the superficial peeling of the RPE layer disappeared after four days. Since then, the cystoid macular oedema has not occurred again. The patient's BCVA ranged between 20/400 and 20/100 over this period. The patient had his final ophthalmic follow-up on March 22, 2022. His BCVA in the left eye was 20/400, and OCT showed no significant macular abnormalities .