A 62-year-old caucasian woman came to the emergency room with fever for a month and pain in the left upper quadrants of the abdomen and lower left back pain. She had no other systemic symptoms or comorbidity. Routine blood tests were in the normal range with no evidence of infectious diseases. On clinical examination there were no signs of peritonitis but we found a palpable large mass in left flank. We performed a CT abdominal scan that demonstrated a voluminous solid oval mass (11.2 cm × 7.5 cm × 12 cm) in the left perirenal space with dislocation of the kidney and in continuity with the anterior renal fascia. After iodinated-contrast we observed a progressive, inhomogeneous enhancement of the lesion with peripheral vascularization [,]. After a percutaneous CT-guided biopsy of the mass the histopathological diagnosis was a dedifferentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma. Considering the site of the neoplasm in left renal loggia and the absence of others repetitive local or distant lesions our tumor board decided for surgical resection of the mass in block with kidney and left adrenal gland. We chose the possibility of laparoscopic approach with conversion to open surgery in case of muscle infiltration or vascular invasion. After preoperative clinical study the surgical procedure was carried out with a transperitoneal approach with the patient in right lateral decubitus position to obtain a large surgical field with well known anatomic landmarks and possibility of exploration of peritoneal organs. We used a laparoscopic 3D vision system [,] with three trocars in the left subcostal region, but during surgical procedure we positioned another 5-mm trocar for spleen retraction. We performed an adequate mobilization of the splenic-pancreatic block in order to identify infiltration of peritumor tissues. We found a well-capsulated mass. The dissection was done with Harmonic scalpel™ (Ethicon Endo Surgery INC – Johnson & Johnson, NJ, USA) from up-to-down until the left renal artery and vein and the ureter were clipped and divided with the aim to perform an in block resection of left adrenal gland, kidney and DD liposarcoma with safety margins adequate for neoplasm resection (a and b). At the end of procedure surgical specimens were positioned in endo-bag and we used Tesseel™ (Baxter International Inc - Deerfield, Illinois, USA) for repositioning splenic-pancreatic block. We left a drain in retroperitoneal space and we did a sovrapubic minilaparotomy for extraction of resected mass [, , , , , , ]. Macroscopically the mass appeared oval, 13 × 11 × 9 cm of size, with a smooth surface coated with a greyish capsule and with regular margins (c and d). The morphological and immunophenotypic characteristics (MDM2 +, vimentin +, S100 +, SMA+, pancytokeratin −, desmin −, CD34 −, ki67 = 20%) confirmed the diagnosis of dedifferentiated liposarcoma (according to WHO 2013). The kidney, the perirenal adipose tissue, the ureter, the adrenal gland and the retroperitoneal lymph nodes appeared to be free from neoplastic infiltration. The patient was discharged from our hospital a week later. On the last follow-up control (about 12 months later) she was in good general clinical condition and without postoperative radiologic evidence of tumor recurrence.