A previously healthy 43-year-old man presented to the emergency room of the San Juan de Dios General Hospital Guatemala City, Guatemala with a history of twenty days insidious onset of gradual progressive numbness of the left lower extremity and weakness of the right lower extremity. He had two episodes of urinary incontinence and at time of evaluation he could not walk without assistance. There was no history of fever, weight loss, night sweats or trauma.
On physical examination he was afebrile with stable vital signs. Neurological examination of mental status, cranial nerves and upper extremities were normal. Examination of the right lower extremity revealed: hyperreflexia, 2/5 strength of all muscle groups. Sensation was decreased to mild palpation, vibration and position. Motor examination of the left lower extremity showed normal strength. Sensation was decreased to noxious stimulation from T4 dermatome to the plantar surface of the left foot. Babinski sign was present on the right side. A non-contrasted computer tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine revealed a contrast-enhancing intramedullary mass extending from C7 to T1 .
The initial differential diagnosis included astrocytoma and ependymoma. The patient was admitted to the internal medicine ward and underwent neurosurgical procedure. Laminectomy of C-6, C-7 and T-1 was performed and after dural opening at the posterior midline, the spinal cord was visualized swollen and containing a cyst localized to the left lateral aspect of the cord, with cord displaced to the right. Cyst resection was performed .
Histopathological findings showed chronic inflammation associated with the cysticercous cyst .
After surgery, the strength of his right lower limb recovered to grade 3/5. Postoperatively, oral steroid therapy and anticysticercal agent (albendazol) were administred for four weeks. Patient was discharged to physical rehabilitation therapy. After one month, steroid therapy was tapered and after the 5-month-follow-up period the patient recovered normal muscle function and was able to ambulate without assistance.