A 40-years-old woman presented to the Emergency Department with acute intermittent abdominal pain with cramps, located in all right quadrants, started from 24 to 48 h. The physical examination results in palpable abdomen without abdominal distension, nor guarding or rigidity and normal intestinal peristalsis; the liver and spleen were not palpable. The clinical evaluation showed absence of fever, nausea, vomiting or modifications of the bowel habit, absence of any abnormal urological symptoms and normal vital signs. All the blood and urine analysis were normal. The history of the patient is free of any abdominal surgical operations. About the sexual history, she was nulliparous, free of dyspareunia, pelvic pain, spotting, itching or other gynaecological symptoms. The patient had in the past some similar episodes of abdominal intermittent pain associated with cramps recurring every 30–40 min, resolving spontaneously, usually two times/year during the past three years; an ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scan and upper/lower endoscopy have evidenced an intestinal mal-rotation. Now we have repeated the CT scan which has evidenced a mobilized intra-peritoneal duodenum in all of its portions associated with the cecum/ascending colon predominately lying on left side and the small bowel almost entirely lying on the right side , with inverted relationship between superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and artery (SMA) – the vein is lying to the left of the artery. Also evidenced absence of any effusion, edema or signs of intestinal ischemia or infarction. Cause of the persistent pain, recurrence of these episodes, the resistance to standard painkiller drugs and normal infective indicator in blood and urine analysis, we decided to perform an exploratory laparoscopy, which evidenced the colon completely mobilized and located on the left side of the abdomen, the duodenum totally intraperitoneal and well-vascularized, but the presence of intense inflammatory process in the hepatic-renal space with bloody fragile viscero-parietal and viscero-visceral adhesions above the Glisson’s capsule , additionally to the typical PID signs, resulting in inflammatory disorder of the uterus, fallopian tubes and adjacent pelvic structures . Collecting buffers for bacterial culture from the pelvic space and the perihepatic space have been done, then toilette peritoneal lavage. The appendix appeared moderately inflamed, so we performed an appendectomy. After the operation, we immediately began with intravenous antibiotic therapy. The bacterial cultures were positive for C. trachomatis, so we continued with the specific oral antibiotic therapy to be in total 14-days. In the follow-up phase, the patient reported clinical improvement and attenuation of the symptoms. Histological result of the appendix was unexpectedly an appendicular NET (maximum diameter 0,3 cm; pT1a G1); according to the American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual Seventh Edition, this Stage I just requires follow-up strategy.