A 33-year-old African health care worker pregnant for the fourth time with two previous second trimester miscarriages and an alive daughter from her third pregnancy presented to our emergency department at 18 weeks and two days of gestation, dated from the first day of bleeding of her last normal menstrual period, coughing up copious amounts of blood.
She had apparently been previously well until at about midnight on that day when she felt like clearing her throat then she coughed up frank blood that filled about half a small pale, the bleeding then stopped. She was afterwards feeling completely fine besides some shortness of breath. At about 19.00 hrs on that day while watching television with her husband she once again coughed up blood estimated to be about 500 ml whereupon she presented to our emergency unit.
Besides this episode she had never coughed up blood before, she denied history of coughing, night sweats, she did not smoke cigarettes, her last serologic test for HIV (human immuno deficiency virus) done three weeks previously was negative and besides being a health care worker, she had no known tuberculosis contact. She was experiencing shortness of breath and palpitations. A systemic inquiry focusing on the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and central nervous systems was unremarkable.
She had a history indicated McDonald cervical suture inserted at 14 weeks of pregnancy for cervical weakness.
All her four pregnancies apparently had the same paternity. Her first two pregnancies ended as mid-trimester miscarriages. For her third pregnancy, cervical cerclage was performed and she subsequently delivered vaginally a live born female baby weighing 3 kg at term. Her five- year-old daughter was apparently in good health and attending early school.
Notably, she had been trying to conceive unsuccessfully while having regular unprotected sexual intercourse for more than one year.
She had no known illnesses or allergies and was taking iron and folate tablets.
Her family and social history was notable in that her sister was apparently asthmatic and was on treatment for this condition.
On examination, she was anxious and besides tachycardia her vital signs were normal. Whilst in the emergency department, she coughed up about 800 ml of frank blood. Examination of her chest revealed dullness to percussion on the left lower side and on auscultation there was decreased air entry and vocal resonance on the left side.
On obstetric examination, the height of fundus was about 18 weeks in size and fetal movements were noted.
She was resuscitated with rapid infusion of intravenous crystalloid, investigations were done and her previous medical records were reviewed (see Table for the patient’s laboratory data).
Echocardiography revealed normal mitral and tricuspid valves, normal left ventricular function and dimensions. There was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension. The ejection fraction was 68% (normal range 50% to 75%).
Ultrasound scan showed a single viable intra uterine pregnancy with a cephalic presentation at an estimated gestational age of 17 weeks. A left-sided cystic mass suspected to be of ovarian origin was noted. There was no evidence of molar pregnancy. Her first first trimester ultrasound scan had shown a left-sided adnexal mass (4.2 cm by 5.2 cm in size), it had been decided at that time to manage this mass conservatively.
Chest X-ray suggested left-sided lung collapse. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest with the administration of iodinated contrast material showed a left carinal mass with complete obstruction of the left proximal main bronchus 10 mm from the carina causing complete collapse consolidation of the left lung and a left pleural effusion (see Figure ). Right middle lobe infiltrates were seen.
The radiologist was of the opinion that these findings were most likely due to tuberculosis or lymphoma. As metastases could not be excluded a bronchoscopy and biopsy was suggested. Rigid bronchoscopy was done; no abnormalities were seen.
Antiphospholipid antibodies, antibody to ds-DNA and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were all negative. Rapid plasma reagin was negative. Repeat serology for HIV three months after her first serologic test was negative, her partner was also seronegative.
Blood was also collected from the patient for coagulation studies; unfortunately the results were not available in time to inform her management.
She was initially admitted to the medical ward and then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). While in the ICU, she developed central chest pain and pyrexia. Her oxygen saturation ranged from 88 to 99% while she was receiving supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula. Her medications included ferrous sulphate, folate, intravenous crystal penicillin which was later switched to ceftriaxone, initially paracetamol then diclofenac. She also got steroids in the form of hydrocortisone at first then prednisone later. Intravenous crystalloids commenced from admission were continued.
Her pyrexia settled and her oxygen saturation improved progressively until she was saturating well on ambient air. Her left lung re-inflated spontaneously (see Figure ); it was difficult to establish exactly when her lung re-inflated. Sixteen days after admission, she was discharged with a plan to continue antenatal care and to have chest physiotherapy while having further sputum specimen collection.
At 27 weeks and 1 day of pregnancy (about 9 weeks after admission) her direct sputum smear microscopy revealed acid alcohol fast bacilli and she was immediately commenced on anti-tuberculosis treatment (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) together with pyridoxine.
In summary, her antenatal care involved serial clinical examination and sonography. Her height of fundus was less than expected for her dates, for example, at 27 weeks gestational age, her symphysial fundal height was 21 cm which would correspond with a pregnancy of about 21 weeks.
Notably, her weight at 14 weeks of gestation (the time of cervical cerclage) was 55 kg; at 27 weeks, 55.7 kg; at 35 weeks 62.5 kg and at term 63.1 kg. She was 1.72 m tall.
It was noticed that our patient at 27 weeks of pregnancy had white transverse nail lines (see Figure ).
Her cervical suture was removed and at 41 weeks and three days of pregnancy she went into spontaneous labor, she delivered a live born female baby vaginally weighing 2.6 kg with APGAR scores of nine and 10 at one and five minutes respectively.
Our patient completed her six months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. Sputum collected during her anti-tuberculosis treatment for microscopy as well as sputum culture was all negative.
She and her baby are apparently doing well about 10 months after delivery. At the 10 month review, the infant’s growth and development were normal.