A 23-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because he had recurrent abdominal pain and fever for more than 2 years. The patient began to have a burning pain in the epigastrium in October 2008, which mostly occurred at night and when he was hungry. The pain occurred once every 1 to 2 months, each time lasting for 1 to 2 days, accompanied by fever, with temperature fluctuating between 38-39°C, which would alleviate by itself. The patient did not have diarrhea, night sweats or other symptoms. Laboratory examination in the local hospital revealed white blood cell (WBC) 10.0 × 109/L (normal 3.6-9.7 × 109/L), neutrophil rate 79.2% (normal 50–70%), hemoglobin 116 g/L (normal 120–160 g/L) and C-reactive protein (CRP) 87.7 mg/L (normal 0–5 mg/L). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 27.0 mm/h (normal 0–15 mm/h), and occult blood test (OBT) was positive. The patient was a non-smoker with no family history of inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroscopy revealed duodenal bulb ulcers. Although acid inhibitors and antipyretics were used in the local hospital, his symptoms did not improve. He was referred to our department for further evaluation. On admission, a physical examination found an enlarged submental lymph node which was soft and removable without pressing pain. After admission, laboratory examination indicated that WBC, OB, CRP, and ESR were normal. The patient tested negative for autoantibodies to nuclear antigen, double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid, nuclear ribonucleoprotein, anti-saccharomces cerevisiae antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. In addition, Pathergy and Widal tests were both negative. Gastroscopy and double balloon enteroscopy revealed duodenal bulb ulcers and scattered round small ulcers in the jejunum with no evidence of Helicobacter Pylori infection (Figure A,
B). Biopsy of a deeply ulcerated area of jejunum revealed nonspecific mucosal inflammation without granulomata (Figure C). Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) found multiple and flake concentration around the jejunum and ileum. Inflammatory and hyperplastic lymph nodes without increased metabolism were found in the abdominal, retroperitoneal and mesenteric region (Figure ).
Although various test had been conducted, the diagnosis of the patient remained unresolved. His medical history was long and he did not complaint of hematochezia. PET-CT scans did not reveal the presence of any abdominal mass nor any sign of neoplasma. Most significantly, the biopsy specimen from the deeply ulcerated area of the jejunum did not show the presence of lymphoma cells, therefore the possibility of intestinal lymphoma was excluded. Coeliac disease is more prevalent in Caucasian, but our patient is an Asian. Meanwhile, eating wheat foods does not have obvious relation with the patient’s symptoms. Therefore, the possibility of coeliac disease was also excluded. However Crohn's disease, tuberculosis of the intestines and BD were difficult to differentiate from each other and remained possible causative conditions. After discharge, the patient still suffered from recurrent abdominal pain. He returned to our department with recurrent abdominal pain and fever in March 2012. On further investigation it was discovered that the patient had had recurrent oral ulcers, genital ulcers and occasional blurred vision since childhood. Capsule endoscopy was carried out and revealed multiple ulcers in the small intestine, mainly located in the jejunum (Figure A,
B). BD is diagnosed based on clinical evaluation. Our patient was diagnosed with entero-BD based on the International Criteria for Behcet’s Disease
. However, although he had been treated with prednisone, mesalazine, cyclophosphamide and colchicines in the local hospital, his symptoms had not improved. After discussion with the patient, a combination therapy including infliximab (5 mg/kg), thalidomide (100 mg,qd) and prednisone (15 mg/day) was prescribed. Infliximab was infused at weeks 0, 2, 6, 14, 22 and 30 according to instructions. No medication-related adverse reactions were observed and the prednisone dose was gradually tapered during the treatment. After the first infusion with infliximab the patient’s abdominal pain and fever disappeared despite complete withdrawal of steroids. CRP decreased from 87.7 mg/L to 0.7 mg/L and ESR decreased from 27.0 mm/h to 4 mm/h. Because most of his symptoms were gastrointestinal, the Crohn's Disease Activity Index (CDAI) was selected as an objective measure of response to the therapy. The CDAI score decreased from 344 to 52 points during therapeutic period (Figure ). Meanwhile, his body weight increased from 53 kg to 64 kg. Capsule endoscopy performed 10 weeks after the last infusion showed marked endoscopic improvement and the patient's multiple ulcers had healed well (Figure C,
D).