In February 2000, a 40-year-old Caucasian woman developed a palpable mobile node in her right breast, 3.0 cm in diameter. The mass was located in the upper-outer quadrant of her right breast. Mammography and ecography revealed the nodule to have suspicious characteristics. The biopsy of the lump revealed a SCNC of the breast. The personal history of our patient was characterized by first degree family history of breast cancer. Her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer at 57 years old and her mother's aunt with SCNC of the lung at 73 years of age. At the time of evaluation, our patient was in good general condition, without other co-morbidities. She was treated with mastectomy and axillary lymph node resection. Our patient was in good health with a Performance Status 0 (ECOG), with negative routine laboratory investigations, normal serum breast cancer markers and chromogranin of 45 ng/mL. A thorough examination (abdominal ultrasound, total-body computerized tomography, bone scintigraphy, pelvic and transvaginal ultrasound) showed no evidence of metastases. Macroscopically, the tumor was 3 cm in maximum diameter (pT2). It was yellowish-white with large areas of coagulative necrosis, ductal hyperplasia and fibrous parenchyma. Widespread vascular invasion was present. One of 16 lymph nodes was metastatic (pN1a). Microscopically, the tumor was characterized by atypical cells with dimorphic nuclei and scant cytoplasm, organized in solid and trabecular arrangements. Widespread necrosis was present. The tumor cells were highly positive for neuron specific enolase (NSE), chromogranin and synaptophysin and negative for c-erb-B2 and cytocheratin 20 . Estrogen receptors were positive in 80% of the tumor cells, progesterone receptors were positive in 90%, Ki-67 90%, c-erb-B2 absent, p53 90%. No ductal carcinoma in situ was observed. For this reason, we obtained two separate revisions of the samples, one by the Pathology Department of "M. Malpighi" Hospital in Bologna and one by the Pathology Department of the Oncologic Institute in Milan (IEO) confirmed the diagnosis.
With immunohistochemical analysis, a distinction between a primary tumor and a metastatic lesion is possible: SCNC of the breast is positive for cytocheratin 7 and negative for cytocheratin 20, whereas the SCNC of the lung is negative for both. SCNC of the breast can be confused also with a lobular breast cancer. Generally, in SCNC an electron microscopy will show neurosecretory granules, which are reminiscent of the argyrophil variant of lobular carcinoma of the breast. Lobular carcinoma is always negative for Caderin E, whereas SCNC is positive in 100% of cases as in this situation.
Our patient was treated with chemotherapy, doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 (AC) with four cycles every 21 days, followed by carboplatin 300 mg/m2 during day one and etoposide 120 mg/m2 during days one to three, (CE) for three cycles every 28 days. These drugs were chosen for their described efficacy both in breast carcinoma as in SCLC. Cisplatin or carboplatin with etoposide are considered standard treatments in SCLC [-], while doxorubicin is the most used drug for breast carcinoma and is also active in SCLS. Hematological and clinical compliance was poor with main toxicities being neutropenia G3 and fatigue G2. No major complications were observed and our patient completed treatment at the full dosage. In consideration of the positive hormonal status and of the negative c-erb-B2, after chemotherapy, our patient received tamoxifen 20 mg daily for five years plus LH-RH analogues for two years. Our patient underwent a regular follow-up check-up every six months. After 18 months, tamoxifen was discontinued for intolerance and minor vascular complications, and was replaced with anastrozole from November 2005. At that time, our patient became amenorrhoic and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteal hormone (LH) were compatible with menopausal status. Our patient is alive and well without disease after eight years.