A 62-year-old woman of Italian origin and nationality with a history of fever and a persistent cough for three weeks was admitted to our hospital for a scheduled fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FB) to assess the nature of a diffuse pulmonary lesion revealed by computed tomography (CT) chest scan .
Multiple cavitated lesions in the lungs were diagnosed. Some contained air and had a hyperdense capsule in the bronchi, consistent with bronchiectasis, whereas others resembled heteroplastic cavitary lesions . The patient had no significant clinical history except for type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), controlled with oral anti-diabetic treatment and a suitable diet. In the three years of follow-up, her hemoglobin A1c remained below 7%.
At the time of admission to hospital, the patient's white blood cell count was 10 × 109/L with 50% neutrophils; hemoglobin and blood glucose were 13.0 g and 260 mg/100 ml, respectively. No coagulation alterations were observed, and the thrombocyte count was 200.000 cells/ml. A human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test performed on admission was negative.
The bronchoscopy examination revealed a mucous and necrotic plug completely occluding the lingular bronchus and the apical segment of both lower-lobe bronchi (B6) . Grasping forceps were used to remove mucous plugs for cytohistologic analysis, and other samples were obtained by bronchial aspiration. At the end of the sampling procedures, performed by a team of bronchologists with more than 20 years of experience in these techniques, the patient had a massive hemorrhage followed by cardiorespiratory arrest and was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) in a state of coma.
Histologic examination showed large areas of necrosis in the bronchial mucosa, with peripheral granulomatous reaction and several multinucleated cells . In the necrotic areas, numerous broad, very rarely septate, haphazardly branched hyphae were evident. Significantly, the hyphae were more deeply stained by hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) than by other special stains for fungi, such as periodic acid Schiff (PAS) and Gomori methenamine silver stain (GMS).
Morphologic aspects and stain affinity suggested mucormycosis. This hypothesis was confirmed by the results of the bronchial aspirate culture (histologic sample), which showed filamentous mycetes belonging to the class Zygomycetes. Consequently, the patient was treated with 5 mg of liposomal amphotericin B per pound of body weight.
No evidence of disseminated infection was found, and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid did not reveal cerebral mycoses. The patient died 20 days after being admitted to the ICU. Autopsy confirmed bronchopulmonary mucormycosis.