A 39-year-old man with a history of opioid abuse and primary generalized epilepsy was found on the ground with a minor head injury. On admission, his reactions were generally slow, but there were no other neurological symptoms. The patient had refused to take his prescribed anti-epileptic medication [levetiracetam 750 mg twice daily]. Due to the patient’s condition and uncooperativeness, no further information as to the effect of the medication or the presence of compliance problems could be obtained. (R1.2) In view of the patient’s low blood pressure, 1 L of IV Sterofundin® ISO was administered. Blood tests for acute drug consumption were negative. A multimodal CT scan [non-contrast CT (NCCT), CT angiography, and CT perfusion (CTP)] were ordered. Shortly before the scan, the patient began to experience generalized onset tonic-clonic seizures which were brought under control by intravenous therapy with 10 mg diazepam. After approximately 15 min, a multimodal CT scan was performed. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe hypercapnia (pCO2: 72.8 mmHg), hypoxia (pO2: 22.4 mmHg), acidosis (pH: 7.24), a slightly elevated bicarbonate level (30 mmol/l), and normal lactate (1 mmol/L). Clinically, the patient remained awake without any focal neurological deficits. He gradually recovered over the following 3 h and, against our medical recommendation, discharged himself from the hospital.
There were marked changes in perfusion of the brain hemispheres and posterior fossa, with sharp delimitation at the midline. Imaging analysis revealed discrepancies between the features on the NCCT, relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF), and relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) maps . There was no infarct demarcation on the NCCT scan and no vessel occlusion on the CTA. Nevertheless, qualitative examination of the maps revealed a significant decrease in flow and volume in the left hemisphere but normal flow and volume in the right hemisphere. Further CT perfusion reconstruction using peak enhancement revealed a peak nine times higher in the right hemisphere than in the left hemisphere as a result of vasodilatation and hyperperfusion [Hounsfield Units (HU) in temporal lobe: right (141), left (17.16); frontal lobe: right (99 HU), left (6.5 HU); cerebellum: right (201 HU); left (12 HU)] with no differences in the time to peak enhancement.