A 30-year-old Japanese woman who had never given birth and who had no disease history consulted her physician for a check-up. Later, she was referred to our department for a uterine tumor with an unusual diagnostic image appearance. During ultrasonography, a uterine tumor that had a maximal diameter of 43 mm and that contained multiple intratumoral cystic lesions was identified (data not shown). On an image obtained by T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), an ovoid heterogeneous tumor in the fundal portion of her uterine corpus was noted . The tumor showed a signal intensity that was higher than that of surrounding myometrial tissue, suggesting the possible presence of either tissue degeneration or hypercellularity, including malignant transformation . Her uterine cavity was markedly deformed because of the uterine tumor.
We informed our patient of the potential risk of hysterectomy if a conservative excision for a uterine tumor with an unusual appearance (indicating a possible malignancy) was unsuccessful. She declined surgery at that time out of a fear of losing her fertility and chose instead to have her disease condition observed by ultrasonography at periodic check-ups. Since natural conception did not occur and the tumor gradually enlarged to a maximum diameter of 59 mm and the number of cystic structures increased six months later , she hoped for a resection of the uterine tumor.
A gasless laparoscopic-assisted excision with an Alexis wound retractor (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) was performed under general anesthesia in accordance with a previous description of the procedure [,]. The length of the suprapubic transverse incision made with the wound retractor was 2.5 cm. A hysterotomy was performed with a Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Japan, Tokyo, Japan) after a local myometrial injection of dilute vasopressin (Pitressin; Parke-Davis, Morris Plains, NJ, USA).
An en bloc enucleation was extremely difficult because of the fragile and myxomatous nature of the tumor . Thus, bluntly fragmented tumor tissue was gradually excised and great care was taken not to disperse the tumor tissue in the abdominal cavity by extensive washing . Owing to an unclear border between the uterine tumor and the myometrium, a concomitant excision of adjacent myometrial tissue was required to obtain maximum resection of the tumor. During this procedure, direct palpation of the tumor and the surrounding myometrium by a surgeon's index finger through the wound retractor was able to reveal the excisional margin and thus minimize the damage to the normal uterine musculature . Endometrial avulsion and partial defect of the endometrium occurred because of the firm attachment of the uterine tumor to the endometrium.
First, endometrial defect was closed with Vicryl Rapide sutures (Ethicon Japan). Then, the myometrial defect was reapproximated by two-layered closure with Coated Vicryl sutures (Ethicon Japan) . There were no difficulties in achieving hemostasis, and the surgical procedures were completed as usual. After hemostasis was obtained, a fibrin glue-coated collagen patch (TachoComb; CSL Behring, Tokyo, Japan) was applied over the hysterotomy site through the suprapubic port to achieve further completion of hemostasis and minimize adhesion formation . A J-Vac drain (Ethicon Japan) was placed in the pelvic cavity and was removed the next day after hemostasis was confirmed. Surgery lasted 82 minutes, and the loss of blood was less than 50 mL. The excised tissue weighed 20 g. The postoperative course was uneventful.
A histopathological examination showed that the excised tumor was composed of numerous large atypical mononucleated or multinucleated cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, karyorrhectic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, nuclear pseudoinclusions, and coarse chromatin . These bizarre cells were located in multiple foci. The stroma lying in between was focally myxoid and showed some hyalinization. Initially, leiomyosarcoma was strongly suspected. However, a low proliferative activity rate (5% to 6%) as assessed by MIB-1 (Ki-67) labeling index gave a final pathological diagnosis of bizarre leiomyoma with marked nuclear atypia .
After the pathological diagnosis was obtained, our patient was advised to have a regular check-up on purely empirical grounds. During ultrasonography, a remnant of uterine tumor was not evident after the operation, and the postmyomectomy scar healed well. Seven months after conservative surgery, she conceived spontaneously and underwent an uncomplicated pregnancy. At 37 weeks of gestation, an elective cesarean section was performed, and she gave birth to a healthy 3256 g girl with Apgar scores of eight and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. During cesarean section, a slight omental adhesion to the postexcisional scar was noted. After adhesiolysis, the uterine wall structure was well preserved and a recurrence of bizarre leiomyoma was not noted .