A 51-year-old Asian woman diagnosed with a primary gastric GIST underwent wedge resection, achieving complete removal of the entire tumor with microscopic examination of the margins showing no tumor cells (R0 margins). She was considered at high risk for recurrence based on the tumor size (8 cm × 7 cm × 3 cm) and high mitotic rate (>50 mitoses per 50 high powered fields (HPF)) of the excised GIST [,]. In addition, mutation analysis showed that the tumor had KIT exon 11 deletions, a genotype shown to be associated with adverse outcomes after surgery . As such, our patient was enrolled in the aforementioned Korean Phase II trial of adjuvant imatinib for patients with localized KIT exon 11-mutant GIST at high risk of relapse . Our patient was started on imatinib adjuvant treatment 400 mg/day but developed a skin rash after three months; the rash was successfully managed with a temporary (three-week) dose interruption. Our patient was subsequently restarted on imatinib 300 mg/day and resumed taking standard-dose imatinib 400 mg/day after three months. She was maintained, generally tolerated this dose and completed the two-year adjuvant therapy regimen.
Ten months after stopping adjuvant imatinib treatment, recurrence was detected in this patient, as computed tomography (CT) scans revealed three gross peritoneal nodules in her upper abdomen . Our patient was rechallenged with imatinib 400 mg/day as first-line treatment for her recurrent or metastatic disease. After one month of treatment, a partial response (PR) by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors was observed; the three peritoneal nodules had decreased in size from 31.4 mm, 15.3 mm and 22.1 mm (sum, 69 mm; Figure and ) to 17.1 mm, 9.2 mm and 12.4 mm, respectively (sum, 39 mm; Figure and ), representing a 43% decrease in size. Imatinib rechallenge was well tolerated, as the only adverse events experienced by our patient were grade 1 edema, anemia and fatigue. Our patient maintained a stable PR for over two and a half years after being rechallenged with imatinib treatment, as evidenced by repeated CT scans. However, progression was observed three months later; CT scans revealed that the sum of two peritoneal nodules had increased in size by 50% since the last tumor assessment. Disease progression was confronted through dose escalation to imatinib 800 mg/day. Our patient's response to dose escalation will be monitored closely during future follow-up visits.