We report the case of a 62-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man who presented to our Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya with a history of generalized malaise and anorexia of 1 week’s duration.
He had had poorly controlled type 2 diabetes for 12 years treated with orally administered hypoglycemic agents, which was complicated by diabetic nephropathy with a baseline serum creatinine of 220 micromol/L which was done 3 months back with urine analysis showing ++ protein. He was on thyroxine 100 mcg for hypothyroidism. He was a hypertensive for 10 years on losartan potassium. He was dyslipidemic and was on orally administered atorvastatin 40 mg daily. Serum lipids done 1 month back revealed high serum cholesterol with elevated triglycerides (TG) of 350 mg/dL. Gemfibrozil 600 mg twice daily was added on top of the statin by his general practitioner. Soon after starting gemfibrozil, our patient developed myalgia and he himself stopped taking gemfibrozil after 5 days. He then noticed gradual resolution of symptoms.
He developed generalized malaise and anorexia 3 weeks after the initial event. He noticed a reduction in urine output with dark urine for 2 days prior to admission. He noticed a reduction in exercise capacity with shortness of breath at rest.
On examination his temperature was 36.7 °C (98 °F). He was oriented in time, place, and person. He had mild pallor and bilateral ankle swelling. His pulse rate was 96 beats/minute with a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg; his precordium examination was normal. He was dyspneic at rest with a respiratory rate of 24 cycles per minute and he had bilateral fine crackles up to mid zone. An abdominal examination was unremarkable. He had mild tenderness of his thigh muscles. He had 4/5 of normal strength against resistance in proximal muscles and his distal muscles had strength close to normal. Deep tendon reflexes were present but diminished.
Laboratory investigations revealed a serum creatinine of 1232 micromol/L with a blood urea of 27.7 mmol/L. His serum potassium was 8 mmol/L with electrocardiographic evidence of hyperkalemia. His serum alanine transaminase (ALT) was 413 U/L and aspartate transaminase (AST) was 229 U/L. Hemoglobin was 9.4 g/dL with a mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 85 fL. His white cell count was 6.6 × 106/microL and platelet count of 87 × 103/microL. Corrected serum calcium value was 1.63 mmol/L for an albumin value of 31 g/L. His serum phosphate was 4.7 mg/dL (2.5–4.5 mg/dL). His lactate dehydrogenase level was 240 U/L (88–230 U/L) and uric acid was 12.4 mg/dL (2.4–7.4 mg/dL). His C-reactive protein was 68.5 mg/L. Arterial blood gas revealed severe metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.12: bicarbonate 8.8 mmol/L, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) 27 mmHg, and base excess of − 20.5 mmol/L. An ultrasound scan of his kidney-ureter-bladder revealed normal size kidneys with slightly altered corticomedullary demarcation and no obstruction to outflow tract. His creatine kinase (CK) level was 49,146 U/L and urine myoglobin was positive. A diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis leading to acute-onset chronic renal failure was made. His random blood sugar was 145 mg/dL and urine ketone bodies were negative. He was clinically euthyroid while on thyroxine 100 mcg/day and his thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was 6.5 u/L (normal range 0.4–4 u/L). Other causes of rhabdomyolysis, such as hyperthermia, prolonged seizures, trauma, physical muscle damage or stress, dehydration, burns, or alcohol abuse were not evident in our patient. He did not have fever preceding the event. His clinical course and laboratory data suggest that the combination of atorvastatin and gemfibrozil is the most probable cause of rhabdomyolysis.
He was catheterized. He was given calcium gluconate and insulin dextrose to manage the hyperkalemia. Acidosis was corrected with an 8.4% sodium bicarbonate infusion. He was started on intravenously administered furosemide. Considering his high serum creatinine, severe metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia, he was offered urgent hemodialysis via a vascular catheter. His daily renal functions and CK were monitored. He was offered four consecutive hemodialysis sessions every other day. Gradual improvement in his urine output was noted. His CK levels normalized over the days. He was discharged on day 8 of admission with a serum creatinine of 280 micromol/L and normal CK level. On a follow-up visit 1 week later, his serum creatinine was 256 micromol/L with normal CK level.