A 26 year-old male student presented to a chiropractic clinic with a complaint of chronic bilateral ankle pain. Walking was not limited by pain, although he reported sharp constant pain that was located over the dorsum of the ankles. The pain intensity varied from 2/10 to 7/10. The pain was aggravated by physical activity such as running and relieved by rest and ice. There was a previous history of locking and swelling in both ankles. The locking was usually accompanied by decreased active dorsiflexion until the patient manually self-mobilized the ankle to regain the lost motion. He reported recurrent bilateral ankle sprains over the past few years. The patient was otherwise healthy and past medical history and systems review were unremarkable.
On examination, the patient weight was within normal limits with respect to his height. No lower limb alignment abnormalities or leg length inequalities were noted. There was no swelling or redness. He had difficulty heel walking due to left ankle pain. Right ankle active and passive ranges of motion were decreased by 10% in dorsi- and plantar flexion. Resisted testing was unremarkable. Neurological examination of the lower limb was unremarkable. Orthopaedic examination illustrated positive bilateral anterior drawer and synovial impingement manoeuvres. The impingement manoeuvre involved concurrent pressure applied anterior and inferior to the lateral maleolus while the ankle was moved from plantar to dorsiflexion . One leg stance was held for 5 and 10 seconds on the right and left, respectively. Joint play illustrated restrictions in the right subtalar joint. Muscle palpation revealed tight bilateral soleus, fibularis and anterior tibialis muscles with no noted asymmetry in muscle mass.
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral synovial hypertrophy with associated ligamentous laxity. He received conservative treatment which included ultrasound, soft tissue therapy, ankle joint manipulation and exercises. After eight visits over the course of one month, no improvement was noted and plain film radiographs of the right ankle were ordered.
The radiographs illustrated several calcific loose bodies projecting posterior to the tibiotalar joint with additional loose bodies anterior to the joint. The ankle mortise and subtalar joint spaces were well maintained. A small osteophyte was noted at the posterior malleolus . Mild degenerative joint disease of the tibiotalar joint was also noted.
The diagnosis was changed to primary synovial chondromatosis potentially associated with a history of previous trauma to the joint. Conservative care was discontinued at this point.
Five months later the patient returned with acute left ankle pain following an inversion injury six days earlier while playing indoor soccer. At the time of injury there was immediate pain and swelling. The patient was able to weight bear within 10 minutes. He reported limping for the first few days following the injury.
On examination, swelling was evident at the left lateral malleolus. Active and passive left ankle ranges of motion were painful and decreased by 25%. The talar tilt test on the left was positive. Anterior drawer was positive on the right with no pain. This test was difficult to perform on the left due to swelling and pain. Palpation elicited tenderness anterior to the lateral maleolus and the fibularis longus muscle. One legged stance was not painful for greater than 10 seconds.
Radiographs of the left ankle were ordered. These illustrated bone-spurring at the medial and anterior talofibular joint . Several ossified bodies with lucent centres were noted posterior and anterior to the talotibial joint. It was suggested that the calcific bodies were located in the synovial sheath of the flexor hallucis longus or tibialis posterior tendon. Soft-tissue swelling was detected anterior and posterior to the talotibial joint. Mild degenerative joint changes at the anterior and medial talotibial joint, likely traumatic in origin, were noted . As with the right ankle, the patient was diagnosed with primary synovial chondromatosis, likely associated with a history of previous joint trauma.
The patient began treatment which included cryotherapy, ultrasound, and soft tissue work to the fibularis muscles. Manual mobilizations of the ankle mortise joint occurred infrequently. He received six treatments over approximately 4 weeks. The patient was discharged as asymptomatic with minor residual swelling and some periodic episodes of locking.
Although discharged from conservative care, the patient was referred for an orthopaedic surgery consult due to the recurrent nature of the ankle pain and the radiographic findings. MR imaging was ordered and revealed calcifications in both ankle joints and the right and left flexor hallucis longus tendon sheaths . Following MR imaging and orthopaedic assessment, the orthopaedic surgeon concluded that surgery to extract the calcifications from the tendons would be too invasive and would not be pursued at the present time. The patient was advised to continue with his daily activities.