A 56-year-old man was admitted to the Peking University Third Hospital in December of 2011 because of abnormal imaging of the pancreas and high serum AFP levels found during routine health checkup. He had no symptoms of hypoglycemia, diarrhea or abdominal pain. Fifteen months earlier, he suffered from a liver abscess with normal serum AFP, which was treated successfully with antibiotics. Cholecystolithiasis was diagnosed at that time. One month earlier, he had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstones at another hospital. Enlargement of the tail and body of the pancreas was demonstrated by computed tomography (CT), and a diagnosis of pancreatitis was considered. The patient did not smoke but drank alcohol occasionally. Physical examination on admission revealed no specific findings.
Laboratory tests showed that serum AFP levels were elevated to 321.4 ng/ml (normal: 0–20 ng/ml). The levels of other tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA], carbohydrate antigen 19–9 [CA199], carbohydrate antigen 125, and prostatic antigens) were all within normal limits. There was no serologic evidence of hepatitis B or C. Blood cell counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and coagulation tests were normal. Levels of serum aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, albumin, urea nitrogen, creatinine, amylase, lipase, glucose, human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), and immunoglobulins were all normal. Testicular ultrasonography revealed a cystic mass in the left epididymidis.
Imaging examinations are shown in Figure . Abdominal CT revealed diffuse enlargement of the body and tail of the pancreas, which appeared as a region of low-attenuation with an indistinct margin. A mass measuring 5.2 × 4.8 × 4.1 cm showing probable encasement of the splenic vein was found in the enlarged pancreas by contrast-enhanced CT. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed enlargement of the body and tail of the pancreas with poor enhancement after gadolinium administration. Some enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes were also noted. None of the imaging examinations showed abnormal findings in the liver. The main pancreatic duct, common bile duct, and intrahepatic bile ducts were normal on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. The patient underwent a resection of the tail and body of the pancreas, splenectomy, and resection of four regional lymph nodes in January 2012. No metastatic neoplasm was found on the liver surface or in lymph nodes during surgery.
Grossly, a grey ill-define nodular mass, measuring 5 × 4.5 × 3.5 cm, was shown at the body and tail of the pancreas . Necrosis, hemorrhage and parapancreatic adipose tissues invasion were observed. Light microscopy revealed that the tumor tissue consisted of large and small solid nests of polygonal cells with a scattering of pancreas islets among them. No residual pancreatic tissue was found within the tumor. The tumor cells had moderate amounts, granular and eosinophilic cytoplasm, and round to oval nuclei with mild to moderate atypia. One or two red, moderately sized nucleoli were noted in some tumor cells. The mitotic rate was nearly 30 per 10 high-power fields. There was no differentiated component characteristic of adenocarcinoma, acinar cell carcinoma or hepatoid carcinoma of the pancreas. The surgical margins were negative for neoplastic infiltration. There was no evidence of vascular or perineural invasion. No lymph node metastasis was shown. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the tumor cells contained electron-dense neuroendocrine granules measuring 230 nm in diameter.
Immunohistochemistry showed patchy expression of chromogranin A (CgA) and synaptophysin (Syn). Tumor cells also showed diffuse immunoreactivity for AFP and focal strong immunoreactivity for hCG. Dot-like pan-cytokeratin (CKpan) reactivity near the nucleus, β-catenin reactivity at the cell membrane, diffuse CD99 expression in cytoplasm, and wide CK19 expression in tumor cells were observed. There was no expression of HapPar-1, CD10, CD56, or progesterone receptor (PR) in tumor cells. Ki-67 index was nearly 25%. The histopathology findings supported the diagnosis of a pure AFP-producing neuroendocrine carcinoma according to the forth edition of WHO Classification of neuroendocrine tumors .
Serum AFP levels decreased to 23.15 ng/ml on day 29 post-surgery, but increased to 180.9 ng/ml on day 80. Lymph nodes metastasis and a recurrent mass in the residual pancreas were detected by CT. The patient was treated with a somatostatin (SS) analog (Sandostatin LAR) for 4 months. Serum AFP levels gradually increased to 1200 ng/ml 5 months after surgery, and liver metastases were found on CT. Hepatic metastases were treated with hepatic artery embolization and percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFA) in another hospital, and the serum AFP levels fluctuated around 700 ng/ml. His clinical condition gradually worsened, and he died 21 months after the original surgery. Other tumor markers (such as CEA and CA19-9) remained within the normal range during follow-up.