A 69-year-old female was admitted to our hospital because of a hard mass in her left neck six months prior . On physical examination a palpable mass about the size of a quail egg was found to be located at the left neck. The mass had unclear boundaries, and was not tender. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) showed a soft tissue tumor of the left levator scapulae muscle with a size of 2.5 × 3.5 cm . The mass appears isointense in T1-weighted image (WI) and heterogenously hyperintence in T2WI and short TI inversion recovery (STIR) image. Contrast-enhanced T1WI revealed marked enhancement with gadolinium. She had no medical, family, or surgical history. Needle biopsy specimens were obtained, and histological examination showed spindle cells with minimally atypia arranged with fascicular or storiform growth patterns in the fibrous stroma, suggestive of low-grade spindle cell sarcoma. Immunohistochemistry revealed focally positive for α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), and negative for S-100. Based on the diagnosis of low-grade spindle cell sarcoma, tumor excision with a wide surgical margin was performed . The cut surface of the surgically resected tumor was grayish-white . The histological features comprised a proliferation of spindle-shaped tumor cells in the fibrous stroma with partially infiltrative growth into the surrounding muscle tissues. There was no pseudocapsule but the tumor boundary was nevertheless well-delineated. Inflammatory cells, atypia, and mitosis was rarely seen. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, αSMA (focally), and negative for HHF-35, desmin, H-caldesmon, CD34, and nuclear β-catenin. S-100 protein was focally positive. An ultrastructural analysis could not be performed because we had only paraffin-embedded material, unsuitable for electron microscope analysis. The lesion was diagnosed as LGMS.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was alive with no evidence of local recurrence or metastasis eight years after the surgery without any additional therapy. She had no functional deficit and the shoulder range of motion was 150° in abduction, 150° in flexion, and 45° in extension at the final follow up. The patient had provided informed consent for publication of the case, and the study protocol was approved by Medical Ethics Committee of Kanazawa University.