A 7-year-old girl presented to the Cardiology Department of Beijing Children’s Hospital with complaints of precordial discomfort and fatigue following a three-day episode of fever and coughing. She had experienced three times of myocardial injury which occurred after acute infection in the previous three years . Two previous myocardial injuries were diagnosed as respiratory infection with fever and cough, and one was diagnosed as digestive tract infection with diarrhea. The patient experienced chest pain, chest tightness, and shortness of breath during the course of the disease. Furthermore, these episodes were characterized by elevated myocardial enzyme spectrum indicators and T-wave changes or ST-T changes on electrocardiogram (ECG) . Between episode, the patient’s electrocardiographic changes showed improvement . The patient also had intellectual disability and congenital amblyopia. Her parents were healthy and not biologically related. Physical examination revealed that the patient was thin and short, weighing 17 kg and measuring 110 cm in height (both of which are below the 3rd percentile for children of the same age and gender), with distinct facial features such as a narrow mouth, short philtrum, prominent forehead, midface retraction, and mild hypotonia in the limbs. The creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CK-MB) level was slightly elevated at 51 U/L (reference range: 0–25 U/L). High-sensitivity Troponin-I and N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide precursor (NT-pro BNP) levels were within normal range. Echocardiogram showed no presence of regional wall motion abnormalities or ballooning of the left ventricle, and no evidence of stress-induced (takotsubo) cardiomyopathy. Abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple gallstones, while chest X-ray showed no abnormality . Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging scan displayed abnormal nodular signals adjacent to the left anterior horn of the lateral ventricle, indicating suspected gray matter heterotopia and a cisterna magna cyst . Coronary artery computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no abnormality in the origin or the course of bilateral coronary arteries . Twenty-four-hour dynamic ECG revealed an average heart rate of 96 beats/min, with sinus tachycardia accounting for 10% of the total heartbeat. The standard deviation of the NN intervals was 68 ms. The ECG exhibited T-wave changes, specifically T-wave inversion in leads II, III, aVF, V4-V6 . School-age Wechsler Intelligence Test showed mild impairment which equivalent to 4–5 years old with IQ of 64 points, verbal IQ of 77 points, operational IQ of 57 points, and social adaptation ability of 8 points.
Approximately 2 mL peripheral blood samples of the family members were collected. Whole-exome sequencing (WES, Supplement materials) was performed from the patient’s and her parents’ DNA sample, which identified a heterozygous frameshift mutation, c.3852_3856delGGTAT (p.Met1284Ilefs*2), in exon 3 of the SON gene. This mutation was detected in the affected individual but not in her parents, suggesting it was a de novo mutation specific to the patient. Sanger sequencing confirmed this finding in all family members . The frameshift mutation, c.3852_3856delGGTAT (p.Met1284Ilefs*2), is likely to result in loss of protein function. It is not reported in the 1000 Genome Project, ESP6500 (NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project), ExAC_ALL (Exome Aggregation Consortium), or ExAC_EAS (Exome Aggregation Consortium East Asian) databases. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines, the variant was classified into pathogenic, likely pathogenic, uncertain, likely-benign, and benign. Thus, this patient had a pathogenic variant (PVS1 + PS4 + PM2_Supporting + PS2_supporting) [–]. This specific mutation has been previously reported in the HGMD by Tokita in 2016 and is known to cause “intellectual disability, congenital malformations, and failure to thrive” .
Based on the genetic analysis and clinical features, the patient was diagnosed with ZTTK syndrome. A β-blocker (metoprolol) was administrated orally to reduce heart rate as well as myocardial oxygen consumption, combining intravenous with coenzyme Q10. Standard anti-infection treatment was also given. After six days, the patient was discharged with stable body temperature and partially relieved cardiac symptoms. At the age of 8 years and 10 months, the patient visited neurology outpatient department due to learning difficulties, and Binet Intelligence Test scored 89 (marginal). According to the growth curve of children aged between 2 and 18 in China, the height and weight of the patient were below the 3rd percentile for children of the same age and sex, and her BMI, which normally ranging from 18 to 24 kg/m², was below the 25th percentile for children of the same age and sex. During the 42-month follow-up at the outpatient clinic, the patient remained stable, accompanied by intermittent fatigue and palpitation, with a normal echocardiogram and improved T-wave changes on ECG . She weighed 32 kg at the last follow-up, ranging from the 25th to 50th percentile of children of the same age and sex.