A 74-year-old Korean woman was admitted to our hospital with right upper quadrant (RUQ) abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting which began the preceding day. She had no smoking history or significant family history. Her past medical history included cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis with gallbladder (GB) stones 10 years prior. At that time, the pathologic report was inflammation of the GB. Two years before admission, a computer tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen performed for routine screening revealed two small stones (4 mm, 3 mm) in the RCD, and two small stones (3 mm, 2 mm) in the distal common bile duct (CBD). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatoscopy (ERCP) was performed, and the two CBD stones were removed. At that time, surgery was recommended for the RCD stones, but the patient refused the operation.
At admission, she was afebrile and physical examination showed tenderness of the RUQ of the abdomen. Blood test and laboratory data indicated an elevated white blood cell count (10360 μl-1; normal < 9000 μl-1) and elevated serum concentrations of high sensitivity C reactive protein (22.98 mg/L; normal < 1.0 mg/L). However, the serum concentrations of total bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphate, as well as tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were within the respective normal ranges. Both CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen demonstrated inflammation of the RCD with multiple impacted stones .Complete removal of the RCD was performed with a preoperative diagnosis of inflammation of the RCD and multiple impacted stones. The size of the excised RCD was 2 cm × 1 cm and the wall was thick. There were multiple stones (1 cm × 1, 2 ~ 3 mm × 5) and pus-like bile. The pathologic report indicated chronic active inflammation with abscess formation and adenocarcinoma that appeared to invade the perimuscular connective tissue . On positron emission tomography CT scan, there was no evidence of metastasis.
The second operation was planned due to suspicion of pT2. Confirmation of the resection margin of the RCD, wedge resection (segment 4b and 5) of the liver, and lymphadenectomy were performed. There were no cancer cells in the resection margin of the RCD, liver, or lymph nodes (0/6). The final histopathological diagnosis was pT2N0M0. The patient recovered without any complications, and is still living 1 year after surgery without any recurrence or metastasis.