A 37-year-old man complained of lumbago that had persisted for 4 months. He had been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis at the age of 29 years, and had undergone restorative proctocolectomy and hand-sewn IPAA when 33 years old for ulcerative colitis refractory to medical treatment and suspicion of dysplasia. Pathologic evaluation revealed no malignancy in the resected specimens. After IPAA, he had a history of chronic pouchitis, which required continuous antibiotic therapy.
Although he had persistent low-grade fever and bilateral paresthesia of the outer thigh, the patient did not complain of weakened muscles apparent in the lower legs. He had no complaints of urinary retention or fecal incontinence. Laboratory tests disclosed elevated inflammatory status (C-reactive protein 3.68 mg/L, white blood cell count 11,780/μL). Gastrografin contrast radiography of the ileal pouch revealed contrast leakage from the ileal pouch extending into the L5/S1 epidural space . The fistula was isolated from the anastomotic site, located at the top of the efferent limb. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed collection of epidural fluid at L5/S1 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the CT findings, and the fluid collection at the sacrum did not compress the spinal cord . He was diagnosed with spinal epidural abscess attributable to a fistula arising from the ileal pouch.
The patient was admitted to our department for drainage of the spinal epidural abscess. In this case, where causative bacteria should be of enteric origin, we used cefmetazole for empirical antibiotic treatment to cover gram negative bacilli and anaerobes. At surgery, the fistula was observed to originate at the staple line of the top of the pouch in efferent limb and communicated with the promontory of the pelvis. After excising the root of the fistula, suspected to be a possible source of spinal infection, the foramen was closed and a diverting loop-ileostomy procedure was performed.
Although abdominal distension caused by postoperative ileus persisted, his postoperative course was generally favorable, and he was discharged after 28 days. Ten months after surgery, laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell count (11,270/μL) and C-reactive protein level (3.61 mg/L), leading us to suspect a residual abscess. MRI and Gastrografin radiographic examination showed a fistula arising from the ileal pouch to the presacral space, but a spinal epidural abscess could not be detected (Fig. ). The patient was diagnosed with residual presacral abscess and fistula formation, and underwent further drainage of the presacral abscess. At surgery, there was dense fibrosis and tissue granulation between the top of the pouch and the sacrum (promontory-S2). From the abscess, a fistula extended to the top of the ileal pouch, which was confirmed using pouchoscopy. After mobilizing the ileal pouch from the presacral abscess, the fistula of the pouch was excised thoroughly. As the ileal wall appeared intact, primary closure and defunctioning ileostomy were performed. Postoperatively, the fistula and abscess healed completely. The patient finally underwent closure of the ileostomy 15 months after the initial surgery. Although he requires medication to control pouchitis, he is doing well as an outpatient with no signs of recurrence 3 years post-initial surgery.