A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a 1-month history of melena and mild abdominal pain. She denied nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, jaundice, cough, hemoptysis, fever, and/or menstrual abnormalities. She had no significant medical history or family history of pulmonary TB. She also denied tobacco or alcohol abuse. Upon admission, her general examination showed pallor, and abdominal examination revealed mild upper abdominal tenderness. Laboratory findings were as follows: hemoglobin 76 g/L, hematocrit 25.6%, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 25.3 pg/cell, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 36 mm/hour, and a C-reactive protein level of 24 mg/L. A T-SPOT.TB assay was performed and showed a positive result. Hepatic enzymes such as alkaline phosphatase, as well as bilirubin, albumin, prothrombin time, and partial prothrombin time showed no abnormalities. Additionally, the human immunodeficiency virus, a hepatitis panel, and tumor markers were negative. After treatment with pharmacological agents, such as proton-pump inhibitors and octreotide, active gastric variceal bleeding stopped.
Gastroduodenoscopic examination showed isolated gastric fundal varices with red color signs . Colonoscopic examination did not reveal any abnormality. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed non-enhanced masses of soft-tissue density in the lesser omentum and behind the head, body, and the tail of the pancreas, as well as multiple para-aortic lymph nodes and multiple small hypodense splenic lesions . CECT findings were suggestive of an infectious or metastatic disease or lymphatic cysts. Whole body [F-18]2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was performed to evaluate for lymphoma and metastatic disease. This test showed hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa, right tracheoesophageal groove, the lesser omental and retropancreatic areas, the mesentery, the porta hepatis, the splenic hilum, and the retroperitoneum with maximum standardized uptake values (SUVmax) ranging from 5.3–7.5 . Additionally, the bone marrow showed hypermetabolic FDG activity with a SUVmax of 5.2. The PET/CT findings were suggestive of lymphoma.
Bone marrow biopsy revealed no abnormality. Subsequently, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was performed and revealed a hypoechoic mass at the splenic hilum, compressing the splenic vein . EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration was performed to obtain tissues for histopathological examination. Histopathological examination showed sheets of inflammatory cells, primarily lymphocytes and macrophages along with some glandular tissue. CT-guided biopsy of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes was performed to establish a definitive diagnosis, and the histopathological examination of these biopsy specimens showed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation and microorganisms that stained positive with acid-fast stains .
Based on all the aforementioned findings, she was diagnosed with abdominal TB. Anti-TB treatment comprising rifampicin, isoniazid, and ethambutol was initiated following histopathological confirmation. After leaving our hospital, she went to a TB hospital for further treatment, where her doctor added pyrazinamide to the treatment. She received a 6-month regimen of rifampicin: 2HRZE/4HR. During the course of treatment, the patient experienced mild elevation of transaminase. Abdominal CECT showed a decrease in the size of the lesser omental and retropancreatic masses, as well as the para-aortic lymph nodes after 4-month anti-TB therapy . The patient was asymptomatic at her 12-month follow-up.