A slim 46-year-old Japanese man was brought to the emergency room of the Chiba Emergency Medical Center because of intermittent epigastric pain. He had no history of abdominal surgery. His initial blood and urine examinations showed no abnormalities. However, the pain had been getting worse and signs of peritoneal irritation appeared within a few hours.
An abdominal enhanced MDCT scan without multiplanar reconstruction was then performed, which revealed small bowel loops with suspicious ischemic change in the right lateral part of the abdomen of our patient . An internal hernia with strangulation was diagnosed, and emergency surgery was subsequently performed.
During surgery, a band between the mesentery near the cecum and the retroperitoneum was found. Part of his jejunum had been sliding under the band and had thus become necrotic. The necrotic bowel, which was 50 cm in length, was resected. Furthermore, one-quarter of the proximal small intestine was encapsulated in a peritoneal sac that was surrounded by transverse mesocolon. The bowel was entering the Waldeyer's fossa through an opening beside the ligament of Treitz . A right paraduodenal hernia was then diagnosed.
The bowel was removed manually from the sac. There was no sign of ischemic change. The fossa was approximated tightly with no free space. Furthermore, there was no malrotation of our patient's bowel, and the cecum was located in the normal position without Ladd's band. On the third post-operative day, our patient complained of nausea and he started vomiting, thus a nasogastric tube was placed. After that, more than 2000 mL of bilious gastric juice was drained from him every day.
An upper gastrointestinal contrast series revealed dilatation of the right side of the duodenal third portion with a straight line cut-off sign. The contrast medium did not pass to the proximal side in supine position, although it did pass with postural change to the prone position . SMAS was strongly suspected, and an enhanced MDCT of our patient was again performed to examine the stricture around his duodenum and SMA. A multiplanar reconstruction of these was performed, and pre-operative images were also taken.
The images revealed a very narrow aortomesenteric angle (AMA) and a short aortomesenteric distance (AMD) . These data were compared with the pre-operative findings. The AMA had changed from 44 to 14 degrees, and the AMD had changed from 28 mm to 5 mm. Furthermore, before the operation, bowel was present under our patient's aorto-SMA junction, but the bowel disappeared after surgery . Thus, SMAS caused by the surgical repair of RPH was diagnosed.
On the 21st post-operative day, because the symptoms had not improved with conservative management, a duodenojejunostomy (DJ), which left a duodenal loop, was performed on our patient.
Our patient's post-operative course was uneventful. The post-operative upper gastrointestinal series showed good passage through the anastomosis .