A 65-year-old Caucasian man complained of pain and constipation related to adenocarcinoma (stage IIB) involving the hepatic flexure. He had a long-standing history of hypertension, but it was well controlled with a beta blocker. An anamnestic investigation showed that he had been operated on twice: approximately 10 years earlier he had undergone surgical repair of an inguinal hernia, and 2 months earlier, a transurethral resection for a papillomatous lesion of the bladder. Following both surgeries, he had symptoms indicative of thrombotic complications. The first operation was followed by the rapid onset of postoperative pain in the left arm, with swelling and redness. These symptoms lasted for approximately 1 month and were treated with antibiotics and low-molecular-weight heparin. His symptoms suggested a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the upper extremity, a suspicion confirmed by the finding of prominent veins in our patient’s left arm. After the second intervention, he experienced a severe loss of vision in his left eye, attributed to retinal vein branch occlusion (RVO).
Our patient’s prior history was consistent with a hemostatic disorder. Before undergoing surgery for his cancer-related complaints, a complete screening for risk factors of thrombosis was performed. The levels of C and S proteins were in the normal range; his serum Hcy level was 25μmol/L. A subsequent molecular analysis showed homozygosity for the MTHFR C677T mutation. He did not have the Leiden variant of factor V. Treatment with folic acid (25mg/day intramuscularly (i.m.)), cocarboxylase (38mg/day, i.m.), pyridoxine hydrochloride (300mg/day, i.m.), hydroxocobalamin (5000μg/day, i.m.), and antiplatelet therapy with low-dose aspirin was started. After his serum Hcy level had decreased to 18μmol/L, he underwent a right hemicolectomy. Low-dose aspirin therapy was maintained. Anesthesia was performed with sevoflurane in 40% O2, without the use of nitrous oxide (N2O).
The operative course was uneventful and there were no immediate or late complications as determined in a physical examination, molecular laboratory analysis, blood test, and Doppler ultrasound screening of the upper and lower extremities performed 7 days, 15 days, 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months postoperatively. His serum Hcy levels were 13μmol/L, 11.5μmol/L, 10.4μmol/L, 9.8μmol/L, and 8.7μmol/L, respectively.
Antithrombotic therapy after surgery consisted of 100mg of intravenous acetylsalicylic acid every 24 hours starting 12 hours after the end of the surgery. On day 3, our patient resumed oral therapy with low-dose aspirin. The administration of B vitamins continued with high doses during the first 7 postoperative days, followed by oral folic acid (15mg/day) and hydroxocobalamin (5μg/day) for maintenance.