A 68-year-old female, right hand dominant, slipped on ice and fell on her left outstretched hand. There were no open wound, no neurovascular deficit and no other significant injuries. The skin was not at risk. Standard x-rays of the shoulder girdle showed a minimally displaced lateral fracture and a second displaced medial fracture of the left clavicle. A conservative treatment was proposed with regard to the patient’s age and her low functional demand. A week later the assessment was completed by a computed tomography (CT) scan which underlined a displaced medial fracture with shortening of the clavicle bone . This statement drove us to propose a final fixation of the clavicle by means of two locking plates. The hardware used consisted of two 3.5/2.7 locking compression (LC) anatomical plates with a lateral extension (DePuy Synthes®, United States). A left sided plate was used for the lateral fracture and placed cranially while a right sided plate was used for the medial fracture and placed anteriorly. The patient was operated in beach chair position under general anesthesia. Antibiotic prophylaxis was given at the induction. A longitudinal anterior incision was used. The reduction of the medial side of the intermediate segment of the clavicle was particularly difficult due to the small medial fragment still attached to the sternoclavicular joint, and the rupture of the costoclavicular ligament and the lever arm produced by the coracoclavicular ligaments still attached to the lateral side of the intermediate fragment. Fixation of the lateral fracture facilitated the reduction and fixation of the medial fracture. Three 2.7 mm locking screws were placed in the medial fragment and stabilized the sternoclavicular joint by means of a transosseous non-resorbable suture of #2 FiberWire (Arthrex®, United States) running through two holes of the extension of the right sided plate placed anteriorly and through two tunnels of 2 mm of diameter drilled in the manubrium. Early passive and active mobilization of the left shoulder was begun from the second postoperative day. A sling was used for six weeks as antalgic support and the abduction of the left arm was limited to 90° during this period because of the poor quality of the clavicle bone and the relative stability of the fixation of the medial fracture. After six weeks the patient was practically pain free and presented a limitation of the range of shoulder motion. After three months the patient was able to completely move her left shoulder. After six months bony consolidation of the clavicle was achieved . After the last control (at 12th months) the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and hand (DASH) score was 5.0 and there was no significant hardware irritation.