A 23-year-old male presented with 2–4 weeks of worsening left greater than right-sided lower back pain, radiating bilaterally into both lower extremities, accompanied by 4 days of urinary overflow incontinence. On neurological examination, the patient exhibited decreased distal strength in both lower extremities (grade 3/5 dorsiflexion, grade 2/5 planterflexion, grade 1/5 inversion and eversion), with decreased sensation in the L5 and S1 distribution and absent Achilles response. A full spine MRI revealed mixed signal abnormalities in the thoracolumbosacral spinal canal representing a T12-S1 syrinx with septations, a tethered cord, and thickened filum terminale . With contrast, there was only mild enhancement seen at the L3-4 level. At the S2-3 levels, there was a Tarlov cyst that contributed to scalloping of the vertebral bodies; it was isointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2 MRI, did not enhance, and measured 50 × 40 × 19 mm.
During surgery, a L3-4 laminectomy revealed thinned-out dura, and a midline myelotomy decompressed the syringomyelia and revealed a gliotic encysted space occupying lesion that was biopsied . In addition, through a S1-2 laminectomy, the filum terminale was divided, allowing for dithering of the cord and its proximal migration . Furthermore, the Tarlov cyst was fenestrated (e.g., cyst fluid was removed along with part of the cyst wall, whereas surgical clips obliterated the communication between the subarachnoid space and the cyst) .
By the 3rd postoperative day, the patient's distal strength improved to the 4−/5 level on the left side and 4+/5 level on the right side; pain was relieved and sphincter control improved. Two weeks later, the patient was ambulated with minimal support, and sphincter function and his neurological exam normalized.
Pathologically, the gliotic space occupying lesion at the L3-4 level was an ependymal cyst. It was lined by cuboidal cells with rounded uniform nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Glial tissue was identified just underneath these cells and immunohistochemical stain was positive for S-100 protein and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), however, it was negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and epithelial membrane antigen.