Here we report the case of a 45-year-old white woman, a non-tobacco smoker, affected by PM with systemic autoimmune manifestations.
In 2011 she was hospitalized. On examination during admission, she was afebrile, dyspneic, especially mildly orthopneic, and tachycardic while her other vital signs were normal. Her body mass index (BMI) was in the normal range. No preferential decubitus was noticed and no peculiar friction rub was heard using the stethoscope.
Her blood tests and blood cell count were unremarkable except for an above normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and mild anemia of chronic disease . She later underwent a blood sample for antibodies to coxsackievirus, echovirus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr virus, which were all negative, thus ruling out a possible viral infection.
Several instrumental investigations were performed. An electrocardiogram showed ST elevation in all leads, suggestive for acute pericarditis. Echocardiography underlined the presence of 1 cm-wide pericardial fluids between the pericardial layers, while no suspected masses were observed. Her atrial and ventricular function as well as myocardial appearance and valves were reported as normal. An X-ray of her thorax showed a moderate enlargement of the cardiac shadow. Pericarditis was treated with ibuprofen and beta-blockers with benefit.
After the first hospitalization, in the following 2 years, she developed non-erosive polyarthritis, photosensitive rash, sicca syndrome, and several episodes of pericarditis with pericardial effusion. A complete laboratory assessment was performed and disclosed antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA 1:320), weak and transient anti-cardiolipin antibody on two separate occasions (<12 weeks), while complement proteins C3/C4, extractable nuclear antigens (ENA), double-stranded (ds) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and anti-Smith antibodies, were absent or within physiological ranges. Mild anemia and an above normal ESR with normal C-reactive protein (CRP) were also detected, while counts of leukocytes with differential, biochemistry panel, and anti-phospholipid antibodies (anti-cardiolipin, anti-beta2 glycoprotein I, lupus anticoagulant) were within normal range . The presence of pericardial disease, polyarthritis, photosensitive skin rash, and positive ANA test fulfilled the classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) .
She was treated with prednisone 25 mg/day administered orally, hydroxychloroquine 400 mg/day, and colchicine 1 mg/day without complete resolution of the pericardial disease. In the following year, she was frequently hospitalized for serositis with pericardial effusions, always accompanied by dyspnea and disease flare with articular symptoms. The first pericardial episode was successfully treated by increasing her steroids dosage.
An ultrasound (US)-guided pericardiocentesis was performed for diagnostic purposes; cytological and cultural analysis of pericardial effusion samples resulted negative. Instead, two more episodes were treated as exacerbations of pericardial disease by increasing corticosteroid dosage with only partial recovery. Neither symptoms nor signs attributable to constrictive pericarditis were found. Of note, her ESR levels were consistently above normal, while her serum CRP concentration was constantly within the physiological range .
During her hospitalization in 2014, 3 years after the first one, her vital signs were still normal, but a moderate weight loss was noticed .
Eventually, a thorax computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed extensive, irregular thickness of pericardial visceral and parietal layers, completely surrounding her heart, aortic root, pulmonary arteries, and veins .
She underwent pericardiectomy with histological analysis, revealing neoplastic cell growth with immunophenotypic profiles positive for calretinin, cytokeratin chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) 5.2/cytokeratin 7/KL1, and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), confirming epithelioid PM. According to the American Cancer Society guidelines, PM may benefit from surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy . Unfortunately, the PM was too advanced to be eligible for surgical removal, and the heart and aortic involvement ruled out any radiotherapy indication. She was treated with cisplatin and pemetrexed without any clinical benefit and died 8 months later. Since cases of mesothelioma are subjected to special legislature in Italy and given the peculiarity of our case, a histological revision was performed by pathologists of another institute, who confirmed the diagnosis.