The patient, a 38-year-old woman, was granted written authorization to disseminate the data included in this report. The patient exhibited 2-month duration of gradually worsening pain in her right knee. The patient experienced increased pain when she engaged in activities such as climbing stairs and exercising, which limited her ability to walk long distances. The patient’s medical history did not reveal any notable findings. There was no history of injury to the knee before the patient’s symptoms. The patient also complained of a growing mass over the medial aspect of the right knee, which has been noticeable for the past 2 months. The mass formed spontaneously without any prior injury.
Upon examination, an initial inspection of the right knee revealed no deformity in both knees. On palpation, there was a palpable mass on the anteromedial tibial condyle of the right knee, where moderate intra-articular swelling was also present. The mass was roughly 2 by 2 cm in dimension and had a dense and firm consistency. The border was distinct, uniform, and smooth. While palpating the mass, it was immobile and mildly tender. The patient could fully extend her knee, but discomfort prevented her from flexing it deeply. There was no ligamentous instability found. On the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, an extra-articular multiloculated hypo-intense cystic lesion (1.8 × 1.2 × 1.4 cm) was identified on the medial aspect of the right anteromedial condyle tibia. In addition, multiple intra-articular lesions were also observed on the tibiofemoral joint space, along with the effusion on the suprapatellar bursa ( and ).
The patient was planned for elective surgery and underwent a two-stage surgical procedure. The initial phase involved performing a right knee arthroscopy, which was able to note multiple loose bodies in the medial gutter and articular surface of the patella . The meniscus appears intact with no tears, and no communication between the intra- and extra-articular regions was found. Thus, a synovectomy involving the debridement of these bodies was carried out. The second stage involved a medial open incision on the anteromedial of the knee, which identified a cartilage-like mass measuring approximately 3.5 × 3 cm . The cartilage-like mass was removed, and the wound was subsequently closed. Both the intra-articular loose bodies and the extra-articular mass were sent for histopathological examination.
The results of the post-operative histopathologic analysis were identical in both samples, confirming our diagnosis of SC. The section showed synovial connective tissue containing multiple hyaline cartilaginous nodules with clustered chondrocyte cells. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported a total absence of discomfort and the absence of any further swelling in the right knee.