We present the case of an 87-year-old woman with a history of recurrent intrathoracic SFT, progressive hypoglycemia and known DPS, who was admitted to the University Hospital of Freiburg, Germany in November 2022. DPS was first diagnosed in 2016 and after R0 resection of the SFT, the tumor recurred in 2021 .
Initially the patient was admitted to a tertiary hospital in 2016 with recurrent confusion, palpitations, reduced appetite, halitosis, and hypoglycemia. She denied dyspnea, fever, night sweats, and unintentional weight loss. Her medical history, family medical history and physical examination were unremarkable, except for 30 years of passive nicotine exposure and decreased breath sounds in the left lower thorax.
A CT-scan showed a mass primarily located in the left thorax. Laboratory chemistry revealed low serum levels of insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide. Histology following percutaneous biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of DPS. Tumor extirpation with lower lobe and partial diaphragm resection were performed successfully. Pathological examination confirmed the resection status as R0, with a tumor mass of 11.5 cm × 18 cm × 22 cm, weighing 1300 g. Regular follow-up thoracic CT-scans showed a slight pleural effusion, but no further signs of malignancy up to 5 years after the surgery. The patient experienced no further hypoglycemic episodes at this stage.
In 2021, almost 5 years after the initial diagnosis, the patient reported dyspnea (NYHA II), recurring episodes of dizziness, lethargy, and hypoglycemic syncopes. Once again clinical examination showed slightly decreased breath sounds on the left thoracic side. CT-scans revealed a corresponding tumor mass infiltrating the mediastinum, pericardium, and diaphragm. Due to the tumor morphology, an R0 resection was deemed unfeasible by the treating physicians. Debulking surgery at the same external tertiary hospital revealed multiple gelatinous, liquified tumor lesions instead of a solid tumor at this time.
The successful debulking surgery improved the patient's clinical symptoms, who no longer experienced hypoglycemic episodes. Histological examinations of the resected tumor showed fusiform cells with oval, vesicular, and relatively monomorphic nuclei. The tumor was covered with mesothelium (AE1/3(+)) and was CD34(+), BCL2(+), Vimentin(+), AE1/3(−), CD56(−) with a Ki67 index of 10%. There was no overexpression of p53, one mitosis per high-power field (HPF) and necrosis in more than 10% of the tumor.
In November 2022, only 1 year after the second surgery, another follow-up thoracic CT- scan detected rapid tumor progression, with a substantial increase in tumor size. Without clinical symptoms for the first 9 months after her debulking surgery, the patient then gradually experienced recurring hypoglycemic episodes, with increasing intensity and frequency. She reported up to five hypoglycemic episodes per day, with blood glucose levels dropping down to as low as 30 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L). Uninterrupted sleeping was no longer possible at this stage. The patient had to wake up at night to consume foods with a high glycemic index in order to artificially maintain blood glucose levels above 50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L).
Radiological imaging showed significant tumor progression compared to the preceding 6 months. A total of 82 intrathoracic lesions were identified. Additionally, atelectasis of the left lower lobe was assessed. [68Ga]DOTATATE/PET-CT revealed variable and focally increased SSTR-expression of the SFT and further lesions in the pericardial fat tissue .
From the first day after her admission, the patient required continuous intravenous glucose infusions (intravenous glucose 20% with infusion rates of up to 40 mL/h) overnight, in order to prevent fatal hypoglycemic episodes. Since the tumor showed SSTR-expressing lesions in the [68Ga]DOTATATE/PET-CT, an adjuvant treatment with a somatostatin-analogue, Octreotide, was started. While uptitration of Octreotide to a dose of 800 μg/day subcutaneously (4 × 200 μg) improved hypoglycemic episodes, continuous glucose infusions were still necessary to maintain tolerable blood glucose levels above 50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L) .
After weighing the potential age-related risks and benefits, with informed consent of the patient, another debulking surgery was performed, removing great portions of the gelatinous, liquified tumor by suction and manual extirpation. Histological examination of the resected tissue again confirmed the diagnosis of the SFT, with fusiform neoplasia, elevated mitosis rates (5 per HPF) and without necrosis. Immunohistology showed that tumor cells were CD34(+), STAT6(+), EMA(−), CK1/3(−), and SMA(−), with a MIB-1 determined proliferation rate of 15%. According to Demicco et al., the tumor was classified as low risk. Glucose infusions could be terminated immediately after the surgery. Due to the inability to achieve R0 resection and considering the rapid tumor progression after her initial debulking surgery, the patient continued the Octreotide-treatment aiming at a suppression of tumor proliferation and a reduction of hypoglycemic episodes in the future with now reduced tumor mass. Ten days after surgery, Octreotide was replaced with Lanreotide (120 mg/month subcutaneously) to allow a longer interval between injections. The patient was discharged after 32 days in our hospital. Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) using a “Freestyle Libre 3” device was used to track the patient's blood glucose levels after her discharge. No hypoglycemic episodes have been reported since the redebulking surgery .