A 31-year-old male with a history of untreated depression and alcohol abuse was brought by ambulance to the emergency department (ED) for somnolence after an intentional overdose of liquid clonazolam, which he had received from a friend. The patient had sent a suicidal text to his ex-girlfriend shortly before he ingested approximately half of a three-milliliter bottle of liquid clonazolam . When she arrived at his house, within approximately 30 minutes of his text, he appeared confused and intoxicated, and she called emergency medical services (EMS). Upon EMS arrival, the patient was somnolent. His fingerstick blood sugar was 108 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range 70–100 mg/dL). When the patient arrived at the community ED, his blood pressure was 115/79 millimeters of mercury, heart rate 89 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. He was somnolent and minimally following commands but was protecting his airway. Pupils were 4 millimeters, equal, round, and reactive to light. He was not diaphoretic. Lungs were clear, and heart was regular rate and rhythm. The abdomen was soft and nontender, and bowel sounds were present. He had normal patellar reflexes without clonus. There were a few old, superficial abrasions to the left forearm. Glascow Coma Score was 12 (minus three for verbal response).
Lab work was significant for a low normal bicarbonate of 22 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (reference range 22–29 mEq/L). The anion gap was normal. Potassium was slightly low at 3.2 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (3.6–5.2 mmol/L). Salicylate and acetaminophen levels were undetectable. Ethanol was 204 mg/dL. Urine drug screen (UDS) was positive for cocaine. It should be noted that benzodiazepines are not evaluated on the hospital’s UDS. An electrocardiogram (EKG) was non-ischemic with normal intervals.
Approximately one hour after arrival in the ED (90 minutes after ingestion), the patient became more somnolent with respiratory depression and oxygen saturations in the mid-80s. Flumazenil 0.2 mg intravenous (IV) was administered with immediate improvement in respiratory effort and oxygenation. One hour later, an additional 0.2 mg dose of IV flumazenil was again administered for respiratory depression and hypoxia. Because there were no intensive care unit beds available, the patient continued to board and be managed in the ED. Within six hours, his mental status normalized, and he was medically cleared for psychiatric evaluation. The next day, the patient recounted taking the clonazolam as a suicide attempt. He recalled drinking alcohol and perhaps using cocaine.