A 52-year-old perimenopausal woman who suffered from progressive dysmenorrhea for 36 years was diagnosed with adenomyosis at a local hospital and underwent laparoscopic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingectomy (the patient insisted on the preservation of her ovaries) 2 years ago. She was not followed up regularly after the operation.
Three months ago, the patient attended the gastrointestinal outpatient department of our hospital with progressive aggravation of low back pain for more than one month. The serum CA125 was abnormally elevated (5280.20 U/ml, normal: 0–35 U/ml), HE4 was 86.0 pmol/L, carbohydrate antigen 199 and carcinoembryonic antigen levels were normal. Serum female hormones (anti Mullerian hormone, AMH: < 0.02 ng/ml; estradiol, E2: < 15 pg/ml; progestin, P:0.72 ng/ml; follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH: 27.31 mIU/ml; luteinizing hormone, LH: 8.03 mIU/ml) results suggested her postmenopausal status. Her gastroenteroscopy results showed no abnormality. Simultaneously, abdominal and pelvic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested that the left ovary was cystic and solid , and fluid or blood accumulation was considered. An irregular retroperitoneal mass at the lower margin of the first to the third lumbar spine measured approximately 75 × 42 × 37 mm3, which was considered to be a retroperitoneal malignant lymph node . After a multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion by gastroenterologists, oncologists, radiologists, and gynecological oncologists, the patient was admitted to the gynecological department. Additionally, positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) showed that the lesion was located on the left side of the retroperitoneal abdominal aorta, measuring about 70 × 40 × 36 mm3 in size with increased metabolic activity and unclear borders, with a high probability of being a malignant lymph node .
Laparoscopic surgery was performed 1 week after admission, and no other abnormalities were found during exploration of the abdominal cavity. The shape and size of both ovaries were normal, while the left ovary was cystic-solid . After opening the retroperitoneal space, an enlarged lymph node-like tissue with moderate solidity and measuring about 8 × 4 × 3 cm3 was found near the abdominal aorta . When the surrounding adhesions were separated, lymph node-like tissue was poorly demarcated from the abdominal aorta and renal artery , with dark red blood clots and interstitial tissue discharging from it. Some lymph node-like tissue samples were sent for intraoperative frozen sections, which demonstrated a benign lesion, with endometrium-like features . Because the first intraoperative frozen sections suggested the possibility of a benign lesion that was closely related to the abdominal aorta and renal artery, and considering the great surgical risk of complete resection, the lymph node-like tissue was only excised as much as possible . The second set of intraoperative frozen sections were sent, which also suggested a high possibility of endometrial lesions. The final histopathological examination demonstrated the presence of endometriosis in a para-aortic lymph node and left ovary. Immunohistochemistry was positive for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), CD10, paired box 8 (PAX 8), and Ki 67 at 10% positive .
The patient's serum female hormone levels (AMH: < 0.02 ng/ml, E2: < 15 pg/ml, P: 0.20 ng/ml, FSH: 62.08 mIU/ml, LH: 42.07 mIU/ml) were still at postmenopausal levels after surgery, but because of the high preoperative CA125 and suspicion of malignant lesion on imaging, MDT had another discussion, and the diagnosis of endometriosis in a para-aortic lymph node metastasis was made. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone antigen (GnRH-a) treatment every 28 days was recommended.
Presently, the serum CA125 has decreased to normal levels, and no para-aortic lesions were detected on abdominal enhancement CT. She is being followed up regularly.