A 40-year-old Indian man from West Bengal presented to our facility with progressive left hip pain of insidious onset for a duration of five years. The pain had worsened in the six months prior to presentation, and was continuous, dull and aching in nature and relieved with analgesics. His clinical examination was unremarkable except for mild tenderness over the left hip anterior joint line. All hip movements were normal and pain free.
Plain radiographs of the pelvis revealed a 15 × 11 mm, well defined lytic lesion with a thin sclerotic rim located in the subarticular portion of the left femoral head. Figure shows a plain radiograph in anteroposterior view showing a well defined lytic lesion with a thin sclerotic rim located in the subarticular portion of the left femoral head (white arrow). On MRI, the lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense with a hypointense rim on T2-weighted imaging. Figure shows a T1-weighted axial MRI showing a corresponding hypointense lesion (white arrow). Figure shows a T2-weighted coronal image showing hyperintense focus with a hypointense rim (black arrows). Figure shows T2 fat-suppressed images in coronal sections showing hyperintense focus with a hypointense rim (black arrows). CT sections confirmed the above findings and revealed a distinct nidus measuring 11 × 10 mm. Figure shows an axial CT section, confirming a clearly defined lucent nidus with surrounding sclerotic rim (white arrow). A radionuclide bone scan revealed a focal hot spot at this site (black arrow).
Despite the uncharacteristic location, based on the imaging features a diagnosis of osteoid osteoma was made. After informed consent was obtained it was decided to perform a radiofrequency ablation. Under general anesthesia the nidus was localized with 3 mm CT sections and osseous access was established with a 4.5 mm drill. Figure shows an axial CT section with radiofrequency ablation (RFA) needle placed within the drilled tract. After localization, the RFA needle (Starburst SDE, RITA Medical Solutions, Mountain View, CA, USA) was introduced through the drilled canal and tip placed in the nidus. Monopolar RFA was performed at a 90°C for a period of 5 minutes at 60 W. Figure shows residual air pockets post radiofrequency ablation. The procedure was deemed successful as our patient was pain free within 24 hours of the procedure and remained so at follow-up. Figure shows a plain radiograph in anteroposterior view (white arrow) at review 4 months post procedure. Figure shows plain radiograph frog leg lateral views (black arrow) showing resolution of the lesion.