A 60-year-old woman was referred to the authors’ hospital with a 30-year history of intermittent abdominal pain, sometimes with nausea and vomiting, and occasionally with fainting. The symptoms usually subsided after a few minutes. The patient had no relevant surgical history. On physical examination, she was afebrile, and the abdomen, including McBurney’s point, was non-tender. Laboratory investigations revealed a white blood cell count of 4.41 × 109/L and a hemoglobin level of 10.6 g/dL (106 g/L); her stool was negative for occult blood. Abdominal CT revealed a long, annular mass in the proximal ileocecal portion of the ascending colon. The mass was hollow in the center, and there were no enlarged peripheral lymph nodes . The uterine adnexa were normal. Colonoscopy revealed a long protruding lesion in the ileocecum with a velvety to granular surface, exhibiting the “coiled spring” sign . Local biopsy indicated tubulovillous adenoma.
On laparoscopy, the appendix was not visible at the end of the cecum; rather, the appendix and its mesentery were completely inverted into the cecum and could not be flipped out . No regional enlarged lymph nodes were found. Laparoscopic partial cecectomy was planned.
During the operation, after fully dissecting the mesenteries of the distal ileum and ascending colon, the cecum was lifted out and incised under direct vision. A mucosa-extroverted appendix was found completely inverted into the cecal cavity . The appendix and partial cecum were resected without lymph node dissection; The intraoperative frozen-section biopsy indicated that the surgical margin was tumor-free. The residual wall of the cecum was closed using a linear closure and reinforced with a figure-of-eight suture. The patient’s postoperative recovery was quick and uneventful, and she was discharged after 5 days. At the 10-month follow-up, there were no signs of complication or recurrence.
On gross pathology, the appendix measured approximately 11 cm in length and 1.5 cm in external diameter. The extroverted mucosa was diffusely thickened and granular in appearance . Histopathology confirmed tubulovillous adenoma of the appendix with local high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia .