A 37-year-old female patient was admitted to psychiatric department with complaints of numbness and prickling sensations in the lower extremities for the past 2 months and being persecuted and controlled for one week. Prior to disease onset, she was a curtain retailer and could take care of herself. The numbness progressed gradually, from level of ankles to the waist over time. She experienced a depressed mood and loss of interest after the occurrence of these discomforts. She was taken care of by her husband thereafter. One month before she developed symptoms of low appetite, worry, anxiety and gait described as ‘stepping on cotton’. One week before she couldn’t walk, couldn’t help fearing and trembling and found her husband suspicious of controlling her. At our psychiatric evaluation, the patient reported that at first she only had numbness and prickling sensations on the lower extremities. Gradually she began to feel depressed, worried, and unable to raise interest in doing things, and increasingly worried. With persistence of symptoms, she developed fears and suspiciousness. Meanwhile, she presented with psychotic symptoms. She believed that her husband was hostile to her by clicking on the phone to manipulate her legs, making her feel pain and out of control. Additionally, after admission, she distrusted doctors and nurses. She believed that the doctors use their pens as manipulation buttons, the pressing of which could control her body and make her feel numb and uncomfortable. She was extremely suspicious and unable to calm down at night. The psychiatric examination showed decreased psychomotor activity, excessive worrying, despair and anxiety, difficulty in falling asleep, delusions of being controlled and mood-congruent persecutory delusions. Her insight was reduced. But the patient did not have deficits in memory, concentration, or orientation.
Before admission, she visited gastroenterology outpatient and received only Mosapride 5 mg orally three times per day for her low appetite and fatigue, which brought no improvement. Several days later, she went to the neurology outpatient for limb numbness. Examinations were arranged 10 days before admission. Blood routine showed red blood cell (RBC) of 1.31 × 1012/L and hemoglobulin (HGB) of 61 g/L while head CT, electroencephalogram (EEG), motor nerve conduction velocity and sensory nerve conduction velocity results were normal. However, she did not come back to doctor after the medical results being reported until her psychiatric symptoms emerged. Then she came to psychiatry outpatient and was immediately hospitalized. After admission, it was found that she kept a vegetarian diet for approximately 8 years. She denied any substance abuse or family history of psychiatric disorders. Neurological examination revealed impaired acupuncture and vibratory sensation and decreased muscle strength in lower extremities. Speculated diagnoses included SCD and delusional disorder, and systematic examinations were suggested.
Laboratory tests showed Vitamin B12 < 36.9 pmol/L [reference range 145.0–569.0 pmol/L]), RBC 1.91 × 1012/L, Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV) 113.6 fl [reference range 82-100 fl]. Complete blood count (CBC) revealed HGB 47 g/L [reference range 115-150 g/L]). MRI of the brain and whole spine showed abnormal signals of the cervical thoracic cord below the level of the spine centrum No. 6 and small circular hyper-intensity in the pituitary . Bone marrow smears and peripheral blood smear implied megaloblastic change. Results of abdominal enhancement CT scanning, electronic gastroscopy, autoimmune antibodies, thyroid function and stool routine results were normal.
The primary diagnosis of this patient was SCD. We excluded the possibility of multiple sclerosis, compressive myelopathy, autoimmune and gastrointestinal diseases. The secondary diagnoses included organic mental disorder, megaloblastic anemia and Vitamin B12 deficiency.
The patient received intramuscular injection of Vitamin B12 500 mg per day. Folic acid was supplemented 10 mg orally 3 times per day. Vitamin B12-rich diet was recommended. We administered blood transfusion (3.5 units of suspended RBC) when found HBG of 47 g/L. Duloxetine 60 mg per day was used to improve depressive symptoms, with a combination of Olanzapine 10 mg per day which was administered for her psychiatric symptoms. Three days after caring in psychiatric quarantine ward, the patient increased inappetence. And her fear and suspicion worsened with persisting physical inability and maladaptation. Her vital signs remained stable. Her HGB increased to 84 g/L. A week later, her abnormal sensations, weakness, and numbness began to resolve, with fear and suspicion improving simultaneously. She achieved complete remission of her neurologic and psychiatric symptoms after 14 days of treatment. Eighteen days after admission, she was discharged with suggestions of supplementation of Vitamin B12, folic acid and other nutrients.