A 75-year-old male with AF and hypertension was referred for LAAC due to subdural haemorrhage (SDH). He had two prior ablation procedures for AF and previous neurosurgery with removal of a meningioma over one of the brain hemispheres. The SDH occurred 4 months after neurosurgery while being treated with direct-acting oral anticoagulation (DOAC). He was considered unsuitable for long-term DOAC treatment. His CHA2DS2VASc and HAS-BLED scores were 3. Echocardiography was normal except for trivial mitral and aortic regurgitation. An electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated sinus rhythm, and physical examination was unremarkable. Metoprolol and amlodipine were given as antihypertensive treatment, and there were no other concomitant medical conditions.
The patient underwent the first-in-human implantation of a WFP device as part of the WATCHMAN FLX Pro CT study (NCT05567172). Pre-procedural planning was done using cardiac computed tomography (CT) showing a chicken wing LAA with a landing zone of 24 × 18 mm and a depth of 17 mm without any signs of LAA thrombus. He was planned for a 27 mm WFP device.
The procedure was performed under local analgesia guided by intracardiac echocardiography (ICE). The procedural workflow has previously been described in detail. In brief, ICE from the right atrium guided an infero-posterior puncture of the interatrial septum. With a supportive guidewire in the left upper pulmonary vein, a double-curve 14F access sheath was advanced over the wire to increase the puncture hole in the septum followed by advancement of the ICE catheter along the guidewire into the left atrium (LA). The access sheath with a pigtail catheter in front was advanced into the LAA at the level of the device landing zone followed by selective LAA angiography . After deairing the WFP device, the catheter with the device inside was advanced inside the access sheath to the landing zone. The 27 mm WFP was deployed to the ball configuration and positioned using the radiopaque markers at the level of the landing zone. The platinum markers were clearly visible on fluoroscopy and ICE . After co-axial alignment of the device and LAA, and positioning at an optimal depth, the device was fully deployed by further back sheathing the delivery sheath ( and ). Device stability was tested by gently tugging the core wire while observing device movements . The radiopaque markers clearly demonstrated that the device returned to its position after tugging, confirming no device displacement or instability. There was a small protrusion of the device into the LA at the infero-posterior shoulder. The degree of shoulder protrusion could be readily quantified by adjusting the C-arm position to get the three radiopaque markers in a straight line while performing a contrast angiogram . Device compression was measured by ICE (23/27 mm; 15%; ). The device was released after confirming the position, anchoring, size, seal (PASS) criteria ( and ).
Per the WATCHMAN FLX Pro CT protocol, the post-procedural antithrombotic treatment was ASA 75 mg/day alone, and follow-up was done by CT, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 14 days, 45 days, and 3 months. At 45 days, cardiac CT, TEE, and MRI concordantly showed the device in an optimal position with complete sealing of the LAA . There was no pericardial effusion or peridevice leak . Computed tomography showed a ∼6 mm hypoattenuated thickening (HAT) at the superior half of the device as a smooth surface in continuity with the left atrial wall . This was also seen on TEE ( and ; ). A specific 3D T1-weighted MR sequence was applied for visualization of fresh thrombus. This bright-blood and black-blood phase sensitive (BOOST) scan will light up with bright white in areas with fresh thrombus, but there was no such signal in the area of HAT, suggesting tissue ingrowth rather than thrombus. The patient is awaiting his 3-month imaging follow-up and has not had any adverse events including thromboembolism.