A 40-year-old man was brought to the emergency department of our hospital with a history of chest pain for the last two hours. His past history was notable only for smoking as a cardiovascular risk factor. His vital signs included arterial blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and a pulse rate of 66 bpm. His electrocardiogram was consistent with ST elevation in leads V1 to V6. His echocardiogram was notable for anterior and apical hypokinesia, with an ejection fraction of 40%. All his biochemical and blood count parameters were within normal limits.
The patient was diagnosed as presenting anterior myocardial infarction and was transferred to the catheter laboratory for primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). He was administered loading doses of 600 mg, 300 mg and 8000 U of clopidogrel, acetylsalicylic acid and unfractionated heparin, respectively. A coronary angiogram showed 99% stenosis in the proximal portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) . The left circumflex artery was free of any stenosis and the right coronary artery had a 30% non-significant lesion in its mid-segment. A 3.0 mm x 24 mm drug-eluting stent was placed at a pressure of 12 atm in the severely stenotic LAD segment, without predilatation .
The patient was then transferred to the coronary care unit for further observation. Thirty minutes later, the patient was defibrillated at 270 J due to an episode of ventricular fibrillation. Because his chest pain intensified, he was taken back to the catheter laboratory for a check on stent patency. Coronary angiography showed a thrombus in the LAD stent .
A decision was made to administer abciximab to prevent further thrombosis inside the stent lumen or elsewhere in the coronary circulation. Abciximab was administered as a bolus at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg, followed by infusion at a dose of 0.125 mcg/kg/min intravenously. However, 20 minutes after the start of the infusion, the patient developed subconjunctival hemorrhage in both eyes . Therefore, infusion of the drug was stopped, but administration of acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel was continued.
An ophthalmology consultation was obtained for the patient, and it was recommended that he should receive conservative treatment consisting of artificial tears. The chest pain did not recur in the coronary intensive care unit after administration of abciximab was stopped. He was transferred to the cardiology ward, and a few days later, a coronary angiogram showed absence of thrombus and the patient was discharged.
He returned to the cardiology outpatient clinic for a follow-up visit, at which it was noted that his conjunctival hemorrhage had been completely eliminated. He was asymptomatic, while continuing to take acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel two months later.