Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this manuscript and any accompanying images.
A 56-year-old female was admitted to the hospital due to the severe pain in the right leg. Symptoms started few hours earlier and consisted in acute pain of the right lower limb associated with paleness, coldness and numbness. In the previous days the patient complained also for weakness of her left leg.
Her medical history was unremarkable, except for a mild COVID-19 infection in the previous month, for which she had started anticoagulant therapy at a prophylactic dosage (enoxaparin 40 mg/day).
She was nonsmoker and she did not report any previous limb claudication nor arterial or venous thromboembolism.
According to our Institutional protocol based on the COVID-19 outbreak, SARS-CoV-2 throat swab was performed and tested positive; however she was asymptomatic at the admission. The patient was then hospitalized in a COVID Unit.
Blood analysis showed a high level of C-reactive protein (8.9 mg/dL; cutoff < .5), hyperleukocytosis (13’850/μL), high fibrinogen (765 mg/dL; normal range 200-400), low hemoglobin rate (10.4 g/dL; normal range 12-16), normal platelet count (211’000/μL) and normal renal function, while there were signs of hepatic cytolisis. The D-dimer level was high (1.18 μg/mL; cutoff < .5) and the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was normal. There was no laboratory sign of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
At clinical examination, both legs was pale and cold. Femoral pulses was present, while popliteal and peripheral pulses were not palpable on both side. Color duplex scan revealed total occlusion of the right superficial femoral artery from the middle third of the thigh and extended up to the popliteal artery; tibial vessels showed no Doppler signal.
In addition, a total occlusion of the contralateral superficial femoral-popliteal axis was found with reperfusion flow at the origin of the tibial vessels.
The electrocardiogram (EKG) was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography showed preserved contractile function of the left ventricle (ejection fraction 59%), without pathological findings on the cardiac valves. No thrombotic formations or vegetations were detected.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed. At the chest focal ground-glass parenchymal thickening associated with fibrotic-disventilative striae was present bilaterally at the lung bases, without any signs of pulmonary embolism. At the level of the abdomen, a floating eccentric thrombosis was found in the aorta, starting about 3 cm below the renal arteries and extending for about 5 cm more caudally, where it occupied almost 50% of the lumen . The presence of a left inferior renal polar artery was noted .
No more embolic lesions affecting the other organs were detected.
Considering the recent history of recurrent peripheral embolism despite anticoagulation therapy, the unstable nature and site of the thrombus, the patient was scheduled for endovascular treatment with Gore Excluder stent-graft (W.L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) to cover the thrombus, besides femoral-popliteal bilateral Fogarty thrombectomy. Planning and sizing were performed on CTA multiplanar, 3-dimensional and centerline reconstructions using 3Mensio image processing software (Pie Medical Imaging, Bilthoven, The Netherlands).
Surgery was therefore undertaken on an emergent basis. Under epidural anesthesia and with bilateral surgical femoral approach, a Gore Excluder iliac extension (9.5 cm long and 16 mm in diameter) was advanced and then released from the right access proximally up to the lower edge of the left renal artery and distally immediately above the aortic bifurcation.
Bilateral embolectomy with Fogarty catheter of the iliac and femoral-popliteal arteries was performed, with removal of fresh thrombus on both sides. At the end of the procedure, flushing from the femoral artery showed excellent antegrade flow and backflow.
At the end of the procedure both legs were warm and well perfused at duplex scan, with peripheral pulses that could be appreciated by hand.
The patient was then placed on anticoagulant therapy with enoxaparin (6000 International Units twice a day).
On the following day, signs of recurrent acute right limb ischemia with a cold and pale foot were present. Color-Doppler ultrasound examination revealed recurrence of total occlusion of the right superficial femoral artery from the middle third of the thigh and extended up to the popliteal artery, without any flow at the level of the tibial vessels.
Angio-CT scan was performed, showing regular patency of the visceral and renal arteries without signs of embolic lesions, as well as regular patency of the stent-graft at the level of the abdominal aorta .
A new thrombectomy via right open popliteal approach was then performed. All thrombi were removed from superficial femoral, popliteal and tibial arteries.
Anticoagulant therapy with low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH: 6000 units twice a day) was continued for the duration of the hospital stay. In addition, a double antiplatelet therapy (Acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day and Ticagrelor 90 mg twice a day) was initiated.
The coagulation system screening (platelet count, bleeding time, prothrombin ratio, activated partial thromboplastin time, thrombin time, liver function test) revealed a slight increased level of Xa factor (0,54, normal range <0.2 U/mL), while other tested procoagulants (coagulation factor I-XIII, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-β2-glycoprotein) and anticoagulants (Protein C, Protein S, anti-thrombin III) were in normal ranges.
The pathohistological examination of the extracted thrombus confirmed the presence of clots with inflammatory cells, excluding the presence of malignant cells.
The remaining postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on 27th postoperative day, due to the persistence of the positivity of the throat swab even without any respiratory symptoms. According to the hematologist, therapy at discharge consisted of dual antiplatelet for 6 months and subcutaneous LMWH therapy, which was replaced 2 days after the discharge with a new oral anticoagulant (Rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice a day). Six months later, Ticagrelor was stopped and the patient was kept on single antiplatelet therapy with Acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day in addition to Rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice a day.
After 12 months, the patients was asymptomatic for limb claudication. Follow-up Angio-CT scan demonstrated patency of the abdominal aortic stent-graft, with complete exclusion of the floating thrombus , and regular patency of both femoral-popliteal arteries, with normal opacification of tibial vessels. No other peripheral embolic events were reported.