A 83-year-old woman with history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. The blood pressure and hyperlipidemia were well-controlled with medication. She was admitted to our hospital with chest pain on effort and exertional shortness of breath. Her vital sign was stable with blood pressure 131/70 mmHg and heart rate 67 beats per minute at initial presentation. A mid-systolic ejection murmur was heard along the left sternal border with chest X-ray showed minor pulmonary congestion. Incidental high resting LV mid-wall pressure gradient (86 mmHg, Figure A) was shown by 2-dimensional echocardiography without LV septal wall thickness (8.5 mm). The LV end-diastolic volume was 90 ml, and LV end-systolic volume was 27 ml. Apparently hypertrophied anterolateral (A) and posteromedial (P) papillary muscles together with a large, third accessory PM were observed . Neither aortic stenosis nor SAM was observed. Complete ECG disclosed obvious U wave (V1-V4) with normal QT interval (416ms, Figure D). Blood level of B-natriuretic peptide was obviously elevated (227 pg/ml).
Repeated 2D transthoracic echocardiogram during hospitalization revealed no more pressure gradient (plummeted to 5 mmHg) after holding diuretics . Meanwhile, she was in euvolemic state with blood pressure 128/76 mmHg and heart rate 62 beats per minute. To further clarify the spatial relationships between these hypertrophied PMs and other LV wall segments, real-time 3D echocardiography (RT-3DE) was performed and showed nearly complete LV mid-wall cavity obliteration by the these morphological abnormal PMs during end-systolic phase . Subsequent MRI study demonstrated normal LV volume (end-diastolic volume: 71.9 ml), unremarkable LV wall abnormalities, normal global LV mass index (79.9 gm/m2) though significantly hypertrophied PMs (total PM mass: 20.2 gm; 13.4 gm/m2 indexed to body surface area; Figure C-D) without visible perfusion defects or delayed hyperenhancement (DHE). High temporal resolution Tissue Doppler Imaging (>250 frames per second) further demonstrated markedly diminished diastolic mitral annulus relaxation velocities (1.8 cm/sec for basoseptal and 4.3 cm/sec for basolateral segments; Figure E-F). When PMs mass were taken into account (up to 16.8% LV mass; Figure A-B), the total LV mass may reach the echocardiographic criteria for LV hypertrophy (defined as LV mass index >95 gm/m2 in women and > 115 g/m2 in men). Beta-blockade was then prescribed and the symptoms improved drastically during the subsequent follow up.