A 14-year-old Caucasian Spanish girl without previous diseases or known renal diseases, had an upper respiratory tract infection in December 2007 with malaise, no cough, tonsilar swelling, sore throat and fever >38°C, which were treated with codeine and acetaminophen. Four weeks later, she developed arthralgias and asthenia followed by purpura on legs, arms and abdomen. There was no abdominal pain or oedema. During physical examination, blood pressure was 100/45 mmHg and she did not have oedemas; she presented palpable purpura. Urine analysis revealed microscopic haematuria, proteinuria (ratio protein/creatinine 3.4 mg/mg) and granular casts with normal renal function (serum creatinine 0.8 mg/dl). Some other laboratory findings were: haemoglobin 12.7 g/dl, white cell count 6300 μ, platelet count 226000 μl, antistreptolisin-O 465 U/ml (normal under 240), serum total proteins 6 g/dL and albumin 3.7 g/dL. Coagulation study was not altered. ANA, anti-DNA, ANCAS, antibodies anti-MBG, crioglobulins, lupus anticogalulant and anticardiolipin antibodies were negatives. IgG 969 mg/dl, IgA 150 mg/dl, IgM 93 mg/dl. C3 87 mg/dl and C4 low (13 mg/dl, normal interval 15-45).
Abdominal ultrasound revealed normal kidneys. We performed biopsies of the purpuric lesions and the kidney. In the former, there was leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Upon renal biopsy, we examined 42 glomeruli with diffuse proliferative endocapillary proliferation with a certain degree of mesangial proliferation and increased mesangial matrix, without humps, leukocyte infiltration or crescents. Moreover, there was no vasculitis. Direct immunofluorescence revealed the deposition of granular IgA and with less intensity C3 and fibrinogen in the mesangium. The lesions were graded according to ISKD and were classified as stages II .
Ultrastructural study with electronic microscopy was not done. Treatment was initiated with oral prednisone 1 mg/Kg/day. Nevertheless, the illness of our patient evolved to overt nephrotic syndrome (hypoalbuminemia, oedemas) and enalapril (5 mg/day) plus aspirin (100 mg/day) were added as treatment. Prednisone was maintained for 16 weeks with progressive dose tapering. Subsequently, we observed the progressive decrease of proteinuria that remitted completely . In the last revision, performed nine months after initial presentation, our patient only had microhaematuria as unique manifestation of renal disease. Serum ASLO indeed decreased by more than 50% compared to initial values. Curiously, our patient maintained low levels of serum C4 without modification of serum C3 levels. See the evolution at Figure .