A 62-year-old male patient, active smoker with a history of hypertension, was found to have an incidental aortic aneurysm on abdominal ultrasound performed in preparation for elective cholecystectomy. Contrast enhanced CT revealed a penetrating descending thoracic aortic ulcer and associated intramural hematoma measuring 79 mm in the setting of a as well as a chronic aortic dissection with permeable FL. The abdominal aorta measured 59 mm in greatest diameter, . The celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery and right renal artery originated from the TL. The left renal artery originated from the TL with evidence of a re-entry tear supplying FL flow at that location. The true lumen in the infrarenal aorta was compressed and a distal re-entry was noted at the left external iliac artery .
A two-stage endovascular repair was decided upon due to the complexity of the case. First, the penetrating ulcer of the thoracic aorta was treated with two Hercules™ self-expandable stent-grafts (Micro Port. Shanghai. China) with immediate good results.
Three months later, the patient underwent the second staged endovascular repair under general anesthesia with placement of a spinal drain. Bilateral femoral arteries and the right subclavian arteries were accessed via surgical cutdown. Two 70 cm multipurpose Flexor® guiding sheaths (8Fr and 7Fr) (Cook Medical. Bloomington, IN. USA) were introduced via the subclavian artery and used to selectively catheterize the superior mesenteric artery and the right renal artery, respectively. A PTFE SICBI G SETA® (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) balloon expandable covered stent (8 × 38 mm) was deployed in the superior mesenteric artery and another PTFE SICBI G SETA® (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) balloon expandable covered stent (7 × 38 mm) in the right renal artery, so as to maintain blood flow to these arteries in a planned chimney procedure. The left renal artery was left unstented for the second part of the current procedure.
The right femoral access was used to deliver a 25 mm x 80 mm RAKB SETA® balloon-expandable stent-graft (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) in the abdominal aorta. This is deployed carefully at low pressure until the resistance of the intima is met. Next, a 25 mm x 50 mm SETA MUG® balloon-expandable stent-graft (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) was placed at the level of the renal arteries, intentionally covering the origin of the left renal artery, in preparation for in-situ fenestration procedure. Once this last aortic stent-graft was fully expanded, we expanded the previously placed stents in the superior mesenteric and right renal arteries using standard parallel grafting techniques.
We then introduced an 8 Fr OSCOR® steerable guide catheter (Oscor Inc. Florida. USA) via the right femoral access, and positioned it within the SETA MUG stent graft, directly in line with the ostium of the left renal artery . Using a Terumo® 0.035” straight hydrophilic standard guide (Terumo Corp. Tokyo. Japan), the SETA MUG membrane was easily punctured and crossed, thus gaining access to the false lumen and left renal artery. This wire was exchanged for a 0.014” support guide, over which a 3.5 mm coronary angioplasty balloon was delivered and deployed , and then exchanged for a similar 5 mm angioplasty balloon in order to serially dilate the fenestration in the membrane. Two 6 mmx22 mm SIGBI G SETA® covered stents, (Latecba. SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) were placed through the stent graft membrane fenestration and deployed in the left renal artery, thus, restoring true lumen flow and closing the re-entry tear at this level .
Finally, two balloon expandable limb extensions RIK SETA® (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina) were deployed in each of the common iliac arteries, using “kissing stent” technique. An additional extension, also balloon-expandable RIK F SETA® (Latecba.SA. Buenos Aires. Argentina), was implanted in the left external iliac artery. This RIK F module had a fenestration at the origin of the hypogastric artery, to allow the permeability of this vessel. The total time was 330 minutes, 420 cc of non-ionic contrast were used and the mean fluoroscopy time was 93 minutes. The patient tolerated the procedure well without any paraplegia or other adverse event. Spinal drain was removed on post-operative day 1. He was discharged on day 4.
A contrast-enhanced CTA image performed at 30 days showed patency of both renal arteries and superior mesenteric artery, absence of endoleaks, and complete occlusion of the false lumen and restoration of true lumen flow in all visceral vessels .