A 78-year-old Thai female presented with a right painful ocular irritation and progressive blurring of the vision for 2 months. At the first visit, best-corrected visual acuity was hand motion for the right eye and 20/70 for the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 40 mmHg for the right eye and 10 mmHg for the left eye. On slit lamp examination, her right eye had marked ciliary injection, mild corneal edema with inferior heavily pigmented KP, cells grade 3+, and flares grade 3+ in the anterior chamber. The pupil was mid-dilated, fixed, and did not react to light. The lens was swollen and totally opaque (mature cataract) . The left eye was unremarkable except for senile immature cataract. She was diagnosed with phacolytic glaucoma of the right eye and underwent extracapsular cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation on the next day without intra-operative complication. In early post-operative period, the intraocular pressure was well controlled without anti-glaucoma medication and the visual acuity slightly improved to 20/200. Topical antibiotic and steroid eye drops were prescribed but the inflammation in the anterior segment of the eye did not subside.
Seven weeks later, her right eye developed 2 yellowish scleral masses at 5 and 11 o’clock . The inflammation continued to persist (cell and flare grade 3+) and fundus could not be examined due to vitreous haze grade 3. Ultrasound of the right eye showed minimal retrolental vitreous opacity and the vitreous echoes showed rapid after movements. The retinal-choroidal thickness was 0.68 mm. Post-operative endophthalmitis was suspected and the patient was sent for vitreous tapping and intravitreous injection with vancomycin and ceftazidime. The culture for aerobic, anaerobic, and fungus revealed all negative results. Topical fortified cefazolin and ceftazidime eye drops were given. When topical steroid was discontinued, this resulted in worsening of the inflammation in the anterior chamber and scleral masses. Because the masses increased in size and showed obvious abscess formation, exploration and debridement of the scleral abscesses were done. Specimen was sent for Gram stain, KOH test, aerobic bacteria, anaerobic bacteria, and fungus cultures, all of which were negative.
One week after scleral exploration, her eye was still severely inflamed with corneal edema, cell grade 4+, flare grade 3+, and frank fibrin in front of the IOL. The anterior chamber became shallower and resulted in captured IOL. New scleral abscess was noted at 11 o’clock adjacent to the explored area. The clinical signs were getting worse and did not respond to broad-spectrum fortified antibiotic eye drops. Scleral exploration with abscess debridement was performed for the second time. The authors then became highly suspicious that she may have atypical pathogens so the specimen was also sent for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and modified AFB stain. The smear showed AFB positive organisms .
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was done on the scleral abscess, aqueous humor, and vitreous, which were positive in the abscess and aqueous. The tests of the vitreous samplings yielded negative results. Later, the pus culture with a combination of liquid (Mycobacteria growth indicator tube) and solid media (Ogawa) grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
The patient was referred to an infectious disease specialist to investigate for systemic tuberculosis. She reported a loss of 10 kg of body weight in the past 3 months. She denied fever, night sweats and chest symptoms. Physical examination including her left eye was otherwise normal. The hematocrit was 35.3 % (reference range 36–45 % in women). The white blood cell count was 6500 cells/mm3 and the cells were predominantly neutrophils (70 %). The other routine laboratory test results were normal. A chest radiograph revealed normal finding. Sputum AFB was also negative. Neither the evidence of extraocular tuberculosis nor history of tuberculosis contact was identified.
The patient was then started on systemic anti-tuberculosis medications with isoniazid 250 mg/d, rifampicin 450 mg/d, ethambutal 1000 mg/d and pyrazinamide 1250 mg/d. Prednisolone acetate eyedrop was prescribed after starting anti-tuberculosis for a week. A 4-drug anti-tuberculosis regimen was continued for the first 2 months, and for the next 4 months, only isoniazid and rifampicin were used. Regular follow-ups were performed. After 1 month of treatment, no new abscess was found and the intraocular inflammation subsided a bit even though her visual acuity was still hand motion. After 2 months of treatment, the inflammation had completely subsided with no development of new abscess and the IOP was controlled but the vision did not perceive any light so the authors speculated that this was due to the ischemia of the anterior segment.