A 59-year-old Caucasian female presented to the Gastroenterology Department for moderate and intermittent upper right quadrant pain of 3-month duration. The pain was not associated with food intake or radiating to other regions. She did not have nausea, vomiting, weight loss, loss of appetite, or a change in bowel habits. The stool and urine colors were also normal.
The patient’s history consisted of osteoporosis, tension headache, chronic recurrent urinary infection, and hypertension. The patient does not smoke or drink alcohol. Her drug history consisted of valsartan and acetaminophen.
On physical examination, vital signs were within the normal range. There was no presence of jaundice, pallor, or edema. Murphy’s sign was negative. (To check for Murphy's sign, the patient is asked to inspire deeply while the examiner palpates the right subcostal region. If pain is elicited and the patient suddenly ceases his/her inspiratory effort, a positive Murphy’s sign has been induced.) Laboratory tests revealed no abnormal results .
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan excluded any obstructive lesion that might have caused the double-duct sign. The abdominal ultrasound showed normal gallbladder.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed dilation of the common bile duct (CBD) (13.4 mm) and pancreatic duct (PD) (6.9 mm) near the head of the pancreas with no stones in the CBD or suspicious mass lesions in the pancreas or the ampulla of Vater.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) confirmed the dilatation of the CBD and PD starting at the level of the ampulla of Vater. The patient’s history and results of applied investigations together with the Milwaukee Classification system established a diagnosis of biliary type II SOD.
During ERCP, a 6-mm endoscopic sphincterotomy was performed with a 7-French plastic stent placement of 5 cm length in the PD followed by a 10-French plastic stent of 9 cm length in the CBD. The pain diminished after sphincterotomy, and the stents were removed after 3 months.
Biopsy of the ampulla of Vater was performed during the ERCP and revealed a mild, chronic, and non-specific inflammation with no atypical cells. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient had a good status with no abnormalities.