A 24-year-old Caucasian woman came to our observation with a history of dysmenorrhea from the menarche. An ultrasound investigation, including an initial two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound assessment of her pelvis with the selection of the region of interest and the acquisition of a three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound, was performed. The investigation revealed a right unicornuate uterus of the dimensions of 71mm × 33mm × 30mm with an endometrial thickness according to her menstrual phase. At the left side, lining her left ovary, a non-communicating rudimentary horn with an endometrial thickness of 7mm was described, which also accorded with her menstrual phase (Class II B by the American Fertility Society 1988).
Both her ovaries were normal for morphology and volume.
Because the presence of a cavity in the rudimentary horn is the most important factor leading to complications such as ectopic pregnancy, the treatment of rudimentary horn laparoscopic removal was indicated [,] .
The patient became pregnant 18 months later; therefore, blood tests and ultrasound examinations were regularly performed as for a pregnancy in a normal uterus.
Obstetric ultrasound examinations at the first, second and third trimester of her pregnancy showed a normal insertion of the placenta, normal amniotic fluid index and breech presentation.
At 20 weeks’ pregnancy, she came to our observation complaining of lower abdominal pain; an obstetric visit and a cervix ultrasound measurement were performed revealing a cervix length of 34mm.
A tocolytic therapy was prescribed and serial ultrasound measurements of her cervical length were performed.
The tocolytic therapy consisted of 5mg of ritodrine twice a day, with the aim of relaxing the smooth muscle fibers stimulating the beta receptors on the cell membrane.
At 33 weeks’ pregnancy, an intrauterine growth under the normal threshold was detected. A serial growth ultrasound examination was performed confirming a low baby weight (10° percentile) until the last weight estimation at 37 weeks and 4 days’ gestation.
At 39 weeks’ pregnancy, the patient came to our observation complaining of contractions and light vaginal bleeding so an obstetric visit, cardiotocography and ultrasound measurement of her cervix were immediately performed. Both her cervix and vagina were healthy on a pelvic examination; cardiotocography revealed only sporadic uterine contractions and her cervix length was 28mm.
She was invited to return to our obstetric unit so as to perform the cesarean cut at 39 weeks and 4 days’ gestational.
She underwent a cesarean section and she had a healthy baby boy, with an Apgar score of 9 to 10, weight of 3160g and height of 49cm.
The mother had no postsurgery complications.