We present the case of a 58-year-old woman with a 3-year history of nocturnal left temporal pain that awakened her during the wee hours. Headaches were dull and not accompanied by migraine-related symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, blurred vision, flashing light, amaurosis, diplopia, tinnitus, and numbness or weakness of the body limbs. There were no cranial autonomic symptoms, such as conjunctival congestion, tearing, nasal congestion, runny nose, sweating, or ptosis, which are helpful in distinguishing between the types or subtypes of trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias, especially cluster headache. The headache lasted for approximately 2 h, even after the patient was awake, and the frequency of attacks was >15 days per month. The patient did not snore and denied a family history of headaches. The patient had a medical history of asthma and gastric ulcer.
On admission, her blood pressure was normal. No signs of nervous system impairment were observed. Serological analysis results, including hematology, electrolytes, fasting blood sugar, glycosylated hemoglobin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hepatic function, and renal function, were within normal limits. Brain MRI did not reveal any midline structural abnormalities associated with circadian rhythms . To explore the possible causes of secondary headaches, such as sleep apnea, nocturnal hypertension , and awakening from sleep, we performed polysomnography and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring . The patient was awakened by a headache at approximately 5:40 am after the last REM phase. No sleep apnea-hypopnea events were observed. The oxygen saturation and blood pressure were normal. The patient was diagnosed with HH according to the ICHD-3 guidelines and was prescribed agomelatine 25 mg at bedtime as a prophylactic treatment. In the following month, the frequency and severity of headaches decreased by 80%. After 3 months, the patient’s headache completely resolved, and the medication was discontinued.