A 65-year-old Japanese man was admitted for growing cystic tumors in his liver. Liver cysts were originally found 13 years prior.
Two cystic lesions, located in the right hepatic lobe with diameters of 6 (anterior tumor: Tumor-Ant) and 18 (posterior tumor: Tumor-Post) mm, were detected by primary imaging performed in 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated simple liver cysts; however, tumor-Post partially contained abnormal lesions . Because ultrasonography of tumor-Post demonstrated hyperechoic lesions, leading to the suspicion of solid tumors, ultrasound-guided histological puncture of tumor-Post was performed, and the result showed normal liver tissue with no malignancy . Biannual follow-up examinations were performed, because there is a possibility that the biopsy missed the target and the complex morphology of the cystic tumor had the potential for malignancy.
In 2015, eleven years after the initial clinical visit, MRI demonstrated a 4 mm papillary lesion on the anterior surface of tumor-Ant for the first time. Tumor-Ant and tumor-Post had enlarged to 14 and 30 mm, respectively. From these findings, we diagnosed the tumor as IPNB and recommended surgical resection to the patient. Although the tumor had a potential for malignancy, the patient hoped to wait and see if the papillary tumor grew. Two years later, in 2017, tumor-Ant had enlarged to 33 mm, and new papillary lesions were present, so the patient underwent a detailed examination. The timeline of tumor proliferation is shown in Figure .
The patient had no previous noteworthy medical history.
The patient did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. There was no noteworthy family medical history, such as cancer or liver diseases.
The patient’s height and weight were 162 cm and 59 kg, respectively. The patient exhibited a clear sensorium, with a body temperature of 37.0 °C, blood pressure of 120/52 mmHg, and pulse rate of 58 beats/min. The abdomen was soft and flat, with no spontaneous pain or tenderness.
There were no abnormal laboratory data findings, including tumor marker results.
The papillary lesion had grown to 8 mm with another new 9 mm papillary lesion on the posterior surface of tumor-Ant . No significant papillary hyper-enhancement was detected through dynamic CT or MRI studies.
CEUS using perfluorobutane (Sonazoid™; Daiichi-Sankyo, Japan) demonstrated papillary hyperenhancement and marginal hyperenhancement of tumor-Ant during the arterial phase. Moreover, marginal hyperenhancement of tumor-Post was demonstrated on CEUS, which indicated IPNB extension to tumor-Post . Although cystic-type IPNB usually has a connection between bile ducts, we could not detect a connection by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography or drip infusion cholecystocholangiography CT. Endoscopic retrograde cholan-giopancreatography was not performed because we could not obtain patient agreement for the procedure.