In November 2015, we observed a woman 82-year-old, with an episode of caustic soda ingestion at the age of twenty-three for suicidal purpose. At that time, she presented to the emergency department with chest pain, vomit and hematemesis. The patient was hemodynamically stabilized and underwent a gastric lavage. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed several esophageal burns, ulcerations and liquefactive necrosis. In the following days, the patient experienced dysphagia, odynophagia, heartburn, hematemesis and weight loss. After three months, the symptoms gradually decreased but a cicatricial fibrotic stenosis of the lower third of the esophagus aroused. The patient started self-dilatation with semi-rigid dilators without reaching any relevant symptomatology relief. At one year from the ingestion, she autonomously bought a Maloney dilator of 5 mm of calibre, and started periodically self-dilatations, after an adequate training, consisting of undergoing physician-performed endoscopic dilation and participating in three self-dilation practice sessions supervised by a physician, according to the technique described by Dzeletovic . The periodical self-dilations and semi-liquid nutrition led to a great improvement of her nutritional status . The patient had been in good wellness for about 40 years, when she presented to the Emergency department of Surgical Endoscopy for an esophageal obstruction. A food remnant was endoscopically removed, and for the first time the patient underwent an esophageal dilatation with a Savary bougie. For the following 20 years, the woman has practised occasional Savary bougie endoscopic dilatation (maximum calibre 7 mm) alternated with self-bougienage, achieving a good control of symptoms. Moreover, only over the counter, drugs as dimethicone and sodium alginate have been seldom administered. Only during the last year, the patient has experienced dysphagia, heartburn and nocturnal reflux, so an upper gastrointestinal barium examination has been carried out. A stenosis of the middle and lower third of the oesophagus with a delayed emptying was identified . An endoscopic 7 mm Savary bougie dilatation was performed with a significantly relief of symptoms. Currently, the patient undergoes monthly standard Savary bougie dilatation with an excellent control of the symptoms.