We report the outcomes of pregnancy in a 43-year old woman with a Padua Ileal Neobladder (VIP, vescica ileale padovana) after SPC, performed after the diagnosis of a malignant tumor at the age of 39. A written consent for case report publication was previously obtained from the patient.
The patient’s history began in 2015 with a diagnosis of muscle invasive bladder cancer for which she underwent robot-assisted SPC with totally intracorporeal neobladder reconstruction, performed by an experienced robotic surgeon (M.G), as previously described [–]. Histological examination reported high grade urothelial carcinoma with partial squamous differentiation and concomitant carcinoma in situ (stage pT3b + CIS). A total of 34 lymph nodes were removed and analyzed, resulting with no metastatic involvement (stage pN0). Surgical margins were free from tumor (stage R0). After surgery, the patient was under constant urologic outpatient department surveillance. Left hydronephrosis due to anastomosis fibrotic stenosis was diagnosed 11 months after SPC, and treated with robot-assisted ureteral reimplantation, as previously described . She had continent neobladder requiring clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) once a day before sleeping to avoid nighttime incontinence, with normal renal function.
After 49 months of negative follow-up the patient underwent In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) in the attempt to get pregnant. Since pregnancy was confirmed, the patient had been under close urological and gynecological observation.
At 15th weeks of gestation, flank pain and fever occurred. Blood test showed white blood cell (WBC) count 12.28 × 109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 370,600 μg/L, procalcitonin 32.36 ng/mL, serum creatinine 1.26 mg/dL and eGFR 57 mL/min. Ultrasound (US) showed slight upper and left side dislocation of the ONB, causing chronic urinary retention, and high grade left ureterohydronephrosis. A bladder catheter and an US-guided percutaneous nephrostomy tube was placed, with minimal x-ray exposure. Escherichia coli has been isolated in urine sample and an intravenous antibiotics infusion was started (meropenem 1gr tid) based on antibiogram. After 10 days of therapy, clinical improvement was achieved, and negative lab tests and urine culture were reported. Patient was discharged without bladder catheter, with the indication to intensify CIC. One month later, right ureterohydronephrosis was diagnosed by US routine assessment. In order to avoid further complicated UTI, an elective US-guided percutaneous nephrostomy tube was placed, with no X-Ray exposure.
During the second and the third trimester of pregnancy, the patient had recurrent asymptomatic bacteriuria, successfully treated at home in accordance with antibiogram reports. Renal function, measured by serum creatinine dosage, remained stable until the conclusion of pregnancy.
An MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) was performed in December 2019 in order to assess anatomical relationship between uterus and neobladder .
At 32 weeks of gestation, with the beginning of regular uterine contractions, the decision was to perform an elective cesarean section under continuous epidural anesthesia. The surgery, conducted by two gynecologists and an urologist, lasted 40 min with no perioperative transfusions needed. Neither maternal nor neonatal complications were reported during puerperium observation. Neobladder integrity was checked at the end of the procedure. Patient returned to normal voiding 72 h after delivery and was discharged at postoperative day 5. The nephrostomy tubes were removed 5 weeks later, after bilateral antegrade pyelography showing absence of ureterohydronephrosis, bilaterally. No further complications were reported, and no cancer relapse was diagnosed after 68 months follow-up.