A 69-year-old Caucasian man presented with intermittent upper abdominal pain, nausea and bloating for the previous 12 months. There was no history of fever, jaundice, pale stools or dark urine. His past medical history included a Billroth II gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y reconstruction for peptic ulcer disease 11 years earlier. On examination, he was haemodynamically stable and afebrile. Abdominal examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests, including liver function tests and inflammatory markers were all normal. Transabdominal ultrasound examination revealed gallstones and intra- and extrahepatic biliary dilatation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was unsuccessful. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram (MRCP) and computed tomography (CT) confirmed gallstones within the gallbladder and biliary dilatation to the level of the ampulla, and demonstrated a 4 × 3 cm low density filling defect in the second part of the duodenum .
After he was admitted to a specialist centre, endoscopic ultrasonography and repeat ERCP were attempted but failed due to inability to cannulate the duodenal limb of the Roux-en-Y. Two hours after the procedure he developed severe, generalized abdominal pain and hypotension. This raised the possibility of iatrogenic intestinal perforation. However, it was decided to proceed directly to laparotomy rather than repeat imaging, since it was apparent that surgical exploration would be required in the event of unsuccessful ERCP. During the operation, there was no evidence of intestinal perforation. A 3.5 cm gallstone was found proximal to a stricture in the second part of the duodenum. There was no evidence of a cholecystoduodenal fistula. The duodenal papilla and pancreas were normal. The common bile duct, which was dilated due to extrinsic compression by the intraduodenal gallstone, was explored and found to be normal, and contained no stones. The gallstone in the duodenum was extracted via a duodenotomy, the duodenal stricture was dilated digitally and a cholecystectomy was performed. A t-tube was placed in the common bile duct. He made an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged 10 days later after a normal t-tube cholangiogram. The t-tube was removed six weeks post-operatively.