A 57-year-old Chinese female patient complained of irregular postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. The demographic characteristics of the patient are listed in Table .
The patient had the clinical symptom of irregular vaginal bleeding for 6 mo.
The patient had a medical history of colon cancer and received a radical colon cancer operation 20 years ago.
The patient and many of her family members had a cancer history.
A small amount of white secretions with no odor was found in the vagina. A smooth cervical surface was detected. The vulva was atrophic, the vagina was patent, and mucosal fold atrophy was palpated. Moreover, the uterine was in an anterior position, with a smooth surface and good range of motion. No obvious abnormality was found in the bilateral adnexal areas.
No abnormality was found in the routine blood tests.
Preoperative abdominal Doppler ultrasound showed that the uterus, with a size of 3.8 cm × 3.5 cm × 3.1 cm, was located in an anterior position, the uterine cavity line was clear, the endometrial thickness was 1.1 cm (significantly greater than the normal value of endometrial thickness in postmenopausal women), and the ultrasonic echo of the endometrium was uneven. In addition, bilateral ovaries and adnexa presented no abnormality. Color Doppler flow imaging showed no abnormal blood flow signal.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed that the uterus was in an anteversion and flexion position. A mass with an equal T1 and slightly long T2 signal was found in the uterine cavity, with an unclear boundary . The tumor size was about 31 mm × 23 mm, and the display of the uterine junction was not clear . The enhanced images showed that the lesions exhibited inhomogeneous enhancement. Diffusion-weighted imaging showed that the lesions exhibited a high signal. The shape and signal of the bilateral adnexa were normal . There was no obvious abnormal signal in the bladder and rectum. No abnormality was found in bilateral iliac vessels and inguinal lymph nodes. No effusion was found in the pelvic cavity, and no obvious abnormal signal was found in pelvic wall soft tissue.