A 21-year-old woman was referred with an occasionally painful right loin mass, persistent microscopic haematuria and lower urinary tract symptoms of 3-month duration. She reported increasing breathlessness and felt dizzy whilst carrying out routine activities. Clinical examination revealed only a weak radial pulse and a palpable right renal mass with no ascites or peripheral oedema.
Ultrasound scan (USS) revealed a large 11 cm mass arising from the lower aspect of the right kidney, which extended along the right renal vein and into the inferior vena cava (IVC) and up to the diaphragm. Further radiological studies included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and the abdomen. MRI of the kidney revealed a large 13 cm, right encapsulated, lower-aspect renal mass with tumour thrombus extending into the right renal vein, IVC and into the right atrium and occupying a significant proportion of the right atrial volume. The right atrium appeared largely distended with thrombus with a faint trickle of contrast just getting past its wall . There was a 12 mm paracaval lymph node and increased vascularity in the adjacent perinephric bed. Three nodules of less than 5 mm were identified within the lung parenchyma.
The patient underwent right radical nephrectomy and IVC and atrial tumour (level IV) thrombectomy with cardiopulmonary bypass in deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. The postoperative period was unremarkable apart from a pericardial effusion, which was aspirated.
Gross examination revealed a friable, greyish white, lobulated mass (125 mm × 90 mm), which replaced most of the kidney with only a small amount of uninvolved parenchyma at the lower pole. Haematoxylin and eosin staining showed the tumour to comprise cohesive sheets of small, uniform, primitive, blastema-like malignant cells separated by fibrous bands. Perivascular rosetting was noted, but there was no architectural arrangement. The malignant cells had only a small amount of cytoplasm, and there was brisk mitotic activity . The tumour also infiltrated the IVC.
The differential diagnosis was blastema-predominant Wilms' tumour and a peripheral PNET. Immunohistochemical staining exhibited diffuse expression of the cluster of differentiation (CD) 99 and CD56 antigens, but not the Wilms' tumour suppressor gene (WT1), indicating PNET as the most likely diagnosis.
Prechemotherapy CT scans of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated no evidence of residual or local recurrent disease. There was no lymphadenopathy or evidence of pulmonary abnormality. There was thrombus in the IVC extending as far as the right atrium. A whole body bone scan was negative. The patient then underwent eight cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin and etoposide).
A CT scan after 4 months showed regression of the pulmonary nodules. The patient remained well at a 10-month follow-up.