A 65-year-old male patient was transferred to our hospital due to liver metastasis of gastric adenocarcinoma for more than 4 years and epigastric pain for 1 month. This patient was initially admitted to another hospital with abdominal pain for 1 day in December 2008. Related auxiliary examinations such as gastroscopy, gastroscopic biopsy, and computed tomography (CT) examination of the chest and abdomen were performed. Gastroscopy examination showed a tumor with a size of 30×40 mm protruding to the gastric cavity in the upper part of the gastric body near the posterior wall of the lesser curvature. The pathological diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma was confirmed by the method of endoscopic biopsy. In addition, CT of the abdomen revealed multiple-liver metastases of gastric adenocarcinoma.
The patient was treated with lobaplatin and TS-1 chemotherapy combined with PD-L1 immunotherapy and targeted therapy with apatinib for 8 courses, then TS-1 and apatinib maintenance therapy for 1.5 years, and finally apatinib maintenance therapy. Due to headache and nausea, the dose of apatinib was reduced to 1 tablet per day and this patient took it regularly for half a month, with a one-month break in between, until March 2023. During treatment, the patient’s clinical symptoms had not improved significantly, and imaging studies and gastroscopy showed no significant reduction in the mass. After chemotherapy, the clinician thought that the chemotherapy regimen was effective because the condition of the patient had not progressed further.
However, the patient suffered from epigastric pain again and was transferred to our hospital for further treatment in April 2023. After hospitalization, this patient underwent a re-examination of the gastroscopy and CT scan of the abdomen.
Gastroscopy showed a huge mass with an uneven surface and ulcer formation on the posterior wall of the upper part of the gastric body and another huge submucosal bulge on the posterior wall of the gastric fundus. CT scan of the abdomen revealed multiple hepatic metastatic lesions, which increased compared with previous ones .
Then, the endoscopic biopsy was performed again. Microscopically, gastroscopic biopsy showed sheet-like atypical cells composed of round and oval cells, with eosinophilic cytoplasm, and a few vacuoles can be seen in the cytoplasm .
As in routine diagnostic thinking, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was initially considered due to its clinical history of gastric adenocarcinoma with liver metastases, and corresponding immunochemistry was performed, including pan-cytokeratin (CK-pan), LCA, and Ki67. However, what puzzled us was that the tumor cells were all negative for CK-pan and LCA. To rule out the conditions that either false-negative immunohistochemical results or the loss of CK-pan marker secondary to long-term chemotherapy. The second phalanx of CK-pan and CK8-18 immunostaining was detected again. The immunohistochemical results showed negative staining for CK-pan and CK8-18 as well. Subsequently, we considered mesenchymal tumors with epithelioid morphology. Based on the location of the tumor, GISTs were first considered, and relevant immunohistochemical examinations, including CD117, DOG1, and CD34 were detected. Finally, positive immunohistochemical results for CD117, DOG1, and CD34 supported a diagnosis of epithelioid GIST .
However, this diagnosis was inconsistent with the previous result of gastric adenocarcinoma, and the possibility of two kinds of tumors could not be ruled out. Therefore, we suggested the patient borrow biopsy slices from the first-visit hospital where he was first diagnosed to our hospital for further pathological consultation.
The consultation sections showed sheets of epithelioid cells in the submucosa, with abundant eosinophilic or sometimes ring-like clear cytoplasm. The pathological diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma was made by the first-visit hospital, without performing relevant immunohistochemistry. Epithelioid morphologic features did warrant consideration of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and epithelioid GISTs, thus a series of immunohistochemical examinations were performed. Immunohistochemical results showed the tumor cells were positive for CD117, DOG1, and SDHB, while were negative for CK-pan . Then, whole-genome sequencing of tumors was performed and found a mutation in KIT Exon11 (KIT p.I563_P577del Exon11), resulting in the deletion of isoleucine at position 563 to proline at position 577. Therefore, the results of the consultation sections and whole-genome sequencing approved of the diagnosis of epithelioid GIST. Epithelioid histological features are indeed easily misdiagnosed as poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, especially in the absence of immunohistochemistry. Finally, this patient was given targeted therapy with Imatinib mesylate for 400 mg daily.