A 58-year-old gentleman presented to our facility after being diagnosed with aortic valve stenosis 3 years ago due to a calcified bicuspid valve. He underwent uncomplicated aortic valve replacement using a 21 mm Carbomedics® mechanical valve. He was started on warfarin therapy with a target INR of 2.0–3.0 which was established prior to discharge.
His disease course after surgery was complicated by multiple admissions for acute decompensated heart failure, which were managed with intravenous (IV) diuretics. Also, an episode of acute cholecystitis was managed with laparoscopic cholecystectomy, where the oral anticoagulation was temporarily replaced with intravenous heparin under monitoring of sufficient anticoagulation.
About a year after AV replacement, the patient was admitted to the hospital as a case of suspected infective endocarditis. He complained of fatigue and exertional dyspnea. There was no fever, no chills, and no stigmata of infective endocarditis. Transesophageal echo study resulted in finding multiple vegetations on the mitral valve but the study was suboptimal and prosthetic endocarditis was not ruled out despite low probability (absence of fever, negative blood cultures, persistence of symptoms despite treatment with antibiotics). TEE study showed: EF 50%, severe right ventricle (RV) impairment, pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) 45 mmHg, multiple vegetations on his native mitral valve, Mitral Regurgitation (MR) III, the prosthetic aortic valve showed a mean gradient of 56 mmHg and Aortic Regurgitation (AR) II–III, and prosthetic endocarditis could not be ruled out. He was discharged in a clinically improved situation after receiving 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy (rifampin, gentamicin and vancomycin).
He had recurrent sub-therapeutic INR readings of 1.2–1.8 despite warfarin dosage modification. Follow-up trans-thoracic echocardiogram one month later revealed no vegetations but revealed aortic valve regurgitation with a mean pressure gradient of 46 mmHg.
He was admitted four months later due to acute decompensated heart failure; he complained of severe shortness of breath at rest (New York Heart Association functional classification of IV). He had bilateral crackles on auscultation extending to his mid lung zone. His weight at admission was 83.6 kg and his chest X-ray revealed marked congestion of the lung field and enlarged heart shadow. After initiation of IV diuretics, his symptoms significantly improved. Trans-thoracic echocardiography revealed a stable ejection fraction of 55%, aortic valve regurgitation with mean pressure gradient of 50 mmHg with Grade II aortic valve regurgitation and restricted motion of one valve leaflet, Grade I–II mitral regurgitation, right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 45 mmHg, and no vegetations were identified.
He underwent cinefluoroscopy for PVR which revealed a stuck leaflet .
Surgery as the first therapeutic option was refused because of the high risk of mortality according to the patient's clinical situation, so the patient was continued on anticoagulation and IV diuretics. His condition kept improving until his discharge one month after admission. His weight at discharge was 72.1 kg (weight loss of 11.5 kg). His INR was 3.6 at discharge. He was continued on warfarin therapy with close follow up with a target INR (2.5–3.5).
After 6 months of close follow up, repeated cinefluoroscopy for aortic valve was done which revealed normal motion of both PVR leaflets .
Trans-thoracic echo study done later revealed a stable ejection fraction, Grade II leaking aortic prosthetic valve with a mean pressure gradient of 30 mmHg, Grade I–II mitral regurgitation, RVSP of 40 mmHg, and no vegetation or thrombus was observed.
The patient is currently in a fair condition with New York Heart Association functional class I.