A 47-year-old female patient reported to the department of oral diagnostics with pain in the left lower back region and food lodgedment in the right lower back region of the jaw for 1 year.
The pain was severe throbbing type that aggravated on sleeping and consuming food. It was relieved on taking analgesics. Clinically, on examination there was decayed 38 that was of concern. On right lower jaw missing 46 and silver amalgam restored 47 was seen .
An intraoral periapical radiograph (IOPA) was advised as a part of investigative procedure for 38 and 47. Tooth 38 showed periapical pathology suggesting abscess and tooth 47 showed an interesting finding in the periapical region. Crown showed radiopacity involving occlusal and mesial aspect with a distal radiolucency involving the crown suggestive of dentinal caries. Periapically, a small well-defined radiopacity was seen in relation to mesial root that was attached to the apex of the root measuring approximately 1 cm . Surrounding the radiopacity a uniform radiolucent halo was seen. To enhance the view, digital volume tomography (DVT) was taken . Coronal, axial and sagittal view of the concerned area showed a rounded well-defined radiopaque mass attached to the root of the respective tooth surrounded by a well-defined radiolucent halo. A differential diagnosis of condensing osteitis and benign cementoblastoma was considered. Other lesions considered were PCOD and osteoblastoma.
Further, vitality test of 47, 48, 37 and 38 was carried out. Tooth of concern 47 showed delayed response, indicating that the tooth was vital. Teeth 48 and 37 were vital, whereas 38 was nonresponsive.
Based on the findings of the vitality test, IOPA of 47 and DVT, a diagnosis of benign cementoblastoma was made. It was decided to extract 47 along with the periapical mass followed by a through curettage. The specimen was obtained as gritty fragments [ inset] and was sent for histopathologic examination.
The decalcified sections showed anastomosing curvilinear bony trabeculae (ginger root pattern) in a fibrous stroma with basophilic outlines, noted focally [Figure and ]. Areas of hemorrhage were appreciated close to the mineralized masses . Section from other fragments revealed cellular mesenchymal tissue composed of spindle-shaped fibroblasts, collagen fibers and several engorged capillaries with mixture of short, irregular and thick trabeculae of immature bone/and irregular basophilic cementum-like masses . Irregular thick trabeculae of immature bone with osteocytes and osteoblastic rimming and few osteoclasts on the edge of bony trabecule within a homogenous fibro-cellular background were also evident.
Based on the findings of the histopathology, a final diagnosis of FCOD was made. No postoperative complications were seen and patient was followed up for a period of 6 months with no signs of recurrence.