A 65-year-old woman was admitted to a local hospital due to increased blood sedimentation during a physical examination six years ago.
The patient was admitted to our hospital due to signs of oedema in both lower limbs, tachycardia, and lymphadenectasis one year ago.
She was admitted to a local hospital due to increased blood sedimentation during physical examination six years ago without pain and discomfort. Fever, splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and musculoskeletal complaints were absent, and she was subsequently diagnosed with WM but did not receive treatment due to the absence of symptoms. However, the regular review was performed as recommended by the doctor. She was a non-smoker and denied a history of alcohol intake. Approximately three years later, she presented with weakness and lymphadenectasis, and bone marrow aspiration indicated that the proportion of lymphocytes was significantly higher, a small number suspected of plasmacytic lymphoma cells.
Serum protein electrophoresis demonstrated significantly dark stained bands in the Y region, a negative P53 mutation by fluorescence in situ hybridization, and a normal chromosome karyotype. Bone marrow biopsy indicated an increased proportion of heterogeneous lymphocytes with an abnormal cell population accounting for 14.03% of the nucleated cells in the flow cytology of bone marrow and abnormal B lymphocytes expressing CD19, CD20, CD79b, CD23, CD200, CD1d, sign, sign, lambda, and partially expressing CD5 and CD38. Bone marrow immunophenotyping indicated that abnormal cells accounted for approximately 14.03% of the nucleated cells, and abnormal B lymphocytes expressed CD19, CD20, CD79b, CD23, CD200, CDId sign, sign, and lambda. Despite the absence of the MYD88 L265P mutation, the diagnosis of WM was made based on the above results, and the patient received Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor monotherapy for two years.
The patient denied a family history of malignant tumors.
On physical examination, her vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.3 °C; blood pressure, 118/70 mmHg; heart rate, 82 bpm; respiratory rate, 19 breaths/min. She was pale and had signs of oedema in both lower limbs on examination.
The patient was admitted to our hospital due to signs of oedema in both lower limbs, tachycardia, and lymphadenectasis one year ago. Complete blood counts revealed moderate anaemia (80 g/dL). Biochemical tests demonstrated hypoproteinemia (16.8 g/L), normal lactate dehydrogenase (128.4 U/L), and increased IgM (36.60 g/L) and light chain λ (5.82 g/L). Serum beta-2-microglobulin (4.79 mg/L) was also above normal . Bone marrow smears showed an increased ratio of mature lymphocytes (68.0). Flow cytometry analysis of the bone marrow revealed abnormal cells that were HLA-DR+, CD19+, CD20+, and CD79b+, strongly suggesting a mature B-cell neoplasm. Serum protein electrophoresis demonstrated an “M” component of 21.83 g/L with a severe immunoparesis with band typing as IgM kappa (serum IgM 41.20 g/L) .
Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose) confirmed a maximum standardized uptake value of 2.9 in the bilateral submandibular, bilateral cervical, bilateral axillary, mediastinal, and bilateral inguinal multiple lymph nodes.
An allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay was carried out to detect the MYD88 L265P mutation and the mutation, frequency was 29.2% (sequencing depth 1890 ×). Immunohistochemical staining was carried out on bone marrow (BM) biopsies which showed lymphocytosis (75%), indicative of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma involvement in the BM. Bone marrow fluid specimens were cultured and analyzed for 20 mid-phase cells, five of which showed karyotypes with partial short arm deletion of chromosome 1, suspected partial short arm deletion of chromosome 4, and one missing chromosome 6, with an additional marker chromosome, attached.
A left cervical lymph node biopsy was performed on December 1, 2021. Histological examination of the biopsy specimens using hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated proliferation of predominantly small-sized abnormal lymphoid cells, and these cells were MUM1 (multiple +), CD138 (-), Kappa (individual +), CD20 (multiple +), PAX5 (+), CD3 (few +), CD56 (scattered +), Cyc1in D1 (one), CD79a (multiple +), CD21 (FDC shrinkage), CD5 (few +), and Ki67 (GC+, scattered + around), and Congo red (+/-) on immunohistochemistry . Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA in situ hybridization was negative. The PCR-IG gene rearrangement test (400bp) showed the following: IgHV-FR1 (-), IgHV-FR2 (-), IgHV-FR3 (-), IgK-Vk-Jk (+), and IgK-Kde+INTR-Kde (+). Remarkably, the patient showed oedema, hypoproteinemia, increased plasma creatinine, 3+ urine protein, and 7233.20 mg total protein in a 24-h urine collection. The results of the left cervical lymph node biopsy stained with Congo red were positive/negative for amyloid, and the results of the BM biopsy stained with Congo red were negative; therefore, amyloidosis complicated by renal injury was suspected, which required fat aspiration and a renal biopsy for confirmation, but the patient refused.
To investigate whether WM and INMZL in this patient had the same origin, we planned to perform immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene rearrangement analyses of the BM and lymph node using PCR of laser micro-dissected samples from a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded section. However, as the patient still refused this assessment, we could not to exclude the possibility of a composite lymphoma.