A 50 year old female patient was admitted to the hospital because of a palpable lump in her right breast with a diameter of approximately 5–6 cm. The tumor that was initially classified as a fibroadenoma based on a needle core biopsy was surgically removed by lumpectomy. Because of close margins, reoperation was performed.
Histologic examination of the excised tumor showed the pattern of a biphasic tumor in the absence of the characteristic leaf-like patterns of phyllodes tumors or necrotic areas. It was composed of nodules with partially well-defined but focally permeative borders thus excluding typical features of a fibroadenoma. Spindle-shaped cells were embedded in a hyalonous or myxoid stroma surrounding open tubules . Mitotic activity varied across the lesion with a maximum of 13 mitotic figures per 10 HPF (high power fields) occasionally presenting with atypia. The nuclei of the cells appeared to be of highly variable size and pleomorphism. Very rarely, multinucleated cells were seen as well . By immunohistochemistry the expression of vimentin and S 100 and focally of calponin and p63 was demonstrated. In contrast, no expression of either actin, CK 5/6, CK 8/18, nor CD 10 was noted . Accordingly, the tumor was classified as a periductal stromal tumor.
After reoperation, extended adenosis was found in the marginal zone of the initially resected tumor. After regular follow-up the patient was found to be recurrence free for more than 36 months.
Only paraffin-embedded samples of the tumor were available for analysis. Thus, classical analysis was not performed. Overall, array analysis reveals a pseudotetraploid tumor with a copy number of 4 for most of the chromosomes and a 50% AB frequency of the respective BAF plot . Nevertheless, additional changes of chromosomes 1, 5, and 6 were noted.
As to chromosome 1, almost the entire short arm showed pentasomy while a short part of it adjacent to the centromere as well as the entire long arm (1p13-1qter) was found to be octosomic the latter suggesting an origin of the aberration prior to the duplication of the whole chromosome complement. Accordingly, this aberration is also most frequently found compared to the other aberrations as revealed by the BAF plot thus as well offering evidence for its early occurrence during tumorigenesis.
The entire chromosome 5 was hexasomic most likely indicating a duplication before duplication of the whole chromosomal complement. As to chromosome 6 data revealed more complex chromosomal alterations . A short segment of its p-arm as well as almost the entire q-arm were found to be disomic whereas the largest part of the p-arm as well as a short segment of the q-arm adjacent to the centromere as well as a distinct short segment of 6q14-15 were pentasomic. However, these aberrations of chromosome 6 are the second most prevalent among the tumor population although they are apparently not shared by all cells showing aberrations of chromosome 1.
Chromosomes 2–4 and 7–22, respectively, did not show any deviations except for tetrasomy with a copy number of 4 and a 50% AB frequency as indicated by the BAF plots.
In general, genetic heterogeneity among the tumor cell population indicates karyotype evolution during the growth of the tumor.
Because of the high prevalence of MED12 mutations in phyllodes tumors we have next sequenced the hotspot of these mutations. As a result, no mutations of MED12 as seen in large subsets of fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumors of the breast were detected .