A 54 year-old woman was admitted to the general surgery clinic with a neck mass complaint. Thyroid gland enlargement without palpable nodularity was found on the physical examination. Neck ultrasonography revealed multiple nodules in the right thyroid lobe and there was no cervical lymphadenopathy in the clinical and ultrasonographic examination. The patient was found to be “euthyroid” in terms of thyroid functions. Fine needle aspiration biopsy of the dominant nodule was reported as “suspicious”. Total thyroidectomy was performed under general anaesthesia. In the histopathological evaluation, papillary carcinoma measuring 1 cm in diameter was determined in the right thyroid lobe. Lymphatic invasion, perineural invasion and extra capsular spread were demonstrated.
Following total thyroidectomy the patient was not treated with thyroid hormone replacement. She was put on a low-iodine diet for four weeks. The patient was ablated with 5.5 GBq RAI when serum levels were measured as 59.5 μIU/mL for thyroid stimulating hormone, 3.69 ng/mL for thyroglobulin and 717.4 IU/ml for anti-thyroglobulin antibody. In WBS administered 7 days after ablation, the abnormal focal RAI uptake was observed in the upper postero-lateral part of the right gluteal region. The patient was advised to take a shower and wear new clothes to exclude a possible radiopharmaceutical skin contamination. On the posterior and right lateral static images received the next day, the pathological RAI uptake appeared to persist in the same region . In the ultrasonography, a lesion hypoechoic peripherally and hyperechoic in the middle was determined in the right gluteal adipose tissue with a diameter of 10 mm . The lesion did not show a clear blood supply in the color Doppler ultrasonographic examination . In the pelvic magnetic resonance imaging, a lesion, which was hypointense in T1-weighted images and hyperintense in T2-weighted fat-suppressed images with slightly irregular borders, was observed at the same location . The location of the lesion was marked with ultrasonography and was excised with safe surgical margins under local anaesthesia . In the histopathological examination, the lesion was found to be a foreign body granuloma .