A 75-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of chest discomfort and exertional dyspnoea. She had no remarkable medical history of rheumatic fever or cardiac surgery, except for a history of tuberculosis when she was 10 years old. On auscultation, a Grade 2/6 systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border was observed. On visual inspection, she was found to have systemic oedema and jugular distension. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with incomplete right bundle branch block and right-axis deviation. A chest radiography showed bilateral pulmonary oedema and pleural effusion, which was consistent with decompensated heart failure. Interestingly, however, laboratory findings showed a disproportionally low serum brain natriuretic peptide concentration of 63.4 pg/mL. And the qualitative analysis of Troponin T was negative at initial check-up. On the other hand, echocardiography revealed an unusual finding of the linear high-echoic lesion along the posterior LA wall, suggesting dense calcium deposition . There was moderate tricuspid regurgitation, with a peak pressure gradient of 54 mmHg, and the configuration of the ventricular septum was distorted to a D-shape in systole, which was consistent with significant pulmonary hypertension . However, there were no remarkable aortic and mitral valve dysfunctions, and her left ventricular (LV) contractile function was preserved with an ejection fraction of 78% (, Video S3). Transmitral and mitral annular velocities disclosed the presence of severely elevated LV filling pressure with an early diastolic and atrial wave velocity (E/A) and E/e’ ratios of 1.9 and 35.5, respectively. Of note, her pulmonary venous flow showed a significantly blunted systolic forward flow (S) and retrograde flow during atrial contraction (Ar), conversely, a prominent diastolic wave (D) was observed . Despite the presence of these severe LA functional abnormalities, interestingly, her LA was not dilated at all (LA volume index of 25.5 mL/m2). The patient underwent cardiac catheter examination for further investigation of her strange hemodynamic state. Her pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) waveform was impressive as shown in Figure . Especially, the morphology and the magnitude of v wave, which consisted of a steep ascending limb with giant peak of 43 mmHg (mean pressure of 15 mmHg), was consistent with an extremely stiff LA. Multidetector row computed tomography (MDCT) clearly revealed that the dense calcifications were predominantly distributed along the roof and bottom of the LA wall: therefore, the LA was sandwiched between the dense calcifications . Furthermore, the LA posterior wall was posteriorly compressed by the vertebral body . Integration of these functional and anatomical findings ultimately led to the diagnosis of stiff LA syndrome caused by both coconut LA and vertebral compression.
After the administration of diuretics, with azosemide 30 mg daily and tolvaptan 7.5 mg daily, her systemic oedema and heart failure symptoms gradually ameliorated, without worsening of renal function. Although this therapeutic trial was effective, her heart failure symptom was still presented in New York Heart Association II. We thus proposed surgery after medical management. However, she refused cardiac surgery and was discharged after 25 days and continued to receive close outpatient follow-ups.