The patient was a 7-year-old boy in the southwest of China, who had blue cornea, photophobia, and poor vision from birth. When the subject was 36 days old, he had binocular anti-glaucoma surgery, which was followed by long-term treatment with travoprost and brinzolamide eye drops. However, the intraocular pressure (IOP) was not well controlled. The patient underwent surgeries to repair an atrial septal defect causing congenital heart disease and resection of a sublingual cyst. Recently, the eye symptoms worsened and the patient’s vision declined significantly. Thus, the boy and his family came to the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University. A three-generational pedigree of the patient’s family is shown in Fig. .
Ophthalmic examination of the patient revealed similar pathological changes in both eyes. Uncorrectable poor vision (VOD 0.08, VOS 0.06) and horizontal tremors were observed. No hyperemia or edema was detected in the conjunctiva. The cornea was transparent but the sclera was pale blue. The diameter of the cornea was 14 mm and the center of the anterior chamber was deep. The aqueous humor was clear. The texture of the iris was unclear with partial depigmentation. The lamellar and incomplete disconnections of the root of the iris formed some iridocyridosis and slit-like iris holes (from 4 to 9 o’clock in the right eye, 3 to 9 o’clock in the left eye) . The pupil displacement was worse in the right eye. The lens and vitreous of both eyes were slightly turbid. The optic disk was pale, with a cup to disk ratio of 0.9. The retina was ruddy with a wet-silk-like reflection, and the macula was not clear , D). IOP was 33 mmHg in the right eye and 20 mmHg in the left eye. Binocular B-ultrasound images showed prolongation of the axial axis (27.16 mm in the right eye, 26.56 mm in the left eye) associated with a long period of high IOP . Binocular ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) images showed deepening of the anterior chamber, anterior adhesion, and typical fracture of the iris . The optical coherence tomography (OCT) images of the binocular disk revealed a deepened binocular cup, which was enlarged due to the glaucoma damage . We also reviewed the patient's previous medical records, including chest X-ray images and cardiac color doppler ultrasound images .
According to the clinical manifestations, the patient was diagnosed with ARS (Type 3), bilateral congenital glaucoma, and bilateral congenital cataracts. To treat the glaucoma and relieve optic nerve atrophy, the patient underwent a trabeculectomy and iris circumferential resection in the right eye. After surgery, the IOP was 15 mmHg in the right eye. The IOP in the left eye dropped to 16 mmHg after treatment with anti-glaucoma drugs.
Considering the possibility of congenital disease, three of the boy’s family members (father, mother, and grandmother) underwent complete ophthalmologic and systemic examinations, but no positive findings were observed. Genetic tests were performed on the patient.