Our patient was a 47-year-old Japanese man who had been diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia in January 2013. He received induction chemotherapy, experienced complete remission, and subsequently received postremission chemotherapy in March of that year. He had a totally implantable central venous access port (TICVAP) that was used for intravenous access for chemotherapy. In April, a second course of postremission chemotherapy was begun, which resulted in prolonged pancytopenia. He then received antimycotic prophylaxis with micafungin. On day 14 after initiation of chemotherapy, he developed fever, headache, vomiting without nuchal rigidity, and alteration of his mental status.
His medical history included a diagnosis of anaplastic oligodendroglioma that had been treated using a craniotomy for tumor resection in 2006 and multiple cycles of chemotherapy. No neurosurgical device was left in place after the surgery. After the surgery, the patient had left-sided hemiparesis and occasional seizures that had not been observed during the last few months. His medications were anticonvulsants (zonisamide, phenytoin, and lamotrigine) and famotidine. The patient lived with his parents and his brother in an urban area. He did not work. He consumed alcohol in moderation and did not smoke or use illicit drugs. At the time of presentation, he was alert. His temperature was 38.4 °C, his pulse was 76 beats per minute, his blood pressure was 124/64 mmHg, and his oxygen saturation was 97% while he was breathing ambient air. A cardiopulmonary examination showed no murmurs and revealed clear lung fields to auscultation bilaterally. An abdominal examination revealed a soft, nontender abdomen with no organomegaly. His muscle strength was 4 in his left limbs and 5 in his right limbs. No seizure or nuchal rigidity was observed.
The patient’s laboratory data at presentation were a white blood cell (WBC) count of 0.2 × 109/L, an absolute neutrophil count of < 0.1 × 109/L, platelet count of 34 × 109/L, and an elevated C-reactive protein level (8.3 mg/dl). The results of his renal function test were normal, as were his blood levels of electrolytes and serum aminotransferases of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase. Computed tomography of the brain showed a surgical cavity following resection of the tumor . Two sets of blood cultures were obtained: one from the TICVAP and another from a peripheral vein according to the guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of America . The patient was treated empirically with intravenous meropenem (1 g every 8 hours) and vancomycin (1 g every 12 hours), and the following day, a lumbar puncture was performed after platelet transfusions. The lumbar puncture yielded clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with < 11 cells /μl (differential not determined). The day when the lumber puncture was done was a holiday, and CSF cell counting was performed only by an automated cell counter (XT-4000i; Sysmex, Kobe, Japan), the cutoff value of which was 11 cells/μl in our hospital. The patient’s CSF glucose was normal (3.3 mmol/L), and his protein was slightly elevated (1.7 g/L). Gram staining and India ink staining of the CSF did not show any microorganisms, and no blast cells were found in the patient’s CSF. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a surgical cavity following resection of the tumor in the right frontal lobe .
Gram-positive cocci grew in the two blood cultures obtained on day 14 and in the one CSF culture obtained on day 15, respectively, and the patient’s TICVAP, which was considered to be the source of his bacteremia, was removed. Although the patient’s headache and vomiting partially resolved, his fever persisted and the results of repeat blood cultures were negative. Methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis was isolated from the patient’s blood, CSF, and catheter cultures, and the isolates were susceptible to vancomycin; therefore, intravenous vancomycin treatment was continued. Oral rifampin was added, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor was initiated. On day 22, the patient’s headache and vomiting worsened; therefore, a lumbar puncture was performed again. The patient’s CSF total cell count yielded 130 cells/μl (83% mononuclear cells, 17% polymorphonuclear cells), his glucose level was 2.1 mmol/L, and his protein level was 4.0 g/L. On the same day, a complete blood count revealed an increased absolute neutrophil count of 1.6 × 109/L. Follow-up brain MRI using gadolinium showed no significant change, and no organisms grew in the CSF culture. A third lumbar puncture was performed on day 28 and revealed improved CSF parameters (cell count 21 cells/μl, glucose 2.9 mmol/L, and protein 2.3 g/L), and the result of a CSF culture was negative. The simultaneous absolute neutrophil count was 1.3 × 109/L. The patient’s symptoms continued for 3 weeks following the initiation of therapy, and antibiotic treatment was ended on day 39. No signs of relapse of meningitis were observed, and the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on day 56. Three months later, his leukemia relapsed, and he died shortly after that.
The vancomycin levels in the blood and CSF were measured during treatment. Four vancomycin serum trough levels were within the therapeutic range of 11–18 mg/L, and the peak level in the serum on day 26 was 28.6 mg/L. The CSF concentration of vancomycin 1 hour after intravenous administration was 12.8 mg/L, and the CSF trough level was 9.4 mg/L.