A 3-month-old Mediterranean female, full term after cesarean section “CS”, Apgar score of 8 which was normal and normal birth weight. with cardiac anomalies in the form of atrial septal defect “ASD”—3 × 3.5 ml—and patent foramen ovale “PDA” -closed spontaneously-, presented with failure to thrive, abdominal distention and diarrhea. Physical examination showed hepatomegaly and superficial dilated veins which are suggestive of portal hypertension. Ultrasound revealed massive ascites.
On at admission the child weight was 2.5 kg and length 49 cm both were on the low centile for age.
There was negative family history of medical diseases and negative consanguinity hemoglobin was 8.6 g/dl, albumin was 2.8 g/dl, and prealbumin 13.6 mg/dl. Laboratory values were white blood cell count 10.6 × 103/mm3, platelet count 500 × 103/mm3, normal prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times, serum sodium 120 mmol/l, potassium 6.2 mmol/l, chloride 80 mmol/l, CO2 22 mmol/l, urea 26 mg/dl, creatinine 0.5 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 105 U/l, alanine aminotransferase 65 U/l, alkaline phosphatase 248 U/l, γ-glutamyl transferase 167 U/l, total bilirubin 0.8 mg/dl.
CT abdomen with IV contrast was done and revealed a well-defined lesion at the left lobe of the liver, which was suspected to be hemangioendothelioma, all liver and kidney functions were normal. MSCT angiography and portography “Multi-slice computed tomography” was done and revealed complex intrahepatic arterio-portal vascular malformation in segment 4 between an apparent atypical branch of the hepatic artery proper and the left portal vein, the apparent branch was communicating with a dilated venous cystic structure which was communicating with left main portal vein there was an associated solid component showing up as a parenchymal stain. The patient was referred to the interventional radiology department for embolization using an endovascular micro-catheter through the celiac trunk and pancreaticoduodenal arcade, but both failed which is thought to be due to hyper-dynamic circulation related thrombosis of the proper hepatic artery which was replaced by multiple collaterals.
The usual trans arterial route embolization through this complex vascularity was impossible therefore using a direct ultrasound guided using an 18G spinal needle trans hepatic obliteration of the cystic (the aneurysmal venous sac) component by histo-acryl which is a glue ratio 1:3 (histoacryl: lipiodol) and coiling as well a single coil 15 mm × 30 cm detachable coil while the second component the intraparenchymal multiple channels between the artery and vein at segment 4 was obliterated by gel foam. Follow-up controlled angiography showed that the vascular communication (cystic component) was closed. The remaining solid intraparenchymal component was surgically removed two days later by left medial segmentectomy -segment 4- since not all the channels were obliterated by gel foam .
The patient was discharged to the ICU postoperatively, then the patient was transferred to the department and then discharged with an uneventful post-operative period. After 4 months of follow-up, the portal hypertension symptoms -ascites completely resolved, but there were very small residuals for follow-up every 6 months and the patient is completely asymptomatic. Weight on follow up at 2 years of age is 16 kg which is 75th centile for age.