A 42-year-old male patient was referred with an incidentally discovered right renal mass. He originally presented with acute epigastric pain and was found to have acute pancreatitis on CT. The scan also demonstrated a 2.6 cm heterogeneously enhancing right renal mass concerning for neoplasm. The mass was entirely endophytic, located along the medial aspect of the upper pole . After resolution of pancreatitis, a percutaneous renal biopsy was performed that demonstrated clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), Fuhrman grade 2. Treatment options were reviewed with the patient, including partial nephrectomy, both open and minimally invasive, ablative therapies, including radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation, and radical nephrectomy. Based on a desire for a more definitive oncologic procedure and a more rapid recovery, he elected for an RALPN with the possibility of open conversion. A renal ultrasound was performed to confirm that the tumor was identifiable on sonography, as the tumor would require intraoperative identification with ultrasound based on its endophytic nature; however, the tumor was found to be isoechoic. He then elected to proceed with a novel procedure for intraoperative tumor identification, that is, percutaneous placement of a localizing vascular embolization coil by interventional radiology (IR) preoperatively, which might facilitate RALPN.
The morning of surgery, he underwent coil placement by IR; a 2 × 5 mm platinum embolization coil was percutaneously deployed under CT guidance into the center of the tumor through a 22-gauge ×20-cm Chiba needle . A second coil was placed at the capsule of the tumor to further guide in identification. The patient was then taken for retroperitoneal RALPN. The retroperitoneal space was insufflated and ports were placed in a standard manner. The renal artery and then vein were identified. The kidney was defatted and the capsule was exposed. Consistent with preoperative imaging, there was no exophytic portion of the tumor. The capsular coil could not be seen and was presumed to have been dislodged during dissection of perirenal fat. However, when laparoscopic ultrasound was performed, the intratumoral coil could be visualized by the metallic artifact on the ultrasonic image . Intended lines of resection were marked on the capsule . Bulldog clamps were placed on the renal artery and renal vein, the kidney blanched, and the tumor was resected with grossly negative margins. The collecting system was entered. The defect was over sewn in standard manner, the clamps were removed, and hemostasis was achieved. The procedure was completed and the patient had no complications. Pathology revealed a 2.5 cm ccRCC, Fuhrman grade 2 with negative margins.