A 35-year-old woman with a history of hypothyroidism and heart failure with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was referred to our institution for transplant evaluation. Four years prior, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated an LVEF of 10–15%. She was started on medical therapy with lisinopril and metoprolol succinate, and her LVEF improved to 50% after 1 year of therapy. However, she was unable to tolerate medical therapy due to recurrent hypotension and hyperkalaemia, and serial TTEs revealed a stepwise decline in her LVEF over the next 3 years. Four months prior to her referral, she underwent cardiopulmonary exercise testing with cycle ergometry, as well as left and right heart catheterizations. The results of these tests are included in . Ultimately, her fatigue and dyspnoea progressed, and she was started on a home dobutamine infusion at 5 µg/kg/min. She was subsequently diagnosed with American Heart Association Stage D heart failure with New York Heart Association Class IV symptoms and was referred to our institution for cardiac transplantation evaluation.
At her first heart failure clinic visit, a complete history and physical was performed. Her symptoms and functional status had not improved while on home inotrope therapy, and she was dependent on her mother for care. Her home medications included levothyroxine, torsemide, and ivabradine, all of which were initiated prior to dobutamine. Her family history was only notable for heart failure in her paternal grandfather and grandmother. Her temperature was 36.5°C, blood pressure, 113/79 mmHg; heart rate, 106 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 20 r.p.m.; and pulse oximetry, 99% on room air. On physical examination, she was jaundiced, and her internal jugular vein pulsation was measured at 10 cm H2O. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with evidence of biatrial enlargement . shows laboratory data at the clinic visit. Notably, her lactate was elevated to 5.4 mmol/L.
She was admitted to the hospital’s advanced heart failure service for an expedited transplantation evaluation and for suspected cardiogenic shock. On admission, a right brachial peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) venous sample showed an elevated lactate level of 5.8 mmol/L and a mixed venous oxygen saturation of 53%. Milrinone 0.2 µg/kg/min was initiated, in addition to dobutamine 5 µg/kg/min. A TTE revealed an LVEF of 20–25%, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation (MR), severe left ventricular (LV) dilation, and a right ventricular (RV) systolic pressure of 40–50 mmHg. In addition, a right heart catheterization was performed, and the following measurements were obtained: right atrial pressure, 7 mmHg; pulmonary wedge pressure, 20 mmHg; Fick cardiac index, 2.1 L/min/m2; and systemic vascular resistance, 1919 dynes s cm−5. She subsequently underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast. Imaging revealed severe LV systolic dysfunction, severe MR, and late gadolinium enhancement of the septal, inferior, and inferolateral walls in a midwall and subepicardial pattern ( and ). Follow-up labs were notable for a thiamine level of 7 nmol/L (ref: 8–30 nmol/L), for which thiamine supplementation was initiated. Based on her clinical history, thiamine deficiency was not believed to be the cause of her heart failure, though it may have contributed to a more progressive disease course.
The patient demonstrated undulating lactate levels (range: 0.2–8.6 mmol/L) while hospitalized. Her lactate levels increased after periods of exertion, and often did not correlate with mixed venous oxygen saturation measurements. The findings of non-ischaemic heart failure, chronic weakness, and elevated lactate levels after exertion were suggestive of mitochondrial disease. This was supported by a serum pyruvate level of 1.68 mg/dL (ref: 0.3–1.5 mg/dL) and lactate-to-pyruvate ratio of 31:1 (normal <20:1). A multidisciplinary team, including genetics, neurology, endocrinology, and ophthalmology, was assembled to further evaluate the patient.
Genetic testing of peripheral blood leucocyte DNA and mtDNA content was unrevealing and included variants for ∼1800 mtDNA genes, 188 nuclear-encoded genes associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, and 168 genes responsible for inherited cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias. Electrodiagnostic (EDX) studies demonstrated a mild non-irritable proximal appendicular and axial myopathy. Ophthalmologic evaluation revealed a >90% limitation in lateral gaze deviation in both eyes. Direct ophthalmoscopy did not reveal pigmentary retinopathy.
At the time of discharge, she was transitioned to milrinone for home inotrope therapy. Her cardiac transplantation evaluation was deferred pending further evaluation by a neuromuscular specialist. Shortly after discharge, the patient was seen in the neuromuscular disease clinic, and testing for transthyretin amyloid, adrenal insufficiency, paraproteinemia, and autoimmunity as causes of her muscular weakness and non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy were all negative. Guided by the EDX study results, she was scheduled for a skeletal muscle biopsy to further characterize her disease.
Unfortunately, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for cardiogenic shock with a lactate above the detectable limit of 20 mmol/L, pulmonary oedema, and hypoxaemic respiratory failure prior to the scheduled muscle biopsy. A repeat TTE demonstrated severe LV dilation, an LVEF of 20%, severe MR, and mildly reduced RV function. The TTE included the following RV measurements: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, 15 mm; RV annular systolic velocity, 7.1 cm/s; RV basal diameter, 3.30 cm; and RV to LV size ratio, 0.69. She was emergently placed on veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. LV unloading was achieved by percutaneous placement of a transeptal left atrial drain cannula via the femoral vein. Given her deteriorating clinical status, an expedited left deltoid muscle biopsy was obtained. Key light and electron microscopy histopathological features are shown in . Next generation sequencing of mtDNA obtained from the frozen muscle biopsy specimen revealed two pathogenic overlapping mtDNA sequence deletions, diagnostic of primary mitochondrial disease. Based on her clinical presentation, she was diagnosed with MCM.
The interventional cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery teams evaluated the patient and elected to pursue early LVAD placement rather than transcatheter mitral valve edge-to-edge repair. The patient subsequently underwent LVAD placement as a bridge to cardiac transplantation. A core LV excisional biopsy was obtained during device placement. Light microscopy findings are shown in . After LVAD placement, her hospital course was complicated by RV failure. A ProtekDuo dual lumen catheter (LivaNova, London) was inserted through the right internal jugular vein into the pulmonary artery, through which blood was pumped from the right atrium into the pulmonary artery. Furthermore, she developed acute renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. The ProtekDuo catheter was removed after RV recovery and a tunneled subclavian venous catheter was placed for short-term haemodialysis. The patient’s renal function recovered before discharge, and the subclavian catheter was removed. Her estimated glomerular filtration rate at discharge was 20 mL/min/1.73 m2. She received carnitine, arginine, creatinine, and coenzyme Q10, as well as nutritional supplementation during her hospitalization and upon discharge. Following discharge, the patient has been hospitalized multiple times for volume overload and RV dysfunction. She has been on chronic inotropic support since April 2022, initially with milrinone and more recently with dobutamine. She follows regularly with neuromuscular and advanced heart failure specialists for her MCM, medical comorbidities, and LVAD management.