A 56-year-old Hispanic man with a past medical history of alcohol and cocaine abuse was initially evaluated in our clinic after presenting to the emergency department with sudden-onset abdominal pain and one episode of emesis. The patient stated that this was the first time an episode like this had ever occurred in him, and he described the pain he had felt as epigastric in location, nonradiating, and 8/10 on a numeric rating scale. He denied any other symptoms, including weight loss, changes in appetite, and changes in stool. However, when asked about back pain, he recalled that he had been experiencing dull, intermittent left back pain for the past 2–3 years that radiated to his left rib cage at the midaxillary line. He described the pain as 4/10 in severity at its worst and denied feeling any pain on his right side.
The patient reported being a smoker in the past but that he had quit approximately 15 years earlier. He also reported using cocaine once per week and heavy drinking of liquor during certain months of the year. His past medical history was otherwise noncontributory; however, he did report inconsistent visits with his last primary care provider. His social history was significant for his occupation as a landscaper, which had caused the patient to disregard his back pain as being a work-related injury.
The result of his complete physical examination was unremarkable, except for his body mass index being clinically overweight at 26.6 kg/m2. His abdomen was soft and nondistended, and his bowel sounds were normal. Basic laboratory tests were performed during his hospital admission and revealed an elevated blood glucose level (612 mg/dl; reference range < 140 mg/dl) and an elevated hemoglobin A1C (13.3%; reference range < 5.7%). Abdominal/pelvic computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast revealed abnormalities suggestive of malignancy in the pancreatic tail and multiple liver metastases . An elevated cancer antigen 19-9 tumor marker (15,453 U/ml; reference range < 37 U/ml) was also noted, which was strongly suggestive of pancreatic carcinoma. A CT-guided needle biopsy of the liver was performed, and results were consistent with a poorly differentiated primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed neoplastic cells that were CK7+/CK20− and positive for CDX2, MUC5AC, and PODXL1, which was highly suggestive of a primary pancreaticobiliary neoplasm. Thus, a diagnosis of stage IV pancreatic tail adenocarcinoma with multiple liver metastases was made.
During follow-up 1 month later, prior to the start of chemotherapy, the patient stated that he had been experiencing worsening left back pain; however, had not experienced any epigastric pain, nausea, or vomiting since his hospital admission. He described the pain as now constant and radiating anteriorly to the left lower ribs at the midclavicular line. The pain was rated as 8/10 on a numeric rating scale, and the patient reported that even the pressure of putting a shirt on hurt him and that he could only now lie on his right side. On physical examination, the region was exquisitely tender to palpation, but the result of the remainder of his examination was unremarkable. The patient was then started on a FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy regimen (5-fluorouracil /leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin).