A 65-year-old never-smoking white male with advanced sarcomatoid NSCLC harboring a MET exon 14 skipping mutation and with a PD-L1 tumor proportion score of 80% was initiated on combination chemotherapy plus ICI therapy after progression on a MET inhibitor. At the time, positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) demonstrated diffuse metastases in the liver, adrenal gland, and bones. Despite high tumor PD-L1 expression, the decision was made to initiate combination chemotherapy plus ICI rather than ICI monotherapy due to the patient’s never-smoking status.
The patient received two cycles of carboplatin-pemetrexed plus pembrolizumab. He tolerated treatment well, with no high-grade toxicities. However, repeat imaging after two cycles demonstrated concern for disease progression, with enlarging lesions in the lung, liver, adrenal gland, neck, and skull. Although clear growth was observed, it did not meet the threshold for hyperprogression, which is most commonly defined as at least a doubling of tumor growth rate [, ]. Given primary disease progression and the high burden of disease, the clinical team planned to change treatment to docetaxel plus ramucirumab. In the weeks following discontinuation of the carboplatin-pemetrexed plus pembrolizumab regimen, the patient reported improved symptoms and energy level, which were attributed to waning of treatment-associated toxicities.
On the day prior to the planned initiation of docetaxel plus ramucirumab, repeat imaging was performed to provide a near-term baseline for subsequent efficacy assessment. The chest CT demonstrated improvement compared to the prior CT image. Accordingly, instead of changing the treatment regimen, the clinical team proceeded with two additional cycles of carboplatin-pemetrexed plus pembrolizumab, following which further response was noted on the chest CT and PET images . Subsequently, maintenance therapy was initiated with pemetrexed plus pembrolizumab, which was changed to pembrolizumab monotherapy after one cycle due to serum creatinine elevation and fatigue. Since then, the patient has received six cycles of maintenance pembrolizumab, and disease control remains ongoing at 6 months after the initiation of combination chemotherapy plus ICI. Aside from requiring a mild levothyroxine dose adjustment, the patient has had no substantial toxicities.