In December 2018, a 67-year-old man was referred to our hospital for systemic chemotherapy. During diabetes follow-up, his anemia progressed, and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level became high. By upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, a type III tumor was found stretching from the fundus to the corpus of the stomach . A biopsy from the stomach showed human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative adenocarcinoma (tub1; Fig. ). Its microsatellite instability (MSI) status was stable. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a thickened gastric wall with several enlarged lymph nodes along the lesser curvature and a swollen paraaortic lymph node . The cancer stage was cT4aN3M1, cStage IVB. His serum AFP level was 33.90 ng/ml (normal range < 15 ng/ml). He was diagnosed with AFPGC. He underwent six cycles of 1st-line therapy consisting of cisplatin and S-1, and three months later he presented at the emergency department due to hematemesis. Paclitaxel was administered as a 2nd-line therapy, but the chemotherapy could not control his bleeding from the GC. He underwent total gastrectomy plus D2 + No. 16b1 dissection to control the bleeding. Right after radical surgery in January 2020, a CT scan showed no metastases. Adjuvant chemotherapy (S-1) was administered, and peritonitis carcinoma was suspected. During paclitaxel rechallenge administration as a 3rd-line therapy, serum AFP increased . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed PVTTs in segment 6/7 (S6/7) and segment 8 (S8, Fig. ). We switched the paclitaxel to nivolumab. After the 2nd cycle of nivolumab, serum creatinine kinase increased. There were no symptoms of myasthenia gravis. To avoid immune-related adverse effects, after the 3rd cycle, we changed nivolumab to irinotecan. At that point, a CT scan revealed that liver metastases were not clear as before, but intrahepatic cholangiectasis was present at S6/7 and S8. After irinotecan was initiated, the serum AFP level remained within the normal range, and the liver metastases kept shrinking. Given the long-term effects of nivolumab, we stopped irinotecan at the 4th cycle in February 2021. During follow-up without immunotherapy or chemotherapy, in October 2021 a CT scan revealed that the liver metastases had disappeared and that there were no other recurrent lesions. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT also showed no recurrence of the tumor. At present (December 2022), the patient has reached 48 months of survival without any recurrence.