We report the case of a 24-year old male patient, with unrelevant past medical history, who went to the emergency department due to sudden, non-traumatic, left hypochondrium severe pain. The patient reported to suffer frequent headaches that started 2 years before and subsided taking NSAIDs. On the physical examination the patient was eupnoeic and haemodynamically stable, though, despite being considered normotensive (reporting normal blood pressure levels in several previous medical examinations), he had blood pressure levels of 160–90 mmHg on arrival, which increased to 180 mmHg of systolic blood pressure. The laboratory tests performed did not show remarkable disorders. An abdominopelvic CT was performed with intravenous contrast (iv), which evidenced the presence of a large retroperitoneal haematoma of 24 × 9 × 8.5 cm in diameters and active extravasation of contrast in the left adrenal area, but the responsible vessel could not be established. Stenosis of the left renal artery and free peritoneal fluid were also seen .
An urgent arteriography was performed, viewing significant bilateral renal stenosis. After the selective angiographic series of the left renal artery, the existence of a profuse collateral vascular network to the adrenal gland with signs of active bleeding was seen . This network could be embolised completely by injecting Onyx (Medtronic ev3 Neurovascular Irvine CA. USA). After this, another arterial branch, which also nourished another part of this network, evidencing signs of active bleeding was detected . It was embolised in the same way by injecting Onyx. Finally, after an extensive vascular study confirming no other sign of active bleeding, an angioplasty of the left renal artery was performed using a Mustang balloon catheter (Boston Scientific Corporation. Malborough MA. USA) of 4 mm × 4 cm, with moderate recovery of calibre .
The patient had a favourable outcome, though he had a fever peak of 37.9 °C (with negative urine and blood cultures), so levofloxacin antibiotic therapy was instituted for preventive purposes. He had very high blood pressure levels, with peaks up to 200 mmHg, requiring administration of Amlodipine, Doxazosin and even intravenous Urapidil pulses for controlling them. Given this situation, it was decided to perform a new renal angioplasty, in this case bilateral, using a Mustang balloon catheter of 6 mm × 4 cm (Boston Scientific Corporation. Malborough MA. USA) achieving full bilateral recovery of the normal renal artery calibre . After this, the patient’s blood pressure levels returned to normal.
During his hospital stay, he underwent Doppler ultrasound of the supra-aortic trunks and transthoracic echocardiogram showing no pathological disorders.
The patient was discharged at 16 days of admission, asymptomatic, fever-free, not requiring medical treatment and with the only recommendations of avoiding intense exercise and a salt-free diet.
Due to the hospital situation caused by COVID-19, all face-to-face patient review consultations were suspended in our centre. Recently, we were able to carry out an evolutionary assessment of the patient by phone (eleven months after the endovascular treatment) in which he declared to be asymptomatic, maintaining normal blood pressure without the need for medical treatment.