A 66-year-old man, who underwent reconstruction of abdominal incisional hernia (8 cm in diameter) which was developed 6 months after his abdominal aorta aneurysm operation (Y-graft replacement) by retroperitoneal 15 × 8 cm Composix mesh application 10 years prior, visited our department complaining discharge from his operative wound scar. At first, conservative therapy was initiated since the discharge was serous and no symptom of infection was observed. Despite intermittent lavage and drainage for 6 months, however, the discharge was not reduced, and gradually, the properties of it changed into infective. Mesh infection was strongly suggested, and finally, we planned removal of the infected mesh. At admission, his height was 165 cm, body weight was 71.5 kg, and body temperature was normal. The fluid collection was palpable under his upper midline operative wound scar, and the skin fistula discharging contaminated exudates was observed in the middle of the wound . Results of blood examination were within normal range except for slightly elevated CRP (1.46 mg/dl). Enhanced abdominal CT showed encapsulated 12 × 6.0 × 2.5 cm high-dense fluid collection involving microbubbles, suggesting abscess formation . The operation was performed through upper midline incision including the skin fistula. Careful dissection successfully led complete removal of the abscess wall without damaging the peritoneum and abscess wall . No intestinal fistula was observed through the procedure. Judging from the huge size of intramuscular defect of abdominal wall, simple primary closure seemed impossible whereas mesh reattachment was not preferable due to potential remnant infection. Therefore, we decided to apply posterior components separation technique (see schema in Fig. ), and abdominal wall reconstruction was successfully achieved by anterior rectus sheath closure . Resected specimen contained an everted mesh, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was identified in the abscess contents by postoperative microbial cultivation . He discharged without any significant complications, and no recurrence of hernia and symptom of infection were observed at least 3 years after the reconstruction.