We present a case of a 13-year-old girl who sustained a remote right ankle injury at the age of 2 from a riding lawn mower injury. She sustained an open injury to the medial distal tibia with traumatic loss of the medial malleolus; the fracture was classified as Gustillo-Anderson 3B. This was managed with immediate debridement and a spanning external fixator . The wound was closed with latissimus dorsi free tissue transfer and split thickness skin graft. She did well in the postoperative period and had the external fixator removed a few months later. Eight years later, she sustained a Salter-Harris II fracture of the right distal fibula while quad biking. She was placed in an Aircast Boot. Following this injury, she was found to have developed a progressive varus deformity of the right ankle (A) and a leg length discrepancy with the right lower limb shorter than the left (B). MRI scan of the right distal tibia and fibula showed a premature asymmetrical growth arrest involving the medial distal tibial growth plate, chronic non-union of the distal fibula physeal fracture, and severe attenuation of the deltoid ligament.
Given that the patient was developing increasing pain and difficulty weightbearing, especially on uneven surfaces, the multidisciplinary team made the decision to address the varus ankle deformity and reconstruct the medial malleolus. At this time, the patient was 11-years-old. The operation was performed in conjunction with the original plastic surgeon who elevated the existing flap and exposed the medial aspect of the ankle. This was necessary to protect the circulation to the flap and ensure viable soft tissue at wound closure following completion of the skeletal reconstruction. Via a separate lateral incision, a closing wedge osteotomy was performed at the level of the physis of the distal fibula, which was fixed with a fibular locking plate . After correcting the distal fibular alignment, the talus was reduced under the tibial plafond. It became clear that there was an asymmetrical deformity to the tibial plafond, with varus malalignment of the medial half of the plafond only . An intra-articular osteotomy of the medial half of the plafond was performed in order to correct this deformity . Iliac crest bone graft was used as an opening wedge. An appropriately sized tricortical iliac crest autograft with preserved apophysis and gluteal fascia was obtained in order to reconstruct the medial malleolus and the deltoid ligament. The medial border of the distal tibia was decorticated as was the wall of the graft in order to promote bony union. The tricortical graft was placed with the apophysis oriented inferiorly and fixed to the distal tibia using a medial distal tibia anatomic locking plate ( and ). The gluteal fascia was sutured to the periosteum/deltoid insertion on the talus in order to reconstruct the medial deltoid ligament. The original skin-grafted latissimus flap was re-inset. There were no wound healing complications. Postoperatively, the patient was immobilised in a full cast for a period of 6 weeks with no weightbearing on the right lower limb. After 6 weeks, she was allowed to start gradual weightbearing while using an ankle brace.
Three months following surgery, standing frontal EOS radiological images of the pelvis and lower limbs were taken. Calculation of the projected leg length discrepancy confirmed the right leg would be shorter than the left by more than 3 cm at skeletal maturity. Five months later, the patient underwent a percutaneous drill epiphysiodesis of the left distal femur and proximal tibia to equalise the leg length discrepancy. No formal epiphysiodesis of the distal tibia was performed because screws were placed on either side of the growth plate. As such, there was no need to perform an epiphysiodesis as this would arrest any further growth.
Two-year follow-up after the medial malleolus reconstruction of the right ankle and epiphysiodesis of the left distal femur and left proximal tibia showed a leg length discrepancy of 1.1 cm, healing of the osteotomy sites, and neutral alignment of the ankle ( and ). Clinical assessment showed that she is doing well so far. She reported no pain in the right ankle and that she does not use the ankle brace most of the time. She feels her right ankle is stable, and she has been able to return to sporting activities. Her post-surgery health-related quality of life scores as measured by the PedsQL tool were consistently within 1 standard deviation of the population mean for healthy children. Her scores on all subscales as well as overall quality of life scores are described in . Soft tissue coverage remains stable, and there is no scar contracture that might contribute to further malalignment .