A 4-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with a 5-d history of intermittent headache and a 2-d history of both drowsiness and vomiting.
Five days ago, the patient experienced intermittent headaches without any apparent cause. Two days later, she developed drowsiness and vomiting. While waiting for a scheduled enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), she suffered a sudden onset of epilepsy; then, she fell into a coma, showed bilateral pupil dilation and was in critical condition.
The patient’s history of past illness was not significant.
The patient’s personal and family history were not significant.
Physical examination showed that her body temperature was 36.5 °C, pulse rate was 100 beats per min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per min and blood pressure was 95/48 mmHg, showing bilateral pupil dilation.
Complete blood count: White blood cells 7.67 × 109/L, red blood cells 4.36 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 117.00 g/L, platelets 338.00 × 109/L.
Nonenhanced MRI showed a large space-occupying lesion containing cystic and solid components in her right frontotemporal lobe . A Verasonics Vantage 256 System (Verasonics Inc., Kirkland, WA, United States) equipped with a P4-2v (Verasonics Inc., Kirkland, WA, United States) phased probe was used to acquire 200 frames of ultrasound radio-frequency (RF) data from the decompression window. The center frequency of transmission for imaging of a deep region was 2.72 MHz. The excitation voltage to guarantee safe image acquisition was 13 V. Coherent compounding of diverging waves from 5 angles (-20°, -10°, 0°, 10°, 20°) was used to improve the imaging quality, and the effective frame rate was 1000 Hz. First, the RF channel data were beamformed using the conventional delay-and-sum method. Then, the SVD method was used to reject tissue clutter and extract blood flow signals. Afterward, a Hessian-based vessel enhancement filter was applied to further decrease noise and enhance the visualization of vessels. Finally, the enhanced vessels were superimposed on the B-mode image for a more comprehensive display.