A 56-year-old man visited our hospital with radiating pain in the lower limbs for 2 wk.
The patient had been suffering from progressive intermittent pain in the lumbar area for approximately 3 years, and his pain was only partially relieved after bed rest. He then began to feel severe radiating pain in the left lower limb 2 wk before presentation.
The patient had mild kyphosis of the spine and intervertebral tenderness in the L4-L5 and L5-S1 disc spaces. Physical examination showed left hip tenderness and percussion pain. The muscles of the left lower limb were significantly atrophied relative to the right lower limb. Resultantly, the left lower limb was observed to be 3 cm shorter than the right one.
A Faber test of the left lower limb was positive. Straight leg elevation tests of both lower extremities were negative. Pain sensation and temperature sensation were normal in both lower limbs. Muscle tension in both lower extremities was also normal.
Dorsiflexion force of the left ankle joint was 3+, and plantar flexor muscle strength was level 3. The nail of the big toe was grade 0. Right ankle dorsiflexor force was 4, and plantar flexor force was 5. The anal sphincter contracted evenly and forcefully. Bilateral knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal. The physiological reflex was present, but the pathological reflex was not elicited.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis of the lumbar spine exhibited an intramedullary mass between the L3 and S1 levels. An impressive Schmorl node was visible in the L4 vertebral body .
Histopathological examination of the specimen showed that the tissue was composed of most polygonal and some spindle tumor cells. The tumor cells were relatively uniform in size, with rich and transparent cytoplasm. The nuclei of most of the cells were either round or oval, and they had large nucleoli. The tumor cells displayed a high degree of mitotic activity, but no necrosis was seen . The isolated tumor was also subjected to immunohistochemical examination, which revealed positive staining for S-100, homatropine methylbromide (HMB)-45, and p53, indicating an intramedullary malignant melanoma . The tumor cells expressed vimentin and did not exhibit positivity for the epithelial marker cytokeratin, which indicates that the tumor had undergone the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition process . Additionally, immunostaining for Ki67 supported an appreciable proliferative activity, and the Ki67 proliferation index was about 10%-50% .