The patient was a 12-year-old girl, who had been followed up for six years because of a diagnosis of celiac disease. She complained of a condition of painless abdominal distension.
The patient’s weight and height were in the normal range according to age. In the physical examination, a mass spreading from the left upper quadrant of the abdomen to the right upper quadrant, passing the middle line, was detected. Other systemic examinations were normal. The laboratory investigation of the case included the following results: white blood cells: 8,900/ul; hemoglobin: 12.4 mg/dl; hematocrit: 38.4%; thrombocytes: 337,000/ul; iron: 60 ug/dl; iron binding capacity: 250 ug/dl; folic acid: 11 ng/ml; ferritin: 15 ng/ml; and vitamin B12: 216 pg/ml. The results regarding tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A (Ig A) (27.58 RU/ml), anti-gliadin immunoglobulin A (IgA) and anti-endomysium antibody IgA were negative.
The patient was fully compliant with her gluten-free diet, according to her own declaration, and did not present any anemia. She showed significantly decreased tissue transglutaminase Ig A, which was > 200 RU/ml (normal level < 20 RU/ml) at the time when celiac disease was initially diagnosed. She was initially positive for anti-gliadin IgA and anti-endomysium IgA antibodies, at high titers, but she had become negative for these antibodies under her gluten-free diet recently.
There was no pathological finding from direct abdominal radiography. In the abdominal ultrasonography (USG), the radiologist could not detect any pathological condition. Through computed tomography (CT), most of the stomach could be seen and soft tissue densities that were possibly compatible with a bezoar were observed . Surgical intervention was approved by the department of pediatric surgery. The trichobezoar, which had the shape of the stomach and stretched out towards the small intestine, was removed .
The patient had developed a habit of pulling out and eating her hair over the last year. She was reported to be successful at school, but she suffered from stress during examination periods and her relationships with friends was weak, which meant that she usually spent time on her own. Less hair was noticed in the frontal region of the skull. She underwent evaluation by a child psychiatrist, and this revealed that she was afraid of not being able to grow up adequately because of her celiac disease. Her communication with her peers was weak and she did not want to get involved in the social environment. She felt unable to calm herself down and she had initially started to pull out her hair and then started to eat it. The observation made at the end of her psychological assessment was that her anxiety was explicit and that she had depressive complaints. Administration of sertraline (50 mg/day) was started in connection with anxiety disorder and depressive disorder. During the follow-up at the department of child psychiatry, with cognitive and behavioral techniques therapy, the patient’s trichophagia regressed completely. The patient has been followed for the last year since the operation.