The patient in this case was a 43-year-old woman. She had no significant past medical history and no familial history such as cancer and inflammatory bowel disease. She was examined by her local physician because of flu-like symptoms, fever, and diarrhea. Abdominal ultrasound examination incidentally revealed a pelvic mass, and she was referred to our institution. Transvaginal ultrasound examination revealed an 11 cm pelvic mass . Inside the mass, suspected hair was observed in the form of hyperechoic lines, leading to suspicion of an ovarian mature cystic teratoma. Blood and biochemical tests did not reveal blood-count or other abnormalities. Serum levels of tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 1.0 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125; 59 U/mL), and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9; 9 U/mL) were within normal range, but that for squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC; 2.0 ng/mL) was elevated. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an 11 cm cystic tumor in the pelvis, containing lipids and a fat–fluid level. No distinct abnormalities were observed in other organs.
The fat–fluid level inside the tumor was also observed on pelvic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with high signal intensity on the abdominal side in both T1- and T2-weighted images and low signal intensity on fat-suppression images, suggesting ovarian mature cystic teratoma . No solid areas with contrast enhancement to suggest malignancy were observed inside the tumor. From the imaging findings, an ovarian mature cystic teratoma was suspected and the decision was made to perform laparoscopic surgery.
The patient also consulted the local medical gastroenterology clinic because of ongoing symptoms of diarrhea ranging in color from white to bright green. Endoscopic examination of the lower gastrointestinal tract revealed hair and a submucosal tumor-like protrusion with redness at its apex, situated approximately 12 cm adoral to the anal orifice . No signs of diverticulitis were observed in the surrounding area. As this lesion site was adjacent to the ovarian tumor, and hair was present at the lesion site, formation of a fistula from the ovarian mature cystic teratoma into the rectum was suspected. As rectal invasion by a benign mature cystic teratoma is very unlikely, the possibility of malignant transformation of the mature cystic teratoma was considered, and the decision was made to perform salpingo-oophorectomy of the diseased side via laparotomy rather than laparoscopic surgery.
Surgical findings were as follows. The left ovary was enlarged to approximately 10 cm in diameter and occupied most of the pelvic cavity. The ovarian tumor had a smooth surface, and part of the dorsal side was closely adhered to the rectum . The tumor was carefully separated from the rectum, and drainage of the tumor contents from the separation site revealed bright-green pus with a strong odor. After completion of the left salpingo-oophorectomy, the resected tissue was submitted for frozen-section pathological diagnosis during surgery. The resulting diagnosis was ovarian mature cystic teratoma accompanied by inflammatory granulation, with no malignant findings. In addition, a fistula of approximately 1 cm in diameter was observed in the anterior rectal wall at the site of separation from the tumor . Based on the result of frozen-section, it was possible to perform partial resection of rectal wall as minimal surgery, but necessity of histological examination of the tissue surrounding the rectal fistula was considered, and upper anterior resection of the rectum without temporary colostomy was performed at same time following the left salpingo-oophorectomy. Postoperative progress was satisfactory, and the patient was discharged on the 9th day after surgery. The final pathological diagnosis was identical to the pathological diagnosis during surgery, confirming a benign left-sided ovarian mature cystic teratoma. Findings of abundant inflammatory cell invasion in the cyst wall and hair-shaft tissue were consistent with a mature cystic teratoma . Further, although inflammatory cell invasion and hair-shaft tissue were observed in the rectal serosa, no structural disorders such as diverticulitis of the colon or signs of malignancy were observed .