A 48-year-old woman presented with easy fatigability and ptosis. She initially noticed right eyelid drooping and experienced intermittent double vision. Two months after symptom onset she developed proximal limb weakness and had difficulty in climbing stairs and swallowing. She experienced marked diurnal fluctuation of symptoms, with them being worse in the afternoon and when she was fatigued. She did not report dry mouth, constipation, or blurred vision. Her past medical history was unremarkable. A neurological examination revealed right ptosis, which was worse after sustained upward gaze, and bulbar muscle weakness. She exhibited proximal muscle weakness at Medical Research Council grade 4/5. Deep-tendon reflexes were absent, but potentiated after brief voluntary contraction of the tested muscles.
Routine hematological, chemical, and serological tests revealed no abnormalities except for seropositivity for antinuclear antibodies. The serum titer of antibodies against AChRs was elevated (5.9 nmol/L; normal level <0.1 nmol/L). The edrophonium (Tensilon) test disclosed clinical improvement of the right ptosis. Chest CT was negative for thymoma, and extensive exploration seeking a malignancy yielded negative results. RNS testing of the right ulnar nerve revealed low-amplitude compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) at rest, which decreased by 25% on low-frequency (3 Hz) stimulation and increased by 500% on high-frequency (50 Hz) stimulation . Her symptoms gradually improved after treatment with prednisolone (20 mg/day) and pyridostigmine (240 mg/day). Six months later azathioprine (50 mg/day) was added to the steroid medication due to reoccurrence of right ptosis.
During the 10-year follow-up the patient complained of intermittent ptosis, but there was no marked worsening of her myasthenic symptoms. The results of RNS tests were continuously consistent with the findings of LEMS. The electrophysiological findings were not aggravated compared with the initial investigation.
Four serial anti-AChR antibody titers measured over the 10-year follow-up period revealed constant elevation without clinical deterioration (range, 6.7-7.0 nmol/L) . Follow-up chest CT revealed thymic hyperplasia, but there was no evidence of malignancy. She was maintained on pyridostigmine (240 mg/day), prednisolone (5 mg/QOD), and azathioprine (50 mg/day), with a stable course.