A 68-year-old male patient with no significant past medical history was admitted because of progressive shortness of breath (NYHA III-IV) which began 6 months prior to the admission. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed an aneurysmal bulge of the right aortic sinus into the right ventricle without obvious rupture. The patient had smoked for more than 50 years, denied any alcohol consumption and took no medication.
On TTE, an extensive unruptured SVA was visible, arising from the right coronary sinus of Valsalva and protruding into the right ventricular chamber, significantly comprising the cavity. TTE also revealed prolapse of the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve and severe (grade IV) aortic valve regurgitation on an otherwise uncalcified native tricuspid aortic valve. The left ventricular systolic function was depressed, with an ejection fraction of 40%, presumably as a consequence of the long-standing progression of the aortic valve regurgitation (LVESD 53 mm, LVEDD 62 mm). TTE revealed no other valvular dysfunctions.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) confirmed the presence of a saccular aneurysmal structure originating from the right coronary sinus of Valsalva, protruding into the right ventricular chamber, measuring 50,2 mm × 50,9 mm × 64 mm . The diameters of the dilated aortic annulus and aortic root measured 34,9 and 51,8 mm, respectively . No coronary disease was found. Considering the clinical and paraclinical findings, the patient was scheduled to undergo surgical correction.
As part of the preoperative preparation, because of the depressed LV function, levosimendan was administered. The surgical intervention was performed under general anesthesia. After median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass was applied by cannulating the ascending aorta and the right atrium. Myocardial preservation was obtained via cold Custodiol crystalloid cardioplegia. The aortic valve was exposed using a transverse aortotomy. The intraoperative discoveries confirmed the above findings: a giant aneurysm originating from the right aortic sinus was protruding into the right ventricle , while the annulus of the aortic valve was severely dilated. However, the aortic valve showed no signs of calcification. Thus, the surgical approach aimed to exclude the aneurysm from the right ventricular chamber and preserve the native aortic valve. The orifice of the saccular aneurysm protruding through the wall of the right ventricle was closed with a running 4–0 Prolene suture. The aortic root was replaced with a 26 mm AlboGraft vascular graft in the manner described by Yacoub et al. . The aortic annulus was reduced to a diameter of 25 mm by applying the modified basal suture annuloplasty technique proposed by Schäfers et al. . According to the description of the procedure, a running annuloplasty suture was placed at the basal level of the aortic root, thus achieving appropriate external stabilization of the valve. Additionally, free-edge plication of the right and non-coronary leaflets was performed, as well as suture reinforcement of the free margin of the right leaflet, in order to resolve the aortic insufficiency. The effective height of the cusps was corrected to 9 mm . The extracorporeal circulation time was 186 min, while the cross-clamp time was 155 min. After reconstruction, intraoperative control transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed competent aortic valve and no significant transvalvular gradient.
The patient’s recovery was favourable. The follow-up TTE obtained 1 month after surgery showed a fully competent aortic valve with no regurgitation.