A 76-year-old man visited a local clinic with icteric conjunctivae. He had sick sinus syndrome and used a pacemaker. Blood biochemistry revealed significantly high levels of total bilirubin and transaminase, and US imaging demonstrated intrahepatic bile duct dilatation. Therefore, he was referred to our department for examination of suspected obstructive jaundice.
On admission, the patient’s body temperature was 35.9 °C, and yellowing of the conjunctivae and skin was evident. The patient had medium build, and no abnormal findings were evident in the neck or thoraco-abdominal region. Blood tests on admission showed no abnormality, but blood biochemistry revealed significant increases in the levels of transaminases and biliary enzymes (glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase (GOT): 260 U/L, glutamate pyruvate transaminase (GPT): 420 U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP): 1166 mU/mL, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 1163 U/L). The total bilirubin level was 6.0 mg/dL. Examination of tumour markers revealed a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 3.0 ng/mL and a high level of cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) (194.1 U/mL) .
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed disruption of contrast medium flow from the confluence of the cystic and common hepatic ducts through the distal bile duct, as well as significant dilatation of the common and intrahepatic bile ducts. Therefore, an endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) stent was inserted for biliary drainage (a). Brush cytology at the site of distal bile duct stricture demonstrated class V (adenocarcinoma).
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a contrast-enhanced lesion that filled the lumen of the bile duct from inside the distal bile duct. This lesion did not extend beyond the walls of the bile duct, and neither infiltration into other organs nor no clear lymphadenopathy was observed (b). Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan revealed accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) that coincided with the lesion in the bile duct, and there were no clear findings of distant metastasis (c). Based on these results, we made a preoperative diagnosis of distal bile duct carcinoma (T1N0M0) according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) classification and performed pancreatoduodenectomy with regional lymphadenectomy.