A 56-year-old female underwent a cemented postero-stabilized condylar TKA with fixed tibial plateau through an antero-medial approach, in our department. She had severe osteo-arthritis of the left knee with a major stiffness (irreducible flexum at 25°). (, ) Initial (1) and post operative(2) Knee radiographs before, and after the arthroplasty.
Three weeks later, the patient tripped and fell off with all her standing height striking the anterior aspect of the left knee with hyper flexion. She was taken to the emergency room with left knee pain and a large skin wound. Physical examination showed a large, deep and longitudinal wound measuring 15 cm in length due to a total breakdown of the suture line (the antero-medial approach performed during the TKA) (, ). . A clinical picture showing the open patellar fracture
. Lateral Knee radiograph showing the patellar fracture above a total knee arthroplasty, without any signs ofimplants loosening.
The knee radiographs showed a short oblique fracture at the inferior pole of the patella without any loosening of the implants or dislocation of the knee: this
fracture is classified as type I according to Ortigueraet D.J. Berry classification (a stable implant without disruption of the extensor mechanism). The patient was transferred to the orthopaedic surgery department. She urgently received intravenous antibiotic (augmentin, gentamicin), as well as tetanus vaccination. Her fracture was temporarily stabilized in a long-leg plaster splint before she was transported to the operating room. She underwent wound irrigation, debridement of non-viable soft tissue from the wound, open reduction and fixation with a figure-eight cerclage wiring, without any revision of the implants. The wound was closed without any skin tension, after placing an intra-articular drain. Complementary immobilization with a removable knee pad at full extension, for six weeks was prescribed. Post-operative knee radiographs showed a satisfactory reduction of the patellar fracture.
(, ). Post operative Knee radiographs
She received intra venous antibiotics: augmentin for 2 weeks associated with gentamicin during the first five days, as well as subcutaneous heparin. The drain was removed at the third post-operative day. Her wound was clean, dry, and without erythema. The patient was afebrile with a normal leukocyte count. She was discharged from the hospital after she was instructed to remain non-weight bearing with a follow-up in 2 weeks.