A now 52-year-old woman with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus well-controlled by metformin initially presented at age 49 to another institution with complaints of blurry vision. Work-up revealed a pituitary macroadenoma, invasive into the left cavernous sinus as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The referring neurosurgery service performed a partial resection of the lesion by an endoscopic endonasal approach, resulting in symptomatic improvement for the patient. Review of this original pathology showed a population of fairly monotonous polygonal cells with coarse chromatin, distinct nucleoli, and small amounts of granular, basophilic cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining for chromogranin A and ACTH were positive, confirming the lesion as a functional pituitary tumor. A diagnosis of atypical pituitary macroadenoma was rendered due to positive p53 staining and an elevated Ki-67 proliferation index of 4%.
The patient’s symptoms including blurry vision and headaches gradually recurred. She presented to our institution 8 months later for a second opinion and repeat resection. At this point, an MRI demonstrated a recurrent pituitary lesion occupying the sellar and suprasellar regions with mass effect on the optic chiasm and extension into the left cavernous sinus . On the day of surgery, ACTH measured 259 pg/mL (normal range 9–50 pg/mL). An endoscopic endonasal transplanum surgical approach was performed and all of the sellar and suprasellar components of the recurrent tumor were resected . The tumor was fibrous and adherent to the optic apparatus, requiring lengthy sharp dissection. Intraoperative assessment concluded that microscopic residual tumor remained in the walls of the bilateral cavernous sinuses.
Pathologic examination revealed similar morphologic findings to the previous specimen, however the Ki-67 labeling index had increased to approximately 8% overall and was focally up to 15% . A diagnosis of recurrent atypical pituitary adenoma was thus rendered. Next, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) was administered at a dose of 5040 cGY in 28 fractions. Slight growth of the cavernous sinus tumor was noted even prior to initiation of radiation therapy . She tolerated surgery and radiotherapy well with relief from her neurologic complaints and stabilization of the lesions after several months . She was started on pasireotide after completion of IMRT but could not tolerate the medication long-term due to hyperglycemia.
Interval surveillance of serum ACTH and 24-hour urine cortisol levels was used to monitor for recurrence. Twenty-one months after the patient’s second pituitary tumor resection, significant elevations of serum ACTH and 24-hour urine cortisol to 142 pg/mL (normal range 10–60 pg/mL) and 541 μg/day (normal range 3.5–45 μg/day), respectively, were detected despite stability of her pituitary MRI . She was thus started on mifepristone for refractory hypercortisolemia. A PET scan was performed, which demonstrated a heterogeneously hypermetabolic liver with a maximum SUV of 3.3 . MRI showed a 1.8 cm lesion suspicious for metastasis . An ultrasound-guided liver needle core biopsy was thus performed. Pathology revealed nests of tumor cells, again displaying a monotonous epithelioid appearance, abundant granular cytoplasm, and distinct nucleoli . Immunostains for AE1/3, synaptophysin, and ACTH diffusely highlighted the lesional cells. p53 demonstrated diffuse strong positivity, and Ki-67 highlighted an average of 10% of the tumor nuclei, with focal areas approaching 20% . The diagnosis of metastatic pituitary carcinoma was thus confirmed.
The patient subsequently underwent resection of the metastatic liver lesion, with surveillance testing for serum ACTH, 24-hour urine cortisol, and pituitary MRI performed every 2–3 months thereafter. Pathology on the patient’s wedge resection confirmed the findings from her needle core liver biopsy. Imaging follow up performed 6 months postoperatively, consisting of PET-CT and pituitary MRI, was negative for additional metastatic disease or local progression . Approximately 1 year after resection of the metastasis, the patient presented with subjective left periorbital edema. Significant tumor growth in the cavernous sinuses causing venous congestion was demonstrated on MRI . She was initiated on temozolomide and capecitabine oral chemotherapeutics and repeat imaging at last follow-up revealed stabilization of the intracranial lesions after 8 months of chemotherapy, 22 months after the initial diagnosis of metastatic disease . Her neurological status remains at baseline. However, she has suffered biopsy-proved recurrence of her liver metastases, which are now inoperable.