A previously healthy 28-year-old non-smoking woman was admitted to the hospital because of cough, mild dyspnoea, and fever of 38°C. The blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration rate of the patient were 103.0/63.0 mmHg, 100 beats/min, and 25 beats/min, respectively. During physical examination, she presented tachycardia, cyanosis, and diffusely reduced breath sounds but no vesicular murmur, crackles, or wheezing. Blood gas analysis revealed the following findings: pH 7.47; pCO2, 40 mmHg; pO2, 53 mmHg; HCO3-, 29.1 mmol/L; and Lac, 0.6 mmol/L. These findings indicate hypoxemia. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest revealed bilateral diffuse airspace opacification . Levofloxacin was administered intravenously for 4 d. Her condition deteriorated with acute onset of dyspnoea and rapidly progressive respiratory failure, and the patient required intubation and mechanical ventilation. Blood gas analysis indicated hypoxemia; pH 7.19; pO2, 32 mmHg; and pCO2, 35 mmHg. HRCT revealed the deterioration of diffuse ground-glass opacification . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed on the same day after the patient was transferred to an intensive care unit. The bronchial tubes were normal with little sputum. Microbiologic investigations were negative. Transbronchial lung biopsies were performed on the same lobe (left upper lobe) on the fifth day of hospitalization. The first lung specimen exhibited edema, hyaline membrane formation, and acute interstitial inflammation, which all suggest an exudative phase of AIP . High doses of intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg for 3 d and 160 mg for 2 d) were administered based on presumptive diagnosis of interstitial lung disease. After 5 d, HRCT revealed diffuse ground-glass attenuation . However, the patient still had acute hypoxic respiratory failure and could not be extubated after the procedure. Despite initiating intravenous with normal dose of methylprednisolone (80 mg per day) and high concentrations of oxygen, the patient remained intubated for eight weeks. Chest X-ray analysis indicated that her lung deteriorated did not improve even when high-dose glucocorticoid was re-administered. Her oxygen saturation was only 30% when the fraction of inspired oxygen was 100%. The patient eventually expired after 62 d of hospitalization. The patient underwent autopsy, and the slides showed diffusely thickened alveolar septal interstitium by hyaline membrane remnants, pulmonary interstitial and alveolar edema, type II pneumocyte hyperplasia , and significant amount of myofibroblasts . These results indicate organized DAD. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that the epithelial cells, which are characterized by their basement membrane and specialized cell-cell junction structures, contained bundles of filament in the cytoplasm . The presence of filaments in these cells suggested the occurrence of EMT. We then determined the changes in EMT-related proteins, such as surfactant associated protein (SPC), α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and Snail. (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. Dallas, Texas, USA). The results of the double immunostaining of the lungs showed mesenchymal specific protein α-SMA in the alveolar epithelial cells (SPC-positive cells). The double positive cells were evidently increased in the lung tissue from the 62 d autopsy compared with that from the 5 d biopsy . The zinc finger transcription factor Snail was evidently expressed in the lung tissue, especially in the lung tissue from the 62 d autopsy .