A 70-year-old Caucasian female was evaluated for a one month history of progressively worsening low back pain and weakness. She had no gastrointestinal tract complaints. Her past medical history was significant for multiple basal and squamous cell cancers, as well as Merkel cell carcinoma 5 years previously, at which time she presented with a lump in her left groin. After local resection, she was treated with radiation and carboplatin. There was no recurrence and a subsequent abdominal CT (computed tomography) scan 3 years later showed no evidence of metastatic disease. The primary site was thought to be an inguinal lymph node.
On physical exam she had a 5 mm mobile lymph node in the left supraclavicular area. There were no focal neurological deficits. Stool tested guaiac negative. Labs revealed hemoglobin 7.1 g/dL, hematocrit 21.1%, iron level 15 mcg/dL, total iron binding capacity 330 mg/dL, and transferrin saturation 5%, consistent with severe iron-deficiency anemia. A contrast enhanced abdominal CT scan showed bulky retroperitoneal adenopathy encompassing the renal arteries, aorta, inferior vena cava as well as circumferentially thickened loop of small bowel in the left hemiabdomen . A small bowel series was negative. The decision was made to perform a colonoscopy.
The findings at colonoscopy revealed a semi-sessile ascending colon polyp measuring approximately 1 cm in size. The polyp was smooth and pale, with regular margins, and normal surrounding mucosa. It was resected as a single piece using hot snare polypectomy technique, and all tissue was recovered into a sterile trap and submitted for routine histology. Post-resection appearances suggested complete removal of all polypoid mucosa. Pathological examination of the specimen showed a small blue cell neoplasm involving both the mucosa and submucosa . The tumor cells were relatively small with scanty cytoplasm and hyperchromatic round nuclei. Immunostain for cytokeratin 20 showing perinuclear dot like cytoplasmic and surface positivity. Immunostaining for endocrine markers chromogranin and synaptophysin showed strong cytoplasmic positivity. The findings are typical of MCC and were similar to the patient’s previous groin tumor. The patient was diagnosed with stage IV MCC based on the presence of a distant metastasis.
The patient was treated with 4 cycles of cisplatin and etoposide (VP-16). Five months later, a CT of the abdomen showed increase in abdominal lymphadenopathy and a midjejunal small bowel mass that was felt to represent a metastatic focus. She received an additional 8 cycles of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine and a follow-up positron emission tomography scan showed resolution of the previous multifocal lymphadenopathy in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with no new lesions.