A 71-year-old man was referred to our outpatient clinic for echocardiography with symptoms of decreased exercise tolerance, exertional dyspnoea and angina pectoris. Relevant medical history reports fractional flow reserve-guided (0.78) percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the right coronary artery (RCA) in 2015 due to stable angina pectoris. Angina pectoris persisted during follow-up and coronary angiography was repeated in 2016. The stent was patent with no new significant coronary artery disease. The last echocardiography performed in 2017 described mild aortic stenosis, left ventricular hypertrophy and a restrictive diastolic function. The diagnosis microvascular coronary artery disease was suspected. Treatment with calcium-antagonists was initiated with moderate improvement in symptoms. At the time of referral the patient used metoprolol 50 mg once daily, amlodipine 5 mg once daily, nitroglycerine plaster 5 mg/24 h once daily, and acetylsalicylic acid 80 mg once daily.
The patient reported a significant decline in his ability to exercise. The patient used to cycle more than 15 000 km a year but is currently only able to cycle short distances using electrical support.
Physical examination revealed a man of average stature (body mass index 24 kg/m2) with a blood pressure of 133/75 mmHg and a pulse of 57 b.p.m. A systolic murmur (Grade II/VI) was heard at the right second intercostal space. Further physical examination revealed no further abnormalities.
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm 57 b.p.m., normal electrical axis, first degree atrioventricular block, QRS duration of 94 ms, low voltage in the limb leads and pseudo-infarct pattern in the precordial leads. Compared to the previous electrocardiograms low voltage in the limb leads were progressive . Although the first electrocardiogram from 2016 does not meet the criteria for low voltage in the limb leads, it is disproportionally low compared with the amount of left ventricular hypertrophy on the echocardiogram.
Left and right ventricular hypertrophy with a decreased systolic left ventricular function (41%) was seen on echocardiogram ( and , Videos S1 and S2). Further echocardiographic findings were mild aortic stenosis, bi-atrial dilation, interatrial septum thickening, and restrictive diastolic function . The global longitudinal strain (GLS) of the left ventricle was decreased (-8.8%) with ‘relative’ apical sparing . Moreover, left atrial GLS was impaired . These echocardiographic findings raised a high suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis.
Current echocardiographic findings were compared to previous findings. This revealed progressive thickening of both ventricles and the interatrial septum . Over time the diastolic dysfunction became restrictive with an increase in E/A ratio, decrease of e′ and reversal of pulmonary vein flow . Pattern of ‘relative’ apical sparing of the left ventricle became more pronounced .
To confirm the suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis a bone scintigraphy (using technecium-99m-3,3-diphosphono-1,2 propanodicarboxylic acid (99mTc-DPD)) was performed which was positive (Perugini Grade 3) . Blood testing confirmed the absence of monoclonal proteins, leading to the diagnosis of ATTR amyloidosis. To differentiate between wildtype and hereditary ATTR amyloidosis blood samples were taken and analysed. No genes associated with hereditary ATTR amyloidosis were found, confirming the diagnosis of wildtype ATTR amyloidosis. Treatment with Tafamidis 80 mg once daily (built up over 4 weeks from 20 mg once daily) was initiated and will be continued indefinitely. As follow-up an echocardiogram will be repeated 1 year after treatment with Tafamidis.