A 69-year-old woman underwent emergency endoscopic hemostasis at her local hospital for massive bleeding of the stomach. Endoscopic examination revealed an irregular ulcerative lesion with a visible vessel. Histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen of the ulcer confirmed the presence of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells. The patient was diagnosed with early gastric cancer that did not meet the criteria for endoscopic resection because of its ulceration and histological type, and she was subsequently referred to our hospital for surgical treatment. Physical examination and laboratory data, including tumor markers, revealed no specific findings. The patient also had no relevant medical history. Following treatment for gastric ulcer hemorrhage, the lesion was clarified as type 0–IIc with an ulcer scar 35 mm in size on the greater curvature side of the fundus . Endoscopic ultrasound revealed that the third layer was poorly demarcated at the ulcer scar, indicating invasion of the submucosal layer . Computed tomography (CT) did not reveal enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastasis. Following a clinical diagnosis of early gastric cancer confined to the submucosa (T1b) without lymph node metastasis and with intraoperative findings of no nodal metastasis, laparoscopic proximal gastrectomy with D1+ lymphadenectomy was performed. An additional resection of the distal side of the stomach was performed because the tumor was close to the resection margin. The operating time was 257 min, and the blood loss volume, including ascites, was 120 mL. Postoperative pathological examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells, 49 × 44 mm in size, with abundant fibrosis affecting all layers . The initial pathological diagnosis was intramucosal carcinoma (T1a) without lymphovascular invasion (Ly0, V0). However, 26/58 lymph nodes showed metastasis (N3b); n#1 (1/5), n#2 (5/5), n#3a (6/10), n#4sb (0/3), n#4sa (6/8), n#7 (0/7), n#8a (1/6), n#9 (5/9), and n#11p (2/5) . Further pathological examination was performed with more resected specimens transected every 2–3 mm and with D2-40 staining. The re-examined pathological samples identified only one lesion containing a small number of cancer cells in the lymphatic duct below the muscularis mucosa . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as having T1b gastric cancer with ly1 because of the single lesion in the lymphatic duct, although direct invasion to the submucosal layer was not found, even with further examination. The final pathological diagnosis was T1b gastric cancer with multiple lymph node metastases (pT1bN3bM0, pStage IIB). Postoperatively, the patient followed an uneventful course with no complications. We planned remnant gastrectomy and additional lymph node dissection, but the patient elected not to undergo the additional surgical treatment and selected only adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine/oxaliplatin. To date, there has been no evidence of recurrence more than 12 months after surgery.