A 28-year-old female initially experienced right lower limb numbness that gradually spread to the left side of the body in April 2020. Three months later, limb numbness had completely recovered, except for in the left upper limb. In January 2021, the patient developed blurred vision in the left eye. No other vision-related symptoms including itching, discomfort, foreign-body sensation, burning/stinging, photophobia, tearing, and discharge were reported. Furthermore, arthralgias or myalgias were not noted. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. Upon examination, the patient exhibited a nasal visual field defect of the left eye, left upper limb hypoalgesia, left knee hyperreflexia (+ + +), and a positive left Babinski sign. Left eye visual acuity was 20/200, and right eye visual acuity was 20/20. Lumbar puncture revealed positive cerebrospinal fluid-specific oligoclonal bands. No erythema, edema, or sclerotic skin plaque had been found on her limbs or trunk. Serum immunological tests showed that anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), and anti-extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), including anti-SSA (Ro), SSB (La), and Ro-52 antibodies were positive, while other laboratory tests (complete blood cell count, differential cell count, hepatic and thyroid function, urinalysis results and proteinuria, anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA)/anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibody (LKM), anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), anti-double stranded DNA antibody (dsDNA), complement C3, complement C4, serum immunoglobulin A (IgA), IgG, and IgM) were normal. The rheumatic factor was negative. Meanwhile, the patient received a consultation with rheumatologists and underwent a structured examination, including ultrasound examinations of the salivary, thyroid, and lacrimal glands. Considering that the patient presents no obvious clinical symptoms related to systemic autoimmune disease and abnormal glandular function, and only positive serum ANA, anti-Ro/SSA, La/SSB, and Ro-52 antibodies, rheumatologists suggest that the possibility of systemic autoimmune disease can be ruled out. Furthermore, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple hyperintense lesions in the left optic nerve, periventricular, and juxtacortical regions . An MRI of the cervical spinal cord showed gadolinium-enhanced lesions . The patient was subsequently diagnosed with relapse-remitting MS according to McDonald criteria 2017 with an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 3 points (vision, 4; sensory, 1; pyramidal functional system, 2).
A significant recovery, indicated by a reduction of the EDSS score to 1 point (vision = 1), was observed after the intravenous administration of methylprednisolone at 1000 mg daily for 3d and 500 mg daily for 2d. In February 2021, the patient started daily oral administration of teriflunomide at 14 mg as a sequential DMT treatment. Three months post-teriflunomide treatment, multiple well-demarcated, painful, itchy erythematous annular lesions forming confluent patches begun to appear in the facial region. Symptoms exacerbated upon sun exposure . Laboratory test results indicated positive anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, and anti-histidyl antibody (Jo-1). Additional laboratory tests include complete blood cell count, differential cell count, hepatic and thyroid function, urinalysis results and proteinuria, anti-AMA/anti-LKM, anti-ASMA, ANCA, ESR, CRP, anti-dsDNA, complement C3, complement C4, serum IgA, IgG, and IgM were normal. Facial skin fungal examination ruled out the possibility of fungal mycelia infection. Confocal laser scanning microscopy examination of the skin lesions showed that the basal layer was infiltrated with various amounts of dendritic cells, the dermal papilla and superficial capillaries were dilated and congested, and the perivascular infiltration of inflammatory cells was also observed. The clinical and serological features did not meet the diagnostic criteria of the American College of Rheumatology Classification Standard for SLE (2009) , but were consistent with the diagnosis of SCLE . The dermatologist prescribed hydroxychloroquine 0.2 mg daily as an intervention strategy for SCLE. In addition, dermatologists consider that Janus kinase (JAK) is a key mediator involved in the pathogenesis of cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and its inhibitor tofacitinib has been used as a new strategy for treating cutaneous lupus erythematosus and related diseases . Tofacitinib citrate tablets of 5 mg daily were also used. After 6 weeks of treatment, the patient’s symptoms and cutaneous lesions gradually resolved . The pathophysiology underlying of the SCLE development was attributed to the continued use of teriflunomide.
In February 2022, considering that the cutaneous lesions had subsided, the patient voluntarily stopped hydroxychloroquine and tofacitinib citrate. The facial annular plaques relapsed 2 weeks later. Laboratory test results also indicated positive anti-Ro/SSA, anti-SSB, and anti-Jo-1, while other tests (complete blood cell count, differential cell count, hepatic and thyroid function, urinalysis results and proteinuria, anti-AMA/anti-LKM, anti-ASMA, ANCA, ESR, CRP, anti-dsDNA, complement C3, complement C4, serum IgA, IgG, and IgM) were still normal. Reintroduction of hydroxychloroquine and tofacitinib citrate combo therapy as SCLE-related intervention completely resolves the plaque. In addition, clinical follow-up in June 2021 and January 2022, MRI of the brain and cervical spinal cord showed no significant increase in lesion number and size longitudinally along with stable maintenance of EDSS score of 1. During the last follow-up in August 2022, the patient remained stable with a minimal blurred vision of distant objects in the left eye and an EDSS score of 1 with no clinical relapse during teriflunomide treatment. No facial annular plaques were observed. The case report timeline is shown in Fig. .