A 24-year-old Chinese man presented to the hospital with a 6-day history of haemoptysis, cough and dizziness. He had a history of intermittent cough and blood-tinged sputum for 2 years but denied a history of infectious diseases, occupational exposures or foreign travel. He had no history of smoking. A history of penicillin allergy was noted. No significant medical or drug history was recorded.
Physical examination revealed a temperature of 37.2 °C, a heart rate of 143 beats/min, a blood pressure of 132/64 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and a pulse oximetry value of 98% in ambient air. The patient was tall and slender with a height of 175 cm and a weight of 65 kg (body mass index of 21.22 kg/m2). Chest auscultation revealed decreased lung sounds on the right hemithorax. The clinical examination was otherwise normal.
Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 9.45 × 10^9/L (neutrophils 67%, lymphocytes 23%, and eosinophils 1%), a haemoglobin level of 153 g/L and a platelet count of 231 × 10^9/L. The serum creatinine level, liver function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level were all within normal limits. Tests for connective tissue disease with auto-antibodies, including antinuclear, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, were negative. The test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a right-sided pneumothorax, several small cavitary lesions in the right lower lobe and nodules in the left lung . An intercostal chest drain was inserted in the patient, with complete resolution of the pneumothorax. Bronchoscopy showed bronchial inflammatory disease. Due to a history of penicillin allergy, the patient refused further bronchial artery computed tomography angiography (CTA) and an enhanced chest CT examination. On day 12 of the hospital stay, he was discharged after the removal of the chest tube.
However, after 3 months, he visited our clinic again and complained of dyspnoea with a duration of 2 days. A high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the chest was performed, which showed a large amount of gas in the left thoracic cavity, and the left lung tissue was compressed by approximately 60%. Both lungs had scattered patchy and nodular high-density shadows, and some shadows exhibited ground-glass density . The left-sided pneumothorax was managed with an intercostal chest drain. Both occurrences were diagnosed as primary spontaneous pneumothorax.
After 1 month, the pneumothorax relapsed, and the patient was readmitted to the hospital. Chest CT scans revealed bilateral pneumothorax with the mediastinum deviated to the right, and patch-like high-density shadows with an ambiguous boundary scattered in the two lungs . He was treated conventionally with an intercostal drain. Laboratory tests for connective tissue disease were performed again, and auto-antibodies were still negative. Bronchoscopy was performed again, and visible endobronchial lesions were not detected. An analysis of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) revealed a red blood cell count of 1270 cells/μL and a white blood cell count of 590 cells/μL (neutrophils 36%, lymphocytes 7%, monocytes 3% and other cell types 54%), prompting suspicion of occult intrapulmonary haemorrhage. Because of repeated relapses of pneumothorax and the presence of intrapulmonary nodules, the patient was referred for CT-guided lung puncture. A histopathological investigation of the right lower lung nodules revealed mild atelectasis and hyalinization of the alveolar tissue, and haemosiderin-containing macrophages were observed . No specific indication of lung puncture pathology was found; he was discharged from the hospital and followed.
In the next month, the pneumothorax relapsed again, and chest CT scans revealed gas on both sides of the chest cavity, scattered nodules in both lungs, and patchy high-density shadows with unclear boundaries . We performed wedge resection of the pulmonary parenchyma using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for his recurrent pneumothorax and obtained a specimen of the right lower lung lesion for pathology. The histopathological investigation revealed fresh and old haemorrhages and fibrous nodules. The wall of the cavity showed granulation tissue and calcification. Intra-alveolar haemosiderin-containing macrophages were indicative of a previous haemorrhage .
An in-depth physical examination was performed to determine the underlying cause of these atypical clinical manifestations. His skin was thin and translucent with visible venous patterns on the dorsal side of his feet. The clinical examination revealed subtle skin hyperextensibility on the face and forearm and hypermobility of the elbow and metacarpophalangeal joints . No evidence of scoliosis and no history of joint dislocations were observed. These findings led us to suspect a diagnosis of vEDS.
Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted from a blood sample collected from the patient. Whole-exome sequencing analysis was performed on the DNA sample using chip capture high-throughput sequencing at Shenzhen Huada Clinical Laboratory Center, Shenzhen, China. Chip capture high-throughput sequencing was performed to sequence exons and adjacent exon sequences of approximately 20,000 genes in the human genome. A variant analysis was performed on 3583 genes in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database that had a clear correlation with a single genetic disease. The process of analysis involved first filtering the sequences by 1% of the population frequency (variants present in greater than 1% of the population frequency were evaluated as sites with a low probability of aetiology). According to the patient’s clinical complaint, we next assessed whether mutation sites were likely to fit the symptoms in the filtered mutation dataset. The pathogenicity of the variants was interpreted and classified according to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) Guidelines published in 2015 .
Heterozygosity was observed for a novel variant, c.2977G > A (NM_000090.3), which represented a missense mutation that changes a glycine to serine at amino acid 993 (p. Gly993Ser) in the collagen type III alpha 1 protein. The mutation is named according to the Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) recommendations . This variation was not detected in gnomAD. The variant (COL3A1; NM_000090.3; c.2977G > A; p. Gly993Ser) was validated by Sanger sequencing in the proband and his parents. It was not detected in either of his parents, indicating that this variant was a de novo mutation. Other genes that caused overlapping features (such as FLCN) were excluded. Finally, a definitive diagnosis of vEDS was established.
Considering the deadly arterial complications of this disease, we then recommended further imaging tests to evaluate for possible arterial complications. The patient was referred for a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) angiography of the intracerebral, thoracic and abdominal arteries, which showed normal calibres of all arteries.
However, 1 month after surgery, the patient experienced a left-sided pneumothorax that was treated with a chest tube again, and he was closely monitored in the clinic. Fortunately, as of 8 months after discharge, the patient remains symptom-free and lives well, without a relapse of pneumothorax or new pulmonary lesions.