A 22-year-old woman presented with a history of transient dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. No neurological deficits were apparent; however, on further evaluation, initially with computed tomography (CT) scan, revealed multiple cystic hypo-dense mass lesions in bilateral cerebellar hemisphere, brain stem, and left thalamus with unclear boundary . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed these lesions presented as hyper-intense in axial T2-weighted images and hypo-intense in axial T1-weighted images . The solid components were visible in some of the lesions in axial T2-weighted images . In addition, axial T2 FLAIR revealed iso-hyperintense . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) showed no restricted diffusion . After contrast, one of the tumors showed mild peripheral enhancement, while others presented no enhancement , and small nodule-like higher signals in T2-weighted images were present . While, on perfusion-weighted imaging, the lesions were hypo-perfused .
Based on the above radiological findings, the woman was initially diagnosed with cerebral cysticercosis most possibly. Naturally, primary tumors of the central nervous system and metastatic tumors were differential diagnoses. Subsequently, she was admitted to the infectious diseases department to conduct empirical anti-infective therapy in addition to a follow-up post 2 weeks of MRI examination. Over the course of 2 weeks, she underwent further laboratory examinations, including serologies (specifically enzyme-linked immunotransfer blots (EITBs)); however, the results were negative. Meanwhile, eosinophilic cells and lymphocytes were neither found in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Other parasite antibodies were not discovered either. Most importantly, there were no significant changes in the MRI findings after 15 days . Finally, to determine an ultimate diagnosis, she underwent a biopsy of the right cerebellar hemisphere lesions in which the histopathological results confirmed a WHO grade I RGNT ultimately. Microscopically, the tumors showed that small round nuclear tumor cells were distributed in a network and arranged into a chrysanthemum-shaped cluster surrounding the nerve with single permutation. Synaptophysin immunopositivity in the pericapillary area of a perivascular pseudorosette was shown, along with scattered neurons in the focal areas were also visible. In addition, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in the astrocytic component of the tumor was diffuse distribution. .