A 4-year old Sri Lankan boy presented with gradually worsening difficulty in walking and unsteadiness for two weeks duration. He was the first child of non-consanguineous parents without a significant family history. He was investigated for anaemia since 18 months of age when he presented with haemoglobin of 8.0 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 57.8fL, mean corpuscular haemoglobin of 17.6 pg and hypochromic microcytic red blood cells (RBC) in the blood film. His serum ferritin, serum iron and haemoglobin high-performance liquid chromatography were normal. Peripheral blood film showed haemoglobin H inclusion bodies, and the DNA analysis revealed a compound heterozygous state for 3.7 kb α-globin gene deletion and triplicated α-globin genes (-α3.7/ααα). Complete blood counts of both parents were normal however, the α-globin genotype of mother revealed α-thalassaemia trait (-α3.7/αα). He was managed as non-transfusion dependent α-thalassaemia due to haemoglobin H disease with infrequent RBC transfusions and folic acid 1 mg daily.
During 3-months preceding the current presentation, his haemoglobin level frequently dropped below 7 g/dL thus requiring monthly blood transfusions. Then he started to lose motor developmental milestones in the two weeks before admission. At the time of admission, his gross motor development corresponded to the age of 9–12 months; he could sit unaided and stand with support, however, was not able to walk even with support. He was taking a normal balanced diet with food of both animal and plant origin and did not have any chronic illnesses.
On examination, the child had low mood, poor appetite, irritability and hypopigmented hair, which were of recent onset . His weight was 11 kg (at -3SD), and the growth chart showed weight loss of 2 kg over the past six months. His height was 92 cm (between − 2SD to -3SD) and BMI was 12.9 kg/m2 (between − 2SD to -3SD). There were multiple petechiae in the body. Neurological examination revealed generalised hypotonia, grade 4 muscle power in lower limbs and exaggerated knee jerk and extensor plantar response bilaterally. Examination of the upper limbs was normal except for hypotonia. Glasgow coma scale and intellectual functions were unaffected. Examination of other systems was normal.
His complete blood count revealed; haemoglobin- 6.8 g/dL, white cell count- 2800/mm3 (neutrophils-9 % and lymphocytes-89 %) and platelet- 53,000/mm3 . Blood film showed pancytopenia and haemoglobin H inclusion bodies remained positive. His reticulocyte count was 0.6 %, and the bone marrow biopsy revealed mildly suppressed megaloblastic erythropoiesis with partial maturation arrest of RBC precursors. Granulopoietic progenitor cells were hypercellular with giant metamyelocytes .
Based on the megaloblastic changes and neurological manifestations, vitamin B12 deficiency was suspected. Subsequent investigations revealed; low serum vitamin B12 (116 pg/ml; normal 187–883 pg/ml) and RBC folate (91 µg/L; normal 126–650 µg/L) levels. MRI of the spine revealed symmetrical T2-weighted high signal intensity in the posterior column from cervico-medullary junction to the 12th thoracic vertebra suggesting subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord . Axial T2-weighted images showed ‘inverted V sign’ with symmetrical bilateral hyperintense signal in posterior columns . MRI of the brain revealed multiple bilateral patchy T2-weighted high signal intensity in the centrum semiovale and deep white matter areas with mild cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. The ventricular system, extra-axial cerebrospinal fluid spaces and cerebellar folia were prominent. His nerve conduction study was normal, anti-intrinsic factor antibody titre was 14.7U (Normal < 20.0), and anti-parietal cell antibodies were negative. Urine analysis revealed urine albumin 2 + with normal microscopy. Urine protein: creatinine ratio was 225 mg/mmol suggesting non-nephrotic range proteinuria. His liver and renal function tests, serum electrolytes, serum calcium, serum protein and renal ultrasonography were normal; however, 25-hydroxy vitamin D level was 27.3 ng/mL (normal 30–100 ng/mL).
Due to the presence of non-nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency and proteinuria in the absence of renal pathology, the diagnosis of Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome was made. Genetic testing was not done due to its unavailability locally and difficulties in getting it done internationally. He was commenced on intramuscular hydroxocobalamin 1 mg daily for two weeks followed by 1 mg weekly for eight weeks and then 1 mg monthly. With treatment, he demonstrated rapid improvement of general well-being, hair pigmentation, neurological functions, and haematological manifestations over 4–8 weeks . He could walk unaided after two weeks and was transfusion independent after two months.