The patient is a 53-year-old man who was admitted to our hospital because of delayed perforation (> 6 h) after ESD of the rectum with a failed transrectal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM), and the patient had abdominal pain and fever.
The patient's out-of-hospital diagnosis was a laterally spreading tumor of the rectum, which was 25 mm × 20 mm in size and approximately 3-5 cm from the anus . The patient eventually underwent rectal ESD, which was performed by an inexperienced endoscopist (fewer than 50 cases), at a local hospital. According to the operation records of the local hospital, there was considerable bleeding during the ESD procedure, and the wound surface was large. It was impossible to accurately determine whether there was a perforation during the procedure, so the endoscopist decided to close the wound surface with a purse-string suture technique . However, the patient developed severe abdominal pain and fever (39.4 °C) six hours after ESD. A computed tomography (CT) scan performed at the local hospital indicated gas accumulation in the rectum and perineum. Considering the rectal perforation, the anorectal surgeons at the local hospital attempted to treat the perforation and wound surface with TEM. The wound surface was obviously congested and edematous. The anorectal surgeons first attempted to remove the clips and sutures. This operation resulted in worsening of the original perforation, enlargement of the perforation, multiple injuries to the mucosa around the perforation, partial tearing of the rectal mucosa and injury to the internal anal sphincter . Due to the significant bleeding, surgical suturing under direct vision was not possible. Hence, gauze and the anal canal were placed within the rectum, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further emergency treatment.
The patient was previously in good health without any other underlying medical conditions.
There have no difference.
The patient’s physical examination results were as follows: temperature of 37.7 °C (after intravenous injection of dexamethasone), pulse rate of 81/min, and BP of 155/100 mmHg. The patient had no cardiorespiratory symptoms, but he did have abdominal distension, muscle tension, middle and lower abdominal tenderness (+), rebound pain (+), significant swelling of the scrotum, hip, and perineum, and subcutaneous crepitus.
The patient’s laboratory examination results were as follows: WBC of 11.6 × 109/L, neutrophil count of 82.1%, CRP level of 158 mg/L.
The CT from the local hospital showed that the patient had gas around the intestines and pneumatosis under the perianal, perineal and scrotal skin.