A 169-cm, 65-kg, 51-year-old, right-handed man with right-side hemiparesis and dysarthria underwent screening magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 2 years before craniotomy: a diffuse parietal tumor was misdiagnosed as cerebral infarction. Anticonvulsant polytherapy (carbamazepine, 200 mg daily; levetiracetam, 1000 mg daily) was started for symptomatic epilepsy. Right-hand and oro-facial motor paresis worsened beginning 4 months before surgery, and he was diagnosed with malignant glioma. He was referred to our institution 2 months before surgery. MRI demonstrated a T1 hypointense, T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery hyperintense area in the left lower parietal lobe with a gadolinium-positive mass in the postcentral gyrus. 11C-methionine positron emission tomography showed a high accumulation of methionine mainly in the postcentral gyrus. The results of a manual muscle test (MMT) showed reduced function (3/5) in his right-upper extremity.
The patient’s hypertension was well-controlled with telmisartan (40 mg, daily) and hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg, daily). Diabetes was treated with glimepiride (1 mg, daily) and anagliptin (400 mg, daily). Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) was suspected due to a history of snoring. Electrolyte imbalance was not observed. Although carbamazepine was increased to 400 mg daily beginning 17 days before surgery, epileptic seizure in his right-upper limb occurred every 2–3 days. Levetiracetam was increased to 2000 mg daily upon admission 4 days before surgery.
The lesion, suspected grade III glioma according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines , was distributed throughout the primary motor and sensory areas of his dominant hemisphere. We chose awake craniotomy using the “Asleep-Awake-Asleep” technique combined with intraoperative MRI for removal of his glioma. Uncontrollable seizure suggested rapid growth of the tumor. The patient was evaluated as American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status Class 2. While the preoperative blood examination at admission indicated that his plasma sodium level (reference 136–145 mEq/L) had decreased from 140 to 130 mEq/L, he was asymptomatic. Preoperative correction of hyponatremia was ruled out to avoid neurological deterioration due to further growth of the glioma. Additional blood or urine examinations were not performed.
No premedication was given. Besides standard ASA monitoring, invasive arterial pressure and processed electroencephalogram monitoring were adopted. Following the intravenous administration of 100 μg fentanyl, general anesthesia was commenced and maintained with the target-controlled infusion of propofol (4.0 μg/mL) and the continuous infusion of remifentanil (0.5 μg/kg/min). After several attempts, a supraglottic airway (SGA) was inserted without muscle relaxant. Ventilation was adjusted to maintain an EtCO2 level around 35 mmHg. Normal saline and bicarbonate Ringer’s solution were given. Scalp blocks and infiltration analgesia were provided with 60 mL of 0.3% ropivacaine and 20 mL of 1% lidocaine with 0.01% epinephrine, respectively. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis (STAT PROFILE® Critical Care Express; Nova Biomedical, Waltham, MA) after induction showed mild hyponatremia .
Hypotension followed by induction was stabilized by three boluses each of ephedrine 4 mg and phenylephrine 0.1 mg until the beginning of surgery. Before dural incision, 200 mL of 20% mannitol was administered over 10 min. ABG analysis 117 min after induction, 25 min into mannitol infusion, revealed hyponatremia with hyperkalemia . Neither pathological electrocardiogram changes nor arrhythmia was observed. Sodium bicarbonate 2.8 g was given. Glucose-insulin (40 mL of 50% glucose containing 8 units of insulin) was infused simultaneously with another ABG analysis, which was performed to exclude mechanical failure . Hyponatremia was not treated promptly because of the risk of central pontine myelinolysis. ABG analysis 191 min from induction indicated persistent hyponatremia without hyperkalemia . In the planned transition to the awake phase, we anticipated insufficient wakefulness, intractable seizure, and deterioration of upper airway patency. Thus, the entire procedure was performed under general anesthesia. The remaining operation was uneventful, although the plasma sodium level remained less than 125 mEq/L . Anesthetics were discontinued, and SGA was removed 415 min after induction. The patient’s cardiorespiratory status was stable, but the patient could not follow orders. An intravenous transfusion of 1500 mL bicarbonate Ringer’s solution, 300 mL 1% glucose-containing acetated Ringer’s solution, 650 mL normal saline, and 200 mL mannitol was given. Total urine output was 1300 mL, and estimated blood loss was 36 mL. Surgery and anesthesia lasted 433 and 354 min, respectively.
The patient regained consciousness 1 h after the operation. MMTs of his right upper and lower extremities showed 1/5 and 3/5, respectively. Motor aphasia persisted until eight postoperative days (POD), and he walked unaided on POD 24. His plasma sodium concentration normalized by POD 35, before discharge on POD 39. MMTs at discharge were 2/5 and 4/5, respectively. Since the pathological examination revealed an oligoastrocytoma (WHO grade II), he received adjuvant chemotherapy. Prophylactic anticonvulsant polytherapy was continued, and there was no evidence of tumor recurrence at 36 months follow-up.