A 59-year-old Caucasian woman underwent cardiological examination due to palpitations over the past two years. Her medical history was relevant for Hodgkin’s lymphoma, treated with chest radiation and splenectomy at the age of 30. The patient was non-smoker and reported no illicit drug use. Apart from a slightly accelerated pulse, vital signs and physical examination were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed a sinus tachycardia. Echocardiography revealed a 2 × 3 cm mass in the inferior wall of the left atrium with no other cardiac abnormality . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging further described the mass as highly vascularized and infiltrating the inferior wall of the left atrium . Cardiac magnetic resonance cine images best delineated the mass. In T1- and T2-weighted images, the mass appeared isointense and hyperintense to myocardium, respectively. Gadolinum infusion revealed a positive contrast uptake on first-pass perfusion and a strong, heterogeneous delayed hyperenhancement. Computed tomography angiogram of the thorax identified no metastasis. The patient was referred to our tertiary centre for surgical treatment. After sternotomy and initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass with bicaval cannulation, the tumour was exposed via left atriotomy and macroscopically excised. A subsequent partial resection of the posterior wall of the left atrium was reconstructed with bovine pericardium. The postoperative course was, apart from a single episode of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, uneventful, and the patient could be promptly discharged.
Histopathological analysis of the tumour revealed heterogeneous pattern of epithelioid, stromal, vasogenic, and spindled cells, as well as hyaline matrix . The proliferation rate was moderate (1/10 high-power fields, Ki-67 proliferation index 20%). Cardiac myxoma and local recurrence of Hodgkin’s disease were excluded with negative calretinin and specific immunohistochemistry (CD30, CD15, and Pax5), respectively. The partial expression of endothelial markers (CD31 and ERG) pointed to a vascular tumour. The WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion, specific of the epithelioid type of hemangioendothelioma (HE), was negative. After external analysis for second opinion, the tumour was finally designated as composite haemangioendothelioma.
After 24 months, the patient was without cardiac or general symptoms. Repeated echocardiography and full body positron emission tomography–computed tomography revealed no signs of local relapse or metastasis.