A 19-year-old male visited the Ophthalmology Department in November 2013 due to a rapid decline in visual acuity within a short period of time. Ocular examination with slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed that the corneas of both eyes were transparent, but the inferior corneal quadrant thinned and bulged slightly, and Vogt’s striae were visible. There was a dense copper-brown depositional ring (KF ring) in the Descemet membrane around the periphery with a mean width of approximately 1.5 mm. The widest point was at the 12 o’clock position, at approximately 2 mm . The sclera did not stain yellow, the anterior chamber was clear, the pupils exhibited an equal size and shape and were sensitive to light, the lens was transparent, and there was no obvious abnormality on fundus examination. Corneal topography showed that the Sim K value of the right eye was 52.5D@99/49.9D@9, and the thinnest point of the cornea was 0.8 mm below the center, with a thickness of 361 μm. The Sim K value of the left eye was 55.9D@80/51.2D@170, and the thinnest point of the cornea was 0.7 mm below the center, with a thickness of 336 μm . The parameters of both corneas were consistent with the typical characteristics of KC.
The patient was referred to the Neurology Department for further consultation because of the existence of KF ring. Serological examination showed that the level of serum ceruloplasmin was low (18 mg/L; normal range: 204–407 mg/L), and the level of urinary copper was high (363 μg/24 h; normal range: less than 150 μg/24 h). Abdominal USG showed fine granular changes in the liver parenchyma. In addition, brain MRI showed abnormal signals indicative of cerebral peduncle and globus pallidus on both sides. However, all physical examinations were negative. Based on these findings, the patient was eventually diagnosed with asymptomatic WD. Over the 5 years since then, the patient has worn RGP lenses, consumed a low-copper diet, and taken penicillamine for copper discharge and zinc gluconate to inhibit copper absorption. Moreover, the removal of copper was occasionally assisted via the administration of dimercaptopropane sulfonate. Recent examinations showed that the color of the KF ring was obviously lightened , the corneal morphology and thickness were stable, and symptoms of neurological, mental, and liver damage were negative.