A 29-year old Caucasian male presented with a one week history of increasing dyspnea on minimal exertion and two syncopal episodes. His past history was notable for pulmonary atresia, a hypoplastic RV and a secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) at birth, for which he underwent closed pulmonic valvotomy and creation of a central aortopulmonary (AP) shunt on day 2 of life. He subsequently underwent a classic Glenn shunt, ligation of the central AP shunt and finally closure of the ASD secundum. He was lost to follow-up until his current presentation. On physical examination, the patient was afebrile with a normal pulse and blood pressure. Peripheral O2 saturation was 84% on room air. The jugular venous pulsation was elevated at 6 cm above the sternal angle. Auscultation revealed a grade 3/6 systolic murmur over the left lower sternal border and bibasilar crackles. A room air arterial blood gas demonstrated a pH of 7.51, PaO2 of 64 mmHg, PaCO2 of 28 mmHg, and HCO3- of 25 mmol/L. Electrocardiogram revealed evidence of right atrial enlargement with nonspecific ST-T wave changes across the precordial leads. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed no evidence of a pulmonary embolism. Of note, the right atrium and inferior vena cava (IVC) were markedly dilated and several venous collateral vessels were observed between the superior vena cava (SVC) and IVC . Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography (TTE and TEE) revealed evidence of a double chambered right ventricle with a peak systolic gradient of 50 mmHg across a prominent moderator band . There was no evidence of obstruction noted across the pulmonary outflow tract. The left ventricular systolic function was within normal limits with no valvular abnormalities. Following administration of agitated saline contrast from the left antecubital vein, there was evidence of right-to-left shunting. The site of shunting could not be identified on TTE nor TEE. Further imaging with CMR revealed a hypertrophied muscle bundle dividing the RV into two chambers with a systolic dephasing jet across this band corresponding to the region of flow acceleration detected on TTE , confirming the diagnosis of a DCRV. The CMR pulmonary angiogram confirmed venous collaterals extending from the SVC to IVC, with no explanation for the right-to-left shunting. Right heart catheterization revealed a large venous collateral arising from the left innominate vein draining into a segmental branch of the left superior pulmonary vein .