A 56-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a 4 cm in diameter lump in her left breast. She had a screening mammogram done 3 years earlier which was reported as suspicious but the patient did not seek medical attention for this period. She was otherwise fit and well without any significant past medical history. She was not on any medications and did not have previous admissions to a hospital. She did not have any family history of any form of cancer.
The patient underwent a triple assessment for the breast lump which was found to be suspicious in both the clinical and imaging investigations.
The mass was confirmed to be a grade II invasive ductal carcinoma on core biopsy which was strongly positive for estrogen (ER) receptors while it was negative for progesterone (PgR) receptors. The tumor was HER-2 negative.
During pre-treatment, staging investigations, which included computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen, she was found to have a 13.5 cm mass in her left ovary, a small amount of ascites and a large right pleural effusion. The pelvic ultrasound showed a 13.5 cm × 10 cm × 8 cm hypo-echoic ovarian mass with an irregular necrotic, also hypo-echoic central area and moderate amount of ascitis.
Considering the common presentation of ovarian carcinomas with similar picture and the association of breast cancer with ovarian carcinomas, initially the ovarian mass was thought to be metastatic as was the pleural effusion. Serum tumor markers showed a raised CA125, (59 u/ml with normal values < 24) supporting the malignant nature of the ovarian mass. The pleural effusion was aspirated but cytology was indeterminate. Aspiration of the pleural effusion caused a pneumothorax. Due to persistent fluid drainage through the chest tube, the patient eventually underwent thoracoscopic pleurodesis with simultaneous biopsy of the pleura, 6 months after diagnosis. The pleural effusion did not recur after this procedure and the pleural biopsy taken at the time showed no malignancy. The patient from the beginning was strongly against mastectomy and she was commenced on neo-adjuvant Letrozole 2.5 mg daily with a view to perform breast conserving surgery later. The breast cancer became impalpable within 1 year and continued to respond to Letrozole. Meanwhile, regularly repeated pelvic ultrasounds initially showed a reduction of the ovarian mass size , which had an irregular necrotic area in its centre , and then an unchanged picture without any progression of the disease. Repeated CA 125 values showed a decline and subsequently a normalization of the value (15 u/ml) during the following 3 years. All these changed our initial impression about the malignant nature of the ovarian mass and the extent of the breast cancer. Since, the breast cancer size plateau at 1 cm and 3 years after the diagnosis the patient was advised and persuaded to have some surgery. She only agreed to have wire – guided excision of the breast primary lesion, sentinel node biopsy and axillary sampling. Despite the indication for hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the patient declined extensive procedures and agreed only to have the ovarian mass excised laparoscopically. During the laparoscopy there was no residual ascitis, the ovarian tumor was mobilized laparoscopically and removed through a small Pfannestiel incision extending horizontally to the left of the midline only.
Histological examination of the 11 cm firm, solid ovarian mass confirmed the presence of a benign ovarian fibroma. Her breast cancer was completely excised with good margins but the sentinel lymph node contained metastasis while 2 of 4 sampled nodes contained isolated tumor cells on immunohistochemistry. Since the patient declined axillary clearance, she was referred for post-operative radiotherapy to the breast and axilla. The CA 125 remained within the normal range postoperatively (15 u/ml).