A 15-year-old girl presented with blurred vision after being hit by an elbow on her left eye. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 16/20. On fundus examination, both a choroidal rupture that formed a crescent shape concentric to the optic disc and a subretinal hemorrhage were detected . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed that the juxtafoveal retinal pigment epithelial layer with Bruch's membrane was disrupted, and the inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) of the photoreceptor junction and the external limiting membrane (ELM) layer were distorted with suspected pinpoint disruption .
After 3 weeks, her visual acuity reduced to counting fingers. Fundus examination revealed that the subretinal hemorrhage had absorbed and the choroidal rupture had expanded. The crescent-shaped window defect including the fovea was observed on fluorescein angiography (FAG) . Wider disrupted layers of the RPE, the IS/OS junction, and the ELM at the corresponding area were detected in OCT. When compared with the first medical examination after the injury, the IS/OS junction and the RPE adjacent to the ruptured site were hardly distinguishable, although they were originally clearly observed .
Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 500 mg intravenous for 3 days and prednisolone 30 mg oral, tapering for 11 days) was started in another hospital, and 3 months after the injury, visual acuity increased to 20/125. Five months later, OCT revealed that the size of the expanded choroidal rupture had reduced, and the adjacent retina had improved sufficiently to distinguish the IS/OS junction and the RPE. However, FAG disclosed a choroidal neovascular membrane originating from the nasal edge of the choroidal rupture . An intravitreal bevacizumab (Avastin, 1.25 mg/0.05 ml; Genentech, Inc., San Francisco, Calif., USA) injection was administered, and 1 month later, the patient's BCVA of the left eye had improved to 20/32, and the CNV had shrunk . Also the IS/OS junction and the RPE had improved sufficiently and were able to be distinguished .