A 62-year-old man presented for evaluation of an elevated serum PSA (19.8 ng/mL). Needle biopsy led to the diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 4 + 5 = 9. MRI was notable for prostate tumor invading the seminal vesicles, although skeletal scintigraphy revealed no bone metastasis and no visceral metastases were detected on abdominal CT. Based on these results, the clinical stage was determined to be cT3bN0M0. First-line treatment included IMRT (total 80 Gy) with combined androgen blockade. Serum PSA decreased to 0.05 ng/mL during the treatment but increased to 2.64 ng/mL at 29 months later. CT scan at that time revealed a metastatic left internal iliac lymph node. The patient was diagnosed with CRPC and treated with local irradiation of 60 Gy to the lymph node. After radiation, serum PSA dropped to its nadir at 0.30 ng/mL. Eight months later, his serum PSA level increased to 4.25 ng/mL in association with multiple lung metastases detected on CT . The patient was treated with ABI. Nine months after initiating ABI therapy, most of the lung metastases had disappeared, although one lesion remained. This ABI-resistant solitary lung nodule was diagnosed as an oligometastatic lesion; this definition implies that an appropriate surgical procedure may be curative. To remove the remaining lung metastasis, VATS was performed. After the procedure, the PSA level again dropped to 0.04 ng/mL; serum PSA has remained <1.0 ng/mL for 10 months .
The lung tumor cells proliferated in solid pattern that was consistent with the diagnosis of metastatic PCa . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were strongly positive for AR, weakly positive for PSA and negative for both thyroid transcription factor 1 and p40 which are markers for adenocarcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma of the lung, respectively.
We performed a genomic analysis of this resected metastatic tumor using the NGS clinical sequencing system at our hospital ., We also identified homozygous (biallelic) deletions of BRCA2 and RB1 in the tumor tissue . CDK12 somatic point mutation (p.Q937*) was detected as a pathogenic variant. All variants detected, including VUS are presented in Table .
Oncogene targeted amplification resulted in the detection of IDH2, AR, MYC, ERBB2, ERBB3, ESR1, NRAS, SMO, and AKT2. All relevant copy numbers are presented in Table . Tumor mutation burdens were calculated at 4.0 single nucleotide variants per million bp. Copy number variation and variant allele frequency plots indicated a high frequency of loss of heterozygosity and scattered allelic imbalance; these findings are detected comparatively frequently in homologous recombination-deficient tumors.