The patient was a 37-year-old man. He was diagnosed with CD at the age of 14 years. He was started on infliximab at age 26 years, followed by azathioprine at age 31 years, and budesonide at age 33 years, but his disease remained poorly controlled.
At the age of 35 years, he underwent seton drainage for his anal lesions and subsequently switched from infliximab to adalimumab, but the inflammation of the intestinal tract remained completely uncontrolled. At the age of 37 years, he was referred to our department for the surgical treatment of multiple stenoses of the intestinal tract and anorectal area.
He had no medical history, was 164.9 cm tall, weighed 47.8 kg, and had a body mass index of 17.6.
Physical examination revealed no tenderness in the abdomen, but he had 10 bowel movements per day, and 3 seton drainage tubes were placed around the anus. Outpatient rectal examination could not be performed due to pain. Blood test results showed anemia (Hb: 8.6 mg/dL) and low nutrition (albumin: 2.5 g/dL, prealbumin: 15 mg/dL); inflammatory markers were mildly elevated (CRP: 3.54 mg/dL).
CS showed a cobblestone appearance, a longitudinal ulcer, and multiple stenoses that were difficult to pass without a transnasal endoscope . Endoscopic contrast examination revealed severe stenosis in the transverse colon and rectum , which was considered an indication for surgery. The Montreal classification was A1L3B2p, and the CDAI was 283.
Prior to surgery, we decided to perform an examination under anesthesia (EUA) to exclude perianal malignancy. Rectal examination under general anesthesia reveals the anal fistula has one primary lesion and three secondary ones. One seton drainage tube was placed between the primary and secondary, and two seton drainage tubes were placed between the secondary lesions . Following this, endoscopy was performed, and a random biopsy was obtained from the stenosis of the rectum, which was difficult to evaluate in detail during the preoperative examination. The perianal infected foci were scraped, and the fistula tract was resected as far as possible and subjected to pathological examination. The operation was terminated by the reinsertion of a seton drainage tube .
Pathological examination revealed no malignancy in the random biopsy of the rectum, but part of the resected fistula revealed a highly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and the patient was proven to have coexisting anal fistula cancer .
Contrast-enhanced CT and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging studies were performed, but the perianal area showed severe inflammatory changes, and the spread of the lesion could not be evaluated. No obvious lymph node or distant metastasis was observed. Tumor markers (CEA: < 1.7 ng/mL, CA19-9 < 2 U/mL) were within the normal range.
Finally, we diagnosed the patient with CD-related anal fistula cancer (cT1N0M0 cStage I) and performed hand-assisted laparoscopic total colectomy, rectal amputation, extensive perineal resection, and reconstruction with a left rectus abdominis flap.
After total colectomy and partial rectal resection with hand-assisted laparoscopy, the patient underwent a transanal procedure. We performed a resection of the remaining rectum and an extensive perineal resection to remove the fistula as much as possible . The perineal tissue defect was replaced with a left rectus abdominis flap , and the remaining skin defect on the left buttock was treated with a segmental skin graft . The operative time was 12 h and 5 min, and the blood loss was 1280 mL. A urethral injury was found on postoperative day 14, but the patient recovered conservatively with the insertion of the urethral catheter. On postoperative day 44, the patient was discharged home.
Although the skin graft fell off, the skin flap survived, and epithelialization was achieved in most of the wound area 3 months postoperatively .
Pathological examination showed that the anal fistula cancer extended 4 cm in length, with a histology of well- or moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma. The pathological diagnosis was pT2N0M0 pStageIIA (UICC-TNM classification, 8th edition).
10 months postoperatively, the patient has had no apparent recurrence.