A 73-year-old man who had undergone laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with Billroth I reconstruction for early gastric cancer 15 months before experiencing abdominal distension and occasional vomiting was admitted to our hospital. The patient had undergone follow-up computed tomography (CT) and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for 1 year after surgery (2 months before admission), during which time no abnormal findings, including the previously observed dilatation of the bile and pancreatic ducts, were found.
Symptoms worsened and ingestion became difficult. On admission, blood tests showed a slightly inflammatory reaction, and CT revealed a solid mass in the third portion of the duodenum and dilatation of the oral side of the duodenum and remnant stomach . EGD revealed a bezoar deep in the third portion of the duodenum . The bezoar collapsed while trying to grasp it with forceps. We then tried crushing the bezoar with the forceps, but it was too deep to crush completely. We were also unable to search the duodenum on the other side of the bezoar. At midnight on the day of the EGD, he experienced sudden abdominal pain. Blood tests performed the next morning showed a significant increase in inflammatory response. Therefore, CT was repeated. The bezoar had disappeared from the duodenum but was observed in the ileum . Moreover, small bowel dilatation was observed on the oral side of the bezoar. Although CT showed no free air or ascites, laboratory data showed the increase of leukocyte (8400/μL) and C-reactive protein (18.1 mg/dL), and abdominal pain was severe. Emergency surgery was performed because conservative treatment was considered ineffective. Although the small intestine was expanded and edematous on the oral side of the bezoar, no perforation or necrosis was observed. We tried advancing the bezoar into the colon, but the ileum was too narrow; therefore, we incised the ileum and removed the bezoar . The bezoar was ocher, elastic, and hard, and its cross-section was uniform and orange . We found no abnormal duodenal findings on palpation. The postsurgical interview revealed that there was the tree of persimmon in the garden of his house and he loved eating Japanese persimmons (Diospyros kaki) and seemed to eat 30-40 persimmons in one season; therefore, a diospyrobezoar was diagnosed. His postoperative progress was good and without complications. He left the hospital 10 days after surgery. EGD performed 4 weeks after surgery revealed no abnormal duodenal findings.