A 7-year-old boy complained of poor vision and photophobia in both eyes. At the first visit, his uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The preoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 with refraction of + 5.50 –1.75 ×170 in the right eye and 20/32 with refraction of + 5.00 –4.00 ×180 in the left eye. He was not wearing glasses or contact lenses for correction of hyperopia. Eye movements were normal. Alternate prism and cover measurements revealed exotropia of 18 prism diopters in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed a persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) in both eyes, but otherwise was essentially normal . Each PPM consisted of many strands inserting into the collarette of the iris with several free floating edges. The membrane covered half of the pupil area in the right eye and two thirds in the left eye, and its root was fully extended after mydriasis with phenylephrine eyedrops. The central portion of each membrane was attached to the anterior lens capsule, but there was no posterior synechiae in either eye. Because of their large size, the membranes seemed to cause blurred vision and visual impairment by occluding the visual axis. Findings on funduscopy were normal. The patient had no family history of ocular disease.
The PPM was surgically resected from both eyes under general anesthesia. A superior clear corneal incision was made using a 2.4 mm keratome. Then a high-viscosity viscoelastic material (Opegan-Hi™, Santen, Osaka, Japan) was injected into the anterior chamber and behind the iris to separate the PPM from the anterior lens capsule , after which the strands were excised with a curved iris scissors. Next, residual strands were removed completely by irrigation and aspiration, after which hydration of the superior corneal wound was done with sterile balanced salt solution (OpeGuard Neo Kit®; Senju, Osaka, Japan). Histopathological examination revealed typical features of normal iris tissue in the excised membranes . Each specimen consisted of a thin fibrovascular membrane containing small vessels, fibrocytes, and stromal melanocytes. Melanin-rich pigment epithelial cells covered the surface of the membrane that was closest to the pupillary margin.
Postoperatively, the pupils were round and central in both eyes . There were no surgical complications, including endophthalmitis, lens damage, or corneal opacity. UCVA was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. BCVA was 20/20 with refraction of + 7.50 –1.75 ×170 in the right eye and 20/20 with a refraction of + 9.00 –5.75 ×5 in the left eye at 5 months postoperatively. Exotropia resolved and orthophoria was achieved immediately after surgery.