A 20-year-old female presented to the hospital with an abdominal mass and gross haematuria for 1 month. She recently complained of left abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and noticeable weight loss. The patient did not have a family history of malignant tumours. The physical examination revealed abdominal distention with a large mass in the left upper quadrant. The mass was irregular, hard, immovable, nontender and without overlying skin changes. The laboratory test results for tumour markers were as follows: carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125), 136.89 U/mL (reference range: 0.00–35.00 U/ml); the levels of other tumour markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA-199), and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), were normal. Urine analysis showed that the red blood cell (RBC) count was 56/µl (reference range: 0.0–25.0), and the white blood cell (WBC) count was 59/µl (reference range: 0.0–25.0). Liver and kidney function test results and the complete blood count were within normal levels. Conventional ultrasound (US) examination showed a 4.5 × 3.2 cm irregular lesion at the lower pole of the left kidney. To further clarify the diagnosis of the tumour, contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) was performed, which presented signs of annular enhancement and heterogeneous enhancement of the tumour, and simultaneous wash-in was predominant. The possibility of a tumour lesion was considered . A CT scan showed a 3.7 × 3.8 × 4.0 cm heterogeneous mass in the left kidney, which had blurry edges and a high-density dissepiment in the interior. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the kidney showed that the lower one-third of the left kidney was occupied . Gross total removal of the tumour was achieved. The tumour was a 3.5 × 3 × 2.6 cm well-defined grey‒white nodular mass with necrosis . Hematoxylin–eosin staining (HE) and immunohistochemistry (Leica DM4 B, DFC7000 T camera and LAS X software) were performed. Under the microscope, the tumour cells were small, round, short spindle-shaped, and densely arranged; Homer Wright rosettes were found; the cytoplasm of the tumour cells was sparse; and the nuclei were slightly enlarged and hyperchromatic. The tumour tissue was accompanied by extensive haemorrhage and necrosis. Immunohistochemistry showed the following: CD99 ( +), Vimentin ( +), EMA (−), CD10 (−), CD56 (−), syn (−), and NSE (−) . Other immunohistochemistry staining see supplementary information (Additional file ). The pathological diagnosis was an EWS/pPNET that did not invade the ureters. Subsequently, 21 days after the operation, the patient received 8 cycles of a CAV (vinorelbine, ifosfamide, epirubicin) + IE (isocyclophosphamide, etoposide) regimen from December 1, 2017, to May 11, 2018. Adjuvant radiotherapy (dose: 45 Gy, radiation field: the tumour bed following surgical resection) was also administered from June 11, 2018, to July 13, 2018. At the same time, the serum CA-125 level of the patient showed a gradual downwards trend after surgery and chemotherapy. The serum CA-125 levels returned to normal at the end of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The patient had no signs of local recurrence or metastasis on CT scan within a follow-up of 4 years.