A 70-year-old woman visited another clinic with loss of body weight and mucous diarrhea. She had no family history and no characteristic travel history. She underwent total colonoscopy, which showed erythematous polypoid lesions from the lower rectum to the sigmoid colon . Biopsy was taken from several typical polyps. Histopathological examination of biopsy specimens revealed hyperplastic polyps or tubular adenomas with low-grade atypia . She was not judged to be an appropriate case for complete endoscopic polypectomy because of multiple polypoid lesions. She underwent gastroscopy, where slight atrophic gastritis with erythematous edema was confirmed. She was not diagnosed with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection by rapid urease tests and histopathological findings.
6 months later, the patient returned to clinic with a worse complaint of repeated mucous defecation (5–6 times/day) and bilateral leg edema. Second colonoscopy revealed no remarkable changes of polypoid lesions with purulent mucus. Biopsy specimens showed tubular adenomas which contained moderate atypia. Laboratory tests showed hypoproteinemia (serum total protein 6.0 g/dl; normal range 6.6–8.1 g/dl) and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 3.3 g/dl; normal range 4.1–5.1 g/dl) while white blood cell count (5800/mm3) and C-reactive protein levels (0.28 mg/dl) were not elevated. Other laboratory data were unremarkable. The patient sometimes developed tenesmus and mucous bloody diarrhea, and visited our hospital for detailed treatments.
Considering the overall course of examination and taking into account the patient’s strong request for surgery, we judged she was not suffering from inflammatory bowel diseases or hereditary/non-hereditary polyposis coli and diagnosed protein-losing enteropathy which could not be denied malignant potential. Therefore, we performed laparoscopic low anterior resection of the rectum and the sigmoid colon with diverting ileostomy. During operation, we found thick subserosal layer with moderate fibrosis and edematous change. Anal surgical margin was located 3 cm above the dentate line. Surgical specimen revealed more than 100 polyps consisting of elongated and mild adenomatous glands with a thick layer of subserosal tissue . Polyps were covered with a layer of inflammatory granulation tissues and fibrinopurulent exudate. The intervening mucosa of the polyps was relatively normal, so the patient was diagnosed with cap polyposis . After surgery, symptoms improved, including return to normal range of serum total protein and albumin levels. 6 months later, she had no complaints or recurrence of cap polyposis in the remnant colon. We will continue a tight follow-up surveillance.