A 62-year-old man with chronic kidney disease and hypertension was hospitalized due to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). After recuperating for 11 days at home, he developed hemoptysis and dyspnea for >2 days. He received two COVID-19 vaccine doses before the onset of symptoms. On admission, he was stable without sustained hemoptysis, not requiring oxygen administration; he was not administered deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis. On hospitalization day 2, he experienced sudden-onset epigastric pain, followed by decreased oxygenation and hemodynamic failure leading to pulseless electrical activity. Femorofemoral VA-ECMO was introduced 54 min after cardiac arrest owing to poor response to advanced cardiopulmonary life support. The patient was transferred to our hospital for intensive care. The ECMO system was set using the CAPIOX Emergency Bypass System (CAPIOX EBS; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), which includes a centrifugal pump (CAPIOX Centrifugal Pump SL; Terumo) and a membrane oxygenator (CAPIOX LX; Terumo).
On hospitalization day 2, PE and acute epidural hemorrhage (AEDH) were diagnosed using computed tomography (CT; Fig. ). Unfractionated heparin (UFH) administration continued after CT confirmed no AEDH progression between days 2 and 3, with activated partial thromboplastin time targeted at 45–60 s as the therapeutic range. Flow was reduced gradually unless the mean arterial pressure was <65 mmHg or pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) increased by 5–10 mmHg from the baseline. On day 6, we reduced the ECMO flow from 2.0 to 1.0 L/min as a weaning trial and monitored the hemodynamic parameters , echocardiographic findings, and blood gas levels. With low catecholamine doses (norepinephrine: 0.1 mcg/kg/min and dobutamine: 3 mcg/kg/min), blood pressure and PAP remained unchanged (137/77 to 141/69 and 81/32 to 84/37 mmHg, respectively) and cardiac index increased (2.1 to 2.8 L/min/m2). There were no relevant changes in the echocardiographic findings and blood gases during the weaning trial. PAP was high but there was no exacerbation; thus, we decided to decannulate ECMO. However, his circulation gradually collapsed, and he developed pulseless electrical activity 30 min after withdrawal. VA-ECMO was reintroduced within a low flow time of 35 min. Although PE was assessed as the cardiac arrest cause, continuous UFH administration was stopped because of AEDH exacerbation . As the patient was comatose, targeted temperature management at 36°C was maintained for 72 h. Catheter-directed aspiration thrombectomy was performed on day 7 without a significant change in PAP. Surgical pulmonary arterial thrombectomy was not performed because the use of large amounts of heparin to introduce a cardiopulmonary bypass was considered fatal in the presence of AEDH. Resolution AEDH trends were confirmed with regular CT follow-up, and UFH administration, aimed at an activated partial thromboplastin time of 35–40 s, was cautiously resumed on day 9. By day 22, PAP, although higher than normal, progressively decreased. In addition, most of the PE remained on repeated CT . Therefore, VA-ECMO weaning through PCRTO was scheduled with 20-ppm inhaled nitric oxide, as cautious evaluation of RV compensatory function was required. On day 23, a heparin bolus (16 units/kg) was administered for trial initiation. The sweep gas flow was stopped after reducing the pump speed to 355 rpm, and a retrograde flow of 0.83 L/min was achieved. Hemodynamic monitoring parameters and ECMO settings before, after, and during PCRTO are presented in Table . On PCRTO initiation, the cardiac index (from 2.0 to 2.9 L/min/m2), right cardiac work index (RCWI; from 0.95 to 1.67 kg·m/m2), and pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPi; from 1.71 to 4.10) gradually increased. After confirming the patient's stability via repeated hemodynamic and echocardiography assessments, ECMO was discontinued 1 h after PCRTO. Hemodynamic parameters between 1 h after PCRTO and after decannulation were similar: PAP (68/27 versus 68/25 mmHg), CI (2.9 versus 3.1 L/min/m2), RCWI (1.67 versus 1.74 kg·m/m2), and PAPi (4.10 versus 3.90). The patient was extubated on day 32 and transferred to the previous hospital on day 37, with a cerebral performance category of 1.