A routine examination's chest X-ray revealed an abnormal shadow in the right middle lung field of a never-smoker, 82-year-old Japanese woman. She had a medical history of atrial fibrillation and stomach ulcer. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a solid 2.5 × 2.0-cm nodule in the very small right middle lobe . Positron emission tomography (PET) showed an accumulation of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in the nodule, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.68 in the early phase and 5.63 in the late phase. Bronchoscopy showed patency of B4 and B5 up to subsegmental bronchi and no abnormal bifurcation .
A trans-bronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) of the mass in the right middle lobe was performed; it revealed atypical cells with round nuclei growing in multiple foci, and immunostaining was positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and CD56, suggesting pulmonary carcinoid. The preoperative clinical diagnosis of primary lung cancer, cT1cN0M0 stage IA3 was considered.
A right middle lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection were performed by video-assisted thoracic surgery . Intraoperatively, the middle lobe of the right lung was very small, and both the pulmonary arteries and veins were 1–2 mm in diameter, which was considered pulmonary hypoplasia. The size of the resected right middle lobe was 5.3 × 3.0 × 2.8 cm, and the tumor was 2.8 × 1.3 × 1.1 cm .
The histopathological examination showed that the tumor was composed of a proliferation of atypical cells with round or oval nuclei and stippled chromatin. Pleural invasion of tumor cells was observed. There was no mitosis or necrosis . The immunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . The normal area of the resected lung did not show the inflammatory cell infiltration usually seen in atelectatic lung, so we consider it to be lung hypoplasia rather than atrophic lung caused by atelectasis. The final histopathological diagnosis was typical carcinoid, pT2aN0M0 stage IB. Because of the patient's advanced age, she was followed up without adjuvant chemotherapy and has survived for 5 years without recurrence.