An 11-year-old Caucasian girl with acute delusions and aggressive behavior was admitted to our acute in-patient Child Psychiatry Unit.
This patient was the first child of non-consanguineous parents, born at term by Caesarean section with a birth weight of 3,450kg. The neonatal period was regular, with maternal nursing. Autonomous walking occurred at 14 months and the first words were spoken at 12 months with a subsequent normal language development.
The patient showed normal learning abilities and good social skills before the onset of the psychiatric symptoms, even if her parents described her as ‘shy’ and with low social initiative; moreover, they reported behavioral modifications with a reduction of interests and social withdrawal a few months before the beginning of delusional symptoms. Her emotional relationship toward her parents was reserved and unstable.
A month before admission to the in-patient unit the girl started to develop suspicious thoughts with obsessive features concerning the possibility of being harmed by her parents, accompanied by a high level of anxiety. These symptoms soon worsened and the patient was referred to the Emergency Service for a clinical picture characterized by auditory hallucinations and persecutory delusions towards her parents. In detail, she believed that, after a short trip, her parents had been replaced by impostors and that the ‘new’ persons replacing them were planning to poison and kill her. At this point she showed a depressive mood with frequent sadness and crying, loss of energy and difficulties in sleeping and concentrating. Delusion was not extended to any other person or inanimate object, and was not associated with reduplicative paramnesia. Her parents showed at the time of admission a sense of guilt and a depressive mood with unsupportive interactions with their child. At the following visit they revealed an emotional feeling characterized by difficulties in caring for their child, frustration, and anger toward the child herself. Nevertheless, their overall social skills in interaction and communication were within the normal range
.
A diagnosis of ‘Delusional Episode’ based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edition) was performed using Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children. The qualitative pattern of the delusion, concerning the identity of her parents despite still recognizing the semblance of their body, is typical of Capgras syndrome, which is the best known among delusional misidentification syndromes
. The girl was normal at both physical and neurological examination. The electroencephalography was also normal, whereas the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a cerebellar arachnoid cyst of non-pathological relevance. The results of other diagnostic tests including electrocardiography, sequential multiple analysis comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, serum electrophoresis and thyroid function, were within normal range.
A complete psychopathological assessment was conducted at the time of admission (T0), and after one month (T1), three months (T2) and six months (T3). Between T0 and T1 the patient was treated with risperidone 3mg per day, and between T2 and T3 50mg per day of sertraline was added to the risperidone.
At T0 (no medication) the girl showed a full-scale intelligence quotient of 82 using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-III (Verbal Scale score: 86; Performance Scale score: 82), a Children’s Global Assessment Scale score of 39, high levels of depressive symptoms with a Children’s Depression Inventory score of 27, and a score of 71 on the Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children for anxiety symptoms. The Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia revealed a positive subscale score of 22, a negative subscale score of 20, a general psychopathology subscale score of 41 and a total score of 83. Finally, the girl scored 7 on the Clinical Global Impression-Severity (CGI-S) scale.
At T1 (after one month of treatment with risperidone, 3mg per day), a reduction was observed in the positive symptoms, including auditory hallucinations, albeit still relevant. By contrast, the CGI-S showed only a minimal improvement and no reduction in the depressive symptoms was detected (see Table
). Due to the modest improvement of the clinical picture and to the stable high levels of depressive symptoms and obsessive thoughts, clinicians decided to introduce an antidepressant in association with risperidone: the choice was sertraline (50mg per day).
At T2, after two months of combined treatment, a significant improvement was observed in all the domains analyzed, with a full remission of the clinically relevant psychotic symptoms, as assessed in the clinical setting and by direct interviews. Finally, a significant reduction in the severity of symptoms was also detected after six months (T3) of treatment with risperidone and sertraline: the patient started to recognize her parents and the monothematic delusion characterized by her belief of parents being replaced by impostors disappeared. Moreover, the PANSS scores for schizophrenia also showed a progressive reduction over time: from 22 at admission to 19, 12 and 9 at T1, T2, and T3, respectively (see Table
).