A 41-year-old Japanese man was transferred to our emergency department in October 2012 with complaints of headache and nausea. He was hypotensive (98/57 mmHg), tachycardic (120–140 beats/minute), and edematous over the trunk and all four limbs. He had experienced the same episode 9 months previously. That first attack had been complicated by stroke, which caused right hemiplegia. Laboratory studies demonstrated elevated levels of hemoglobin (18.6 g/dl) and hematocrit (53.5%), as well as hypoalbuminemia (2.2 g/dl). To keep his systolic blood pressure from dropping below 60 mmHg, he was given aggressive intravenous fluid therapy (500–1000 ml/hour). Following hydration for more than 12 hours, he complained of severe pain in his right forearm. His forearm compartments were tense and swollen. He underwent fasciotomy of the right forearm to prevent muscle necrosis. A volar longitudinal incision was made. The patient’s hypotension lasted for 2 days, and his symptoms reversed quickly with massive diuresis. One week after fasciotomy, the wound was closed.
In view of these clinical features, a diagnosis of SCLS was suspected. Serum monoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) and κ light chain was detected by immunofixation electrophoresis, supporting this diagnosis. The patient’s IgG level was 1143 mg/dl. A bone marrow study revealed 1.0 % of plasma cells. These findings were consistent with a monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. The clinical suspicion of angioedema was not high, because the patient’s complement levels, such as C4 and C1q, were all normal.
Prevention of these crises was attempted with theophylline (400 mg/day), IVIG (2 g/kg/day for 1 day, repeated every 4 weeks), and high-dose dexamethasone (40 mg on days 1–4, 9–12, and 17–20, repeated every 4 weeks); however, five additional episodes of hypotension occurred in the subsequent 3 months after hospitalization . The last one was so severe that it required repeat fasciotomy of the right forearm. Over the next 3 months, seven episodes ensued despite VMP (bortezomib, melphalan, and prednisolone) therapy, which consisted of bortezomib (1.3 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, 15, and 22 with melphalan (9 mg/m2) and prednisolone (60 mg/m2) on days 1–4. Then, daily oral thalidomide (100 mg) was started. Surprisingly, the patient had no further episodes for 2 years, except for one episode soon after the initiation of thalidomide. Notably, his monoclonal IgG κ protein remains clearly detectable, despite the complete disappearance of his hypotensive crises.
The serum of the patient was stored on the 50th hospital day, immediately after the onset of the 5th hypotensive crisis, to profile possible mediators responsible for the capillary leak. The second sample was serum obtained on the 204th hospital day, when the patient’s hypotensive crisis had disappeared after the introduction of thalidomide. The cytokine levels in the patient’s serum were measured using Quantikine enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Our institutional review board approved the study protocol, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient.
First, we focused on VEGF, Ang-2, and CXCL10, since the possible involvement of these cytokines in SCLS has been indicated in some reports [–]. The results presented in Table show that the concentrations of VEGF, Ang-2, and CXCL10 were all within the normal range at each measurement point. Then, we analyzed VEGF isoforms VEGF-C and VEGF-D. The results were that the concentration of VEGF-D on the 50th day was 1042 ng/ml, which exceeded the normal range (135–642 ng/ml). In the serum obtained on the 204th day as the negative control, the VEGF-D level was normal. The concentrations of VEGF-C did not exceed the normal range on either the 50th or the 204th day. Supplemental examinations of four more cytokines—interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-11—were performed; however, none of them was detected.