A 57-year-old male was presented in July 2019 with a 3-week history of fresh bleeding via the rectum, dizziness, weight loss, and altered bowel. By physical examination, it was evident that the patient looked pale, but the abdominal and rectal examinations were unremarkable. In addition to this, basic laboratory investigations including kidney function test (KFT), liver function test (LFT), coagulation profile, and urine analysis were all within normal range. On the other hand, hemoglobin (Hb) was low at 8.5 gm/dL with low mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and blood film showed microcytic hypochromic anemia with slight neutrophilic leukocytosis and thrombocytosis.
Computed tomography scans presented soft tissue mass lesion in the lower pole of the cecum associated with multiple enlarged regional lymph nodes only, without any liver or lung lesions . PET scan done and showed hypermetabolic malignant cecal mass with hypermetabolic regional mesentric lymph nodes . In addition, colonoscopy exhibited a large polypoid mass lesion arising from the cecum and extending beyond the hepatic flexure. Also, biopsy showed clonal plasmacytosis (Immunoreactive for CD138, CD56 and negative for CD3 and CD20 and lambda light chain restricted); a picture consistent with plasmacytoma . Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy showed no evidence of clonal plasma cell disorder. In addition to this, serum free light chain showed a kappa level of 15.5 mg/L (normal: 3.3–19.4) and lambda level of 364 mg/L (normal: 5.7–26.3); ratio 0.042 (normal: 0.26 to 1.65). Urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP) and immunofixation were normal, while a monoclonal band (IgG Lambda) in the gamma area measuring approximately 2.2 gm/dL was evident in serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and immunofixation. Further workup showed a β2 microglobulin 1.8 mg/L (normal 0.8–2.5), immunoglobulin-G (IgG) 2994 mg/L, IgM: 175 mg/dL and IgA: 203 mg/dL. Moreover, PET scan showed hypermetabolic malignant right colonic (cecal) mass, which is compatible with known primary tumor.
Right hemicolectomy was performed and revealed a cecal exophytic polypoid mass measuring 5.5 cm in maximal dimension. The histopathologic study of the mass revealed a submucosal tumor composed of large oval cells consisting of a round nucleus in eccentric position with coarse chromatin and plenty of cytoplasm. The tumor infiltrates the muscular wall of the intestine and the pericolic fat . Eleven out of fifteen regional lymph nodes were involved, the surgical margins were free and immunohistochemical stains were performed. The tumor cells were immunoreactive for CD138+, CD56+ and showed lambda light chain restriction ( and ). They were negative for CD20 and synaptophysin and CD3. The overall findings are consistent with extramedullary colonic plasmacytoma.
Along with large tumor size, persistent monoclonal band, and regional lymph node involvement, radiotherapy is sought out to have minimal benefits. Moreover, data established from secondary plasmacytoma and primary plasmacytoma of sites other than colon showed favorable outcome with bortezomib adjuvant therapy. Therefore, it is worthy of investigation in primary colonic plasmacytoma.
Following surgery, the patient received adjuvant treatment with 6 cycles of VCD, which all were well tolerated. Three months after surgery, monoclonal band was reduced to 0.4 gm/dL, and after finishing all planned adjuvant VCD, no monoclonal band was seen. Currently, with 30 months after surgery, no monoclonal bands were detected and PET scan showed no evidence of disease (complete remission).