A 38-year-old Asian male patient was diagnosed with right hepatocellular carcinoma accompanied with a right anterior portal vein tumor thrombus . The patient received transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) at the local hospital before visiting our hospital. Blood tests suggested that his liver function was almost normal, with HBsAg+, anti-HBe+, and anti-HBc+. The serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19–9 were 1200 ng/ mL and 14 U/mL, respectively. Theoretically, anatomic and right hepatectomy could achieve a radical curative effect. However, computed tomography (CT) data showed that the volume of the right liver lobe was large, whereas the volume of the future liver remnant was too small, which increased the risk of postoperative liver failure.
We further performed liver volume measurements and three-dimensional reconstruction of the liver. The total liver volume (TLV) was 2009.47 mL, and the volume of the left liver lobe, the future liver remnant volume (FLRV), was 621 mL . FLRV was smaller than the physiological liver volume required for the patient [standard liver volume (SLV), 823.54 mL].
To achieve sufficient hypertrophy of the left liver lobe, we adopted a planned two-stage right hemihepatectomy strategy. The patient and his family did not agree with performing ALPPS, whereas PVE was not suitable due to the portal vein tumor thrombus. Thus, concurrent ligation of the right branch of the portal vein and the right bile duct was adopted. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and his parents prior to the surgical procedure. All surgical procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of Third Affiliated Hospital of Second Military Medical University (Shanghai, China).
After all the preoperative preparations were performed and informed consent was obtained, the first step was to investigate the specific local status of the abdominal cavity and the tumor under laparoscopy. After the abdominal cavity and the tumor were detected, the gallbladder was removed, and the portal vein bifurcation and the right branch were carefully separated. Next, we pulled the right branch of the portal vein with 4–0 silk thread, and pinched the right branch of the portal vein with two ham-lock clamps near the confluence. During the ligation procedure, we tried to reach a maximally close proximity to the confluence to avoid embolization in the right anterior branch. Further, the right bile duct was ligated in the same way. Almost no bleeding occurred during the operation. Postoperatively, the liver function of the patient was significantly abnormal. During the first 3 days after the operation, transaminase levels sharply elevated. The leukocyte count also increased slightly, but there was no fever. We performed symptomatic treatments such as liver protection and prophylactic antibiotics, and closely monitored for changes in the vital signs. The patient’s general condition improved on the fifth day after surgery.
Reevaluation was performed 1 week post-first-stage surgery. Contrast enhanced CT of the abdomen and liver volume measurement was conducted again . The volume of FLRV was 1051.56 mL and of TLV was 2914.9 mL . The TLV and FLRV values had almost doubled. Data showed that the volume rate of the left hepatic lobe decreased to 36.08%, but its volume increased. FLRV was significantly larger than the standard liver volume of the patient, and thus we considered surgery to be safe. The second step of the laparoscopic right hemihepatectomy was performed on the following day. The blood loss was 350 mL, and the duration was 360 minutes. No complication was observed in the intraoperative and postoperative course. The patient recovered very smoothly and was discharged from the hospital 1 week postoperatively. Histological examination showed hepatocellular carcinoma associated with microvascular damage. We recommend that patients return to the hospital 1 month after surgery to receive one-time preventive transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE). The patient is still alive; he has been tumor-free and in good health for more than 6 months postoperatively.