The patient is a 27-year-old male who had been admitted to the emergency room after a road traffic accident. He suffered from a severe pain in his right thigh and ankle. He had a previous medical history of an osteosarcoma of the right distal femur 5 years ago. A wide resection of the tumor had been performed followed by cemented total knee tumor prosthesis replacement. Six months later, he was operated due to a deep wound infection and a revision knee arthroplasty was done. Five years later, he was free from metastases, knee extension 0° and flexion 50°.
On examination and imaging studies in the emergency room, a bifocal periprosthetic fractures around both femoral and tibial stems components were found. There were closed comminuted subtrochanteric fracture of femur adjusted at the tip of the prosthesis in the presence of extruded bone cement at the fracture site , and open Gustilo Type IIIB fracture of middle and distal third of the tibia and fibula with bone and soft-tissue loss . The high suspicion of prosthetic loosening was presented too.
In the operating room under general anesthesia, massive irrigation and surgical debridement of open fracture of the right leg with reduction and spanning external fixation by Ilizarov frame were performed .
Closed reduction of the subtrochanteric femoral fracture was achieved by expansion of the external hybrid Ilizarov frame to the hip . For fixation of proximal fragment, an external fixation arch with three threaded 6 mm half-pins (two of them inserted through femoral neck and one-through lesser trochanter) was used. The Ilizarov fixator of the tibia in combination with additional mid-femoral ring with small wires was used as a distal segment of the external fixation frame for stabilization of the femoral fracture. The temporary bridging of the knee joint was performed .
The healing of soft-tissue wound of the right leg occurred without any complications using method of negative pressure wound therapy followed by skin grafting. The physiotherapeutic treatment, which included muscle strength exercises, active and passive motions of the ankle joint, walking with partial weight bearing on right lower limb, was started on the 3rd post-operative day. Six weeks later, the patient walked with full weight bearing with two crutches. Eight months after operation, in the presence of radiological signs of bone consolidation, clinical test of full weight bearing on the right lower limb by unscrewing the nuts of the threaded rods of external fixation frame was performed – the walking remained painless. Thirty-eight weeks after surgery, the hybrid Ilizarov device was removed and support with long leg brace was continued for additional 3 months. There was no evidence of prosthetic loosening (, , ). Five months later, the patient returned to his previous activities. By follow-up at 24 months, he had full knee extension 0° and flexion 40°, which corresponded to the ranges of pre-traumatic motions, and he walked without support.