A 63-year-old Caucasian man, 175 cm in height and 75 kg in weight, was brought to the emergency room with sudden onset of abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, with breathing difficulty, and with facial swelling after quarrelling with an acquaintance. The medical history of this patient included repeated anaphylactic symptoms after eating pasta, drinking beer, taking loxoprofen, or at the time of feeling anxiety, having quarrels, etc. for more than 30 years, for which he occasionally received epinephrine auto-injector administration. He also had undergone detailed checkups for skin lesions and unexplained splenomegaly at other hospitals. A skin biopsy specimen obtained 3 years earlier showed the presence of nonspecific inflammatory cells but was nondiagnostic, whereas a bone marrow aspiration procedure resulted in dry tap with reticular fiber hyperplasia, suggesting primary myelofibrosis.
On admission to our hospital, his body temperature was 38.2 °C, his blood pressure was 106/88 mm/Hg, heart rate was 168 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 80% on room air. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 12,100/μL, consisting of 24.2% neutrophils, 72.1% lymphocytes, 1.9% monocytes, 1.7% eosinophils, and 0.1% basophils, with no abnormal cells. His hemoglobin concentration was 10.6 g/dL, his platelet count was 183 × 103/μL, and his serum C-reactive protein concentration was 1.74 mg/dL. Evaluation of serum concentrations of hepatic enzymes revealed the following: lactate dehydrogenase, 96 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 31 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 26 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 174 U/L; and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 209 U/L. His renal function was normal. His serum concentrations of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (soluble IL-2R, 3695 U/mL; reference, 157–474 U/mL) and tryptase (444 µg/L; reference, 2.1–9.0 µg/L) were markedly higher than normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen at the emergency room showed a characteristically swollen and edematous small intestine (arrows) and splenomegaly , but no evidence of mechanical obstruction. Physical examination showed diffuse MPCM on his trunk (chest, abdomen, and back), arms, and legs , which he had had for more than 30 years. Bone abnormality included osteopenia/osteoporotic lesions of the pelvic bones and in a few spinal bones (arrowheads) . Based on these results, he was suspected as having a possible anaphylactic combination of persistent gastrointestinal tract problems, symptoms of respiratory compromise, and involvement of the skin associated with additional bone disease. He was treated with oxygen (7 L/min), intravenous saline containing Polaramine® (d-chlorpheniramine maleate; 5 mg/dose), Gaster® (famotidine; 20 mg/dose), and Solu-Medrol® (methylprednisolone sodium succinate;125 mg/dose). The abdominal cramps disappeared within 6 h. He became free from oxygen in about 3 h and was discharged from the hospital the next day.
He subsequently visited to the rheumatology and hematology department, where he underwent a bone marrow aspiration/biopsy; the aspiration resulted in dry tap like in previous attempt. The marrow obtained by biopsy contained abundant mast cells at least more than 80% and was strongly positive for CD117 and CD25 and slightly positive for CD2 . These bone marrow findings suggested chronic mast cell leukemia (MCL), an advanced subtype of SM ; however, the diagnostic MCL criteria of WHO are based on marrow aspiration, not by biopsied specimen. A biopsy sample was also obtained from an area of cutaneous MPCM rash on his abdomen. Histopathologic examination of this rash specimen showed marked infiltration of mast cells positive for CD117, CD25, and CD2 . A KIT point mutation at codon 816 mutation (D816V) was not confirmed in his peripheral blood. After SM diagnosis being confirmed, the patient was taken care in the hands of hemato-oncologists.