A 27-year-old Swedish woman with no family history of cancer presented with stomach pain, rectal bleeding and weight loss. A computed tomography (CT) revealed an 80 × 55 mm tumor in the transversal colon. Colonoscopy showed a stricturating, voluminous tumor with irregular polyps. Most of the tumor surface was covered with white necrotic tissue. Multiple biopsies from the site showed suspected adenocarcinoma, but the result was not conclusive. A biopsy was then taken from the abdominal wall, and MAC with K-ras mutation in codon 12, gene pGly 12ASP (c.35G > A) was found.
Two months after the prior CT, a new CT showed that the tumor had grown rapidly, measuring 150 × 90 mm . It was locally advanced, seemed to infiltrate the duodenum and the mesentery, and involved the abdominal wall. Moreover, 3 small liver metastases were discovered, sized 12 mm, 7 mm and 4 mm, respectively. Carcinoembryotic antigen (CEA) was <5 μg/L and cancer antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) was 27 kE/L, both within the normal range.
The primary tumor was originally considered non-resectable at multidisciplinary conference (MDC) and chemotherapy with neoadjuvant intention was initiated. The patient received 3 cycles of fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (FLOX), but unfortunately suffered from several infections and the dose was gradually reduced . Even so, she rapidly deteriorated. She lost weight, slept most of the day and was dependent on parenteral nutrition . She had anemia, thrombocytosis and hypoalbuminemia , and also suffered from a pulmonary embolism. A CT scan showed similar tumor size compared to the previous CT .
The therapy was now focused on palliation and she was referred to palliative care. The treatment was switched to low dose metronomic (LDM) capecitabine 500 mg × 2 (500 mg twice daily without interruption) and bevacizumab 350 mg every other week. Within a short time she began to feel better, being able to stay up most of the day. After 2 months she described herself as feeling fresh and alert, and had gotten her appetite back. Her blood tests were restored to normal. After 3 months she was no longer in need of parenteral nutrition. She did not report any side effects of the given treatment. After 4 months a CT showed some regression in tumor size but clearly less solid component and low attenuating areas, indicating necrosis . At a new MDC the tumor was deemed resectable. Four and a half months after she began treatment with capecitabine/bevacizumab, she had surgery with right hemicolectomy, mesentery resection and omentectomy. Parts of the right rectus abdominis muscle were removed along with the tumor overgrowth. In the same operation, 3 of the liver metastases in segments 1, 3 and 4b were also removed. Yet another liver metastasis in segment 8 was identified with intraoperative contrast-enhanced ultrasound. It measured 5–6 mm and was treated with intraoperative radiofrequency treatment. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a moderately differentiated MAC in the colon, measuring 90 × 60 mm. In addition, there was an 80x80 mm portion of the tumor that engaged the abdominal wall. There were large areas of necrosis in the tumor. Perineural growth was seen but no lymphovascular invasion. None of the 34 surgically removed lymph nodes contained metastasis. In the liver, 3 metastases of MAC were found, measuring 15 × 18 mm, 6 × 15 × 8 mm and 18 × 15 × 11 mm, respectively. There was also an incidental finding of a neuroendocrine tumor grade 1, pT1a, in the appendix.
The patient suffered from a postoperative infection, but recovered well. No adjuvant chemotherapy was given. She is under follow up and there are no signs of recurrence 9 months after surgery.