A 32-year-old man from Yemen presented on 6 May 2020, with low-grade fever, sore throat, and insomnia. His father had passed away 5 days prior due to COVID-19. His medical history included a microadenoma that was diagnosed using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and secondary adrenal sufficiency, which was managed with steroid therapy. For 2 years preceding his diagnosis, the patient experienced daily headaches that were especially severe in the morning. They were usually located in the occipital area and were described as boring or occasionally throbbing pain. The headache increased with movement and stress, and sometimes responded to analgesics. In July 2019, the patient developed symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia. His random blood sugar level was 50 mg/dL during his first episode and 31 mg/dL during the subsequent episode. The patient also experienced general fatigue. His symptoms led to the diagnosis of secondary adrenal insufficiency, which was confirmed by low cortisol and cosyntropin levels. The patient was prescribed prednisone (20 mg/day). However, he did not receive any drugs or interventions for the pituitary microadenoma. Two months before the diagnosis of COVID-19, the patient developed blurry vision and scotoma in his left eye. He had normal thyroid function test results and normal prolactin levels. Antinuclear antibody test results were negative. The patient was a heavy smoker who smoked two packs per day. At the time of COVID-19 diagnosis, physical examination showed that the patient was febrile (temperature 38.3 °C) and acyanotic. His blood pressure, respiratory rate, pulse rate, glucose level, and oxygen saturation were 117/83 mmHg, 18 breaths per minute, 80 beats per minute, 118 mg/dL, and 95%, respectively. The patient was administered ceftriaxone (1 g twice daily intravenously), azithromycin (500 mg tablet once daily), and paracetamol (1 g tablet every 6 hours) but did not respond to treatment. Two days later, he became severely ill and toxic, and had symptoms of altered mental status, including hallucinations. He complained of shortness of breath (SOB) with progressive air hunger. Within the next 24 hours, his symptoms reached maximum severity. His oxygen saturation dropped to 80% on oxygen via a nonrebreather mask, and his temperature, respiratory rate, and pulse increased to 39.8 °C, 28 breaths per minute, and 95 beats per minute, respectively. Pulmonary physical examination revealed rhonchi and crepitation. Cardiovascular examination revealed no murmur, normal S1 and S2, and no gallops. No jugular vein distention was observed. Neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Score of 15, fluctuating mental status, motor strength of 5/5 in all limbs, and intact sensation in all limbs. His abdomen was soft and nontender. No edema or rash was observed on the skin. The patient’s blurry vision and scotoma in his left eye increased in severity during the COVID-19 course. On the second day after the appearance of severe illness and dyspnea, the patient was administered methylprednisolone (80 mg twice daily intramuscularly for 5 days, followed by oral administration with dose tapering over 10 days until return to his daily dose of 20 mg). Three days after starting the medication, the patient’s health improved dramatically; the oxygen saturation increased to 91%, and fever, SOB at rest, and cough disappeared. On the ninth day after developing dyspnea, high-grade fever recurred, along with edema of the lower limb and abdominal discomfort. The patient did not have SOB at rest or cough, and his dyspnea gradually improved. Despite the administration of a variety of antibiotics, his fever did not improve. Chest radiography performed on day 10 showed some improvement in lung infiltration, but persistent ground-glass opacification. Repeat chest radiography performed on day 17 revealed significant improvement in lung infiltration and significant clearance of the ground-glass opacification. The patient remained febrile for 1.5 months. C-reactive protein (CRP) level during this period was normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was also normal during this period. Blood cultures revealed no growth, and malarial parasites were not observed on thin or thick films. With regard to his laboratory values, the patient’s white blood cell count increased throughout his disease course. Neutrophilia and lymphocytosis were also observed. The patient also had an increased number of monocytes. Later in the disease course, lymphopenia was observed. Platelet levels ranged from 293 to 90 g/L. The CRP level was elevated early in the disease course and later normalized. The ESR increased to 40 mm/hour and subsequently normalized. The D-dimer level peaked at 750 ng/mL, the ferritin level was 1250 ng/mL, and the lactate dehydrogenase levels ranged from 171 to 371 mg/dL. The troponin level did not exceed 0.008 ng/dL, and his creatinine levels remained normal. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG levels were 40 and 70 AU/mL, respectively. Chest radiography revealed bilateral patchy infiltration. Electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm.
On 18 August 2020, 3 months after the initial presentation to the hospital, the patient was advised to undergo a control brain MRI for comparison with his previous MRI findings . MRI showed improvement in the pituitary microadenoma. The changes included the disappearance of the hypointense lesion and hyperintense enhancement that was seen in the previous magnetic resonance images obtained on 28 March 2019. No macroadenoma or microadenoma was observed . Clinically, the patient’s blurry vision improved, and the severity of his headaches decreased drastically.