A 44-year-old man presented to his primary physician with complaints of right lower abdomen discomfort for 4 years and diarrhea for 5 months. The symptoms were aggravated within 1 week.
The colonoscopy examination showed a 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm protuberant lesion in the cecum with erosion, necrosis, and ulcer formation on the surface . The tissue was tough and prone to bleeding during the biopsy. Histologically, the lamina propria was markedly expanded by medium-sized round/oval cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nucleus . The cells were slightly atypical and admixed with numerous eosinophils . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the round/oval cells were negative for the epithelial markers, such as CKpan, cam5.2, EMA, CK7, and most lymphohematopoietic markers, such as CD20, CD79ɑ, CD3, CD5, CD8, CD21, CD23, BCL2, BCL6, CD10, mum-1, cyclin-D1, TDT, GranB, TIA-1, perforin, MPO, CD138, CD38, as well as other markers, such as CD163, langerin, CD1a, S-100, CD34, and EBER, but were diffusely positive for CD45 , CD117 , CD25 , CD68 , CD123 , CD4 , CD56 , and CD35. The staining intensity of CD4 was slightly lesser than that of small lymphocytes. The Ki-67 proliferation index in the disease area was 50%. Giemsa staining showed purplish-red granules in a small number of cells. Molecular analysis revealed missense mutation (D816V) in the exon 17 of KIT gene by Sanger sequencing , without clonal immunoglobulin (Ig)/T-cell receptor (TCR) rearrangement and BCR-ABL fusion. No chromosome aberration was observed by karyotyping analysis. Further bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular marrow with trilineage hematopoiesis and no mast cell aggregation . No primitive cells were found in bone marrow smear and peripheral blood smear (not shown).
Laboratory examinations identified increased serum tryptase level (38.56 ng/ml, normal range 0–8 ng/ml). PET/CT showed local cecum wall thickening with increased FDG uptake and mild enlargement of adjacent lymph nodes. Vital signs and physical examination showed no obvious abnormalities. The patient’s body weight decreased by about 2.5 kg in recent 5 months.
A final diagnosis of KIT D816V-mutant aggressive SM involving intestinal tract was established based on the combination of morphologic, immunohistochemical, molecular, and clinical findings.
The patient was given avapritinib at an initial dosage of 200 mg once daily. After a month of treatment, the symptoms of diarrhea and abdomen discomfort ceased and the level of serum tryptase returned to normal ranges. Meanwhile, the patient’s memory was impaired, which recovered by gradually adjusting the drug dosage to 75 mg once daily. The patient underwent a routine ultrasound examination once a month by one designated doctor. Ultrasound results showed that the intestinal lesions and adjacent lymphadenopathy subsided after 1 month of treatment. The patient was followed up for 12 months and no recurrence was observed at the adjusted avapritinib dose (75 mg once daily).