A 69-year-old woman with a past history of hypertension was admitted to our hospital because of upper abdominal pain. She tested positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV) ribonucleic acid (RNA) for the first time, though she had not been given a transfusion. Laboratory data on admission showed a slightly high inflammatory response with a white cell blood count of 5200/mm3 and C-reactive protein level of 0.64 mg/dL. Aspartate transaminase was elevated at 42 IU/L, and alanine transaminase was within a normal range of 27 IU/L. Other liver enzymes were also elevated as the following: alkaline phosphatase of 479 IU/mL, leucine aminopeptidase of 93 IU/L, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase of 55 IU/L. Serum albumin was within a normal range of 3.9 g/dL. The tumor marker test revealed a high protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) level of 181 mAU/ml and a normal alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) of 7 ng/ml. The enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed an 81 × 65-mm-sized tumor with multiple nodules in segment 3 of the liver .
The rim of the tumor was enhanced, and the inside of nodules showed hypoattenuation. Through gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a 17 × 12-mm-sized tumor was found in segment 5 in addition to the tumor in segment 3 . Both tumors were highly enhanced in the early arterial phase, followed by washout in the delayed phase, which is a common enhancement pattern of HCC.
In addition, a lymph node in the hepatoduodenal ligament was enlarged at 13 mm in size . The enhancement pattern of the lymph node was similar to liver tumors on Gd-EOB-DTPA-MRI. Furthermore, both two liver tumors and the lymph node showed high signal on diffusion-weighted MRI, which suggested lymph node metastasis of HCC . No other suspicious lesions, such as mediastinal or hilar lymph node enlargement, were found. Although she was an HCV carrier, her Child–Pugh score was A. Despite the enlarged lymph node suggesting metastasis, all lesions seemed to be resectable. Therefore, hepatectomy of the lateral segment, partial segment 5 liver resection and enlarged lymph node dissection in the hepatoduodenal ligament were performed. Since the enlarged lymph node in the hepatoduodenal ligament was found to adhere to the lymph nodes around the common hepatic artery during the operation, they were resected all together.
Both tumors in segments 3 and 5 were white and solid and comprised multiple nodules . Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed high-density tumor cells ranging from well to moderately differentiated HCC with a large nucleus–cytoplasm ratio without vessel invasion . The tumors contained necrotic cells and epithelioid cell granulomas with multinucleated giant cells, which is typically observed in sarcoidosis . The liver tissue showed pathologically moderate chronic hepatitis, but not cirrhosis.
Macroscopic findings of the dissected lymph nodes were also white and solid. They contained epithelioid cell granulomas, as well as giant cells with asteroid bodies . There was no malignancy in the dissected lymph nodes. The pathological findings suggested the coexistence of malignancy and sarcoidosis. However, since the postoperative angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was within the normal range of 11.2 IU/L or any typical findings of pulmonary or cardiac sarcoidosis, the case was diagnosed as HCC with SLR in the regional lymph node.
Thirteen months after the surgery, multiple recurrent tumors in the liver were surgically resected. Lymph nodes that remained in hepatoduodenal ligament were found enlarged during the operation, and they were also dissected. All of these specimens including lymph nodes were pathologically diagnosed as metastasis surrounded by SLR. Although lenvatinib mesylate was orally administered, she died 17 months after the first surgery due to additional tumor recurrence in the liver.