In February 2021, a 70-year-old woman presented to emergency department with a 5-day history of non-sedable diffuse epigastric pain. He was associated with vomiting, initially bilious and then hematemesis, fever, paroxysms of cough and dyspnea. No history of previous abdominal surgery in the past.
Heavy smoker patient. In anamnesis: chronic obstructive bronchopathy, chronic atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, a primary hyperparathyroidism from known parathyroid adenoma and an inveterate umbilical hernia.
The patient reported, for about 30 years, repeated episodes of epigastric pain, with alimentary vomiting, which resolved spontaneously a few hours after onset, attributed to episodes of incarceration of the umbilical hernia.
At the admission in the emergency room: Blood pressure: 105/55 mm Hg; heart rate: 102/min; external body temperature: 38,2 °C; sPO2: 91% in ambient air.
Physical examination of the abdomen revealed a voluminous umbilical hernia, not reducible, particularly painful on palpation. For the rest, the abdomen was flat, not breathing, hardly treatable and showed signs of defensive contracture and peritonism.
Blood tests showed a hemoconcentration with HT: 50.5%, WBC: 10,600/mm3; hyperamylasemia (2768 IU/l) and hyperlipasemia (1577 IU/l), γGT: 63 IU/l; AST: 75 IU/l, creatinine: 1.20 mg/dl; CRP: 45 mg/l.
Arterial blood gas analysis: pO2: 42.4 mm Hg; pH: 7.48; pCO2: 51.7 mm Hg; HCO3: 39 mmol/l; K: 3.3 mEq/l, Na: 152 mEq/l.
The indirect intra-abdominal pressure was 6 mm Hg but, under coughing, it reached values of 25 mm Hg and more.
Real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA was positive.
CT examination of the chest and abdomen diagnosed necrotic-exudative pancreatitis with peripancreatic fluid collections. Intrapancreatic choledochus diameter: 11 mm.
In the umbilical area, a large hernia with a 50 mm diameter hernial port and engagement of the intestinal loops, the proximal duodenum, the distal stomach and the head of the pancreas . Retrograde invagination of the jejunum from Treitz to the stomach was also described with signs of distress of the intestinal wall and complete intestinal obstruction .
Multiple ground glass foci in both lungs.
Once the gastric-nose tube was placed, approximately 250 cm3 of hemorrhagic fluid were aspirated.
After surgical evaluation and informed consent was obtained, the patient was immediately transferred to the operating room where she underwent an emergency laparotomy. After the lysis of viscero-parietal adhesions and the reduction of the hernial contents in the abdomen, a significant distension of the duodenum and gastric antrum from retrograde invagination of the jejunum from the Treitz to the stomach was highlighted in abdomen. Therefore, manual reduction of the invaginated intestine was carried out with the release of about 60 cm of intestine which showed significant signs of hemorrhagic infarction and multiple diastatic perforations (, , ).
A prompt resection of the intestinal piece was performed with jejuno-jejunal stapled side-to-side anastomosis.
The surgery was completed with simple hernioplasty and placement of two abdominal drains.
The surgery lasted 75 min.
Blood losses were quantified as less than 50 cm3.
Transferred to the Resuscitation Unit, the post-operative course was characterized by progressive and constant worsening of respiratory exchanges (PaO2: 34 mm Hg; PaCO2: 60 mm Hg; PaO2/FiO2 < 100 mm Hg), linked to SARS-COV2 pneumonia, which unfortunately complicated the severe septic situation, leading to death the patient in the third postoperative day for severe ARDS.