A 72-year-old Saudi Arabian woman had a small right breast opacity detected on a screening mammogram, which revealed right upper outer mid and posterior third regional clusters of microcalcifications with underlying increased density associated with partially marginated nodule . The target ultrasound shows partially marginated hypoechoic mass with tubular extension from the lateral aspect and relatively soft in elastography . The lesion was asymptomatic and impalpable. Histological examination of a core biopsy revealed intraductal papilloma, and although follow-up was recommended unfortunately it was not performed.
Two years later she represented with a three-month history of a painless palpable lump in her right breast. On examination, a hard, mobile, well-circumscribed 5 cm mass occupying most of lower outer quadrant of the breast was detected. There was no nipple discharge or skin involvement and there were no palpable axillary lymph nodes. The contralateral breast, axilla, and nipple were normal. There was no history of breast trauma, radiotherapy, or hormonal therapy or a family history of breast cancer. Mammography revealed a heavily calcified, lobulated, hyperdense irregular mass in the outer mid breast. The lesion was adjacent to a blood vessel, closely resembled bone, and measured 4.8 × 3.9 cm with minimal perilesional edema. The visualized axilla was unremarkable .
Axial and coronal contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scans were ordered to better characterize the lesion and rule out metastasis. A heavily calcified right breast mass was noted in the axial plane measuring 3.2 × 5.8 cm with overlying skin thickening .
The patient underwent diagnostic lumpectomy. On macroscopic examination, the mass measured 5.5 × 4.7 × 4.2 cm and was ill defined with a heterogeneous, tan, hard cut surface and extending to within 0.05 cm of the closest medial, deep, and superior margins. On histological and immunohistochemical examination, the lesion was negative CTK, CK5/6, CK7, CKLMW8/18, p63, and CK14. The lesion was diagnosed as a primary osteosarcoma of the breast.
She subsequently underwent a right modified radical mastectomy in which a 5 × 4 × 3 cm tan, firm mass in the lower outer quadrant was resected. The mass contained cystic spaces filled with blood but no further residual osteosarcoma was identified and the sentinel lymph node was negative. She did not receive any adjuvant chemotherapy but did receive close follow-up.
Three months after mastectomy she presented again with recurrent, multiple firm lumps in the outer lower quadrant of her right breast at the mastectomy site . She underwent reoperation, at which multiple, white masses were identified measuring 6 × 5.5 × 3.5 cm maximum with cystic walls underneath the previous scar. No tumor tissue was identified.