In January 2021, a 67-year-old female who had undergone parastomal hernia repair surgery 3 years prior began experiencing chronic abdominal pain upon resuming defecation through the anus.
In January 2021, she underwent abdominal computed tomography (CT) for initial workup, which revealed a foreign material located in the distal colon . Three months later, in April 2021, a portion of the foreign material was excreted from the patient’s anus. The patient consulted our center in an emergency and underwent CT examination again . The foreign material was removed by a doctor who confirmed the foreign material as the mesh used in a parastomal hernia .
The patient underwent anus-preserving radical resection (Dixon operation) for rectal cancer in November 2010. The pathological diagnosis revealed rectal villous tubular adenocarcinoma with negative margins and no lymph node metastasis. Four months later, she was admitted to the hospital because of difficulty with defecation and was diagnosed with postoperative anastomotic stenosis. The stenosis was removed using a colonoscope. Recurrent defecation difficulties for 3 years led to an emergency colostomy for intestinal obstruction. According to the surgical records, the distal colon was removed and closed from the peritoneal reflection. In January 2018, the patient was admitted to our center and underwent parastomal hernia mesh repair (keyhole, Shanshi, China) for an emerging parastomal hernia.
The patient underwent anus-preserving radical resection (Dixon operation) for rectal cancer in November 2010.
A portion of the foreign material was excreted from the patient’s anus. The foreign material was removed by a doctor who confirmed the foreign material as the mesh used in a parastomal hernia.
Laboratory tests were unremarkable.
We performed gastrointestinal contrast, where a contrast agent was injected through the stoma revealing a t-branch tube structure in the enterocoelia . Transanal colonoscopy was performed and revealed stenosis blocking the passage of the colonoscope. Severe inflammation triggered by the mesh of the parastomal hernia was observed. Due to severe stenosis at the anastomosis, the t-branch tube structure could not be seen in this direction .