A 68-year-old Caucasian female was admitted to our Clinic on August 24, 2020, for exacerbating dyspnea and chest and right upper abdominal pain, accompanied by confusion for 3 weeks.
Five months earlier, in March 2020, she underwent radical right nephrectomy due to a CCRCC (tumor stage: pT3a, pNx, R0, M0). During the primary diagnosis, the blood analysis showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 7,450/μl (reference range: 4,000–7,000/μl) with 1.1% (reference range: 1–6%) of eosinophilic granulocytes.
A computed tomography (CT) scan performed in July 2020, 3 months after the nephrectomy, revealed a retroperitoneal tumor mass in the surgical bed with hepatic and diaphragmatic invasion, and right pleural metastases. Histopathological assessment of liver infiltrates confirmed the diagnosis of local CCRCC relapse. During the diagnosis of tumor recurrence, the blood analysis showed a WBC count of 17,560/μl with 12.8% of eosinophilic granulocytes (AEC: 2,250/μl).
When abdominal pain and dyspnea occurred, palliative treatment with dexamethasone, pantoprazole, and buprenorphine were initiated. Moreover, targeted therapy for CCRCC was planned for the patient, but due to the rapid deterioration of health condition and a further increase of eosinophilic granulocyte count, the patient was admitted to our Clinic of Internal Medicine.
The past medical history also revealed that the patient had hypertension well controlled on bisoprolol only and underwent skin-sparing right mastectomy in 2005 for breast cancer (mammography and ultrasonography examination of the breasts, performed in August 2020, excluded the tumor recurrence). The patient had no history of alcohol abuse, asthma, or other allergic diseases.
On the day of admission to our Clinic, on examination, the patient appeared alert with mild functional cognitive disorder. Tachypnea and dullness over the right lung, up to seven intercostal spaces, were observed with the absence of breath sound. Abdomen tenderness during palpations and mild edema in distal parts of the lower limbs were also noticeable. Preliminary blood tests showed an increased C-reactive protein level of 240 mg/l, a WBC count of 40,770/μl, marked eosinophilia with an eosinophil count of 6,530/μl, mild anemia with a hemoglobin level of 11.6 g/dl, and a normal platelet count of 346,000/μl. A CT angiography of the chest revealed right-sided pleural effusion, pneumonia, and pulmonary microembolism.
Thoracentesis was performed for pleural effusion, and treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic (intravenous) and low-molecular-weight heparin (subcutaneous) were initiated. At that time, dexamethasone was discontinued due to the suspicion of infection disease and in purpose to carry out the differential diagnosis of hypereosinophilia. Despite the treatment, a further increase in leukocytes up to 56,000/μl with 33% of eosinophilic granulocytes (AEC: 18,500/μl) was observed.
Paraneoplastic eosinophilia is mainly associated with hematologic malignancies, although there is fairly extensive literature about eosinophilia in solid tumors, which mainly include case reports (–) .
Several tests were performed to rule out the noncancer causes of hypereosinophilia. There was no clinical or serologic evidence of an allergy, a parasitic infection, or vasculitis. Blood tests showed a normal total immunoglobulin E (IgE) level of 59.2 kUa/l (normal < 81 kUa/l), while specific IgE for Aspergillus fumigatus or antibodies against myeloperoxidase were not detectable. A bone marrow biopsy was performed which showed no evidence of leukemia. Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed no FIP1L1-PDGFRa fusion. The temporal appearance of eosinophilia and recurrence of CCRCC without any other apparent potential causes confirmed the paraneoplastic nature of hypereosinophilia in our patient.
A massive intravenous dose of corticosteroids (1.5 g methylprednisolone) was initiated, which caused a profound, albeit transient, decrement in the eosinophil count . Unfortunately, the patient’s condition further deteriorated despite the treatment, and so targeted therapy for CCRCC was not initiated. We discontinued the corticosteroids after three days to limit their toxicity. Due to the poor prognosis, the patient received only palliative support and succumbed to the disease 6 months following surgery and 2 months after the diagnosis of tumor recurrence. Permission for a postmortem examination of the body was not granted.