A 63-year-old male patient presented at our hospital in 2016 with a worsening non-productive night cough but no dyspnea. He had a history of hypertension and a recent diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. A former smoker who quit 10 years ago, he had not experienced weight loss in recent months. An abdominal ultrasound revealed an area near the hepatic hilum with lobulated contours, roughly oval, displaying an iso-hypoechogenic echo structure, with a maximum diameter of 43 mm, indicating the presence of malignant lymph nodes (a–c).
A total-body CT (computed tomography) scan was performed, which confirmed this suspicion and revealed the presence of a solid, nodular-like, expansive process in the right upper lobe of the lung (21 × 29 mm, adjacent to the subclavian artery) and multiple lymphadenopathies in the mediastinum (paratracheal and subcarinal) and abdomen (near the origin of the celiac trunk and periaortic lymph nodes) .
Bronchoscopy and cytology of bronchial lavage returned negative results, while FDG PET (fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography) confirmed the presence of multiple hypercapturing lesions consistent with the CT findings. Subsequently, an ultrasound-guided biopsy was performed on lymph nodes near the celiac tripod .
A histological examination described a poorly differentiated neoplasm suggestive of primary lung cancer. Immunohistochemistry results were positive for CKAE1/AE3, CK7, EMA, and focally for TTF1 and p63, while negative for CK5/6, CD56, Chromogranin A, and Synaptophysin. The Ki67 value was 50%. The study on EGFR for the mutation of exons 18, 19, 20, and 21 gave a negative result.
Various tumor markers were measured, indicating a primary non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC): CEA was 1021.2 ng/mL (<6), Ca 19.9 was 9.0 UI/mL (<37), and NSE was 6.6 UI/mL (<10).
Given the metastatic stage of the disease, surgical removal of the primary lesion was not pursued. The patient started a chemotherapy regimen consisting of cisplatin (70 mg/m2 on day 1 every 21 days) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 every 21 days) [,]. After three cycles, blood tests showed hyponatremia (Na+ 127 mEq/mL, successfully treated) and a favorable response in cancer markers: CEA decreased from 1021.2 ng/mL to 116.2 ng/mL, and Ca15.3 decreased to 27.5 UI/mL (<30 UI/mL). Subsequent CT scans revealed a partial response to therapy with a reduction in the size of the lung tumor (from 21 × 29 mm to 10 × 15 mm) as well as thoracic and abdominal lymphadenopathies. Three additional cycles were planned, but the patient could only complete two cycles due to bone marrow suppression and subsequent anemia, which required two blood transfusions. The patient underwent bone scintigraphy, which yielded negative results for metastases in the skeletal system. Following another CT scan, which showed progression of the disease in the subdiaphragmatic lymph nodes, the patient started immunotherapy with Nivolumab (3 mg/kg every two weeks) (PD-L1 expression < 10%).
This treatment showed a positive response with a progressive decrease in CEA levels (reaching 3 ng/mL after six months) and Ca 15.3 (22, ng/mL) and a reduction in the size of the lesions observed in subsequent CT scans (no new lymphadenopathies and a reduction in existing ones). After 18 months, Nivolumab was discontinued, as agreed with the patient, considering his positive response to therapy and the elevated risk of potential adverse reactions, compounded by his related apprehension. The patient developed pruritus unresponsive to antihistamines, which was managed with glucocorticoids. Over the next 3 years, regular monitoring with CEA, Ca15.3, and CT-PET scans indicated a complete response. CEA levels remained stable below 6 ng/mL, and subsequent CT-PET scans revealed the absence of areas exhibiting FDG uptake in the thoracic and abdominal regions. In the latest total body CT scan performed in 2023, no evidence of neoplastic disease was detected in the lung parenchyma or in the subdiaphragmatic, paratracheal, subcarinal, or periceliac lymph nodes . The complete timeline of the case is reported in .