A 22-year-old female professional water-polo player presented to our Hand Department complaining of persistent pain on the dorsoulnar aspect of the right wrist (dominant hand) during the last 4 months, aggravated by sport activity, and not responding to medical treatment or rest. The patient did not report any acute trauma at that region and noted that her symptoms worsened while shooting. At that time a painful snapping sensation over the dorsoulnar aspect of the wrist followed the forceful forearm rotation. Physical examination revealed swelling, edema and tenderness over that area. A “clunk” and palpable dislocation of the ECU tendon along the ulna head with active or passive supination and ulnar deviation of the wrist was observed. Hand and finger function was normal, and neurovascular examination showed no abnormality.
The patient underwent radiological investigation with plain radiographs of the wrist, that were negative for any bone pathology ( and ), and dynamic Ultrasound (U/S) at rest (with the wrist in 0° of flexion-extension) and during pronation and supination with comparison to the contralateral ECU tendon. During supination, the unstable ECU tendon slided abruptly over the ulnar wall of the distal ulnar groove and dislocated volarly, while during pronation the tendon relocated into the groove ( and ).
Diagnosis of recurrent ECU tendon dislocation was made on the basis of clinical history, physical examination and imaging findings. As the patient’s symptoms had not improved after a 4-month period of conservative management and in conjunction with a highly demanding sport, surgical intervention was opted.
Surgical reconstruction of ECU tendon sheath was carried out under axillary block anesthesia using a high humerus tourniquet. A straight dorsomedial incision was made along the distal ulna starting 5 cm proximal to the wrist and ending 1 cm proximal to the joint . The extensor retinaculum, found to be intact, was opened longitudinally over the ulnar aspect. Dislocation of the ECU tendon in ulnar-palmar direction was confirmed with the forearm in supination and the wrist in palmar flexion. The fibro-osseous sheath was found to be torn along its entire length from the ulnar retaining wall . The distal ulnar groove was deep enough to retain the tendon in its normal position and it was not reconstructed. The ECU tendon was elevated, reduced into the groove and 4 mini bone suture anchors were placed along the groove’s ulnar margin . The sutures were then passed through the ulnar border of the ECU sheath in horizontal mattress fashion and were tied, securing tendon sheath to bone. A piece of extensor retinaculum was used as a graft, to strengthen the reconstructed sheath . Splinting of the humerus-forearm with the elbow flexed to 90° and the wrist in approximately 30° of extension, radial deviation, and pronation was applied for 6 weeks. A progressive rehabilitation program was prescribed after cast removal, including active and passive wrist flexion, extension, forearm supination and pronation, and progressive strengthening with gradual return to sport activities. The patient was allowed to fully participate in her team’s schedule 4 months postoperatively. Follow-up evaluation 12 months postoperatively revealed no recurrent dislocation of the ECU tendon and normal painless range of motion of the affected wrist.
All procedures concerning the management of the patient were in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983.