A 31-year-old male presented with persistent right knee pain and stiffness for a year following a road traffic accident that led to intramedullary nailing of his right femur and tibia. Despite initiating physiotherapy and transitioning to full weight-bearing, he developed knee pain accompanied by a significant inability to fully extend the right knee.
Physical examination showed tenderness around the medial aspect of the right knee but no instability or effusion or local warmth. A fixed flexion deformity of 30° was observed, with active and passive range of motion limited to 30–80° of flexion due to pain. The surgical incision from the prior operation appeared healthy. A palpable, fixed bony prominence was identified over the right medial femoral condyle, and no neurological deficits were detected.
Plain X-ray imaging unveiled a curvilinear opacity within the soft tissue, originating from the medial femoral condyle and extending distally . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a curvilinear calcification with small osteophytes along the posteromedial aspect of the femoral condyle. This calcification extended along the path of the MCL, indicative of a calcified hematoma, suggesting a probable diagnosis of post-traumatic Pellegrini–Stieda syndrome . Initial conservative treatment, including oral analgesics, physiotherapy, and corticosteroid injections, was provided temporary relief, leading to surgical intervention.
On the table, examination revealed a fixed flexion deformity of 30° that did not correct even after giving spinal anesthesia and adequate muscle relaxant . Diagnostic arthroscopy exposed early arthritic changes and joint adhesions, which were addressed through arthroscopic adhesiolysis. Subsequently, a 10 cm incision was made along the medial knee, extending from the medial femoral condyle to the medial tibial condyle, exposing the ossified mass . The pinkish, bony hard, rough mass measuring approximately 7.5 cm × 4.5cm × 1 cm was en bloc resected using osteotome and mallet, significantly improving the patient’s range of motion . Intraoperatively, clinical assessments for laxity were performed. There was no significant valgus laxity noted at the knee. It was decided to forgo the reconstruction of the MCL.
Histopathological examination revealed abundant peripheral fibro collagenous tissue with the central area showing many trabeculae composed of laminar bone. Intertrabecular area showing adipose tissue. Surrounding the bony tissue, mature cartilage was seen. Features confirmed heterotopic bone formation.
Post-surgery, the patient began a range of motion exercises and full weight-bearing mobilization. Follow-up assessments at 2 weeks and 1-, 3-, and 6-month post-surgery revealed no pain, substantial range of motion improvement, and only 5° of fixed flexion deformity . Active flexion reached 100°, passive flexion was 120° without pain , and radiographs showed no Pellegrini–Stieda lesion .