Α 28-year-old woman (G1, P0, A1) visited the Outpatient Gynecological Department of our Hospital complaining about chronic pelvic pain and infertility problems. We evaluated her symptoms and proceeded to the appropriate laboratory and imaging examinations. Ultrasound as well as the mobile diagnostic hysteroscopy performed in the Outpatient Department revealed the presence of an intrauterine embryonic ossicle . On the other hand, laboratory examinations and patient's vital signs were all normal. Therefore, the patient was scheduled for a surgical hysteroscopy in 2 weeks, with a ultimate goal of removing the fetal bone fragment and restoring the physiological enviroment of the uterus. However, the patient did not comply with our recommendations.
Her obstetric history included a miscarriage at the 19th week of gestation due to placental abruption, one-year prior to her visit to our hospital. The patient declared undergoing an emergency surgical dilatation and curettage, due to heavy bleeding, in order to remove the fetal components.
Impressively, one year after our initial diagnosis, the patient visited our hospital during her 9th week of gestation. Transvaginal antenatal ultrasound examination revealed the following: fetal movement, crown rump length (CRL) of 26 mm, fetal heart rate of 170 bpm and the intrauterine fetal bone fragment. She was appropriately informed about the risk factors of her gestation and advised to have regular appointments at our Outpatient Obstetrics Department. Obstetric ultrasounds of the 1st, 2ndand 3rdtrimesters, as well as the laboratory examinations were all physiological, despite the presence of the intrauterine ossicle .
The woman was admitted to the Hospital during her 39th week of gestation and an elective caesarean section was performed, due to her volition. A live and full-fledged fetus was delivered, weighing 3180 kilograms and with an Apgar score of 9 and 10 in the 1st and 5th minute respectively. Following the procedure, we observed formed bony tissue macroscopically in the placenta, therefore the placenta was sent for histopathological analysis . The report from the Pathology Department indicated the presence of placental components and calcium salt deposits as well as the intrauterine rendition of the fetal bone.