A 33-year-old Caucasian man developed heart failure after myocardial infarction in 1996. In 2003, he had a septic shock with acute tubular necrosis treated by continuous veno-venous haemofiltration (CVVH). Renal function recovered to an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 40 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal value >60 mL/min/1.73 m2). Despite revascularization and cardiac resynchronization therapy, he developed heart failure New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV in 2013. He was rejected for a heart transplant because of his impaired renal function (eGFR 22 mL/min/1.73 m2). A combined heart–kidney transplant is not performed in the Netherlands. During LVAD screening, ultrasonography showed normal kidney sizes with diffuse loss of renal cortex but no focal parenchymal degeneration or hydronephrosis. As on inotropes and temporary mechanical support with an Impella® (ABIOMED Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) renal function improved to an eGFR of 39 mL/min/1.73 m2, we hypothesized that renal function could partly recover after optimization of haemodynamics with an LVAD. Accordingly, the patient was accepted for LVAD (HeartWare Inc., Framingham, MA, USA) implantation as destination therapy. The post-operative period was complicated by acute tubular necrosis treated by CVVH. Renal function recovered to eGFR of 27 mL/min/1.73 m2 and exercise capacity improved to NYHA Class II.
In 2016–2017, renal function fluctuated with eGFR values of 14–23 mL/min/1.73 m2. The patient was admitted several times with congestion in this time frame. Echocardiographic pump speed evaluation showed that, at the current speed (2700 RPM), the interventricular septum had a neutral position, indicating good left ventricular unloading. The tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 17 mm, evidencing a good right ventricular (RV) function. Aortic valve opening was intermittent with minimal diastolic regurgitation. With the latter, clinically relevant recirculation of blood volume (from the left ventricle through the LVAD into the aorta and back into the left ventricle) is excluded. Pump data revealed good LVAD function with a power of 4.4 W and a flow of 4.7 L/min with good pulsatility. Accordingly, it was concluded that the fluid overload mainly had a renal aetiology. Upon treatment with intravenous diuretics, a euvolemic status was reached during each admission whereafter the patient could be discharged home.
In 2018, at the age of 55, the patient was hospitalized because of acute renal function worsening with anuria due to contrast nephropathy after a computed tomography scan for abdominal pain. After 18 days of CVVH, renal function recovered. In February 2019, he was re-admitted for congestion. Echocardiography showed adequate left ventricular unloading and a good RV function. The LVAD values were normal. With intravenous furosemide he became euvolemic but remained dependent on intravenous diuretics. At this time, optimization of haemodynamics with inotropes did not improve renal function illustrating that the renal dysfunction was irreversible. Therefore, we decided to start dialysis. As there was no adequate vascular access to create a functional arteriovenous graft, HD was not possible. The PD catheter placement was complicated by an abdominal wall haematoma treated by temporary interruption of anti-platelet therapy.
Continuous PD was started with 1 L icodextrin overnight resulting in an ultrafiltration of 300 mL and metabolites within range and a residual diuresis of 1.5 L. Body weight remained stable without the need for intravenous diuretics and he was discharged. In May 2019, he was re-admitted because of congestion despite intensification of the PD scheme to two long dwells of 1.5 L of icodextrin and 15 mg bumetanide a day. Urine production had decreased to 800 mL/24 h and ultrafiltration fluctuated from 100 mL to 1 L/day. LVAD flow and pulsatility remained stable between 3 and 6 L/min. The patient was treated with furosemide intravenously and initiation of glucose-based PD fluids (physioneal) using automated peritoneal dialysis (APD). With a regimen of seven cycles of 1 L 3.86% glucose in 9.5 h, 2–2.5 L ultrafiltration was established and bodyweight returned to target weight. Unfortunately, the patient had become anuric within this period. After 3 weeks, the patient was haemodynamically stable, without intravenous medication and with stable ultrafiltration on the new PD schedule. He was discharged with APD, seven cycles of 1.5 L 2.27% glucose in 10 h. He regained 500 mL residual diuresis and ultrafiltration on this schedule was 1600 mL/day.
From July 2019 until June 2020, the patient was ambulatory and in NYHA Class II. On physical examination and echocardiography, there were no signs of fluid overload. He was trained in adjustment of his PD schedule based on bodyweight and signs of congestion. His quality-of-life, assessed with the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure questionnaire, significantly improved from 80 of 105 before PD in February 2019 to 51 of 105 in July 2019. The patient reported he had regained pleasure in life again, especially due to the reduced sense of thirst and the improved exercise capacity that enabled him to sail his boat again. LVAD flow remained stable during PD . In July 2020, he developed herpes zoster encephalitis of which he died.