A 30-years-old woman was admitted to the emergency department with upper abdominal pain. The patient had been well until the day before, when she began to have pain in the epigastrium. A few hours before admission the pain, which was now localized to the upper right abdominal quadrant, became constant and severe. Anorexia and nausea developed, followed by vomiting.
The patient had a previous history of hepatic hydatid disease. Two months earlier she underwent an abdominal ultrasound for abdominal pain during admission in another hospital. Following that exam, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which was diagnostic for hepatic hydatid cyst. For this reason the patient was on mebendazole for about 2 weeks until the last hospital admission. She took an oral contraceptive for about six months in the past and was not on any other medication.
The temperature was 39°C, pulse 96 and blood pressure was 100/70. The oxygen saturation was 98 % while the patient was breathing ambient air. On physical examination the patient appeared in severe pain. Lungs and heart sounds were normal. The abdomen was distended, and bowel sounds were absent. There was tenderness in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium, with guarding and rebound tenderness. No abnormalities were found on rectal examination.
The hematocrit was 30%, hemoglobin 10 g/dl, red blood cells 3.3 × 103 mm3, white cell count 13.7 × 103 mm3, and neutrophils were 84.4 %. The remaining lab tests and urine were normal. Since it was an emergent setting, no further attempts were made to confirm echinococcus infestation. Abdominal ultrasound and contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a 9 × 11.8 × 10 cm cyst localized in the IV, VII and VIII hepatic segments, with multiple smaller cysts inside . The cyst was located just posterior to the portal branch for the VII and VIII segments . It compressed the inferior vena cava and the right and medial hepatic vein. The wall of the cyst was detached from the hepatic parenchyma as for hemorrhagic leak. Posteriorly to the hepatic peduncle, the wall of the cyst emerged at liver surface, just underneath the Glisson's capsule. Also, the adipose tissue between the liver on one side and the right adrenal gland and right kidney on the other showed signs of haemorrhage.
The patient was brought to the operating room in an emergent setting. Bilateral subcostal incision was performed. At the opening of the peritoneal cavity a small amount of clear fluid was found. Intra-operative liver ultrasound was employed. A voluminous hepatic cyst was found, which emerged to the liver surface at the level of caudate lobe and was extended up to the VIII segment. The cyst was evacuated of its content which was a brown-colored mucinous fluid. The intracystic fluid was sent for bacterial culture and evaluation for parasitic infestation. Hypertonic saline solution (33%) was injected into the cyst as a precaution in case of parasitic infestation. Partial pericystectomy was performed at the level of the caudate lobe. Ultrasound confirmed the complete evacuation of the cyst. Cholecystectomy was carried out due to the presence of biliary sludge. A biliary cystadenoma was confirmed at histologic evaluation. Sections 3 μm thick were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The sections were immunostained with primary antibodies directed against vimentin (1:100 dilution; Dako), muscle-specific actin (1:100 dilution; Dako, clone HHF35), and desmin (1:100 dilution; Dako, clone D33). Immunodetection was performed using Universal Dako Cytomation LSAB + KIT, Peroxidase. Section analysis revealed multiple communicating locules of different size. The locules were lined by columnar, cuboidal or even flattened epithelium . This was surrounded by a layer of highly cellular, mesenchymal tissue resembling ovarian stroma. The stromal cells were diffusely positive for vimentin and muscle specific actin, and focally positive for desmin. Cystic fluid analysis showed elevated levels of carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19.9 (126387.10 UI/ml) while serum CA 19.9, carcinoembryogenic antigen (CEA) and α-fetoprotein were within the normal range. Cultures returned negative.
Post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 8. After complete recovery, the patient was admitted again to our Unit for definitive treatment. Before undergoing re-operation, the patient was re-evaluated with a new abdominal CT scan which showed the partial collapse of the cyst. Patient was brought to the operating room, where she underwent caudate lobectomy and posterior segmentectomy, including segmentectomy of segments VI and VII, and atypical segmentectomy of segment IV. Intra-operative ultrasound was used to evaluate the relationship of the cyst with adjacent structures. Since a communication between the cystadenoma and the biliary tree was found, a cholangiogram followed by a single suture closure of the biliary communication was performed. Histology confirmed the previous diagnosis of biliary cystadenoma. Postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8. Follow-up abdominal CT scans showed no local recurrence and the patient is doing fine 15 months after hepatic resection.