A 35-year-old Caucasian man presented to his local general hospital emergency department with a history of acute urinary retention. He had a background history of grade 1 astrocytoma in the posterior fossa at the age of six that was resected in 1979, and required re-excision in 1982 followed by radiotherapy resulting in residual hydrocephalus, epilepsy and mild learning difficulties. There was no history of testicular maldescent, orchidopexy or other inguino-scrotal surgery. On examination he was found to have no new neurological deficits, but right testicular enlargement was noted. An ultrasound study confirmed a 9×8 cm heterogeneous mass replacing the body of the right testis. His serum β-human chorionic gonadotrophin level was 5047 U/L (normal range 0 to 5 U/L), serum α-fetoprotein level was 7413 kU/L (normal range 3 to 8 kU/L) and lactate dehydrogenase level was 1452 IU/L (normal range 230 to 460 IU/L). His liver and renal biochemistry was normal.
A urethral catheter was placed, and drained normal urine. He underwent a radical left inguinal orchidectomy five days later. Histology indicated a non-seminomatous germ cell tumor, with predominantly yolk sac tumor and small amounts of undifferentiated teratoma. The overall histological diagnosis was malignant teratoma intermediate (British Testicular Tumour Panel (BTTP) classification) or embryonal carcinoma (World Health Organization (WHO) classification). Lymphovascular involvement was noted, with widespread blood vessel involvement seen . The spermatic cord was not involved (pT2 classification).
A staging computed tomography (CT) scan revealed extensive disease within the thorax with multiple bilateral pulmonary metastases measuring up to 3 cm in both lungs . In addition there was bulky mediastinal adenopathy with nodes measuring up to 3.8 cm in the prevascular space and also abnormal adenopathy was noted in both pulmonary hilum, measuring 2.6 cm versus 2.1 cm on the right and left, respectively. Two prominent interaortocaval nodes measuring up to 7 mm, bilateral 8 mm external iliac and 7.5 mm right inguinal nodes were seen. There were no significant anatomical abnormalities of the renal tract or major vessels. Postoperatively, upon catheter removal retention of urine continued. A flexible cystoscopy examination demonstrated a penile urethral tumor, and an incision biopsy was performed. A suprapubic catheter was placed. An MRI scan of the penile lesion demonstrated bilateral inguinal nodes measuring up to 9 mm along with bilateral external iliac nodes measuring up to 8 mm and bilateral internal iliac nodes smaller than 1 cm. An 8 mm pelvic lymph node adjacent to the anterolateral aspect of the bladder was noted. There were two areas of abnormality noted in the ischium, which gave a low signal on T1 and a high signal on the short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) MRI sequences consistent with bony metastasis. Within the penile shaft, 3 cm proximal to the glans penis, a soft tissue mass was confirmed measuring 2 cm in long axis, involving both the penile corpora . A technetium bone scan showed a low-grade tracer uptake in the left ischium corresponding to the site of morphological abnormality on the MRI scan.
Histology of the urethral mass confirmed a metastatic malignant undifferentiated teratoma . Immunochemistry was positive for placental alkaline phosphatase and CD30 . The diagnosis was of an International Germ Cell Cancer Collaborative Group (IGCCCG) poor prognosis metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumor. Four cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin chemotherapy were administered without complication. Then, 12 weeks after starting chemotherapy, his suprapubic catheter was clamped and he was able to micturate per urethera. His catheter was then removed. A reassessment CT scan of the chest and abdomen four weeks after completion of chemotherapy indicated excellent response to treatment. At the site of pulmonary metastasis, there was complete resolution of the pulmonary masses with only residual ill-defined areas of nodularity and lacunae seen. There was also a reduction in the size of all retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph nodes to less than 5 mm. His serum α-fetoprotein level fell to normal by week one post-chemotherapy with a plasma half life of six days, his serum β-human chorionic gonadotrophin level normalized prior to starting chemotherapy and his lactate dehydrogenase level fell to normal by week five post-chemotherapy. A repeat MRI of the pelvis six weeks after completion of chemotherapy indicated partial resolution of the penile and bony lesions. A further repeat MRI scan of the penis performed 14 weeks later confirmed further resolution of the penile metastasis, which is now a fibrotic scar-like 9 mm lesion . Our patient remains in clinical, marker and radiological remission 10 months after diagnosis. His post-treatment follow-up continues.