A 32-year-old man initially visited our hospital with the chief complaint of bloody stool at the age of 29. A colonoscopy performed after hospitalization revealed loss of the vascular appearance, erythema, friability of the mucosa, and spontaneous bleeding in the sigmoid and the rectal colon . Histological examination of biopsies showed chronic inflammatory cell infiltration with distortions of crypt architecture and cryptitis . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with moderate UC. Although his clinical symptoms were relatively controlled by the oral administration of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA).
He was then hospitalized at the age of 32 for severe diarrhea and progressive epigastric pain. He had rectal bleeding and his disease activity was severe according to the Truelove and Witts’ severity index. On physical examination at the time of hospitalization, body temperature was 39.8°C and the abdomen was diffusely tender without muscular guarding or rigidity. Laboratory data, including complete blood count and coagulation profile, were within normal range aside from microcytic and hypochromic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 11.5 g/dL. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated at 23.9 mg/L. Serum tumor markers were within the normal range. Blood, stool, and urine cultures were negative. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigenemia test was negative, and antinuclear antibody and serum complement were both in the normal range. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed marked colonic wall thickening extending from the transverse colon to the rectum, but there was no abnormality in the mesenteric vessels and no abdominal free air . Colonoscopy revealed highly edematous mucosa, complete obliteration of the vascular pattern, and multiple deep ulcerations extending from the transverse colon to the rectum . Histopathology of biopsies obtained during colonoscopy showed findings consistent with possible UC. Basal plasmacytosis and eosinophil infiltration were unremarkable and there was no typical “owl eye” inclusion indicating CMV infection . Based on clinical findings, Buerger’s disease, Behçet’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus were excluded. A diagnosis of severe UC was made and intravenous steroids and antibiotic therapy were started. Since the clinical symptoms and laboratory blood data were not improved by the systemic steroid therapy, the dose of steroids was decreased gradually on the 10th hospital day, while oral administration of tacrolimus was started and maintained at a high trough level. However, his clinical symptoms were completely unresponsive to tacrolimus therapy and surgical colectomy was recommended, but he strongly refused surgery, and consent was not obtained. We performed four sessions of granulocyte and monocyte adsorption apheresis as an additional therapy. On the 35th hospital day, his abdominal pain had worsened with rebound tenderness and ultimately led to a state of shock. CT revealed dilated loops of colon and abdominal free air . Following a diagnosis of perforation peritonitis complicated with toxic megacolon, subtotal colectomy and ileostomy were performed . Histopathology of the surgically resected colon showed only minor changes in the mucosal histological structure; however, many veins present from the submucosal layer to the subserosal layer demonstrated prominent myointimal hyperplasia with narrowed lumens in contrast to arteries that were essentially normal . Vasculitis of the small mesenteric veins and their intramural tributaries with thrombosis was also observed . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of MIVOD. Despite the occurrence of various postoperative complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), CMV infection (Given the positive finding of CMV-C7HRP in his blood during management in the postoperative ICU, administration of ganciclovir was performed and we confirmed a negative result for CMV-C7HRP 14 days after administration of ganciclovir.), rectal hemorrhage, and renal failure, the patient gradually improved with multidisciplinary treatment and was discharged after 6 months of hospitalization. He is in remission with oral administration of 5ASA after discharge. The clinical course of this patient is shown in Fig. .