This 62-year-old male presented to an outside institution after an acute episode of aphasia. MR-imaging was performed and revealed an enhancing left temporal mass (maximum enhancing diameter, 2.1 cm, Fig. ). Biopsy of the lesion was histologically consistent with GBM (IDH1R132H negative, 1p/19q intact, MGMT unmethylated, p53 positive and without EGFR amplification). The patient underwent LITT (Energy: 24.42kJ, Pulses: 876, Time: 0:29:07) of the enhancing portion of the GBM via a single treatment track approximately 4 cm in length. The patient was discharged home on post-treatment day 2 at his neurological baseline.
Two weeks after LITT, despite corticosteroid therapy, the patient presented to our institution with complaints of increasing headache and calculation difficulties. MR-imaging revealed tissue necrosis with hemorrhagic material within the LITT treated region and edema surrounding the treatment site. The patient underwent en bloc resection of the enhancing lesion and adjacent tumor-infiltrated brain via a left temporal craniotomy . Patient headache and calculation difficulties resolved after surgery (discharged post-operative day 2). Post-operative MR-imaging confirmed complete resection of enhancing lesion.
He underwent adjuvant radiation therapy and was treated to a dose of 5945 cGy in 29 fractions with concurrent temozolomide. Subsequent maintenance temozolomide was discontinued after 5 cycles due to persistent pancytopenia.
Interestingly, despite no surgical or medical treatment for the past 4 years, serial MR imaging since surgery has shown no recurrence of his disease.
The gross specimen was 6.5 cm in the anteroposterior and 4.4 cm in the mediolateral dimensions. Histological examination revealed a thermal injury pattern characterized by 3 distinct staining patterns in relation to the different zones of the lesion. . First, a central necrotic zone (Zone 1) devoid of cells was present in which there was gradual loss of staining and early resorptive changes at the margins. Surrounding the necrotic zone, an active rim (Zone 2) of granulation tissue was present (mean thickness, 1.3 ± 0.3 mm) which included vascular proliferation, lymphocytes and microglia positive for CD68 and CD45, respectively, just beyond the necrotic core and mesenchymal and glial reaction at the margin . Immediately beyond the granulation tissue zone, cytologically atypical, GFAP-positive astrocytes were found (Zone 3) . Immunoreactivity in these cells to OLIG2, p53, and Ki67 confirmed their neoplastic nature . The majority of these tumor cells showed moderately intense immunoreactivity to p53. IDH1R132H was negative in tumor cells by immunohistochemistry.
Additional immunohistochemical examination of the tissue showed hallmark features previously described in non-human tissue in vivo that has undergone LITT. In the area of viable tumor, there were noted mitoses . Within the transition area of from the necrotic area to the viable tumor zone was a band of granulation tissue, in which a histiocytic reaction with multinucleated giant cells was present. . Axonal ischemic changes such as axonal spheroids were noted . Moreover, cells with nuclear fragmentation indicating neuronal and cell body injury in response to laser ablation were detected . Microglial cells were noted in the areas of high degrees of reactive astroglosis . Vascular effects of laser treatment including thrombotic occlusion of vessels were also found. These thrombotic changes were most prominent near the area of laser ablation .
Additionally, genomic analysis revealed the following modifications: EGFR L861Q (kinase domain) and no EGFR amplification, R108K (extracellular domain) activating mutations, PTEN G36R (missense mutation within the PTEN phosphatase domain), CDKN2A/B loss, IDH1 negative, 1p 19q intact with a Ki-67of 25–30%.