A 58-year-old man, with a recent history of polyglobuline treated with phlebotomies, first degree obesity and multinodal goiter. After the appearance of a subcutaneous swelling of the left abdominal wall, extended by the umbilical line for ~6 cm, of solid consistency and fixed to the fascia, ultrasound imaging and a biopsy of the removal of the abdomen were performed.
Histological examination described the presence of a malignant neoplasia of medium-sized cells, with nucleated chromatin, dispersed in nests and cords; with high mitotic activity and apoptotic index. Immunohistochemical study was positive for Citokeratina (CK) 20, CKpan, CD56, chromogranin, sinaptofisine, CD44, neurofilaments (dot-like, partial) and Pax5 (weak and partial) and negative for Vimentina, S100, CK7, CD117, CD99, TdT and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1). Diagnosis was of Merkel’s skin neuroendocrine carcinoma.
A positron emission tomography (PET) with CT-scan reconstruction showed hyper metabolic at the right breast nodule of 1.8 cm (SUV 3.7), at the left abdominal mass of 6 cm (SUV 9.37) and at superficial (SV 9.6) and deep (SUV 8.5) inguinal lymph node .
Then a right mastectomy with third level axillary lymphadenectomy, for sentinel lymph node positivity; removal of the left abdominal mass with resection of the band of external oblique muscle and of the infiltrated anterior inguinal wall; lymphadenectomy of the external and common left iliac artery; deep and superficial left inguinal lymphadenectomy were performed. Reconstruction of the abdominal band and of the inguinal canal wall was obtained using a GORE® BIO-A® prosthesis .
Final histological examination confirmed an abdominal MCC with inguinal and axillary massive lymph node metastasis T3 N1b M1a, Stage IV. The right breast nodule was a melanocytic nerve.
According to the oncologists and radiotherapists, the patient was not subjected to any therapy; 10-month follow-up there is no evidence of recurrence. We did not observe inguino-crural hernias after 10 months.