A 74-year-old woman presented with epigastric pain and jaundice for 3 days. She had epigastric tenderness but a negative Murphy’s sign. The aspartate transaminase level was elevated to 191 IU/L, the alanine transaminase level to 79 IU/L, and total bilirubin level to 15.23 mg/dL. The alkaline phosphatase level was 409 IU/L and γ-glutamyltransferase level was 815 IU/L. Computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse dilatation of biliary tree, with multiple intrahepatic duct stones and common bile duct (CBD) stones . Previously undiagnosed situs inversus viscerum was also found on CT . Before performing ERCP, an endoscopic examination using conventional gastroscopy was performed, which showed a reversed anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract. For removal of bile duct stones, the patient was placed in the prone position and the endoscopists performed ERCP from the right side of the table. The endoscope was rotated 180° counterclockwise in the stomach. After entering the duodenum, the endoscope was again shortened using a 180° counterclockwise rotation . Although access was relatively easy, the ampulla in the endoscopic view was deviated to right side and right-upward direction . Moreover, it was difficult to control the endoscope owing to the looped endoscope shaft. In the first ERCP, the cholangiogram revealed a large filling defect and diffuse dilatation of tge CBD. After performing a sphinterotomy and mechanical lithotripsy, we removed a bile duct stone. However, several stones still remained in the CBD on follow-up cholangiography.
Two days later, we performed a second ERCP using a different method. The patient was again placed in a prone position with the endoscopist on the right side of the table. This time, the second portion of the duodenum was reached by following the lesser curvature, while slowly rotating the endoscope clockwise . Despite the reversed organ anatomy, the endoscope was successfully advanced to the second portion of the duodenum using a slow and careful technique. In this approach, there was no looped endoscope shaft. The ampulla appeared at the center and upward direction of the endoscopic view screen . Although endoscopic access to the duodenum was more difficult than during the first ERCP using a counterclockwise rotation, selective CBD cannulation and stone removal were easier, owing to correct location of the orifice and direction of the bile duct.
The patient’s gallstones were completely removed with the second ERCP, and her serum total bilirubin levels decreased to 1.83 mg/dL. There were no complications during the procedure, and the patient was discharged in good condition.