A 45-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with an acute episode of central left facial palsy (House–Brackmann Grade III and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale of 9) 10 h after the symptoms onset. No other abnormalities were identified on the initial neurological exam. The MRI performed at the Emergency Department demonstrated diffusion restriction on the right globus pallidus and head of the caudate nucleus. There was no PWI/DWI mismatch at that time [Figure and ]. Twelve hours later, the patient presented with progressive worsening of the symptoms, becoming hemiplegic on the left side. The new MRI (performed approximately 22 h after the first symptoms) revealed no major extension of the diffusion restriction but did reveal significant compromise of the perfusion in the whole territory of the right MCA , with an estimated PWI/DWI mismatch >60%. MR angiography reconstructions suggested acute occlusion of the right MCA at the M1 segment [Figure and ].
The case was presented to the endovascular team which decided to submit the patient to a digital subtraction angiography which confirmed complete occlusion of the proximal MCA . At that point, more than 24 h had already passed from the initial symptoms onset. Given the patient's young age, the absence of major clinical morbidities, and the fact that the new MRI demonstrated a significant PWI/DWI mismatch, an interventional approach was considered. After an extensive discussion with the family about the risks and benefits of such procedure, the endovascular team decided to perform a combined mechanical thrombolysis followed by intra-arterial thrombolysis. A microcatheter was advanced until the superior trunk of the right M1, and the thrombus was removed with a clot retrieval system (Catch mechanical thrombectomy device, Balt, Montmorency/France). After the mechanical thrombolysis, rt-PA was injected super-selectively in the right M1 at an initial dose of 4U followed by two additional doses of 1U until the digital subtraction angiography demonstrated complete recanalization of the MCA .
After the interventional procedure, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit. A control angiography performed 7 days later confirmed the sustained recanalization of the right MCA, with the presence of some residual stenosis [Figure and ]. It was also possible to observe the absence of flow in the capillary phase at the area of initial diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)-restriction that had progressed to infarction [Figure and - arrows. The endovascular team discussed with the patient and the family the option of intracranial angioplasty for the residual M1 stenosis. However, as the patient was progressively improving, they decided to pursue a conservative approach. After 10 days of in-hospital care, the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility with complete left-arm paralysis and left central facial palsy. At the 11-month clinical follow-up, the patient had improved strength in the left superior limb (proximal strength Grade IV and distal Grade II) whereas the left facial paresis had completely resolved. By that time, he was considered to have a modified Rankin scale of 2 and a Barthel index of 85.
According to the family, the patient currently has an independent life with minor restrictions for his daily activities, especially regarding activities demanding fine movements with the left hand. The MRI performed 12 months after the procedure demonstrated the final infarction area (as revealed by the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery [FLAIR] sequence) consisting of the initial area of diffusion restriction before the thrombolysis with an additional cortical zone which likely represented an area of borderline perfusion .