A 70-year-old apparently healthy woman with no obvious clinical history was admitted to medical examination in other Hospital. She had past history of generic dyspeptic symptoms, such as nausea and epigastric pain for last 10 years, in the last three months she had reported frequent episodes of vomiting and a weight loss of 8 Kg. Therefore she underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which demonstrated a widely hyperaemic gastric mucosa, with a nodular appearance of the fundus and corpus and antral hypertrophic plicae. The pylorus and duodenum looked quite normal. Several superficial biopsies of the gastric corpus were performed and in that contest the histology in association with a routined immunohistochemical analysis of the specimens took to the diagnosis of an "undifferentiated medullary type gastric carcinoma with focal neuroendocrine differentiation".
CT scan did not reveal any abdominal or nodal metastases. With evidence of absence of disease elsewhere, the patient underwent a total gastrectomy with lymphoadenectomy R1 and a mechanical T-L esophago-jejunostomy with a Roux loop technique.
Macroscopically the gastric mucosa of the fundus and corpus looked thinner than normal, with multiple brownish elevations, 18/18 perigastric lymph nodes resected were metastatic. Histological sections of the stump were stained with Hematoxylin-eosin. Immunohistochemistry using the strepavidin-avidina-biotina technique, was performed with the following antibodies: estrogen receptor protein (ER) (dilution 1:100 DAKO), progesteron receptor protein (PR) (dilution1:100 DAKO), CA19.9 (dilution 1:50, BioGenex); cytokeratins (CK7, CK20) (dilution1:100, DAKO); gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP15) (dilution 1:100 Immunomarkers). All sections were controstained with Carazzi's hematoxylin. Histological examination of neoplastic tissue was consistent with atypical epithelial elements arranged in a single cell growth pattern, involved widely the entire stomach, also spreading through the whole thickness of the wall, from mucosa to perivisceral fat .
Cells were monomorphic, with slight nuclear atypia and poor cytoplasm and sporadically intracytoplasmatic lumina were visible in few ones . These architectural and cytological features can be typically seen in breast lobular carcinoma too. Immunohistochemistry showed reactivity for CK7 , for ER , PR and GDFP15 , while CK 20 and CA 19.9 were negative.
It was evident that a complete histological and immunohistochemical analysis of the gastric specimens oriented now to a strongly suspected lesion as a metastasis arising from the breast. Therefore the patient was therefore contacted in order to investigate further. Mammography displayed a non-palpable lesion (max 1 cm in diameter) with irregular margins, located in the lower outer quarter of the left breast . Ultrasound examination confirmed that the lesion was possibly a cancer. Next the diagnostic stained tissue sections of surgical specimen demonstrated that it was, in fact, a lobular carcinoma of the breast , with this immunoassaying profile ER + (60%); PR + (40%); Ki67: 5%; human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her-2) (DAKO) negative.
Postoperative hormone therapy was administered to the patient, who died, however, 10 months later.