A 21-year-old gravida 2, para 1, at 25+5 weeks of gestation was referred to the emergency department of a university hospital with complaints of severe epigastric pain, vomiting, and decreased fetal movement for four days. She denied any history of trauma. Regarding menstrual history, she attained her menarche at 12 years, and she had a regular 30-day cycle with bleeding lasting for 3–4 days. Her past medical history was unremarkable. On examination, she was pale, severely dehydrated, tachycardiac (pulse – 140/min), tachypneic (respiratory rate – 35/min), hypotensive (blood pressure – 100/60 mm of Hg), and febrile (temperature – 101°F). Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15/15. Abdominal examination revealed a palpable epigastric mass that was firm, tender, and measured roughly 10 cm x 8 cm. The uterus was approximately 22 weeks in size. Two contractions, each lasting fifteen seconds, were noted in ten minutes. On auscultation, fetal heart sounds could not be appreciated. Per-vaginal examination revealed a midline cervix of medium consistency, 1 cm dilation, and 20 to 30% effacement with the presence of “show”.
Laboratory investigations revealed severe anemia (4.4 gm%), thrombocytopenia (33,000/cu. mm), deranged prothrombin time (PT – 60 seconds) and international normalized ratio (INR – 5), and hypokalemia (2.4 mEq/L). Amylase and lipase were within normal limits. The standard values of these lab parameters used in our hospital are presented at the end of the text. Ultrasonography (USG) showed intrauterine fetal death (IUFD) of 26–27 weeks of gestation, a complex mass at the epigastric region (retroperitoneal area), and gross hemoperitoneum. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen ( and ) showed a well-defined, round to oval, heterogeneously enhancing mass measuring 18 cm x 12.5 cm, originating from the body of the pancreas, suggestive of pancreatic neoplasm. A significant amount of high-density collection in the peritoneal cavity was suggestive of hemoperitoneum.
In the emergency room, an intravenous line was opened in both the arms with a wide bore cannula, and the patient was managed with intravenous normal saline, pantoprazole (40 mg), ondansetron (4mg), and antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 gm and metronidazole 500 mg). A multidisciplinary discussion with the surgical, radiological, and anesthetic team was done. After reviewing the case, the team decided to transfer the patient to radiology a second time to perform a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan, identify the bleeding point, and attempt arterial embolization in the same setting. However, she could not undergo CECT because of her unstable hemodynamic status and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for further management. On re-evaluation in SICU, she had hematuria, slight vaginal bleeding, bleeding from the nasogastric tube in situ, and her blood pressure was 90/50 mm of Hg. Per-vaginal examination showed progressive dilatation of the cervical os to 4 cm. Repeat evaluation of the coagulation profile demonstrated an INR of 20. Deranged coagulation profile and bleeding from multiple sites raised suspicion of IUFD induced coagulopathy. In the meantime, three units of fresh frozen plasma, three units of whole blood (including one unit of fresh blood), and two units of platelet-rich plasma were transfused over six hours. However, her blood pressure continued to drop, and she was eventually started on noradrenaline support (0.1 micrograms/kg/min). Her oxygen saturation continued to fall and eventually reached 52% in room air. Consequently, she was intubated. Repeat physical examinations were done at regular intervals to evaluate the clinical status of the patient and the progression of labor.
Twenty-one hours after admission to the hospital, there was a spontaneous expulsion of the dead fetus weighing around 900 grams, with no gross anomalies, and a complete and normal-looking placenta. Ten units of oxytocin were administered intravenously following delivery. There was no evidence of active vaginal bleeding postpartum. Yet, her hemoglobin (6.4 gm%) and platelet count (28,000/cu. mm) were low. The surgical team still planned to acquire sufficient information via CECT on the exact source of bleeding before shifting the patient to the operating room for laparotomy. However, multiple attempts to shift the patient to radiology were unsuccessful. Thirty hours after hospitalization, her blood pressure plummeted, and she went into asystole. She was managed with ten cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), following which her blood pressure reverted to 84/46 mm Hg. Simultaneous inotrope and vasopressor support were barely helpful, as severe bradycardia ensued, followed by asystole. Two hours later, she was pronounced dead.
The family members of the deceased did not provide consent for the autopsy. Thus, postmortem histopathological evaluation of the tumor could not be done. In the end, we were unable to get more details of the tumor or the bleeding site.