A 43-year-old right-hand dominant Caucasian man presented to our emergency department with bilateral elbow pain. He was lifting a large sheet of drywall into position at chest level, when he felt a sudden sharp pain in the anterior aspect of his right elbow. He immediately compensated by shifting the weight to his left arm, incurring another eccentric contraction at his elbow, when he felt a similar pain on his left side. The pain and subsequent weakness in both elbows persisted precipitating his visit.
His medical history was significant only for episodes of right lateral epicondylitis in the past treated with corticosteroid injections and bracing. He had been asymptomatic from this for a number of years. He also had mild chronic low back pain and a remote tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. He took no regular medications, had no allergies, had never smoked cigarettes and drank one to two beers per week. He had been working in manual labor for 15 years, and enjoyed golf, hockey and playing the guitar.
Physical examination of his right elbow demonstrated an obvious deformity in the contour of the biceps muscle and tendon distally. There was significant ecchymoses present in the antecubital fossa extending distally down his anteromedial forearm. There was clear supination weakness and no tendon was palpable. The range of motion on his right was 5/0/134 degrees of flexion-extension, pronation of 75 degrees and 82 degrees of supination.
His left elbow biceps muscle belly extended more distal than on his right and he did have 4/5 supination power. He was, however, quite tender to palpation in the region, and no obvious tendon was palpable. The range of motion on his left was 0/0/134 degrees, with 73 degrees of pronation and 85 degrees of supination.
Median, anterior interosseous, posterior interosseous, radial, ulnar and musculocutaneous nerve function was intact bilaterally, and vascular status was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging was subsequently obtained showing complete tears with 6.7cm of retraction on the right , and with 1cm to 2cm of retraction on the left .
After discussion with our radiology department, our patient, and his family, we decided to perform a staged distal biceps tendon repair first on his right and then six weeks later on his left.
The technique used for both sides was a single anterior incision approach with tendon fixation provided with a suspensory cortical button (Endobutton; Smith and Nephew Endoscopy, Andover, MA, USA) . Briefly, a tourniquet was applied to his upper arm and a 5cm anterior curvilinear transverse incision was made, and carried distally on the medial border of his brachioradialis. The lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve (LABCN) was identified and the retracted end of his biceps was completely detached and easily visualized. The vacant tendon tract leading down to the radial tuberosity was exploited, and with his elbow fully supinated and extended, the radial tuberosity was exposed. A bicortical hole was made first with a 4.5mm drill in the anatomic medial aspect of the biceps insertion on the radial tuberosity. A second and third unicortical 4.5mm drill hole was made just proximal and distal to the first. A high speed burr was used to make the unicortical opening sufficiently wide to accept the tendon end. The tendon end was debrided of interposing tissue, and two fiberwire (Arthrex Inc., Naples, FL, USA) sutures were used to secure the tendon to the two central holes of the endobutton. Bunnell-type sutures were placed in the medial and lateral margins of the tendon with the knots placed proximally. Sutures were then placed in the leading and trailing holes of the endobutton and threaded through a long straight-eyed needle. The needle was advanced through the bicortical hole dorsally, with tension applied to the lead suture in order to pass the endobutton and deliver the tendon end into the tunneled insertion site. The endobutton was flipped securing the repair. The strength of the repair was confirmed by lifting his arm off the table by the biceps tendon using a retractor. Intra-operative fluoroscopic images were obtained confirming that the button was on the dorsal side .
The same postoperative protocol was used for each elbow. In the operating room, a plaster splint was fashioned with the elbow at 90 degrees flexion, the forearm in neutral rotation and the wrist in neutral. All digits were free. One week after the operation, a removable splint with the extremity in the same position was made and physiotherapy started. This consisted of passive elbow flexion and active extension exercises with his forearm supinated. Elbow flexion was full while a 30 degree extension block was observed. Passive full supination, and active pronation limited to 50 degrees with the elbow at 90 degrees flexion was also performed. This was implemented for five weeks. At six weeks, the removable splint was stopped, and strengthening and stretching exercises were added to obtain full motion. Resistance was progressed to a maximum of 4.54kg (10 pounds). Three months after the operation, all restrictions were removed.
Initially, our patient experienced postoperative paresthesias in the anterolateral aspect of his right forearm. This gradually improved but had not completely resolved when he resumed full work activities four months after the left-sided repair. The rest of his neurovascular examination was normal.
Our last follow-up was approximately 30 months after the second operation. At that point, our patient was still working full-time without major difficulties. He felt he was at 85% of his premorbid function. On his right, he had 6/0/128 degrees of flexion-extension, 75 degrees of pronation and 85 degrees of supination. On his left, he had 6/0/145 degrees of flexion-extension, 80 degrees of pronation and 89 degrees of supination. He still had a small area of numbness over his anterolateral right forearm and said he had not been able to return to hockey or golf. Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores were obtained at the time of initial evaluation and 30 months after surgery. Pre-injury DASH scores were based on our patient’s recollection of premorbid arm function. The DASH scores went from 41 before the operation to 20 on his left and 29 on his right 30 months later (Additional file ).