A 42-year-old female with no significant past medical history presented with worsening shortness of breath and chest pain. She has a significant family history of cardiac disease consisting of coronary artery disease (CAD) and valvular disease in her mother, CAD in her father, and two sisters both with congestive heart failure. She had been admitted 1 month prior for sharp, midsternal chest pain that radiated to the right arm, new onset dyspnea with minimal activity and ankle edema. At that time, a myocardial infarction had been ruled out as the electrocardiogram and troponin was normal three times. A Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed the aortic root to be 3.5 cm with a normal ejection fraction greater than 55%. A Computed tomography (CT) was performed which identified an aneurysmal dilatation of the mid ascending aorta measuring 5.1 cm with extensive calcifications seen along the LAD and right coronary artery concerning for extensive atherosclerosis. The follow-up visit 1 month later consisted of a TTE that identified a dilated aortic root at 4.1 cm and a CT Angiography that identified a 5.7 cm fusiform aneurysm of the ascending thoracic aorta with a suspected intramural hematoma . Additionally, Left Heart Catherization identified the LAD to have a mid-saccular aneurysm which was immediately preceded by a severe 85% eccentric lesion and followed by a second 70% stenosis .
In the operating room, a large inflammatory-appearing aneurysm was identified in the ascending aorta which consisted of a shiny, eggshell appearing glistening capsule. The thick wall appeared pink-yellow and had areas of white-tan fibrosis and calcifications . A similar inflammatory, thickened plaque was found overlying the mid-LAD in the area of the presumed aneurysm . The ascending aneurysm plaque extended to just proximal to the innominate artery (IA) branchpoint. Therefore, standard aortic cannulation was not possible as there was not enough mobility due to severe tissue inflammation. Interestingly, the patient had a bovine arch anatomy with the left carotid artery (LCA) branching off a common trunk with the IA, which was carefully avoided. A partial occluding clamp was placed on the IA distal to the LCA takeoff. Central cannulation was achieved with a graft to the IA for arterial inflow. Standard cannulation followed with dual-stage venous return through the right atrial appendage. Cerebral protection was achieved by modified deep hypothermic circulatory arrest with antegrade cerebral perfusion via the innominate artery. The ascending aorta and the proximal hemiarch aneurysm were resected and replaced with a 26 mm Gelweave Graft (Terumo Aortic, Sunrise, FL). A coronary artery bypass graft was performed bypassing with LAD with the left internal mammary artery. The patient was extubated shortly after the operation, and the remainder of the postoperative course was uneventful.
Histologic evaluation of the aneurysm revealed aortitis consisting of lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with patchy acute inflammation, destruction of the media, and edema with a rare giant cell . An elastin stain also demonstrated the destruction of elastin fibers in the area of inflammation . Bacterial, fungal, and treponemal stains were negative. Testing for SARS CoV-2 RNA was also negative.