A 44-year-old male patient (weight 60 kg) was posted for C2–C5 astrocytoma excision under general anesthesia. The surgery was performed at All India Institute of Medical Sciences Patna, India in 2019. The patient did not have any coexisting disease or history of seizure. Anesthesia was induced with injection of propofol, fentanyl, and vecuronium followed by tracheal intubation. The propofol infusion at a rate of 75–100 μg/kg/min was started for the maintenance of anesthesia as motor and somatosensory evoked potential monitoring was planned for the patient. The bispectral index (BIS), invasive blood pressure, and central venous pressure were also monitored in addition to standard monitoring. Furthermore, the patient was made prone for surgery. Thirty minutes after the start of propofol infusion, as the surgeon was dissecting the superficial muscular layers after skin incision, the patient developed generalized tonic–clonic seizure (GTCS) involving all four limbs and truncal muscles. A sudden increase in blood pressure, heart rate, end tidal CO2, and BIS were also noted. The injection of 2 mg midazolam was then immediately given intravenously (IV). Although the intensity of seizure decreased, GTCS continued, for which a repeat dose of midazolam was given, but in vain. As the seizure was not controlled, a loading dose of 15 mg/kg phenytoin was given IV over 20 minutes. Nonetheless, the seizure continued with a seizure-free interval of 5 minutes. The injection of 250 mg thiopentone was then administered IV as a last resort for treating SE, which successfully aborted the episode for approximately 20 minutes, only to reappear again. Meanwhile, investigations such as electrolytes and arterial blood gases (ABG) were done to rule out aggravating factors. ABG indicated metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia, and electrolytes were within the normal range. A provisional diagnosis of propofol-induced seizure was made, and propofol infusion was discontinued. Anesthesia was then maintained on fentanyl, dexmedetomidine infusion and isoflurane to maintain a minimum alveolar concentration of 0.5–0.8, and surgery was allowed to proceed. The rest of the intraoperative and postoperative periods were uneventful, and the postoperative computerized tomography of the brain and electroencephalogram were within normal limits. The patient was symptom-free after three months of follow-up.