The patient was a 62-year-old male. His relevant medical history included chronic hepatitis C, which was cured with interferon. He had undergone extended right anterior sectionectomy of the liver for cStage II HCC 8 years previously. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the resected specimen revealed a moderately differentiated HCC of the simple nodular type. During surveillance, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass lesion measuring 2.5 cm in diameter at the hepatic hilum, suggesting lymph node metastasis . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass with early staining and gradual washout at the hepatic hilum . This mass lesion had the same contrast pattern as the initial HCC. The tumor did not involve major vessels or other organs. No distant metastases other than the mass lesions were observed. The patient’s laboratory results were unremarkable. Tumor markers of alpha-feto protein (AFP) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) were also normal (2.2 ng/mL and 13.0 mAU/mL, respectively). The AFP level was within the normal range (4.6 ng/mL); however, PIVKA-II level was elevated (1058 mAU/mL) before the initial surgery. The patient exhibited a well-preserved liver function. Based on the above findings, we diagnosed the patient with solitary metastatic lymph node HCC, and extirpation of the tumor was planned. To detect the location of the tumor in the complicated adhesive surgical field around the hepatic hilum (due to prior surgery), ICG for intraoperative navigation surgery was injected intravenously at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg body weight (total dose 24.5 mg), 3 days before the current surgery. After laparotomy, the severe adhesions were released, and the hepatic hilum was explored. As expected, the tumor showed partial fluorescence under a PINPOINT Endoscopic fluorescence imaging system (Stryker Japan K.K.), a near-infrared light camera system . ICG fluorescence from the tumor itself was no longer observed at the hepatic hilum after tumor removal. The operative time was 118 min, and blood loss was minimal. The pathological diagnosis was lymph node metastasis of the HCC. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the resected specimen revealed that the normal lymph node structure was replaced by a moderately differentiated HCC, which was consistent with the findings of the initial excised specimen . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9 without complications. The patient remains alive without recurrence of HCC 2 years after the second surgery.