A 55-year-old man, with previous history of alcohol consumption, presented to our institution with a 6-day history of right upper quadrant pain, fever and progressive jaundice. Physical examination showed a temperature of 38 °C, a pulse rate of 98/min, a blood pressure of 10/7 cm Hg, scleral icterus and right upper quadrant pain with no rebound. Laboratory blood tests showed a leukocyte count of 12,300/ml, C-reactive protein of 215 mg/l, a conserved renal function. His liver function tests revealed a total bilirubin of 130 umol/l, an alanine transaminase (ALT) of 213 U/l, a gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (γ-GT) of 686 U/l and an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 284 U/l. Amylase level and prothrombin time were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography foundcholelithiasis and a mild dilatation of both the extrahepatic and intrahepatic biliary tract. The obstacle was not identified. CT scan confirmed the presence of several stones impacted in the common bile duct, upstream biliary tree dilatation, and an enlarged pancreatic head with adjacent peripancreatic inflammation. We retained the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis with ascending cholangitis. The patient was admitted and antibiotics were then intravenously administered. Twenty-four hours later, he had an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with sphincterotomy and stones extraction with favorable evolution . The patient was discharged 3 days later.
A laparoscopic cholecystectomy was scheduled, after regression of peripancreatic inflammation, 3 months later. Due to dissection difficulties, we converted to a Kocher’s incision to complete the cholecystectomy. Transcystic cholangiography showed residual stones. We performed choledocotomy with two stones retrieval and T-tube choledochostomy. Immediate post-operative course was uneventful and T-tube cholangiography was normal. The patient was discharged in the 5th post-operative day.
Two weeks later, the patient presented with hematemesis and melena. On examination, he had icterus, blood pressure of 12/8 cm Hg and a pulse of 85 beats per minute. On digital rectal examination, he had melena. There was no blood exteriorization from the T-tube. Blood tests showed a hemoglobin level at 96 g/l, a total bilirubin of 46 umol/l, an ALT of 225 U/l, a γ-GT of 516 U/l. He underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showing mycotic esophagitis and erosive bulbitis with no active bleeding. Lateral duodenoscopy revealed no bleeding from the papilla. CT scan showed infiltration of sub-hepatic fat and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was normal. During hospitalization, the patient was hemodynamically stable, without further drop in hemoglobin level. He was discharged with an appointment to our outpatient department.
After 1 month of being discharged, the patient presented with recurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and haemobilia with blood exteriorization from the T-tube. On examination, he was hemodynamically stable, he had scleral icterus and right upper quadrant pain. On digital rectal examination, he had melena. Hemoglobin level was at 85 g/l and his liver function tests revealed icteric cholestasis. A CT-angiography was performed showing a pseudo-aneurysm of the gastroduodenal arterywith probable erosion of the main bile duct .
In the third day post admission,a massivebleeding and hemorrhagic shock occurred. Hemoglobin level was at 40 g/l. The patient was admitted to the intensive care department. After resuscitation and transfusion his condition was relatively stabilized, and he was addressed for urgent embolization. Coeliac arteriography confirmed the bleeding from the pseudo-aneurysm of the gastroduodenal artery. Embolization using three coils achieved successful hemostasis with preserved permeability of the gastroduodenal artery. The immediate post-embolization period passed without any complications. The patient was discharged 6 days later after T-tube removal. Then he was lost to follow-up.
Twenty months later, the patient presented with Charcot’s triad. Physical examination showed a temperature of 40 °C, heart rate of 120/min, blood pressure of 14/9 cmHg, icterus and right upper quadrant tenderness. On blood tests, leukocyte count was 22,770/ml, C-reactive protein level260 mg/l, and conserved renal function. His liver function tests revealed a total bilirubin of 355 umol/l, conjugated bilirubin of 195 umol/l, an ALT of 215 U/l, a γ-GT of 729 U/l and an alkaline phosphatase of 126 U/l. Prothrombin time was 50%. On ultrasonography, we noted dilatation of both the extrahepatic and intrahepatic biliary tract. CT scan revealed a hyper-dense obstacle of the lower bile duct .
ERCP showed the presence, in the lower bile duct, of an intraluminal coil and stones, with upstream biliary tree dilatation . An extraction of the coil and fragmented stones was carried out and vacuity of bile ducts was attained. Following this, the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged 8 days later.