A 68-year-old man with a history of post orthotopic liver transplantation suffered from septic shock in a regular nursing unit. Five hours before transferring to LICU, the patient has had a fever with the highest reading of 41.0 ℃. The patient’s blood pressure dropped to 73/58 mmHg, with heart rate increased to 113 beats/min post transferal. White blood cell (WBC) count was 0.82 × 109/L [reference range 3.50–9.50 × 109/L], and the neutrophil count was 0.0 × 109/L [reference range 1.8–6.3 × 109/L].
Significant past medical history includes chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection for 30 years and hepatocellular carcinoma for 17 months. The patient received his liver transplantation 16 days before the event. After liver transplantation, the HBV DNA was undetectable, while HBsAb, HBeAb, and HBcAb were positive. The patient was taking entecavir 0.5 mg daily. No other known hepatobiliary diseases were found, and the patient denied any history of smoking or alcohol use.
At ICU admission, coarse breath sounds were present in both lungs. The levels of inflammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP) exceeded 90 mg/L [reference range 0– 10.0 mg/L] and procalcitonin (PCT) was 39.51 ng/mL [reference range < 0.50 ng/mL]. The culture of two sputum samples obtained before LICU admission were positive for MDR Acinetobacter baumannii. The patient was started on polymyxin B intravenously of loading dose 1500,000 units with the maintenance of 750,000 units every 12 h, along with meropenem 1 g intravenously every 8 h. The immunosuppressants were discontinued. On day 6 of LICU admission, the culture of the blood sample drawn on day 2 was positive for carbapenem-sensitive Pseudomonas aeruginosa, so polymyxin B was stopped. Treated with meropenem and amikacin, the patient’s body temperature and hemodynamic index normalized, and agranulocytosis got corrected. The culture of a follow-up blood sample drawn on day 7 of LICU admission turned negative.
On day 8 of LICU admission, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed patchy high-density shadows in the left upper lung and both lower lungs, with stripes and grid-like changes in both lungs. MDR Klebsiella pneumoniae was repeatedly detected from the induced sputum. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with hospital-acquired pneumonia caused by MDR Klebsiella pneumoniae. Culture indicated susceptibility to tigecycline, ceftazidime/avibactam (CAZ-AVI), and polymyxin B. Because CAZ-AVI requires the patient’s own expense, high-dose tigecycline (loading dose 200 mg, followed by 100 mg every 12 h intravenously) combined with polymyxin B (50,000 units by aerosol inhalation every 12 h) was used for treatment. However, his liver function started to disorientate, with biochemical levels gradually rising and exceeding the ULN. After four days of intravenous tigecycline, there was a significant increase in the levels of TB, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). They increased from 17.7 to 23.3 µmol/L [reference range 3.4–20.4 µmol/L], 36 to 106 U/L [reference range 9–50 U/L], and 115 to 374 U/L [reference range 45–125 U/L], respectively . A routine post-transplant CT scan of the abdomen was performed three days before liver function declines showed no masses, gallstones, or biliary dilatation. A color Doppler ultrasonography also showed normal blood flow to the transplanted liver. Serological levels of all hepatitis viruses were negative. To prevent further liver injury, immunotherapy of oral tacrolimus 1 mg every 12 h was resumed, with tigecycline dose reduced to 50 mg every 12 h. Nevertheless, the liver function continued to decline. To distinguish whether the reason for liver injury was due to drug factors or liver rejection, we performed a liver puncture biopsy. The histopathological finding was cytotoxic injury. Cholestasis, micro cavitation, and punctate necrosis of liver cells were seen under the microscope . According to the DILI guideline , the updated Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM) scale was used to evaluate the causal relationship between tigecycline and liver injury. The results were 7 points, indicating a “probable” of causality grading. Due to the R ratio being 0.71 [R=(ALT level/ALT ULN)/(ALP level/ALP ULN)], the pattern of tigecycline-associated DILI was determined to be a cholestatic injury with the severity of grade 1.
Then, we replaced tigecycline with CAZ-AVI 2.5 g every 8 h intravenously. Methylprednisolone was administered for DILI therapy, with an initial intravenous dose of 80 mg and tapered down to 16 mg orally after 18 days. The trend of the biochemical levels of liver function is shown in Fig. . TB levels returned to normal after four days of tigecycline withdrawal, and transaminase levels returned to normal on day 12. The patient was discharged on day 35. A monthly outpatient follow-up lab showed that the patient’s liver function stayed normal post-discharge.