A woman aged 77 years was referred to our hospital due to respiratory distress. She had no medical history until then like hypertension, dyslipidemia or diabetes. And she also did not have any risk factors like thrombophilia, history of trauma, hospitalization steroids use, hormonal contraceptives, current smoking, chronic respiratory disease, infection, recent surgery, cancer and chemotherapy. Her blood pressure was 132/74 mmHg, she had a regular heart rate of 108 bpm and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and her oxygen saturation was 85% on room air. Electrocardiography showed inverted T waves in leads V1–3. Chest X-ray showed dilatation of the pulmonary artery and a cardiothoracic ratio of 60% .
Echocardiography showed right ventricular dilatation and a tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient of 70 mmHg . Computed tomography (CT) revealed thrombotic occlusions of both pulmonary arteries and, coincidentally, a thrombus in an aneurysm in the popliteal vein of the left leg ( and ). Right to left ventricle (RV:LV) diameter ratio, measured on the four-chamber view, was high (2.11). Based on these findings, acute PE was diagnosed and the patient was started on rivaroxaban (15 mg orally twice daily for the first 21 days, followed by a maintenance dose of 20 mg orally once daily).
After 12 weeks of anticoagulant therapy, the thrombus in the popliteal vein aneurysm was disappeared . The D-dimer value had normalized (from 14.6 μg/mL to 0.5 μg/mL). CT angiography showed dissipation of the pulmonary thrombus, but RV:LV diameter ratio remained high (1.25). Perfusion scintigraphy showed that multiple perfusion defects remained ( and ). Swan–Ganz catheterization was also performed. Mean pulmonary artery pressure was 26 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance, 6.65 Wood units. Pulmonary angiography revealed organized distal thrombi. Based on these findings, we diagnosed CTEPH due to recurrent formation of thrombi in the PVA.
The patient is now due to undergo balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA) and surgery to treat the CTEPH and PVA, respectively.