A 40-year-old Hispanic woman, with a history of obesity, a body mass index (BMI) of 32, and hypertension, presented to our emergency department (ED) complaining of squeezing bifrontal headache for 3 days. Her headache started gradually, had a progressive course, and was associated with nausea, vomiting, dizziness, transient visual disturbances in her right eye, and a feeling of both her ears being clogged. A day prior to the presentation, she started to feel numbness and weakness of the right side of her face, along with an inability to close her right eye properly. She denied having diplopia, loss of vision, photophobia, tinnitus, or any feeling of weakness, numbness, or tingling in other locations of her body. She had no history of migraine headaches, tick bite, or any recent illness or fever. She was not taking oral contraceptive pills at the time.
On initial evaluation, she was hemodynamically stable and afebrile. On neurological examination, she was fully alert and oriented, and had fluent speech and intact comprehensive abilities. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. CN testing revealed: 3–4 mm pupils that were equal in size and reactive to light and accommodation; intact extraocular movements with no nystagmus, saccadic movement or skew; and full visual fields. No signs of abducens nerve palsy were present. However, there was facial asymmetry evident by right lower facial droop, weaker right eye closure, and limited ability to raise the right eyebrow. Facial sensation, on the other hand, was equal on both sides, with a strong jaw opening and a midline tongue of good power. In addition, shoulder shrug was symmetrical, and hearing was intact. A fundus examination revealed bilateral grade I–II papilledema. The rest of her neurological examination, including motor function, sensation, reflexes, coordination, and gait analysis, was within normal limits.
She underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of her head that showed some right-sided pontomedullary hypodensity. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with magnetic resonance venography (MRV) revealed a stenosis in the lateral aspect of the transverse sinus, a partially empty sella turcica, and a picture of mild papilledema, findings consistent with ICP . A lumbar puncture (LP) produced CSF with an opening pressure of 28 cm, which is above the limit of the reference interval. The cytological and chemical findings of the LP were otherwise within normal limits: white blood cells (WBCs) 2, lymphocytes 100%, protein 24, red blood cells (RBCs) 13, and glucose 58. She was initially treated with intravenously administered 25 mg diphenhydramine and 10 mg metoclopramide along with 500 ml intravenous normal saline 0.9% (IVF) and her headache subsequently subsided. She was also started on prednisone 60 mg daily for 5 days and 500 mg of acetazolamide twice daily. Two days later, she reported a dramatic improvement in both the headache and the facial nerve palsy. A week later, she attended our clinic for a right facial nerve examination, which was completely normal.