A 65-year-old Caucasian gentleman presented with 9 g proteinuria, fatigue, loss of weight 20 pounds, joint aches, and distorted sense of taste. He had been diagnosed with HIV 34 years earlier and had taken part in a clinical study in which he was determined to be a chronic non-progressor of HIV and had not required any antiviral therapy until 2 years prior to presentation. At that time, he was initiated on antiretroviral therapy (ART) with elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate due to declining CD4 counts and rising viral load. His other medical history included hypothyroidism, but he had no hypertension or diabetes.
Examination revealed a well-appearing man without hypertension (blood pressure 120/64 mm Hg) or tachycardia (pulse 64/min), and no clinical features of nephrotic syndrome. Laboratory studies demonstrated hypoalbuminemia (2.8 gm/dL) and low white blood cell count (4,700/μL) with otherwise normal blood count and basic chemistry panel. HIV-1 RNA by PCR was <20/μL, and absolute CD4 count was 341 cells/μL. Serum creatinine was 1.0 mg/dL. Urine analysis showed 0–2 RBC/HPF and 0 white cells, and 24-h urine protein was quantified at 9,390 mg. Anti-nuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, complement 3, complement 4, Sjogren's antibodies (SS-A, SS-B), rapid plasma reagin, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody studies were negative/normal. The primary clinical concerns were for immune complex diseases in the setting of HIV and HIV-associated collapsing glomerulopathy, the latter of which was considered less likely in this patient with well-controlled HIV and Caucasian background. Kidney biopsy was performed to determine the cause of nephrotic range proteinuria.
Kidney biopsy demonstrated MN with segmental subepithelial eosinophilic immune deposits on the outer aspect of the glomerular capillary loops. There was no mesangial or endocapillary hypercellularity, crescents, or segmental sclerosis, and minimal chronic injury in the tubulointerstitium. Immunofluorescence revealed a nearly “full house” pattern of glomerular capillary wall immune complex deposition composed of IgG (3+), IgM (1+), kappa and lambda light chains (both 3+), C3 (1–2+), and C1q (2+). There was no significant staining for IgA and no extraglomerular staining. Phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) was negative, and IgG subclass evaluation revealed 3 + staining for each of IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. Electron microscopy revealed irregularly distributed subepithelial immune deposits with occasional subendothelial and mesangial immune deposits. No deposit substructure nor definitive endothelial tubuloreticular inclusions were identified. Subsequent testing for other antigens in MN revealed that the immune deposits stained for neural epidermal growth factor-like 1 (NELL1) and were negative for exostosin 1/2 and thrombospondin type 1 domain containing 7A (THSD7A).
The patient was started on losartan. Malignancy workup including colonoscopy (prior to biopsy), prostate-specific antigen testing, and subsequent fecal immunochemical test was negative. Mycophenolate mofetil was offered due to presence of lupus-like MN, but after extensive discussions, he opted not to take this or other immunosuppressive medications. He continued on losartan and his herbal supplements, none of which contained steroids nor lipoic acid (full list with ingredients available in online suppl. Material; see for all online suppl. material). His proteinuria improved from 9 g to 6 g in 2 months' time and to less than 1 g at 7 months . His antiviral therapy was switched to dolutegravir, abacavir, and lamivudine subsequently. At 7 years since his initial presentation, he continues to have normal renal function with no proteinuria.