Our patient is a 15-year-old boy, a Chinese national, with no significant medical history. His personal and family history were both negative for FAP and Gardner syndrome. He had a normal infancy and early childhood and was fully vaccinated. Significantly, he has a family history of pulmonary tuberculosis, hemophilia, and he is an offspring of parents who are first-generation cousins. He was referred to our institution after visiting his local hospital for a routine physical examination where he was diagnosed as having an upper abdominal mass. A computed tomography (CT) scan at his local hospital revealed an abdominal cystic mass adjacent to his pancreas measuring 11.5 × 9.0 cm.
He was initially seen at our Surgical Out-patient Department. His chief complaints were a 1-week history of mild abdominal pain (mainly in the epigastric region), nausea, vomiting, and a low-grade fever. On physical examination his abdomen was slightly distended, with dullness on percussion, and generalized tenderness on palpation. A large mass measuring approximately 7 × 10 cm was palpable in his left upper abdomen extending from the epigastric to left hypochondriac region; it was of a hard consistency with well-defined surface and borders and poor mobility. In our hospital, an enhanced CT scan of his abdomen was done and this revealed a large cystic mass in the anterior aspect of the body of his pancreas measuring 9.3 × 8.5 cm with characteristic of pancreatic cancer (of pancreatic origin). Other radiological differentials were a solid pseudopapillary tumor or cystadenoma. A large splenomegaly with compression of splenic vein was also noted. He was subsequently admitted for further investigation and management .
An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also done and this confirmed a huge cystic mass measuring approximately 8.1 × 9.3 × 11cm closely adherent to the body and tail of his pancreas. Our patient was scheduled for an elective exploratory laparotomy with a preoperative diagnosis of pancreatic cancer of unknown origin. Intraoperatively, a decision was made to perform a radical resection of the pancreatic mass. Due to the large size of the tumor and extensive local adhesions encountered, a partial pancreatectomy, total splenectomy, segmental resection of transverse colon and distal jejunum, and subsequently a one-stage jejunojejunostomy and colonic anastomosis were also performed.
Preoperative laboratory investigations (complete blood count, liver function test, renal function test, electrolytes) were all unremarkable. Intraoperative findings were a grossly enlarged spleen measuring approximately 13 × 9 cm and a mass approximately 20 × 14 cm at the body and tail of his pancreas with adhesion to the posterior wall of his stomach, transverse colon, and distal portion of jejunum. There were also multiple enlarged lymph nodes. The duration of the surgery was 5 hours and 5 minutes and it was completed without any incidents. There was a total blood loss of 1700 ml; therefore, 700 ml of packed red blood cells and 400 ml of plasma were transfused intraoperatively. Postoperatively, our patient progressed satisfactorily and was discharged from hospital in a clinically improved and stable condition. He was seen in follow-up clinic 2-months post-operation with a repeat abdominal CT scan which revealed no evidence of recurrence of the abdominal mass. He is currently not being considered for adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy but will continue to attend out-patient clinics for close monitoring and care.
Pathology and immunohistochemistry studies of his pancreas, jejunum, and spleen showed transitional hyperplasia and spindle cells atypia with invasion of his pancreas and muscular layer of his intestinal wall. There was evidence of reactive hyperplasia of lymph nodes and mild congestion of his spleen.
Individual immunohistochemistry results were β-catenin (+), vimentin (+), S100 (+), Ki67 < 1% (+), DOG1 (−), CD117 (−), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (−), desmin (−), ALK (−), CD34 (−), calretinin (−), WT1 (−), CK5/6 (−), EMA (−), D2-40 (−), and MC (−). The combined pathology and immunohistochemistry results were consistent with aggressive fibromatosis or desmoid-type fibromatosis of the pancreas.