A 78-year-old Caucasian gentleman with persistent AF, previous pulmonary vein isolation, coronary artery disease with remote coronary artery bypass surgery and recent percutaneous coronary intervention, and hypertension and obstructive sleep apnoea and recurrent haematuria on novel oral anticoagulation and resulting microcytic hypochromic anaemia was referred for LAAO. He was at an elevated embolic stroke and bleeding risk with a calculated CHADS2VASc score of 5 and a HASBLED score of 4. He was scheduled for a LAAO with a planned WATCHMAN™ FLX device with intra-procedural transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance. According to our catheterization laboratory policy, pre-procedural TEE/cardiac computed tomography (CT) is not routinely obtained for patients on anticoagulation, unless there is a high suspicion for an appendage thrombus or a previously unsuccessful occlusion attempt with a complex anatomy.
The patient was sedated and intubated for the procedure. Ultrasound-guided right femoral vein access was obtained and an 8 French (Fr) sheath was introduced using the Seldinger technique. On TEE, the LAA measured at 30 mm × 27 mm and two lobes separated by a muscular ridge were noted. The interatrial septum was visualized and no lipomatous hypertrophy was noted. Transoesophageal echocardiography–guided trans-septal puncture (TSP) was obtained in the inferior and middle quadrant of the interatrial septum by utilizing the VersaCross™ trans-septal system using radiofrequency ablation, and a double curve trans-septal sheath with the dilator was advanced into the left atrium. We routinely utilize the VersaCross trans-septal system for all LAAO-related TSPs because of the benefit of an internally validated reduction in procedure time from venous access to left atrial access. The dilator was removed and a 6 Fr pigtail catheter was advanced over the VersaCross™ wire into the LAA and an angiogram obtained. Two separate LAA lobes separated by a muscular ridge with a single common wide ostium were noted, both on TEE and on cine-angiography ( and ). The larger of the two lobes was directed anteriorly and the other posteriorly. Closure with a single 35 mm WATCHMAN™ FLX device was attempted after accounting for 10–30% compression from the TEE-derived LAA measurements. However, the ridge prevented optimal exclusion of both lobes and biased the device anteriorly, thereby resulting in a suboptimal deployment with flow around the WATCHMAN device on colour doppler (, see , ). Therefore, the 35 mm device was recaptured and removed with the sheath left in the left atrium. After a careful analysis of the TEE and the lobe angiography, it was suggested that complete closure of the appendage was possible using two devices placed sequentially and partially overlapping, such that the larger device would partially lock in the smaller device. The use of a LAMBRE device was not possible because it was not approved in the USA. Surgical ligation was deferred due to the patient’s non-preference for open surgery and elevated surgical risk stemming from a previous sternotomy and multiple comorbidities.
A second TSP was obtained in the inferior and mid quadrant of the interatrial septum, using the technique described above and a second double S-curved sheath was inserted in the LAA. A 20 mm WATCHMAN™ FLX device was deployed in the smaller posterior lobe without releasing the device. A second WATCHMAN™ FLX 31 mm device was deployed in the larger anterior lobe partially covering the first one in a way to form a L-shaped configuration. Both devices were evaluated under TEE and cine-angiography, and position, anchor, size, and seal was met for both devices, and they were sequentially deployed. There was a small (<1 mm) peri-device leak at the end of the procedure and no pericardial effusion (, see , ). Haemostasis was achieved and the patient was discharged the next day on home apixaban 5 mg twice daily and aspirin 81 mg once daily. He was seen in the clinic on his 45-day visit, with TEE showing well-seated devices with no peri-device leak (, see , ). His apixaban was stopped and he was switched to clopidogrel 75 mg once daily and aspirin 81 mg once daily.