We present a case of a 72-years-old multiparous woman who accessed our Gynecology and Human Reproduction Physiopathology Unit in September 2020 after an incidental finding of a right adnexal mass of 43 mm with contrast-enhancement on a control computed tomography (CT) scan made for diverticulitis in the department of Gastroenterology of a first-level hospital. Tumoral markers, including CEA, CA 19-9, CA 15-3 and CA 125 were negative.
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, glaucoma and diverticulitis. Moreover, in her 40s she underwent laparotomic cholecystectomy surgery.
The diagnostic work-up and the surgical management are shown in Additional file : Video.
At the admission in our department, she was asymptomatic and a transvaginal (TV) and a transabdominal (TA) ultrasound (US) were carried out by an expert sonographer with at least 5 years of experience in onco-gynecological ultrasound. US showed a normal anteverted uterus with normal left adnexa. A solid tumor that measured 44 × 22 × 43 mm was identified adjacent to the right ovary. According to International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) terminology it was a solid inhomogeneous mass (solid component > 80%) with multiple anechoic cysts, irregular external contour and with a remarkable vascularization at Power Doppler (Color Score 4) . The sliding tumor sign was present. The origin of the tumor was unclear; however, the position and the presence of the sliding sign with the right ovary seemed to indicate an intestinal origin . No free fluid was seen in the Douglas pouch. Visible peritoneal implants, omental thickenings, and hepatic, splenic and lymph node secondary involvement were not observed. The examiner classified this tumor as probably malignant and the suspect diagnosis according to the literature was Extra Gastrointestinal Stromal tumor (eGIST) . A tumor staging CT scan was carried out in our department that was negative for infiltrated lymph nodes and distant metastasis.
The patient was then scheduled for a diagnostic laparoscopy that showed normal uterus and normal adnexa. An exophytic cerebriform whitish tumor of about 4.5 cm, rising form an ileal loop was observed . Laparotomic removal of the ileal tumor by segmental intestinal resection and latero-lateral anastomosis was performed and the tissue sent for histopathologic examination.
The post-operative course was regular, and the patient was discharged from our ward without any complications.
After some difficulties to identify the histological nature of the tumor, the samples from the ileal lesion were sent to a referral center for further analysis. They confirmed the nature of a malignant mural-based neoplasm. The slides showed a nested epithelioid malignancy that was located within the muscularis propria and the submucosa. The neoplastic cells were uniform and had a clear, vacuolated cytoplasm, small round nucleoli with fine chromatin, and focally prominent nucleoli. ln some areas, the tumor exhibited a moderate amount of hyalinized stroma with a capillary network. This stroma was minimal at the base of the tumor.
Immunohistochemical stains showed expression of vimentin, CD10, p63, CD56, and cyclin D1, but did not express CK7l18/8, EMA, BERP4, synaptophysin, chromogranin, calretinin, inhibin, PAX8, WT1, ER, PR, SMA, desmin, caldesmin, CD34, Ckit, DOG1, HMB45, and MART1. Additional immunohistochemical stains showed that the neoplastic cells express S100 in the areas with decreased stroma but did not express SOX10. An immunohistochemical stain for TFE3 was equivocal, the differential diagnosis would include several mesenchymal neoplasms, including clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, which can share histologic features along with S100 labeling; however, the negative staining for SOX10 argued against that possibility. They also considered the recently described entity of soft tissue sarcoma with GLI1 fusions. GLI1 fusion analysis by both FISH and ARCHER were conducted. Both tests founded an in-frame ACTB-GLI1 fusion involving exon 2 of ACTB and exon 6 of GLI1. Given the histomorphology and the fusion identified the final diagnosis was malignant epithelioid neoplasm with GLI1 fusion .
After a multidisciplinary meeting, involving the oncologists, the surgeons, the pathologists and the radiologists, and in consideration of the initial stage of the pathology, there were no indications for further therapies. Moreover, because the lack of a defined oncological follow up program, the patient was scheduled for annual follow up.