A Five-day-old female infant, born to a 23-year G2P1L1 mother by spontaneous vaginal delivery at 39+2 period of gestation was brought to the emergency department with a complaint of multiple episodes of bilious vomiting along with abdominal distension and unable to pass stool since birth. There was no history of fever, lethargy, inconsolable cry, and irritability. The female had no history of spontaneous abortion and her first child is healthy and normal.
On examination, the child was conscious and ill-looking with a small head but prominent occiput, low set abnormal ears, small jaw, upturned nose, widely spaced eyes, small neck with widely spaced nipples, clenched hands with overlapping fingers, flexed big toe, and prominent heels; features suggestive of Edward's syndrome . She was afebrile but tachycardic (heart rate: 160/min) and tachypneic (respiratory rate-70/min) and other vitals were stable. The abdomen was distended, tense with dilated veins, everted umbilicus, and absent bowel sound. The orogastric tube was thus placed for decompression.
All the hematological parameters were within normal limits. X-ray abdomen supine view revealed marked dilatation of large bowel with no gas in the rectum . USG abdomen and pelvis revealed a gaseous abdomen with minimal interloop ascites. There was no passage of stool even after the rectal wash. Considering the possibility of intestinal obstruction, an exploratory laparotomy was done which revealed multiple bands of approximately 3 cm and 10 cm distal to an ileocolic junction along with malrotation of the gut. Bands were released and the malrotation was corrected. Furthermore, Biopsies were taken from splenic flexure and descending colon which showed the absence of ganglion cells suggestive of HD . With typical clinical features of ES and the absence of ganglionic cells, a diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease with ES was made. The baby underwent colostomy and her first stage of the Soave procedure for the management of HS is planned at 6 months of age. All the procedures were performed by the experienced team of gastrointestinal surgeons of Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital and were well tolerated by the patient. Parents were counseled regarding the disease diagnosis and expected long-term outcomes, quality of life, and the prospects of poor prognosis even with the multiple surgical interventions. The patient is under regular follow-up.