An 83-year-old male receiving ipilimumab for metastatic melanoma presented to our hospital with grade 3 diarrhea for 5 days. He had previously been treated with pembrolizumab for 4 months, which was stopped 2 months prior to onset of his symptoms due to disease progression. He was initiated on ipilimumab therapy 1 month before his presentation to our hospital. He noted several days of watery, non-bloody diarrhea and crampy abdominal pain. He had no recent travel and had not been exposed to anyone with similar complaints. He presented to an outside emergency room, where he had an unremarkable CT scan of the abdomen and was treated empirically with fluids, hydrocortisone 100 mg, and metronidazole. He was discharged home but continued to have symptoms and returned to the emergency department. He was again treated with IV fluids, and transferred to our hospital. On presentation, he was well appearing, afebrile, without tachycardia or hypotension. His abdomen was benign, with no tenderness or distension and normal bowel sounds. Labs were notable for hyponatremia, acute kidney injury, severe gap and non-anion gap metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia. White blood cell count was elevated to 11.25 K/cu mm with 30% bands. Urinalysis revealed moderate ketones. Stool studies were negative for clostridium difficile toxin B by PCR, EHEC-EIA, bacterial culture, giardia, ova and parasites, microsporidium, and cryptosporidium. His stool was positive for fecal lactoferrin. Interpretation of the outside hospital CT abdomen with IV contrast was performed by our radiology department. This was significant for minimal thickening of the terminal ileum, with few prominent adjacent lymph nodes. He was started on IV methylprednisolone 125 mg twice a day for presumed ipilimumab-induced colitis. His diarrhea began to improve and he underwent a colonoscopy, which showed no erythema, ulceration, or other mucosal abnormality . Random colon biopsies also showed normal mucosa . With colitis ruled out by colonoscopy, steroids were tapered to prednisone 60 mg daily, but he had worsening of his diarrhea and electrolyte abnormalities. At this point, prednisone doses were increased to 80 mg twice daily (1 mg/kg) and an upper endoscopy with push enteroscopy was performed. There was a small duodenal ulcer but the remainder of the duodenum and jejunum had normal appearing mucosa . Random biopsies of the small bowel were taken, and pathology was notable for duodenal mucosa with acute inflammation, lymphoplasmacytic expansion of the lamina propria, villous blunting, and increased apoptotic bodies . This pathology is consistent with ipilimumab-associated injury. The patient continued to improve and was discharged home on a 4-week steroid taper. After reaching a dose of hydrocortisone 30 mg daily, he developed bloody diarrhea, fatigue, and hypotension, requiring hospital admission. He underwent sigmoidoscopy, which showed normal mucosa but random biopsies were taken and pathology was consistent with ipilimumab-associated colitis. His steroids were increased to 1 mg/kg b.i.d. and he received a dose of infliximab. His diarrhea did not recur.