A 76-year-old male presented with 3 days of slurred speech and limb tremors in his extremities. He had a history of well-controlled hypertension for over a decade and no other documented medical history. The neurological signs at entry include lack of fluent speech, inability to perform rapidly alternating movements, and mild muscle tremors when his hands were raised horizontally. The renal function test showed a uric acid concentration of 533 μmol/L (202–416 μmol/L), and thyroid function tests exhibited an increased thyroid stimulating hormone concentration of 8.05mIU/L (0.27–4.2mIU/L). The other laboratory tests were all negative or normal, including blood routine test, blood lipid, and liver function, the spectrum of myocardial enzymes, B-type natriuretic peptide, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urine routine test, glycosylated hemoglobins, coagulation function test, D-dimer determination, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and cardiolipin antibodies. Infections of syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B and C virus were all seronegative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed symmetric hyperdense on T2-weighted imaging around the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle , slightly restricted speckle diffusion signals in the right cerebellum on the diffusion-weighted imaging , and mild cranial arteriosclerosis . Chest computed tomography, electrocardiography, and cardiac color Doppler ultrasonography were almost normal. Based on the clinical signs and examination, he was diagnosed with ischemic cerebrovascular disease and stayed in-patient for observation.
On day three after admission, the patient developed an epileptic-like seizure while walking, presenting as loss of consciousness, limbs convulsion, eyes rolling, and foaming at the mouth for about 1 min. An urgent brain computed tomography showed no obvious signs of hemorrhage and infarction. A video electroencephalogram showed middle-amplitude slow waves at around 2–2.5 HZ in all leads during the awake period and no epileptic waves during both awake and sleep periods . Meanwhile, he developed symptoms of drowsiness, sleep apnea, and awakening from the airy obstruction. An electronic laryngoscope examination excludes the organic changes causing sleep apnea. Because the findings of brain magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography could not explain the symptoms of seizure, drowsiness, and sleep disorders. A lumbar puncture was performed, and the intracranial pressure was normal (122.4 mmH2O). The cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed slightly increased protein levels of 0.47 g/L (reference value 0–0.4 g/L) and normal cell counts. An assay panel of autoimmune encephalitis and paraneoplastic syndrome, including autoantibodies against N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1, contactin-associated protein-like 2, metabotropic g-aminobutyric acid type B receptors, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 1/2 receptor, IgLON5, dipeptidyl-peptidase-like protein 6, and glutamic acid decarboxylase and paraneoplastic-related antibodies (IgG anti-Hu, Yo, Ri, contactin response mediator protein 5, amphiphysin, Ma1, Ma2, SRY-box transcription factor 1, delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor, Zic family member 4, protein kinase C gamma, Recoverin, and Titin antibodies) were implied (cell-based assay, Simcere co.,ltd, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China). He was positive for IgG anti-IgLON5 antibodies (1:1000 in the serum and 1:10 in the cerebrospinal fluid). A further human leukocyte antigen sequence-based typing detection revealed DQB1*04:01, DQB1*05:03, DRB1*04:05, and DRB1*14:05. The final diagnosis of anti-IgLON5 disease was made, and he was treated with plasma exchange (a total of two times every 2 days) and methylprednisolone pulse therapy (methylprednisolone sodium succinate, 1000 mg/day for 3 days, 500 mg/day for 3 days, 240 mg/day for 3 days, 120 mg/day for 3 days, and then 60 mg/day orally with a reduction of 5 mg every week till the end). Mycophenolate mofetil (0.5 g, twice daily) was added when the oral steroids started. Two weeks after immunotherapy, the patient showed obvious clinical improvement in speech, limb tremors, lethargy, and obstructive sleep apnea without epileptic seizures, and then he was discharged.
Two months later, the patient presented to the department of gastrointestinal surgery of our hospital because of unexplained bloody stools. The colonoscopic biopsy showed protrusion lesions in the lower rectum, with hyperemia and erosion on the surface . An endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed and the histopathological studies demonstrated the moderately-differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma , positive for staining of Desmin, P53, Ki-67 (area for 40–50%), CD34, and D2–40 but negative for MUC6 staining . Additionally, the methylation of the septin 9 gene is negative. He refused further radiotherapy and chemotherapy, then was discharged with oral steroids (gradual reduction) and mycophenolate mofetil therapy.
Six months after the first neurological signs, our patient continued the mycophenolate mofetil therapy. A follow-up showed that he still had intermittent bloody stool, mild sleepiness, sleep apnea, and awakening from the airy obstruction but no limb tremors, slurred speech, or epileptic-like seizures.