This case report concerns a 51-year-old woman who eventually developed refractory right-sided heart failure. Her past medical history consisted of surgical pulmonary commissurotomy for pulmonary stenosis and closure of atrial septal defect at the age of 7 years and aortic valve replacement using a mechanical valve due to aortic regurgitation at 27 years of age. She also had a medical history of haemodialysis for 17 years because of end-stage renal failure, and then underwent living kidney transplantation. Since the age of 49 years, she suffered from right-sided heart failure owing to severe PR; thus, oral diuretics were prescribed to treat symptoms of heart failure. However, systemic oedema and weight gain gradually worsened despite use of a large amount of diuretics, and eventually her heart failure became refractory to the medical treatment. Finally, she was admitted to our institution because of leg blister developed because of stasis dermatitis resulting from severe right-sided heart failure.
On admission, her blood pressure was 116/64 mmHg, heart rate 64 beats/min, and oxygen saturation 96% (room air). Physical examination revealed jugular venous distention, abdominal distension, and bilateral stasis dermatitis with blister. On auscultation, a harsh holo-diastolic murmur was observed at the left upper sternal border. Electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm with Wenckebach atrioventricular block concomitant with complete right bundle branch block. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular contractile function; however, severe PR and resultant RV dilatation were observed (, , Video S1). Furthermore, a leftward shift of the ventricular septum during inspiration (i.e. septal bounce) was clearly confirmed (, , Video S2). On pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiogram, mitral E velocity increased and decreased on expiration and inspiration (respiratory variation of 25%), respectively, while the tricuspid E velocity decreased and increased on expiration and inspiration (respiratory variation of 43%), respectively , indicating an exacerbated ventricular interdependence. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed RV end-diastolic volume index of 146 mL/m2, right ventricular ejection fraction of 47%, and regurgitant fraction of PR of 44% (, , Video S3). The patient underwent cardiac catheter examination for further haemodynamic evaluation, which revealed the elevation and equalization of the diastolic pressure in all cardiac chambers . In addition, the right atrial (RA) pressure waveform, consisting of significantly elevated mean RA pressure with a prominent y decent was consistent with the constrictive physiology . Right ventricular pressure tracing revealed a typical dip and plateau waveform . Although respiratory reciprocation of both ventricular pressures was not confirmed because of the mechanical valve at the aortic position; nevertheless, these haemodynamic findings were consistent with typical CP. Computed tomography showed mildly thickened pericardium with scattered pericardial calcification and severe abdominal visceral calcification due to secondary hyperparathyroidism resulting from chronic renal failure . Because the severe right-sided heart failure was intractable despite continuous administration of large amount of loop diuretics, she underwent continuous haemodiafiltration (CHDF) to remove excessive circulatory volume. After CHDF, although cardiac catheter examination showed a prominent y descent in RA pressure and a dip and plateau waveform in RV pressure , the equalization of diastolic pressure was absent .
After a thorough discussion within the heart team, we decided to perform pericardiectomy simultaneous with pulmonary valve replacement. On surgical inspection, however, there was no pericardial thickening or adhesion, indicating no obvious signs of CP. Eventually, she underwent only pulmonary valve replacement. The patient did well just after the surgery, without the need for intravenous diuretics. However, she died owing to renal failure on the 60th post-operative day triggered by urinary tract infection.