A 47-year-old male patient initially presented new urological symptoms such as polyuria and nocturia. Furthermore, he reported episodes of slight abdominal pain and a pre-existing gastroesophageal reflux. The urological examination revealed a benign prostatic enlargement without signs of urethral obstruction. An abdominal ultrasound showed ascites, other intra-abdominal pathologies were not described. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed for further investigation (A + B). It confirmed the ascites, and additionally showed focal calcification between small bowel loops in the right lower abdominal quadrant. Furthermore, the CT scan raised suspicion of an internal hernia at the same place. However, there were no signs of a complete or incomplete small bowel obstruction.
The patient was referred to our institution for surgical consultation. The physical examination remained unremarkable with no sign of an abdominal mass, abdominal tenderness, or peritonitis. A recent colonoscopy a year earlier had shown no significant findings. The personal history to that point remained unremarkable as well with no previous abdominal surgery or medication. The lab results showed no abnormalities.
Due to the unclear findings, the potential internal hernia, the possible differential diagnosis of a pseudomyxoma as the origin of the unclear calcification and the ascites, surgery was planned. A diagnostic laparoscopy was performed by an attending and a surgical resident. It showed no sign of ascites or an internal hernia. Yet, we found a cystic lesion with perifocal milky fluid accumulation, located in the mesentery of the proximal jejunum. We performed a mini-laparotomy and a complete excision of the lesion. Due to the proximity of the lesion to the small bowel, we performed an “en bloc” intestinal loop resection of about six centimeters and an end-to-end anastomosis.
The histopathological examination confirmed a lymphatic mesenteric cyst with a diameter of 11 cm (, ). There was no contact between the cyst and the small bowel.
No postoperative complications occurred. The patient remained at fasting for the first three postoperative days and there was no complication during the following oral food intake. The patient was discharged on full diet and without any complication on the ninth postoperative day. On the 6-week follow-up the patient was doing well and mentioned no discomfort or abdominal pain.
Retrospectively, the patient remembered a hospitalization over several days due to unspecific abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting at the age of 10. The pain was located in the epigastric area and was also associated with abdominal cramps and incapacity of oral food intake for several days. The diagnostic assessment carried out during that hospitalization remained inconclusive but no abdominal imaging had been available at that time. The patient also reported, he suffered from several similar episodes of the same unspecific abdominal pain during his teenage years until they resolved at the beginning of adulthood.