A 50-year-old woman was admitted with headache and vomiting for 2 days. One year prior to the present admission, she had visited the department of urology for the treatment of a prolapsed mass in urethral orifice. Cystoscopy revealed a proximal urethral mass with an unremarkable bladder. Based on the pelvic computed tomography (CT) , cystoscopy and biopsy findings , she was diagnosed as a primary urethral TCC. Systemic evaluation including positron emission tomography - CT, bone scan, and magnetic resonance (MR) images revealed distant metastases in both the lungs and in multiple bones. The patient had been treated with five courses of M-VAC chemotherapy protocol (45㎎ methotraxate, 4.5㎎ vinblastin, 45㎎ adriamycin, 110㎎ cisplatin). On follow-up, persistent progression of lung and liver metastasis was observed, thus the chemo-regimens had been changed into the second courses of GC protocol (1600㎎ gemcitabine and 100㎎ cisplatin), followed by the third courses of PC protocol (120㎎ palcitaxel and 100㎎ cisplatin).
On physical examination at the admission, no neurological signs were observed. Brain MR imaging study demonstrated a 3㎝-sized enhanced lesion on the right cerebellar hemisphere with ventricular effacement. Several smaller enhanced lesions were also noted on the cerebral and cerebellar hemisphere. Majority of the lesions showed an internal hyperintensity on the T1-weighted MR due to hemorrhage and peritumoral edema as well . After corticosteroid treatment, surgery was performed using a suboccipital approach for the largest lesion on the right cerebellar hemisphere. The mass was removed in toto and the postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological findings were consistent with the diagnosis of TCC .
One week after surgery, the patient underwent gamma knife radiosurgery for the remaining multiple metastatic lesions. Systemic re-evaluation revealed concomitant aggravation of lung, spleen, and liver metastases. Although adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended for systemic cancer control, patient's family opted for a conservative medical support. The patient died of aggravation of lung metastasis two months after the diagnosis of brain metastasis.