A 43 year old Caucasian male had a wide local excision of a changing pigmented lesion on his left knee in 2009 (Stage III BRAF V600) with biopsy proven local recurrence and multiple left inguinal lymph node metastases developing within the ensuing 2 years. Brain MRI performed at the time was negative for intracranial metastatic disease. Over the next 3 years, he underwent adjuvant chemotherapy but progressed with recurrent left iliac and pelvic nodal involvement, hepatic and osseous metastases. In November 2014, he received a single cycle of ipi/nivo (295 mg/90 mg), complicated by transaminitis and a subcapsular hepatic hemorrhage. Subsequent treatment included dabrafenib (150 mg twice daily), tramentinib (2 mg daily) for two months followed by standard high dose IL-2. Follow-up brain MRI in March 2015 showed no evidence of intracranial involvement, although continued progression with right pelvic node and multiple soft tissue lesions became evident in December 2015.
The patient was re-started on ipi/nivo (300 mg/90 mg every 2 weeks) in March 2016 and within a week developed new headaches. Brain MRI at that time revealed multiple enhancing and hemorrhagic lesions which were new compared to the MRI performed one year prior. The patient did not receive brain radiotherapy at any time during the course of his treatment. Instead, ipi/nivo therapy was continued and on repeat MRI 6 weeks later many of the smaller parenchymal lesions were no longer enhancing. Although there was evidence of interval hemorrhage of the dominant, left parietal lesion , his prior symptoms had resolved and he had no focal neurologic deficits. Concurrent CT imaging revealed a substantial reduction in the size of metastatic lesions involving the liver, greater omentum and left pelvic wall . He was continued on ipi/nivo for four months (280 mg/90 mg every 2 weeks) and surveillance MRI performed 6 months after the initiation of this round of immunotherapy showed further contraction of prior parenchymal hemorrhages and no residual or new enhancing metastases . The patient is currently continuing on maintenance nivolumab therapy (240 mg every 2 weeks) with no evidence of new or progressive intracranial disease at the time of this publication (12 months after the initiation of immunotherapy).
A 58-year old Caucasian woman was treated with wide local excision of melanoma of the right index finger (T3B, BRAF V600E) and had a negative right axillary sentinel node dissection in 2014. Within 4 months of completing 15 treatments of adjuvant radiation to the distal finger she developed a right forearm lesion, with additional bilateral lung metastases and a single hepatic lesion two months later. She started pembrolizumab, dabrafenib (150 mg twice daily) and tramentinib (2 mg daily) at an outside institution, with significant decrease in the size of the intrapulmonary and intrahepatic lesions but mildly progressed intra-abdominal nodal involvement. After significant progression of multiple skin lesions in the ensuing three months, she started a trial of LGX818/MEK162, however surveillance revealed multiple new soft tissue nodules within the mediastinum, abdomen, bilateral breasts and right axilla. While she underwent radiation to the right arm in March 2016 (24 Gray in 3 fractions), MRI of the right upper extremity in April 2016 revealed interval growth of the primary lesion and multiple associated subcutaneous nodules. Brain MRI at that time revealed no intracranial metastases.
In April 2016, ipi/nivo was initiated (250 mg/90 mg every 2 weeks) with resulting decreased size of multiple clinically visible cutaneous nodules involving the right upper extremity over the course of 4 cycles of ipi/nivo. She subsequently reported new and continuing dizziness and eye discomfort, without headache or tinnitus. Brain MRI 3 months after starting ipi/nivo showed new sub-centimeter supra- and infratentorial enhancing and hemorrhagic lesions despite significant improvement in systemic disease on concurrent chest and abdominal CT imaging . She also developed progressive vision loss and orbital pain which ultimately was not responsive to topical or intraocular steroid therapy. A final dose of nivolumab (240 mg) was then administered and she was continued on steroid therapy. The patient did not receive brain radiotherapy at any point during her treatment. As serial MR imaging one month later revealed only a solitary focus of enhancement , her persistent visual symptoms were felt to be on the basis of an immunotherapy-related adverse event rather than direct effect from intracranial metastatic disease. Subsequent evaluation by Ophthalmology revealed both uveitis and exudative retinal detachments suggestive of Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada disease. She was tapered off steroids without any significant change in her clinical exam or radiological findings at 5- month follow-up imaging .