A 24-year-old primigravida was admitted to the Peking University First Hospital at 22+ 6 weeks of gestation for a shortened cervical length. Transvaginal ultrasound at the 8th week of gestation revealed a convex, intramural, fundal, posterior wall fibroid measuring 130 mm in diameter with a heterogenic hypoechoic pattern and a local, irregular anechoic area. The fibroid gradually increased in size during the pregnancy. A regular ultrasound at 22+ 6 weeks of gestation showed that apart from the initial fibroid, there were two other fundal fibroids with a diameter of 70 mm. The cervical length was 13.2 mm, and the anterior amniotic sac was embedded, wherein flocculent hypoechoic pattern could be detected. A vaginal swab and genital and urine cultures were then taken, which demonstrated negative results. Although the doctors promptly administered expectation treatment, including antibiotics and tocolytics, the patient’s membranes ruptured spontaneously 6 days later, and a lifeless female infant was delivered vaginally. The placenta was fragmented, and the remains were evacuated manually. Repeated genital cultures, including vaginal and cervical cultures and the pathologic results for the placental tissue, were negative, which indicated that there was no evidence of infection, chorioamnionitis or other pathological abnormalities. Over the next nine days, the patient’s swinging pyrexia continued, and the levels of serum markers of inflammation increased. Ultrasonography revealed that the posterior wall fibroid had become larger and the endometrium had pushed anteriorly. The echogenicity of the irregular areas filled with fluid had increased, indicating the possibility of degeneration . The patient was diagnosed with a degenerating fibroid, which may have been the main cause of the persistent fever. Due to the inherent risks of hysterectomy and the desire to preserve fertility, both the team and the patient were eager to avoid surgical intervention unless significant clinical deterioration occurred. The patient was apyrexial after an escalation of antibiotics and was consequently discharged.
Forty days after spontaneous miscarriage, the patient was admitted to the hospital again due to high fever and lower abdominal pain. The patient lost consciousness after a sudden convulsion as soon as she arrived in the emergency room, and she was suspected of having delirium. She demonstrated tachycardia at 173 beats per minute and hypotension at 91/63 mmHg, and her temperature was 39.6°C. A bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was distended up to the umbilicus and was equivalent to 22 weeks in size, and a large, offensive, malodorous, fleshy mass with a friable surface just bulging from the dilated cervix but not protruding into the vagina was found on speculum examination. Immediate ultrasound indicated that the size of the uterus was 16.1 × 7.2 × 21.6 cm3, which was consistent with the bimanual exploration. The previously documented intramural fibroids had become submucosal fibroids with diameters of 17, 10, and 9 cm and could be detected in the uterine cavity. The submucosal fibroids had degenerated and necrosed, and a very large heterogeneous echoic pattern bulging into the vagina was detected. C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated to 43 mg/L, and blood gas analysis revealed respiratory alkalosis. Aerobic and anaerobic blood culture results suggested Klebsiella pneumoniae infection, and the cultures showed negative results. The patient was started on meropenem for presumed ongoing sepsis. Resuscitation measures, including quick fluid rehydration, were taken.
The following day, serum blood tests showed a procalcitonin level of 41 ng/mL, a white blood cell count of 4.16 × 109/L and a CRP level increased to 54 mg/L. The patient showed no significant improvement in symptoms and presented with edema of the limbs and face, diarrhea, abnormal blood coagulation function and multiple organ dysfunction. The diagnosis of sepsis was doubtless, and vancomycin was added to her antibiotic regimen. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis were performed to search for other intra-abdominal sources of the sepsis. The examinations revealed a 13 cm submucosal fibroid with degeneration and necrosis and dilatation of the maternal renal pelvis.
The decision was made to correct the sepsis and remove the fibroids at the same time if possible. Informed consent for the operation covering all possible risks was signed. Transvaginal mass resection was performed first, and approximately 200 mL of dark red blood clots and necrotic membrane-like tissue were removed. However, it was rather difficult to clamp the whole fibroid. Thus, exploratory laparotomy was performed, and it was revealed that a large, foul, malodorous submucosal fibroid had filled the whole uterine cavity, which had been distended to up to 20 weeks in size. The fibroid was attached at the fundus with a relatively short but broad band and was completely enucleated. The specimen measured 20 × 15 × 10 cm3 and weighed 650.0 g . Postoperative incision of the myoma indicated a solid mass composed of uniform and soft tissue with a central area of cystic degeneration. Histopathologic examination confirmed that the lesion had a bacterial structure, and neutrophilic infiltration in the focal point was the portion of the fibroid that demonstrated significant degeneration and suppurative necrosis. However, the results of intraoperative cultures were negative.
Postoperatively, the patient was given seven days of meropenem and vancomycin intravenously, resulting in a good clinical response and infection marker levels. She was discharged on the seventh day after surgery and was required to take meropenem orally for 7 days. At the 2-, 5- and 7-month follow-up visits, the patient remained stable and symptom free. She conceived naturally and delivered a live, healthy, full-term baby by cesarean section two years later.