A 34-year-old male presented with a complaint of left nasal cavity mass, nasal obstruction for the past 6 months .
The patient also had a tongue ulcer on the left lateral aspect of the tongue for the past 8 months. The patient was already a diagnosed case of carcinoma tongue at the previous hospital 6 months back. The histopathology was moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. The patient neglected tongue ulcer and did not take any treatment. There was no history of any substance abuse .
On examination, the oral cavity showed an ulcerative lesion over the left lateral border of the tongue (anterior two-thirds) of the size 3x1 cm. On palpation, ulcer base was indurated with induration extending posteriorly to involve left side tongue base. On nasal examination, widening of the nasal bridge along with left-sided periorbital swelling was present, more so in the region of the left medial canthus.
Reddish polypoidal mass was seen protruding from the left nostril which was covered with necrotic slough. The septum was pushed towards the opposite side. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the nose and paranasal sinus showed heterogenous mass with mild enhancement completely filling the left nasal cavity with opacification of the left maxillary sinus and anteriorly extending out of the nasal cavity. Medially, the mass was causing bowing of the nasal septum towards the right.
Postero-superiorly, it was extending to the sphenoid sinus and causing widening of the on the left spheno-ethmoidal recess. Erosion of lamina papyracea was also seen on the left side Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) face showed an irregular heterogeneously hypointense lobulated soft tissue mass (95 mm x31mm x48mm) in the left nasal cavity extending up to the left ethmoid sinuses superiorly, medial canthus of the left orbit antero-superiorly and into the left half of nasopharynx through left choana with associated mucosal thickening of the left maxillary and bilateral frontal sinuses. An enhancing lesion involving the base of tongue was also seen. .
Biopsy from nasal cavity mass showed elongated spindle-shaped cells with features of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma .
The biopsy sample was also subjected to immunohistochemistry with myogenin marker and the diagnosis was confirmed.
Owing to the pathology and the extent of the sino-nasal tumour, the case was discussed with the Department of Radiotherapy and a multimodality treatment was planned. The patient was referred for chemoradiotherapy (CRT) initially with surgical excision of the nasal mass later on kept as an option if required post-chemoradiotherapy. Unfortunately, the patient succumbed to the disease after 2 weeks of chemoradiotherapy due to the advanced stage of the disease and poor health.