A 50-year-old male was admitted to the hospital with ongoing chest pain. Eleven years ago, he underwent implantation of a mechanical aortic valve prosthesis due to degenerated bicuspid valve with normal coronaries on preoperative angiography. His medical history included treated hypercholesterolaemia and current smoking. There were no previous records on atrial fibrillation, left ventricular dysfunction, coagulation disorders, or recent cancer. At admission, the cardiopulmonary exam was normal, the blood pressure was 95/65 mmHg, heart rate 79 b.p.m., temperature 36.2°C, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air.
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with anterior ST-segment elevation . Emergent angiography revealed total occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD, Figure , Videos 1 and 2). Thrombus was aspirated; however, no histopathological analysis of the extracted material was undertaken. Due to high thrombus burden and absence of the blood clotting status at the time of angiography, bolus of intravenous glycoprotein IIbIIIa inhibitor was administered. Except the apical part of the LAD showing distal embolization, coronary flow was completely re-established with no evidence of stenosis or significant atherosclerosis . As an additional finding, first diagonal branch showed a filling defect possibly resulting from embolization or minimal iatrogenic dissection. An OCT of the LAD was performed, which revealed at the site of occlusion a normal vessel wall without relevant atherosclerotic plaque that could explain an erosion or plaque rupture, the middle part of the vessel showed minimal intimal thickening s. Thus, an embolic event was the only reasonable explanation for the coronary obstruction. Accordingly, no stent was implanted. Transoesophageal echocardiography was performed and confirmed a floating structure measuring 3.5 mm in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT, Figure , , suggesting that an embolus originating from the prosthetic aortic valve obstructed the LAD. Except the moderate dysfunction of the left ventricle [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 40%], resulting from apical septal hypokinesia, no other abnormalities were observed, especially no dysfunction of the prosthetic aortic valve. Left atrium appendix thrombi and persistent foramen ovale were ruled out by transoesophageal echocardiography including a bubble study with Valsalva manoeuver. Left ventricular thrombus was not shown in the transthoracic echocardiography (TTE); however, it cannot be definitely ruled out since no contrast ultrasound agent was used. Although, according to Duke Criteria the diagnosis of infective endocarditis (IE) was possible (one major and two minor criteria, respectively, positive echocardiographic diagnosis, predisposing cardiac condition, and vascular phenomena embolism), in the absence of fever and laboratory inflammation parameters, we considered IE as unlikely, therefore neither blood cultures were obtained nor antibiotics were given. Additionally, the further course of the patient including 3 months of follow-up revealed no events suggesting of an endocarditis.
The international normalized ratio (INR), gained after angiography, measured 4.3, however, 2 days prior to presentation, the INR was 1.9 and the patient administered 5 mg warfarin. Target INR was increased to 2.5–3.5. Due to previously subtherapeutic INR suggesting suboptimal anticoagulation control and possible minimal non-flow limiting dissection in the diagonal branch aspirin 100 mg was given additionally only for 1 month. A month later, the floating structure in the LVOT was no longer detectable in the transoesophageal echocardiography, prosthetic aortic valve functioned normally and left ventricular function normalized (LVEF 55%). Computed tomography thorax likewise showed neither evidence of thrombus in the LVOT nor any other intrathoracic pathology. The patient was advised to take part in the INR self-testing training.