On March 13, 2020, a 47-year-old occasional-smoker man with unremarkable past medical history was admitted to our emergency department in the northeast Iran, with myalgia, dry cough, low-grade fever (37.9 °C), shivering and diaphoresis for the past 5 days. His vital signs were stable. He had no complaint of dyspnea and his O2saturation was 97%. There was no history of suspicious contact to a person with COVID-19. His blood sample results showed leukocytosis (19000 cells/μLiter; normal range 4000-10000 cells/μL) with 75 % neutrophil and 20% lymphocyte. C-reactive protein (CRP) was negative but erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 25 mm/hour (normal range< 15 mm/hr).
A non-contrast chest CT was done and showed a wedge-shaped consolidation with air bronchogram in the left upper lobe. Another small pleural based consolidation was also seen in the superior segment of the left lower lobe . According to his good general condition and lack of dyspnea, he was discharged with outpatient orders and treated for COVID-19 infection by azithromycin for 5 days and chloroquine for 10 days. It should be considered that the diagnosis of COVID-19 was only based on the imaging due to the very shortage of PCR kits of COVID-19 at the beginning of the epidemic in Iran.
During this period, he developed weakness and loss of appetite, with no sign of dyspnea or fever. On the 30th of March, 2020 he fainted at home suddenly and experienced severe pain in left hemithorax. He was referred to the emergency department to rule out the cardiac angina. His electrocardiogram (ECG) and troponin level was normal. We performed the second CT at this time to distinguish any complication or progression of coronavirus infection that was encountered with left pneumothorax. Patchy consolidation with air bronchogram was seen in the left upper and lower lobe and right lower lobe. Patchy ground-glass opacity with superimposed septal thickening (crazy paving pattern) was seen in the right upper lobe too . His O2 saturation was 98% and no sign of respiratory distress was detected and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was ruled out. The only symptom was a pain in the left hemithorax. The patient refused hospitalization; therefore, we sent the patient home notifying him of the red flags and quarantine protocols. Cap amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 625mg was prescribed for one week.
One week later his general condition got better, and only complained from minimal pain in left hemithorax. We performed an x-ray and saw a little pneumothorax. He was in a good shape with normal O2 saturation, so he was sent home with azithromycin for one month. On May 11, 2020, a follow-up CT represented a small (20×11 mm) loculated pneumothorax and pleural thickening in the medial basal part of the left hemithorax. A subpleural band-like opacity was also seen in the anterior portion of left lower lobe and right upper lobe, and patchy ground-glass opacity was more predominant in the left side . His general condition was good with O2 saturation of 98% and the dry cough has been resolved.