An 86-year-old man with a past medical history significant for dementia and hypertension was transferred to our institution from an outside hospital out of concern for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. A week prior to presentation, the patient developed a cough and shortness of breath, with no chest pain reported. He presented to an outside institution with acute hypoxic respiratory failure, and mechanical ventilation was initiated prior to transfer to our institution.
Initial electrocardiography prior to transfer was concerning for anteroseptal ST-segment elevation in precordial leads, and this was confirmed upon presentation to our institution. Physical examination was significant for a blood pressure of 85/57 mmHg, and he was sedated and intubated. A cardiopulmonary exam yielded no abnormalities. Admission labs (as shown in Table ) were significant for a troponin of 4.82 ng/mL (normal value < 0.10 ng/mL), creatinine of 1.84 mg/dL (normal value < 1.25 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase of 496 U/L (normal value 120–250 U/L), and a C-reactive protein of 173 mg/L (normal value < 5 mg/L). Chest radiography reported bilateral infiltrates at the bases with no other abnormalities. Electrocardiography revealed 3–4 mm ST-segment elevations in leads V2 and V3 as seen in Figure .
An emergent transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 50–55%, no significant regional wall motion abnormalities, and no signs of cardiac tamponade. Emergent coronary angiography immediately followed, and no significant coronary artery disease was detected as seen in Figure . The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, requiring mechanical ventilation and vasopressor support. The following day, troponin increased to 7.84 ng/mL, likely due to a small amount of myonecrosis.
On hospital Day 3, the patient’s COVID-19 test came back positive. By hospital Day 5, his respiratory status worsened and he required increased oxygen and positive end-expiratory pressure. Despite initial improvement with intravenous diuretics, his renal function worsened, as did lymphopenia and inflammatory biomarker abnormalities. On hospital Day 7, he required higher amounts of oxygenation. As seen in Figure , his subsequent electrocardiograms showed a loss of R waves, transient T wave inversions, and deepened Q waves. On hospital Day 8, amidst worsening kidney injury and a further rise in the D-dimer level, the patient’s family decided to pursue comfort care measures and, on the same day, the patient died.