A 30-years-old female was admitted with a chief complaint of severe left knee pain after falling off a motorcycle and striking her left knee on the road. Her knee was swollen and painful right after the accident. She denied any history of previous knee deformity, injury, or surgery. Physical examination showed moderate left knee effusion with restricted knee joint range of motion from 0 to 90°. Anterior drawer test was positive without opening varus or valgus stress. An initial two-view X-ray radiograph of the left knee was obtained and denoted displaced tibial eminence avulsion. In preparation for surgery, a CT scan was performed to assess the displacement and comminution of avulsed fragment .
The patient underwent surgery 7 days after the accident at a major trauma referral hospital. The surgery was performed under epidural anesthesia. The position of the patient was supine with the knee in 90° flexion on a standard leg holder and thigh support. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to reduce blood loss and improve visibility. High anterolateral and anteromedial portals were used. Initially, the arthroscopic cannula was inserted into the joint and the knee was then lavaged with thorough saline to wash the joint and remove the hematoma. Complete diagnostic arthroscopic then performed using the high anterolateral portal for assessment of meniscal tears, cartilage damage, loose bodies, and associated injuries. Clear intra-articular visualization was enhanced by adequate debridement.
Fracture debris and remaining blood clots were evacuated with a 3.5 mm shaver until the avulsed fragment and fracture site were exposed, and the ACL was probed to confirm its integrity. A 55°-adjusted ACL tibial guide then inserted through the high anteromedial portal and its tip laid on the distal part of the ACL so that the avulsed bone fragment was temporarily reduced .
A pair of non-absorbable ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene sutures (Hi-Fi Suture, Metric 5, Conmed, Linvatec) were used to stitch through the ACL bundle. First, employing the high anterolateral portal, a suture passer (Seahawk, Left, Conmed, Linvatec) was used to hook the ACL bundle just proximal to its tibial insertion on the fracture fragment, and the loop-stitch was passed outside the portal using an arthroscopic grasper. Then, another suture was passed through the high anteromedial portal using a suture passer or pre-bent cannula (Zone Specific, Right, Conmed, Linvatec) and pulled out through the high anteromedial portal. This maneuver was performed until the ACL bundle cross-tied perfectly. The double half hitches knot ligature was used on both sutures limbs and pushed to the base of the bundle knot using a knot pusher for ensuring a good hold of the ACL bundle .
A 2-cm vertical incision was made over the anteromedial tibia at the level of the tibial tuberosity. Through the previous installed ACL tibial guide, a 1.25 mm pin wire was drilled aiming to the mid-coronal plane of the reduced avulsion bone fragment under direct arthroscopic visualization without going through the fracture fragment. Then, a single 4-mm tibial tunnel was drilled just below the fragment as close as possible. A non-absorbable No. 5 Ethibond suture loop was introduced through the tunnel, and its articular part was pulled outside the high anteromedial portal with an arthroscopic grasper. This loop was used to retrieve the previous suture limbs outside the anteromedial portal. A similar maneuver was performed while retrieving the suture limbs outside the high anterolateral portal. By withdrawing the No. 5 Ethibond loop through the tibial tunnel, the ends of all suture limbs were retrieved outside of the tunnel .
The anatomic bone avulsion reduction was achieved and evaluated arthroscopically by pulling down the sutures limbs. With firm tensioning, the 4 suture limbs were then fixed distally over the anteromedial tibial cortex using a knotless suture anchoring screw (PopLock 4.5 mm, Conmed, Linvatec). Knee stability was evaluated with an anterior drawer test. The tension of the ACL bundle after fixation was confirmed arthroscopically with a probe under direct visualization. The postoperative radiologic X-ray showed well-reduced bone avulsion fragment .
The knee joint was immobilized in full extension within a knee brace for 2 weeks after surgery. After 2 weeks, partial weight bearing supported by a crutch was allowed as tolerated with gradual range-of-motion exercise. Full weight bearing was permitted at 6 weeks postoperatively. To avoid muscle atrophy, isometric quadriceps muscle exercise was performed through the immobilization period. At 6 months follow-up, the patient reported no complaint of knee pain or instability . The study then reported in line with the SCARE Criteria guidelines .