In May 2022, a 50-year-old self-employed, married Greek man, working as a psychiatrist, presented with a 3-month history of a painless, slowly enlarging mass in the right parotid space. Allergies, medical conditions, daily medication, previous surgeries, recent trauma or infection were not reported. The patient did not mention any specific dental history except regular dental cleaning. The patient denied smoking and alcohol consumption.
Physical examination revealed a 2 cm × 1 cm firm, mobile, and nontender mass located anteriorly and caudally of the right ear lobe. Both papillae of Stensen’s duct were present. The outer ear was free of wax and inflammation. We noted no signs of inflammation or perforation of the tympanic membrane, and the middle ear was filled with air. We did not observe any septal deviation in the nose and the nasal mucosa was neither inflamed nor swollen. A fiberoptic examination revealed a normal nasopharynx, and the larynx as well as the hypopharynx were free of pathologies. The oral mucosa was normal. We noted a tonsillar grade II hypertrophy, without pus. The rest of the oropharyngeal mucosa was normal. Palpation of the neck as well as of the left parotid area revealed no further pathologies. The patient reported no neurologic condition. Therefore, we did not refer the patient to a neurologist for neurologic examination. Pulse was 65 bpm, blood pressure was 112/75, and temperature was 36.6 °C.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck with gadolinium revealed a complete absence of the right parotid gland without accessory parotid tissue . The left parotid gland was normal. The right parotid gland was replaced by fatty tissue, suggestive of PGA. A well-defined, 1.7 cm × 1.2 cm × 1 cm, rather homogeneous, solid mass in the right parotid space surrounded by fatty tissue was noted . The radiologist suggested a benign parotid tumor. Fine needle aspiration guided by ultrasound was indicative of a reactive lymph node.
Surgical resection was planned under general anesthesia. Preoperative blood tests, including complete blood count and liver and renal function, electrocardiography, and chest X-ray were normal, except for a slightly higher percentage of lymphocytes in the peripheral blood (45%; normal range: 25–40%). Urinalysis, serology as well as microbiologic examinations were not performed systematically in the preoperative check-up.
The number of branches within the duct might indicate the degree of parotid aplasia/hypoplasia. This could provide additional information about the abundance of parotid tissue, which could be useful during surgery. Therefore, a sialendoscopy was performed. Reduced saliva secretion through the right papilla during dorsoventral massage of the right parotid space compared with the left side was noted. During sialendoscopy, the duct’s color, diameter, and elasticity noted by its reaction to normal saline as well as its course by the masseter muscle appeared normal. As far as the endoscope could reach, two branches were noted. Transillumination was intense.
Tumor resection was planned through a modified Blair incision. This was carried out in an ordinary fashion as if it were a lateral parotidectomy. In the parotid space beneath the preauricular flap, a mixture of fatty- and parotid tissue instead of the usual parotid tissue was noted . The greater auricular nerve followed its typical course . The facial nerve was found in its typical place, medially and caudally to the pointer . The facial nerve was dissected free from its lateral partially fatty- and partially parotid tissue . The 4.5 cm × 4.5 cm specimen with the tumor was sent for histopathologic evaluation.
No complications were noted postoperatively. The drain was removed on the second postoperative day. Subsequently, the patient was discharged. After surgery, the patient intravenously received 1 g of paracetamol at 16:00 and 24:00 h, as well as 40 mg of parexocib at 21:00 h. He also intravenously received 2.2 g of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid at 15:30 and 23:30 h. On the first postoperative day, he intravenously received 1 g of paracetamol every 8 h as well as 2.2 g of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid every 8 h. On the second postoperative day, prior to drain removal he intravenously received 2.2 g of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. After discharge, he orally received 1 g of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid every 8 h for 5 days. He was advised to follow an acidic-free and sour-free nutrition for 2 weeks.
The histopathology examination revealed a lymph node with partially disrupted architecture on account of a small lymphocytic proliferation with interfollicular/perifollicular and vaguely nodular distribution, staining positive for CD20, CD5, CD23, and LEF1 on immunohistochemistry. Therefore, the diagnosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) was reached. The lymph node was surrounded by fatty tissue with small islets of parotid tissue .
The patient was informed about the findings and revealed that his parents were also diagnosed with CLL in the past. The patient was referred to the hematology department for treatment. A positron-emission-tomography/computed-tomography scan with 18 fludeoxyglucose as a radiotracer revealed no further pathology in the body. The patient received no treatment and has remained under regular examination by the hematologists since then.