We present a case of a previously healthy eight-year-old male who fell while ice skating during a hockey scrimmage. The patient suffered a small scalp contusion, but there was no loss of consciousness, neurologic deficit, depressed Glasgow Coma Scale, subsequent seizure, or retrograde amnesia. He was not on anticoagulation. Nine days later, the patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of diffuse abdominal pain and post-prandial, non-bloody, non-bilious emesis. He did not have any neurologic signs or symptoms at that time and was discharged from the ED with a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease and constipation. The following day he developed a headache followed shortly by an episode of acute ataxia resulting in difficulty with ambulation, prompting a return to the ED.
Upon repeat evaluation, the patient was well-appearing, in no acute distress, and well-hydrated. He was afebrile and hemodynamically stable (39.1 kilograms; temperature 36.5°C; heart rate 64 beats per minute; respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute; and blood oxygen saturation 100% on room air). On physical exam, he had an ataxic gait. The remainder of the exam was unremarkable. Given the acute neurological deficit, he underwent brain computed tomography (CT) without contrast, CT angiography (CTA) of the brain and neck, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, which revealed a subacute left internal carotid artery dissection. With no known risk factors for spontaneous or traumatic vascular injury, this finding was presumed to be secondary to his prior non-syncopal fall. The patient was immediately started on an intravenous infusion of weight-based unfractionated heparin, which was later switched to subcutaneous enoxaparin. Neurosurgery was consulted and advised against acute surgical intervention. He was discharged symptom-free on therapeutic enoxaparin for eight weeks, followed by daily aspirin therapy. Subsequent repeat MRI several weeks later demonstrated spontaneous resolution of the intimal dissection.