A 54-year-old man presented to the Infectious Diseases Department of the University Hospital of Caracas with dyspnoea, malaise and fever over 6 days; he was admitted as a suspected case of COVID-19 due to hypoxaemia (oxygen saturation < 90%) with no significant medical history. On admission, blood test showed neutrophilia (8.05 × 103/μL), lymphopenia (0.88 × 103/μL), mild transaminases elevation (aspartate aminotransferase: 40 U/L; alanine aminotransferase: 69 U/L), bilirubin levels within normal range (total bilirubin: 0.5 mg/dL; indirect bilirubin: 0.3 mg/dL; direct bilirubin: 0.2 mg/dL), and inflammatory markers elevation (lactate dehydrogenase: 394 U/L; C-reactive protein: 9.1 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 55 mm/h). Human immunodeficiency virus serology was performed according to the Infectious Diseases Department protocol, with a non-reactive result. A nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. After 7 days, he presented diarrhoea, choluria and then dysentery; subsequent liver function tests revealed transaminases limit values (aspartate aminotransferase: 31.6 U/L; alanine aminotransferase: 45.8 U/L), and mild indirect bilirubin elevation (total bilirubin: 1.16 mg/dL; indirect bilirubin: 0.74 mg/dL; direct bilirubin: 0.42 mg/dL). An abdominal ultrasound showed an image compatible with an ALA; stool examination revealed E. histolytica trophozoites. Serological diagnosis was performed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, obtaining an optical density of 0.325 (our institution’s cut-off point using healthy patient sera was 0.215). Immediately, treatment with metronidazole, ceftazidime and nitazoxanide was started. Although the patient presented clinical improvement, on day 12 of treatment the patient reported acute abdominal pain, and an ultrasound examination revealed free liquid in the abdominal cavity. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed, finding 3000 mL of a thick fluid described as “anchovy paste”. Liver biopsy showed hepatocytes with ballooning degeneration , acidophilic bodies , binucleated and trinucleated hepatocytes , glycogenic intranuclear vacuolisation , moderate microvesicular steatosis , necrotic hepatocytes around the central vein , moderate inflammation in the portal tracts with occasional lymphocytic infiltrate , large fibrin thrombus in the portal vein branch , and ductular and intracanalicular cholestasis . Furthermore, Kupffer cells were hypertrophic ; there was no interphase hepatitis. Computed tomography scan revealed a second abscess , which was drained by percutaneous drainage . The patient ended up receiving 21 days of antibiotic treatment and was discharged with satisfactory improvement.