A 40-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital with complaints of thirst, polydipsia, and polyuria. She had delivered her first baby without any perinatal difficulties 6 months earlier. From her symptoms, she was diagnosed with central diabetes insipidus (DI) by an endocrinologist, and the DI was controlled by desmopressin. Subsequently, the patient developed symptoms of fatigue, galactorrhoea, and amenorrhea, leading to the diagnosis of panhypopituitarism. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed thickening of the pituitary stalk and disappearance of hyperintensity in the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland . Whole-body computed tomography revealed no other abnormalities. After 6 months, the mass lesion in the hypothalamus had clearly enlarged; she was referred to our department for biopsy of the lesion for definitive diagnosis . No procedure for cerebrospinal fluid sampling, such as lumbar puncture, was performed before the biopsy.
She was alert, and no neurological abnormalities were found. After another 5 months, follow-up MRI revealed that the lesion in the hypothalamus had further enlarged and new, multiple enhanced lesions were detected in the basal ganglia and white matter [Figure and ]. Biopsy of the hypothalamic lesion was performed using bifrontal craniotomy. Using the interhemispheric approach with opening of the lamina terminalis, we detected a white, solid lesion in the hypothalamus. Although the lesion was solid and bled easily, sufficient samples were obtained for histological examination. Her postoperative course was uneventful.
Histopathological examination of the surgical specimens showed remarkable invasion of several types of inflammatory cells with fibrosis . Some of the inflammatory cells were immunoreactive for CD1a, which is a definitive marker of dendritic cells , and others were immunoreactive for CD68, CD8, and CD20, which are markers for macrophages, T lymphocytes, and B lymphocytes, respectively [Figure -]. There was also immunoreactivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein, which marks a response for reactive astrocytes .
Finally, we diagnosed the lesion as LCH in the CNS. After steroids were started (60 mg/day of prednisone) for 1 month, all lesions in the hypothalamus, basal ganglia, and white matter were clearly reduced in size, as detected on MRI. Steroid treatment was gradually decreased, and no recurrence has been observed 18 months postoperatively [Figure and ].