A 72-year-old female with a past medical history of a renal transplant 11 years ago was admitted to our hospital with progressively worsening headaches and confusion. She had unremarkable medical and surgical history otherwise. She was induced with dacrolimus and methylprednisolone and had been on maintenance immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus 1.5 mg in the morning and 1 mg at night, mycophenolate 500 mg twice a day, and prednisone 7.5 mg once a day, with regular follow-ups.
Screening for EBV was not performed when she was transplanted. Furthermore, at that time, she had a negative BK-PCR and a positive result for cytomegalovirus (CMV). The donor of the kidney was CMV-negative.
Her clinical examination did not show any focal motor or sensory deficits, and she had intact reflexes and a normal gait. Her mini-mental state examination revealed confusion and intermittent disorientation to person and place.
Further imaging with computed tomography (CT) revealed vasogenic edema in the left frontal and bilateral temporal lobes .
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with contrast revealed multiple lesions present in the left frontal, left parietal, and anterior left temporal lobes with the frontal lesions having significant vasogenic edema and mass effect ( and ).
Following her imaging, there were no accessible lesions from which a biopsy could be obtained. We decided to perform a craniotomy and excision biopsy to obtain tissue for diagnostic and therapeutic interventions, as the differential included intracranial metastatic lesions as well as intracranial abscess. The left frontal craniotomy was performed directly over the frontal dural lesion with excision and central biopsy . Pathology examination showed atypical EBV-positive lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, consistent with polymorphic type PTLD . Bone Marrow biopsy was negative for lymphoma. Her EBV antibody profile was positive for IgG and negative for IgM, with a negative EBV-PCR. HSV-PCR was positive. Her lactate dehydrogenase levels were between 280 to 576 U/L while hospitalized. Spectroscopy was pendent.
The patient was started on rituximab (RTX) along with reduction in her immunosuppressive medication (she was kept on tacrolimus 0.5 mg two times a day and dexamethasone 4 mg oral every 8 h). A follow up head CT showed no change in the multiple intraparenchymal lesions. Further work up included a CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, which showed no other sites of disease. MRI on the spine showed complete severe degenerative disease, with no lymphoma involvement of the spinal cord noted in the study. In addition to the RTX, she required institution of proton beam therapy for her intracranial lesions. Unfortunately, she had poor clinical response to therapy and experienced multiple medical complications (sepsis, thrush, HSV gingivostomatitis, and perianal HSV). Antibiotics were started for sepsis; however, she did not respond to treatment, declined quickly, and unfortunately died. Because of this, we were not able to perform additional studies and obtain an informed consent. However, we have made sure that all the presented information has been de-identified.