In January 2016, a 34-year-old primigravida presented on an ultrasound examination with cystic echoless mass (maximum diameter 15 cm) behind uterus and several hyperechoic papillae were detected in its inner surface (maximum diameter 5 cm) at 20 weeks of gestation . Ultrasonography at 6 weeks and 18 weeks at gestation had found suspect pelvic mass in a local community hospital and she was enjoined regular examinations. The fetus was not with any malformation in ultrasound examination. The patient had no previous history of cancer in family. CA125, CA199, and HE4 levels were 125 U/ml, 31 U/ml, and 238 U/ml, respectively. Abdominal pain and obvious distention occurred. Careful examinations of other body systems were normal. Malignant tumor from ovarian cancer was highly suspicious and then exploratory laparotomy was performed at 21 weeks of gestation with combined spinal-epidural anesthesia (CSEA). Intraoperative condition was large amount of bloody abdominal ascites, extensive nodules (maximum diameter > 2 cm) involving the bowel, bladder, surface of uterus, omentum and peritoneum, bilateral ovaries had lesions (left maximum diameter 15 cm, right maximum diameter 8 cm) and left pelvis had been “frozen pelvic”. The uterus was in the normal size of the second trimester but the left ovary had a typical crispy surface . Frozen section biopsy was positive for malignancy. This patient and her family had strong wish to preserve the fetus after they were told the potential risk for mother and fetus, the severe malignant degree of an advanced ovarian cancer and the subsequent changes of combinational therapy before operation by doctors in this multidisciplinary team. Conservation surgery was performed. Bilateral adnexectomy, infra-colic omentectomy, independent macroscopically visible resections of uterus surface lesions, peritoneal washing was performed. The patient and fetus had no complication during perioperative period. The final histopathological diagnosis was a high grade serous adenocarcinoma and the patient was staged at IIIC . This patient had a chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity test in vitro by cell biological approaches test which showed that the cancer cells are sensitive to Taxanes and Carboplatin.
At 22 weeks of gestation, the first course chemotherapy was administrated. At Taxol (paclitaxel) test volume, the patient self-described dyspnea and electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. At last, Taxotere (docetaxel) and Paraplatin (cisplatin) was used in four courses of chemotherapy before delivery. No fetal anomalies were documented at several periodic ultrasounds during the four chemotherapy courses. After the second chemotherapy course, serum biomarker had dropped to normal range. The Chinese version of Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (CERQ- C) was filled out by this patient and her partner in psychological aspect which showed a favorable inclination towards adaptive strategies and duration psychological support was provided.
At 35 weeks of gestation, cesarean section was performed with CSEA followed by radical surgery for ovarian cancer with general anesthesia. The male infant was 2100 g with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The placenta appeared normal at the time of delivery. At surgery, residual lesions involved the uterine surface, Douglas’ pouch, sigmoid colon (maximum diameter 5 cm). Cytoreductive surgery for ovarian cancer was operated. Hysterectomy, pelvic/para-aortic lymphadenectomy, omentectomy, appendectomy, partial sigmoidectomy, peritoneal washing was performed and all apparent independent cancer nodules were resected. Final histopathological revealed negative lymphonodi and surgical margins of sigmoid colon . After delivery, the patient had four more chemotherapy courses. At the end of the last chemotherapy course, clinical examinations were without any evidence of disease.
This patient had recurrence 19 months after the last chemotherapy with PETCT examination showing several swollen pelvic lymph nodes and right supraclavicular lymph node and serum CA125, HE4 was 177.10 U/mL and 142 pmol/L, respectively. One cycle of TC regimen was administrated, but CA125 increased to 268.10 U/mL so DC regimen (PLD, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin and carboplatin) replaced. This patient had serious hypersensitivity reaction (hot flashes, dyspnea, tachycardia and facial numbness) during carboplatin intravenous infusion so DC regimen changed into PLD plus bevacizumab regimen. Until now, the patient has finished six courses of that regimen and there is no evidence of disease both in serum biomarkers and imageological examinations. The baby boy now 33-month old, is in fairly good condition and growing normally.
The patient provided informed consent to publish the case details and associated images.