A 69-year-old man (162 cm, 48.5 kg), with a history of coronary artery disease (CAD) previously treated with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, hypertension as well as diabetes mellitus under medication, and end-stage diabetic nephropathy on hemodialysis, was scheduled for aortic valve replacement (AVR) and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) for newly diagnosed severe aortic stenosis (AS) and recurrent CAD. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography showed a global left ventricular ejection fraction (in the presence of regional hypokinesis) of 53%, left ventricular diastolic/systolic dimensions of 37/27 mm, and AS due to calcified valve leaflets, with an aortic valve area (AVA) of 0.5 cm2 and indexed AVA of 0.19 cm2/m2. Coronary angiography showed 90% stenotic lesions in the right coronary artery (RCA) and left circumflex artery (LCX).
After the establishment of an arterial line, general anesthesia was induced with midazolam 4 mg and fentanyl 400 µg. Vecuronium bromide 8 mg was given to facilitate tracheal intubation. A central venous catheter and pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) were placed via the right internal jugular vein. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was also used. General anesthesia was maintained with propofol 2 mg/kg/h and remifentanil 0.3 µg/kg/min. Following a median sternotomy, the right internal thoracic artery (RITA) graft and saphenous vein graft (SVG) were harvested. During RITA harvesting, the right chest cavity was accidentally opened but was subsequently left opened until immediately before chest closure. After graft harvesting, CPB was started with the arterial cannula placed in the ascending aorta and venous cannulas placed in the superior and inferior vena cava (IVC). First, on-pump beating CABG was performed, including a RITA-LCX anastomosis and two sequential SVG-RCA anastomoses. Then, the ascending aorta was cross-clamped, and AVR was performed with a Trifecta biological valve. During CPB, the patient received transfusions of 12 units of red cell concentrates and 4 units of irradiated fresh-frozen plasma (FFP).
After completion of the surgical repair, adequate de-airing of the heart was facilitated with a manual lung inflation maneuver and volume loading of the heart. Prior to weaning from CPB, mechanical ventilation was resumed with an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 1. The patient was successfully weaned off CPB with some inotropic support. His pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) remained normal, and cardiac index (CI) remained at approximately 2.5 L/min/m2. TEE revealed the well-functioning artificial valve, well-preserved left ventricular wall motion, trivial mitral regurgitation (MR), and no enlargement of the left atrium (LA). A significant volume of retained blood was evacuated from the right thoracic cavity. The patient was uneventfully weaned off CPB. The durations of CPB and aortic cross-clamping were 251 min and 127 min, respectively.
After administration of protamine, 4 units of irradiated FFP and 20 units of platelet concentrates were transfused. Shortly after the start of the transfusion, however, he developed progressive hypoxemia. The ratio of arterial oxygen tension to FiO2 (PaO2/FiO2) decreased from 301 mmHg 5 min after CPB to 140 mmHg 45 min after CPB and, further, to 42 mmHg 90 min after CPB . As soon as the surgical wound was closed 475 min after the start of surgery, anesthesiologists inserted a return cannula into the right atrium via the left internal jugular vein, while surgeons inserted a drainage cannula into the IVC via the right femoral vein to establish V-V ECMO. A chest X-ray showed diffuse unilateral pulmonary consolidation in the right lung with no increase in a cardiothoracic ratio, indicative of non-cardiogenic UPE . V-V ECMO with a flow rate of 2 L/min successfully increased PaO2/FiO2 to 170 mmHg .
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Continuous hemodiafiltration was started via a catheter placed in the left femoral vein. The improvement in oxygenation was maintained with V-V ECMO and pressure-controlled ventilation employing a lung-protective strategy . The patient was weaned off V-V ECMO on postoperative day (POD) 3 and was extubated on POD 7. The patient was, however, re-intubated due to aspiration on POD 7 and re-extubated on POD 13. He returned to the general ward on POD 17 and was subsequently discharged in an ambulatory condition on POD 78. Neither antihuman leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibody nor anti-granulocyte antibody was detected in samples of the transfused blood products.