In October 2019, a 51-year-old woman from a rural area of Santander, Colombia, was admitted to our unit with a story of fever and shivers for the past 5 days associated with epigastric pain, emesis, diarrhea, and an episode of hematemesis. Previous medical history included hypertension and dyslipidemia, and she was taking enalapril, hydrochlorothiazide, atorvastatin, and ASA.
Examination revealed hemodynamic instability, tachycardia, hypotension requiring vasopressors, delayed capillary refill time, and dehydration. Petechiae were identified on the skin of the extremities. Cardiopulmonary auscultation documented bilateral basal rales and palpation of the abdomen, painful hepatomegaly (4 cm).
Her blood count showed pancytopenia with severe thrombocytopenia (7000 cc/mm3). Liver function tests revealed transaminase elevation (50 times above its normal value), LDH> 1000, normal bilirubins, and normal alkaline phosphatase suggesting hepatocellular injury with an ischemic component; the PTT was prolonged without PT alteration (See Table ). The chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound showed evidence of leakage with free fluid in the abdomen and pleural effusion, and hepatomegaly was also noted. The presence of bubbles in the right cavities without evidence of shunt was reported by echocardiography, as a consequence, a Doppler ultrasonography of portal and mesenteric veins were performed as well as CT with portal venous phase, showing an image compatible with acute complete non-cirrhotic thrombosis in the proximal portion of the portal vein (see Fig. ). She was serologically confirmed positive for anti-DENV-1 IgM by ELISA .
The patient required close monitoring in the intensive care unit with vasopressors for 11 days due to distributive shock. A presumptive diagnosis of severe dengue with secondary coagulopathy and thrombotic complications was made.
She received methylprednisolone and prednisone 1 mg/kg as maintenance for suspected ITP, and anticoagulation with LMWH was started when platelets reached >70,000 cells/mm3. She was treated with piperacillin tazobactam (4.5 g IV q.i.d.) for 7 days starting at the 6th day of thedisease.
The patient was further evaluated for additional causes of acute hemorrhagic fever syndrome with thrombotic events associated as well as prothrombotic systemic states (See Table ). Cultures of the blood, urine, and stool yielded normal results. Malaria and Chagas tests in blood smear were negative. Hepatitis A, B, and C virus infections were ruled out serologically as well as CMV, HIV, and Leptospira infections. Screening for TMAs and inherited thrombophilia did not reveal any abnormality. She was screened for antiphospholipid syndrome, protein C and S deficiency, factor V Leiden, hyperhomocysteinemia, and ATIII deficiency. There was no evidence of hemolytic anemia, blood smear did not show abnormal cells, and ADAMTS 13 levels were normal. Complement fraction C3 was consumed and C4 was normal. ANAs, anti-dsDNA, and ANCAs were also negative. She was not tested for COVID-19 given that the first case reported in our country occurred in March 2020.
She underwent a control 8 weeks later, and Doppler ultrasonography of portal and mesenteric veins as well as laboratory initial alterations were completely normal. Steroid and anticoagulation therapy was discontinued after 3 months.