A 60-year-old man with a past history of RCC (clear cell type, G2, T1b N0 M0 Stage I) treated by a right nephrectomy in June 2015 was required to have a follow-up examination at 6-month intervals after surgery, without the use of an anticancer agent. In January 2018, a routine gastrointestinal endoscopy found an ulcerative lesion of approximately 10 mm diameter in the greater curvature of the gastric body . An endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) of this lesion showed the first three sonographic layers were blurred, which suggested submucosal invasion. An endoscopic biopsy of the lesion exhibited clear cytoplasm with prominent nucleoli, which was histologically compatible with metastasis to the stomach of the patient’s known RCC. On the other hand, computed tomography (CT) incidentally detected a well contrast-enhancing round-shaped mass in the fundus of the gallbladder . Additional ultrasonography revealed a sessile polypoid lesion, and gallbladder stone and wall thickening were not observed. Although these findings were lacking conclusive evidence of diagnosis whether the gallbladder tumor was primary or metastatic, the circumstantial evidence potentially pointed to the tumor as a metastasis from the patient’s known RCC. 18F-Fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with CT (FDG-PET/CT) was performed as a preoperative workup to detect other possible remote metastasis. However, specific FDG uptake was not shown, even in the gastric and gallbladder tumors. The blood examination was unremarkable.
In February 2018, a gastric wedge resection via laparoscopic and endoscopic cooperative surgery (LECS) technique was applied to the gastric tumor, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy to the gallbladder tumor was simultaneously performed . The operation lasted 190 min with little intraoperative blood loss. Intraoperative pathologic diagnosis was not performed in this case. The hospitalization period after surgery was not eventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. Histological examination confirmed that the tumors of the stomach and gallbladder were both metastatic RCC. Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for CAM 5.2 and vimentin, supporting the diagnosis. Macro- and microscopic findings are shown in Fig. . Thereafter, the patient required examination every 3 months without the use of anticancer agents and has survived without relapse to 12 months after the surgery.