A 5-year-old boy presented with recurrent abdominal distension and left lower extremity swelling over a three-year period.
In September 2015, the patient was diagnosed with PIL because of diarrhea, edema, hypoproteinemia, lymphocytopenia, endoscopic findings, and biopsy findings . The stool was found to be normal under an uncontrolled diet. He experienced intermittent attacks of abdominal distension and swelling of the left lower extremity, primarily secondary to diarrhea, approximately twice per year. After albumin supplementation and diuresis, the swelling was relieved. Since the time of onset, the patient had no history of seizures, behavioral changes, or mood disturbances.
The patient had a surgical history of posterior fibrolipoma resection in April 2015.
The patient’s language and physical abilities were normal. He interacted appropriately with his classmates at school. More than one year previously, his mother was diagnosed with TSC because of a shagreen patch, pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis, and TSC1 mutation [147C > A (p.Tyr49Ter)].
The physical examination revealed map-like hypopigmented regions on the back and buttocks. The abdomen, left scrotum, and lower extremity were swollen and rubbery to the touch and had a normal skin temperature. The patient was negative for shifting dullness. The abdominal circumference was 70.5 cm. The right leg root circumference was 28.5 cm, while the left leg root circumference was 42.5 cm . The patient’s neurological examination was unremarkable.
The detailed results of laboratory evaluations are listed in Table .
Considering that the patient had hypomelanotic regions and the mother had TSC, an autosomal dominant genetic disorder, we recommended genetic testing. A mutation of TSC1 was detected: c.147C > A (p.Tyr49Ter). c.147C > A (p.Tyr49Ter), a nonsense mutation, was the same mutation that the patient’s mother exhibited. The 49th amino acid of the translated protein is changed from Tyr to a termination codon, leading to early termination of protein translation.
We conducted other tests to assess organ involvement. No abnormalities were found in the retinal examination. Ultrasound showed multiple solid nodules in the left popliteal fossa. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed thickening of most intestinal walls, thickening of the mesentery with dilatation of veins, and peritoneal effusion. The left kidney was enlarged, and the left renal pelvis was thickened and echogenic. Echocardiography indicated a patent foramen ovale (3.3 mm), and lower extremity venous ultrasound was normal. Computed tomography of the lung revealed no lesions. Magnetic resonance imaging showed subependymal nodules in the anterior region of the left lateral ventricle and enlargement of the left renal parenchyma with abnormal signal intensity. The left kidney and abdominal cavity had effusion. The intestinal wall and mesenteric fat space were generally thickened, with edema and abnormal signal intensity, particularly in the left semi-intestinal tube.