A 48-year-old right hand dominant male presented to the emergency department for the right wrist pain. The patient was an out-of-state resident who was visiting the area. He reported that he was up late consuming alcoholic beverages with family members when he remembered suffering a mechanical fall from standing height, during which he caught himself with his right hand. He presented to the ED 9 h later for evaluation with continued pain and decreased function of his right wrist, as well as right ankle pain. The patient has a history of psoriasis and hypertension, alcohol, and tobacco use.
On examination, the patient had an abrasion over the volar aspect of his right wrist with associated swelling, ecchymosis, obvious deformity, and severe tenderness to palpation and range of motion . He had decreased sensation within the distribution of the median nerve, but all other nerve functions remained intact (including the anterior interosseous nerve, posterior interosseous nerve, ulnar, and radial nerves). Brisk capillary refill was noted. On secondary examination, the patient was noted to have right hip pain with log roll and tenderness over his greater trochanter. Swelling was noted over his right ankle with mild pain to both passive plantar flexion and dorsiflexion. His lower extremities were neurovascularly intact. No other obvious injuries or deformities were found. He was noted to be intoxicated on evaluation.
Imaging of his right wrist, right ankle, right hip, and pelvis was obtained. X-rays of his right wrist revealed a trans-radial styloid, trans-scaphoid, trans-triquetral, and perilunate dislocation . All other imaging were reviewed and found to be negative. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the wrist was obtained to further classify the injury for pre-operative planning (-).
Closed reduction under sedation was obtained on first attempt with reasonable alignment following the use of longitudinal traction for 10 min. Splint was placed for stabilization before definitive management. After post-reduction observation and evaluation, the patient continued to have acute carpal tunnel syndrome and the proximal pole of the scaphoid was still malrotated . He was taken to the operating room that evening for extended carpal tunnel release, ORIF of the scaphoid, radial styloid, and scapholunate ligamentous repair. A primary proximal row corpectomy would have been considered, but with a radial styloid fracture, the radioscaphocapitate ligament was likely incompetent. A dual incision approach, dorsal and volar, was used to obtain repair. An extended carpal tunnel release was performed. Dorsally, incision was made over the wrist joint extending in line with the third ray. The floor of the third dorsal extensor compartment was incised and the joint capsule was clearly torn. The proximal pole of the scaphoid was completely detached from any soft-tissue fragments. A 0.045 K-wire was placed into the proximal pole to use as a joystick. The scaphoid fracture was reduced and the K-wire was advanced. This was difficult secondary to comminution at the scaphoid waist. A 4 mm × 20 mm headless compression screw was placed in the center-center position through the scaphoid. The scapholunate ligament (SL) was torn off the scaphoid and still attached to the lunate. The patient was also noted to have a lunotriquetral ligament (LT) tear which was also visible on fluoroscopy by widening of the interval. The LT gap was reduced and held in place with a 0.045 K-wire. A K-wire was placed across the SL interval to hold reduction. This pin also served as a buttress force to the radial styloid fragment. A suture anchor was placed in the proximal portion of the scaphoid and the SL ligament was repaired. After this, attention was changed to the radial styloid fracture. A small 1 cm incision was made over the radial styloid and nick and spread technique was used to dissect down to the fracture fragment. The styloid fracture was pinned in place with a K-wire. For further stability, a K-wire was placed from the scaphoid to the capitate . The wound was irrigated and closed and the patient was placed into a thumb spica plaster splint .
The patient outcome was evaluated 16 months after index procedure. The patient reported excellent outcome with pin removal at 11 months with imaging performed before removal of hardware . Standardized subjective scoring measures were obtained including disabilities of the arm, shoulder, and hand (DASH) (5.83/100), patient-rated wrist evaluation (PRWE) (1/100), and SF-12 Health Survey (33/47). DASH and PRWE showed terrific outcome with lower score representing improved outcome, and SF-12 showed moderate outcome with higher score significant for improved outcome. The patient complained of limitations and mild difficulty with recreational activities and moderate stiffness of his wrist. Of note, the patient had recent liver transplant at time of interview and attributed most of his deficits on the SF-12 to his recovery from recent surgery rather than the outcome of his wrist.