A 29-year-old primigravida with SLE history began to visit our obstetric hospital for perinatal checkups. She was diagnosed with SLE at 26 after an episode of repeated paralytic ileus one year prior. Her SLE was treated with prednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil for 1 year and 9 months, followed by hydroxychloroquine. The immunosuppressant was shifted to tacrolimus (3 mg/day) 6 months before the conception. Her disease activity was stable enough to continue her pregnancy without any dose adjustment of tacrolimus. She did not have any history of surgery on the uterus or infertility treatment. Her pregnancy almost had a standard course, except she had the shortening of the cervix of 15 mm in length without uterine contractions in her second trimester. Ultrasound findings of the uterus showed posterior wall thickness was only 2 mm and fluid accumulation in the Douglas pouch simultaneously. In addition, her cervical length was shortened to 8 mm in the early stage of the third trimester, but she did not complain of any uterine contractions. We considered it was cervical incompetency and observed it closely on bed rest at home. The placenta was on the anterior wall to the bottom of the uterus in the second trimester, but gradual spreading to the entire surface was confirmed with ultrasonography in the third trimester . Her fetus’s growth had a standard course. There was no sign of hypertensive disorder during pregnancy. We could not notice the structure relationship between the placenta and the thin uterine wall since no major pregnancy complications related to SLE were not remarkable during regular checkups.
At 39 weeks of gestation, she was admitted due to a rupture of the membrane. Her cervix was dilated to 3 cm with 80% effacement on admission. Her white blood cell count was 13.5 × 106/ml, neutrophils were 90%, and C-reactive protein was 8.0 mg/dL. Her body temperature was 37.8 degrees Celsius (oC). Other blood tests and vital signs were unremarkable. We started antibiotic injections and induced labor with oxytocin at admission due to a low-grade fever. Although the injection dose of oxytocin rose to 20 mU/min, midwives reported softening her abdomen, and uterine contractions were did not occur at all. An emergency cesarean section (CS) was performed due to failure of the uterus to contract, and intrauterine infection was suspected. During the CS, there were several engorged vessels on the surface of the anterior uterine wall at the time of laparotomy . We confirmed that this engorged vessel was a part of the bulging placenta with intraoperative ultrasonography. By the examination through color ultrasonography, we found a placenta-free spot at the lower edge of the placenta. A healthy male baby (2908 g) with an Apgar score of 8/9(1 min/5 min) was delivered. The uterus did not contract at all even though we intramuscularly injected the 5 IU/ml of oxytocin . We closely observed the placement of the uterus and placenta. The uterine wall was fragile, and the placenta obscured her entire uterus. We decided to perform a hysterectomy because diffuse PAS replaced her uterus. The amount of blood loss was 5400 ml in total. She stayed in the intensive care unit for two days. The condition after CS and hysterectomy was good, and the patient and baby were discharged on the sixth day postoperatively.
Gross examination of the uterus revealed the uterine wall thinning with diffuse placental attachment . Histopathological study showed that the thickness of the myometrium layer was less than 1 mm at not only the attachment site of the placenta but also most parts of the uterus . Perivillous fibrin deposition was also observed at the placenta-invaded site of the myometrium . We confirmed the diagnosis of PAS by an appreciation of part of villus component that reached the serous membrane of the uterus. Fibrosis was seen within the layer of myometrium through the trichrome staining . Inflammatory cell infiltration in vessels was visible at the site of placenta-free normal myometrium through hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining .