A 56-year-old Arab male patient from Iraq, with diagnosis of end-stage renal disease due to hypertension has been referred to receive a kidney transplant. Before the transplant, the patient underwent hemodialysis for two years through the brachial fistula of the left hand 3 times a week for 3 hour each time. The patient had no history of any special disease except for uncontrolled hypertension, and the patient’s habitual history was not remarkable. Before the kidney transplantation surgery, ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis were done, and the patient’s liver was found normal in size and shape. The intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts were not dilated. The port system had normal size and appearance, and no stone or space-occupying lesion was observed in the gall bladder. Also, echocardiography, endoscopy, and pulmonary function tests were performed based on the institute protocol, which did not have any specific clinical abnormality. The patient underwent the surgery (day 0) and was discharged twelve days later (day 12) in a stable condition with medication instructions as followed. Tacrolimus (Prograf, Janssen) 1.5 mg twice daily, prednisolone 10 mg daily, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily, cotrimoxazole 480 mg daily, valganciclovir 450 mg twice daily, calcitriol 0/25 micg daily, epoetin alfa 10,000 IU three times weekly, folic acid 1 mg daily, calcium carbonate 500 mg daily, famotidine 20 mg twice daily, valsartan 80 mg twice daily, carvedilol 6/25 mg twice daily and prazosin 2/5 mg twice daily. The patient’s lab data at the time of discharge are listed in Table .
Two weeks after discharge (day 26), the patient presented with complaints of weakness, lethargy, decreased urine volume, icterus. In laboratory results pancytopenia was found (WBC 0.9 × 103 cells/μL, Hb7.9 g/dL, Plt 112 × 103 cells/μL). In the examination of the head and neck, the sclera was icteric, the pupils were reactive to light, the mucous membranes were dry, the jugular vein was not prominent and the thyroid was of normal size and consistency. No petechiae, rashes, or ecchymoses were observed. No organomegaly was observed in the physical examination of the abdomen. The neurologic, cardiac and pulmonary examinations were normal. The patient’s liver enzymes on admission include serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 45 IU/I, alanine transaminase (ALT) 40 IU/I, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 400 IU/I. Bilirubin total and direct were 10.46 and 7.72 mg/dL respectively. Viral profiles including hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis A virus (HAV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), coronavirus disease- 2019 (COVID-19), influenza, and blood and urine cultures were negative. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography were requested for the patient, and the liver was reported normal in size and shape, without space-occupying lesions. The intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts were not dilated and the portal vein was seen with an increased diameter. Gallbladder has normal dimensions and shape, with normal thickness in wall, and no stones or space-occupying lesions were observed. The patient’s coagulation tests were slightly elevated (INR 1.62, PTT 28 seconds). Therapeutic drug monitoring for tacrolimus reported 6.2 ng/dL serum level. According to the results of work-ups based on the timeline of the patient’s symptoms appearance, the medical team suspected drug-induced hyperbilirubinemia, and after examining the patient’s medications, the most suspected was tacrolimus. Therefore, mycophenolate and tacrolimus were stopped (day 27) for the patient, and intravenous hydrocortisone and ursodeoxycholic acid were prescribed. The patient’s serum creatinine was normalized with fluid therapy and corticosteroids, and cyclosporine 100 mg twice daily (day 30) plus mycophenolate 500 mg twice daily (day 35) was started for the patient. The patient’s liver tests decreased and the patient was discharged with AST 36 U/I, ALT 25 U/I, ALP 270 U/I, bilirubin total 5.45 mg/dL and bilirubin direct 2.38 mg/dL. The trend of the total and direct bilirubin is shown in Fig. . In the follow up period due to an episode of infection the patient was hospitalized in another medical center and unfortunately expired.