The patient was a 4-month-old female born to non-consanguineous parents from a rural region in the state of Andhra Pradesh in south-east India. At 5 weeks of age the patient underwent newborn screening and was borderline for CF, with IRT levels of 88.5 μg/L with the normal range for newborn babies quoted is < 90 μg/L. Although the patient’s IRT level was slightly below the positive screen cut off value, second-tier testing was initiated due to a suspected family history of CF.
Second-tier confirmatory genetic testing for CF by full gene sequencing using NGS as previously described , was used as part of a pilot study to investigate clinical utility of NGS in a newborn screening program. The NGS panel includes full sequencing of CFTR and the intronic regions flanking all exons. DNA variants were identified and classified according to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines . We found the patient was heterozygous for the NM_000492.3:c.1521_1523delCTT, p.(Phe508del), and heterozygous for the NM_000492.3:c.870-1G > C pathogenic variants in the CFTR gene . The identification of two pathogenic variants supported the diagnosis of CF in the patient.
The c.1521_1523delCTT variant (also known as F508del) is the most common CF causing variant globally , and is included in all targeted CF panels. In contrast the c.870-1G > C splice-site variant is absent from gnomAD, ExAC and other population allele frequency databases, and is not included in targeted CF panels or currently listed in disease-specific variant databases such as CFTR2. The child’s mother was confirmed to be a carrier of the c.1521_1523delCTT variant, while the father did not consent to genotyping.
Due to financial constraints of the family and combined with lack of access to a public-funded dedicated CF Clinic, no specific treatment for CF was given and the child was discharged. The child presented to the hospital 6 months later and was pronounced dead on arrival. The baby was reported by the parents to have failure to thrive and had lower respiratory tract symptoms from 4 months of age. Two doses of oral amoxycillin by a local healthcare provider had been prescribed prior to death. The likely cause of death was from lower respiratory tract infection and respiratory failure. The exact cause of death is unknown because an autopsy was not performed, although it is assumed to be CF-related. An older sibling also had failure to thrive and died of a respiratory illness at the age of 1 year, and is thought to have had CF. No other information about the sibling is available.