A 72-year-old man in cardiogenic shock was admitted to our hospital. His medical history included angina pectoris and paroxysmal AF. He had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention for the left ascending artery and pulmonary vein isolation 3 and 1 year before admission, respectively. At the time of admission, his heart rate was 112 b.p.m. with an irregular rhythm, blood pressure was 78/52 mmHg on intravenous catecholamine, and oxygen saturation was 94% on room air. Physical examination revealed bilateral fine pulmonary crackles, a holosystolic apical murmur, leg oedema, and cold limbs. Chest radiography revealed pulmonary oedema and pleural effusion, while electrocardiography revealed tachycardia due to AF. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe LVD [ejection fraction (EF) 15%, a decline from the 24% measured 2 years earlier], severe FMR [regurgitant fraction (RF) 55%, effective regurgitant orifice area (ERO) 0.54 cm2], and left-to-right shunts through IASDs formed via atrial septal puncture during the pulmonary vein isolation (Qp/Qs: 2.1; ). Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 23.7 mm. Laboratory testing showed elevated serum creatinine (1.97 mg/dL), total bilirubin (1.55 mg/dL), and brain natriuretic peptide (1500 pg/mL) levels; the troponin I level was within the normal range (0.018 ng/mL). Coronary angiography revealed no significant coronary artery stenosis, while RHC revealed elevated PAWP (22 mmHg), pulmonary artery pressure (systolic, 43 mmHg; diastolic, 18 mmHg; mean, 30 mmHg), and right atrial pressure (10 mmHg).
The patient was stabilized in our ICU using electrical cardioversion, IABP insertion, and intravenous dobutamine and furosemide. An electrocardiogram after electrical cardioversion revealed sinus rhythms with left bundle block and QRS duration of 152 ms . On Day 10, after haemodynamic stabilization, the IABP was removed. The patient was gradually weaned off dobutamine, and we initiated OMT with an angiotensin receptor blocker, a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, a sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, and oral diuretics. These medications were carefully titrated, eventually transitioning to Entresto (replacing valsartan) 50 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, dapagliflozin 10 mg, furosemide 40 mg, tolvaptan 18.75 mg, and pimobendan 5 mg. However, despite the patient maintaining sinus rhythm and receiving OMT for >1 month, the severe dyspnoea on exertion, pulmonary oedema, and pleural effusion did not improve. On Day 45, TTE did not show improvement in severe LVD (EF 18%), FMR (RF 62%, ERO 0.63 cm2), and haemodynamic left-to-right shunt through IASD (Qp/Qs: 2.1; ). Pulmonary artery wedge pressure also did not improve (28 mmHg) on RHC. On Day 48, the heart team discussed additional interventional therapy options and selected CRT implantation.
After CRT implantation on Day 51, the patient’s symptoms gradually improved. After confirming the resolution of pulmonary congestion, bisoprolol 0.3125 mg was introduced. Two weeks later, significant improvements in cardiac function (EF 21%), FMR [RF 38%, regurgitant volume (RV) 24 mL, ERO 0.18 cm2], left-to-right shunts through the IASD (Qp/Qs: 1.3; ), and PAWP (10 mmHg) were observed. Furthermore, chest radiography showed complete resolution of the pulmonary oedema and pleural effusion . Because of his successful recovery, he was discharged on Day 76.