A 67-year-old woman with cardiac risk factors of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and being post-menopausal was admitted complaining of chest pain and sweating. Her blood pressure was 80/60 mmHg, her heart rate was 120 beats/min. Auscultation revealed no murmurs. There was ST elevation in leads D1, AVL, D2, D3, aVF, V6 and ST depression with dominant R waves in leads V1 and V2 in 12-lead electrocardiography. Oral aspirin, intravenous nitroglycerin and heparin were given. The chest radiograph was unremarkable. With the diagnosis of acute inferoposterolateral myocardial infarction, thrombolytic therapy was started. The choice of thrombolytic was streptokinase since tPA was not available and primary PCI was not possible within an acceptable time period. Reperfusion criteria were not achieved within four hours of thrombolytic therapy. Blood pressure was lowered gradually and there was dyspnea and sweating with blurred conscious. Echocardiography revealed a moderate pericardial effusion with mild right chamber collapse and pericardial thrombus. There was a turbulant flow between posteroapical left ventricular free wall and pericardial sack on color Doppler. Cardiac catheterization revealed totally occluded left anterior descending (LAD) and circumflex coronary arteries and normal right coronary artery .
She was taken to the operating-room immediately. Median sternotomy was performed and the pericardium was opened. A large amount of blood with thrombus was removed. Her hemodynamic indices improved immediately. When the heart was lifted carefully, the area of necrosis was inspected (approximately 3 cm in diameter) in the distribution of the obtuse marginal coronary artery and was found to be extremely friable. There was active bleeding from multiple sites with a 4 mm rupture. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by cannulation of the ascending aorta and dual stage venous cannulation through the right atrium. Moderate hypothermia was used and a left ventricular vent was inserted through the right superior pulmonary vein. Myocardial protection was achieved by means of isothermic blood cardioplegia delivered in an antegrade manner through the ascending aorta. Direct closure of rupture was carried out by two mattress sutures with Teflon felt. Reversed autogenous saphenous vein bypass grafts were placed to the LAD and second obtuse margin coronary arteries. The patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass with dobutamine support. The cardiopulmonary bypass time and aortic cross-clamping time were 104 and 88 minutes, respectively. The chest was closed and drained in the usual manner.
The patient was transferred to the open heart recovery room in stable condition with inotropic support. Postoperatively, she was electively sedated and ventilated for 8 hours, during which time inotropic support was withdrawn. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 16th postoperative day. At the 1-year follow-up visit, she was free from angina and in New York Heart Association Functional class l.