A 75-year-old woman with a chief complaint of epigastric pain from the previous night was transported to our emergency department early in the morning. Fluid resuscitation was initiated immediately, and noradrenaline was administered for hypovolemic shock. Her level of consciousness was assessed using the Japan Coma Scale I-3. After intubation, dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed.
Eight months prior, she had undergone partial hepatectomy for HCC in segment 6 of the liver. The indocyanine green (ICG) retention test result was 14% (ICG-K = 0.137), and the Child–Pugh score was 5 (class A). Postoperative pathological findings showed no liver fibrosis (F0–1). Four months prior, transcatheter arterial chemoembolization was performed for recurrent HCC in segments 4 and 5. The HCC in segment 5 was fully controlled, but the HCC in segment 4 was increasing and was scheduled for retreatment. The Child–Pugh score was 5 (class A) after chemoembolization. The comorbidities included hyperlipidemia and bronchial asthma. She was not infected with hepatitis B or C viruses and had no history of habitual alcohol intake, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or autoimmune disease.
Enhanced CT revealed extravasation of the contrast medium from the known HCC lesion in the medial segment of the liver. A large amount of high-density ascites was observed in the abdominal cavity . Thus, the patient was diagnosed with spontaneous rupture of HCC.
TAE was performed to control the bleeding from HCC rupture. No tumor staining was observed on examination of the right hepatic artery. The left inferior phrenic artery (IPA) and the left hepatic artery branching from the left gastric artery were embolized. Hemostasis was achieved and blood pressure was elevated; however, the IAP was 27 mmHg. Then, abdominal puncture was performed, resulting in the drainage of 3000 ml from the intra-abdominal hematoma; the IAP improved to 10 mmHg.
Three hours after the first TAE, the patient experienced hemorrhagic shock due to recurrent bleeding. A second TAE was performed. The left IPA regained flow, and rebleeding from the left IPA was observed. In addition, tumor staining from A8 was observed at this time. Then, the branches of A8 and the left IPA were embolized. The IAP after the second TAE procedure was 35 mmHg. Hemostasis was achieved, and hemorrhagic shock was fully controlled. However, her blood pressure tended to decrease, with anuria. Then, she was diagnosed with ACS.
Finally, 27 h after her arrival to the hospital, we decided to perform open drainage of the massive hematoma and left hepatectomy for ACS relief, prevention of re-bleeding, tumor resection, and intraperitoneal lavage. The preoperative hematological examination results are shown in Table .
The abdomen was opened by an inverted T-shaped incision using an incision under the right rib arch of the previous operation. We found and aspirated a large hematoma in the abdominal cavity. Bleeding from the ruptured tumor was not observed. The adhesions around segment 6 of the liver were detached. The hepatoduodenal ligament was identified and encircled for the Pringle maneuver. The main tumor consisted of a ruptured HCC lesion extending from the medial area to segment 3. No obvious HCC was palpable in the right lobe of the liver. No chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis was observed in the liver. The gallbladder was removed. The left hepatic artery was a replacement derived from the left gastric artery. The proper hepatic artery (PHA) was encircled, and the portal vein behind the PHA was identified. The left branch of the portal vein was encircled. We clamped the left branch of the portal vein and confirmed the demarcation line. The inferior vena cava (IVC) of the upper liver was dissected, and the root of the middle hepatic vein (MHV) and left hepatic vein (LHV) was identified. The left lobe of the liver was mobilized, and the replaced left hepatic artery was ligated and dissected. The left IPA was dissected with the hepatogastric ligament. We started the liver dissection and preserved the MHV. The V4 branch and the fissure vein branch were ligated and dissected. Since the venous pressure was high and some venous bleeding was observed, the infrahepatic IVC was exposed, and hepatectomy was performed under the clamp of the infrahepatic IVC. The caudate lobes were preserved, and the first branch of the left Glisson capsule was dissected using a Tri-Staple (Echelon FLEX™). The LHV was also dissected using a Tri-Staple (Echelon FLEX™), and the specimen was removed. We performed peritoneal lavage with saline. A fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil™) was attached to the cut surface of the liver. The operative duration was 225 min, and the blood loss volume was 4626 g. Blood transfusion with 6 units of packed fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) and 6 units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) was performed.
The postoperative pathological diagnosis was HCC, moderately differentiated, and ruptured . The hepatic serosa was ruptured, and the hematoma was continuous with the liver parenchyma with necrotic tissue. No vascular infiltration was observed.
Regarding blood transfusion, 30 units of PRBCs, 30 units of FFP and 10 units of platelets were infused on the day of TAE in total, and 8 units of PRBCs, 12 units of FFP and 10 units of platelets were infused on the day of the surgery in total.
The postoperative complications included pleural effusion and grade B liver failure (the maximum serum total bilirubin level was 1.8 mg/dl) . The patient was extubated 3 days after the surgery. She was discharged on postoperative day 33. Despite intrahepatic recurrence of HCC, 9 months after the surgery, the patient was treated with chemotherapy, which achieved a complete response. She survived for more than 40 months after spontaneous rupture of HCC without functional deterioration.