A 4-year-old female child reported to the department of pediatric dentistry with a chief complaint of swelling in the upper front region of the oral cavity for 8 months. The parents of the child gave a history of trauma to the upper anterior teeth region due to a fall on the floor at the age of 3 years. They noticed swelling past 8 months, which gradually increased to attain the present size. Medical history and past dental history revealed no contraindications. Intraoral examination revealed localized, pedunculated, soft, nontender, pinkish color enlargement involving the upper left anterior buccal region of the oral cavity. The swelling extends from the mesial region of 51 to the mesial region of 63 in the buccal and palatal region, involving marginal and interdental gingival, which was 1.5 cm in length and 2 cm in width ( and ). This is associated with a buccal shift in 61 and full covering of the crown of 62. A preoperative intraoral periapical and occlusal radiograph was taken and showed displacement of the left primary central incisor ( and ). The treatment plan called for a thorough surgical excision of the lesion because of the size of the swelling. Excision of the soft tissue mass and extraction of 61 were performed under local anesthesia, the wound was sutured with a 3-0 black silk suture, and a Coe-Pak was placed. After 7 days, the patient was summoned back for suture removal, and a histopathological analysis of the excised tissue was performed.
It revealed the presence of hyperplastic parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, and basal cells appeared to be hyperchromatic with elongated rete ridges. Connective tissue stroma was fibrocellular, dense inflammatory cells with extravasated red blood cells, and blood vessels were seen . On the basis of this histopathological finding, a confirmatory diagnosis of fibroepithelial hyperplasia was made.
The patient was recalled after 1 week; the excised site had healed . A 2-year follow-up was done, which showed eruption of permanent right lower incisor and satisfactory result ( to ).