A 70-year-old Caucasian male patient with a history of partial meniscectomy of the left knee presented to the hospital on two occasions over a period of 10 days with complaints of swelling and pain in the knee while negating any trauma or other provoking factors. During the first visit, after a synovial fluid puncture, the patient received an intraarticular corticosteroid injection, which provided relief of symptoms for a few days. More intense knee swelling was present on the second visit 7 days after the first visit. Synovial fluid was collected from the knee and was sent for analysis. A follow-up appointment was performed 3 days after the second visit, and synovial fluid analysis results revealed increased leukocytes at 10,980 × 106/L. Still, the microbiological analysis was negative for the presence of bacteria. Blood results showed increased leukocytes at 20 × 109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) at 222.7 mg/L, and procalcitonin at 0.33 μg/L. The patient was admitted to the hospital on the same day for suspicion of septic arthritis. Laboratory workup confirmed a previous coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection via analysis of cellular immunity levels, which was not recognized a month prior to hospitalization and was treated with empiric antibiotics (amoxicillin and clavulanic acid) by an ear nose throat (ENT) specialist in a different institution prior to hospitalization. The patient underwent urgent arthroscopic lavage the day after admission, revealing a cloudy synovial fluid, moderate synovitis, petechial bleeding, some fibrin accumulations, and degenerative lesions of the medial meniscus and articular cartilage . The synovial fluid sample taken on the day of admission and tissue samples taken during the arthroscopy were sent for bacterial culture analysis and were found to be sterile. Furthermore, panbacterial multiplex 16 s-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on the synovial fluid and tissue samples taken intraoperatively and showed negative results for the presence of bacterial DNA as the causative agent of septic arthritis . On the first postoperative day, Clostridium difficile toxin was isolated from the stool and oral vancomycin was introduced in part with the empiric therapy for suspected septic arthritis. Follow-up laboratory parameters were carried out several times and showed regressive dynamics of inflammatory indicators over the next 2 days. The patient was discharged on the fourth day after admission, afebrile and not complaining of knee pain. Intravenous vancomycin (1 g twice a day) and ceftriaxone (2 g once a day) for potential septic arthritis with concomitant oral vancomycin (125 mg four times a day) for C. difficile were continued for 2 weeks postoperatively, followed by a switch to 1 week of oral cephalexin (500 mg three times a day). Furthermore, several laboratory parameters, such as serum levels of rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody levels, were evaluated, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) testing was performed. Both anti-CCP antibodies (1.5 U/mL) and RF (< 20.0 kU/L) were below the reference interval values and therefore considered negative. The results of genetic testing for HLA revealed the presence of the HLA-B27 allele. At the follow-up visit 2 months after discharge, C. difficile toxin in the stool was tested and the result came back negative. The patient reported significant improvement in symptoms, negated any further episodes of diarrhea, and clinically showed signs of recovery.