A 36-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department of a university teaching hospital with a 12-hour history of acute lower abdominal pain and distension associated with the inability to pass urine. A detailed clinical history revealed no history of any urological, neurological or sexually transmitted disease. He had neither previous abdominal, spinal or genital trauma, nor substance or alcohol abuse. He also denied any history of constipation. This patient had no previous lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). However, extensive bowel irrigation (approximately 5 litres at room temperature over a 5-hour period) was performed due to hygienic purposes prior to his presentation. No rectal pain or discomfort was experienced by the patient during bowel irrigation.
On clinical examination, the patient was in obvious suprapubic discomfort. However, his cardiorespiratory and neurological examinations were normal. A tender suprapubic mass was palpable up to the umbilicus, which is consistent with acute urinary retention. Results of his genital and penile examinations were also normal. His digital rectal examination revealed a small, benign and non-tender prostate. Rectal sphincter tone and peri-anal sensation were normal and the rectum was empty of faeces. A clinical diagnosis of AUR was made and his urinary bladder was decompressed by insertion of 18 FG indwelling Foley catheter which yielded 2000 ml of clear urine.
Results of laboratory haematological studies including full blood count, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and random blood sugar were all normal. The biochemical tests showed marked elevation of serum creatinine level 701 µmol/l (normal range 60 to 100 µmol/l) on admission. His urinalysis was normal and without pyuria or haematuria. Bilateral moderate hydroureteronephrosis to the level of the urinary bladder were identified on renal ultrasonography. The patient's serum creatinine level dropped to 153 µmol/l eight hours after urinary catheterization.
The patient was then hospitalized and subsequently underwent full urological and radiological assessment. Post-void residual, uroflowmetry and cystoscopy examinations were performed during the next few days following hospitalization and revealed normal findings. Urodynamic studies were postponed for more than three days and the findings were also normal. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI, Multiple Sclerosis protocol) of his brain and spinal cord were both clear. Serum creatinine level returned to normal in the second day post-admission. Two days later, a repeat renal ultrasonographic examination demonstrated normal sized kidneys and no evidence of urinary obstruction. Prior to patient discharge, he was taught to use clean intermittent self-catheterization (CISC) by a urology nurse specialist. Follow-up assessment two months later showed that the patient emptied his bladder completely and had no LUTS. He used CISC for only 10 days after his discharge from hospital.