An 82-year-old female patient had history of hypertension under medication for several years, and she presented to out-patient department in Feb., 2018 with 10-year-duration of palpable tumor on left breast which was in rapid growth in recent months. Otherwise, no dyspnea, bone pain, or headache were noted. Lab data showed WBC: 14500/μL, hemoglobin: 9.2 g/dL, alkaline phosphatase: 689 U/L, and CA-153: 65.6 U/ml. Computerized tomography of chest and abdomen showed no lung or liver metastasis . Whole body bone scan showed no bony metastasis. Total mastectomy of left breast was performed thereafter . The excised specimen consisted of a large and firm oval mass partly covered by an elliptical skin, measuring 30 × 26 × 20 cm, weighed 4400 g. Pathology microphotograph revealed overgrowth of a diffused hypercellular tumor in stroma of breast tissue with nuclear atypia and mitoses indicating malignant phyllodes tumor of breast. High mitosis activity (10/10 HPF) and tumor necrosis were found . However, the tumor free margin was less than 1 cm. Adjuvant radiotherapy was suggested while she declined out of personal reasons.
The patient had two local regional recurrent tumors over left chest wall 2 months later (Apr., 2018), and she underwent local excision then. She was subsequently followed by image guided radiotherapy with 5040 cGy/28 Frs since then. After completing whole course of radiotherapy, she was lost followed up.
It’s not until 6 months later (Nov., 2018) her suffering from local recurrent tumors over left chest wall again that she came to out-patient department for help where scheduled excision of breast tumor was performed . One tumor (7x5x5 cm) was located at left para-sternal region, and the other one (3.5x3x2.5 cm) was over left sub-axillary region. On 5th day after the operation, she had symptoms of passage of tarry stool and progressing weakness. On further inquiry, she has melena for 2 weeks. Laboratory data revealed severe anemia (decreasing hemoglobin level from 8.8 to 5.4 mg/dL in 1 week). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a prominent protruding, ulcerofungating gastric tumor with punctate bleeding at fundus . We performed gastrostomy with excision of the gastric tumor mentioned above due to refractory passage of tarry stool despite conservative treatment . Metastatic tumor from malignant phyllodes tumor of left breast was confirmed by pathology . After then, she didn’t experience any bleeding events anymore. Adjuvant chemotherapy was suggested while her family declined because of old age. During the hospital course, she was diagnosed of brain metastasis due to altered personality and decreased consciousness. Under hospice care in nursing home, she ultimately died 2 months later. (Mar., 2019).