A 12-year-old Japanese boy presented with complaints of disturbance of consciousness and vomiting associated with increasing abdominal distension starting 3 days prior to presentation. He complained of headache and appetite loss for 7 days. His previous medical history included repair of myelomeningocele on the day of his birth; subsequently, a VP shunt was placed for congenital hydrocephalus associated with spina bifida when he was 10-days old. Thereafter, he underwent several subsequent abdominal surgeries for reinsertion of the shunt catheter and was followed up every 6 months without medication. A physical examination revealed a deteriorated consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score of E1V2M4) and a large palpable elastic mass in his lower abdomen. His vital signs were stable (blood pressure 124/76 mmHg, heart rate 88 beats/minute, body temperature 36.8 °C). His pupil sizes were 3 mm in each eye with rapid light reflex. Laboratory tests results revealed an increased white blood cell count of 9910/μL (3300–8600 /μL) and a C-reactive protein level of 0.54 mg/dL (< 0.15 mg/dL). Liver and kidney functions were normal with normal serum electrolytes. Serum ammonia level was 34 μg/dL (30–80 μg/dL). Urine analysis results were unremarkable. An abdominal ultrasound confirmed a large collection of homogeneous encysted fluid encapsulating the tip of the shunt catheter. Abdominal radiography showed the VP shunt catheter and the presence of a soft tissue mass in his upper abdomen. Cranial computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral ventricular dilation and effacement of sulci. An abdominal CT scan demonstrated a 11 cm × 8 cm × 7 cm collection of homogenous low-density fluid adjacent to the catheter tip of the VP shunt . As abdominal pseudocyst associated with shunt malfunction was highly suspected as a diagnosis, the proximal side of the peritoneal shunt catheter (Strata® 0.5, NSC™ valve, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was distally externalized for extraventricular drainage management by neurosurgery. Subsequently, the cystic mass was punctured through the abdominal wall and 900 mL of clear fluid was drained. Culture of the drained intracystic fluid was negative for microorganisms, with protein 36 IU/L and glucose 71 mg/dL. The leukocyte and erythrocyte counts were 0 and 2/μL, respectively. The distal side of the peritoneal shunt catheter was removed from his abdominal cavity. Prophylactic cefazolin sodium 3 grams/day was administered for 3 days postoperatively. A follow-up brain CT taken 3 days postoperatively revealed no increase in ventricular size. The shunt catheter was reinserted to another position in his abdomen 3 weeks later. He fully recovered with no further complications.