This study was approved by our hospital, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.
A 30-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital on January 15, 2020, with a history of proteinuria for more than 2 years that has aggravated over the previous 2 weeks. There was no obvious relationship between posture changes and exercise, and no distal paresthesia. She denied having a history of hypertension and diabetes or using drugs such as hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and amiodarone, which have previously been reported to induce zebra body formation. Neither of her parents had a history of kidney disease, while routine urine tests showed no abnormalities. Physical examination showed that her temperature was 36.5°C; her blood pressure, 120/73 mmHg; and her heart rate, 82 bpm. The patient did not have any rashes on the body, abnormalities related to the eyes and ears, or edema in her lower extremities on any of the sides.
The results of routine urine tests were as follows: urine protein, 1+~2+; red blood cells, 0~++/HP; 24-h urine protein, 1400 mg. Blood biochemistry findings showed that renal function was normal: serum creatinine level (SCr), 66 μmol/L; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 117 mL/min/1.73 m[; plasma albumin level, 44.6 g/L. The results of liver function, immunofixation electrophoresis, hepatitis virus, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, echocardiography, and ophthalmic examinations were negative. The results of immunology tests for immunoglobulins, complements, double-stranded DNA, antinuclear antibody, Sjögren’s syndrome A, Sjögren’s syndrome B, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antistreptolysin O, and rheumatoid factor were also normal. Abdominal ultrasound examination showed that both kidneys had normal size (left kidney: 108 × 46 mm, right kidney: 105 × 42 mm) and morphology. Further, no abnormalities were detected on the chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, cardiac color Doppler ultrasonogram, or craniocerebral magnetic resonance images.
Pathological examination of the renal biopsy sample under a light microscope showed that eight glomeruli were present, but they did not exhibit glomerular sclerosis or segmental glomerular sclerosis. A slight increase in the volume of the glomerular mesangial matrix, swelling of some podocytes, vacuolar degeneration of renal tubular epithelial cells, a small area of focal atrophy (5%), small focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the renal interstitium, and small-size arteries were observed. However, there was no obvious fibrosis or obvious disease in the tube wall. Immunofluorescence analysis of paraffin-embedded sections of renal biopsy tissue did not demonstrate any glomeruli, but IgA (+ to 2+), IgM (+/−), IgG, C3, C1q, and Fib were observed. Still, the tissue was not positive for Alb, while small droplets of renal tubular reabsorption were Alb positive. Electron microscope specimens were stained with toluidine blue. There was no obvious proliferation of cells in the glomerular capillaries, the capillary loops were open, and parietal cells did not show proliferation. No obvious thickening of the basement membrane (thickness = 260–360 nm) was observed; however, swelling of epithelial cells, vacuolar degeneration (indicated by a foam-like appearance), increase in the number of secondary lysosomes, myeloid corpuscles (zebra bodies), and segmental fusion of the foot process were observed . No electron-dense deposits were observed in the subepithelial and basement membrane, but the slight proliferation of mesangial cells and the surrounding matrix and a small amount of electron-dense deposits in the mesangial area were observed. No medullary bodies were detected in renal tubular epithelial cells, arteriole endothelial cells, or smooth muscle cells. Based on these findings, the pathological diagnosis was IgA nephropathy (Oxford type M1E0S0T0C0) with renal FD. However, analysis of the patient’s serum sample for plasma lyso-Gb3 showed a concentration of <0.55 ng/mL (normal value, <1.11 ng/mL), and genetic testing revealed no abnormalities. These findings were contradictory to the diagnosis of FD. The patient’s condition was stable, and she was discharged on January 21, 2020. The final diagnosis was IgA nephropathy (Oxford classification M1E0S0T0C0) with a renal disease that mimicked FD. After the renal biopsy, the patient was administered losartan potassium, 100 mg, q.d. (an ARB, Hangzhou Moshadong Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.), without any hormone or immunosuppressant.
After 1 year follow-up at our department, the patient insisted on taking losartan potassium 100 mg (q.d.) for about a year, and no other drugs were added to her regimen. The 24-h urinary protein concentration gradually decreased till almost reaching normal levels (March 2020: 1019 mg, April 2020: 856 mg, July 2020: 470 mg, October 2020: 360 mg, January 2021: 190 mg). The patient’s renal function remained stable for a long time (March 2020: SCr, 73 μmol/L, BUN, 4.6 mmol/L, July 2020: SCr, 68 μmol/L, BUN, 4. 1 mmol/L, October 2020: SCr, 64 μmol/L, BUN, 4. 7 mmol/L, January 2021: SCr, 71 μmol/L, BUN, 4. 2 mmol/L).