A 60-year-old Caucasian female patient was consulted and admitted in the Gastroenterology Department, after complaining of epigastric pain referred along the left costal margin and postprandial fullness that worsened in the last couple of weeks.
The symptoms started 2 years prior, initially the pain occurred without any triggering factor, but in the past 7 mo, it became progressively more frequent, more intense and more likely postprandial. Occasionally, it would be like an angina with left shoulder irradiation. The patient mentioned bloating in the epigastrium and the left hypochondrium calmed by eructation and she also described pyrosis for at least 5-6 mo.
Her personal medical records indicated a primary arterial hypertension grade II well controlled by medication, dyslipidemia under medication, right hip luxation (surgically treated) at the age of 9 and coxarthrosis. There were no other surgical interventions abdominal or thoracic, nor any traumatic history. Modified Visick score for acid reflux was 3.
She had a familial history of arterial hypertension. Smoking was denied, alcohol consumption occasionally, she preferred carbonated drinks.
Physical examination was not relevant, showing only a palpatory mild pain in the epigastrium and left hypochondrium, inferior liver margin at 1-2 cm below the ribs costal margin, no other peculiar findings.
Complete blood count, liver and renal functions within normal parameters.
Abdominal ultrasound indicated a mild hepatomegaly with steatosis, and small renal parapyelic cysts.
Chest X-Ray remarked the herniated stomach as a round-oval transparency located retrocardiac of 3.8/2.6 cm .
Upper digestive endoscopy showed normal esophageal mucosa and a small sliding hiatal hernia. In retroversion, a herniation of about 1/3 of the stomach could be seen through a separate opening in the diaphragm lateral to the cardia . This was interpreted as such, because of the circular shaped openings: one the hiatus and the other the diaphragmatic defect, which allowed the stomach to herniate. Between the two openings, a narrow band of tissue existed, which was interpreted as the left crus.
Diagnosis of PHH was confirmed by the upper gastrointestinal barium series, showing a small sliding hiatal hernia located medially and a large diaphragmatic hernia, located laterally, with the upper pole of the stomach above the diaphragm and a posterior volvulus of the gastric fundus in the mesenterial plane. Stasis was remarked in the gastric fundus, the rest of the stomach and duodenum were normal both in endoscopy and contrast radiology .