A previously healthy, 53-year-old male patient presented with a 7-day history of cough and chest pain, then a 4-day history of fever and dyspnea. He was referred to respiratory intensive care unit on September 28, 2021 (day 1). The patient had a smoking history of 40 years with a pack of cigarettes every day. He was a handyman but denied recent travel history, or any cooling systems or other special man-made water system exposure. A chest computed tomography (CT) taken on September 26 (day −2) showed consolidation in the left upper lobe and left lower lobe, left pleural effusion, and bullae in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe . Since he presented with hypoxia, high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy was used.
On admission, the laboratory examination results were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count was 26.12 × 109/L, with a neutrophil percentage of 93.6%, the concentration of procalcitonin (PCT) was 5.39 ng/mL, the level of C-reactive protein was 167.21 mg/L, the CD4+ lymphocyte count was 245/μl, and the serum β-(1,3)-D-glucan and galactomannan were normal. The empiric antibiotic therapy included piperacillin-tazobactam and moxifloxacin . On day 2, his hypoxia progressed and he started to be supported by noninvasive ventilation with 90% FiO2, inspiratory positive airway pressure of 12 cm H2O, and expiratory positive airway pressure of 8 cm H2O. To search the infectious etiology of pneumonia, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were harvested and sent with a blood sample to perform mNGS (KingMed Diagnostics, Changsha, China). The methods of BALF and blood mNGS were described in . The BALF culture for bacteria and fungi, galactomannan, polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Legionella urine antigen test (KingMed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, China) were negative. On day 3, the antibiotics were adjusted to meropenem and moxifloxacin, which were more broad-spectrum.
The BALF mNGS results reported Legionella gormanii infection on day 4 . DNA mNGS detected 7,957 sequences which can be mapped to Legionella gormanii in a total of 21,977,576 sequences, and the coverage was 13.52%, making up 95.76% of the total microbe sequences . RNA mNGS detected 3,443 sequences which can be mapped to Legionella gormanii in a total of 12,763,560 sequences, and the coverage was 4.24%, making up 47.85% of the total microbe sequences . However, the blood mNGS results for DNA and RNA were both negative. Targeted PCR of Legionella gormanii in BALF using two pairs of primers was applied: Primer1 forward 5′-CTCCGCCCACATCAATCGTA-3′, reverse 5′-AAACCCGAACTCATGGCAGT-3′; Primer2 forward 5′-GAAAGTGGTATGGTGCGGGA-3′, reverse 5′-CTCTTCACGACTTGCACCCT-3′. The primers were designed and verified using Primer-BLAST based on the reference genome sequence of Legionella gormanii in NCBI . The capillary electrophoresis technique (Qsep 100TM; Bioptic) and Sanger sequencing confirmed the Legionella gormanii infection . The patient was finally diagnosed with community-acquired Legionella gormanii pneumonia.
After 1 week of therapy, the patient's body temperature, hypoxia, and inflammatory biomarkers improved . Chest CT on day 11 showed consolidation in the left upper and lower lobe of the lung improved, while the right lung developed interstitial infiltrates . On day 13, the oxygen therapy was changed to nasal cannula, and the antibiotics were de-escalated to levofloxacin monotherapy due to mild elevated liver enzyme (ALT 175.7 U/L, AST 82.8 U/L). The patient was transferred to the general ward on day 14. Chest CT on day 22 showed the infection had improved, and subsequently, the patient was discharged. He took oral levofloxacin therapy at home for 3 weeks, and the chest CT on day 42 (20 days after discharge) showed marked improvement in the lung . The patient recovered well without any complications, and he had return to work and normal activities on the last follow-up (2 months after discharge).