A 19-year-old woman (164 cm, 74.5 kg) with a history of hilar jejunal anastomosis performed for biliary atresia at 1 month of age presented to our hospital (details of anesthesia are unknown). The previous surgery resolved the jaundice, but portal hypertension, splenomegaly, and hypersplenism progressed gradually. She had ruptured esophageal varices at the age of 9 years, and ruptured gastric varices and experienced recurrent cholangitis at the age of 18 years, leading to end-stage liver disease, which required liver transplantation. Her older sister had developed malignant hyperthermia at the time of inguinal hernia repair, with unexplained elevation of end-expiratory carbon dioxide, muscle rigidity, and elevated body temperature. Preoperative blood tests showed hemoglobin 9.7 g/dL, platelet count 21000 /μL, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.39, activated partial thromboplastin time 56.5 s, aspartate transaminase 141 U/L, alanine transaminase 62 U/L, albumin 2.3 g/dL, total bilirubin 23.3 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 16.7 mg/dL, creatine kinase 43 U/L, creatinine 0.44 mg/dL, and sodium 144 mEq/L. No hepatic encephalopathy or ascites was present, and the Child–Pugh class was B, and the MELD-Na (model for end-stage liver disease sodium) score was 22. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that cardiac function was well maintained. The patient was relatively young, and prolonged, massive doses of propofol risked inducing propofol infusion syndrome. In addition, because of the presence of multiple massive splenic artery aneurysms in the splenic hilum that could cause a critical mass of blood loss. Therefore, we chose to use total intravenous anesthesia with remimazolam. The recipient’s biological father (57 years old, 172 cm, 58.4 kg) was chosen as the donor. Since there was no history of general anesthesia and no specific assessment of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia, general anesthesia for the donor was performed under total intravenous anesthesia with propofol. And his right lobe of the liver was removed.
The anesthesia records are shown in Fig. a, b. At induction of anesthesia, we slowly administered remimazolam 0.18 mg/kg, continuously administered remifentanil 0.22 μg/kg/min to confirm loss of consciousness and disappearance of her eyelash reflex. We also administered a bolus dose of fentanyl 150 μg and rocuronium 70 mg, 2 min before tracheal intubation and immediately started a continuous dose of remimazolam at 0.9 mg/kg/h. The bispectral index at the time of loss of consciousness was 76. Continuous intraoperative administration of rocuronium was performed, and we did not observe any body movement or electromyographic interference with the bispectral index. During surgery, we administered remimazolam and remifentanil at 0.7–1.1 mg/kg/h and 0.16–0.25 μg/kg/min, respectively. We maintained hemodynamics without the continuous administration of catecholamines. Intraoperatively, the mean arterial pressure dropped below 60 mmHg only three times. We administered only one-time bolus dose of 50 μg noradrenaline during the portal vein revascularization and two-time bolus doses of 100 μg phenylephrine during the bile duct jejunal anastomosis. We maintained the bispectral index at approximately 60–70 and adjusted the rate of continuous remimazolam administration appropriately. We treated sudden increases in the bispectral index above 70 with bolus doses of 0.06–0.1 mg/kg remimazolam. After reflow, lactate levels were largely within normal limits, and there was no evidence of progressive metabolic acidosis or hypoglycemia. Based on the above, we concluded that the grafted liver was functioning normally. The surgery and anesthesia times were 19 h, 11 min and 21 h, 50 min, respectively. Intraoperative hemorrhage was 7440 ml, and we transfused 2240 ml of red blood cells, 2400 ml of fresh frozen plasma, and 400 ml of platelet concentrate. We discontinued remimazolam and replaced it with a continuous propofol administration (1.6–2.7 mg/kg/h) at 3:30 a.m., approximately 3 h before the end of surgery. Remimazolam administration lasted for 17 h 50 min, with a total dose of 1384 mg. After surgery, we admitted the patient to the intensive care unit (ICU) still intubated. The patient rapidly awakened from anesthesia, and we extubated her at 10:30 a.m. the day after surgery because of stable respiratory and circulatory dynamics. At the 12:00 a.m. interview, the patient responded that she found herself in the ICU after surgery and that she had no memories or discomfort during the surgery. Intraoperatively and postoperatively, there were no particular signs of suspected malignant hyperthermia.