A 42-year-old woman presented to the neurology emergency department with headaches, lack of mobility in right hand and foot and lost speech ability. On physical examination, there was complete Broca's aphasia and right hemiplegia. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed an evidence of embolic infarction in the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) zone and the treatment for cerebrovascular accident was started. Then, the heart and carotids were evaluated.
Carotid Doppler ultrasound and electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal. The heart rhythm in ECG was normal showing a sinus rhythm. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was normal in chambers and heart valves, A suspicious mobile mass was seen in the aortic arch in assessment of suprasternal notch. To investigate further, the CT angiography of the thoracic aorta was performed and a filling defect was observed in the aortic arch. TEE was performed emergently. Hypermobile mass was seen in the aortic arch with the dimensions of 4.0 × 0.5 × 0.5. On the histopathology, the resected intra-aortic mass showed a blood clot. Regarding the nature of mass, hypermobility and lack of intracerebral hemorrhage in brain CT scan, the decision was made to urgently resect the tumor. The patient was immediately transferred to the operating room.
Midsternotomy was performed right after receiving heparin and arterial cannulation of the right atrium was performed with a grade 7 cannula. Anonymous artery was cannulated with a cannula number 14 and the patient was cooled to 18 degrees and then was given health care assistant (HCA). The base of the anonymous artery was clamped and arterial flow was maintained through the anonymous artery cannula to 800 cc/kg. First arc opening and cutting was undertaken during septum.
A red mobile mass of 4.0 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm was observed at the junction of the ascending aorta and arch, with a soft consistency which was attached with a pike of 0.5 × 0.5 cm in aortic tissues. The free end of the mass reached the left carotid artery at the time of mobility which was consistent with the cerebrovascular accident (CVA) signs in the patient. Mass was removed with a margin of 2 mm from the wall of the aorta and aortic wall was repaired and the patient was warmed. After taking the appropriate course of action, the patient was referred to the heart department on the second day. The patient’s clinical condition improved on the second day and she was discharged with aspirin and warfarin after 8 days. A follow-up echocardiogram one month later showed no change in the aortic arch and she had an uneventful surgical resection of the mass.