A 72-year-old Japanese man with a month-long history of dyspnea on exertion and bilateral shoulder pain gradually presented difficulty in raising both upper limbs. He visited a local doctor and underwent laboratory testing, which revealed an elevated serum C-reactive protein (CRP) (12.62 mg/dL). Hence, he was admitted to our hospital. He was naturally healthy and had no allergies, therefore was not on any medication. He is currently unemployed. His sister has a medical history of rheumatoid arthritis, and his daughter has a medical history of systemic lupus erythematosus. He has smoked 40 cigarettes a day for the past 50 years and does not consume alcohol. On admission, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 147/90 mmHg, pulse 110 beats/minute, respiratory rate 12 breaths/minute, and SpO2 98% (room air). He had no headache, jaw claudication, visual loss, or fever. Tenderness in the bilateral temporal arteries was absent, whereas mild tenderness was observed in both shoulders. The upper right limb could not be elevated to shoulder level, whereas the upper left limb could not be elevated at all . A physical examination revealed no abnormalities other than those mentioned above. The laboratory tests revealed an increase in CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) levels (13.99 mg/dL and 31 mm/hour, respectively). Both rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) were negative, and the matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) level remained normal (54.3 ng/mL). Antinuclear antibody and anti-SSA antibody were also negative . PMR and EORA were considered as differential diagnoses. However, PMR was unlikely as there were no signs of tenosynovitis and bursitis in both shoulders on musculoskeletal ultrasound examination. Moreover, the total score was 3 points and did not meet the 2012 Provisional Classification Criteria for Polymyalgia Rheumatica (“absence of RF or ACPA”: 2 points, “absence of other joint involvement”: 1 point; Table ) . EORA was also unlikely because both RF and ACPA were negative, and there were no signs of synovitis on musculoskeletal ultrasound examination. Moreover, the total score was 2 points and did not meet the 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria (“joint involvement”: 1 point, “acute-phase reactants”: 1 point; Table ) . Since he did not complain of pain even if both upper limbs were passively lifted, neurological disease or muscle disease was considered. Precise neurological examination revealed that there was absence of sensory impairment, but deep tendon reflexes were present in bilateral triceps and the lower limbs, except for bilateral biceps and brachioradialis reflexes. Muscle strength was evaluated by conducting a manual muscle test. The muscle strength of the biceps brachii, brachioradialis, supinator teres, deltoid, pectoralis major, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus decreased predominantly on the left side . Ultrasonographic examination showed absence of movement in the left diaphragm during breathing. Hence, bilateral C5 and C6 radicular involvement (the ventral root of spinal nerve) and left C4 radicular involvement were suspected. Since cervical magnetic resonance imaging showed no mechanical causality, cervical radiculopathy of unknown origin was suggested. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) revealed increased FDG lineal uptake along the vessel walls, including the temporal arteries, vertebral arteries, axillary arteries, descending aorta, and femoral arteries . Ultrasound examination showed absence of abnormality in the common carotid arteries, internal carotid arteries, and temporal arteries, but bilateral vertebral arteries were dilated to approximately 8 mm from bifurcation to C3 level . Ultrasound examination did not reveal any abnormality in the temporal artery. However, because 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed FDG uptake in the temporal arteries, a left superficial temporal artery biopsy was conducted that showed histopathological findings compatible with GCA . Thirty milligrams (0.6 mg/kg) of oral prednisolone (PSL) was administered, and CRP test turned negative 10 days later. The patient could almost completely elevate both upper limbs almost immediately, his dyspnea on exertion disappeared, and he was discharged 20 days later. Currently, 4 years and 8 months after treatment, he is healthy and the result of CRP test remains negative with 1 mg of PSL (Additional file ).