A 65-year-old Hispanic man from Bolivia with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) diagnosed 11 years before presentation and initially treated with alkylating agents, steroids and purine analogs, underwent an allogenic stem cell transplant from an HLA-compatible sibling a year before presentation. He developed cough and malaise eight months after the transplant for which he was admitted to another facility. Chest radiographs were reportedly negative and the patient was diagnosed with bronchitis and sent home on oral antibiotics. He continued to have intermittent cough productive of clear sputum associated with worsening malaise and weakness for about four months and was eventually evaluated at our hospital. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed diffuse soft tissue thickening around the left main stem (LMS) bronchus . This area was also intensely FDG-avid on PET scanning with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 7.4 . The radiologic interpretation was consistent with leukemic infiltration of the bronchus or, less likely, localized graft-versus-host disease. Inflammation and mucosal thickening of the walls of the sphenoid sinuses were also noted incidentally on the same PET/CT scan and interpreted as sinusitis.
His medical history was remarkable for adult-onset asthma, two episodes of pneumonia several years ago, actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. He was a lifelong non-smoker and was on immunosuppression with prednisone and tacrolimus, and routine prophylaxis with atovaquone, valacyclovir and voriconazole. His vital signs were stable and his respiratory exam was unremarkable. He was thrombocytopenic (21,000/mm3), but not neutropenic (absolute neutrophil count 3,960/mm3).
An initial bronchoscopic exam revealed circumferential narrowing of the entire LMS bronchus . The mucosa on the medial wall of the distal end of the LMS bronchus appeared to be necrotic and friable. This necrotic area measured about 1.5 cm in diameter. The necrotic area was washed with normal saline but biopsies were not taken because significant superficial bleeding was noted during minimal suctioning. Cytologic analysis of the bronchial wash revealed fragments of cartilage without diagnostic features. Stains and cultures for bacteria, AFB and fungus were negative. The patient's thrombocytopenia was known to be refractory to platelet transfusions. In an effort to safely expedite a diagnosis, a second bronchoscopy was performed utilizing convex-probe EBUS (Olympus UC-160F, Olympus America Inc., Center Valley, PA) with the goal of performing directed biopsies while avoiding vascular structures. Under ultrasound examination, a thickening of soft tissue was noted on the medial aspect of the LMS bronchus, underlying the area of necrosis visible endoluminally . The thickening of the soft tissue on the anterior and lateral aspect of the distal LMS was also observed, with no evidence of a distinct lymph node in this location. With EBUS guidance, transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) biopsies were obtained from this abnormal region. On-site cytopathology evaluation revealed abundant necrotic material with multiple mycelia consisting of septate hyphae branching at around 45 degrees , characteristic of aspergillus species. The patient tolerated the procedure, which was free of complications. Based on our findings, the patient was immediately started on high-dose intravenous liposomal amphotericin B and posaconazole. He was discharged after ten days of therapy, but re-admitted seven days later with worsening respiratory symptoms and partial left upper lobe collapse. He was discharged again after two more weeks of intravenous antifungals with clinical and radiographical improvement.