A 30 year old woman presented to the Emergency Ward after mid-night, complaining of severe, squeezing chest pain, radiating to the left arm. This discomfort started approximately 5 hours prior to admission. Associated symptoms included nausea and fatigue. Patient also noted that for a few months has had productive cough and night sweats. Patient suffered from mild arterial hypertension for six years, since her first pregnancy and was not under antihypertensive medication. She underwent cholecystectomy 4 years ago. Patient did not have a history of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, tobacco use, alcohol, drug abuse or oral contraceptive usage. She also denied having family history of premature coronary artery disease.
Her vital signs were as following: blood pressure 140/90 mmHg; pulse rate 110 beats/min.; respiration rate 17/min.; body temperature 37.5°C. Heart auscultation revealed regular heart rhythm, clear sounds and diastolic murmur 2/6 on the second right intercostal space. On lung auscultation there was normal breathing. Other systems had no remarks on physical examination.
ECG showed normal sinus rhythm, heart rate of 110/min., and ST segment elevation of 1–3 mm in inferior and antero-lateral wall leads . Initial enzyme profile that could be obtained in our Emergency Centre Laboratory displayed following results: ALT: 32 IU/l, AST: 72 IU/l, CK: 493 IU/l and CK-MB: 21 IU/l, with upper limit reference values for CK and CK-MB being 110 IU/l and 12 IU/l, respectively. Troponin data could not be attained in our hospital. Subsequent enzyme results showed lower values. CRP level was 20 mg/l, whereas lipid profile revealed the following results: total cholesterol = 4.81 mmol/l; HDL cholesterol = 2.02 mmol/l; LDL cholesterol = 2.41 mmol/l; VLDL = 0.24 mmol/l; and triglycerides = 1.2 mmol/l. All other laboratory findings were within normal reference range.
Based on these findings patient was admitted in the Coronary Unit and was treated as acute myocardial infarction, with analgesics, Oxygen, Aspirin, thrombolytic therapy (Streptokinase), a beta blocker and low dose of ACE inhibitor. Chest X-ray and echocardiography were done that morning.
Chest X-ray discovered homogenous shades, well defined, of solid tissue intensity, located mainly in the para-tracheal part of the left lung .
Echocardiography findings demonstrated: very mild thickening of the septal wall (11,5 mm), thickening of aortic cusps, grade 2 aortic regurgitation, grade 1 mitral regurgitation, diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle, and hypokinesis of the inferior, anterior and lateral myocardial walls. There was no evidence of echo-free space amid epicardium and pericardium and separation between them was not detected. Pericardium was not thickened. Echocardiography measurements were as follows: Aortic root = 34 mm; Left Atrium = 35 mm; Mid right ventricular diameter = 27 mm; Right atrium diameter = 30 mm; Interventricular septum = 11.5 mm; Posterior wall = 11 mm; Left ventricular end diastolic diameter = 55 mm; Left ventricular end systolic diameter = 38 mm; Fractional shortening (FS) = 31%; Ejection Fraction (EF) = 58%; E/A = 0.8; E wave deceleration time = 240 ms.
Patient's chest pain went away the next day and did not recur during the 12 day hospitalization period, while weakness, intermittent coughs and night sweats persisted. ECG of the second day showed decrease of ST elevation and terminal T wave inversion in leads V3–V6 and T wave inversion in D2, D3 and aVF. ECG of the third day demonstrated changes consistent with non-Q-wave myocardial infarction of the inferior and lateral wall, and Q-wave infarction of the anterior wall. This ECG pattern remained the same throughout the hospitalization time .
Due to chest X-ray abnormalities of unknown nature, a pulmologist was consulted. Hexagon TB test and PPD resulted positive. Patient was diagnosed by pulmologist as Active Pulmonary Tuberculosis and was put under tuberculostatic therapy. Eight weeks later Mycobacterium tuberculosis was isolated from the Löwenstein sputum specimen.
Patient was asked to undergo coronary angiography and endocardial biopsy, but due to her socioeconomic status and in the absence of medical insurance system in our country, she was not able to complete it.
At follow-up visit, two weeks after hospital discharge, patient did not experience any chest pain, ECG changes were indistinguishable from the discharge ECG and echocardiography findings did not differ from the ones obtained during hospitalization.