A 45 year old gentleman is referred to a colorectal clinic with diarrhoea and faecal incontinence for 2 months. He has also suffered with progressively worsening urinary symptoms: hesitancy, frequency and nocturia, poor stream and sensation of incomplete emptying and possible intermittent retention, with urge incontinence over 2 years. Previous review by Urologists revealed no abnormality on cystoscopy, X-ray KUB or renal ultrasound and a diagnosis of prostatitis was made. There was no history of pain, lower limb neurological symptoms and he had normal erectile function. There was no history of diabetes, multiple sclerosis or other neurological disease. On clinical examination, resting and squeeze anal tone were reduced. Perianal sensation was intact. Colonoscopy was requested which revealed a normal colon. Faecal calprotectin and stool cultures were normal. At this stage anorectal physiology was not requested as primary anorectal pathology was not thought to be the cause of these symptoms and there was a clear clinical picture of incontinence therefore manometry would not have altered management. A referral was made to Neurology and re-referral to Urologists.
Neurological review 1 month later revealed newly developed mild lower limb numbness when sitting down which disappeared on walking. However there was no deterioration in function. Full central and peripheral neurological examination only revealed a brisker reflex in the right knee.
An MRI of the spine showed a lesion just distal to the conus, causing the roots of the cauda equina to be displaced peripherally at the level of L1/2. The lesion enhanced fairly uniformly and appearances were thought to be in keeping with an ependymoma .
A month later laminectomy and excision of this tumour was performed with electrophysiological intra-operative monitoring. Histology revealed a classical ependymoma (WHO Grade II) with no myxopapillary regions . Perivascular pseudorosettes were evident, and mitoses were very infrequent with no necrosis. The immunohistochemistry showed strong focal positivity for GFAP and S100, but only very focal positivity for EMA. The proliferation index was low at approximately 2%.
Six months after initial presentation he had some residual urinary symptoms but his faecal incontinence had resolved.