A 74-year-old man presented with multiple episodes of syncope. One episode occurred while he was operating a skid steer and three others occurred while he was seated in his chair. Each episode was associated with brief prodromal symptoms of lightheadedness and chest discomfort. He regained consciousness within a few seconds after each event; no seizure-like activity or loss of bowel/bladder control were noted. His background history was significant for a pathogenic variant in DSP-encoded desmoplakin (c.478C >T; p.Arg160X). The mutation had been identified one year prior via variant-specific cascade screening because his nephew was diagnosed with DSP-mediated ACM after a resuscitated cardiac arrest. At the time, the patient underwent comprehensive workup including electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and cMRI which were normal ; no evidence of ACM or arrhythmias was found. Left atrial volume index was normal (19 ml/m2) and right atrial size was visually normal on echocardiography. There was no family history of sinus node dysfunction or bradycardias. Approximately one month prior to the current presentation, he had completed an event monitor after experiencing a syncopal episode in the context of a gastrointestinal illness. The event monitor showed several nocturnal pauses up to 3.7 s in duration without corresponding symptoms. He was not taking any atrioventricular nodal blocking or antiarrhythmic medications at the time of the event monitor or during his current presentation.
The patient was vitally stable on presentation (heart rate 74 beats per minute, blood pressure 127/77 mmHg, temperature 36.8°C, respiratory rate 14/min, and oxygen saturation 97%). Blood work including complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and troponin were normal. His electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with first degree atrioventricular block (PR interval 230 ms). He was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit and monitored on telemetry. Shortly afterwards, he had several episodes of marked sinus rate slowing followed by overt sinus arrest up to 8 seconds in duration . His previously described symptoms were reproduced consistently during these events.
Due to the frequent and concerning nature of his episodes, he underwent urgent dual chamber pacemaker implantation. During the procedure, because of his DSP-positive status, ventricular programmed stimulation was performed via the RV pacing lead which did not induce sustained ventricular arrhythmias; hence, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator was deferred. Atrial pacing with the lead positioned in the right atrial appendage demonstrated fragmented, low-amplitude and prolonged paced P wave suggestive of significant intra-atrial conduction delay and atriopathy . AV nodal Wenckebach was seen with atrial pacing at 150 beats per minute. His syncopal episodes resolved after pacemaker implantation with no recurrent events at three-month follow-up. Atrial and ventricular pacing percentages were 39.1% and 4.98% respectively, with the device programmed AAI<->DDD with lower pacing rate set at 60 beats per minute.