A 65-year-old male presented with the sudden onset of progressive abdominal distension.
The patient’s symptoms started two days prior and included associated nausea, dry-heaves, lightheadedness, and melena.
His only medical history is a remote RYGB eight years prior for weight loss.
The patient denied further medical history. He also denied a history of tobacco, alcohol, and NSAID use. His father died of myocardial infarction at age 70 and his mother was diabetic. He denied a family history of gastrointestinal malignancy.
On presentation, he was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. However, he appeared pale with conjunctival pallor. The abdomen was distended but non-tender with normal bowel sounds. The rectal exam exhibited melena.
Complete blood count and complete metabolic panel were notable for a hemoglobin of 12 g/dL and hematocrit of 35.8%, which were near his baseline. His blood urea nitrogen was 23 mg/dL and his creatinine was 0.8 mg/dL. The remainder of these laboratory examinations, including liver enzymes and coagulation studies, were within normal limits.
Chest X-ray was normal. A subsequent computerized tomography scan with intravenous contrast illustrated a massively distended stomach, which was "fluid"-filled .
A nasogastric tube was inserted, which did not result in any immediate drainage of fluid or decompression of his abdomen.
He immediately underwent an emergent upper endoscopy and EUS for decompression of the gastric remnant. The endoscopy revealed a normal-appearing gastro-jejunal anastomosis without marginal ulceration or evidence of active or recent bleeding in either limb. EUS confirmed the distended "fluid"-filled gastric remnant. We then proceeded to decompress the gastric remnant by creating a gastro-gastrostomy using a Hot AXIOSTM LAMS delivery system. Fine needle aspiration with a 19-gauge needle into the "fluid"-filled gastric remnant revealed maroon aspirate. A safe window for stent placement was found using doppler guidance. A 15 mm × 10 mm AXIOSTM stent was deployed, first by rapidly puncturing the fluid cavity under doppler guidance with the AXIOSTM tip electrified at 90 Watts, then by the ultrasound-controlled deployment of the inner phalange of the stent, and then finally by the endoscopy-controlled deployment of the outer phalange in the lumen of the gastric pouch. Upon deployment, maroon-colored blood immediately started draining. After extensive suctioning, the gastric remnant was decompressed .
Next, balloon dilatation of the stent allowed a gastroscope to access the gastric remnant. Approximately two liters of blood was suctioned before a large adherent clot was visualized in the gastric antrum. Fresh blood was observed oozing around the clot . Endoscopic therapy was not pursued due to the sheer size of the clot and concern of stent dislodgement. The patient was sent for emergent angiography with embolization of the gastroduodenal artery . He remained hospitalized for two additional days. He was discharged with a stable hemoglobin level and resolution of abdominal distension and bleeding. After a three-week interval, a repeat endoscopy for evaluation of the gastric remnant through the gastrogastric fistula was performed. Healing superficial gastric ulcers were visualized . The LAMS was left in place with plans for removal at an interval date. Gastric biopsies were consistent with Helicobacter pylori infection for which the patient was treated, and successful eradication was achieved.