A 73-year-old woman was hospitalized for cholecystitis due to gallstones, and computed tomography (CT) revealed dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts. Therefore, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed for it. Moreover, substantial coagulation was found in the stomach. Although endoscopic hemostasis was performed for suspected gastrointestinal bleeding, the patient continued to have bloody stools, and the jaundice worsened. Enhanced abdominal CT showed extravasation in the gallbladder, and she was suspected to have hemobilia due to gallbladder perforation from the pseudoaneurysm found in the cystic artery or a branch of the hepatic artery. Subsequently, she was transferred to our hospital.
At the initial visit, she presented with right hypochondrium pain and jaundice of the skin and eyes. Blood tests revealed an increase in the levels of white blood cells, C-reactive proteins, and biliary enzymes. Her bilirubin levels were high at 14.3 mg/dl. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a 50 × 30 mm cyst-like mass near the gallbladder, and a Doppler ultrasound indicated a beating signal. The gallbladder wall was also thickened and hyperintense, and the intrahepatic bile ducts in the left lobe of the liver were dilated.
Enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm in the gallbladder, which was suspected to be derived from the right hepatic artery or the cystic artery . Moreover, a 20-mm gallstone was observed in the neck of the gallbladder, and the gallbladder wall was edematous, indicating acalculous cholecystitis . In this case, the right hepatic artery ran ventral to the common bile duct and was in close proximity to the gallbladder .
Therefore, we diagnosed acute cholecystitis and hemobilia due to perforation of the gallbladder by a pseudoaneurysm. An urgent abdominal angiography was performed to identify the source of bleeding and control it.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) from the right hepatic artery revealed a 50 × 32 mm pseudoaneurysm derived directly from the right hepatic artery or the cystic artery . We initially planned to place a stent to preserve right hepatic artery flow; however, stenting was difficult because of the meandering vessels and vasospasm. Moreover, we observed collateral artery flow from the middle hepatic artery; therefore, we prioritized coil embolization of the right hepatic artery to stop the bleeding. The pseudoaneurysm was isolated by embolizing its proximal and distal portions. DSA of the celiac artery after embolization indicated the absence of blood flow in the aneurysm and that the distal right hepatic artery was supplied by the collateral arterial flow of the middle hepatic artery .
We successfully stopped the bleeding with coil embolization, which was followed by an urgent open cholecystectomy for the possibility of rebleeding due to worsening inflammation caused by gallbladder infarction and persistent cholecystitis, as well as severe cholangitis due to hematoma in the bile duct.
Upon opening the abdomen, the gallbladder was found to be highly inflamed and distended. Hematomas were observed when the gallbladder wall was opened near the fundus. We proceeded to remove the abdominal side of the gallbladder and observed the coil used for embolizing the right hepatic artery in the neck of the gallbladder and bleeding from the same site . We sutured the bleeding point from within the gallbladder wall, which stopped the bleeding. In addition, when the gallstone impacted in the neck of the gallbladder was removed, the lateral wall of the common bile duct and the gallbladder were noted to be in contact, and the patient was subsequently diagnosed with Mirizzi syndrome with a biliobiliary fistula . A T-tube was inserted into the common bile duct from the fistula , and a cholangiogram was performed . The coil used for embolization was observed, so the bleeding was considered well controlled by transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) with only partial deviation of coil. After the peripheral bile ducts were visualized and it was confirmed that there was no leakage, a drain was placed in the gallbladder bed, and the operation was completed.
The gallbladder wall showed clear thickening, with edema, fibrosis, and granulomatous changes. Inflammatory granulation tissue was observed, comprising inflammatory cell infiltrates and fibroblasts. Most of the epithelium had fallen off, and the nuclei of the remaining epithelium were inflamed and enlarged. No malignant findings were observed .
Bile leakage from the site of insertion of the T-tube was observed after surgery, but improved with drainage. No hepatic infarction was observed after the embolization of the right hepatic artery. The drainage tube was removed on postoperative day 24, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 29. The T-tube was removed on postoperative day 60. The patient is currently under outpatient observation.