A 44-year-old woman was initially referred to local hospital for recurrent left abdominal obtuse pain without obvious cause. She had no surgical history or chronic diseases, such as hypertension or diabetes. She denied family genetic history and tumor history. Her performance status was normal with 37.0 °C of initial body temperature, 89 beats/min of pulse rate, 20 breaths/min of breath rate, and 130/79 mmHg of blood pressure. A physical examination revealed left abdominal tenderness, but there was no muscle guarding or rebound tenderness. No obvious mass was palpable in the abdomen, and bowel sounds were normal. An abdominal CT showed feces in the colon, thickening of the intestinal wall at the junction of sigmoid colon, and descending colon . Colonoscopy revealed colonic stenosis is 60-cm away from the anus, which may on account of colonic mass or colitis . Blood tests showed that the patient’s CA72.4 was 11.48 U/mL (normal reference value: 0-6.90). Laparoscopic radical resection was performed. Pathological examination showed as sigmoid colon cancer, which was poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma with serosa invasion, vessel invasion, and 4 of 10 peri-intestinal lymph node metastasis . Gene test results for KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, and exon15 V600E were negative. According to the AJCC cancer staging manual (Version 8), the patient was considered as stage of IIIB with cT3N2M0. Adjuvant chemotherapy regimen of XELOX (oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 plus capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 twice daily on days 1 to 14 every 3 weeks for 18 weeks) was used followed by surgical resection. After the 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy finished, the patient was followed up every 3 months. And the examination results showed that the patient’s disease was stable.
The patient presented with breast tenderness after 14 months diseases-free interval. Physical examination revealed a mass of 3.2 × 2.0 cm size on the inner upper quadrant of the right breast. Ultrasonography showed an irregular mass of 33 × 23 mm size in the right breast with unclear boundary . Breast biopsy displayed that the mass was an invasive lobular carcinoma. The patient underwent modified radical mastectomy for her disease. The postoperative immunohistochemistry of the mass showed as the following: ER, PR, HER-2 results negative; CK-pan, CK-20, CEA results positive; P120, CDX-2 results weakly positive; Ki67 approximately expressed 8%; E-cad, CK-7 results negative. Pathological examination demonstrated that the mass was a metastatic signet ring cell carcinoma, which came from the intestinal tract. Tumor tissue invaded the para-mammary adipose tissue. And the cancer tissue was discovered in the vessel. For further treatment, the patient went to our hospital. Considering the rarity of breast metastasis from the colon cancer, we invited the pathologist in our hospital to consult the pathological sections of this patient. Suggestion of pathological consultation showed that GATA3, mammaglobin, GCDFP-15, HER2, ER, PR, and CDK5/6 were negative; E-cad expressed weakly positive; CDX-2 resulted positive; and Ki67 expressed 10%, which is considered as metastatic signet ring cell carcinoma . Positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET/CT) exhibited strip soft tissue density signal in the surgical area with a prosthesis implantation. The maximum standardized uptake (SUVmax) of 18F-FDG was 5.3, which was considered as the postoperative changes of breast . After the radical resection of colon cancer, 18F-FDG was increased at the anastomotic site and distal intestine with a SUVmax value of 4.4. Tracer distribution was enhanced at the transverse colon, splenic flexure of colon, and rectum. SUVmax of 18F-FDG was 6.6, which was considered as physiological metabolism and may complicate with intestinal polyps . Hysteromyoma also could be seen on the image . Adjuvant chemotherapy based on 130 mg/m2 oxaliplatin on day 1 plus 1000 mg/m2 capecitabine twice daily on days 1 to 14 and combined with 7.5 mg/kg bevacizumab on day 1 every 21 days for 8 cycles was used for this patient. The last re-examination showed that the patient had stable disease (RECIST criteria).