A 56-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department because of progressive abdominal distension with discomfort and decreased urine volume for the past 2 days. His medical history was significant for decompensated alcoholic liver cirrhosis, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and coronary heart disease. He was married with two children, lived in an urban area, and was employed as an accountant. He was a nonsmoker and reported abstinence from alcohol for the past 6 months. His medication included insulin glargine and diuretics (furosemide plus spironolactone). One year before admission, after suffering his first episode of variceal bleeding, propranolol in combination with endoscopic variceal ligation was prescribed at a starting dose of 10 mg twice daily. The patient could not tolerate higher propranolol dosing during titration because of bradycardia. Ten months before admission, he was started on prophylaxis with ciprofloxacin 500 mg daily after a spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) episode, but 3 months later he discontinued antibiotic prophylaxis on his own. Over the past 3–4 months he had more frequent hospitalizations than in the past for large-volume ascites paracentesis.
On clinical examination, he was jaundiced, with blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg (baseline systolic blood pressure 120–130 mm/Hg) and heart rate of 72 beats per minute, and he was afebrile (36.7 °C). On skin examination, jaundice and spider angiomata were found on the trunk, face, and upper limbs; gynecomastia was also seen. Neurological examination revealed lethargy, altered mental status, and mild confusion. Neuromuscular impairment was noted including bradykinesia, asterixis (flapping motions of outstretched hands), slurred speech, ataxia, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Focal neurologic deficits were absent. On chest examination, fine crackles were present at the lung bases. The abdominal wall appearance revealed a caput medusae due to portal hypertension, while dilated abdominal veins were also seen because of inferior and superior vena cava syndrome. Physical examination also showed a remarkable abdominal distension, a fluid wave, and flank dullness to percussion, with diffuse tenderness and normal bowel sounds. The liver was palpable two fingers below the right costal margin, with firm and nodular consistency; an enlarged left lobe was also palpable. Peripheral edema was more pronounced at the lower extremities. A chest X-ray performed on admission showed mild bilateral infiltrates of the lower lung areas . Laboratory parameter values showed increased white blood cell (WBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP), substantial acute kidney injury, and severe deterioration of liver biochemistry compared to a recent previous evaluation .
The patient was evaluated as having sepsis; he was started on intravenous administration of meropenem (1 g three times daily) and daptomycin (350 mg daily) and hydrocortisone 100 mg four times daily and was admitted to the hospital. On day 2, renal function deteriorated further and he was started on terlipressin 3 mg infused over 24 hours in combination with intravenous albumin (1 g/kg on day 1, and then 20 to 40 g/day thereafter) for a possible type 1 hepatorenal syndrome. Later on the same day, he was subjected to a course of hemodialysis due to hyperkalemia (6.5 mmol/L), anuria, and increased central venous pressure (24 cm/H2O). On day 3, the patient developed severe metabolic acidosis, his liver failure worsened, and he subsequently fell into a coma. Within the context of multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), the patient was intubated, but he later died within just a short period after admission to the hospital. No postmortem examination was performed, as the cascade of causes of the patient’s death was documented. The immediate cause of death was MODS as a consequence of sepsis subsequent to bacteremia due to SBP caused by S. pseudoporcinus, which was cultured from the patient’s blood and ascitic fluid (see below). The underlying cause triggering the events resulting in death was decompensated liver cirrhosis.
On admission, a pair of blood and ascitic fluid cultures (pair of both aerobic and anaerobic bottles) was obtained and incubated in a BACTEC 9240 automated system (Becton Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) for a total of 5 days. The cultures (both blood and anaerobic ascitic fluid) were positive after 3 days of incubation. Ascitic fluid gram stain revealed small gram-positive cocci arranged in chains which grew on both 5% sheep blood and chocolate agar plates after incubation for 24 hours under 5% carbon dioxide conditions. The isolate was catalase-negative. The GP ID card of the VITEK 2 system (bioMerieux, Marcy L’ Etoile, France) identified the isolate as S. pseudoporcinus, with excellent identification. Susceptibility testing was performed using the disk diffusion method. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined using the VITEK 2 AST-ST01 card and MIC Test Strips (Liofilchem, Roseto Degli Abruzzi, Italy) . Both methods (disk diffusion method and MIC Test Strips) were performed on Mueller-Hinton agar plates supplemented with 5% horse blood and incubated under 5% carbon dioxide conditions for 24 hours.