A 22-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the hospital with sings of dyspnoea, shortness of breath on exertion, dry cough, dyspeptic syndrome and seldom night sweats. Patient′s medical history revealed COVID-19 infection 1 year prior, currently with no drug history and findings of enlarged cardiac shadow and mediastinum on the initial chest x-ray. Performed electrocardiography was within standards and echocardiography showed pericardial effusion without the signs of cardiac tamponade at the time. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest showed enlarged and multiplied mediastinal lymph nodes, a pathologic mass in the right pulmonary hilum with pericardial effusion. Follow up echocardiography showed progression of the pericardial effusion, therefore the patient underwent pericardial fenestration and the Chamberlain procedure with biopsy. A short incision was made, after preparation in the epigastrium, the pericardium and peritoneum was identified. The pericardial effusion was drained out with the total amount of 700ml of serosangvinous fluid, with subsequent formation of a 2 × 3 cm window between pericardium and peritoneum. The postoperative period was complicated by secondary wound healing. The histology report confirmed the diagnosis of the classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Thereafter, the patient was treated with the BEACOPP (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin hydrochloride (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine and prednisone) regimen of which he underwent six cycles. Two weeks after the last cycle of chemotherapy (approx. 5 months after surgery) the patient displayed the following symptoms for two days; dyspnoea and chest pain with occasional irradiation to the neck. An electrocardiography was performed, which showed only mild tachycardia, while the chest x-ray showed enlargement of the heart. The subsequent echocardiography showed a tumorous mass manifesting in the pericardium, posing as tumour arising from the pericardium or from the liver. The laboratory findings revealed neutrophilic leucocytosis, after administration of granulocyte colony stimulating factor with otherwise unremarkable findings. Heart CT scans showed a retrosternal and subxiphoidal hernia with liver protrusion towards the pericardium. Initially the symptoms were managed conservatively and the patient was discharged home. He underwent scheduled PET/CT (positron emission tomography / computed tomography), which confirmed remission of the Hodgkin lymphoma and findings of the segment 2 liver protrusion into the thorax . Therefore the patient was scheduled for a planned surgery which was approved by the attending haematologist. When the patient was admitted to our surgical ward a physical examination produced no remarkable findings. The next day, he underwent laparoscopic surgery under general anaesthesia, with findings within the normal range in the abdominal cavity, beside herniation of the liver into the thorax. During the procedure, we performed mobilisation of the liver from the pericardium, which revealed the defect with size of approx. 9 × 6 cm, mobilisation of the peritoneal attachments of the liver. Finally, the perforated Parietene™ composite mesh composed on one side from macroporous polypropylene mesh and the absorbable synthetic film on the other was placed . The implanted mesh was manually perforated before placement, in order to preserve the original function of pericardial fenestration. At the end of the surgery single Redon drain was placed in the pericardium. The postoperative period was unremarkable. Follow up echocardiography was performed with the findings of minimal residual pericardial effusion complemented with minimal output of the Redon drainage, which was then extracted and the patient was discharged to outpatient care. Two months after surgery the patient is well and without any difficulties, in further observation of his attending haematologist.