A 17-year-old immunocompetent girl presented to our service for pharmacoresistant epilepsy. She had a history of HSVE at the age of 6 when she presented with seizures. She was treated with a complete course of acyclovir. She underwent an uneventful recovery and returned to baseline and did not have seizure recurrence until 6 years later. At the age of 12 years, she developed intractable seizures consisting of staring, confusion, face droop, and flushing. Seizures persisted despite multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) and she was brought in for evaluation. Preoperative magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed an area of encephalomalacia involving the anterior and mesial aspect of the right temporal lobe, right frontal operculum, and right insula , which correlates with concordant hypometabolism on F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET). Video electroencephalogram (VEEG) showed seizure onset originating predominantly from the right frontal lobe. Functional MRI showed left expressive and receptive language activation and bilateral primary visual cortex and supplementary motor area activation.
A right frontotemporal craniotomy was performed, followed by intraoperative recording using a strip over the temporal lobe, a grid over the frontal lobe, and a depth electrode, which was inserted in the insula under magnification. Intraoperative electrocorticography (ECoG) showed that the temporal lobe was extremely active and the frontal lobe also had frequent epileptic discharges. A tailored right temporal lobectomy, amygdalo-hippocampectomy and right frontal lobe disconnection were performed. No intraoperative steroids were used.
Postoperative MRI showed expected postoperative changes with no complication . The patient was discharged home 4 days after surgery, afebrile, with baseline exam and free of seizure on oxcarbamazepine, lamotrigine, and tapering doses of steroids.
On the 6th postoperative day (POD) she presented with two consecutive episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and three episodes of mouth twitching with unresponsiveness, associated with postictal left facial weakness and fever. The computerized tomography (CT) of the brain performed at another medical center did not show significant findings. The following day, she was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit of our center for further management. Physical examination revealed mild left facial palsy and fever. Rest of the neurological examination was otherwise unremarkable. There were no signs of wound infection. A new brain MRI confirmed no significant changes compared with prior postoperative MRI. There were no extra-axial collections suggestive of empyema. The patient continued with persistent fever and partial seizures involving the face despite AEDs that included her usual medication with the addition of clobazam, levetiracetam, phenytoin, benzodiazepine drip, and corticosteroids. The patient was placed on continuous VEEG and a lumbar puncture was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) testing showed 2 white blood cells/ml (differential: 2 lymphocytes, 0 polymorph), 26.9 mg/dl of protein, normal glucose levels and a negative gram stain. CSF, blood, and urine samples were sent for culture (all were eventually negative) and empiric treatment with vancomycin and ceftazidime was started. On the 10th POD, the patient's condition gradually worsened. A repeat CSF study was normal but follow-up MRI showed extensive cytotoxic edema with restricted diffusion in the right fronto-orbital, insular, and posterior frontal cortex [ and ]. The cause of the fever and seizures was unclear, but clinical suspicion of HSVE relapse was considered, especially in the setting of a prior history of HSVE and clinical evolution. On CSF analysis, HSV, CMV, EBV, HV 6-7-8 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were negative and the viral and fungal CSF culture remained negative as well. Acyclovir treatment was started at 40 mg/kg/day. On the 12th POD, the patient became hemodynamically and respiratory unstable, requiring sedation, intubation, and ventilator support for 6 days. Thereafter, she had with progressive improvement of fever and seizures, but cognitive deterioration and new onset left hemiparesis persisted. Serial MRI showed progression of the signal changes revealing at the end extensive gray and white matter disease with patchy enhancement in both cerebral hemispheres, worse in the right side extending into the right basal ganglia, thalamus and pons [ and ]. After antiviral therapy for 21 days the patient recovered enough to follow commands, however, aphasia, dysphagia and left upper weakness remained. MRI performed 1-month following surgery revealed persistent changes of the right hemisphere and left frontal lobe .
The final pathology report from surgical resection revealed encephalomalacia of cortex characterized by cystic degeneration/cavitation, astrocytic gliosis with gemistocytic astrocytes and perivascular lymphocytic monocyte cuffing. There were no viral inclusion bodies and in situ hybridization for HSV DNA was negative. These findings were consistent with chronic encephalitis .
At follow-up 1 year after surgery in an outpatient clinic, the patient is seizure-free. However, she has left hemiparesis, severe difficulty in swallowing requiring jejunostomy tube, dysphasia, and flat affect. She also has mild behavioral impairment and emotional lability manifested by fluctuations in level of cooperation from quiet and smiling to marked irritability.