A 41-year-old nonsmoking Caucasian man presented in June 2007 with a painless swelling under his tongue, which was originally thought to be a sialadenitis of the sublingual or submandibular gland. Shortly afterward, a diagnosis of a soft tissue sarcoma, and a myofibrosarcoma in particular, was made via biopsy at another hospital. The following workup revealed no regional or distant spread. The chosen aggressive multimodal treatment was a modified version of a pediatric cooperative soft tissue protocol published in 2002 by the Cooperative Weichteil-Sarkomstudie (CWS) of the Society of Pediatric Oncology. Initially, our patient received three cycles of multiagent chemotherapy (vincristine, dactinomycin and ifosfamide), followed by radiographic restaging. Thereafter, our patient underwent surgical resection, including a radical neck dissection of levels I and IIa on both sides. The original tumor showed a size of 1.3cm in its greatest dimension and blurred edges, with a focal extension into the preepiglottic space margin (R1). Postoperatively, two more cycles of the same multidrug chemotherapy regimen were given in combination with external beam radiation (51 Gray (Gy)) to prevent local treatment failure. Until September 2010, our patient remained disease-free. He then developed local recurrence on the floor of his mouth, without signs of metastatic spread. Our patient was unsuccessfully treated with various chemotherapy regimens (paclitaxel + gemcitabine; Adriamycin® + ifosfamide; Adriamycin® + dimethyl-triazeno-imidazole-carboxamide (DTIC); and Yondelis® (trabectedin)). By August 2011, the tumor had reached a size of 11cm in its greatest dimension, which was the reason for a consult at our department (Oral and Maxillofacial Plastic Surgery) at the University Hospital of Würzburg . After restaging, our patient underwent total glossectomy with modified radical neck dissection on both sides. The epiglottis was removed, but the larynx was preserved. A wide resection of skin in the neck area was also necessary. Reconstruction of the several defects was performed with a latissimus dorsi free flap from the left side . The tumor was diagnosed as an adulthood sc-rms. To analyze the mismatch between the original diagnosis and the second diagnosis, we requested and reevaluated the slides of the original tumor specimen and accordingly corrected the former diagnosis of a myofibrosarcoma to a diagnosis of an adulthood sc-rms. Given negative surgical margins and the previously administered chemotherapies, our patient was discharged after three weeks in a good general condition, without any additional treatment beyond speech therapy. In September 2012, local recurrence in the anterior floor of the mouth was diagnosed and resected. Magnetic resonance imaging of the neck showed several suspicious lymph nodes in the nuchal area. Thereafter, a modified level III re-neck dissection (Robbins) was performed, and the locoregional disease was confirmed by histology. The reoperation was very well tolerated by our patient. This was again followed by a strict follow-up with close intervals. In May 2013, a third local recurrence was confirmed by biopsy. Further resection of the anterior floor of the mouth, parts of the latissimus dorsi flap, the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the right thyroid cartilage and the lateral pharyngeal wall had to be performed. Because of a pathological fracture of the anterior lower jaw that was caused by extensive tumor infiltration, parts of the lower jaw had to be removed as well, and continuity could not be obtained. To date, the patient is still alive with disease and is nourished via a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) feeding tube.
Macroscopically, the resection specimen of the first local recurrence (August, 2011) weighed 724g and contained a well-demarcated tumor measuring 11×8×8cm, without any invasion of the surrounding structures, including the extremely edematous tongue, epiglottis and skin. The cut surface of the tumor was white, firm and fleshy, without hemorrhage or necrosis. Microscopically, the tumor showed variable cellularity and was predominantly composed of spindle-shaped tumor cells with pale eosinophilic, partially ill-defined cytoplasm; an oval, tapered nucleus; vesicular chromatin; and mostly small eosinophilic nucleoli. In certain areas, morphologically, the tumor cells appeared more rounded and epithelioid. The tumor predominantly consisted of highly cellular areas characterized by an arrangement of long and intersecting fascicles of the neoplastic spindle cells, partially resembling a herringbone growth pattern. Occasionally, there were also regions with shorter fascicles of spindle cells surrounded by a collagen matrix. There was no sign of hyaline sclerosis of the intercellular matrix. Admixed throughout the tumor were a variable number of spindle-shaped and tadpole-like rhabdomyoblasts with abundant sparkling eosinophilic cytoplasm, an eccentrically placed nucleus and rare cross-striation. The rhabdomyoblasts were mostly loosely scattered between the spindle cells and were not very obvious. However, there were also certain areas with lower cellularity and a conspicuous gathering of rhabdomyoblasts. Overall, the rhabdomyoblasts were the most significant morphological clue suggesting the correct diagnosis on conventional light microscopy . Mitoses, including atypical forms, numbered up to 16 per 10 high-power fields (one high-power field = 0.53mm for the microscope used). Focal tumor necrosis was present, accounting for less than 1% of the total tumor volume. There was no obvious lymphangioinvasion or hemangioinvasion and no detectable invasion of the surrounding structures matching the gross description. All surgical resection margins were negative, as were all 52 lymph nodes.Immunohistochemically, the spindle cells partially expressed and the rhabdomyoblasts uniformly expressed desmin , whereas h-caldesmon staining remained negative. Furthermore, most rhabdomyoblasts and certain spindle cells showed specific nuclear positivity for the myogenic determination factors myogenin and MyoD1 . Actin exhibited focal positivity, with an accentuation at the periphery of the tumor. There was no immunoreactivity of the pan-cytokeratin marker KL1, and no S100, CDK4, MDM 2 or CD117 was detected.
In conclusion, the morphology and the immunophenotype led to the diagnosis of an sc-rms. Furthermore, these features indicated a tumor stage (TNM, 7th edition, 2010) of yrpT2b yrpN0 (0/52) L0 V0 Pn0, a resection status of R0 and a grade G3 tumor with six points in La Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) grading.
Additionally, we directly compared the morphology of the primary tumor specimen and our specimen from the first local recurrence, which showed the same histological features. To finally prove that these two specimens contained the same tumor entity, we complemented the primary immunohistochemical battery with tests for the specific markers of skeletal muscle differentiation myoglobin and MyoD1, which showed the same nuclear expression as described above. Therefore, a diagnosis of a sc-rms was made.
In the following resection specimens (2012 and 2013), including regional lymph nodes, the tumor tissue showed histology identical to that of the tumor described above, corresponding to further local recurrences and regional spread to lymph nodes, respectively.