An 85-year-old male patient was referred for investigation of iron deficiency anaemia. His comorbidities included ischemic heart disease and localized prostate cancer with previous transurethral resection (TURP) and external beam radiotherapy (EBRT). Gastroscopy found the presence of two Forrest grade III antral ulcers which were biopsied. Histopathology from the gastric antral biopsies showed moderate chronic gastritis and focal intestinal metaplasia. His colonoscopy was unremarkable. CT abdomen pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast did not find a source of bleeding, evidence bowel obstruction or mural thickening suspicious for malignancy. He subsequently underwent capsule endoscopy for investigation of occult gastrointestinal bleeding which found a non-bleeding lesion in the duodenum. Antegrade single balloon enteroscopy again identified the 1.5 cm polypoid, subepithelial lesion in the lateral wall of the second part of the duodenum, distal to the major papilla. The lesion had central depression and minor ulceration but otherwise normal appearing mucosa on endoscopy . Initial biopsies of the lesion showed normal appearing intestinal mucosa with no evidence of malignancy. Subsequent enteroscopy found bleeding from the duodenal lesion, which was refractory to endoscopic therapy. Hence an open laparotomy and lateral wall excision of the lesion was performed to achieve haemostasis. Complete local excision of the lesion was successful and the entire specimen was submitted for histopathology.
The resected specimen measured 20 × 20 mm with a thickness of 6 mm. Histopathology revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with submucosal invasion, arising in an adenomatous polyp with an inverted pattern of growth and normal appearing mucosa (AJCC 8th edition, Stage I, T1bN0M0) . The focus of the duodenal adenocarcinoma featured prominent cytological atypia, nuclear pleomorphism and increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio consistent with malignancy . Immunohistochemistry of the lesion showed positive staining for gastric-type mucins MUC5AC and MUC6 . The lesion was negative for MUC1, MUC2, CK20, and had patchy staining for CDX2 and CK7. Staining for DNA mismatch-repair proteins (MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, and PMS2) showed normal levels of expression. The histological features and immunohistochemistry profile of the lesion is most consistent with a tumour of pyloric gland origin.