A 60-year-old female with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 had left total knee arthroplasty done in 2012 with a cementless implant for knee osteoarthritis. Asymptomatic, progressive osteolysis was seen in the distal femur in 2016 and subsequently resulted in medial condyle fracture with the superior migration of the femoral component by February 2019. In December 2019, the patient had a distal femur replacement which was functional but minimally painful. Eleven months later, the patient underwent an unrelated laryngeal surgery and developed significant pain, redness, and swelling in the left leg and knee shortly after the procedure. Pain, rated 7 out of 10 on pain scale, worsened with flexion and extension of the knee resulting in an antalgic gait and use of a cane.
She presented to the office 19 days after her surgery. On examination, her blood pressure was 132/80 mmHg, pulse 92 beats per minute, temperature 36 °C, respirations 20 breaths per minute. There was a punctate opening superolateral to the left patella with purulent drainage, and it was sent for aerobic and anerobic bacterial culture analysis but did not yield any growth. No additional labs were performed at this time. A course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was prescribed for empiric treatment of presumed cellulitis, and significant improvement and resolution of drainage were observed; however, the pain did not resolve and the duration was extended to three weeks. Observation after completion of antibiotic therapy revealed gradually worsening edema.
The peripheral blood white blood cell (WBC) count was 8780 cells/µL, hemoglobin 9.0 g/dL, platelets 519,000 cells/µL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 27 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 6 mg/L. The arthrocentesis revealed a synovial WBC count of 5440 cells/mm3: predominantly neutrophils (89%). Synovial fluid CRP was 0.5 mg/L with alpha defensin detected. Additionally, the synovial fluid fungal culture grew Acremonium species. Synovial gram stain and bacterial culture were negative.
The tibial component had failed in December 2020 with the long-stemmed tibial component protruding through the lateral cortex and reactive bone formation. Erosion was noted around the implant distally with intact proximal positioning. The left knee hardware was removed with placement of static antibiotic spacer containing vancomycin and tobramycin.
Four of the six intraoperative cultures again grew Acremonium in the hardware sonicate and bone samples.
Table demonstrates the results of the antifungal susceptibility testing performed by a reference laboratory. The patient was started on voriconazole 400 mg orally twice daily for two doses, followed by maintenance voriconazole 200 mg twice daily and then discharged. Upon outpatient follow-up, the patient was tolerating therapy without adverse reactions, voriconazole levels were < 0.5 µg/mL, and the dose was increased to 300 mg orally twice daily. The follow-up levels were 1.0–1.5 µg/mL. Approximately 3.5 months after explantation, the distal femur replacement was reimplanted per patient’s preference and intraoperative cultures of the synovial fluid, tissues, and hardware sonicate culture did not grow any bacteria or fungus. Overall, the patient completed one year total of antifungal therapy.