Here we describe the case of a 37-year-old man (body weight, 64 kg) who intentionally took an overdose of 780 mg duloxetine (usual clinical dose in the range 40–60 mg/day) in combination with antipsychotic drugs flunitrazepam (18 mg: usual range 0.5–2 mg/day), quetiapine (850 mg: usual range 50–600 mg/day), and trazodone (1100 mg: usual range 75–200 mg/day). The patient had a history of gender identity disorder and depression. He had self-administered these medicines in combination as a suicide attempt and was emergently admitted to Kyoto Medical Center. On arrival, the patient’s awareness level as a Glasgow Coma Scale score was eye 2, verbal 2, and motor 4 (E2V2M4), breathing rate was 16 breaths/min, body temperature was 37.1 °C, oxygen saturation was 98% on room air, blood pressure was 124/86 mmHg, and the heart rate was 89 bpm. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with a QTc of 473 ms. The patient was then infused with bicarbonate Ringer’s solution but was not administrated charcoal and did not undergo artificial dialysis. The clinical laboratory results for the patient 1, 32, and 56 h after the self-administered overdose are shown in Table . The patient’s awareness level had improved to E4V5M6 and QTc reduced to < 430 ms 35 h after admission to hospital. No abnormalities were found in vital signs at discharge 3 days after admission. We report herein the drug monitoring data for the patient and the results of pharmacokinetic modeling. The findings indicate that predictions using this tool are appropriate for application in an emergency. The ethics committee of Kyoto Medical Center approved this study (18–018).
Frozen plasma samples collected from the patient 1 and 32 h after an overdose of a combination of drugs were pharmacokinetically analyzed. The patient gave written informed consent to take part in this study and for its publication. The concentrations of duloxetine, flunitrazepam, quetiapine, and trazodone in the plasma samples were quantified by liquid chromatography using a gradient elution program followed by tandem mass spectrometry systems according to the reported methods [–] with slight modifications; the following transitions were used: m/z 298 → 154, m/z 314 → 268, m/z 384 → 253, and m/z 372 → 176, for duloxetine, flunitrazepam, quetiapine, and trazodone, respectively. Under the present conditions, duloxetine, flunitrazepam, quetiapine, and trazodone levels in plasma were measurable (≥10 ng/mL) or detectable (≥0.10 ng/mL) each time point. Duloxetine, flunitrazepam, quetiapine, and trazodone were purchased from Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemicals, Osaka, Japan.
The patient’s plasma duloxetine concentration during ambulance transport was 57 ng/ml after an oral overdose of 780 mg , and, 32 h later, the level was still as high as 126 ng/mL. The plasma concentrations at 1 h and 32 h after administration were 46 and 26 ng/mL for flunitrazepam and 1720 and 1060 ng/mL for trazodone, respectively. In contrast, the plasma concentration of quetiapine at 1 h after administration (1140 ng/mL) had rapidly decreased to 52 ng/mL at 32 h. Of the four medicines evaluated in this patient, duloxetine disappeared most slowly from plasma, whereas quetiapine disappeared most quickly.
Based on the reported human blood concentrations in patients orally treated with the normal therapeutic doses of the four antipsychotic drugs (shown in Fig. ) [–], four simple PBPK models consisting of receptor (gut), metabolizing (liver), and central compartments were separately set up as described previously [, , , ]. Rate constants for the transfer of drug from/to the central (first) compartment to/from the peripheral (second) compartment (k12/k21) were adopted for flunitrazepam. The plasma unbound fractions (fu,p), octanol–water partition coefficients (logP), blood-to-plasma concentration ratios (Rb), and liver-to-plasma concentration ratios (Kp,h) of the relevant compounds were estimated using in silico tools [, , ]. The initial values for the fraction absorbed × intestinal availability (Fa·Fg) and hepatic clearance (CLh) were estimated from the elimination constants in empirical one-compartment models. The absorption rate constant (ka), volume of the systemic circulation (V1), and hepatic intrinsic clearance (CLh,int) values for PBPK models with standard deviations were determined by fitting using nonlinear regression analyses; these final parameters are shown in Table (within 25% of coefficients of variation for ka, k12, k21, CLh,int, and V1). The general ratios of CLh to the renal clearance (CLr) were set at 9:1 for the four drugs. The 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated for the fitted intrinsic hepatic clearance values using 100 virtual subjects created using random numbers, as described previously [, ]. The resulting system of differential equations was solved to obtain the concentrations of the substrates for the overdosed patient in this study:
where X and X are the substrate amounts in the gut and peripheral compartments, V is the liver volume (1.5 L), C is the hepatic substrate concentration, Qh is the blood flow rate of the systemic circulation to the hepatic compartment (96.6 L/h), and C is the blood substrate concentration.
The measured plasma concentrations and the PBPK-modeled concentration profiles of the four drugs self-administered in a single oral overdose are shown in Fig. . The observed concentrations of duloxetine and flunitrazepam in this overdose patient were generally within the 95% CIs of the predicted plasma concentration curves.