A 30-year-old pregnant Caucasian woman without significant past medical history tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the nasopharyngeal swab. Four days later, she developed malaise, fever, and rhinorrhea without need for respiratory support or any other therapeutic intervention. At that time, vaccination was not yet possible in the Netherlands. Seven days after the positive test, at a gestational age of 36 0/7 weeks, she gave birth by emergency cesarean section because of fetal distress. Both parents wore surgical masks, but there was a short moment of unprotected mother–child contact directly after birth. Afterward, the parents and patient were strictly separated. Parents were allowed to visit wearing FFP-2 masks if they had no clinical signs of active SARS-CoV-2 infection. A female neonate, with birth weight of 2660 g (10th–50th percentile), was born. The Apgar score was 4 and 7, at respectively 1 and 5 minutes. Inflation breaths and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) were given. The girl was cared for in isolation according to the local protocol. None of the staff caring for the patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 during this period. Because of progressive respiratory insufficiency with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0, the neonate was intubated and endotracheal surfactant (twice 100 mg/kg) was administered. Thereafter, the girl was transferred to a tertiary Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. The nasopharyngeal aspirate, obtained 19 hours after birth, and the endotracheal aspirate tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR. Viral genome sequencing demonstrated a strain that was common in the Netherlands (20E (EU1) clade (Pangolin lineage B.1.177)), and strains from mother and child were identical. Cycle threshold values decreased minimally over the first 5 days, reflecting an increasing viral load . Furthermore, there was lymphopenia and slightly elevated C-reactive protein. SARS-CoV-2 total immunoglobulins (Ig) were negative on day of life (DOL) 1 (both Ig and IgM) and became positive on DOL 9. Laboratory evaluations are presented in Table . No amniotic fluid, cord blood, or placenta was available for diagnostic testing as they were not stored in the peripheral hospital where the girl was born.
The neonate required mechanical ventilation with maximum positive inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 28 cmH2O and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 0.33 for 5 days. On DOL 5, she was extubated and received CPAP with FiO2 of 0.3–0.4. During the first week of life, she had intermittent fever and received broad-spectrum antibiotics for 5 days to treat suspected early-onset sepsis. Blood culture remained negative. Furthermore, she received a combination of parenteral nutrition and formula feeding through a nasogastric tube. Breast milk was not possible during the first 5 days of life because of maternal use of opioids.
On DOL 9, the neonate was reintubated because of oxygenation failure (CPAP with PEEP of 8 cmH2O and FiO2 of 0.9). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed bilateral areas of consolidation with coexisting patchy ground-glass opacities. There were no signs of congenital interstitial lung diseases or central pulmonary embolisms. The CT was rated as CO-RADS 5 (COVID-19 Reporting and Data System) with a CT severity scale of 18. This implies a very high level of suspicion for pulmonary involvement by COVID-19 . Since there was an oxygenation index between 14–22, the criteria for neonatal ARDS were met . Because secondary surfactant deficiency is associated with ARDS, endotracheal surfactant was administrated twice more (100 mg/kg) with short-time effects. To overcome ventilation–perfusion mismatch, inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) at 20 parts per million was given (DOL 9–18). Following established adult SARS-CoV-2 intensive care unit protocols, prone positioning was performed, dexamethasone intravenously (IV) (DOL 9–26) (starting with 0.150 mg/kg and gradually decreased), flucloxacillin IV empirically, and prophylactic subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (DOL 10–32) were started (325 IE/day). After consulting a pediatric immunologist and experts of the Dutch national blood transfusion laboratory (Sanquin), coronavirus disease (COVID-19)-specific IgG were administrated IV on DOL 11 because of the negative IgG levels on DOL 1 and the critical condition of the neonate. No antiviral drugs or inotropes were given.
On DOL 11, there was further clinical deterioration, with high oxygen requirement on conventional ventilation, so high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) was started with good effect (maximum mean airway pressure of 18 cmH2O, amplitude 37%). The oxygenation index varied between 12 and 22. X-ray of the thorax showed slightly progressive infiltrative changes, now more appearing as consolidations. Blood culture was positive for Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). The diagnosis of S. aureus pneumonia with bacteremia was established. High-dose flucloxacillin IV was given for 20 days. On DOL 12, the girl developed a pneumothorax, requiring a chest tube. Thereafter, there was a gradual improvement of the respiratory function. On DOL 18, HFOV was ceased and conventional mechanical ventilation was restarted. On DOL 22, she was extubated and respiratory support was continued with heated humidified high-flow nasal cannula with flow of 8 L/min and FiO2 of 0.6. A short course of prednisolone was given (0.53 mg/kg during 7 days). Repeated SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing remained positive in the nasopharyngeal aspirate up to DOL 31. Afterward, the tests were negative. In the following weeks, respiratory support and supplemental oxygen could be reduced. She is now 11 months old and does not have major respiratory complaints. She uses an inhalation corticosteroid and salbutamol because of bronchus obstruction during periods of respiratory infections. She receives tube feeding because of feeding difficulties. Her motoric and neurological development is within normal ranges.
An overview of the clinical course and therapeutic interventions is presented in Fig. .