An 8-year-old girl had a 1-year history of epilepsy, for which she was treated with oral sodium valproate at 200 mg every 8 h. Since her epilepsy had become uncontrollable since the last month, her parent stopped sodium valproate and switched to carbamazepine at 200 mg two times daily for the past 3 weeks. Four days before admission, she developed a sore throat, high non-intermittent fever, and erythematous rashes scattered on her body. Her parent thought it was just some viral infection and then gave her a combination of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. However, after three days of treatment, the patient remained with a high fever and developed a widespread bullous, pruritic eruption from the trunk toward extremities on an erythematous base. Bilateral conjunctivitis, multiple erosions, and hemorrhagic crusts of the lips were noted. She was then transferred to Vietnam National Children's Hospital on the day fourth of illness.
On initial examination at admission, the 38-kg child had a widespread epidermal detachment on her body . Nikolsky's sign was positive. Remarkably, multiple oral ulcers of the buccal mucosa, tongue, soft palate, floor of the mouth, genitalia, and hemorrhagic crusting of the lips were also noted. Ophthalmic examination revealed conjunctivitis and sloughing of central corneal epithelium with positive fluorescein staining. Vital signs showed a temperature of 39°C, oxygen saturation of 100% at room air, tachycardia of 115 beats per minute (BPM), capillary refill time of <2 s, and noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) of 125/75 mmHg. With normoactive bowel sounds, her abdomen was soft and not distended. Other organs were stable on examination. Her parent denied any previous history of drug allergy.
An initial total blood count revealed white blood cell (WBC) count of 8,100 cells/μl, red blood cell (RBC) count 508 × 103 cells/μl, platelet (PLT) count 358 × 103 cells/μl, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 78 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 43 U/L, urea (Ure) 14.9 mmol/L, creatinine (Cre, 138 μmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to Cre ratio 26. 75, C-reactive protein (CRP) 180 mg/dl, albuminemia (ALB) 36 g/L, glycemia 6.2 mmol/L, serum bicarbonate 24.6 (mmol/L), fibrinogen 4.8 g/,; prothrombin time (PT) 14.3 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 36.9 s, natremia, 131 mmol/L, and kalemia 3,4 mmol/L. Serum antibody titers failed to detect mycoplasma pneumonia, hepatitis virus (A, E, and C), HIV, and Aspergillus fungi. The result of the rapid hepatitis B test was negative. Microbiologic studies using polymerase chain reaction techniques revealed negative results of mycoplasma pneumonia, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and Human herpesvirus-6 from various specimens. Blood and nasopharyngeal cultures were also negative.
According to typical manifestations and affected BSA, the patient was diagnosed with carbamazepine-induced TEN without skin biopsy and histopathology of the affected area. The algorithm of drug causality for epidermal necrolysis (ALDEN) was 6 points, which suggested a “very probable” causality of reaction . The genetic screening test showed that the patient was positive for the HLA-B*15:02 allele. The initial management comprised immediately withdrawing carbamazepine and administering crystalloid fluid replacement. With systemic steroids at 2 mg/kg/day, the intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was administered at 1 g/kg/day for two consecutive days. The patient received broad-spectrum antibiotics with meropenem and linezolid for the suspected infection, which we could not entirely rule out. The ocular involvement was managed with topical antibiotics of tobramycin and artificial tears. Supportive care for mucocutaneous, genitourinary lesions, antacids, and supplemental nutrition was also warranted.
On the third day of hospitalization (7 days after cutaneous presentation), she developed hematemesis and diarrhea of 15–20 watery bloody stools per day. She remained with a high fever and progressed to extensive sloughing of cutaneous lesions. Physical examination showed a body temperature of 38.8°C, tachycardia of 128 BPM, NIBP of 115/72 mmHg, and pulse oximetry of 97% at room air. Soft, non-distended abdomen and no abdominal pain were recorded. Arterial blood gas analysis showed pH of 7.42, PaO2 of 85 mmHg, PaCO2 of 33 mmHg, and bicarbonate of 22.6. Conventional coagulation tests were as follows: PLT count 223 × 103 cells/μl, PT 14 s, APTT 36 s, fibrinogen 4.7 g/L, and D-dimer 1,210 ng/ml FEU. Other remarkable results of laboratory tests were hyponatremia of 128 mmol/L, hypokalemia of 3.2 mmol/L, hypoalbuminemia of 21.9 g/L, a low hemoglobin level of 96 g/L, and procalcitonin of 1.68 ng/ml. A diagnostic workup of stool samples showed a strong positive presence of white blood cells and erythrocytes. However, a stool real-time PCR failed to detect 24 infectious pathogens, involving Vibrio vulnificus, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Vibrio cholera, Campylobacter spp. (C. jejuni, C. upsaliensis, and C. coli), Salmonella spp., Clostridium difficile (tcdA/tcdB), Yersinia enterocolitica, EAEC, ETEC, STEC, STEC O157:H7, EPEC, EIEC, Plesiomonasshigelloides, Norovirus GI and GII, Rotavirus A, Astrovirus, Spovirus GI, GII, GIV, GV, Entamoebahistolytica, Cryptosporidium spp., Giardia lamblia, and Cyclosporacayetanensis. Stool cultures were also negative. The Score for Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis was 3 points (tachycardia > 120, serum urea > 10 mmol/L, and initial detachment > 10%), giving a probability of in-hospital mortality of 35.3% . Her tachycardia responded well to 20 ml/kg of crystalloid fluid replacement over 30 min and 2.5 L of daily fluid compensation. Considering the high risk of hemorrhage and perforation, we decided to delay digestive tract endoscopy and biopsy procedures. We maintained 2 mg/kg/day of methylprednisolone for another 6 days. Also, additional intravenous IVIG at 1 g/kg/day was indicated for two consecutive days. The patient required electrolyte adjustment and a TPN supplement for daily nutrition.
On the ninth day after admission, her diarrhea declined to <10 watery stools per day without hematochezia. Because of non-progressive mucocutaneous and ocular lesions, the methylprednisolone dose was gradually tapered off on the tenth day of hospitalization. The patient responded well to the partial enteral nutrition provided on day 12. After 18 days of admission, she was discharged home to continue the tapering-off of oral steroid therapy and was required to return to the outpatient clinic for long-term follow-up.