A 29-year-old woman of Han nationality with a history of chronic hepatitis B presented more-than-one-year persistent right epigastric pain. She was a long-term resident of the pastoral area of Aba in Sichuan Province and raised dogs at home. The BMI assessed at admission was 23.9 kg. m2, the nutritional risk score was 1, the ability of daily living (ADL) grade was I and ECOG score was 0. Physical examination showed normal vital signs; skin and sclera without yellow dye; no abnormal cardiopulmonary function and palpable superficial lymph nodes; liver and spleen were impalpable. Auxiliary examination showed HBsAg(+), HBeAg(+), HBcAb(+), Pre-S1Ag(+);HBV-DNA:5.7E + 04 IU/ml;ALT: 118 U/L, AST: 92 U/L,normal PT, ALB, TBIL, liver function: Child A; ICG R15:5.4% (DDG-3300 K, Nihon Kohden); normal serum AFP (chemiluminescence analysis); liver ultrasound imaging: hepatic cystic echinococcosis; contrast-enhanced CT: no hydatid lesion was found in head and lungs; an about 6 cm cystic mass with a little marginal calcification, which down into the gap of liver and kidney, was found on the anterior lobe of the right liver . The cystic fluid was slightly turbid, and the cystic mass was diagnosed as hepatic cystic echinococcosis.
Half an hour before surgery, a dose of antibiotics (ceftazidime, 1.0 g) was used to prevent infection. The patient was treated with 100 mg hydrocortisone and rapid fluid infusion of 2000 ml before operation, the CVP was required to fall below 12 cm H2O during operation. After general anesthesia and tracheal intubation, the patient was placed in a 15° reverse Trendelenburg position (head-high, feet-low). The pneumoperitoneum pressure was maintained at 15 mmHg.
The distribution of Troca was shown in Fig. and Da Vinci robot assisted resection was performed as follows: The right side of the umbilicus was selected as observation hole and the left side of the umbilicus was selected as auxiliary hole; No. 1 arm located below the left costal margin in the mid-clavicular line; No. 2 arm located 3 cm above the umbilical level on the right anterior axillary line; No. 3 arm located 3 cm above the umbilical level on the left anterior axillary line,. A straight needle with thread was punctured into the round ligament. After crossing the round ligament in the abdominal cavity, the thread was pierced from the opposite side. Lifting the thread to fully expose the surgical site. Then the liver and abdominal cavity was examined after successful puncture.
The adhesion between the cyst and omentummajus, colon and stomach was severed with the ultrasound knife . Free the lower edge of the cyst with the ultrasound knife. The operation should be careful, especially to prevent the rupture of colon. To find the space between fibrous capsule and hepatic tissue, the liver capsule and part of the liver parenchyma was dissected with an ultrasound knife along the junction of hydatid cyst and normal liver tissue. Then the space was deepened gradually via a series of measures such as pushing, squeezing, sub and hook. The blood oozing and crushing tissues were scraped and sucked out by aspirator to make the operation field clearer. When encountered a pipe structure larger than 3 mm, the titanium clip was used for clamping . During the propulsion process, the cyst was pressed from inside to outside with an aspirator by the assistant to maintain a certain tension and good vision of the space. Promote in the same plane from top to bottom, from front to back, until the specimen was completely free. No visible spill of cystic contents was observed during the operation. Then the outer capsule of the hydatid cyst was completely removed. Biliary ducts were seen during the operation, but no major biliary duct was observed. A complete removal of the external capsule was performed during our operation, so there was no residual cystic cavity, and only the interface between the liver and the cyst were left after resection. So omentum was not used to obliterate the cyst cavity.
After resection, the cyst was loaded into the specimen bag and then the contents of the cyst were suck out with a puncture needle. Bleeding points were treated with electrocoagulation and suture . Electrocoagulation hook (Johnson & Johnson, US) was mainly used for electrocoagulation of wound oozing blood and small bleeding point. No vessel sealing system was used in this study. Larger tubes (such as portal branch, branch of hepatic vein, small bile duct and hepatic artery) were treated with titanium clips and sutures. Before the end of the operation, the dissection plane of the liver parenchyma and surgical field were immersed with hypertonic saline for 10 min to kill potential echinococcus and an abdominal drainage tube was placed in the liver sections postoperatively. The drainage fluid was a pale bloody liquid (mainly from small amount of blood oozing from the wound surface). No bile or other liquid was observed. To prevent recurrence and reinfection, oral albendazole (15 mg/kg/d) therapy against parasites was initiated half a month after surgery and lasted for one year.
After operation, the patient was educated with diet, hand hygiene, and proper knowledge for keeping dogs. The volume of blood loss was about 200 ml during operation. The main cause of bleeding was the small nutrient vessels and the hepatic parenchymal hemorrhage when the hydatid cyst was separated. In addition, since the sixth branch of the middle hepatic vein was close to the cyst, a small break may occur during the process of cyst separation, which also lead to small amount of bleeding. Reliable hemostasis was achieved after suture. The surgery time was 130 min. The patient’s vital signs were stable, no cystic allergies appeared. Subhepatic drainage was left for 24 h. On the first day after surgery, only liquid peroral diet was allowed. No complications such as postoperative bile leakage and bleeding were observed. The patient was discharged 5 days later. Cystic echinococcosis was confirmed by postoperative pathology. Excellent result was obtained in the laparoscopic resection of hepatic hydatidectocyst by the Da Vinci Surgical System (DVSS) in our study.