A 76-year-old man with stage IV intraorbital diffuse large B cell lymphoma with disease progression despite R-CHOP, RICE, ibrutinib, and radiation, was admitted for an investigational CD-19 directed, autologous CAR-T cell therapy. The patient had no known cardiovascular disease and was not taking any cardiac medications. He had a 50-year smoking history but quit >10 years prior and was otherwise active at baseline with no history of dyslipidemia, diabetes, obesity, or stroke. His baseline ECG and echocardiogram prior to initiation of CAR-T therapy showed sinus bradycardia, normal biventricular ejection fraction, and grade I diastolic dysfunction. He received polatuzumab as a bridging therapy to CAR-T and received standard lymphodepletion with cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2 and fludarabine 30 mg/m2. Less than 5 min into the CAR-T cell infusion, after receiving 0.8 out of 2.2 mL of cell product, he developed severe chest pain, dyspnea, nausea and vomiting, generalized body aches, flushing, and tingling. His blood pressure was 66/47 mmHg, heart rate 130 beats per minute, and temperature 36.4°C. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed inferior ST elevations with reciprocal lateral depressions . He subsequently received aspirin 325 mg, intravenous heparin, sublingual nitroglycerin, and morphine. Due to concern for an acute infusion reaction, he was given diphenhydramine, famotidine, Epi-pen, and 1L of normal saline. Initial fourth-generation troponin I was normal (upper limit of normal is <0.02 ng/mL). Epinephrine infusion was started for hypotension.
Emergent coronary angiography revealed mild non-obstructive coronary disease with ≤30% stenosis in all vessels and TIMI 3 flow (, , and ). Post-catheterization EKG showed normal sinus rhythm with resolution of ST segment changes. The patient’s symptoms completely resolved after catheterization, and he remained hemodynamically stable post-catheterization with no pressor requirement. High sensitivity troponin I trended from 656 to 883 to 425 ng/L (upper limit of normal ≤58 ng/L). One day after the acute reaction, an echocardiogram showed mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 52%, normal right ventricular function, and no regional wall motion abnormalities. Given the complete resolution of symptoms and EKG abnormalities in the context of non-obstructive coronary artery disease, the patient’s clinical presentation was thought to be most consistent with ST elevation MI due to coronary vasospasm. Diltiazem was added to prevent recurrent vasospasm with re-initiation of CAR-T, but was discontinued after the decision was made not to rechallenge the patient with CAR-T given the significant cardiac risks. The patient was subsequently started on metoprolol for cardiomyopathy and was maintained on aspirin 81 mg daily for non-obstructive coronary artery disease.