An-84-year-old man with a history of chemotherapy for ileocecal diffuse large B cell lymphoma diagnosis with complete remission and free from chemotherapy, presented with fever and abdominal pain. His body mass index was 21.1 kg/m2 and his body temperature was 38.5 °C. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (PS) score was 0. Blood examination showed elevated levels of hepatobiliary enzymes in the serum. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a thickened gallbladder wall with cholelithiasis and pneumobilia of the intrahepatic bile duct. Endoscopic lithotripsy with endoscopic papillary balloon dilation and antibiotic therapy was used for the treatment of acute cholangitis, and this required hospitalization for 2 weeks. Endoscopic sphincterotomy and brush cytology were not performed. A thickened gastric wall close to the gallbladder, which indicated malignant lymphoma, was detected on computed tomography (CT) scan performed during hospitalization. Tumor markers in serum, including carcinoma antigen 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen, and interleukin-2 receptor, were not elevated. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a concavity on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum (a). Gastrografin injected from the concavity flowed into the gallbladder, which confirmed the diagnosis of CGF (b). The gastric wall thickening was presumed to be due to the inflammation associated with CGF. There were no malignant findings on the mucosa around the concavity, and no biopsy was taken. As the fistula was located near the pylorus, there was a risk of postoperative pyloric stenosis, and LECS was planned to check the positional relation of the suture line and the pylorus. The patient requested laparoscopic surgery and consented that since open surgery is the gold standard treatment for non-obstructing CEF, the procedure may be converted to open surgery if necessary.
A camera port (Kii Balloon Blunt Tip System 12 × 100 mm) was inserted into the umbilicus via an open technique. Three additional ports (three 5-mm ports [Kii Access System 5 mm]) were inserted into the epigastric, right hypochondriac, and right upper quadrants of the abdomen with visual laparoscopic assistance under 10-mmHg pneumoperitoneum. A thick-walled contracted gallbladder was seen to be tightly attached to the omentum and the anterior wall of the gastric antrum. Because the bed side of the gallbladder wall was embedded in the liver by extensive inflammatory adhesions, partial cholecystectomy was performed, leaving the bed side of the gallbladder wall in place. After separation of the gallbladder from the liver, the cystic duct and cystic artery were cut. Subsequently, it became easy to observe the fistular region. The fistula was observed via endoscopy and marked with the injection of indigo carmine (1 mL of indigo carmine, 20 mL of 0.4% hyaluronic acid, and 20 mL of normal saline) into the submucosal layer around the fistula. Branches of the right gastroepiploic vessels in the excision area around the fistula were cut using an ultrasonically activated device (Harmonic Ace Plus; Johnson & Johnson, Tokyo, Japan). Adhesions between the gallbladder and stomach were dissected, and the fistula was exposed (a). Complete excision of the fistula was attempted to avoid postoperative perforation associated with unhealthy inflammatory tissue or the ischemic gallbladder wall, which was left on the stomach. After seromuscular dissection around the fistula, a pull-up and resection of the lifted mucosa that was surrounding the fistula was attempted using a linear stapler (Endo GIA™ Tristapler Purple 60 mm [Covidien]), via a combination of laparoscopic and endoscopic approaches to the neoplasia with a non-exposure technique (CLEAN-NET), which can avoid contamination of the gastric juice in the peritoneal cavity by the continuity of the mucosal layer. However, the thick-walled stomach made resection with an optimal margin from the pylorus difficult. Therefore, coring-out of the stomach wall around the fistular region was performed with an observation of the resection line laparoscopically and endoscopically, and the defect of the gastric wall was closed using intraabdominal hand-sewn sutures (b). After observing the suture line endoscopically, it was confirmed that the margins from the pylorus were enough. The absence of bleeding and air leaks was also confirmed by endoscopic insufflation, both endoscopically and laparoscopically. The total operative time was 4 h and 59 min, and the total intraoperative blood loss was 30 mL.
The resected specimen showed a thick-walled contracted gallbladder with gallstones measuring about 2 cm in diameter. Histologic examination revealed pseudo-pyloric gland metaplasia and Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with acute and chronic cholecystitis without malignancy. The patient did not experience postoperative complications in the 3 subsequent months.