A 79-year old woman with claudication in the right lower extremity which decreased her quality of life was referred to our hospital. Past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia and coronary artery disease. The ankle brachial index (ABI) on the right side was 0.71. Pre-procedural angiography showed severe stenosis from the middle-to-distal part of the right SFA and a drug-eluting stent (Eluvia, 7.0 × 150 mm) was placed without pre-dilation because the lesion was not severe calcified lesion. After stent placement, we performed adequate post-dilation, resulting in the optimal expansion of drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) . After drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement, the ABI increased from 0.71 to 0.85 and the patient’s symptoms improved. Since then, she has been taking dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day). However, she had a recurrence of intermittent claudication in the right lower extremity 25 months after drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement. Angiography revealed de novo stenosis in the distal part of the popliteal artery and proximal in-stent restenosis at the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement site . Subsequently, the patient underwent endovascular therapy (EVT) with plain balloon angioplasty for severe stenosis in the distal part of the popliteal artery and a drug-coated stent (Zilver PTX, 7.0 × 120 mm) was placed for the proximal in-stent restenosis of the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia). A completion angiogram showed an optimal angiographic result. In addition, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS, AltaView; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) at the time of EVT revealed vessel enlargement with a maximum vessel diameter of 7.3–10.0 mm at the distal edge of the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement site . Thereafter, the patient was symptom-free until intermittent claudication on the right side recurred 50 months after drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement. Angiography demonstrated de novo severe stenosis from the distal part of the SFA to the middle part of the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery lesion was dilated using a drug-coated balloon (INPACT Admiral, 4.0 × 80 mm; Medtronic plc., Santa Rosa, CA, USA) and the distal SFA lesion was dilated using a drug-coated balloon (INPACT Admiral, 6.0 × 120 mm), resulting in an adequate angiographic result. However, peri-stent contrast staining (PSS) was found by angiography at the distal part of the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement site . IVUS showed a further enlargement of maximum vessel diameter to 12.0 mm at the distal edge of the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) . Moreover, enlargement of the lumen and stent malapposition were also found, suggesting progressive aneurysmal degeneration 50 months after drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) placement. Similarly, duplex images showed a hypoechogenic halo suggestive of aneurysmal degeneration around the distal edge of the drug-eluting stent (Eluvia) .