A 44-year-old female patient was admitted at our hospital with sudden onset of involuntary movements in her left arm for 1 week. She had no medical history. The patient showed dystonic posturing of the left hand with downward wrist flexion and hyperextension of the fingers when she outstretched both arms. Further, the left hand showed intermittent repetitive and patterned flexion of the fingers on maintaining posture. Sustained muscle contractions of the left arm also interfered with voluntary actions. In addition, she exhibited dysmetria and intention tremor of the affected arm in the finger-to-nose test (See Additional file 1). However, she had no problems in the other body parts. Other neurologic deficits, including parkinsonism or myoclonus, were not detected. Laboratory results, cerebrospinal fluid findings, and electroencephalogram recordings were all within normal limits. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed low density in the left cerebellar deep nuclei . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed vasogenic edema in the deep white matter of the left cerebellar hemisphere, including the left dentate nucleus, secondary to a DVA . Other than the DVA, no vascular malformations were found on digital subtraction angiography . The cerebellar lesion was not substantial enough to explain the pathophysiology of the patient’s dystonia; therefore, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was performed to evaluate cerebral glucose metabolism within the basal ganglia and connected motor cortex. However, FDG-PET images revealed no abnormalities in other brain regions, except for hypometabolism in the corresponding cerebellar deep nuclei . Administration of intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for 5 days), and then one-week tapering course of oral prednisolone (initiated at 60 mg/day) completely alleviated the symptoms after 1 month. On follow-up CT, cerebellar edema that may have been responsible for the dystonia was not detected .