A 51-year-old Chinese female experienced progressive left leg weakness for 14 days before hospitalizing in our department. At the onset of the symptom, the patient presented dizziness and left lower limb weakness, and the symptom was still progressive, even after treatment as brain ischemia. Then the patient was transferred to our department. On admission, the physical examinations were all normal, and neurologic examination disclosed that proximal and distal muscle strength of left lower limb was 3/5 by manual muscles testing (MTT). The superficial and deep sensory examinations were completed by cotton swab, tuning fork and pinprick, and all sensory modalities and tendon reflexes were normal, and pathologic reflexes were negative. Cranial nerve function and the mental examination were normal. No family history of neurological disease and metabolic-related disorders had been previously documented, according to her medical records.
Blood analysis showed erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 40 mm/h (normal <20 mm/h) and C-reactive protein of 55.1 mg/L (normal <3.0 mg/L). In the tests for autoantibody, the antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive, and the titer was greatly elevated to 1:10,000. But, antibodies to double stranded DNA, Sm, Ro, La, Scl-7, Jo-1, ACA, ribonucleoprotein, nucleosomes, and histone were negative. Rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP antibody, and ANCA were also negative. The values for blood glucose, liver function, renal function, electrolytes, serum folate, vitamin B12, homocysteine, lactic acid, tumor markers, thyroid function and associated antibodies, C3, and C4 were their normal ranges. Tests for virus, syphilis, HIV, NMOSD, MS (Additional file ) and autoimmune encephalitis were all negative.
Lumbar puncture was performed and showed a normal intracranial pressure; the biochemical and hematologic tests of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed a normal glucose, chloride and protein level; the white cell count was elevated 27 × 106/L with increasing percentage of lymphocyte 77.8%; and the CSF cultures for bacteria, viruses, and fungi were all negative.
Intracranial angiogram was normal . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lesion on right parietal lobe that was hypointensity on T1-weighted, hyperintensity on T2-weighted images, and high signal on FLAIR. There was slim contrast enhancement along the surface of swollen gyrus lesion after Gd-DTPA injection (10 mL/kg of body weight). MRS showed slightly decreased NAA and increased Cr and Cho peak on the right parietal lobe lesion compared to same region on normal left side . Chest CT showed normal. The patient declined a cerebral biopsy.
Based on a series of examination, the patient was diagnosed as having early undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD). From the 5th hospital day, 10 mg of intravenous dexamethasone was administered for 14 days, and changed to oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) with gradual tapering (5 mg/month). At the same time, the patient was placed on maintenance therapy with azathioprine (50 mg/day). After treatment for 2 weeks, the symptom of left lower limb weakness was almost recovered. The patient was discharged and came in for regular visits. Follow-up MRI, performed at 6 weeks after the initial glucocorticoid therapy, showed much regression of lesion and enhancement on right parietal lobe. MRS showed normal NAA, Cr and Cho peak of previous lesion on the right parietal lobe compared to same region on normal left side . Blood analysis showed normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 7 mm/h and C-reactive protein of 1.57 mg/L. The titer of antinuclear antibody decreased to 1:1000. Lumbar puncture and tests of the CSF showed normal intracranial pressure, glucose, chloride and protein level; the white cell count (WBC) was 2 × 106/L with normal percentage of lymphocyte 64.1%. The patient was continuously administrated with a low dosage of azathioprine and gradually tapering prednisolone, and followed up regularly.