A 62-year-old female with many cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension presented to our cardiology clinic with decreased exercise tolerance and poor blood pressure (BP) control.
The patient reported that the symptoms began 2 wk before presentation.
In addition to the cardiovascular risk factors mentioned above, the patient’s history of past illnesses was not significantly different.
The patient denied having a history of decreased tolerance to exercise. However, within her family, her father has a history of hypertension.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: body temperature of 37.3 °C; heart rate of 92 beats per min; BP of 151/86 mmHg; and body mass index of 23.4 kg/m2. Dyspnea, heart murmurs, and other signs of heart failure were not observed.
Cardiac troponin I levels were negative. The lipid profile revealed low-density lipoprotein, high-density lipoprotein, and total cholesterol levels of 3.16, 1.19, and 4.96 mmol/L, respectively. Fasting blood glucose was 9.49 mmol/L, and 2 h after a meal the blood glucose level rose to 22.54 mmol/L. Glycosylated hemoglobin A1c was 7.51%. Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm with ST-T wave slight depressions in leads I, II, III, aVF, and V4-V6 . The echocardiography of the heart revealed no regional wall motion abnormalities and good left ventricular systolic function.
During CAG, selective cannulation of the left coronary artery (LCA) was not possible, and nonselective injection revealed the absence of a coronary artery arising from the left coronary sinus. Aortography showed the absence of the LCA, with no other vessels arising from the left or non-coronary cusps. We could not locate the left anterior descending artery or left circumflex artery . After selective injection into the right coronary sinus, a single ostium was visualized . The RCA is a large vessel without significant atheromatous occlusive stenosis. The RCA passed within the right coronary sulcus before continuing through the crux of the heart to the left part of the coronary sulcus and terminating anteriorly in a small vessel supplying the territory of the left anterior descending coronary artery . The ECT results showed that the inferior wall basal segment, inferior lateral wall basal segment, inferior septal wall middle segment, and basal segment of the left ventricle had a small-to-medium range of moderate myocardial blood flow perfusion reduction, considering the presence of myocardial ischemia . Overall, left ventricular systolic function was normal without abnormal wall motion. However, the resting left ventricular ejection fraction value of the left ventricle was normal, and the load left ventricular ejection fraction value did not increase, indicating a decrease in the left ventricular systolic reserve function .