An 80-year-old man presented with known hyperlipoproteinaemia, arterial hypertension, and known ischaemic heart disease with Ramus intermedius coronary artery-drug-eluting stent due to ST elevation myocardial infarction of the lateral wall. He was admitted with unstable anginal pain (new, worsening chest tightness, get worse with little physical exertion and radiate to the left shoulder and arm) for urgent coronary angiography. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with incomplete right bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed low normal left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 50%, and troponin value of 31 ng/L.
Diagnostic angiography using the right femoral artery approach showed that the proximal-to-medial circumflex artery had a high-grade calcified stenosis (see , ). With a 6 French extra backup guider, attempts were initially made using an Hi-Torque hydrophilic coating guide wire (Abbott BMW 0.014), followed by an Hi-Torque polymer-covered hydrophilic guide wire (Abbott Whisper MS 0.014) as a buddy wire. The lesion was successfully crossed with a wire tip placed in the distal left circumflex, and multiple balloon inflations at stenosis sites using a non-compliant 3.0 × 15 balloon (20 atmosphere) were undertaken. This was followed by proximal-to-medial placement of a 3.0 × 20 and 2.75 × 24 mm drug-eluting stent (Boston Scientific Promus Premier). Angiography post-stent deployment showed thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI)-Flow III (see , ). Two hours later, the patient developed dyspnoea according to New York Heart Association grade IV and cardiogenic shock and became haemodynamically unstable with 15 mm pericardial effusion visualized on bedside TTE without any signs of compression on the right side of the heart. Pericardiocentesis was performed with an aspiration of 600 mL haemorrhagic venous effusion confirmed in blood gas analysis: Hb 11 g/dL, SO2 45%. This was the first clue that the source of bleeding had not been understood.
A second coronary angiography was performed, which showed no signs of coronary artery perforation with TIMI-Flow III in all of the coronary arteries. We further conducted aortography (see , ) and left (see , ) and right ventricular angiography (see , ), which showed no signs of perforation or extravasation. As the patient’s haemodynamic deteriorated again with a second pericardial drainage of 600 mL of haemorrhagic venous effusion, three units of packed red blood cells were given, and we performed thoracic computed tomography (CT). It revealed circumferential haemorrhagic pericardial effusion with delineation of the contrast medium in the area of the Cx that exceeds the myocardial contour . After cardiothoracic consultation, we transferred the patient to a tertiary heart centre. As the patient’s haemodynamic deteriorated for the third time with pericardial drainage of 600 mL of haemorrhagic venous effusion, the decision for emergency exploratory thoracotomy was made. Intraoperatively, a large myocardial haematoma in the circumflex region was evacuated. The perforation site was sought and identified as a tear at the GCV (see , ). The whole area was sealed with Tachosil.
The patient recovered post-surgery with no deficits and was discharged 7 days later. The discharge medications were acetylsalicylic acid, clopidogrel, statin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and B-blocker. Three months after the procedure, follow-up did not show quality of life limitations.