A 3-year-old boy from an urban area of Trujillo, Peru, with no completed vaccines and mild anemia, was admitted to our hospital on March 19, 2018, for persistent fever. The mother indicated that her son has been scratched by a stray cat on the anterior region of the left arm with no apparent signs of inflammation.
Eighteen days before admission, he had a fever of 38.5 °C. The day after, colicky abdominal pain begun. He was brought to the emergency ward of another hospital where metamizole was administrated and hours later he was discharged.
Sixteen days before admission, in a private consultation, it was diagnosed apparently with a food poisoning, and he was treated again with metamizole. At this point the fever ceased. Fifteen days before admission, the mother indicated that he had an episode of diarrhea, without mucus or blood, also presenting nausea.
Thirteen days before admission, the fever appeared again, now accompanied with non-productive cough. In a private consultation he was diagnosed with an acute respiratory infection, and was treated with amoxicillin–clavulanic acid (75 mg/kg/day) until his hospitalization, without significant improvement.
The day of the admission to our hospital, his physical exam revealed fever (38.5 °C), pallor (+/+++), a no congestive pharynx and soft and depressible abdomen. His vital signs include a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, a cardiac rate of 106 beats/min, an SO2 of 96% and a FiO2 of 21%. No signs of regional lymphadenitis were observed. At this point, fever of unknown origin (FUO) was suspected. Laboratory tests at income revealed mild anemia, mild thrombocytosis, prolonged coagulation times, including increase fibrinogen and an increased C-Reactive Protein .
The first day of hospitalization, he presented microscopic hematuria, abdominal pain, and persistent fever. An abdominal ultrasound revealed mild hepatomegaly with multiple hypoechogenic formations with non-defined borders < 11 mm at liver, as well as also at spleen, of < 10 mm in the spleen, suggesting hepatosplenic micro-abscesses .
At day four, treatment with ceftriaxone (81 mg/kg/day) and metronidazole (30 mg/kg/day) was started. On the seventh day of hospitalization, ceftriaxone was changed to imipenem (75 mg/kg/day). Although that, fever persisted for 3 days. Additional laboratory tests at this moment included blood culture for bacteria and fungi, STORCH serologies (VDRL, FTA-Abs, toxoplasmosis, rubella, CMV and EBV, HSV-1, HSV-2), ELISA for HIV, PPD, acid fast bacilli (AFB) from sputum, as well as agglutination tests for Bartonella bacilliformis and Salmonella. All these tests were negative. An indirect immunofluorescence antibodies (IFA) assay tested positive for IgG against B. henselae (titers 1:256) confirming the diagnosis of CSD. Therapy with imipenem and metronidazole was stopped and treatment with azithromycin (10 mg/kg/day) was initiated. One day later fever ceased.
On the tenth day, an abdominal CT-scan with contrast showed irregular hypovascular nodules of 4.8, 4.6 and 6.5 mm in the liver, in segments II, III and VI, and spleen till 10 mm, confirming the ultrasound findings of micro-abscesses. On the day fifteen, a follow-up ultrasound showed augmented hypoechogenic images in the liver up to 19 mm in segments IV and II of the liver, and up to 10 mm in the spleen . Two weeks later an additional follow-up ultrasound showed a significant decrease on size of the micro-abscesses.
Then, 2 weeks after finished the antimicrobial therapy and 50 hospitalization days, the patient was discharged. Follow-up till 8 weeks after discharge show no further related alterations.