A 46-year-old white woman with no medical history presented to our hospital with complaints of dyspnea, chest pain, dysphagia, cyanosis of the trunk and head, and distended superficial veins over her neck and chest of 3 weeks’ duration; these were all features of superior vena cava obstruction. She had no history of tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption, or illicit substance use. A physical examination showed decreased breathing sounds and dull percussion on the lower lobe of her right lung as well as diffuse wheezing of her right hemithorax. Laboratory tests did not reveal anemia, hydroelectrolytic, or coagulation disorders. A chest X-ray revealed widening of anterosuperior mediastinum . A contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mediastinal mass with right-sided pleural effusion . No evidence of distant metastases was found. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed infiltration of the bronchial wall of her carina and her right main bronchus. However, histology of bronchial biopsies did not reveal any tumor infiltration. Mediastinoscopy was therefore performed and histological examination of right laterotracheal lymphadenopathy specimens demonstrated undifferentiated malignant tumor with solid growth composed of cells larger than lymphocytes with a round nucleus, variably prominent nucleoli, with dissociated growth pattern due to the presence of inflammatory cells, polymorphonuclear neutrophils, lymphocytes, and extensive necrosis . Immunohistochemistry revealed tumor cells diffusely positive for p40 with some reactivity for vimentin. Tumor cells were negative for CK and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and for lymphocyte surface markers. Due to these typical findings, subsequent immunohistochemistry for NUT protein was performed and demonstrated marked nuclear positivity .
After multidisciplinary cancer team meeting discussions, our patient underwent a course of radiation therapy to her chest (20 Gy in five fractions) and received three cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel. Her symptoms of vena cava syndrome improved and a chest CT scan showed that the size of the mediastinal mass had decreased by 32%: a partial response according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 criteria . After the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, she developed severe peripheral neuropathy to paclitaxel leading to discontinuation of treatment. One month after discontinuation of chemotherapy, she developed recurrence of vena cava syndrome symptoms and a chest CT scan showed mediastinal progression of the thoracic mass. Due to her poor general state and despite second-line chemotherapy with carboplatin and pemetrexed, she rapidly progressed to the point of palliative care and died 6 months after the initial diagnosis.