A 73-year-old man was referred to our urology department with a high prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (15.9 ng/mL; age-adjusted PSA reference range: ≤4 ng/mL) . He underwent a prostate biopsy, which resulted in a diagnosis of prostate cancer. There were no metastases to other organs. Prostatic biopsy revealed stage IIA adenocarcinoma (cT2bN0M0) with a Gleason score of 7 (3 + 4) in 2 of the 12 specimens. A few days before hospitalization for prostatectomy, he experienced bilateral lower limb edema. Upon admission, he was found to have hypoalbuminemia and proteinuria (urine stick test result of 3+); therefore, surgery was postponed and he was referred to our department. We diagnosed nephrotic syndrome due to severe low serum albumin levels (1.8 g/dL) and nephrotic-range proteinuria (7.79 g/g creatinine; Table ). His serum creatinine level was 1.12 mg/dL. He was receiving angiotensin II receptor antagonist and statin treatments for hypertension and hyperlipidemia, respectively, prior to hospitalization. An annual medical checkup performed 3 months earlier indicated no protein in the urine. He had mild dyspnea, and his serum D-dimer levels were high (9.6 μg/mL); therefore, chest and abdominal contrast computed tomographic (CT) scans were performed, which revealed pulmonary embolism. No abnormality other than pulmonary embolism was found. Antithrombotic therapy with rivaroxaban was administered, and diuretic therapy was initiated to treat the edema. Follow-up contrast-enhanced CT performed 1 month later revealed that the embolus had dissolved, and renal biopsy was performed. He was administered antithrombotic therapy for a total of 3 months, excluding the period of renal biopsy. Renal pathology showed 21 glomeruli. Light microscopy analyses revealed unremarkable pathology with no glomerular lesions (shown in Fig. ). Immunofluorescence studies showed no particular deposits of immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, IgM, C3, C4, and C1q (shown in Fig. ). Electron microscopy revealed diffuse effacement of foot processes (shown in Fig. ). There were no electron dense deposits in the mesangial, subepithelial, and subendothelial areas of the capillary wall, including the basement membrane. Owing to nephrotic syndrome, the patient refused surgery and chose combined androgen blockade and radiation therapy for prostate cancer. High-dose steroid therapy for MCD was considered but not started because treatment for prostate cancer was initiated. Improvement in peripheral edema was observed with the use of diuretics, and MCD secondary to prostate cancer was considered the diagnosis. Soon after the initiation of combined androgen blockade therapy, his PSA levels declined, and the patient achieved complete remission of MCD in 2 months without the need for glucocorticoid treatment (shown in Fig. ).