A 71-year-old man was referred to our hospital with jaundice and liver dysfunction. He had no significant past medical history or family history of malignancy. He was a non-smoker and consumed alcohol occasionally. His laboratory parameters were: total bilirubin 5.7 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 103 IU/L, alanine amino transferase 133 IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase 290 IU/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase 1298 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 1410 IU/L. Tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, DUPAN-2, and Span-1) were within their respective normal range. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a 48-mm hypo-vascular irregular mass in the pancreatic head, along with dilation of the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct . The tumor had infiltrated the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and portal vein (PV) all around (> 180°), but there was no obvious invasion of superior mesenteric artery. Also, there was no tumor presence in lymph nodes, liver, and peritoneum. The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (FDG-PET) showed abnormal accumulation in the pancreatic head (the maximum standardized uptake value [SUV] max = 9.5) . Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) cytology from the pancreatic head revealed the presence of atypical cells which suggested adenocarcinoma . We established a diagnosis of BR-PC [Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), cT3 cN0 cM0 cStage IIA] without invasion of the celiac artery and superior mesenteric artery, and decided to administer neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy (NACRT) with the approval of the patient, family, and our hospital’s institutional review board. The NACRT regime was as follows: induction chemotherapy, gemcitabine (GEM) (800 mg/m2) and nab-paclitaxel (nab-PTX) (100 mg/m2) were administered for a total of four courses (day 1, 15 in 28-day cycle). After four courses, S-1 oral administration (120 mg/day, irradiation day only) and intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) (60 Gy/25 fractions) around the pancreatic head and retro peritoneum were administered. No ≥ grade 3 adverse events were observed, and the treatment was completed. After NACRT, abdominal CT demonstrated reduction in the size of PC to 20 mm with clear delineation of the boundary with PV and SMV . According to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines (version 1.1), the therapeutic effect was judged as partial response (PR) to NACRT and curative surgical resection was deemed possible. Six months after the definitive diagnosis of PC, and 4 weeks after the completion of NACRT, we performed subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with lymph node dissection . Intraoperative examination showed no signs of liver metastasis or peritoneal dissemination, and surgical resection was performed after confirming negative ascites cytology. PC can be exfoliated at the border with PV and SMV; also, cytology of the dissection between the tumor and PV was negative. Therefore, resection and reconstruction with PV was not performed. Histological examination showed highly fibrotic background pancreatic tissue with scattered clusters of foam cells, but no evidence of residual adenocarcinoma, confirming a pCR . The lymph nodes were also negative for malignancy. During the postoperative course, the patient developed pancreatic fistula (International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula grade A), but the condition improved with conservative treatment, and he was discharged one month after surgery. He was prescribed 6 months of S-1 oral administration as adjuvant chemotherapy and is currently alive without recurrence for 2 years after surgery.