A 30 year old male was referred to our department with a 4 years history of pain (pain scale VAS 80) and crepitus in the left TMJ during mastication, increased left facial pain, and limited functional mandibular movements.
Bruxism was reported by the patient for a period of about 18 months. He had natural molar contacts in each dental quadrant, and no parodontal disorders.
Intraoral examination revealed a bilateral Class II molar relationship and a severe overjet [Figure ]. The lower dental midline deviated to the left of the upper by 4 mm. Moderate crowding was observed in both arches.
Clinical examination confirmed acute muscular pain, lateral deviation of the mandible to the left during opening and closing of the mouth, persistent pain and crepitus in left TMJ, limited opening (interincisal distance 20 mm), lateral movement to the right (3 mm), lateral movement to the left (7 mm), and difficulty protruding the mandible [Figure ]. Crepitus and pain were determined by palpation of both joints during maximal protrusion and maximum mouth opening.
A panoramic radiograph of the patient's jaws prior to removal of the mandibular left third molar, revealed left CR [Figure ]. This type of radiographic examination does not offer as clear and reliable images as those of other techniques such as computerized or linear tomography, but does demonstrate the condyles with a degree of clarity .
Routine haematological analysis did not reveal any evidence of underlying systemic bone disease such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Treatment was anterior repositioning of the mandible with a hard acrylic splint in the maxilla.
The splint was 3 mm thick, and it was constructed with an inclined plane for mandibular advancement of 2,5 mm, re-centring the lower deviated dental midline [Figure ]. The splint surface was adjusted to obtain a balanced muscular activity, and checked with conventional clinical control of the dental contacts.
The splint was used consistently, though due to work commitments, not in the mornings. The patient was reviewed every month and showed progressive symptomatic improvement on each occasion. After 8 months, a new panoramic radiograph confirmed new bone formation on the condylar surface [Figure ]. Clinical features were improved, with reduced pain (pain scale VAS 20) and an increase in mouth opening (30 mm), although deviation of the mandible and crepitus were still evident during mastication [Figure ]. After 18 months there was complete resolution of the symptoms, with no pain, and similar morphology of both condyles [Figure , ]. At completion of treatment, there were no occlusal abnormalities.