A 5-year-old girl weighing 20 kg and 109 cm in height was presented with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. She was scheduled for bilateral tonsillectomy under general anesthesia. Preoperative laboratory tests were unremarkable except prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 44.0 s (normal range 25–35 s). All other preoperative laboratory test results were within normal limits. Although there was no history of episodes of bleeding diathesis in the patient or her relatives, a pediatrician was consulted with regard to her APTT prolongation. The results of further laboratory tests included blood coagulation factor XII 15.7% (normal range 50–150%), coagulation factor VIII 81.3% (normal range 70–140%), VWF activity 41% (normal range 50–100%), and VWD antigen level 60% (normal range 50–100%). Because there were no episodes of bleeding diathesis and only a mild decrease in VWF activity, she was putatively diagnosed with type 1 VWD and/or coagulation factor XII deficiency, but the diagnosis of VWD was not definite in this case. The pediatrician surmised that there was no need for prophylactic administration of desmopressin or plasma-derived coagulation factor VIII concentrate containing VWF (Confact F®) before surgery, but recommended the administration of Confact F® immediately if hemostasis complications emerged during surgery. With regard to coagulation factor XII deficiency, no supplemental treatment was required.
In accordance with the pediatrician’s recommendations, 200 mg tranexamic acid (10 mg/kg) was administered intravenously three times the day before surgery. In the operating room, general anesthesia was induced via intravenous administration of 0.3 mg atropine sulfate, 25 μg fentanyl, 40 mg propofol, and 10 mg rocuronium, followed by tracheal intubation with a 4.5-mm cuffed oral RAE® tracheal tube (Nellcor/Tyco Healthcare, Pleasanton, California, USA). Her lungs were ventilated mechanically throughout the operation. Anesthesia was maintained via 1 L/min of oxygen and 2 L/min of air with 2% sevoflurane, and intravenous fentanyl and rocuronium.
During surgery the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate were stable and her body temperature ranged from 36.3 to 36.9 °C. After bilateral tonsillectomy, oozing from the surgical wound did not stop despite conventional bipolar coagulation, suture ligature, and astriction with gauze packing on the surgical wound. Thus, in accordance with the pediatrician’s recommendation, 850 units of Confact F® including 850 units of coagulation factor VIII and 2040 units of VWF was administered immediately. Complete hemostasis was achieved after administration of 850 units of Confact F®. The recommended initial dose of Confact F® was 40–50 units/kg in the present case. At the end of the surgery, 200 mg sugammadex was administered, then tracheal extubation was gently performed. Anesthesia time was 171 min, and the estimated amount of bleeding was 10 g. The patient exhibited no signs of pain or discomfort during emergence. No postoperative bleeding occurred, and she was discharged from hospital without any complications on postoperative day 3.