A 61-year-old Caucasian female with a prior diagnosis of PBC was diagnosed with T3N1M0 stage III, grade 2 left breast invasive ductal carcinoma in October 2011. The tumor was 7 × 4 cm, and a palpable left axillary lymph node was noted on examination. The tumor was positive for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-2 oncogene overexpression (fluorescence in situ hybridization ratio 9.91). Interestingly, her twin sister also had a diagnosis of PBC; other family history included lymphoma in maternal cousin and colon cancer in maternal uncle. Her case was presented at our institution's tumor board and neoadjuvant chemotherapy was recommended.
Due to the patient's underlying PBC, she had multiple baseline abnormalities of liver function tests, alkaline phosphatase [two times the upper limit of normal (ULN)] and grade 2 cytopenia from splenomegaly. Therefore, anthracycline-based regimens were avoided due to a concern for decreased clearance of doxorubicin leading to increased cardiotoxicity, as the patient would require trastuzumab as well. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 6 cycles of docetaxel, carboplatin, and trastuzumab (TCH) was given followed by bilateral skin-sparing total mastectomy and left axillary lymph node dissection with immediate reconstruction. Docetaxel was initiated with a 25% dose reduction and required a subsequent 25% dose reduction on carboplatin due to cytopenia. Postoperatively, pathology demonstrated a decrease in the tumor mass from 7 × 4 to 2.5 × 2 cm, but 4 of 20 axillary lymph nodes were positive for invasive cancer with extracapsular extension (T2N2a). Adjuvant radiation therapy was given to the chest wall and axilla (5,000 Gy). She then completed trastuzumab maintenance for a total of 52 weeks in October 2012 and started adjuvant endocrine therapy with anastrozole.
In February 2013, 3 months after the completion of trastuzumab maintenance therapy, our patient presented with skin nodules, and the clinical examination was remarkable for 2 erythematous left upper chest wall nodules measuring 0.5 cm. Restaging positron-emission tomography-computed tomography demonstrated an increased activity in the anterior mediastinum and subcutaneous tissue along with medial left breast reconstruction area concerning for tumor recurrence. There was no evidence of distant/metastatic disease except for underlying cirrhosis of liver, portal hypertension, and splenomegaly. Punch biopsies of the skin nodules revealed invasive adenocarcinoma significant for a small area of lymphovascular invasion. Immunohistochemical stains for AE1-AE3 were positive, highlighting tumor cells, and CD31 was positive, highlighting the lymphovascular invasion. Cutaneous metastases were estrogen receptor negative, progesterone receptor negative and HER-2 positive. She required a bone marrow biopsy due to worsening of cytopenia, which revealed no evidence of breast cancer or other hematological malignancies.
The patient's unique presentation and complex comorbidities were discussed at the multidisciplinary tumor board. Based on the team's consensus, the patient was started on docetaxel, pertuzumab, and trastuzumab for 6 cycles, followed by pertuzumab and trastuzumab as maintenance therapy. Docetaxel was re-initiated at a 25% dose reduction (65 mg/m2). The patient's bilirubin was within normal limits; however, the patient's alkaline phosphatase was 1.6 times ULN, warranting a dose reduction. Repeat imaging was negative for systemic disease, except for the primary recurrence of cutaneous metastases. Unfortunately, she experienced a second recurrence of cutaneous metastasis while she was on anti-HER-2 therapy, for which she underwent surgical excision followed by radiation therapy (6,000 Gy). Our patient experienced multiple cutaneous recurrences over the period of the next 24 months. Due to abnormalities in liver function tests (bilirubin was over 2.5 times ULN), multiple anti-HER-2-based regimens were contraindicated, including trastuzumab emtansine (TDM1). Treatment with capecitabine, along with trastuzumab, was therefore initiated. The capecitabine dose was reduced by 25% based on the elevated bilirubin and anticipated patient tolerance, which was subsequently discontinued due to side effects and disease progression. Therapy was then changed to vinorelbine, along with trastuzumab. Vinorelbine was given with a 60% dose reduction (12.5 mg/m2) due to its extensive hepatic metabolism by cytochrome P450 enzymes. The patient's disease had progressed after 2 cycles of vinorelbine and it was discontinued.
The patient then developed a left breast implant infection and recurrent metastasis around the port and skin area, requiring removal of bilateral tissue expanders, full thickness excision of necrotic skin on the right chest wall, and antibiotic therapy. Right abdominal fasciocutaneous flap histology was negative for cancer. The patient's bilirubin was 2–2.5 times the ULN; subsequently, nab-paclitaxel at a 50% dose reduction was initiated every 3 weeks for 5 cycles along with trastuzumab, which resulted in complete resolution of the cutaneous metastasis. Our patient requested a drug holiday and decided to hold off chemotherapy temporarily due to severe fatigue but agreed to continue trastuzumab every 3 weeks (6 mg/kg). One year later, she reported 2 small axillary nodules on the left upper chest wall and axilla concerning for recurrence. Unfortunately, her bilirubin was markedly elevated at 5 times ULN (6.0 mg/dl), limiting her ability to receive nab-paclitaxel.