In this report, we present the case of an 83-year-old right-handed male patient with ESRD. The patient, who had been receiving HD for 1.5 years through a left upper-limb AVF, was brought to our hospital on the day following his last HD due to impaired consciousness and status epilepticus. The patient’s left arm was not edematous. His medical history included chronic renal failure, ischemic coronary artery disease, and post craniotomy state from the total removal of meningioma on the left frontal convexity 20 years before admission. He independently drove himself to receive biweekly HD treatment before admission. After controlling his seizures using anticonvulsants, he underwent imaging studies, including brain computed tomography and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging/angiography. MR angiography showed a high signal in the right transverse sinus, sigmoid sinus, and jugular bulb , which indicated a suspected dural AVF. MR imaging revealed a postoperative lesion at the left frontal convexity, which had been known for 20 years with no other significant findings.
The patient experienced aphasia and right hemiparesis for 2 days after gaining consciousness. The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used to evaluate the patients’ cognitive function immediately after he became alert, and a score of 16 points was measured, indicating moderate cognitive impairment. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed and left subclavian arteriography (AG) revealed early filling of the left subclavian vein due to the AVF on the left brachium, with retrograde high-flow venous reflux to the left IJV, sigmoid sinus, and transverse sinus, with the left brachiocephalic vein and superior vena cava patent. The retrograde venous flow was inserted into the confluence and drained through the right IJV [-]. All cerebral venous drainage procedures were dependent on the right IJV. The left internal carotid AG showed delayed venous flow and drainage with venous congestion of the left superior middle cerebral vein as well as stagnant flow in the left transverse-sigmoid sinus junction. Based on these findings, we concluded that the patient’s seizure was caused by venous hypertension in the left cerebral hemisphere due to IJV regurgitation induced by the upper-limb high-flow AVF.
Further examinations were performed using duplex ultrasonography (US). The flow of the left brachial artery was measured at 3150 ml/min, which indicated that the extremely high flow was produced by the brachio-brachial AVF. The brachial vein bifurcated into two major trunks on the proximal side of the anastomosis. Retrograde venous flow to the left IJV from the left subclavian vein was revealed using US . The left IJV valve was then visualized . The regurgitation increased during the Valsalva maneuver. The left brachial artery was compressed to reduce the flow to 600 ml/min, but the regurgitation persisted. When the flow was decreased to zero, there was no regurgitation to the IJV, but this was not an acceptable solution for optimal blood circulation to the left upper limb. The patient also underwent cardiac US and coronary angiography and was diagnosed with Forrester Type I heart failure, which does not require surgical treatment.
Vascular surgeons along with cardiovascular physicians and neurosurgeons discussed the treatment strategy. A flow reduction procedure of the left brachio-brachial AVF was suggested for long-term cardiac outcome under HD, with prevention of heart failure by a high-flow shunt; however, this procedure was not sufficient to terminate the left IJV regurgitation caused by the high-flow AVF. There was no need for an endovascular approach to the central veins because they were patent. With the finding that all cerebral venous return was in the right IJV, the sacrificing the left IJV was thought to be acceptable. The first priority was to terminate IJV regurgitation to urgently normalize intracranial pressure, followed by flow-reduction surgery of the AVF for a long-term systemic prognosis.
Thus, the left IJV ligation was performed under general anesthesia. Videoangiography using indocyanine green performed before ligation revealed retrograde venous flow in the left IJV. Videoangiography performed after ligation showed no flow into the IJV. Immediately, after surgery, the patient’s MMSE score improved to 24 points and persisted until discharge. Post-operative US showed no regurgitation to the ligated IJV, with high flow of the brachial artery. Brain MR angiography did not show high-intensity signals in any of the intracranial dural sinuses with no new lesions in the brain. After confirming successful termination of intracranial venous reflux, the patient underwent surgery for AVF flow reduction. A short interposition with a small-caliber prosthetic graft was performed on one arterialized main trunk of the brachial vein and the other trunk was ligated, which successfully reduced the left brachial artery flow to 920 ml/min, as well as spared persistent AVF as a good vascular access route. The postsurgical course was good and the patient was independently discharged.