51-year-old female patient, primigravida primiparous, with a history of spinal trauma at the age of 25 years treated by osteosynthesis, menopausal for 4 years, with no notion of taking oral contraceptives, followed up for right breast cancer diagnosed at the age of 49 years for which she received a right mastectomy and axillary lymphnode dissection and contralateral breast reduction given its volume. It was an infiltrating ductal carcinoma of 4 cm, SBR III Luminal B, 0 N+/20 N with presence of fibrous mastopathy without sign of malignancy at the left breast reduction specimen. The postoperative course was marked by necrosis of the left areolar-nipple plate, a necrosectomy was performed. The metastatic workup was performed at the time of the first presentation of right breast cancer and did not reveal any secondary lesions.The patient was seen in a multi-disciplinary center. She received adjuvant chemotherapy with 6 courses of anthracycline-cyclophosphamide, external radiotherapy with a total dose of 50 Gy, and hormone therapy with tamoxifen citrate.
One year after the surgery, the patient returned for a nodule of the left breast without inflammatory signs. Clinical examination revealed a four x 2 cm nodule in the upper-internal quadrant mobile in both planes without other associated signs . Mammography identified a dense, hypoechoic, spiculated, heterogeneous, prepectoral nodule of the left superior-internal quadrant, surrounded by stromal infiltration and responsible for a rupture of the glandular trabeculae, vascularized on color Doppler, measuring approximately 21 × 20 × 12mm classified as Birads 5 of the Amercian College of Radiology ACR. (, ). Histological examination of the nodule biopsy showed a spindle cell proliferation with low cellularity, composed of cells with blurred cytoplasmic boundaries and slightly atypical nucleus. The immunohistochemical study showed that the cells expressed beta Catenin diffusely and AML focally. They did not express CD34, desmin or BCL2. This morphological and immunophenotypic appearance was compatible with a desmoid fibromatosis. The patient subsequently underwent a wide local excision . Anatomopathological examination of the surgical specimen confirmed the presence of a desmoid fibromatosis of 4.3 × 3.2 × 3.1cm with healthy resection limits. Post-operative follow-up was simple. No sign of recurrence was found after 10 months.