A 24-year-old, previously healthy Afro-asiatic man presented to our neurosurgical outpatient clinic complaining of headache for 3 months, which was followed by one attack of generalized tonic–clonic convulsions, which prompted him to seek medical advice. He reported no other associated signs or symptoms. Upon general examination, the patient looked unwell, but no pallor, jaundice, or cyanosis was observed. His vital signs were all within the normal range. On neurological examination, he was conscious, oriented to time, place, and person, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15 out of 15 and normal papillary reaction and size bilaterally. The patient had power grade 4+ in both the upper and lower right limbs, with normal tone and reflexes in all joints. Systemic review was unremarkable. Laboratory investigations including stool and urine general test results were unremarkable, so no further cerebral spinal fluid analysis was pursued. Initial plain head computed tomography (CT) showed a focal area of high density within the left parietal region. An MRI of the brain was then performed and showed a fairly well-defined 1.8 × 1 cm lobulated, cortical-based intra-axial lesion within the left posterior parietal region. The lesion demonstrated homogeneous enhancement and had associated moderate perilesional vasogenic edema with only a mild localized mass effect. No other focal lesions were seen . A list of possible differential diagnoses was made and included granulomatous lesion, lymphoma, a primary glial neoplasm, and less likely meningioma.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, although nonspecific, demonstrated a choline peak suggestive of cell membrane turnover that can be seen in a number of different conditions including neoplasms, demyelination, inflammation, and gliosis. Correlating this with the patient age and history, an inflammatory lesion was thought to be more likely . The patient was then admitted and underwent craniotomy and total microsurgical resection of the lesion. Histopathology results showed viable and calcified Schistosoma mansoni ova with marked mixed inflammatory infiltrate composed of granulomas and eosinophils, all features consistent with active cerebral schistosomiasis . Oral administration of antiparasitic praziquantel was initiated at a dose of 20 mg/kg twice a day for a total of 3 days along with orally administered corticosteroids for 2 weeks. The patient was discharged in good condition with improving neurological condition. A postoperative follow-up MRI was performed 3 months later and showed complete resection of the lesion . Marked neurological improvement was noted at 1-month, 3-month, and 6-month follow-up visits. The patient regained full power and had no further convulsions.