A 23-year-old Greek man who had episodes of hematemesis and hematochezia was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital. Clinical signs of anemia and splenomegaly were recognized on our patient. His medical history revealed that he was missing an FVL. His peripheral blood examinations revealed the following: hematocrit, 22.2%; hemoglobin, 7.5 g/dL; international normalized ration (INR), 1.22. Results of his liver function tests, as well as the rest of his biochemical examinations, were within normal limits.
An emergency endoscopy performed on our patient showed enlarged bleeding gastric varices but no esophageal varices. This led us to consider that the enlarged varices may be secondary to splenic vein thrombosis. We used a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube on our patient, but this failed to restrain his bleeding.
Ultrasound and CT scan of our patient revealed his enlarged spleen and an engorged splenic artery with a diameter of 1 cm, and a fusiform dilated splenic vein measuring 5 × 6 × 9 cm .
An angiography was performed using the Seldinger technique on the femoral artery of our patient. Selective celiac angiography and superselective splenic arteriography with frontal and bilateral oblique projections were also performed. A venous phase follow-up examination demonstrated that our patient had a completely occluded splenic vein. GVs and dilated gastroepiploic veins were also noted.
An emergency embolization of our patient's splenic artery was subsequently performed. A guidewire was directed into his splenic artery, and a wedge balloon catheter was passed over the guidewire using several giant Gianturco steel coils. Initially, a coil with a diameter of 10 mm and a length of 10 cm was used because his splenic artery measured around 10 mm in diameter on CT images. Subsequently, smaller coils (5 mm × 5 cm) were used to occlude the lumen of the 10 mm × 10 cm coil . The procedure was uneventful and the bleeding of his GVs eventually subdued.
Our patient was discharged one week later without any symptoms. An elective surgical splenectomy was also scheduled.