A 48-year-old male patient presented with three days of progressive generalized abdominal pain, bloating, and weight loss. He was diagnosed in another hospital with Crohn's disease 25 years previously, which was controlled poorly. Vital signs were as follow: blood pressure was 113/60 mm Hg, pulse was 98/min, temperature was 38.1 C0, and respiratory rate was 22/min.
On physical examination, there were abdominal tenderness and distension without rebound or guarding. There were no hernias or abdominal scars. Other systems were normal. Laboratory findings on admission are shown in . He had leukocytosis (14 × 105) with mild anemia (9.7 mg/dl). We performed an upright abdominal X-ray which showed dilated loops of small bowel with air-fluid levels. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast showed dilated loops with air-fluid levels . Based on clinical and radiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with small bowel obstruction (SBO).
We started with intravenous antibiotics and resuscitation with normal saline. We inserted a nasogastric tube for bowel relief. We monitored vital signs hourly.
On the next day of admission, we decided to perform an exploratory laparotomy under general anesthesia because of the increase in abdominal pain.
Laparotomy was performed, through a mid-line incision. There was minimal intraperitoneal serous fluid and 25 cm. Proximal to the mid portion of the jejunum; we found a severely dilated loop with a palpable mass after the dilation. We resected this segment containing the mass and it was sent to the pathologist. Stapled anastomosis was carried out. We close the incision with 2-0 simple nylon sutures.
Histopathology showed 2.5 × 3 cm submucosal leiomyoma . The course after surgery was uneventful. He passed flatus on day 2 after surgery.
On day 5 after surgery, we discharged him with no complaints. He presented to the out-patient clinic for follow-up after 13 days of discharge. He had no symptoms, and he could eat more food with good defecation. His wound showed healing well, so we removed the sutures. We sent him to complete his treatment of Crohn's disease with his gastroenterologist.
In addition, he was advised to stop smoking completely, reduce the use of NSAIDs, and increase the intake of fibers in his meals .