A 71-year-old Caucasian male with MG was known to suffer from nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and a dilated left atrium. Multiple unsuccessful electrical and chemical cardioversions (using sotalol and amiodarone) had been attempted in the past. Therefore, ablation of the AV node was performed and a permanent dual chamber pacemaker was implanted. Nonetheless, at the time of admission to hospital the patient was complaining of fatigue, palpitations and dyspnea that were rapidly linked to uncontrolled atrial fibrillation at a heart rate of 120/minute. Previously, for a long time he was on metoprolol 100 mg BID concomitantly with diltiazem 300 mg OD for heart rhythm control. To further control the heart rate, he received in sequence atenolol 100 mg OD and, more than 24 hours after diltiazem cessation, verapamil SR 240 mg OD to replace his previous regimen. Two hours after receiving his first dose of verapamil, the patient began to complain of weakness and dyspnea. He presented with signs of shock with blood pressure at 70/50 mm Hg and heart rate at 101/minute. Lung and cardiac auscultation appeared normal with no new murmur of acute valvular failure, pulmonary congestion or signs of pulmonary embolism. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed paced rhythm . A quick bedside echocardiogram showed diffuse hypokinesis of both ventricles with an ejection fraction reduced to 20%. Eighteen months before, an echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular function and ejection fraction of 66%. At that time, the ventricular rate was 110 beats/min while the patient was on long-acting diltiazem 240 mg OD and cilazapril 5 mg OD. Cardiac catheterization was performed within minutes; coronary arteries appeared without significant stenosis, but there was a diffuse hypokinesis. At this point, cardiogenic shock secondary to calcium channel blocker intoxication was suspected. Blood glucose was 4.3 mmol/L, electrolytes (Na+, K+, Cl-) were 138, 5.2, and 105 mmol/L, respectively, all within normal limits. One hundred percent oxygen administration was performed resulting in a saturation of 98% and a pCO2 to 41.5 mm Hg (normal 35 to 45 mm Hg). Verapamil was stopped and the patient received intravenous glucagon, calcium chloride and dopamine. The measure of AchR-Ab was positive at 0.23 nmol/L (normal ≤0.02 nmol/L) and the measurement of antistriated muscle antibodies was also positive at 1:3840 (normal <1:60). A few hours later, another echocardiogram was performed and there was an improvement in ventricular function, resulting in recovery of systolic blood pressure to between 125 and 130 mm Hg. Five days later, the ejection fraction had returned to normal as had as the patient's electrocardiogram . Re-challenge with verapamil was not performed. The patient died two years later.