The patient was a 70-year-old woman with an insignificant medical and family history. She visited a primary care family doctor for a routine clinical examination and underwent an upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy. An elevated lesion was detected in the second part of the duodenum, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination.
On physical examination, no significant abnormalities were observed. Moreover, blood test findings were normal for tumor markers: the cancer antigen 19-9 and the carcinoembryonic antigen levels were 17.8 U/mL (normal range, 0–37.0 U/mL) and 2.1 ng/mL (normal range, 0–5.0 ng/mL), respectively. No abnormal findings were observed in the blood count and biochemical examination.
Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract revealed a 20-mm raised lesion with a slight central depression in the duodenum, opposite the duodenum papilla of the second portion of the duodenum. We performed a biopsy, and no definite evidence of malignancy was identified. However, mucosal epithelial erosions and inflammatory cell infiltration were observed.
Based on the ultrasound-guided endoscopic examination , we concluded that the lesion was an ischemic tumor of submucosal origin, and that the depth of invasion was until the muscularis mucosa. Malignant findings were not identified in the previous biopsy; thus, we performed a bowel biopsy.
The bowel biopsy revealed tumor cells composed of proliferating atypical cells with a prominent nucleolus in a large nucleus and an acidophilic cytoplasm. Immunostaining was positive for CD68 and CD163 and negative for CD1a, CD21, HMB45, and S-100 protein. Abdominal sonography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no enlargement and distant metastasis to the lymph nodes. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed a mildly high maximum standardized uptake value (SUV-MAX) of 4.2 for the tumor site. Accumulation was absent in other sites apart from the tumor.
A diagnosis of primary HS of duodenal origin was made based on these findings, and surgery was chosen as the primary treatment. The tumor diameter was relatively small, and it was predicted that the tumor had invaded the muscularis. Moreover, no malignancy was found during imaging; hence, lymph node dissection was considered unnecessary. The duodenal segmental resection was limited to the duodenal papilla, and the tumor was enucleated with a secure margin.
The gross examination showed a yellowish white mass lesion, 16 × 8 mm in size, histologically extending from the lamina propria to the muscularis mucosa . Additionally, significant hyperplasia of atypical tumor cells with acidophilic cytoplasms was detected. The stump of the resected specimen was tumor negative. Immunostaining was positive for CD68, CD163, CD4, CD5, CD15, and CD45 and negative for CD1a, CD21, CD34, MPO, and S-100 protein . The Ki-67 positivity rate was approximately 20%. There was no evidence of lymphatic or venous invasion. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with HS.
The patient’s postoperative course was insignificant, and she was discharged on day 15 after surgery.
Ten months after the surgery, enlarged lymph nodes were detected in the dorsum of the pancreatic uncus on CT . The lymph nodes showed hypointensity on diffusion-weighted MRI, and a recurrence of HS was suspected. The SUV-MAX on PET was 10.4. Since no other recurrent lesions (except these enlarged lymph nodes) were identified by various examinations, re-excision was chosen as the principal treatment, and a pancreaticoduodenectomy with lymph node dissection was performed. The lymph nodes around the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the hepatic artery were dissected.
Significant hyperplasia of blasts with an acidophilic cytoplasm, similar to that in the primary tumor, was noted during the pathological examination of the enlarged dorsal caput pancreatic lymph nodes; immunostaining was positive for CD68, CD163, CD4, CD5, CD15, and CD45 and negative for CD1a, CD21, CD34, MPO, and S-100 protein. Thus, we confirmed lymph node recurrence of the primary HS. Additionally, enlargement of the lymph nodes near the circumference of the SMA and the dorsal caput pancreatic lymph nodes were noted macroscopically; however, pathological examination revealed neoplastic tissue only in the dorsal caput pancreatic lymph nodes. There was no evidence of lymphatic or venous invasion. At the time of writing this case report, 11 months have passed since the recurrence; the patient is alive and has not experienced another recurrence.