We present the case of a 30-year-old Indian male health care worker working as laboratory attendant at the COVID-19 lab at our institute. On 24 June 2020, he presented with fever and flu-like symptoms at the fever clinic. He was thoroughly examined by the physician, and in view of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for COVID-19 was suggested. His nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were collected in viral transport media (VTM) and immediately transported to the COVID-19 laboratory. RNA was extracted from the sample using the QIAamp Viral (Ribonucleic acid) RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany), and RT-PCR was performed using the LabGun COVID-19 RT-PCR Kit (Lab Genomics, Republic of Korea).
The RT-PCR results showed a cutoff threshold (ct value) for the envelope gene (E-gene) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) gene of 21 and 20, respectively, indicating COVID-19 positivity. In view of the ongoing admission policy issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi, India, in June 2020, he was immediately transferred to the COVID-19 ward of our hospital.
He was stable upon admission to the COVID ward. There was no significant medical history or history of any medical intervention. General physical examination showed no abnormalities; he was responding well to all commands and was cooperating with the treating physicians. No sign of breathlessness was seen, and oxygen saturation of 99% was maintained on room air. His chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), and routine investigations including complete blood count, liver function test, renal function test, and inflammatory markers including C-reactive protein, ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, and coagulation profile were all within normal limits.
He was provided standard supportive treatment with paracetamol, vitamin C with zinc supplementation, and loading dose of hydroxychloroquine 400 mg twice a day followed by 200 mg once daily for 10 days. Repeat swabs were collected for real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on the 10th day and reported negative by the laboratory. A repeat sample was collected the next day and again returned negative results. In view of two negative RT-PCR results, he was discharged and advised to adhere to home quarantine for 1 week, and rejoined the duty after completing home quarantine. On day 30 after the initial diagnosis of COVID-19, a blood sample was collected for SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody assay using the Abbott ARCHITECT chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA), and showed IgG antibody negativity. For the next 2 months the patient was healthy and experienced no post-COVID complications. However, approximately 90 days after his initial illness, he again developed flu-like symptoms with high-grade fever, severe myalgia, anosmia, and loss of taste. COVID-19 RT-PCR was again performed using the same kit, and showed positive results, with E-gene and RdRP cutoff threshold of 21 and 23, respectively.
General physical examination showed no abnormalities, and oxygen saturation of 100% was maintained on room air. His chest X-ray, ECG, and routine investigations were within normal limits. The patient expressed his unwillingness for hospital admission, and in view of the current Indian governmental policy he was advised to undergo home quarantine. He was provided supportive treatment and ivermectin 12 mg tablets taken orally once daily for 3 days. He responded well to the treatment, and on the 10th day of his illness, repeat samples for COVID-19 RT-PCR were negative. Currently, 6 months after reinfection, he is doing well; as a health care worker, he is actively involved in the COVID-19 laboratory. On day 30 of the second episode of COVID-19, a blood sample was retested for SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody using the Abbott ARCHITECT CLIA, and this time the antibodies were detectable at a concentration of 2.6 at index (sample/calibrator), and were considered positive according to the manufacturer's recommendations (positive ≥ 1.4).