A young female patient (27 years old) presented at the Emergency Department of Dhaka Medical College Hospital on November 2020 with a severe headache associated with vertigo and vomiting. The neurological assessment revealed average intelligence and marked cerebellar ataxia. Papilledema was noted on fundoscopy. She had 2 years of history of headache with nausea. After primary resuscitation, detailed history and examination was carried out and previous records were checked. Clinical examination revealed mild anemia and firm flat-topped brownish papules over the face and hyperkeratosis over several areas in the body. Multiple lipomas were palpated in the limbs and torso. She also had neck swelling. Physical examination findings are shown in . Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mildly heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere with significant compression over pons and causing tri-ventriculomegaly [ and ]. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan T1-weighted image film revealed mixed intensity posterior fossa lesion and T2-weighted image film revealed an inhomogeneous hyperintense lesion with almost preserved cerebellar cortical striations . Initially, we thought it to be a glioma or medulloblastoma from radiological imaging. However, we also kept LDD as a differential diagnosis due to the lesions classical appearance as seen in MRI.
The patient also gave us a recent history of cholecystectomy due to cholelithiasis. Before making the diagnosis of cholelithiasis, an ultrasonogram (USG) was done due to her complain of frequent abdominal pain . The resected gallbladder specimen revealed multiple adenomatous polyps and was also confirmed in histopathology. On breast examination, lumps palpated on both sides which were later investigated with USG revealed normal breast. Thyroid function was normal . shows the USG of neck illustrating multinodular goiter with thyroiditis.
The patient was monitored closely to figure out the treatment plan. With decisions from a multidisciplinary medical board, our patient underwent surgical excision of the posterior fossa lesion through suboccipital craniotomy which resulted in improvement of cerebellar symptoms. The patient underwent total resection of the cerebellar lesion. shows a postoperative CT scan. The subsequent histopathology of the resection lesion confirmed it to be a case of LDD . It revealed derangement of the normal laminar cellular organization of the cerebellum. There was thickening of the outer molecular cell layer, loss of the middle Purkinje cell layer, and infiltration of the inner granular cell layer with dysplastic ganglion cells of various sizes and abundance of fibrillary astrocytes. These appearances went in favor of dysplastic gangliocytoma or LDD (differential diagnosis: fibrillary astrocytoma). As genetic testing is readily not that available and also very expensive in Bangladesh, the striated appearance of the affected side of the cerebellum, seen through MRI, is subjected to appear as one of the strongest indicators of LDD here. LDD has a very strong correlation with CS as described in the earlier section and our patient physical examination findings with clinical history suggest CS. All the findings of our patient going in favor of our diagnosis of CS are illustrated in . Finally, all these clinical findings lead to a diagnosis of CS. The patient is on our follow-up and taking treatments accordingly. She took her last follow-up with us in June 2023.