We present a case of a 66-year-old Turkish female with the multicentric, hyaline vascular variant of CD that associated with diffuse large B cell lymphoma. She applied to our center in January 2006, with bilateral cervical masses which have persisted two years since the initial diagnosis and progressively growed. She had dyspnea and pain due to the enlarged lymph nodes. She had also a history of constitutional symptoms such as weight loss and night sweats. Biopsies had been performed form multiple cervical nodes. Pathologic examination of the resected nodes had been reported as reactive lymph node hyperplasia and she had been followed up without any treatment. Her complaints had persisted and an excisional biopsy of a supraclavicular lymph node had been obtained in March 2005. Pathologic examination of the node had been reported as the hyaline vascular variant of CD. A complete physical examination was performed at presentation which revealed multiple submandibular, pre-postauricular, supraclavicular lymphadenopathies. They were freely movable in the subcutaneous space, non-tender, rubbery and the biggest one was 3 × 2 cm in diameter. On examination, there was no ulceration, retraction, skin dimpling and discharge was not expressed. Otorhinolaryngologic examination was normal and no hepatosplenomegaly was detected. There was bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy. Cranial nerve examination was normal. Complete blood count, routine biochemical tests and Ig G, A, M, kappa, lambda levels were within normal limits. EBV, HHV8 and HIV serology were negative. In the bone marrow evaluation (aspiration and biopsy) no signs of lymphoma involvement were demonstrated. Bone marrow assessment by flow cytometry revealed neoplastic cells positive for CD19, CD20, CD22, CD45 and CD10 and negative for CD2, CD3, CD5 and CD138. Computed tomographic scan showed the presence of multiple enlarged lymph nodes of the head and neck (parotid, submandibular, anterior and posterior cervical nodes) and cervical lymph node conglomeration in diameter of 3 × 2 cm, which was narrowing the airway at the oropharyngeal level Thoracic CT findings consisted of enlarged, conglomerated mediastinal, prevascular, paratracheal, bilateral hiler and subcarinal lymph nodes and a subpleural node, 1 cm in diameter, at the medio-basal segment of the left lower lobe (,). Abdominal computed tomography revealed conglomerated lymphadenopaties in both inguinal areas. The involved nodes were resected and they were taken under histopathologic evaluation. Six capsulated lymph nodes were macroscopically observed, the biggest 3 × 2 cm, and the smallest 1 × 1 cm in diameter. Microscopic appearance of paraffin sections showed hyperplastic lymph nodes with atrophic germinal centers. These lymph nodes had a prominent proliferation of hyalinized follicles with marked interfollicular vascular proliferation. Some of the resected nodes were totally ruined. Analysis of cell surface markers on reactive lymph nodes revealed the lack of CD30, CD99, CD4, CD8, CD3, CD5, and also the expression of CD20-CD79a on atypic cells . Both morphologic and immunophenotypic features suggested us associated with CD to B cell lymphoma. The patient was classified as having stage 3B disease. When the diagnosis was established she received radiotherapy (a total dose of 4000 cGy) to cervical area as initial treatment. RT was followed by six cycles of CHOP chemotherapy (Cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2/day, Doxorubicin 50 mg/m2/day, Vincristine 1.4 mg/m2/day and Prednisone 100 mg/day). Following the treatment with radiotherapy and aggressive combination chemotherapy a durable complete response was achieved. The patient is now in complete remission with a follow-up of 2 years.