A 40-year-old woman with ESRD secondary to IgA-nephritis, who had been on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) for 24 mo, was admitted to our emergency department in September 2016 with continuously worsening bilateral immobilizing hip pain since 4 mo.
Her CAPD treatment regime was as follows: Four cycles involving a total dialysate volume of 8000 mL/24 h, three daytime exchanges and one nighttime exchange. The daytime dialysate bags consisted of 1x Dianeal PDG4 1.36%, 2x Dianeal PDG4 2.27% glycose solution containing a calcium concentration of 1.25 mmol/L and 1x overnight extraneal icodextrin solution containing a calcium concentration of 1.75 mmol/L. The CAPD efficacy was measured by peritoneal Kt/V (reference range > 1.7) and was performed on weekly basis. Before the hospital admission, tests had indicated a 24-h urine output of 900 mL, 24-h ultrafiltration rate of 900 mL and a peritoneal Kt/V of 1.32 showing insufficient dialysis quality with clinical signs of uremia. The overall situation was further complicated by the fact that her medical treatment compliance was doubtful, and her peritoneal Kt/V had been successively worsening for the previous 7 mo (for instance, 5 mo before admission, peritoneal Kt/V was indicated at 1.96). For the 4 mo prior to her diagnosis, she had complained of progressive, bilateral pain and immobility of her hips and having progressive, palpable painful indurations around her gluteal and hip regions. She had been taking vitamin D analogues: 1, 25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol at a dose of 0.5 µg orally twice a week for 14 mo and cholecalciferol at a dose of 20000 IE orally every 14 d for 20 mo due to low vitamin D3 level associated with increasing parathormone levels. She had been on phosphate binders: calcium acetate with a total daily dose of 1900 mg for 26 mo and sevelamer carbonate with a total daily dose of 3200 mg for 1 mo.
Her past medical history showed preeclampsia associated with HELLP syndrome in September 2005 and usual ESRD comorbidities as follows: Renal anemia, arterial hypertension and hyperparathyroidism as well as a severe CAPD associated peritonitis (S. aureus) in December 2015.
Family history was positive for chronic kidney disease of unknown etiology in her aunt and cousin.
At admission, her physical examination showed reduced mobility of her hip joints associated with swelling and tenderness on percussion.
Her laboratory findings showed increased serum calcium, phosphate and parathormone levels . Her calcitriol level was at the lower reference range at 20 ng/mL 20 d after admission.
A computed tomography scan of her pelvic region at admission showed severe bilateral manifestation of tumoral calcinosis, mainly around the trochanter major .
Subsequently, the vitamin D analogue therapy was discontinued. She started lanthan(III)-carbonate, discontinued sevelamer carbonate and started an in-hospital low-calcium and low-phosphate diet. Furthermore, due to the severity of the clinical findings and insufficient quality of CAPD, she was instantly switched to daily hemodialysis (HD). Her HD schedule involved 5-h sessions six times weekly at a 250 mL/min blood pump speed and 500 mL/min dialysate pump speed with the following dialysate composition: Sodium 138 mmol/L, calcium 1.0 mmol/L and bicarbonate 32 mmol/L. The follow-up computed tomography scans, one at 2 mo and another at 4 mo after initial diagnosis, demonstrated significant improvement in her tumoral calcinosis. Based on these findings the above-mentioned HD schedule was subsequently reduced to 5-h sessions 3x weekly for the next 3 mo followed by a nighttime HD schedule of 7-h sessions 3x weekly until the present day.
The follow-up computed tomography scan at 11 mo after initial diagnosis revealed complete remission of the tumoral calcinosis along with normal calcium levels. However, hyperphosphatemia and elevated parathormone levels remained. Due to persistent therapy-refractory tertiary hyperparathyroidism and despite the therapy with etelcalcetid and cinacalcet hydrochloride, the patient underwent a total parathyroidectomy 22 mo after the initial diagnosis and started calcium acetate with a total daily dose of 1900 mg with adequate response to treatment. Follow-up with the patient has, at the time of publication, reached a total of 34 mo with normal range values of calcium, phosphate, Ca x P product, parathormone and calcitriol. The patient is currently listed for kidney transplantation.