An 84-year-old man presented with a 3-day history of fevers (38.4°C) and general malaise. He had a transfemoral TAVR (Lotus valve system, Boston Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) for symptomatic severe aortic stenosis with preserved left ventricular function, 11 months prior. His comorbidities included previous coronary stenting, atrial fibrillation, stroke, and hypertension. There were no discernible risk factors for infective endocarditis. His medications included rivaroxaban, bisoprolol, and irbesartan. He presented in shock (blood pressure 70/33 mmHg and heart rate 102 b.p.m.) and was successfully resuscitated with crystalloids. Cardiac examination revealed an ejection systolic murmur without peripheral stigmata of endocarditis.
His initial blood tests revealed neutrophilia 11.99 × 109/L (reference range 4.0–11.0 × 109/L) and a C-reactive protein of 149 mg/L (reference range 0–5 mg/L). A chest X-ray and urine specimen did not demonstrate any abnormalities. Multiple blood cultures from separate sites were positive for Gram-positive cocci, with intravenous ampicillin and gentamicin being commenced. This later cultured positive for Enterococcus faecium, and his antibiotic regimen was changed to intravenous vancomycin and gentamicin once sensitivities returned.
A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a significant increase in mean TAVR prosthesis gradient from 9 mmHg (at 6 months following TAVR) to 40 mmHg with thickened prosthesis leaflets. A transoesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated a mobile linear echo density on the anterior cusp, strongly suggestive of infective endocarditis. The leaflets appeared abnormally thickened and variegated, though prosthesis shadowing artefact limited accurate assessment . Computed tomography imaging (320 slice Aquilion One Vision, Toshiba, Tokyo) was performed to provide further assessment of the leaflet morphology and motion. This revealed features consistent with leaflet thrombosis, exhibiting both hypo-attenuated leaflet thickening (HALT) and reduced leaflet motion (RELM) on four-dimensional images (, Video 1).
He was commenced on warfarin (target International Normalized Ratio 2.5–3.0), and rivaroxaban was ceased. The heart team deemed he was high risk for aortic valve surgery and a decision was made to manage conservatively as inflammatory markers and repeat cultures confirmed ongoing response to antibiotics. His hospital stay was protracted from complications including decompensated heart failure, renal impairment from sepsis and general deconditioning. Repeat echocardiography revealed a reduction in valve gradient to 20 mmHg after 2 weeks, and normalization of the gradient (5 mmHg) and leaflet morphology after 6 weeks of antibiotics and warfarin therapy (, , Videos 2 and 3). The patient recovered well and was asymptomatic at 6 weeks of follow-up.