A 39-year-old male Chinese patient presented to our hospital complaining of progressively decreased vision in his right eye, relating it to a high-voltage electrical injury occurring three months before. The accident occurred upon completion of his work under 35KV high-voltage wires. In his words, after straightening up from a prostrate posture, he immediately felt his body being pulled upward to the wires and was struck instantly. Because of the subsequent muscular contraction induced by the strike, he hit his right hip on a hard object nearby, after which his body was intercepted and he fell from the platform. He was immediately taken to the local hospital by ambulance in an unconscious state and admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) with a diagnosis of multiple systemic skin burns and blunt traumas caused by electrical shock. Two days later, he regained consciousness and, apart from other systemic signs, tearing watery red eyes were noted by the ICU doctors. This condition was not considered to be severe and, without an ophthalmological consultation, our patient was discharged at a later date.
During the period of hospitalization and recuperation at home, our patient did not pay attention to a slight distortion in his eyesight. However, after returning to work, and two weeks before presenting to our hospital, he found his vision gradually worsening.
At our hospital, a physical examination revealed multiple skin burns and scarring, especially around his right hip. His visual acuity was 20/100 in his right eye and 20/40 in his left. His intraocular pressure was measured using a non-contact puff tonometer, revealing a pressure of 13mmHg in his right eye and 15mmHg in his left. Slit lamp examination found the following in both eyes: transparent cornea, hyperemic conjunctiva, no keratic precipitates, normal anterior chamber depth, negative Tyndall sign, normal-shaped iris, no adhesions around the pupil, anterior subcapsular opacities in the lens, and vitreous detachment. Indirect ophthalmoscopy showed normal optic discs with clear boundaries, retinal hemorrhages and a well-defined ‘cuff’ at the macula . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) examination revealed a disruption of the retinal layers at the fovea, with a thin remainder of the internal limiting membrane, the so-called roof, surrounded by obviously edematous macula . A diagnosis of impending macular hole and electric cataract was established.
Our patient underwent pars plana vitrectomy in his right eye, with internal limiting membrane peeling, C3F8 gas tamponade with face-down positioning and, finally, an intraocular injection of 0.05ml (2mg) triamcinolone acetonide (TA). One week postoperatively, the macular hole was closed with one third gas residue in his vitreous cavity ; his visual acuity was 20/63. We obtained our patient’s consent prior to the procedure.