A 30-yr-old woman with oligomenorrhea, clinical hirsutism, and a history of primary infertility for six years was referred to our institute from another province for oocyte retrieval. Laparotomy was performed 10 years prior for an ovarian cyst. The results revealed GTB and granulomatous disease with caseous necrosis. She underwent anti-TB treatment for six months.
At the first admission in our institute, she had a negative tuberculin test (PPD) and a normal chest X-ray with no clinical evidence of TB. Hormonal evaluation on day 3 of the menstrual cycle showed a follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level of 6.02 mIU/ml and luteinizing hormone (LH) level of 7.2 mIU/ml. Vaginal ultrasound results revealed a 10-mm hypoechogenic structure in the right adnexa that agreed with a right hydrosalpinx . Hysterosalpingography (HSG) results showed a bilateral hydrosalpinx . Infertility workup for the husband indicated that he had a normal sperm analysis according to the World Health Organization criteria (5). The patient underwent ovarian stimulation according to the standard long protocol where she received 0.1 mg/day Decapeptyl (Ipsen Pharma Biotech, France) from day 20 of the pre-stimulation cycle until the day of the hCG injection. Once the down-regulation was confirmed, from day 3 of the new menstrual cycle, she received subcutaneous injections of 2 ampules/day of Gonal-F (Merck Serono, Darmstadt, Germany). Follicular growth was monitored by serial transvaginal ultrasound and repeated until the detection of at least three follicles 18 mm in diameter. At that time, the patient received an intramuscular injection of hCG (10000 IU). After 36 hours, 21 oocytes were retrieved. Of these, 15 oocytes were fertilized and cleaved. Because of the risk for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, all embryos were frozen on the third day. After three months, the patient elected to undergo a laparoscopy/hysteroscopy due to hydrosalpinx (es). Laparoscopic findings included dense adhesions of the pelvic organs and a frozen pelvis. The surgeon could not perform a salpingectomy or proximal tubal occlusion so both ostium of the uterine tube were cauterized by hysteroscopy according to a previously reported procedure (6). However, direct smear and bacterial culture of endometrial tissue and evaluation of tissue by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were negative for Mycobacterium TB. After eight months, the patient underwent FET. After GnRh agonist down-regulation, she received estradiol valerate (Aburaihan Co., Iran) as hormone replacement therapy in the following doses: 4 mg/day for the first six days, followed by 6 mg/day for another six days, until endometrial thickness reached 9 mm. When the optimal endometrial thickness was obtained, intramuscular progesterone (100 mg; Aburaihan Co, Iran) was administered and three days later, two good-quality embryos were transferred. The luteal phase was supported with estradiol and progesterone. However, she did not achieve pregnancy. One year later the patient underwent a laparoscopy. A skillful laparoscopist carried out the operation. There was a severe dense pelvic adhesion and frozen pelvis . After adhesiolysis, she had a bilateral hydrosalpinx and both tubes were removed. The next day, the patient was released without any problem. Surgical specimens were collected and stained with hematoxylin and eosin and evaluated with light microscopy. We observed cystically dilated glands surrounded by hypertrophic smooth muscle fibers, which demonstrated bilateral hydrosalpingitis isthmica nodosa . After one year, she underwent a second artificial FET, which was similar to the previous transfer. When the endometrial thickness reached 9.5 mm, we transferred three high-quality embryos. The luteal phase was supported by 100 mg of daily progesterone injections (Aburaihan Co., Tehran, Iran). Biochemical pregnancy was detected by a β-hCG test 2 wk after the embryo transfer and clinical pregnancy was confirmed by the presence of a gestational sac with fetal echoes at 6 wk after embryo transfer. The patient was followed and had a cesarean delivery at 38 wk of gestation. Her child was a healthy girl who weighed 3,100 g.
The patient signed the written informed consent for reporting this case.