A 48-year-old man with ESRD secondary to diabetic nephropathy was admitted for initiation of renal replacement therapy. He had undergone 36 cycles (36 hours of 1 L/h cycle) of acute PD, through a temporary PD catheter inserted through the infra-umbilical approach, at another center 10 days prior and presented to us for maintenance dialysis. After discussing the options, he was started on hemodialysis through a temporary catheter and was planned to start on CAPD. He had a history of diabetic retinopathy and neuropathy. He did not have any history or symptoms suggestive of neurogenic bladder.
The patient underwent 3 sessions of hemodialysis and was planned for CAPD catheter insertion with vancomycin prophylaxis. As per protocol, he was advised to void his bladder completely and to pass stools before insertion. An infraumbilical midline incision was made under local anesthesia and IV sedation, an 18-G introducer needle was inserted through the rectus sheath until it reached the peritoneal cavity, and 1.5 L of peritoneal dialysate was instilled intraperitoneally. After instillation of fluid, a guidewire was passed through the needle, with the tip directed towards the suprapubic region. The needle was removed, the tract was dilated using a 16 Fr dilator followed by insertion of a 16 Fr peel away sheath/dilator. The guidewire was removed followed by the dilator, and Tenckhoff swan-neck double-cuff straight catheter was inserted through the peel away sheath. The sheath was peeled away, and a subcutaneous tunnel was created with the exit site facing down and out towards the left iliac fossa. The deep cuff was positioned over the peritoneum, and the superficial cuff was placed in the tunnel. The incision site was sutured in layers. Postprocedure, the inflow and outflow were found to flow without resistance, and the catheter was brought out through a left-sided tunnel. A 500-mL flush was given, and good inflow and outflow were noted. The outflow was initially blood-mixed, followed by drainage of clear fluid. There were no complications during the immediate postoperative period. With a plain abdominal radiograph, the position of the catheter tip was confirmed to be in pelvis . Ultrasonography was not used during the procedure due to logistic reasons.
On the 3rd day after insertion, after instillation of 500 mL of PD fluid, the patient complained of urinary urgency with an increase in urinary volume to 700 – 800 mL/day from his baseline of 300 – 400 mL/day. Also, there was decrease in the outflow volume with drainage of only 100 mL following instillation of 500 mL of PD fluid. With the increase in the inflow volume, there was a significant increase in his urine volume. Urine analysis was done to look for glycosuria, which showed a 3(+) on dipstick, from his baseline glycosuria of 1(+). He was asked to void after instilling 500 mL PD fluid through the PD catheter, and urinary creatinine testing was done, which was found to be absent. A possibility of peritoneovesical fistula was considered, and a cystogram was planned. The instilled fluid presumably entered predominantly into the urinary bladder through the side holes and led us to presume that the PD catheter could be in the preperitoneal location. Urine culture and PD fluid cultures were sent, which revealed growth of enterococcus (> 105 colony forming units/mL), and he was treated with vancomycin intraperitoneally (IP) and broad-spectrum antibiotics intravenously.
The cystogram revealed a smooth-walled bladder, with no intraperitoneal leak of the contrast, and the catheter abutting the bladder wall . A plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed to confirm the position . The catheter was seen to be piercing the anterior abdominal wall and entering the bladder anteriorly, perforating and coursing through the bladder before exiting through the posterior wall, with the tip in the rectovesical fossa. PD was discontinued, and he was continued on hemodialysis through a temporary femoral access catheter. After discussion with the urologists, it was planned to remove the catheter, followed by reinsertion at a later date, with conservative management for the bladder perforation. With cessation of PD, there was decrease in urine output to ~ 50 – 100 mL/day, and a repeat urine routine performed 3 days later showed reduction in pyuria (from plenty of white blood cells/high power field to 6 – 8 WBC/HPF).
The options were discussed with the patient, and the need for a vascular access was explained. However, due to logistic reasons, an attempt was planned towards catheter salvage. He was planned for catheter repositioning using fluoroscopic guidance under the cover of intravenous and intraperitoneal broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Using fluoroscopy with contrast (urograffin), first the bladder perforation was confirmed. The infraumbilical incision was re-explored under local anesthesia, while leaving the tunnel in situ. The deep cuff was identified, and the PD catheter was pulled back by ~ 6 cm (as measured by the prior abdominal CT image). Contrast was injected through the catheter, and it was confirmed to be intraperitoneal with no filling up of the urinary bladder. Using a guide wire, the catheter was redirected towards the right iliac fossa, and the position confirmed. On subsequent contrast injection through the PD catheter, the intraperitoneal nature and absence of bladder filling was confirmed. The bladder was later filled up with contrast, and there was no presence of any leaks . The initial bladder perforation could have been an intraperitoneal perforation since pulling back and re-positioning the catheter, without any new entry into the peritoneum, confirmed it to be in the peritoneal cavity.
The patient was continued on IV antibiotics for 5 days, IP ceftazidime for a week, and IP vancomycin for 21 days, and was continued on hemodialysis. IP vancomycin was given in a single dwell (1,000 mL) for 6 hours every day. One week post repositioning, he was started on low-volume CAPD and discharged, and a repeat urine and peritoneal fluid culture were sterile. He was continued on Foley’s catheter for 4 weeks, with a residual urine output of ~ 200 – 300 mL/day. At 9-month follow-up, the patient is comfortable with CAPD 3 exchanges/day with good ultrafiltration (~ 1.4 L/day), and no change in urinary volume, with no further episodes of peritonitis.