A 49-year-old male was presented to our emergency department as a stroke alert from another hospital of our country, with 2 h history of acute onset of aphasia and right hemiplegia. On neurological examination, the patient was alert, obeys commands, pupils had a diameter bilaterally of 4 mm and were both reactive to light, with right hemiplegia, motor aphasia, left head and eyes deviation, and right indifferent plantar reflex. There was no past history of fever nor seizures.
His wife referred that 3 months ago he experienced a transient ischemic attack with dysarthria, right hemiparesis and right hemihypesthesia which lasted 15 min, but he did not see any doctor and was left untreated. She also referred that 3 years ago, he was hospitalized and treated for meningitis but with no evidence or medical files at hand.
Regarding the fact that it had an acute onset, the clinical presentation was stroke-like, a head computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and after hemorrhage was excluded from the study, intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) with Alteplase was started. At 15 min of the procedure, we noticed mild gingival bleeding and infusion of Alteplase was interrupted. After the bleeding was stopped, the patient was stable hemodynamically and started perseverating only a few words. One hour later, he had an episode of explosive vomiting and shivering, and his body temperature started to increase to 37.5°C. Two hours later, a focal myoclonic seizure of right arm was observed; therefore, the patient was set under treatment with midazolam i/v.
Later on that day, fluctuations of clinical symptoms were observed, the patient became somnolent, opened eyes only after repetitive verbal stimulus, did not obey any command, and motor aphasia was present again. Even though he was treated with antipyretics, shivering did not stop, and he became febrile to 39.5°C, and irresponsive to treatment. Hemodynamically, he showed a hypotension (90/60 mmHg) and tachycardia 130 beats/min. Over the next 12 h, the myoclonic seizures became more frequent and they were generalized twice. He became more somnolent and opened eyes only to painful stimuli, and the only motor response seen was a flexion response of the right superior limb to pain. Viral encephalitis was suspected and empiric treatment with intravenous acyclovir was started for HSVE.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cortical enhancement in the left frontal lobe in the diffusion-weighted images (DWIs) [ and ]. On day 3 of admission, the patient became alert, agitated, confused, started having visual and auditory hallucinations, while no motor deficits were seen. A lumbar tap was performed to collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing. CSF was clear; the pressure was 210 mm H2O (range 70–180); pleocytosis 45 cells/mm3 (range <5); proteinorrhachia 65 mg/dL (range >40) and normal range glycorrhachia compared with blood glycemia. The serological diagnosis of HSV infection was based on identification of viral DNA with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the CSF.
The patient was treated with intravenous acyclovir for 21 days with a dose of 10 mg/kg 3 times daily, accordingly with suggested guidelines. In the meantime, he became afebrile at the end of the 1st week of treatment, and never had a seizure or seizure-like episode. At the beginning of the 2nd week, an electroencephalography was registered, suggesting complex discharges and slow waves bilaterally in the frontal areas .A control brain CT was performed 2 days before the end of the antiviral therapy and his discharge, with findings considered as radiologically normal . The patient was discharged in a stable condition 2 days after the ending of the antiviral therapy, he showed a mild cognitive impairment on 3-month follow-up.