During the COVID-19 pandemic, a six-year-old Black female presented to an urban ED after an episode of syncope with two days of subjective fevers, sore throat, abdominal pain, and a newly developing rash. History was obtained from her parents, who reported loss of appetite and increased fatigue. Her parents were treating her fever with acetaminophen, but they became concerned when the patient had a brief episode of syncope when attempting to stand. Prior to this illness, she had no remarkable past medical history and was up to date with vaccinations. Family was unaware of any sick contacts.
The patient was tired on examination, but appropriately interactive. She had a fever of 39.5° Celsius (C) and was tachycardic with a heart rate of 138 beats per minute (bpm). Other vitals were unremarkable. Her fever defervesced to 36.8°C with acetaminophen and ibuprofen, and the heart rate subsequently normalized. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was not obtained due to clinical impression that orthostasis was secondary to dehydration. The abdominal examination was benign, her throat was minimally erythematous, and her lips were cracked. She did not have lymphadenopathy. Streptococcal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing (rapid strep) was positive. On reevaluation, a blanchable erythematous rash initially present on her hands and abdomen had spread to her bilateral lower extremities and the dorsum of her feet. A diagnosis of early KD was considered due to the high fever and cutaneous symptoms, but the patient did not meet criteria for diagnosis. She was given amoxicillin and close follow-up.
The patient returned to the ED three days later with persistent fever and periumbilical abdominal pain, as well as new-onset difficulty breathing, bilateral conjunctivitis, and swollen hands. She had delayed capillary refill, and she was tachypneic and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 70/40 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). An ECG revealed a heart rate of 116 bpm (reference [ref] range 75–115 bpm) with a prolonged PR interval of 188 milliseconds (ms) (90–170 ms) consistent with first-degree atrioventricular block . Labs were pertinent for ferritin 699 nanograms (ng) per milliliter (mL) (ref: 11–306.8 ng/mL); albumin 3.8 gram (gm) per deciliter (dL) (ref: 3.8–4.7 gm/dL); lactate dehydrogenase 794 units (U) per liter (L) (ref: 140–271 U/L); blood urea nitrogen 33 milligrams (mg)/dL (ref: 7–25 mg/dL); creatinine 1.09 mg/dL (ref: 0.3–0.6 mg/dL), high-sensitivity troponin 114 ng/L (ref: 3–17 ng/L), D dimer 4.21 mg/L (ref: <0.5 mg/L); fibrinogen 834 mg/dL (ref: 186–466 mg/dL); C-reactive protein 450 mg/L (ref: <5.0 mg/L); and hyponatremia with a serum sodium of 118 millimoles (mmol)/L (ref: 136–145 mmol/L). Central and arterial lines were placed, and epinephrine and dopamine drips were started after point-of-care ultrasound revealed diminished left heart function.
A comprehensive cardiac echocardiogram (echo) was obtained upon admission that revealed mildly decreased left ventricular (LV) function, septal hypokinesis, and mild mitral valve (MV) insufficiency with an ejection fraction (EF) of 59%. There were no coronary artery aneurysms. She was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit for cardiogenic shock vs septic shock from KD vs toxic shock syndrome. High-dose aspirin 10 mg/kilogram (kg) every six hours by mouth and intravenous (IV) immunoglobulin 2 cubic centimeter (cc)/kg were initiated along with broad-spectrum antibiotics. COVID-19 PCR testing was positive. Overnight, the patient became increasingly hypoxic and had an accelerated junctional rhythm before developing a bradyarrhythmia, seizure-like activity, and pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest with return of spontaneous circulation in five minutes. Patient was intubated, sedated, and had several runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia before VA-ECMO therapy was initiated for cardiogenic shock.
Patient was successfully taken off ECMO after a course of approximately six days. LV dysfunction and renal failure resolved with repeat comprehensive echo revealing mild concentric LV hypertrophy, normal LV function, trivial MV insufficiency, and mild pulmonary valve insufficiency with an EF of 69%. On discharge, neurological function was within normal limits and consistent with baseline mentation.