A 39-week gestation of male neonate weighing 3670 g was born in good general condition by vaginal delivery to a 39-year-old gravida 4, para 4 mother. The pregnancy was complicated by maternal diabetes. Apgar scores were 9 at first minute and then 9 and 10 at third and fifth minutes, respectively. Umbilical cord pH was measured at 7.13 (BE −9.8 mEq/l) and 7.14 (BE −9.3 mEq/l). The amniotic fluid was meconium-stained.
After delivery, the newborn presented tachypnea, radiological signs of pneumonia, and increased inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein concentration was 16.39 mg/l and white blood cell count was 22.66 G/l). Further investigation showed Proteus mirabilis from a throat swab and navel culture. The patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics for 7 days. According to the results of laboratory tests, the neuroinfection, TORCH (toxoplasmosis–other–rubella–cytomegalovirus–herpesviridae) infections, coagulation disorders and trombocytopenia, metabolic disorders, and selected genetic abnormalities (factor V Leiden 1601G > A polymorphism and MTHFR 677C > T; 1298A > C polymorphisms) were excluded.
Birth tremors of the upper and lower limbs as well as inconsolable cry were observed. On the third day of life, a single episode of focal seizures of the left upper limb, increased muscle tone in limbs (especially on the left side), excessive tendon reflexes, and neck stiffness were presented. The first cranial ultrasound was performed on the third day of life and revealed extension of the both right and left lateral ventricles with features of third stage IVH. In occipital areas, there were hemorrhagic foci (fourth stage IVH according to papilla criteria). In subsequent ultrasounds, we confirmed posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed in the right hemisphere of the brain on the border of the temporoparietal lobes, an intracerebral hematoma—transverse dimensions approximately 3 × 2 cm. A second, sized 2 × 1 cm was visible in the left temporal lobe, at the lower left corner of the lateral ventricle. The ventricular system was not displaced, supratentorially dilated with significant asymmetric dilation of lateral ventricles. Angio-MR showed the main intracranial arterial trunks. There was no evidence of significant vascular defect .