A 9-year-old Caucasian girl was referred to the Department of Paediatric Cardiology and Rheumatology of Medical University of Lodz with a history of bone pain for the last one month. The pain was localized in the lower extremities, waking up at night and making it difficult to walk. Any peripheral joint oedema had been observed. The patient was otherwise healthy, no fevers, chills or weight loss were reported. She had no family history of bone or joint abnormalities, including tumors. She had no history of trauma or any triggering factor for the onset of the pain.
At the time of initial evaluation, she was reporting pain throughout the day and night. Pain was quantified as 8 out of 10 in the visual analogue scale (VAS). The left ankle was slightly swollen and was tender to touch, but no increase of the local temperature was observed. The active and passive motion ranges of the lower extremity joints – such as hips, knees and ankles - were decreased, due to severe pain. In otherwise general physical exam including skin and neurological exam was normal, no infection foci were found elsewhere in the body.
Her initial blood work revealed high rates of inflammation markers (CRP 119,1 mg/l N < 5,0; ESR 135 mm/h) with normal hematological and biochemical parameters (including lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase or uric acid). At the day of admission, ultrasound examination of peripheral joints of the lower limbs was performed, no joint effusion and any other joint inflammation features were found. Empirical antibiotic (ceftriaxone) therapy together with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs was implemented, however, the inflammatory markers’ levels were worsening in the control laboratory tests. Antibiotic treatment was extended with aminoglycoside, the girl reported aggravating of the night pain, migrating from bone to bone, night sweats were additionally observed. Blood culture was negative, but serologic tests had detected positive antibody titers to various pathogens (EBV, Yersinia spp., Mycoplasma and Chlamydia pneumoniae, Salmonella spp., Borrelia burgdorferi) - that was probably associated with immunological disorders.
It was decided to perform isotope bone scan revealing increased uptake in the femur, humerus and tibia, that could correspond to bone inflammation. Despite prolonged antibiotic treatment, no therapeutic effect was achieved - inflammatory parameters were increasing, gradual anemization appeared. Ultrasound examination of peripheral joints was made again , showing a large progression of lesions. Destruction of distal metaphysis of the left tibia and the outline of the left femoral head was found with the inflammation features penetrating throughout the bone. A suspicion of proliferation process was made based on the radiograph and a computed tomography of the ankle area . It was decided to perform the bone marrow biopsy, which showed no significant abnormalities. No non-specific tumor markers (NSE, AFP, beta-HCG and chromogranin A) were found positive. NMR-DWIBS examination revealed numerous osteolytic foci suggesting a disseminated tumor process - with no apparent pathological mass in both the abdominal cavity and the chest. The decision was made to transfer the patient to the Department of Pediatric Oncology and Oncologic Surgery of Institute of Mother and Child in Warsaw, where the antibiotic treatment had been suspended and bone biopsy was performed. Since the malignancy was ruled out and no bacterial culture were positive, the diagnosis of CRMO was considered at this point. The girl was referred back to our Department, where the antibiotic treatment was stopped as ineffective, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication (naproxen) was again introduced. Due to the unsatisfactory control of the inflammatory process, systemic steroids and sodium pamidronate infusions were used, resulting in significant clinical improvement, relief of pain and decrease in the value of inflammation markers. NMR-DWIBS was performed after two cycles of treatment with bisphosphonates and revealed a large regression of osteolytic lesions including the major focus in the metaphysis of left tibia. No new osteolysis foci were observed.