A 66-year-old man was admitted to a non-academic ECMO centre for a high-risk coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). His previous history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, primary hypogonadism, a metabolic syndrome for which he used testosterone gel, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and a combined dyslipidaemia, depression for which he took venlafaxine. In addition, he was recently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for 7 weeks due to coronavirus disease (COVID-19). After he was discharged, he continued to experience dyspnoea. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed severe worsening of his LV ejection function (LVEF 15%). Coronary angiography followed, and significant three-vessel disease was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse viability and an LVEF of 21%. After he was discussed in the heart team for high-risk patients, he was accepted for a high-risk CABG within a few days.
During the CABG procedure, he experienced supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with loss of output, for which he received a temporary pacemaker (and a Swan Ganz catheter was placed). After admission to the ICU for post-operative monitoring, the patient showed haemodynamic and respiratory stability, with the only remarkable finding being a pericardial murmur. After extubation, he became hypotensive and experienced SVT with progressive cardiogenic shock and high doses of inotropes, which resulted in the implantation of a veno-arterial (VA) ECMO. Hereafter, Harlequin syndrome, which manifests as differential oxygen saturation between upper and lower parts of the body due to peripheral VA ECMO, was not expected due to peri-operative echocardiography showing acceptable unloading under inotropes. However, 2 days later, there were signs of refractory end-organ hypoxia, and a transthoracic echo showed a dilated LV with insufficient opening of the aortic valve, leading to implantation of an Impella CP. On the same day, continuous veno-venous haemodialysis (CVVHD) was started due to acute kidney injury.
Further respiratory failure was seen the following day and suspected for the development of an ARDS caused by pneumonia. X-ray showed pleural effusion and atelectasis in addition . We decided to prone the patient despite prolonged protective ventilation because of the decreased PF ratio (<100 mmHg). This finding was never described before in the literature, our country, or our centre. At that moment, ECMO blood flow was 2.7 L/min, and fractional oxygen needed 80% . The Impella unloaded the ventricle with 2.9 L/min (performance level 6). We mechanically ventilated the patient with a maximum FIO2 of 100%, giving 10 cmH20 positive end-expiratory pressure with peak pressures of 23 cmH20.
Two days later, we could explant the ECMO. Three days later, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed ground-glass opacification in all the lobes of the right lung and pleural effusion and atelectasis of the left lower lung . We proned the patient again due to respiratory failure, partially caused by immobilization of sputum while the Impella was unloading the ventricle with 2.5 L/min (performance level 4). Finally, after the second session of prone positioning, the patient’s respiratory metrics were stabilized, and we could wean off the Impella (1 day later) and stop the sedation. He could be woken up, but due to his ICU-acquired weakness, we performed a percutaneous tracheostomy to wean him from ventilatory support. He stayed for another 19 days in the ICU to wean from mechanical ventilation and to recover from ICU-acquired weakness. In addition, we could stop CVVHD, and there was no need for chronic renal replacement therapy. He was discharged to the cardiac care unit (CCU) for further optimization of his condition. After discharge, his cardiac function increased from severe LV dysfunction to moderate–severe LV dysfunction with an LV ejection fraction of 15% and 35%, respectively. At the CCU, he developed a fever, and a CT scan showed increased pleural effusion, which was deemed post-cardiac injury related. He received a thoracic drain and treatment with diuretics, leading to a stabilization of his clinical condition. He could be discharged to a revalidation facility without further complications. Five months after his discharge from the hospital, ambulatory rehabilitation could be started with swimming, walking, and cycling progression.