A 46-year-old Japanese woman underwent computed tomography (CT) or ultrasonography (US) examinations every year since the detection of a giant hepatic hemangioma . A follow-up CT scan incidentally detected a tumor that was approximately 1.5 cm in diameter at the angle of the stomach in the anterior gastric wall , which had not appeared in the CT image 1 year and 4 months previously . The subsequent examinations by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGE) and abdominal US revealed that it was a submucosal tumor (SMT) with homogeneous low echoes . Physical examination, biochemical data, tumor markers (including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), cancer antigen 125 (CA125), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)), and chest and abdominal X-ray films were all within normal limits. Endoscopic US (EUS) (20 MHz) was also performed to evaluate clinical characteristics of this tumor; it revealed that the tumor had developed from the fourth layer of the gastric wall, which corresponds to the muscular layer, and had homogeneous low echoes . A small amount of tissue sample was taken using the EUS-FNAB technique and was provided for pathological examinations. As a result, the pathological findings showed several spindle-shaped cells with small circular nuclei and a granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining revealed that S-100 was positive ; c-kit, CD34, and desmin were negative. Based on these results, the tumor was diagnosed as a GCT.
Conservative management was considered as a therapeutic option due to the benign nature of most GCTs; in addition, the tumor size was smaller than 2 cm and no swollen lymph nodes were observed. However, it was clear that this tumor was new and had grown quickly between CT examinations; thus, there was a possibility that this tumor was malignant. Consequently, we decided to resect the tumor using local resection without lymph node dissection. Considering the cosmetic appearance of the wound in the young female patient, we decided to use the SILS method to perform a minimally invasive surgery.
We placed a 3-cm skin incision on the transumbilical plane and equipped the incision site with the Lap Protector mini™ (Hakko Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and EZ access (Hakko Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). We used an 11-mm trocar and two 5-mm trocars and inserted them into the abdominal cavity through the EZ access. No other assist ports were placed. When the flexible scope for laparoscopic surgery was inserted into the abdominal cavity, the tumor could be seen at the angle of the anterior wall of the stomach as a small white colored nodule slightly protruding from the gastric wall. It was covered with a thin serosal capsule and had a smooth surface . The lesser omentum near the tumor was dissected using a bipolar-tissue sealing system (ENSEAL®G2 with Articulating head, Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., Cincinnati, OH) in order to perform complete resection with an adequate surgical margin. The cutting line was confirmed with forceps before resection of the tumor . After these procedures, the tumor was resected with an auto-suturing device (Signia™ Stapling System, Covidien Japan, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) . Finally, after verifying that hemostasis was achieved and that there was no suture leakage of the resected stump, the wound was closed in two layers, using a standard protocol.
The resected tumor was an elastic soft mass with a thin fibrous capsule, was 15 × 15 mm in size (cross-section), and was located in the proper muscular layer of the stomach wall . Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed circular-shaped or spindle-shaped cells with small circular nuclei and a granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, which was proliferated densely within the tumor ; the tumor had only a partial capsule . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the S-100 protein was detected in nearly all cells of the tumor , while c-kit and CD34 were negative . In addition, Ki-67 expression was observed in less than 1% of cells . Based on the above results, the resected tumor was diagnosed as a benign GCT. The patient had an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged without complications three days after surgery. No recurrence or complications have occurred in the last 16 months since the surgery.