A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital on May 23, 2021 for a left breast mass that had persisted for 2 years. The patient reported noticing a painless mass in the left breast approximately 2 years prior when it was the size of a peanut. The mass gradually increased to the size of a quail egg. Surgical excision was recommended.
Upon physical examination, the patient had no nipple depression or discharge. A 3-cm diameter mass was palpable in the left breast and was solid, mobile, well bounded, and without tenderness. There was no significant lymph node enlargement in either axilla.
Mammography revealed a 4.0 cm × 3.2 cm × 4.0 cm high-density mass with clear boundaries in the upper quadrant of the left breast. No abnormal calcification was observed in the left breast. However, several lymph nodes were visible in both axillae, with one particularly enlarged in the left axilla. The mammography diagnosis, using a molybdenum target, revealed a left upper quadrant external breast mass (BI-RADS 4B) with bilateral enlarged axillary lymph nodes, particularly one in the left axilla .
Breast ultrasound identified a 41 mm × 32 mm × 30 mm mass at the 1 o’clock position of the left breast. This was noted to be growing horizontally and was mostly oval. The edge of the mass was smooth, and the interior was a cystic solid mixed echo pattern dominated by solid hypoechoic mass, with multiple gritty strong echoes visualized inside the mass. An enhanced echo was also noted behind the mass. Color Doppler flow imaging showed a mixed and abundant blood supply. Multiple lymph nodes of different sizes could be seen in the left axilla. The largest one was 10 mm × 7 mm in size, oval, and with a clear boundary and uniform internal echo. The structure of the lymphatic hilum was not clearly visualized, and the boundary between the cortex and medulla was not clear. The ultrasonic diagnosis was, therefore, a cystic mass of the left breast, US_BI_RADS 4 C, with multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left axilla .
After admission, the relevant preoperative examinations were completed, including blood routine test, liver and kidney function, coagulation function, breast ultrasound, and lung computed tomography examination. The patient underwent segmental mastectomy of the left breast under local anesthesia. Prior to resection of the left breast mass, a rapid frozen section was sent for pathological examination; the report was invasive carcinoma of the left breast. Subsequently, modified radical mastectomy was performed for the left breast. Intraoperatively, the 4.0-cm mass was firm, with clear boundaries, and the left axillary lymph nodes were enlarged. The procedure went smoothly with intraoperative bleeding of approximately 10 mL.
Postoperative microscopy confirmed that the tumor tissue was solid and nodular, with a fibrovascular core, and that some cellular nests were irregular, displaying serrated or cartographic infiltrative growth. ISPC tumor cells were small to medium in size, with round or ovoid morphology. Part of the cytoplasm was eosinophilic or displayed light granular staining, and mitosis was rarely visualized. The pathological diagnosis was ISPC (4.5 cm × 2.8 cm), with no obvious vascular invasion and nerve involvement. Of the 21 axillary lymph nodes examined, one showed cancer metastasis and lymph node invasion (metastasis size 0.6 cm × 0.5 cm). Nipple, skin, and basal margin were negative for malignant infiltration .
Immunohistochemical staining results indicated that ISPC tumor cells were strongly positive for estrogen receptor (ER) (80%) and progesterone receptor (PR) (70%). ISPC tumor cells were also positive for synaptophysin (SYN) and E-cadherin. The specimen was negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), chromogranin A (CgA), and CD56; myoepithelial cells were negative for p63 and calponin. The Ki-67 index was 20% .
Postoperatively, the patient’s pathological stage was determined to be PT2N1M0, with a clinical stage of IIB. Postoperative letrozole endocrine therapy, epirubicin hydrochloride, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy, and left chest wall and left upper and lower clavicle radiotherapy, were initiated. After 17 months of follow-up, no recurrence or distant metastasis was observed.