A 28-year-old Chinese male was admitted to our hospital because of headache, nausea and vomiting for 3 days. He was confirmed HIV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) co-infection 2 years ago and did not receive anti-viral therapy. In the preceding month, he had been hospitalized in another hospital due to pneumocystis pneumonia that was resolved with cotrimoxazole and corticosteroids. One week before his admission to our hospital, a skin rash developed on his left foot which did not receive much attention. At the time of his admission to our hospital, this rash appears as superficial ulcer with partial necrosis and black crust surrounded by a cluster of blisters , which was not thought to be linked with VZV infection. The patient was alert with a stiff neck. An emergent brain computer tomography was unremarkable. Twelve hours after admission, the patient complained of difficult urination and had two seizure onsets in the next 12 hours. He lost consciousness after the first seizure onset and lost autonomous respiration after the second seizure onset. A ventilator was then used to control his respiration, and noradrenaline was needed to maintain adequate blood pressure. Combinatory therapy with ceftriaxone tazobactam, linezolid, voriconazole and ganciclovir was administered to ensure the coverage of common bacterial meningitis, cytomegalovirus (CMV) meningitis, as well as CNS fungal infections.
After his admission to our hospital, the main laboratory tests from blood samples were as follows: (1) white blood cell count: 9.41 × 109, N 0.67; (2) plasma procalcitonin<0.1 ng/mL; C reaction protein: (3) negative serum cryptococcal antigen test; negative serum Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay; negative serum tuberculosis antibodies; negative interferon-γ release assay; negative blood culture;(4) plasma CMV load: serum HBV load: 2.18 × 108 copies/mL; (5) CD4 cell count: 137 cells/uL; plasma HIV load: 1.2 × 106 copies/mL. His clinical condition was not improved with the above mentioned combinatory anti-infective therapy. On the third day of the hospitalization, a lumbar puncture was performed. The CSF opening pressure was 15 cm of H2O. CSF analysis demonstrated a white blood cell count of 91 cells/ mm3, glucose level of 3.28 mmol/L, total protein level of 9.6 g/L, negative India ink staining, negative cryptococcal antigen test, negative gene Xpert MTB/RIF assay and negative culture result. Also, CSF sample was sent for mNGS analysis. The patient was deceased on the fifth day of the hospitalization. The next day, mNGS analysis was completed which revealed high burden of VZV in the CSF. A follow-up telephone visit of the patient’s family member revealed that the patient had a history of chickenpox in childhood. VZV DNA was detected from stored serum sample.