A 66-year-old male was admitted due to syncope while sitting. The patient was a Jehovah’s Witness and had hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and obesity. He had permanent atrial fibrillation (AF) and QRS duration was 120 ms with left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology. Two years prior admission, the patient underwent aortic valve replacement with mechanical prosthesis (CarbomedicsTM 25 mm) due to severe aortic regurgitation. One year later, an asymptomatic Stanford type A aortic dissection was documented in an electrocardiogram (ECG)-gated CTA. Therefore, ascending aortic replacement with a Dacron graft (HemashieldTM 34 mm) was successfully performed. Coronary artery disease was ruled out prior to both cardiac surgeries. He was in functional class I and without angina, and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was mildly reduced. On admission, blood pressure was 155/96 mmHg and heart rate 85 b.p.m. The patient did not report any symptoms before losing consciousness and had a quick recovery without neurological abnormalities, except for a mild cranial contusion. There were no signs of heart failure and a prosthetic valve closing click was present.
An ECG showed AF with a ventricular rate of 110 b.p.m. QRS duration was 120 ms with LBBB. Carotid sinus massage was negative, and supine and standing blood pressure measurements did not show abnormal blood pressure drop. A chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly and mediastinal widening. Blood test evidenced normal haemogram and renal function, international normalized ratio (INR) was 4.13, and a slight elevation of high-sensitivity troponin I was documented: 298–313 ng/L (normal value < 45 ng/L). A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), limited due to poor acoustic window, showed LVEF of 50%. There was neither evidence of aortic prosthesis dysfunction (medium gradient of 11 mmHg), dilatation of the right cavities, nor pericardial effusion. An ECG-gated CTA performed to rule out aortic complications showed ( and ) a large AAP (92 mm) compressing the right atrium and superior vena cava. A small focal dehiscence of the proximal tube suture was detected, and a time-resolved CTA showed slow filling and drainage of the AAP through the proximal tube dehiscence (see , ). During hospitalization, telemetry did not show arrhythmias and syncope was attributed to compression of vascular structures and right heart cavities by AAP.
The case was discussed by the heart team and was considered of high surgical risk (Euroscore II 10.67%). In addition, surgical risk was underestimated since it did not take into account factors such as obesity, third sternotomy, and the fact that the patient was a Jehovah’s Witness refusing blood transfusions. Then, percutaneous closure was considered as AAP was filled through a focal leak. Under local anaesthesia, a 6-French radial access and venous femoral access were gained. An intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) catheter (AcuNav, BiosenseWebster) was placed close to the superior vena cava to guide the procedure. A 5-French JR 4 LBT coronary guiding catheter (Cordis Corporation, USA) was used to probe the focal leak, and a workhorse coronary wire was looped inside the AAP. By inflating a 2.0 mm coronary balloon at the neck, the coronary guiding catheter was easily advanced and seated inside. Under angiographic (image 5; , ) and ICE guiding (image 5; , ), an Amplatzer Duct Occluder II (ADO II) 4/4 (waist diameter and nominal length 4 mm) (Abbot Vascular, Abbott Park, IL, USA) was deployed successfully, and an almost immediate thrombosis occurred (see , and ) . The patient had no complications and was discharged the day after.
After 2 years of follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic. A control CTA showed a well-positioned ADO II with no evidence of leak and a significant reduction of the fully thrombosed AAP. In addition, the Dacron tube, the superior vena cava, and right atrium, previously distorted by AAP compression, regained their previous diameter and morphology.