A 67-year-old man presented with a three-month history of hemosputum. Chest roentgenography revealed a large mass shadow in the left lower lung field . The patient had undergone left upper lobectomy for lung cancer at 46 years of age. Computed tomography revealed a large mass measuring 16 × 12 × 8 cm with low central attenuation (A). Contrast-enhanced CT showed nonhomogeneous enhancement (B) and newly formed vessels inside the lesion (C). Calcification was detected at the periphery of the mass (D). T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass with predominantly low signal intensity (A), whereas T2-weighted MRI revealed a mass with mixed low and high signal intensities (B). A thick pseudocapsule characterized by low intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images was also observed (C). Areas with high signal intensity on T2-weighted images were not suppressed on fat-suppressed T2-weighted MRI (D). The heterogeneous signal intensity inside the lesion was assumed to represent differently aged hemorrhages within the hematoma. Positron emission tomography with 2-[18 F] fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose images revealed uptake only in the peripheral rim of the mass . The maximum standardized uptake value of the lesion was 3.9. No other signs of abnormal uptake suggestive of malignancy were observed.
Based on the clinical course, the patient was diagnosed with an intrathoracic CEH. Embolization of the vessels supplying the lesion was performed one day before the operation. Arteriography showed the development of abnormal blood vessels distributed to the membrane of the mass from the 8th intercostal artery , which was embolized with Gelfoam particles. We performed a left posterolateral thoracotomy through the lateral position. The tumor was completely adherent to the chest wall, pericardium, left diaphragm, left lower lobe, and descending aorta, and had a tough capsule. The mass and tough capsule were resected as completely as possible. However, the capsule surrounding the descending aorta could not be completely removed because of its tight adherence. Total intraoperative blood loss was approximately 2000 mL. Macroscopic observation demonstrated a large, encapsulated mass with necrotic tissue and hemorrhagic material with calcification. The postoperative histopathological findings were consistent with CEH . The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 13th postoperative day. No recurrence was observed nine months after the operation.