A 40-year-old Caucasian male with a 2-month history of headache, memory problems, weight loss, chronic diarrhea, and arthralgias, presented to an outside hospital with new-onset significant left-sided weakness impacting his ability to perform his activities of daily living. Medical history was remarkable for recurrent sinus infections and recurrent otitis media. He had no family history of central nervous system diseases or immunologic disease. CT head demonstrated an ill-defined mass in the right gangliocapsular region and midbrain and approximately 10 mm of leftward subfalcine herniation. MRI demonstrated a 4.4 × 2.4 × 4.5 cm right basal ganglia lesion with extension into midbrain, peripheral enhancement with extensive surrounding edema, and 7 mm midline shift . CT abdomen pelvis revealed reticulonodular infiltrates of the right and left lower lobes, splenomegaly with mesenteric lymphadenopathy. The patient underwent retroperitoneal CT-guided lymph node biopsy which showed no malignancy. A small bowel push enteroscopy noted acute duodenitis and mild villous blunting. He was seen by an oncologist who suspected his case was consistent with lymphoma or unspecified malignancy and started the patient on steroids. Infectious disease doctor ordered AFB and fungal studies.
He then presented to our hospital with worsening weakness. On examination, he had 0/5 strength on his left upper extremity, left side facial droop, midline palatal elevation, midline tongue protrusion, and right-sided ptosis. Laboratory tests on admission are summarized in , and they were all within the normal range aside from a leukocytosis to 24.5 × 109/L. CSF studies showed low glucose, low protein, negative for cryptococcus, and streptococcus. Serum Toxoplasma IgM was reactive and IgG was reactive at 17.4. Negative studies included HIV antibody (Ab), rapid plasma regain, Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay, cytomegalovirus IgM, Rickettsia Ab, Brucella Ab, Bartonella Ab, antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, urine legionella, and pneumococcal antigens. A brain biopsy was performed where four biopsy specimens were obtained at 90° angles and another four biopsy specimens 1 cm deeper were taken in a similar fashion. Pathology was consistent with a histiocyte predominant neuroinflammatory process . Postoperatively, the patient had no neurological changes.
One week later, despite being on antibiotics and antifungals, his neurological examination deteriorated and he became more obtunded and less responsive. A repeat MRI showed an increase in size of mass with new satellite lesions and hydrocephalus. The decision was made to perform a craniotomy for excision of enlarging mass to debulk and obtain tissue specimens for diagnosis.
During the operation, there was a tough rind that was encountered and dissected around. Initial specimens did not indicate any obvious tumor, and thus, a pericapsular dissection was continued until most of the mass was removed with a small rind left around the midbrain. Specimen was sent for pathology, culture, and analysis. Postoperatively, he was intubated but opened his eyes to voice and followed commands on his right side. He was extubated on POD 7 and was AO × 3 with dense left hemiplegia.
Polymerase chain reaction analysis of the mass was positive for toxoplasmosis gondii . He was treated with meropenem, pyrimethamine, leucovorin, and atovaquone for 2 months due to a sulfa allergy. One month postoperatively, an MRI brain showed shrinking residual enhancement. He was discharged on hospital day 60. Following the hospitalization, the patient was referred to an allergy and immunology specialist for undetectable Ig levels consistent with severe panhypoglobulinemia with IgG <109, IgA, and IgM <5 mg/dL that was found during his hospitalization. The patient was diagnosed with CVID and was started on IVIG replacement therapy. He continued to improve and was able to mobilize feet in a wheelchair 4 months after surgery and had his suprapubic catheter removed. At 6 months, he was opening his right eye again and started to move his left lower extremity. He also passed his swallow study and had weaned off of tube feeds. Seven months postoperatively, he unexpectedly passed at home from sudden cardiac arrest.