A 30-year old, gravida 1, para 0, woman at 24th week of pregnancy presented with right lower quadrant pain, fever and nausea. Axillary body temperature and pulse rate were 37.3oC and 104/min, respectively. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness, guarding, and rebound tenderness at the right side of the uterus. White blood cell count was 19,500 cells/mm3 with 92.8% neutrophils.
The sonographic examination did not reveal any findings consistent with acute appendicitis exception for periceaceal fluid and it showed a normal intrauterine pregnancy. With a preoperative diagnosis of acute appendicitis, a laparotomy was done via a paramedian incision in the right side of the abdomen. Appendix was erythematous and appendicectomy was performed.
The histopathological examination of the appendix revealed acute appendicitis with extensive deciduosis of the appendiceal wall of all the three layers. There were also glandular structures among the decidua which were positive with cytokeratin 7, while the adjacent appendicial mucosa was negative. The diagnosis was endometriosis and decidiosis of appendix and acute appendicitis. The patient was discharged with antibioteraphy without further complaints.
One month later, at 28 weeks’ pregnancy, the patient came again with left lower quadrant pain, high fever and vomiting. Her temperature and pulse rate were 38.5oC and 110/min, respectively. At physical examination, the patient had 7 months of pregnant uterus and acute abdominal findings consisting of mainly left lower quadrant tenderness. Laboratory results showed a white blood cell count of 23, 800 cells/mm3. A pelvic sonogram revealed a normal intrauterine pregnancy at 28 weeks and free fluid between the intestinal structures and a 5 cm complicated left ovarian cystic mass compatible with tubo-ovarian abscess. At laparotomy with a median subumbilical incision, a small amount of purulent free fluid and extensive pelvic deciduosis covering all the pelvic peritoneal surfaces with left tuboovarian abscess was observed. The abscess was drained and left salpingectomy was performed.
Papillary excrescences were observed protruding into the lumen of the mass and ovarian biopsies were obtained. The abdominal cavity was washed with warm saline solution and a drain was placed in the Douglas pouch for drainage which was removed 3 days later. Early postoperative recovery was uneventful but on the 5th postoperative day the patient had uterine contractions and tocolytic therapy was initiated with nifedipine. She gave birth to a 1400 gr healthy male baby with spontaneous vaginal delivery.
Histo-pathological examination revealed ovarian endometriosis with marked decidual changes and hemosiderin-laden macrophages as well as moderate amount of polynuclear leukocytosis in cyst wall. The final pathological report confirmed infected endometrioma with deciduosis. Postoperatively patient received tazocin antibiotherapy for 3 weeks and discharged from the hospital without further complications. At the second postpartum month she was completely recovered and her baby was doing well without any complications related to prematurity.