A 26-year-old male patient with a history of spastic cerebral palsy, shunted hydrocephalus, and epilepsy was referred for his baclofen pump refill as well as increasing discomfort from spasticity. He was being treated with baclofen administered via an intrathecal baclofen pump that had been originally placed in subfascial position more than 20 years ago. His pump had been replaced twice previously. Specifically, he had undergone one previous end-of-service pump replacement and one revision to replace a fractured catheter, and the patient had not experienced any complications with any of his prior pump refills.
Because the patient’s baclofen pump could not be palpated in the created pocket and he continued to have signs of spasticity, an X-ray was performed, during his referral appointment at the clinic. The X-ray demonstrated a subcostal location of his baclofen pump, but it wasn’t clear from the X-ray whether the pump had migrated into the peritoneal cavity or not .
The patient was subsequently admitted and taken to the operating room for revision of his baclofen pump. Upon opening the subfascial pump pocket, we saw the pump catheter, but unexpectedly noticed that the pump had migrated. The dissection was extended along the catheter until the peritoneal cavity was entered where the 40-mL baclofen pump was found .
We removed his pump and inspected the bowel to ensure that no perforation had occurred. On further examination, we identified a fascial tear through which the baclofen pump had migrated. This defect in the fascia was in the right lower abdominal quadrant, on the posterior aspect of the subfascial pump pocket. For this reason, a smaller (20 mL) baclofen pump was filled and inserted instead subcutaneously.
Following the removal of his migrated baclofen pump and its replacement with a subcutaneous one, the patient was discharged home on postoperative day 7 only to return on postoperative day 9 with constipation and abdominal pain. Subsequently, he was readmitted and placed on a strict bowel regimen with milk of molasses enema treatments. As his diet was slowly advanced, he was monitored for any evidence of bowel distension. Once the patient was able to have normal bowel movements and tolerate oral food intake, he was discharged home on postoperative day 12. Additionally, on discharge it was noted that the patient would later need a proximal and distal revision of the ventriculoperitoneal shunt for his worsening hydrocephalus.
Due to progression of his hydrocephalus, the patient was then readmitted for a scheduled proximal and distal revision of his ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Although patient had significant adhesions, ventriculoperitoneal shunt revision was successfully performed. The patient was observed until postoperative day 7 to exclude the possibility of his ventriculoperitoneal shunt failure and sent home in good condition following this second procedure. However, on postoperative day 22, the patient began to develop evidence of shunt failure, including headaches and increasing ventriculomegaly. The patient was subsequently readmitted and returned to the operating room for a second revision of his ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Unfortunately, approximately one month later the patient passed away suddenly from what was believed to be sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. Of note, he was being managed with anti-epileptic drugs and intrathecal baclofen has no known effects on seizure exacerbation.