A 36-year-old female presented at a peripheral hospital with ischaemic chest pain for 4 h, described as central tightening that occurred after dinner with autonomic symptoms. Her general examination and cardiovascular physical examination were normal, with stable heart rate and blood pressure. Anterior STEMI was seen on electrocardiogram (ECG). The primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) centre could not be reached within the time limit; therefore, thrombolysis was initiated with intravenous tenecteplase. Post-thrombolysis ECG showed >70% resolution of ST elevations, and the patient was free of chest pain. The initial Troponin I level was 28 µg/L (<0.10), while 2D echocardiography revealed apex, anteroseptal, and anterolateral wall hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 45%.
After thrombolysis, the patient was transferred to a centre with catheter lab facilities for an angiogram and PCI. Coronary angiogram revealed a spiral dissection of the LAD with TIMI 3 flow without significant plaque burden in the coronary vasculature . An angiographic diagnosis of Type 1 SCAD was made. The intra-vascular ultrasound (IVUS) examination confirmed a spiral dissection of the LAD and a small intramural haematoma .
This patient has a history of multiple TIAs, specifically 5 and 7 years ago. Each episode lasted for a few minutes with complete recovery. Currently, she has been free of TIAs for the last 5 years and with no residual weakness. Previous MRI scans revealed multiple small infarctions involving the periventricular white matter. She also has a significant family history of stroke as her father and grandfather were affected by strokes. Her carotid Doppler did not reveal any carotid plaques, and her 2D echocardiography excluded cardioembolism. Risk factor screening, including blood sugar, and lipid profile including lipoprotein A levels, homocysteine levels, and autoimmune panel (anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid [dsDNA], and anti neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies [ANCAs]), were normal. She was then started on long-term single antiplatelet and statin therapy by the neurology team.
The SCAD was managed medically in accordance with the guidelines. The patient was started on dual antiplatelet therapy, statin therapy (due to lower density lipoproteins [LDL] levels of 107 mg/dL), and beta-blocker and angiotensin converting enzyme [ACE]-inhibitor therapies.
Further investigations were conducted to diagnose CADASIL associated with SCAD, considering the background history of recurrent TIAs, repeated MRI evidence of bilateral periventricular white matter hyper-intensities and lacunar infarctions , and strong family history of strokes. At present, her renal, liver, thyroid functions, glycated haemoglobin level, autoimmune panel (antinuclear antibody [ANA], dsDNA, ANCAs), lipoprotein A, and homocysteine levels were normal. A repeat brain MRI showed bilateral deep periventricular white matter ischaemic changes suggestive of leucoencephalopathy. A genetic study was arranged to confirm CADASIL by identifying the NOTCH3 mutation, but exon sequencing with gene mapping revealed a mutation of the thrombospondin Type 1 domain containing 1 (THSD1) gene.
After 2 weeks, repeat 2D echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 55% with mild apical hypokinesia. The bubble contrast study was negative for shunts. Repeat coronary angiograms done 6 months after the index admission revealed a healing SCAD with small residual dissection in the mid LAD .