The first case concerns a 7-year-old Caucasian female with Shone syndrome (characterized by coartation of aorta, mitral stenosis and subvalvular aortic stenosis). At the age of 1 month she underwent a coartectomy and 6 years later she underwent a Ross-Konno procedure (aortic valve replacement with a pulmonary autograft and pulmonary valve replacement with a homograft conduit) plus mitral valvuloplasty. The last echocardiogram, performed 1 month before admission to our hospital, showed a subtotal obstruction of the conduit.
She was admitted to our hospital with a history of 2-weeks of nocturnal fever, treated at home with ceftriaxone without success. The patient appeared acutely ill; clinical examination revealed a 2-3/6 systolic murmur and hepatosplenomegaly. A complete blood count revealed anemia (Hb 10.3 g/dl), white blood cells count 15,760/ml with 84.2% neutrophils and 11.7% lymphocytes, CRP 4.86 mg/dl. Transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for signs of IE. The child had fever to 39°C. Vancomycin and gentamicin were started, with subsequent defervescence. Blood samples were taken for cultures. After 4 days of therapy, fever recurred and was associated with shaking chills. Gram-positive cocci in short chains were isolated from blood cultures, but there was very scant growth on routine bacterial culture media. Applied Biosystems 3130 and 3130xl Genetic Analyzers identified the organism as G. adiacens. Antibiotic susceptibility tests (AST) were not available. A repeat echocardiogram demostrated a filamentous (10 × 2 mm) on the homograft. Antibiotic therapy was changed to vancomycin plus meropenem.
After four weeks, therapy was switched to oral amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. The patient began to complain of right-side abdominal and chest pain. Suspecting pulmonary embolism, a lung computer tomography scan was performed. This revealed a pyramid-shaped area of pleural-based consolidation in the posterior segment of the right lower lobe. No significant filling defects of the pulmonary arteries and their major branches were evident. Intravenous treatment with vancomycin plus meropenem was restarted and continued for additional two weeks; low molecular weight heparin was prescribed. However, due to a persistent dysfunction of the conduct, it was replaced with a pulmonary valved homograft. Cultures of prosthetic material were negative. Six months later the patient was doing well and had negative blood cultures.