A 49-year-old female teacher with no history of chronic illness referred on account of painless swelling on the sole of the left foot of 2-month duration. The swelling had gradually increased in size over the period. She had no history of trauma to the left foot before the development of the swelling.
Before the presentation, a Doppler ultrasound done revealed fluid collection in the subcutaneous tissue of the plantar of the left foot with mixed echogenicity measuring about 2.6 × 2.5 × 1.8 cm (Vol. 6.0 mL). The surrounding soft tissue demonstrated areas of inflammatory changes. Hence, an impression of the abscess was reported with a queried diagnosis of hematoma. X-ray of the left foot was unremarkable.
On examination, there was a 5 cm × 3 cm swelling at the medial arch of the left foot. The mass was soft, tender, not mobile, and attached to the overlying skin. The slip sign was not elicited. The overlying skin was hyperkeratotic . There were no palpable inguinal lymph nodes.
Based on history, physical examination, and investigations, the patient was prepared for an excision biopsy.
A popliteal block was given, and a tourniquet was applied. Under aseptic conditions, an s-shaped transverse incision was made over the swelling and deepened to the capsule of the mass. There was a fatty-looking mass extending from the medial arch of the foot to the base of the second toe. The mass was excised and hemostasis was secured and the incision was closed in layers with vicryl 2.0 to subcutaneous tissue and prolene 2.0 to skin and a dressing was applied.
The post-operative period was unremarkable. The stitches were removed post-operative day 14. The histopathological report revealed microscopically an area showing lobules of mature fat cells with areas of fibrous septae which have blood vessels and some nerves. A definite diagnosis of fibro lipoma with no malignancy was made.
The patient was reviewed at the outpatient clinic. A 6-month follow-up period showed a healed wound and the patient can fully step on her left foot.