A seven-year-old female child presented to our tertiary eye care center with tender swelling involving the right eye and the right cheek for two months. This was not associated with decrease in vision, discharge, photophobia, or fever.
On examination, the swelling involved the right upper and lower eyelid along with the right upper cheek; it was firm in consistency, tender and warm to touch, erythematous, with negative fluctuation tests, and no pus points or discharging sinuses (as shown in Figures 1A & 1B). Visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes. Anterior as well as posterior segment examination of the eye were unremarkable. Despite the extensive edema, extraocular movements were full and free. Direct and consensual light reflexes were normal. A note was made of the enlarged submandibular lymph nodes. These were 2 2 cm, non-tender, non-conglomerated, firm in consistency, not fixed to the overlying skin. The overlying skin was not red and non-tender. The child was otherwise afebrile and had no other systemic complaints.
Furthermore, the patient was being treated with oral antibiotics (no records brought) at a peripheral center for the past one month before presentation to our center, with a steady increase in the size of the swelling. History elicited from the attendants showed their noncompliance with the prescribed treatment. Thereafter, the child was admitted for a course of intravenous antibiotics, with the provisional diagnosis being orbital cellulitis. However, poor response to intravenous antibiotics even after one week prompted us to investigate further. A contrast enhanced computerized tomography of the orbit and the paranasal sinuses (PNS) was ordered which showed a peripherally enhancing collection in the anterolateral aspect of the right maxillary sinus and zygomatic arch, extending superiorly along the lateral aspect of right orbit, showing lytic erosive changes, along with periosteal thickening and bony sequestration in the zygoma (axial scan shown in Figure 3A & 3B). These radiographic features were suggestive of TB.
The child had no history of fever, night sweats, no previous history of TB, and no history of contact with TB. In addition, the swelling was not like a typical tubercular cold abscess and the lymph nodes were not matted nor fixed to the skin. But in view of high endemicity of TB in our country, it was still kept on top of our differentials.
Except for a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), the complete blood count and liver function tests were unremarkable. The tuberculin sensitivity test (TST) showed 20 mm after 48 hr - however this is nonspecific. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was done from the swollen submandibular lymph nodes – it showed necrotic changes but no granuloma or acid fast bacilli (AFB). Sputum as well as gastric aspirate microscopy for AFB showed no evidence of AFB.
Antigravity aspirate of the swelling was done with a 26-gauge needle, under local anesthesia. Around 1 ml of the watery yellowish aspirate was then sent for gram stain, bacterial and fungal cultures, and a relatively new test – the Cartridge-based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (CBNAAT), also known as the Genexpert test. CBNAAT turned out to be positive, thus confirming the diagnosis of primary tubercular osteomyelitis of the right maxilla; the bacterial and gram stain reports were negative, thus ruling out secondary superinfection. The child was put on a four-drug anti-tubercular treatment (isoniazid [10 mg/kg] rifampicin [15 mg/kg], ethambutol [20 mg/kg], and pyrazinamide [35 mg/kg]) and responded well to the treatment, by complete shrinkage of the swelling within six weeks [Figures 2A & 2B].