A 33-day-old full-term Chinese male infant weighing 5.05 kg presented with massive swelling on the right side of his neck, restricted mouth opening, and difficulty feeding .
The postnatal diagnoses included the following: (1) water-cystic lymphangioma of the right neck; (2) neonatal patent ductus arteriosus; and (3) neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.
The planned surgery included percutaneous cyst aspiration and sclerotherapy under ultrasound guidance. The general conditions of this infant before surgery were as follows: spontaneous breathing, 30-40 beats per minute (bpm); peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) on room air, 90%-98%; heart rate, 140-165 bpm; and systolic pressure, 45-68 mmHg. Upon pulmonary auscultation, breath sounds were rough, wheezing sounds could be heard, and slight suprasternal and supraclavicular retractions could be observed during crying. Cardiac auscultation revealed no murmur. Laboratory tests revealed normal complete blood count and liver, kidney, and coagulation functions. Magnetic resonance imaging 1.5T with contrast was performed on day 28 .
An extensive multilocular cystic mass was noted in the right maxillofacial neck and upper-chest mediastinum, with a size of approximately 8.5 × 7.5 × 10.9 cm. Worrisome for lymphangioma with infection or bleeding. The trachea deviated to the left and narrowed under compression. The diameter of the cricoid cartilage was approximately 4.6 mm, as measured using ultrasound.
The anesthesia plan included general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. Airway management included three methods, plans A, B, and C.
Under plan A, spontaneous breathing was maintained with HFNO; esketamine and propofol were selected as intravenous anesthetics. Considering the severe upper airway anomalies, the infant’s own respiratory effort would be essential for maintaining an open airway. Attempted intubation without muscle relaxants was preferred [,]. Once we achieved deep sedation, we placed the infant in a supine position with the head and neck tilted to the affected side, and the glottis was exposed using a C-MAC video laryngoscope (0# blade, 8402ZX; STORZ, Germany). Using video-enhanced visualization of the larynx, 2% lidocaine 1ml was sprayed into the throat and trachea. Moreover, endotracheal intubation (3.0 mm, 9336E; COVIDIEN, Thailand) was performed using the video laryngoscope combined with the fiber-optic bronchoscope (2.2 mm, H110266; PENTAX, Japan) after adequate preoxygenation.
Under plan B, after inserting an intubating laryngeal mask airway (1.0# air-Q; Cookgas, Malaysia), endotracheal intubation was performed through the intubating laryngeal airway using a fiber-optic bronchoscope.
Under plan C, if intubation failed, a face mask or laryngeal mask airway would be used for emergency ventilation. Otolaryngologists could perform a tracheotomy or awaken the baby.
We used HFNO (OPT318/RT330; Maurice Paykel, New Zealand) (initial flow rate, 1.5 L/kg/min; FiO2, 100%). Anesthesia was induced using esketamine and propofol. Endotracheal intubation was performed while maintaining the infant’s spontaneous breathing under total intravenous anesthesia in the supine position with an oral gastric tube in situ. Rescue tracheostomy was performed by the surgeon during induction. Anesthesia was achieved using intermittent boluses of esketamine 15 mg and propofol 10 mg. Our initial attempt at intubation using a videoscope yielded limited visibility of the glottis because of the obstructed view of the vocal cords. Lidocaine was administered to the glottis to enhance hemodynamic stability. However, this approach elicited laryngeal spasm, which resulted in a transient decrease in the infant’s SpO2 to 80% that lasted approximately 10 s. Without delay, we ceased the procedure by retracting the blade and promptly administered 100% oxygen via a face mask. The laryngeal spasm subsided spontaneously, and SpO2 gradually improved to 100%. Owing to the challenging vocal cord visualization and increased risk of tissue damage, bleeding, and swelling associated with blind intubation, we opted to employ a combination of videoscopy and fiber-optic bronchoscopy for the second intubation attempt. Figure provides a visual representation of our second intubation attempt as observed through videoscopy. It displays the layout of the bronchoscopy, the oral gastric tube (OGT), and the intubation blade.
Endotracheal intubation was successfully performed under the guidance of a fiber-optic bronchoscope without desaturation. The endotracheal tube (ETT) used was 3.0# uncuff. Anesthesia was maintained using fentanyl, sevoflurane, and cis-atracurium. The entire surgical procedure was almost 1 hour and uneventful. After communicating with surgeons and neonatologists, considering postoperative bleeding and edema endangering the airway, the patient was returned to the NICU while intubated. The ETT was successfully withdrawn 2 days after surgery.