A 64-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment of a pancreatic tumour found by chest computed tomography (CT) performed at a medical check-up. A pancreatic tumour was identified in images obtained near the end of the chest CT imaging protocol. She had no symptoms related to the pancreatic tumour and had no past history or family history except for hypertension.
An abdominal CT scan showed a 46-mm low-density mass in the pancreatic body and dilatation of the distal main pancreatic duct (MPD) . The tumour appeared to be localized and extend along the MPD. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a 20.6 × 12.3-mm hypoechoic mass in the pancreatic body. EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) revealed polygonal cancer cells proliferating in a fused tubular and papillary pattern. Immunohistochemistry was positive for trypsin and BCL-10, indicating that the pancreatic tumour was ACC. Tumour markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, DUPAN-2, and SPan-1 were not elevated. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed positive uptake in the pancreatic tumour but no distant metastasis.
We performed radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy with lymph node dissection for the pancreatic body tumour. Although the pancreatic cut margin was close to the tumour, intraoperative frozen section revealed no malignant tissue at the transected pancreatic parenchyma.
Macroscopic findings showed a 30-mm tumour in the pancreatic body extending 30 mm along the inside of the MPD . Microscopic findings revealed cancer cell invasion into the pancreatic stroma, perineural site, and vessels. The surgical margin was negative, and there was no lymph node metastasis or tumour invasion around the vessels, indicating that R0 surgical resection was achieved.
A postoperative pancreatic fistula was observed that caused a pseudoaneurysm in the gastroduodenal artery (GDA). Although post-pancreatectomy haemorrhage due to rupture of this pseudoaneurysm occurred, transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) stopped the haemorrhage, after which the patient's condition eventually improved and she was discharged. Adjuvant chemotherapy using S1 was administered but was stopped because of diarrhoea at 11 weeks after start the adjuvant chemotherapy.
She received a regular check-up in our hospital every 3 months with abdominal CT. Follow-up CT performed 18 months after surgery revealed a tumour 34 mm in size in the remnant pancreas that appeared to grow along the MPD and invade the portal vein. EUS showed a 20-mm hypoechoic mass, and EUS-FNA revealed cancer cells that were immunoreactive positive for BCL-10 and trypsin. Tumour markers were not elevated. Considering her past history and pathological findings, we diagnosed recurrence of ACC.
We administered full-dose neoadjuvant chemotherapy of nab-PTX (125 mg/m2) in combination with GEM (1000 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, and 15 every 4 weeks for 2 cycles to shrink the tumour and reduce its extension into the portal vein. During chemotherapy, grade 2 bone marrow suppression and grade 1 symptomatic adverse events such as general fatigue, peripheral neuropathy, hair loss, and diarrhoea based on Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 were observed. CT after neoadjuvant chemotherapy revealed that the pancreatic mass had shrunk to 29 mm, and neither distant metastasis nor new lesions were observed . The effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was evaluated as stable disease based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1 .
Four weeks after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we performed total pancreatectomy as curative resection for the remnant pancreatic head. Although dense adhesions especially around the TAE-treated GDA and the portal vein were recognized , we removed the coil from the GDA and closed its stump with interrupted sutures using 5-0 monofilament suture. Hepaticojejunostomy was performed by interrupted suture using 5-0 PDS II. Gastrojejunostomy and Braun's anastomosis were performed with a linear stapler. The portal vein was tumour free and did not require combined resection, so we achieved curative resection. On postoperative day 1, she complained of melena without abdominal pain or nausea. Emergent gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed oozing at the gastrojejunostomy site, and haemostasis was performed. Thereafter, no new events occurred and she was discharged.
Macroscopic findings showed a 50-mm tumour in the remnant pancreatic head. Microscopic findings revealed that cancer cells had invaded the stroma, perineural site, and vessels, and the tumour had changed to grade I fibrous tissue by the Evans classification. Immunohistochemistry was positive for trypsin and BCL-10, indicating the pancreatic tumour to be ACC . The surgical margin was negative, and no perivascular lymph node metastasis or tumour invasion was present, so we determined that R0 surgical resection was achieved.
The patient has received no adjuvant treatment, and at more than 6 months after surgery, there has been no recurrence or distant metastasis and no elevation of tumour markers.