Our patient was a 16 year-old Caucasian male presenting to the Emergency Department at the Children’s Hospital of Georgia (CHOG) with quotidian fever, intermittent headache, bilateral conjunctival injection, sore throat, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, polyarticular arthritis, and rash. About a month prior to presentation, patient had had cold-like symptoms. His mother had concomitantly had similar symptoms, though worse in severity, and had tested positive for COVID-19. Patient was not tested for COVID-19 at that time. Two weeks prior to presentation, patient had received his first vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine.
Symptom onset was a week prior to presentation. Patient’s symptoms began with fever (at least once per day), headache, and sore throat. He also had episodes of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that resolved 3 days into his course of illness.
Patient was evaluated at an urgent care, where he was administered a rapid strep test and a Monospot; he tested negative for both. He was nonetheless discharged with amoxicillin for empiric treatment of strep pharyngitis and ondansetron for symptomatic relief of his nausea.
Four days into his illness, patient’s oral intake decreased. His symptoms persisted, and he additionally felt weak. He presented at his local emergency department, where he was assessed, but no changes were made to his management.
Thereafter, patient developed bilateral joint edema, erythema, heat, and pain in his metacarpophalanges, elbows, knees, and ankles. The joint pain impaired patient’s ability to walk. In addition, patient developed a rash.
Patient saw his pediatrician, who found that patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were elevated four times above the normal limit. The pediatrician discontinued patient’s amoxicillin and recommended that patient be seen at a children’s hospital with pediatric rheumatology and infectious disease capacity.
Patient presented in the CHOG Emergency Department the next day. At that time, his joint edema, pain, and erythema had improved, although he had persistent erythema over his metacarpophalanges joints and edema bilaterally in his ankles. His primary complaint was sore throat, which was 7 out of 10 in severity and improved with administration of ketorolac. His vital signs were: temperature 36.7 °C, heart rate 87, respiratory rate 18, blood pressure 113/73, SpO2 100%.
On physical examination, patient had bilateral conjunctival injection and pharyngeal erythema without exudates. This skin over his metacarpophalangeal joints was erythematous, and he had 1+, non-pitting edema bilaterally at the ankles. A blanching, salmon-pink, maculopapular rash was apparent at the suprapubic area and descended bilaterally along both legs to his ankles. Patient’s abdominal examination was negative for hepatosplenomegaly.
Patient’s laboratory results were significant for D-dimer elevated to 311, ESR elevated to 60, fibrinogen elevated to 777, CRP elevated to 21.7, ALT elevated to 115, neutrophils elevated to 84, and eosinophils elevated to 7. He was also lymphopenic at 5. (See Table for laboratory results.) Patient’s platelets and non-glycosolated ferritin were within normal limits. A respiratory viral panel was negative, and patient tested negative for COVID-19. He was admitted for workup.
In the course of patient’s inpatient care, he was found to be positive both for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and for antibodies formed after vaccination. Although he had an elevated aldolase at 15.1, his CK was low at 29. Patient’s LDH was within normal limits. Glycosylated ferritin, antinuclear antibody, RH factor, anticitrullinated protein, and ANCA were not tested.
Patient was diagnosed with MIS-C, meeting the criteria set forth by the American College of Rheumatology of fever, rash, oral mucosal involvement, bilateral conjunctivitis, and previous infection with COVID-19.
He could also have been diagnosed with AOSD. Patient met the Fautrel criteria with spiking fevers, arthralgia/arthritis, transient erythema, pharyngitis, neutrophil polymorphonuclear proportion ≥ 80%, and salmon-pink, maculopapular rash. Applying the Yamaguchi criteria is not appropriate because patient was not fully worked up for the exclusion criteria, owing to the low index of suspicion for malignancy, infection, or other inflammatory disease. Patient nonetheless met the following four Yamaguchi criteria, including two major criteria: once-a-day fever lasting a week, salmon-pink maculopapular rash, pharyngitis, and liver enzyme abnormalities. Although five Yamaguchi criteria are required for diagnosis, patient’s arthalgia/arthritis had not lasted 2 weeks at the time of presentation, and he received treatment before his symptoms were allowed to endure for that duration. Additionally, patient was not tested for rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibodies.
An echocardiogram performed inpatient was normal.
Patient’s treatment comprised IVIG and diphenhydramine, methylprednisolone, and aspirin. He had an episode of hives in response to IVIG that was treated with diphenhydramine.
He thus received the first line treatments both for MIS-C and AOSD. (In accordance with the American College of Rheumatology recommendations, methylprednisolone is indicated for patients in shock or who are refractory to IVIG . Our patient was hemodynamically stable on presentation and throughout his treatment, and he appeared to respond to IVIG.) His symptoms improved, and he was discharged after 3 days.
Patient has continued to improve since his discharge. Patient took oral steroids for 4 weeks following discharge. He has required additional NSAIDS for sore throat and joint pain relief following the taper of the steroids, and he has experienced some skin peeling on his fingers. He experienced no recurrence following completion of the steroid course. His 2-week follow-up examination with cardiology was unremarkable, as was his 2 month repeat echocardiogram. Patient did not experience adverse or unexpected events in the course of his treatment. (For a timeline of patient’s disease course, please see Table .
Consent was obtained for this case report.