A 45-year-old woman was hospitalized because of right upper abdominal pain for 3 months. The patient had a cesarean delivery 20 years ago. The patient had no prior history of cancer and chronic viral hepatitis and no family history of BTC or other hereditary diseases related to the gallbladder or liver. Tenderness was examined in the right upper abdomen. The level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 334.66 ng/ml. The levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) were within normal ranges .
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed GBC (3.2 cm × 2.7 cm in size) accompanied by localized multiple lymph node metastasis (the largest one was 2.5 cm × 3.6 cm) posterior to the pancreas, gallbladder enlargement, and gallbladder stones . PET-CT indicated a cervical nodule shadow (approximately 3 cm in diameter) and increased FDG metabolism. All the aforementioned combined with the medical history indicated a primary tumor. In addition, a nodule shadow in the rear of the pancreatic head (approximately 2.5 × 3 cm in diameter), multiple primary lymph nodes in the para-abdominal aorta, and increased FDG metabolism indicated metastatic disease in these organs. PET/CT did not detect metastasis in other distant organs. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration revealed positive lymph nodes posterior to the pancreas and a space-occupying lesion in the gallbladder. Ultrasonic endoscopy found one approximately 2.5 × 3-cm hypoechoic envelope block (without internal blood flow signal) and another approximately 3-cm moderate echo envelope block near the neck (without internal blood flow signal). The local gallbladder wall was not smooth, with a 2.3-cm stone at the bottom of the gallbladder. The puncture biopsy tissue was reddish brown. The presence of heterogeneous epithelioid cell groups combined with the immunohistochemistry (IHC) results supported the diagnosis of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, although the possibility of neuroendocrine differentiation cannot be completely ruled out. The IHC results showed the following: CK+, Ki-67 (70%–80%)+, CK18+, Villin+, CgA a small amount+, SYN−, CD56−, TTF-1−, Hepatocyte−, AFP−, CDX-2−, CD34−, CA 19-9− .
No other obvious signs were shown. The examinations and imaging findings all indicated signs of GBC. According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) guidelines (8th edition), it was evaluated as T3N2M0 (IIIA) stage, for which surgical resection was not recommended.
A multidisciplinary team (MDT) recommended the application of multidisciplinary treatment, for which genetic tests would be helpful. However, the patient refused to undergo genetic testing due to financial difficulties and requested to be treated directly with chemotherapy plus immunotherapy as soon as possible.
According to the guideline of the Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO), the results of a randomized controlled phase III clinical trial did not support the benefit of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for biliary tract malignant tumor. Patients were recommended to attend the clinical trial. Referring to the literature reports and the CSCO guideline , the following treatment protocol was then chosen: 1,000 mg/m2 gemcitabine (Stockhausen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Jiangsu, China) plus 125 mg/m2 PAB (Shiyao Group Ouyi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Hebei, China) combined with 200 mg camrelizumab (an immune checkpoint inhibitor) (Hengrui Medicine Co., Ltd., Jiangsu, China). The patient was treated with 1,000 mg gemcitabine and 170 mg PAB on days 1, 8, and 15 and with 200 mg camrelizumab on day 1 every 3 weeks. The next cycle of treatment was repeated after a 2-week interval. Abdominal CT and measurements of the tumor markers were performed after each treatment cycle to assess the efficacy using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1. After two cycles of treatment, the gallbladder tumor and metastatic lymph nodes shrank more than 30% (partial response, PR), and the AFP level decreased from 334.66 to 24.2 ng/ml. The tumor was then evaluated as resectable. During the therapy, the patient had good appetite without nausea and vomiting and scored 0 in the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). Drug-induced myelosuppression was noted, as the white blood cell (WBC) count decreased to 2.14 × 109/L. The patient also experienced other hematologic toxicities during the treatment . These adverse effects improved after subcutaneous injection of recombinant human granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factors. In addition, the patient suffered from generalized pruritus and hemangioma-like changes at the forearms, back, and knee joints after the first dose in the second cycle , which were not alleviated after administration of loratadine (i.e., an anti-allergic drug). However, these symptoms were improved after intravenous infusion of 5 mg dexamethasone. The therapeutic tolerance decreased after the second cycle. After consultations with the MDT, the patient was encouraged to continue the current treatment protocol. However, considering the decreased tolerance to chemotherapy and the option of surgical resection, the patient refused further chemotherapy plus immunotherapy and requested a radical surgery. After preoperative examinations and informed consent of the patient, radical surgery was performed to remove the primary tumor, along with regional lymph node dissection under general anesthesia. The patient was also informed that hemihepatectomy + biliary–intestinal anastomosis or even pancreaticoduodenectomy might be performed during the surgery, depending on specific pathological findings. After informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family, the surgery was performed under general anesthesia on August 10, 2020. During the surgery, the gallbladder was removed, and a cystic duct margin was found positive after a frozen section pathological examination. Therefore, a partial bile duct resection was performed. Intraoperative pathological examination showed that the first resection margin of the common bile duct was positive and the second lower resection margin of the common bile duct was negative. In addition, the resection margin was positive for the right hepatic duct and negative for the left hepatic duct. According to the intraoperative pathological examination results, the surgical procedures were changed to right hemihepatectomy, radical cholecystectomy, and regional lymph node dissection, with informed consent of the family because the patient was unconscious.
After the surgery, the patient developed pulmonary infection and pleural effusion due to prolonged immobility, which were alleviated after antimicrobial therapy and ultrasound-guided thoracentesis and drainage. The patient was discharged on September 11, 2020. Postoperative pathology revealed that the lesion was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder affecting the entire wall of the gallbladder, along with visible choroidal carcinoma thrombosis and nerve invasion. Metastases were found in lymph node stations 8 and 9, but not in stations 12, 14, and 16 . As it had been reported that postoperative adjuvant therapy could improve OS, the CSCO guideline recommended the use of capecitabine or participation in other clinical trials. Since the neoadjuvant chemotherapy plan of the patient was effective before surgery, we continued to treat this patient with chemotherapy plus immunotherapy after surgery. So far, the PFS of this patient has reached 14 months. The patient has maintained good quality of life in the past 9 months without disease progression .