A 66-year-old non-Caucasian man was referred to the Stomatology Clinic of the State University of Montes Claros (Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros, Unimontes), state of Minas Gerais, Brazil, due to the presence of fibrous prolifera-tive lesions in the oral mucosa. Intraoral examination revealed hypoplastic defects on the vestibular face of the upper central incisor and canines and fibrous proliferations in the lowerlip mucosa, without apparent traumatic factors. The patient reported that he had been a tobacco user since his teenage years . The labial lesion was excised, and microscopic analysis using hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed a lesion compatible with oral angiofibroma . The association of dental enamel pits and gingival angiofibromas led to the clinical hypothesis of TSC and a search for skin lesions was performed.
The patient's medical history included intestinal ulcers and hematemesis, which had been treated using omeprazole. There were positive reports of convulsive crises, with the last episode in 1999, which had been controlled using phenobarbital. The family's history included occurrences of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cancer and TSC.
General clinical examination showed hypopigmented maculae, confetti-like lesions, shagreen plaque, angiofibromas on nasolabial folds, neck and back, nail dystrophy and periungual fibromas on hands and feet , seen under Wood's light. On physical examination, the patient did not show any signs or symptoms of cardiovascular, endocrine, respiratory, immune or musculoskeletal disorders.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging was performed in a 1.5-T scanner including T1, T2, and FLAIR (fluid acquisition inversion recovery), and showed a nodular image similar to cerebral parenchyma, measuring 1.2 x 1.0 cm, with projection of the anterior cornu of the left lateral ventriculum, close to the Monro foramen . A conservative approach was chosen for this case, with control imaging examinations over a seven-year period, without any expansive process. These findings were compatible with a subependymal giant-cell astrocytoma. An electroencephalogram produced normal results and no evidence of signs or symptoms of psychopathological processes.
Abdominal ultrasonography was also requested. Although this showed that the viscera were normal, there was a solid, heterogenic and echogenic mass with a calcified focus inside, measuring 4.6 x 3.4 cm, in the right kidney, which was compatible with angiomyolipoma. Kidney function was normal and asymptomatic, and urine analyses did not show proteinuria. Echocardiography, additional routine laboratory tests and fundoscopy examinations were normal.
The patient was admitted to the Santa Casa Hospital of Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil, for laparoscopic examination and biopsies on his right kidney. Histopathological examination on the material obtained was compatible with angiomyolipoma, but also revealed important areas of malignancy consistent with renal cell carcinoma. The patient then underwent medial longitudinal laparotomy and complete nephrectomy of right kidney. He died one month after the procedure. Permission to perform an autopsy was not granted.
Prior approval to report on this case was obtained from the Institutional Ethics Committee (protocol no. 1047/08) and the patient signed an informed consent statement. We followed the evaluation and management recommendations put forward by Roach et al. This case was compatible with the diagnostic criteria established for TSC, which were confirmed by the clinical, imaging and histopathological findings and by the presence of a family history.