A 49-year-old woman presented with a 3-month history of painful proptosis and periorbital swelling of bilateral eyes, accompanying with reduced vision and diplopia. The patient declared no medical history, such as hypertension, diabetes and systemic immunosuppression. She also denied recent trauma. She had been treated with antiviral medication and corticosteroids for 5 days in another hospital as the initial diagnosis was herpes virus infection, but her symptoms deteriorated. The vision at first visit was 20/25 OD and 20/30 OS. The axial and sagittal T1 contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral orbital lesions spreading to the cavernous sinus . She was therefore diagnosed as bilateral orbital cellulitis complicated with cavernous sinus thrombosis. Thereafter, she was given antibiotic therapy for 1 month and her symptoms had been improved but not healed.
On follow-up examination, best-corrected visual acuities remained as 20/25 OD and 20/30 OS. Intraocular pressures were 21 mmHg OD and 19.3 mmHg OS. Ophthalmologic examination revealed bilateral exophthalmos, bulbar conjunctival edema and conjunctival congestion. Ocular alignment showed a limitation on elevation and abduction of both eyes. Corneas were clear with quiet anterior chamber. Both pupils were round, but there was an afferent pupillary defect in the left eye. Choroidal folds observed in the right eye, and optic disc swelling with lamellar hemorrhage around optic disc was found in the left eye . MRI demonstrated orbital masses behind both globes . T1-weighted contrast-enhanced imaging showed a predominantly low intensity signal with mildly heterogeneous in center of the masses. T2-weighted image demonstrated a heterogeneous hyperintense signal behind each globe. The patient received a number of blood tests, but no significant abnormality was detected. The C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were in normal range. The immunity tests showed negative in antistreptolysin-O, and rheumatoid factors (RF), including IgM-RF, IgA-RF, IgG-RF. The routine blood test also showed nothing abnormal, the results of white blood cell count, red blood cell count, haemoglobin, lymphocyte count, neutrophil count and platelet were all in normal range. The only finding was that eosinophil count was 0.72 × 10^9/L which was slightly above normal range.
Lateral orbitotomy was next performed on the patient’s right eye. A hard mass sized 1.5 × 1.5 × 2 cm was excised with accompanying amounts of pus liquid and black necrotic tissue. Histopathological examinations diagnosed orbital granulomatosis with invasive aspergillosis infection. The patient eventually received 3-week anti-fungal therapy, itraconazole 200 mg twice a day by oral administration. Her symptoms gradually resolved.
At the 8-month follow-up, the patient’s vision got improved to 20/20 OD and 20/20 OS, findings from ophthalmic examination were unremarkable. MRI scan demonstrated that both orbital lesions regressed . She so far remained clinical stable for 3 years.