A 47-year-old woman complaining of bradyphrenia for 3 days was admitted to our hospital on August 29, 2016, after losing consciousness. She suffered from ulcerative colitis for 18 years, receiving treatment with oral hormones (Methylprednisolone, 16 mg daily) and Isoniazid (0.3 g, daily). There was no history of smoking, coronary artery heart disease, diabetes mellitus or hypertension. The patient initially presented with bradyphrenia, shaking of the left lower limb and incontinence for 3 days. The patient suffered a sudden fever the day before admission and then fell unconscious, upon which she was admitted to the Neurology department of a regional hospital. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense lesions in the bilateral cingulate gyrus and bilateral temporal cortex . Magnetic resonance venography of the head was normal. She was treated with aspirin and atorvastatin calcium for suspected cerebral infarction.
As the patient’s condition did not improve, she was transferred to our hospital. Physical examination on admission revealed comatose state (Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS] 3), stiff neck, and no voluntary movements. In terms of laboratory findings on admission, routine blood, general hematological and biochemical tests showed no abnormalities, and inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were normal. A lumbar puncture was performed. The cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure was 85 mmH2O. Routine and biochemical testing of CSF identified the following: proteins 0.55 g/l (0.20–0.40); leukocytes 1 × 106/l (0.0–15.0); glucose 3.2 mmol/l (2.50–4.50); chlorine 131.9 mmol/l (120–132). CSF cytology showed abnormal cytology, with the presence of 35 lymphocytes and a monocyte. Epileptiform abnormal discharge and diffuse slow wave was observed by electroencephalogram. The patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly. As her oxygen saturation continued to decline, she was placed on a mechanical ventilator via intratracheal intubation. Since the patient’s condition failed to improve, she was transferred to the neurological intensive care unit. Meningoencephalitis was suspected, so she was treated with foscarnet sodium (3 g, daily), methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg, daily for 5 days), intravenous immunoglobulin (20 g, daily for 5 days) and other supportive treatments. However, the patient’s condition remained refractory to treatment. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain revealed hypodense lesions in the bilateral insula and bilateral frontal cortex, corresponding with limbic encephalitis . Laboratory examination revealed autoimmune encephalitis and paraneoplastic syndrome-related tests in both serum and CSF to be normal. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for herpes simplex virus type 1 and herpes simplex virus type 2 DNA came back negative in CSF. Considering the poor effect of antiviral treatment, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of CSF was used for the detection of pathogens. In total, 5.5 million reads were obtained by NGS, of which 837 were identified as viral, with a detection time of 48 h. HSV-1 DNA was identified in the CSF. The number of identified unique reads mapped on the HSV-1 genome sequence was 826, making up 98.7% of the viral reads. The coverage of the identified HSV-1 genome was 44%, with depth values of 1. The number and percentage of unique reads, coverage, and depth of the identified HSV-1 DNA sequences are presented in Fig. a, b. Upon diagnosis with HSV-1 encephalitis, the patient was started on intravenous acyclovir (500 mg, three times daily) and foscarnet sodium (3 g, three times daily). A repeated CT scan of the brain showed multiple hypodense lesions in the right frontal lobe, right insula, bilateral temporal lobe, and left basal ganglia, including right frontal lesion hemorrhage. On the 14th day after admission , in view of her deteriorating condition, she was again treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (20 g daily for 5 days). A repeated CT scan of the brain, performed approximately 20 days later, showed the range of the hypodense lesion in the bilateral temporal lobes was increased, and hemorrhage within the left lower temporal lobe hypodense lesion, compared with the previous CT scan . After active treatments, the patient’s condition was not markedly improved. On the 28th day after admission, a repeated CT scan of the brain showed the following: 1, the hemorrhages and densities in right frontal lobe and left temporal lobe were decreased; 2, a new massive brain hemorrhage in the left occipitoparietal and left basal ganglia, and hematoma broken into side ventricles were observed; 3, the midline deviated from the falx cerebri to the right side; 4, subarachnoid hemorrhage . Family members abandoned treatment on day 46 after admission, and the patient died after discharge.