The parents of a 3-year-old Syrian boy noticed that he had gradual progressive painless swelling of his left lower eyelid and ptosis over the course of 2 months that significantly increased over the last 2 weeks. There was no significant loss of vision. Medically, the parents recalled loss of appetite of 1-week duration, with no history of trauma, other systemic manifestations, or past surgery. He had an unremarkable family history.
An ophthalmological examination revealed left orbital dystopia and superomedial displacement of the globe. Extraocular motility was limited in upward elevation of his left eye. His left upper lid seemed to be drooping; however, it proved to be pseudoptosis, which was caused by the upward displacement of the globe due to the mass effect. Correspondingly, the palpebral fissure measurement in his left eye was 5 mm, while it measured 9 mm in his right eye . Further examination of his left eye revealed a hard lesion involving the inferior orbital rim and the lateral aspect of the orbital cavity, measuring 3.5 cm horizontally by 1.5 cm vertically. There was no proptosis, overlying skin changes, or palpable lymphadenopathy.
A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 9.5 mm osseous destruction at the left inferior lateral orbital margin that was associated with a large soft tissue mass measuring 1.9 × 2.1 × 1.9 cm. The mass extended into his left orbital cavity. A small soft tissue component measuring 7.8 × 7.8 × 9.7 mm was also seen extending toward the subcutaneous zygomatic region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his orbits showed a solid enhancing mass lesion, involving the lateral and inferior walls of his left orbit, and extending into the intraconal compartment. The mass was displacing the globe superiorly and medially with medial displacement of the left inferior rectus muscle . His optic nerve appeared normal and there was no associated mass effect on his right globe. No brain abnormalities were demonstrated.
An incisional biopsy under general anesthesia was performed and a 2.1 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm tissue sample was obtained. Histological slides showed diffuse effacement atypical cells of variable size infiltrating the bone . The proliferating cells often had clear cytoplasm, resembling Reed–Sternberg cells, with broad cytological spectrum ranging from irregular, pleomorphic, hyperchromatic to vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Many mitotic figures were seen . The histological features were consistent with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The immunohistochemical (IHC) stains showed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for T-cell markers including CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD43 . Stains for B cell markers were all negative: CD20, CD21, CD30, CD56m, and granzyme B as a marker for natural killer (NK) cells. Stain for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) as a marker for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoblastic lymphoma was also negative. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 10 μm tumor sections were used to extract DNA using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit(DNA FFPE Tissue Kit; by "OR from" QIAGEN). Qualitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was done for T-cell receptors (TCR beta and TCR gamma) gene rearrangement. The test showed positivity for clonal TCR gene rearrangement. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis results also confirmed the presence of a heavy chain TCRB positive band consistent with T-cell rearrangement. These results confirmed the diagnosis of PTCL-NOS.
Serology for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. A systemic evaluation including: CT of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis; bone marrow biopsy; and physical examination of the ear, nose, and throat, were normal. A cardiac function assessment as well as a complete body gallium scan were performed and were negative for metastasis. His peripheral blood workup was within normal limits. He was a high risk and was started on Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster protocol, with 2 weeks on and 2 weeks off chemotherapy. The protocol includes the following agents: cytarabine (ARA-C), L-asparaginase (ASP), cyclophosphamide (CTX), dexamethasone (DEX), doxorubicin (DXR), mercaptopurine (6-MP), methotrexate (MTX), prednisone (PDN), 6-thioguanine (6-TP), and vincristine (VCR). However, the doses and details of administration are beyond the scope of this case report since we are highlighting the challenge and the importance of accurately diagnosing such rare cases. He was followed up every month for 6 months. He tolerated the chemotherapy well according to his parents and his oncologist. He showed remarkable response to chemotherapy with resolution of his signs and symptoms . MRI of his orbit was repeated 6-month post-treatment and showed no signs of recurrence of the tumor . The outcome was considered to be successful following his 18-month treatment plan and this was documented clinically and by repeated MRI. He was last seen in the clinic in early January 2018 (approximately 20 months after his initial presentation) and was doing well (Additional file ).