A 61-year-old female with history of pulmonary embolism (PE), not on anti-coagulation, presented to the emergency department (ED) with pressure-like chest pain and associated dyspnea starting approximately eight hours prior to presentation. Her electrocardiogram on arrival had one-millimeter ST elevations in anterior and inferior leads, and the triage physician activated the cardiac alert system .
On arrival to the resuscitation room in the ED, she was afebrile, had a normal oxygen saturation on room air, a blood pressure of 151/85 millimeters of mercury and a heart rate of 142 beats per minute. The patient reported ongoing chest pain. She was given 325 milligrams of aspirin, and the interventional cardiologist was consulted. The patient was awake and alert and was answering questions appropriately. She reported that her prior PE had been provoked in the setting of childbirth over 20 years earlier but remained anticoagulated until four years prior to her current presentation when she discontinued, after a discussion of risks and benefits with her primary care physician. She had no other significant medical history and was not taking any medications regularly. Review of systems was notable only for a recent diagnosis of shingles, currently on antiviral medications.
Point-of-care ultrasound was performed, which demonstrated markedly reduced ejection fraction with apical hypokinesis, no pericardial effusion, no evidence of right ventricular strain, no aortic flap or dilation, and no evidence of deep vein thrombosis in bilateral lower extremities . Due to the apical predominant dysfunction, the patient was asked about recent psychosocial life-stressors, which she denied . She had a single view chest radiograph which showed no mediastinal widening, evidence of pulmonary edema, or pneumonia. Initial laboratory data were unremarkable with the exception of a potassium of 3.4 millimoles (mmol) per liter (L) (reference range: 3.5–5.1 mmol/L), a brain natriuretic peptide level of 227 picograms per milliliter (pg/mL) (0–100 pg/mL), and a troponin of 6.0 nanograms (ng)/mL (<=0.04 ng/mL). Given ongoing chest pain and electrocardiographic findings, the decision was then made in conjunction with the interventional cardiology team to take the patient to the cardiac catheterization lab to rule out an ischemic etiology, although stress-induced cardiomyopathy was a leading diagnosis on the differential.
Coronary angiography showed no evidence of coronary artery disease. The patient was subsequently transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) for ongoing management of acute cardiomyopathy. At time of admission to the CICU, the patient’s dyspnea had worsened, and she had a three to four liter oxygen requirement. While in the catheterization lab, thyroid studies resulted with an undetectable thyroid stimulating hormone and a free thyroxine (T4) level of 5.75 ng/dL (0.89 – 1.76 ng/dL). Endocrinology was consulted to assist in management of a presumed thyroid storm. Further history revealed no prior history of known thyroid disease, but mild symptoms of thyrotoxicosis including weight loss (22 pounds in the prior month) and new intermittent tremor over the preceding several months.
Due to concerns that thyroid storm was contributing to heart failure symptoms, the inpatient team started propylthiouracil at 400 milligrams (mg) every six hours, potassium iodide oral solution (SSKI) five drops every six hours, hydrocortisone 100 mg intravenously every eight hours, and an esmolol infusion (to allow careful titration given reduced ejection fraction). Heart rate, palpitations, and dyspnea improved with treatment of thyroid storm. During hospitalization, thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibody, thyroglobulin antibody, and thyroid peroxidase antibody levels were found to be elevated, consistent with Graves’ disease.