A 6-year-old boy patient was admitted to the hospital with the chief complaint of “Abnormal gait in both lower extremities for 3 years.” The child's family complained that his lower limbs had abnormal gait for 3 years without pain when he began to walk independently in 2018, he went to the local rehabilitation hospital for rehabilitation training, but the gait did not improve. The gait abnormality of both lower limbs has worsened recently. Jaundice and severe anemia appeared 6 h after birth, which improved after treatment. After that, anemia and yellowing of the skin occurred repeatedly, accompanied by hepatosplenomegaly. He underwent a splenectomy at the age of 4 due to splenomegaly. The child could sit alone at 1 year old, stand alone at 2 years old, and walk alone at 3 years old but fall easily. He can communicate with others normally, with no limitation in upper limbs. His father was healthy, his mother suffered from thalassemia.
Physical examination: T: 36.1°C, P: 104 times/min, R: 20 times/min, body weight 16.7 kg, clear consciousness, yellowish sclera, pale eyelids, lip mucosa, pale nail beds. No hyperemia of the pharynx, no enlargement of bilateral tonsils. Abdominal distension, 8 cm below the right costal margin of the liver, 7 cm below the xiphoid process, tough texture, without tenderness. No spinal deformity, knee reflex, and Achilles tendon reflex can be induced, pathological signs, and meningeal irritation signs were negative. The gait of the lower limbs was obviously abnormal, with claudication of the staggering gait, no obvious swelling, tenderness in both lower limbs, restricted movement of the hip joints, mainly restricted hip abduction and external rotation. The lower limbs were basically of equal length, and good blood supply to the extremities, good sensation and movement could be achieved.
Laboratory examination: routine blood white blood cell count (WBC) 19.88 × 10 9/L, 2.62 × 1,012/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 85 g/L, serum ferritin (FRT) 6786.4 ng/ml, hematocrit 27.6%, platelet count 894 × 10 9/L coagulation function test: fibrin degradation product 31.30 μg/ml liver and kidney function test: total bilirubin 51.7 umol/L, direct bilirubin 17.1 umol/L, indirect bilirubin 34.6 umol/L, glutaminase 179.0 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 89.72 u/L, alkaline phosphatase 188 U/L, r-glutamyl transpeptidase 81.5 U/L. Imaging examination: Pelvic ap film: the right femoral skull epiphysis becomes flat, smaller, irregular in shape, multiple cystic low-density lesions are seen inside, the right acetabulum is flat, and the right hip joint space is widened. The right femoral head shifted outwards and upwards . CT results: the right femoral head epiphysis was flattened, several microcystic changes were observed on the upper edge, the right femoral head slightly shifted outwards and upward, and the right acetabulum was slightly flattened . MRI results show right side femoral epiphysis became flat and local bone collapsed: there were multiple small patchy T2WI hyperintensity shadows under the right femoral metaphysis and right acetabular articular surface .