A 30-year-old woman presented with a history of repeated episodes of identity disturbance characterized by a marked change in behavior, aggression, psychomotor agitation, and voice change (from female to male voice). The episodes started in March 2018 and lasted from 10 min to 6 h, at an average frequency of 3 times a week.
The patient generally had a partial or total recollection of events. She was ashamed of the people who witnessed the episodes because she felt ridiculed. She could not avoid possession, which happened in places like churches, at the school where she worked as a teacher, at home, and at the doctor's office. Since the beginning of the condition, she had been showing moderate social isolation, because the community where she lives believed that she was possessed by an evil entity. She had several days of absenteeism at work due to crises and failed several medical treatments.
She often attended masses of the Catholic Church, where these occurrences were not well regarded. After one almost uncontrollable crisis, the patient broke the pews of the church during the service. The priest decided to submit her to a ritual of exorcism, which consisted of prayers, holy water, and crucifix presentation. During the session, the patient attacked eight people, including the priest, who had his clothes torn.
The treatment was abandoned, as the patient's family was embarrassed by the amount of stuff broken and people injured during the “possession” state, besides not obtaining satisfactory results, which diminished the interest in continuing this procedure.
She did not intend any kind of secondary gain with that disorder and, most of the time, she would get physically exhausted along with the trance: at the start, she would get overly strong and, up to the end, she would be very weak. Practitioners of her religion (Catholic) were not used to dealing with these manifestations. As time went by, the trance episodes increased in frequency and intensity and she felt more isolated at work and in her social relationships. Concomitantly with those religious sessions, the patient went through several unsuccessful psychiatric treatments over a year. Our service was then referred to the patient by another colleague.
At the initial consultation, she was quite frightened, as she had several embarrassing situations and was profoundly affected by the fact that she had no control over her body. Personal background: She denies a history of abuse or neglect. She said that at the age of 5, she was in the recovery room of a tonsillectomy surgery when she had a vision of a spiritual entity, dressed in light clothes, who told her about the importance of ethical and moral behavior in life.
She reported the vision to her family, but it was not taken seriously, and they mocked her. The most striking case was that of a repetitive dream with an unknown middle-aged man, whom she met after a few months at a horse farm.
She had other similar dreams between the ages of 5 and 11. When she was 10 years old, she was awakened in the middle of the night by an entity who stated to be her grandfather, who had died 2 years before. She wrote a letter dictated by her deceased grandfather to her father regarding personal matters that were completely unknown to her. The signature showed some resemblance to her grandfather's. The next day, her parents read the letter and said they were sure it was the devil's work and tore the entire manuscript. In her early teens, she had the feeling that a spiritual entity intended to have sex against her will. She was very bothered by the feeling that someone was running his hands all over her body, including her private parts. She did not talk to others about these feelings, because she was afraid someone might think she was “crazy.” After starting her sexual life, she had an invisible and unusual sensory experience as rape-like provoked by supposed bad spiritual beings. These sensations were so threatening that they led her to frequent suicidal thoughts. The patient reports that the episodes were completely unwanted and aroused a feeling of despair, with an intense resemblance to reality.
She made several suicide attempts through lethal methods such as hanging, drowning, moving motorcar, and electric shock, always being driven by a male voice that guided her. At several moments, she completely lost her mind and body control during the episodes and assumed that an external entity commanded her. The patient consulted several specialists, who gave various diagnoses such as depression, anxiety disorder, schizophrenia, and panic disorder. She took nortriptyline 75 mg daily for 6 months, fluoxetine 40 mg daily for 4 months, escitalopram 20 mg daily for 3 months, risperidone 6 mg daily for 4 months, quetiapine 600 mg at night for 4 months, some of them in combination in the last year, with no clinical improvement. She did not have any therapeutic benefits from these drugs, although she experienced all the side effects. In this case, there was probably a good adherence to pharmacological treatment, although it is not been proven by measuring the plasma level of the substances.
Among the symptoms, the patient said that she heard voices, saw figures, often dreamed of deceased people, thought randomly about things that came to happen after a while, believed to write automatically and unconsciously, driven by a force external to her thinking. She complained of many very rapid mood swings, fear of abandonment, and an intense feeling of emptiness.
The patient was born by transpelvian delivery and had normal neuropsychomotor development. She had a tonsillectomy at 5 years of age. She never attended psychological counseling. The patient denied a history of childhood abuse or neglect. The patient spent her childhood and adolescence in a situation of low socioeconomic level. Her mother had behavioral problems but never went through any kind of treatment. There is no information on family health and AE history.
In the mental state examination, the patient did not present alterations except for a very anxious mood. The structure of thought was completely normal. The physical and neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. The patient obtained 45 points in the Beck anxiety inventory (BAI) and 45 on the dissociative experiences scale (DES). Lab Tests, Brain MRI, and 3 repetitive EEGs were normal.
The patient fulfilled all criteria for diagnosis of dissociative identity disorder according to DSM-V: characterized by two or more distinct personality states (also called alter egos or self-states or identities). There is also an inability to recall daily events, important personal information, and/or traumatic or stressful events, all of which typically would not normally be lost with normal forgetting. The symptoms caused social and professional harm, were not part of a context accepted by religious practice, and were not due to a physiological effect of substances or other medical conditions.
The patient refused psychotherapy for economic reasons and decided to attend Spiritism, which accepts communication among the living and the dead as part of its doctrinal framework. Spiritism started initially in France as a spiritualistic movement developed in the 19th century, and nowadays it has spread around the world. In Brazil, it is the third-largest religion and its practices strongly emphasize controlled psychotic and dissociative experiences called mediumship. Mediumistic practices are not reimbursed but are considered charitable voluntary work (, ).
After 3 months in the new religious order, where her dissociative manifestations were naturally accepted, without the interpretation that it would be the result of the influence of the supreme evil, the patient had marked improvement in anxiety symptoms, reducing the BAI score to 26, becoming able to speak spontaneously about her crises and very rarely presented the picture outside the appropriate religious context. People sometimes refer to fear in participating in Spiritism meetings due to the lack of proper information about the safety of the procedure. The patient denied any concern about it, although she kept discretion about her treatment for people outside its context, due to the fear of suffering prejudice. She also returned to her social and occupational activities.