The patient was a 45-year-old Caucasian female who had a history of systemic arterial hypertension and diabetes mellitus that started 10 years earlier and was treated with neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin and enalapril. She reported having painful and erythematous nodules on the backs of her legs, together with fatigue.
Physical examination demonstrated that she was afebrile (temperature 35.7 °C) and presented subcutaneous nodules of two centimeters and three centimeters in diameter on the posterior and medial faces of both legs, with marked erythematous skin above the lesions. A biopsy on one of the lesions demonstrated caseous necrotic granulomatous panniculitis compatible with EIB. BCG (bacillus Calmette-Guérin) immunohistochemical tests were positive for this antigen. A tuberculin test showed nodulation of 15 mm in her left arm. Serological tests for HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B were negative. Investigations on tuberculosis sites were completely negative and included x-ray and computed tomography of the chest and abdomen, urine culturing (three different samples), Ziehl-Neelsen staining on sputum (three different samples), and gastric fluid investigations. She was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid and pyrazinamide.
Ten days after anti-tuberculosis therapy was introduced, she experienced asthenia, depressive mood and dizziness when standing up. She did not have any orthostatic hypotension. Sertraline treatment was started but she did not show any response until 300 mg/day was reached.
She was hospitalized on three occasions due to heart failure and hyponatremia (sodium: 125 mg/dl). During the last hospitalization, insulin administration was completely stopped since she was showing good glucose control. Six months later, she started to present facial hyperpigmentation, and a skin biopsy showed a nonspecific increase in melanin without other histopathological lesions. Because of the combination of hyponatremia, good glucose control, asthenia, low blood pressure and facial hyperpigmentation, a serum sample was obtained for cortisol measurement. This showed that the levels of this hormone were low, at 1.9 mcg/dl (normal level in the mornings: 5-25 mcg/dl), as were the levels of dehydroepiandrosterone, 1.7 ng/ml (normal: 2.5-6.5 ng/ml), and dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate, 187 ng/ml (normal: 354-2560 ng/ml). A diagnosis of Addison’s disease was made. The eosinophil count was 600 cells/mm3. Computed tomography showed bilateral enlargement of the adrenal glands, with preserved outlines.
Glucocorticoid replacement was then started and the patient had a good outcome. She recovered from the asthenia and fatigue, her blood pressure and serum sodium returned to normal levels, and insulin administration was also resumed. Anti-tuberculosis drug treatment was resumed and, after two months, the regimen was reduced to isoniazid and rifampicin. This regimen was continued until completion of nine months of treatment.
At the end of the treatment, the ulcerated lesions had all healed and the nodules had resolved with only severe hyperpigmentation remaining. Three months following cessation of therapy, no new lesions had occurred and the patient remained well.