A 36-year-old man presented to our hospital for evaluation of progressively worsening facial swelling and nasal congestion. He was initially diagnosed with a nasal polyp with sinusitis and underwent polyp removal with antibiotic therapy.
The patient visited our hospital for further evaluation after redeveloping facial swelling and nasal congestion, this time accompanied by a gradually worsening cough with sputum and blurred vision in the left eye.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient is a non-alcoholic and non-smoker. He has no family history.
The patient showed painful facial swelling and blurred vision. The patient's respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure was p (B) = 15.99/10.7 kPa, and oxygen saturation in room air was 90%.
Based on laboratory findings, the hemoglobin level was 11.9 g/dL (normal range, 12-16 g/dL), and the creatinine level was 0.7 mg/dL (normal range, 0.5-1.3 mg/dL). Monoclonal proteins could not be detected by serum and urine protein immunofixation electrophoresis. The albumin level was 3.77 g/dL (normal range, 3.5-5.5 g/dL) and beta-2-microglobulin level was 4.2 mg/L (normal range, 0.0-2.4 mg/L). The lactate dehydrogenase level was 271 U/L (normal range, 125-220 U/L).
Computed tomography of the neck and thorax revealed a solid mass occupying the left maxillary sinus and an endobronchial lesion in the left main bronchus .
Positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed a hypermetabolic mass in the left maxillary sinus extending to the left ethmoid sinus and nasal cavity and multiple hypermetabolic metastatic nodules in both the cervical and left supraclavicular areas. Multiple hypermetabolic osseous metastases had spread to the sternum, ribs, right scapula, right humerus, thoraxic and lumbar spines, pelvic bone, and left femur. Focal hypermetabolic nodular lesions in the left main bronchus were also observed . Primary lung cancer with multiple bone metastases was initially suspected, but double primary lung cancer with maxillary sinus cancer was excluded. We immediately performed a pathologic examination of the maxillary sinus mass and the endobronchial mass using bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopic findings showed a 1.5-cm protruding mass with pedicles arising from the anterior wall of the left proximal main bronchus , which was suspected to be primary lung cancer. Initially, the maxillary mass had pathologic findings of monomorphic plasmacytoid cytoplasm (positive for CD138, kappa light chain, and negative for CD3, CD20, and lambda light chain) , and it was subsequently diagnosed as a plasmacytoma, which was confirmed by the bronchoscopic biopsy result .
The patient was referred to the hematology department to undergo an evaluation for systemic MM. Biochemical tests revealed normal calcium and creatinine levels, and serum and urine immunofixation were negative for monoclonal proteins. However, the bone marrow biopsy from the iliac crest showed hypercellularity for his age with diffusely infiltrated plasma cells (13.49%) . Although the patient had no anemia and the serum creatinine levels were normal, a diagnosis of non-secretory MM was considered based on the bone marrow biopsy findings and the multiple lesions, including confirmation of the maxillary sinus and endobronchial lesions as plasmacytoma.