A 50-year-old Caucasian man with adult-onset RRP was referred for rhinology consultation for multiple unilateral nasal papillomata. He had undergone endoscopic potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser ablations for diffuse laryngotracheal disease nearly every 3 months prior. Previous biopsies showed evidence of moderate to severe dysplasia on some of the tracheal lesions. Repeat airway debulking and nasal biopsy at our institution revealed squamous papillomata without evidence of dysplasia in both specimens. In situ hybridization (ISH) studies for HPV were negative for high-risk subtypes.
Three months later, his examination exhibited increased nasal involvement with lesions of the middle and superior turbinates and posterior septum while sparing his nasopharynx. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed mucosal irregularities consistent with examination findings without hyperostosis or posterior ethmoid involvement .
Intraoperative frozen sections were consistent with benign respiratory papilloma. However, permanent section pathologic analysis revealed inverted type Schneiderian papilloma in all nasal specimens and benign squamous papillomata with mild to moderate atypia in the larynx and trachea. His surgical resection included removal of the majority of the lesion with an attachment site centered on the middle turbinate. The mucosal surface of the posterosuperior septum and a small portion of skull base were also removed, as they were involved with papilloma (see Fig. ). It is unclear if this patient exhibited synchronous IP of the middle turbinate and recurrent respiratory papilloma of the septum and skull base, or if the multisite disease represents diffuse nasal IP. Viral ISH studies demonstrated evidence of HPV family 6 (subtypes 6 or 11) in both the septum and middle turbinate subsites. Repeat nasal excision with margin analysis is planned in conjunction with the next laryngeal procedure as frozen section pathology was equivocal and the lesion encroached on his skull base.
Prior to coming to our institution, he underwent previous treatments that included KTP laser, cidofovir injections, and indole-3-carbinol. He did endorse a history of smoking cigarettes and has recently decreased consumption from one pack per day to half a pack per day. Based on the initial presentation and pertinent medical history, our patient is at increased risk for malignant transformation of papillomata, particularly in the larynx . Now at 12 months postoperatively, he is stable with no signs of residual malignancy.