A 43-year-old man – a refugee Sudanese man – who had been living in Germany for 19 months was referred to our clinic by his rheumatologist with low back pain and the suspected diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis. On admission our patient complained of low back pain radiating into his right hip, which started gradually during the last 4 months. He described the pain as persistent and more intense at night so that he could not sleep. Fever, weight loss, and night sweats were denied. In the clinical examination, movements of his right hip were painful. Before admission treatment with 25 mg prednisolone and diclofenac had been already initiated since spondyloarthritis was suspected. Prednisolone therapy was started 2 months before admission with an initial dose of 40 mg/day and was tapered to 25 mg/day until admission. On admission his erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal and his C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated (87 mg/l, normal range < 5 mg/l). The rest of routine laboratory tests were normal, except for a slight increase in gamma glutamyltransferase (gamma GT, 78 U/l; normal range < 55 U/l). The immunological tests showed a low titer of antinuclear antibodies (1:160) with no specification in the extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) screening test. The tests for rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies were negative. An HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) test was also negative. A conventional chest X-ray revealed no pathological findings. During his in-patient stay low grade fever was discovered. Conventional radiographs of his right hip, pelvis, sacroiliac joints, and his lumbar spine revealed osteosclerosis of his left sacroiliac joint without further abnormalities. In correlation with the pain in the area of his right hip, a pelvis and hip magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed synovitis of his right hip with trochanteric bursitis . Furthermore, there was left-sided osteitis of the sacral bone. We then performed an interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA), which was positive. Therefore, we collected material for microbiological as well as pathological diagnostics by puncture of his left hip joint. Histological examination of the periarticular tissue revealed the formation of granulomas with caseous necrosis . Despite a negative acid-fast stain of the gained tissue sample, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Culture for mycobacteria remained negative. All other specimens submitted for microbiological testing (blood culture and sputum probes) remained culturally and PCR negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Based on the above described findings, we made a diagnosis of tuberculous coxitis with trochanteric bursitis. Molecular testing yielded no evidence of mycobacterial resistance to isoniazid or rifampicin. We therefore started a four-drug anti-mycobacterial regimen with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. Prednisolone was gradually reduced until its complete discontinuation. After 2 months of therapy, ethambutol and pyrazinamide were stopped. Rifampicin and isoniazid were continued for 7 more months. In the follow-up, 6 months after starting therapy and 2 months after completion of a 9-month anti-mycobacterial regimen, his CRP was normal, and low back pain and painful motility of his right hip resolved completely. Conventional radiographs of his right hip showed a slight joint space narrowing with no further pathological findings. In the absence of functional limitation no surgical treatment was required.