A 27-year-old man of Eastern Asian descent presented to our outpatient clinic with a complaint of the right forearm pain and deformity for over 2 months. The pain started 72 days back when the patient sustained a road traffic accident and fell from his motorbike on an outstretched hand, since then, he noticed the deformity in his forearm, and he first thought it was a simple contusion or bruise. The following days the swelling subsided, but the deformity did not resolve completely and he was not able to move his forearm as he could previously, and he did not seek medical attention due to the fact that he was afraid to lose his job. The patient came to us based on the advice of some relatives that he was visiting. Examination: On general examination, he was a well-built gentleman that was not in any pain or discomfort. Local examination of the right forearm showed an obvious deformity with minimal tenderness to palpation. The range of motion examination of the wrist was painful and showed a 30° flexion-extension arc and 60° of pronosupination. The right elbow, metacarpophalangeal, proximal, and distal interphalangeal joints showed a full painless range of motion. The distal neurological examination of the right upper extremity and distal pulses was intact and was compared to the contralateral limb. X-rays are shown in (, ) which show a distal third radial shaft fracture, ulnar styloid fracture, and a disrupted DRUJ.
The surgery was under general anesthesia, the patient was placed supine and the right arm on a radiolucent arm table with a tourniquet, and then, he was draped and prepped using the sterile surgical technique. The tourniquet was inflated, and an anterior approach to the forearm (Henry) was utilized. The intermuscular interval between the flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis was used, the pronator teres were partially elevated for adequate surgical exposure, and the radial artery and superficial radial nerve were protected throughout the procedure. On exposure of the fracture, the callus was well-formed, so an osteotomy was performed, the fracture was reduced. A 3.5 mm dynamic compression plate with four bicortical screws above and three screws below was utilized. Bone allograft was also used to aid in healing. After anatomic reduction and restoration of the radial bow, the DRUJ was reduced spontaneously, it was tested intraoperatively by ballottement and ulnar pull and was found to be stable, so the decision was made not to extend the incision to the wrist nor to pin it after it was reduced and obviating the need to fix the ulnar styloid fracture. Multilayer closure was done, and then, the arm was splinted in supination (, ).
At 2 weeks postoperatively, the clips were removed and the splint was discontinued, the patient was then referred to physical therapy for postoperative rehab in an attempt to restore his functional range of motion. Figs. and show his final follow-up with us 3 weeks postoperatively since he left the country to avoid the travel ban following the coronavirus pandemic. We have remained in contact with our patient and his local orthopedic surgeon, he was able to achieve radiographic union at 5 months, and his range of motion was 70° of wrist extension, 80° of wrist flexion, and 150° of pronosupination, as shown in (-). The patient was discharged from orthopedic care 5 months postoperatively.