A 28-year-old man was admitted to The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine because of hallucinations and persecutory delusions, which lasted for ~48 hours. When he was alone at home, he had an auditory hallucination that his parents described of inviting a Taoist, and he “heard” that his birthday horoscope did not match with that prepared by his parents. The patient reported that he could sometimes “see” the Taoist. The auditory hallucinations lasted for almost an entire day and severely affected the patient’s sleep. He simultaneously expressed fear that someone wanted to control and harm him. He did not report experiencing headache, fever, or convulsions. Prior to admission, he had been in excellent health and did not have a history of medical problems, psychiatric disorders, or substance abuse. He was born in Zhejiang province of the People’s Republic of China and had not traveled elsewhere. He was single and did not report recent sexual contact. He was a nonsmoker and did not drink alcohol habitually. His family history was negative for psychotic disorders.
Five days prior to admission, he reported symptoms of a cold, including a runny nose, and had therefore started taking an over-the-counter cold medicine (brand name: Kuaike), which contained 250 mg of acetaminophen and 100 mg of amantadine hydrochloride. The patient took one capsule twice daily. Three days later, he began to experience hallucinations and delusions.
During the mental status examination administered upon admission, the patient was described as a slightly thin and cooperative man. The patient was fully oriented to person, place, and time. However, he frequently looked down and did not maintain eye contact with the examiner. His speech was a bit slow, but with normal tone, rhythm, and prosody. He had obvious auditory and visual hallucinations. His thought process was linear; however, he expressed persecutory delusions. His mood was anxious and congruent. No suicidal or homicidal ideation was reported or exhibited. Although the patient acknowledged his own abnormal mental state, his insight was still partially impaired.
Physical and neurologic examinations did not identify any abnormalities. Laboratory studies revealed complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, urea, creatinine, hepatic function, and thyroid hormone levels within normal limits, and the rapid plasma reagin test, serum human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test, and urinalysis for narcotic drugs were negative. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) appeared normal.
The patient was immediately treated with haloperidol (5 mg daily) and paliperidone extended release (3 mg daily), while Kuaike administration was ceased. After 48 hours of treatment, his symptoms were markedly improved. Auditory and visual hallucinations, as well as paranoid ideation, resolved completely. Haloperidol was used for 3 days, and the use of paliperidone extended release was maintained for 2 weeks to prevent relapse. After the 2-week treatment course, he had fully recovered and was discharged. Six months later, we conducted a telephonic follow-up, wherein the patient reported of no subsequent psychotic experiences.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review. The report was approved by The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine ethics committee.