We describe the case of a Caucasian 13-year-old girl who was first referred to our department with a diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa.
She underwent a full clinical examination which included visual acuity, ophthalmoscopic evaluation, structural OCT, and photopic and scotopic ERG. The autofluorescence of both eyes showed a hyperautofluorescent halo around the fovea covering 360°. According to Gelman et al. , the “hyperautofluorescent ring border” corresponds to impending photoreceptor loss.
Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 75 letters Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) in her right eye (RE) and 60 letters in her left eye (LE). The visual acuity impairment was consistent with the abnormalities detected using OCT which revealed a deformation of the retinal profile and the presence of cystic spaces in both eyes . This report was referred to as “schisis at an early stage.”
ERG, performed according to International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard, showed non-recordable rod response, and reduced maximal and cone responses with a decreased b-wave to a-wave ratio. Responses to 30 Hz flicker were reduced and delayed. Specialized ERG recordings of responses mediated prevalently by short-wavelength-sensitive cones (S-cones) and ML-wavelength sensitive cones (ML-cones) were obtained from both eyes. S-cone-mediated ERGs were recorded in response to a blue (420 nm) stimulus of 30 degrees flickered at 4 Hz and presented on a steady yellow background. ML-cone-mediated ERGs were obtained in response to a red (580 nm) stimulus of 30 degrees flickering at 4 Hz and presented on a steady blue (420 nm) background. Blue and red stimuli were photopically matched. In normal individuals the ML cone ERG is three times larger in amplitude (a-b wave peak) and 10 ms shorter (b-wave peak) compared to S-cone ERG. In this particular patient, S-cone ERG was of larger amplitude (1.2 times) compared to ML cone. The peak times of both responses were comparable. These findings indicated the enhanced S-cone sensitivity for this patient .
Highly suspected on the basis of clinical and electrophysiological findings the diagnosis of ESCS was made.
Our patient was evaluated every 6 months for a year. BCVA was measured every time: 6 months after the first examination, it was found to be 65 letters ETDRS in her RE and 75 letters in her LE, while, a year later, it was 82 letters in her RE and 75 letters in her LE.
Two years after the first examination, BCVA decreased to 65 letters in her RE and 40 letters in her LE, consistent with OCT findings. Structural OCT was performed using the DRI OCT Triton™ swept source OCT device (Topcon Medical Tokyo, Japan) and revealed an increased retinal thickness and a markedly altered retinal structure due to macular schisis. These features were detected in both eyes.
Macular schisis, as seen on OCT B scans , affected both the outer and the inner nuclear layers: hyporeflective cystic-like spaces were seen in both these layers, even though they were much larger in the outer one. The outer plexiform layer appeared to be interrupted in the center of the macular region as holes in the inner and outer nuclear layers joined together. The vertical septa were observable mainly in the RE probably due to a greater disruption of retinal tissue in the LE. Hyporeflective holes separated by hyper-reflective partitions could also be visualized in the macular region on “en face” OCT images performed at the level of the inner and outer nuclear layers. These spaces had different shapes: they were round-shaped in the inner nuclear layers, oval in the outer one.
At the same time an OCT-A was performed using the same device and it enabled the visualization of the vascular involvement. Superficial and deep vascular network can be separately evaluated by OCT-A. OCT-A scans of the superficial plexus showed the insignificant involvement of circulation of this layer in both eyes, while the deep plexus revealed a marked remodeling of this vascular layer. In fact, there was an absence of capillary details secondary to the sliding of vessels at the margin of the schisis . The choriocapillaris vascular network did not seem to be affected by any abnormalities.
Changes in retinal structure were monitored by performing swept source OCT 1 month and 3 months after the first evaluation: 1 month later, a decrease in retinal thickness and in size of the hyporeflective cavities were noticed on macular OCT B scans carried out on her RE ; these features were consistent with the aspect observed on “en face” scans which showed a reduction in number and size of the cystic-like spaces. Three months after the first examination, a mild deterioration was detected . A general improvement in retinal structure was congruent with visual acuity increase from 65 letters ETDRS to 80 letters; by contrast, no difference was noticed on horizontal scans and on “en face” OCT images performed on her LE, while visual acuity improved from 40 letters ETDRS to only 50 letters.
Genetic analysis showed two variants in NR2E3 (NM_014249.3): a missense variation c.1118T>C, which leads to substitution of leucine with proline in amino acid position 373, and c.349+5G>C, which involves a gene sequence near a splicing site.