The patient was a 58-year-old woman with no history of psychiatric disorder before the age of 58. When she was younger (approximately 10 years old), despite tending to exhibit inattentiveness and forgetfulness, she obtained good grades in school, and these tendencies did not interfere with her daily life. Although her family noticed certain behaviors—such as inattentiveness and forgetfulness, which was manifested as hitting or misplacing things—they assumed that these tendencies were inherited, since other family members who exhibited similar issues were not diagnosed with psychiatric disease and did not require medical treatment. After graduating from high school, she worked at a bank. Although she was aware of a tendency to forget to take notes or misplace her documents at work, she never made any errors that caused serious repercussions and did not experience problems with her colleagues. After she retired from the bank at 52 years of age, she started her own business.
After starting her own business, she was much busier than she had been when she was simply an employee. Within a year, her attentional difficulties and memory issues gradually progressed, and at approximately 57 years of age, she became so inattentive and forgetful that it interfered with her work and family life at home. For example, she forgot meetings with important clients, transferred money to the wrong bank account, and these failures resulted in poor management of her company. At home, she experienced increasing difficulties with remembering prior commitments with her family and misplacing items, which her family members noticed. With the encouragement of her family and employees, who worried that she was suffering from dementia, she visited our memory clinic at 58 years of age.
Upon visiting the clinic, she reported that she perceived her increased forgetfulness was problematic since it was bothering the people around her; therefore, she feared having dementia and prepared herself to retire from her own company. She did not report experiencing reductions in her levels of desires or interests, and no depressive symptoms were noted during the medical interview. No neurological abnormalities, such as parkinsonism or pathological reflexes, were identified. Neuropsychological testing, such as Mini-Mental State Examination, Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale and Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test, indicated that her memory was intact. Laboratory tests, including blood counts (e.g., full blood count, electrolytes, urea and creatinine, vitamins B1 and B12, and folic acid), blood biochemistry, and electroencephalography, did not reveal any abnormalities . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain did not reveal any clear cerebral parenchymal atrophy in the hippocampus or other regions, but single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) indicated mildly decreased blood flow in the posterior cingulate cortex. Pittsburgh compound B positron emission tomography (PiB-PET) did not show amyloid deposition in the cerebral cortex, and the phosphorylated tau/amyloid beta-42 ratio in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was within the normal range .
Given that her condition at work and at home fulfilled eight of the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for inattentiveness and three for hyperactivity/impulsivity, we diagnosed her with ADHD, and treatment with 18 mg of methylphenidate was initiated and continued this dose. Within a few days after starting the methylphenidate administration, pronounced improvements in her symptoms were observed; for example, she stopped losing her things, was able to concentrate for long durations, and could complete more tasks than she could prior to treatment, which surprised her family and subordinates. Thus, she no longer met the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for ADHD . Although she thought she would have to retire from her business, she instead was able to return to work without issue. We conducted a follow up for 6 months with administration of 18 mg methylphenidate; during this period, her initial symptoms did not reappear.