A 49-year-old woman was hospitalized in the University Hospital Halle/Saale, Germany, with an acute presentation of headache, discrete ataxia and impaired vision. No episodes of pyrexia were reported. Serum inflammatory markers were inconspicuous with only a slight leukocytosis (14.53 Gpt l−1). Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a contrast-enhancing lesion with surrounding edema in the left cerebellum hemisphere next to the cerebellar pedunculus (a, b). In addition, computed tomography (CT) showed a small hyperintense subpleural nodule in the right lower lung lobe . To rule out malignancy the cerebellar lesion was surgically biopsied via a suboccipital craniotomy. A frozen section contained paucicellular glial tissue without signs of malignancy, purulence or specific infection (c, d). Postoperatively, the patient developed cerebral edema with displacement and compression of the fourth ventricle and the brainstem. Severe increase of intracranial pressure required suboccipital craniotomy and application of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage. A microbiological examination of the liquor was not carried out as there was no suspicion of an infection. Despite extensive supportive care the clinical condition did not improve and ten days after hospitalization the patient died. An autopsy demonstrated a purulent pneumonia with punctum maximum in the right inferior lung lobe. In addition, further processing of the cerebral biopsy was undertaken, including PAS and Grocott staining. These revealed the image of cerebral cryptococcosis with presentation of typical capsule, highlighted fungi next to a surrounding histiocyte-rich inflammation with abundance of foam cells and a rare lymphocytic infiltrate (a, b). The same pathogens were also seen in the inflamed pulmonary tissue (c, d). Cryptococcal DNA was amplified by a broad-range PCR assay targeting the ITS2 region of the ribosomal DNA. The amplicon was identified as C. gattii by LCD-Chip hybridization (LCD array fungi 2.1; Chipron). Natural reservoirs for C. gattii are found in Australia, Asia, Africa and some regions of America, including Vancouver Island which has been determined to be an endemic area . In contrast, infection in Europe is rare, although C. gattii has been previously isolated in Greece, southern Italy and Spain . When confronted with the autopsy results the relatives of the deceased mentioned that she spent her holidays on Vancouver Island two years prior her death. Tissue samples were transmitted to the Robert-Koch Institute (Berlin, Germany) where molecular pathogen analysis was confirmed by amplification of the IGS region of the ribosomal DNA with amplicon detection by LCD-Chip hybridization using a commercial system (Chipron) and ITS2 PCR with amplicon sequencing . Subsequently in Nijmegen, the Netherlands, a standard multi-locus sequence typing analysis was performed , which did not yield any PCR product due to the fragmented formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)-DNA. Therefore a FFPE-MLST scheme was developed to cover the most variable parts of each of the seven standard MLST-loci . PCRs and sequencing were performed as described previously . Using the FFPE-MLST it was determined that the involved cryptococcal strain was C. deuterogattii, formerly known as C. gattii genotype AFLP6/VGII. By using phylogenetic analysis, it was determined that this strain clustered within the clade of Vancouver-Island-outbreak-related C. deuterogattii strains , which supports the earlier suggestion that the patient acquired the cryptococcal infection during her holiday to Vancouver Island.