A 41-year-old female patient reported to the Department of Endodontics (Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan) with a chief complaint of a small swelling on the gingiva and spontaneous pain on her upper right front tooth that began six months earlier. The patient denied any previous traumatic event and her medical history was noncontributory. The swelling started as a small nodule and progressed slowly, associated with mild, dull intermittent non-irradiating pain. She had a history of periodontal treatment and endodontic therapy of her upper right lateral incisor at a local dental clinic. However, due to the inefficacy of the treatment, the patient was referred to our hospital for better management.
An intraoral examination revealed a tender, firm, sessile growth measuring approximately 2 mm x 2 mm, involving buccal attached gingiva adjacent to the maxillary right lateral incisor and central incisor . Her tooth 12 was caries-free, with temporary filling material at the palatal surface. Her teeth 11 and 13 responded normally to thermal and electric pulp tests, as well as to vertical and lateral percussion. Her upper right lateral incisor showed grade 1 mobility, a deep periodontal pocket measuring about 10 mm at the mesiobuccal and mesiopalatal sides, and tenderness on percussion and palpation. An intraoral radiograph revealed rarefaction of the bone with imprecise margins completely involving the root of the lateral incisor . A tentative diagnosis of an endodontic-periodontal lesion was made and the etiologies for the lesion included a palatogingival groove (PGG), root fracture, granulomatous disease, or neoplasm.
After the endodontic retreatment performed on tooth 12 , she was referred to the Department of Periodontics for further periodontal management. However, buccal and palatal tissue expansion over her maxillary right lateral incisor was noted after periodontal treatment. So, the patient was referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon who performed an incisional biopsy. The pathological report revealed atypical spindled tumor cells contained abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei oval arranged in interlacing fascicles which indicating rhabdomyoblastic differentiation . Mitotic tumor cells could be found in the Fig. B and the immunohistochemical tests were positive for desmin and myoD1 and negative for myogenin . Hence, a diagnosis of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma was made.
At the recall appointment after the incisional biopsy, the swelling over buccal and palatal side progressed rapidly, measuring approximately 2.5 cm x 2.5 cm. The mucosa covering the lesion was reddish with grayish areas of central necrosis . Further examinations were arranged for the patient. Cone-beam computed tomography was performed to evaluate the upper right area. The buccal and palatal cortex around the upper right lateral incisor demonstrated severe erosion and an irregular destruction of the maxillary bone was noted . Contrast-enhanced MRI revealed a periapical enhancing mass at the upper right gingiva measuring 2.9 cm x 2.3 cm x 2.1 cm with suspicious invasion to the underlining maxillary bone, which is compatible with tumor growth. PET revealed a 2.6 cm high FDG-avid lesion at the upper right gingival area with right maxillary infiltration, which is compatible with a highly metabolic active malignancy . The TNM staging of cT4aN0M0 for this soft tissue sarcoma was considered.
The patient was admitted to our ward, where she received further management. Our treatment plan included wide excision of the tumor and free flap reconstruction . An excisional biopsy was performed during surgery, and it revealed findings similar to those of the incisional biopsy. Subsequent to surgery, she underwent radiotherapy with 60 Gy and chemotherapy with six cycles of vincristine.