A 44 year-old pregnant nulliparous, weight 70 Kg, height 172 cm, BMI 23.7, at 34 weeks of a twin gestation, obtained by “in vitro” fertilization, was admitted to the General Hospital of Massa, complaining spreading pricking and lower limb edema. The patient suffered from unstable insulin-dependent type I diabetes and sciatica. Considering 4 days of immobilization in bed, low molecular weight heparin (Dalteparin© 2500 UI one per day) was administered . The patient underwent a planned caesarean section under double-space CSE anaesthesia, using a 25-gauge atraumatic spinal needle at level L3-L4 and an 18-gauge Thuoy needle at T12-L1 (B. Braun Perifix® epidural set), placed during a single attempt. Preoperative coagulation parameters were within normal range (Platelet count 120.000 per microliter of blood; Prothrombin time 12 s, Partial thromboplastin time 30 s, fibrinogen 540 mg/dL, INR 0.90). Renal function was normal. The operation was carried out routinely and multimodal pain therapy was started (Patient Controlled Epidural Anaesthesia - PCEA - with chirocaine 0,15% plus sufentanil 0,5 mcg/ml, 4 ml/h; i.v. ketorolac 30 mg/day and oral tramadol 30 mg plus acetaminophen 1000 mg/3 times/day). Four hours after the operation, the urinary catheter was removed, the patient began to stand up and to take care of the newborns. Dalteparin 2500 U/die was continued. PCEA was discontinued 2 days after the operation and the epidural catheter was removed on the 3rd day, 12 h after the last Dalteparin administration. Pain control was optimal. The following day, the patient remained hospitalized without any complications and the two babies were admitted in neonatology.
At 06.00 a.m. of the 6th post-operative day, more than 70 h after the removal of the epidural catheter, the patient complained of acute and severe low-back pain, radiating to the right inferior limb, and paresthesia; there was no motor impairment and she was treated with analgesic drugs without any improvement. After an abdominal ultrasound, urinary retention was observed and a bladder catheter was inserted (residual volume: 1100 ml). A right lower limb motor deficit was observed at 11:50 a.m. and methylprednisolone was administered. Since no improvement in the patient’s clinical picture was seen, urgent neurological consultation was requested 8 h after the onset of symptoms (02.00 p.m.). A dorsal MRI scan showed the presence of a T12-L1 posterior SEH, predominantly on the right side, with significant mass-effect and spinal cord signal alteration in the conus medullaris region . The patient was transferred to the Neurosurgical Department for decompression laminectomy and removal of the hematoma and the operation began at 07.00 p.m.. Immediately after surgery, the patient partially recovered her sensory disorder and motor functions. Five days after surgery she began intensive rehabilitation.
In the last follow-up examination (36 months later), while mostly improved, motor, sensory and sphincter deficits persisted in varying degrees. The last MRI confirmed signs of permanent ischemic injury at level T12-L1.