A 65-year-old man of Han ancestry was admitted to the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, because of multiple, painless progressive masses for more than five years in the neck and more than 30 years in the upper back.
The patient presented with progressive soft masses over his neck and upper back for more than five years and more than 30 years, respectively, and the swellings in the anterior neck also gradually enlarged over the previous five years.
The patient drank approximately 500 mL of liquor per day and had a smoking history of approximately 20 cigarettes/day for more than 30 years. The man denied a history of glucocorticoid or drug use, but he had a history of hypertension for more than 10 years, for which he irregularly took amlodipine besylate tablets (5 mg per day) and had poorly controlled blood pressure for many years.
He denied previous drug use except for amlodipine besylate tablets and had no family history of similar diseases that caused masses.
Physical examination upon admission revealed the following: his body mass index was 22.7 kg/m2, and he had no signs of moon facies, central obesity, or thin or purple striated skin. Soft masses of approximately 10 cm × 15 cm × 3 cm were easily found in the patient's upper back . At each supraclavicular fossa, soft masses of 3 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm were found with clear boundaries and were fairly mobile . The patient had mild limitations in his neck movements and had cosmetic deformities caused by the masses.
Laboratory tests revealed elevated serum triglycerides (2.38 mmol/L) and serum uric acid (445 μmol/L) but normal hepatic enzymes and blood glucose. The patient was negative for HBV, HCV, HIV, and syphilis. Main laboratory findings of the patient are summarized in Table .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck and chest documented abundant unencapsulated, subcutaneous fatty deposits in the anterior neck, lateral neck, supraclavicular fossa, posterior neck, and upper back .
The pulmonary function test showed moderate obstructive pulmonary ventilation dysfunction, and the maximum voluntary minute ventilation was slightly decreased .
A color Doppler echocardiogram test showed aortic stiffness, an enlarged left atrium, mitral regurgitation (mild), tricuspid regurgitation (mild), and normal left ventricular systolic function .
The postoperative pathological diagnosis showed (neck) lipomas .
Before surgery, the patient was advised to cease drinking and keep his blood pressure normal so that he could pass the surgical safety assessment. After inducing general anesthesia, the patient had undergone cervical central and lateral mass dissections to remove the anterior neck, supraclavicular fossa, and lateral neck masses.
A neckline incision 15 mm above the superior sternal fossa was made, and when the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and platysma muscle were incised layer by layer, soft anterior cervical masses located between the platysma muscle and anterior cervical muscle were observed. These masses were completely removed along their surfaces. Soon thereafter, bilateral neck masses were found on the surface and deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The sternocleidomastoid muscle was incised to expose the masses, and the lateral neck mass was carefully removed along the surface of the carotid sheath. Compressive dressings and garments were used for drainage during the postoperative period. The resected masses were sent for pathological examination. The patient was admitted to the recovery room for postoperative monitoring and care, and no complications occurred after surgery .