A 74-year-old male presented with a significant extensor lag of his right knee and an inability to gain full extension either actively or passively. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging revealed a medial meniscus tear and the presence of an anterior loose body . A shared decision was made to proceed with arthroscopic surgical intervention.
Arthroscopy of the knee was performed using standard portals. After removing the previously visualized anterior loose body, an osteoplasty of an anterior tibial osteophyte was performed. At this point, the patient was still unable to achieve full extension of the knee. It was then decided to perform a posterior capsular release. Beginning with the posteromedial compartment, inflammation and thickening of the posterior capsule were directly visualized. The posteromedial capsule was then released using a standard arthroscopic electrocautery tool. The posterolateral compartment was subsequently visualized, which also demonstrated inflammation and thickening. It was also released in a likewise fashion. At this time, we were still unsatisfied with the degree of knee extension on manipulation and revisited the anterior aspect of the joint. Further synovectomy and debridement were carried out, addressing remnant intra-articular adhesions surrounding the patella. After releasing the posterior capsule both medially and laterally, in combination with the thorough release of anterior adhesions, full extension was achieved with manual pressure and manipulation . Postoperatively, the patient was placed in a hinged knee brace locked in extension. He was seen at 2 and 8 weeks for follow-up. The patient was subsequently lost to follow-up. However, he had regained full motion, ambulated without a limp, and was pain-free at 8-week post-operative.
The authors believe this case demonstrates the viable use of posterior capsulotomy of the knee using an arthroscopic approach to regain complete knee extension. Furthermore, it also suggests the importance of concomitantly addressing anterior blocks to extension in addition to the capsule itself. For this patient, posterior capsular release alone did not provide full motion, and only with thorough release of anterior adhesions was he able to reach maximal extension. This may represent a crucial advantage of arthroscopic versus open capsulotomy, as the latter would not have readily available access to the anterior knee.