The proband (III-1) was a 37-year-old man with severe dizziness and double vision. He had first experienced visual and gait disturbances at 10 years of age. The neurological examination performed on admission revealed mild disturbance of cognitive function (Revised Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale: total IQ=73, performance IQ=58, verbal IQ=91). Neurological disturbances were observed including bilateral exotropia, double vision, incomplete horizontal movement of the eyes to the bilateral side, horizontal, and vertical gaze-evoked nystagmus, and dysarthria. The light reflex was prompt. No disturbances in cranial nerves I, VII, VIII, and XII were detected. Tremor appeared in his neck, but other involuntary movements including palatal myoclonus were not observed. While his upper and lower limbs showed no paralysis, they exhibited severe cerebellar ataxia and hypotonia. No abnormal findings were detected in his deep tendon reflex and sensory system. Ophthalmological examination revealed atrophy of the optic nerve, but there were no pigmentation changes of the retina. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid analyses were normal. Ergometer exercise did not up-regulate his serum lactate and pyruvate.
Orbital MRI revealed atrophy of the optic nerve , and brain MRI disclosed severe atrophy of the cerebellum and mild atrophy of the brain stem . The bilateral inferior olivary nucleus exhibited low signal intensities on T1-weighted imaging, and high signal intensities on T2-weighted imaging, suggesting degeneration . The patient was diagnosed as having LHON plus olivocerebellar degeneration. Although the thyrotropin-releasing drug taltirelin did not relieve his symptoms, adenosine triphosphate disodium reduced his dizziness.
The patient's mother (II-2) and uncle (II-3) also had optic neuropathy, but other neurological abnormalities such as ataxia and dystonia were not observed. The patient's mother has a history of subarachnoid hemorrhage. MRI of his mother disclosed mild atrophy of the optic nerve , pons, and cerebellum . No signal changes were observed in the inferior olivary nucleus .
We were unable to confirm the detailed clinical information of the proband's grandmother (I-2).
Blood samples were obtained from the patient and his mother with their informed consent, and the methods used were approved by the institutional review board of Tottori University Hospital. Both mtDNA and genomic DNA were extracted by standard procedures. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out using the primers 5'-CCTCCCTACTATGCCTAGAAGGA-3' and 5'-TTTGGGTTGTGGCTCAGTGT-3' for ND4, including 11778G analysis, and 5'-AGTTCAGACCGGAGTAATCCAG-3' and 5'-AGGGTTGTAGTAGCCCGTAG-3' for ND1. The primer set for ND4 was designed to identify G11778A mutations, which is the main mutation for LHON. The primer set for ND1 was designed to detect not only the T3394C mutation as a minor mutation for LHON but also an A3243G mutation that is frequently detected in patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes. PCR products that included the previously reported candidate abnormal points were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis using an automated DNA sequencer. The G11778A and T3394C mutations were identified, while the A3243G mutation was not detected.
The mutations in the mtDNA were confirmed by performing PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), in which the PCR products were digested using either HaeIII (for T3394C) or Tsp45I (for G11778A).
In order to quantify the heteroplasmic mutation of G117 78A, we prepared vector constructs including 11778G or 11 778A, and semiquantitative analyses of G11778A were performed using a mixture of each with several rate standards (described in ).
Sequence analysis revealed the homoplasmic T3394C mutation of the mtDNA . This mutation causes a Tyr-to-His amino acid substitution in ND1. PCR-RFLP data revealed that the T3394C mutation present in both the proband (III-1) and his mother (II-2) was homoplasmic; differences between the patient and his mother were not observed for this mutation .
The G11778A mutation, which causes an Arg-to-His amino acid substitution in ND4, was also observed . PCR-RFLP data showed that this mutation in the patient and his mother was heteroplasmic . The semiquantitative analysis performed to determine the effect of this mutation on disease severity revealed that III-1 had a 92% heteroplasmic G11778A mutation, and II-2 had a 70% heteroplasmic G11778A mutation .
Established genetic abnormalities associated with cerebellar ataxia including polyglutamine diseases were not found.