A 3 years old boy presented with history of recurrent fever, episodes of painful urination, increased frequency and haematuria for one year. He had been treated with several courses of antibiotics for urinary tract infections with temporary relief of symptoms before recurrence. At initial presentations several urine analysis using dipstics were performed at the local dispensary and reported to show features of urinary tract infections but no further work up such as urine culture, voiding cyctourethrogram or abdominal ultrasound was performed. Three months before admission to our unit, his mother had felt a mass on his left flank and an abdominal ultrasound done at the nearby District Hospital suspected Wilms’ tumor and the patient was referred to our unit for further evaluation. The patient had otherwise attained his developmental mile stones as per age and had no any dysmorphic features.
On examination; the child was febrile with body temperature of 38.8 °C with tenderness on the left lumber region and had a palpable mass on the same side. Laboratory investigations performed are summarised in the concise table below; Table .
A repeat abdominal ultrasound showed a left renal mass 7.4X7.1X5 cm with multiple cystic lesions. The renal pelvis was destroyed with some calcific changes but no extension to the neighboring structures were noted. The right kidney was normal in size and echogenicity.
Abdominal CT Scan showed an enlarged left kidney measuring 7.9X6.7 cm in size with thinning of the cortices and loss of corticomedullary differentiation, foci of calcifications were also seen and the renal parenchyma was replaced with multiple septations (A). Contrast enhanced CT scans showed areas of peripheral enhancement surrounding non-enhancing cystic foci within the mass. There was no obvious filling defect seen in the renal vein or inferior vena cava. The right kidney was normal in size and shape, urinary bladder displayed normal outline and other abdominal organs were all normal.
Based on the clinical presentation and abdominal CT scan, a clinical diagnosis of Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis was made and the patient underwent left radical nephrectomy. Intra-operatively an enlarged yellowish grey left kidney with multiple mesenteric and hilar lymph nodes was seen, radical left nephroureterectomy and hilar lymphnode resection was performed, the right kidney was normal on inspection. The resected tissues were sampled and sent for culture and sensitivity but there was no bacterial growth after 7 days. Histological studies reported macroscopically gross yellowish renal tissues microscopically showing a renal histology infiltrated with foamy lipid laden macrophages in a mixture of chronic inflammatory cells and fibrosis confirming a diagnosis of Xanthogralomatous pyelophritis .
The patient faired well postoperatively and was kept on a 7 days course of intravenous Tazobactam/piperacillin and discharged home 10 days post nephrectomy.