A homeless 59-year old man was admitted to the emergency department because of confusion in a public place. Physical examination revealed confusion, a Glasgow Coma Scale of 10 with complete aphasia and right symmetric hemiplegia. There was no evidence of louse infestation, scratching lesions or “vagabond’s” leukomelanoderma. The patient presented an increased C-reactive protein level at 39 mg/L (normal value < 5 mg/L), polymorphonuclear neutrophils count at 10.8 Giga/L (normal range 2,5–7,0 G/L), creatine phosphokinase at 11187 UI/L (normal value < 195 UI/L) and transaminases (SGOT/SGPT) at 271/68 UI/L (normal values <40UI/L).
A non-contrast brain CT scan performed upon admission showed a massive left hemispheric subdural collection resulting in a midline shift and subfalcine and uncal herniation with at least two intraparenchymal hypodense lesions suggesting abscesses .
Emergency neurosurgical evacuation was undertaken with a craniectomy, drainage of the loculated pus and removal of most of the infected capsule. Antibiotic treatment was started with intravenous cefotaxime (12 g/day), oral rifampicin (600 mg oad) and oral metronidazole (500 mg bid) for 4 days without signs of improvement. A remaining collection near the frontal sagittal sinus was not responding to medical treatment. Thus, a new neurosurgical debridement was undertaken.
Pus from the empyema, obtained prior to antibiotic treatment, with no microorganism identified after Gram staining, was cultured on blood agar (TSH, Biomérieux, France) growth medium under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, and chocolate agar (BD, USA) growth medium under microaerobic conditions for 10 days with an incubation at 37 °C and turned to be negative. However, the 3 broths (Schaedler, Biomérieux, France), corresponding to the 3 samples taken during the surgery, grew after 3, 6 and 30 days of incubation at 37 °C with contaminants (C. acnes, S. epidermidis), which may have inhibited the detection of B. quintana. No mycobacteria, fungi or yeasts could be identified after cultures on specific growth media. Pathological examination of the membranes that were removed during the surgical procedure showed epithelioid and gigantocellular granuloma and necrosis (usually absent in spontaneous or traumatic subdural hematoma) without evidence for any organism . This fibrous tissue limited a cavity containing a hematoma.
Given the negative stains and culture results, the cerebral pus was also tested using a 16S rRNA-based PCR. Only the “short” 16S amplification strategy was successful and produced directly from the cerebral pus a 500 bp fragment that could be sequenced. The long (1200 bp) 16S pcr failed from the clinical sample, despite repetitive attempts. The results of the comparison of the 500 bp sequence by BLAST using the mined database BIBI clearly identified Bartonella quintana with an identity of 100% over a stretch of 412 base pairs in the 16S sequence (Additional file ). Serology (IgG antibodies) of Bartonella quintana was positive twice 2 weeks apart with an identical titer of 1/256 (indirect immunofluorescence Eurobio*, positive threshold of 1/50).
Doxycycline (200 mg oad) for 6 weeks and intravenous gentamycin (3 mg/kg/day) for 14 days were added to ceftriaxone (2 g oad). Infectious endocarditis was ruled out. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, body CT scan, prolonged blood cultures and plasma PCR were negative. After surgical debridement and the change of antibiotics, the patient gradually recovered.