A 58-year-old woman presented with lower abdominal pain from the deep pelvis and frequent failure of flatulence for 4 mo.
She was referred from a department of gynecology and diagnosed with a suspicious leiomyosarcoma of the rectum or a pedunculated myoma of the uterus after colonoscopy and abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) in a previous hospital. She visited the outpatient clinic after 10 d and was transferred to the emergency center because of severe lower left abdominal pain on 2 d before her scheduled admission. She had nausea, vomiting, and non-whirling dizziness. She was diagnosed with colonic cancer perforation with an abscess and was admitted for antibiotic treatment. We ensured that the acute septic condition was stabilized, and the patient underwent operation.
She had no co-morbid disease.
On digital rectal examination, a circumferential fungating mass with a central ulceration was palpated 8 cm from the anal verge, and it was fixed in the pelvic cavity. In the emergency center, the patient’s body temperature was 38.9 °C. The systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 110 mmHg and 70 mmHg respectively, pulse rate was 78 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute.
Laboratory results were as follows: White blood cell count (23900/µL; 93.9% of neutrophil), hemoglobin (11.6 g/dL), platelet count (416000/µL), C-reactive protein (16.14 mg/dL), lipase (9 IU/L), albumin (3.2 g/dL), alkaline phosphatase (265 IU/L), sodium (132 mEq/L), chloride (93 mEq/L), and prothrombin time percentage (73.2%).
Chest X-ray showed a nodule in the right upper lung field. Besides this, there was no active lesion in the lungs. Colonoscopy revealed a huge submucosal mass-like lesion with focal ulceration located 8 to 15 cm from the anal verge. Abdominopelvic CT showed a poorly marginated mass measuring 7.4 cm × 6.3 cm × 5.5 cm in size located between the rectum and uterus and separated from the uterus by fat tissues. The mass had focal non-enhancing lesions without lymph node enlargement. To rule out the origin of the mass, the patient underwent pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before the operation. MRI revealed an exophytic growing mass with a maximum diameter of 7.2 cm at the right lateral wall of the rectum with an internal cystic portion and hemorrhage, multiple lymph node enlargement at the iliac bifurcations, obturator, and presacral areas, and a 2.2-cm-sized multiseptated cystic mass in the fundus of uterus . Positron emission tomography-CT revealed a high possibility of a malignant tissue with a hypermetabolic mass (SUVmax = 15.1) and cystic changes in the rectum, and this lesion was considered to directly invade the adjacent uterus. Multifocal FDG uptake (SUVmax = 4.0) was observed in the left common iliac, perirectal area, and presacral area .
The tumor was a polypoid mass measuring 10 cm × 4 cm × 4 cm in size, and it invaded left ovary and salpinx via the serosal membrane . No lymph node metastasis, lymphovascular invasion, or perineural invasion was observed. Microscopically, the tumor was a cellular mass that had a solid growth pattern with few glandular structures and many foci of intratumoral necrosis. Tumor cells had elongated nuclei and scant cytoplasm. Mitotic figures, including atypical ones, were also frequently observed. At the boundary between the tumor and normal tissue, tumor cells were arranged in a palisading pattern, resembling basal cell carcinomas of the skin . Immunohistochemical examinations revealed that the tumor cells were focally positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, p63, and Pan-CK and were negative for CK20; neuroendocrine markers, such as synaptophysin and CD56; and mesenchymal cell markers, including CD34, CD117, desmin, S100 protein, and α-smooth muscle actin. Additionally, the tumor cells were negative for vimentin, WT-1, calretinin, CD99, TTF-1, and CDX2.