A man aged 72 years underwent elective surgery, a surgical revascularization of the myocardium, for a previously verified triple vessel coronary artery disease (CAD) with LAD 100%, CX 90%, RCA 90%. In the previous history of the disease he had diabetes mellitus type 2, arterial hypertension, myocardial infarction, hyperlipidemia and a positive family history of cardiovascular diseases.
The operation and early postoperative recovery went without any complications, and the patient was discharged on home care by protocol. On the first postoperative visit, 15 days after surgery, echocardiography showed a neat finding and upon recommendation, the patient continued with the previous treatment recommended for discharge. A month after the first visit or two months after the surgery, the patient was sent from a local hospital to our Heart Center with verified pericardial effusion and with the susceptible signs of right ventricular compression. At this point the patient had symptoms like fatigue and mild chest pain, more on his left side. On physical examination there were slightly pointed veins on the neck. He was afebrile and with neat diuresis. Heart tones were quieter, without murmurs and the action of the heart was rhythmic. Auscultatory findings on the lungs were without pathological murmurs. Measured blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg and the pulse was 96/min. Laboratory blood tests were in reference values range (white blood count - WBC, CRP). In addition to other discharge therapy, he had all that time acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg, without anticoagulation therapy.
The patient was kept for the observation. On the admission, a X-ray P/A of the chest was performed, that showed a regular size of the heart . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed free fluid by the lateral and posterior wall of the right ventricle and possible compression of it, but there was no visible fluid in some views e.g. long axis view . Due to a difficult visualization, it was recommended, at that time, to observe the patient and do frequent echo monitoring of pericardial effusion while making a decision about treatment. Echocardiographic findings showed also a preserved ejection fraction of the left ventricle and restrictive left ventricular filling.
After 24 hours, a control echocardiographic finding was performed and showed a large amount of the free fluid (around 2,7cm) by the right ventricle and apex, which significantly compressed the right ventricle cavity in the diastole and narrowed it, so that the opposite walls touched themselves . The heart team decided to evacuate the free fluid by fenestration in the general anesthesia. During the operation transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed, but surprisingly it was impossible to verify the large amount of the fluid seen with other diagnostic procedures, in all cross sections. Because of the possibility of the right ventricle rupture, after several attempts to find the fluid, the heart team gave up from further manipulations and closed the patient. The patients problem was not solved so the heart team decided to do the computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax. On the recorded image, the left segment of the heart was enlarged, with pericardial effusion on the anterior side of the heart and especially in caudal aspect. By this diagnostic procedure the pericardial effusion with tamponade of left ventricle was confirmed (estimated amount of fluid was 380-400 mL).
On the control TTE echocardiography, persists the large amount of free fluid by the right ventricle and apex (around 2,7 cm) with the movements and compression also by the posterior wall of the left ventricle (around 2,7 cm). Due to the impossibility to evacuate the fluid by fenestration, and because the patient was still hemodynamically stable, he was observed in our Center for several days, for the possible evacuation of pericardial fluid by opening the chest. After a few days of monitoring with the patient still stable, he was transfered to the local hospital for further monitoring with the new drug included in his therapy, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) - Ibuprofen 600 mg to use it three times a day, during the follow up.
After two postoperative visits, in a monitoring period of two months, it persisted the same echocardiography finding, without any progression compared to previous findings and the patient was hemodynamically stable. Even in two months after the fenestration, with recommended therapy, there was no achievement. The patient was still being monitored, so it was decided to add new drug to the previous therapy. Due to a lack of Colchicin, that is mentioned in Guidelines as the next step, in the therapy was included Prednisone, a corticosteroidal drug, also mentioned in the Guidelines as one option. It was administered according to scheme with gradual dose reduction, as recommended .
One month after the introduction of corticosteroidal therapy, echocardiography (TTE) showed a significant reduction of the pericardial effusion, and there was no compression on the right ventricle, like earlier verified. Considering the reduction of pericardial effusion, it was recommended to gradually reduce the corticosteroids and eventually exclude it. The patient was monitored with frequent echocardiography findings. During all that time no side effects were observed.
Four months after introduction of combined therapy with NSAIDs and corticosteroids, echocardiography verified a complete reduction of pericardial effusion and the right ventricle had a neat triangular form. The treatment was considered successful. The patient was asymptomatic, so the therapy for pericardial effusion was completely excluded, after which the patient was monitored in every six months. After six months of good general condition, completely asymptomatic patient was without any sings of pericardial effusion, what was confirmed on echocardiography findings.