A 31-year-old nulliparous woman was at 11 wk of gestation and admitted to our hospital for parathyroidectomy with gestational hypertension.
When she was at 5 wk of gestational age in this pregnancy, her blood pressure was high at 160/100 mmHg with mild tachycardia of 110/min. A detailed workup, including laboratory tests, was conducted to identify the secondary cause of hypertension.
The patient had a history of intrauterine fetal death with unknown etiology at 16 wk of gestation 1 year prior. The patient was diagnosed with gestational hypertension at that time, but she had not been evaluated for hypertension, and her blood pressure was not controlled by medication.
The patient had no abnormal specific personal or family history of other diseases.
Physical examination showed no positive signs.
Her blood test results showed that the serum calcium level was elevated to 12.9 mg/dL (reference range: 8.8-10.6), and the parathyroid hormone level was elevated to 157 pg/mL (reference range: 15.0-65.0). And the serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D(25(OH)D) level was decreased to 16.0 ng/mL (reference range: 25-80) and the serum Phosphorus level was decreased to 1.9 mg/dL (reference range: 2.5-4.5). Other laboratory test results, including complete blood cell count (CBC), electrolyte and glucose levels, and renal and hepatic function, were within normal limits.
To identify the potential causes of hypercalcemia due to hyperparathyroidism, a neck ultrasound was conducted. It revealed a 0.8 cm × 1.5 cm sized oval, hypoechoic mass in the upper posterior of the left thyroid gland, which was compatible with parathyroid adenoma. Because the patient was pregnant, 99 mTc sestamibi scintigraphy for localization was contraindicated. Therefore, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) with parathyroid hormone (PTH) analysis was performed for confirmation of diagnosis. The PTH measured in the aspiration sample was 2802.0 pg/mL. Pathologic examination of FNA sample presented some giant cells and neutrophils and a few bland-looking follicular cells, which was insufficient for the confirmation of parathyroid adenoma. However, ultrasonographic findings and elevated PTH level of FNA sample highly supported the diagnosis of a parathyroid adenoma. Therefore, it was concluded clinically that her hypercalcemia was caused by parathyroid adenoma-induced primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).