A 66-year-old woman presented with the main complaints of fever (38.9°C) and dyspnoea of 1-day duration. She had an 8-year history of hypertension and took candesartan regularly. Her husband was confirmed to have COVID-19 and had been treated in a local hospital.
In the emergency room, laboratory testing of blood revealed leucocyte count of 3.97 × 109/L, lymphopenia (0.72 × 109/L), a C-reactive protein level of 54.86 mg/L, and procalcitonin level of 1.41 ng/mL. Blood–gas analyses revealed pH of 7.41, the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 8.91 KPa, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 5.19 KPa, with a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 40%. The SARS-CoV-2 testing of the throat swab was positive. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed ground-glass opacities and chronic inflammation of bilateral lungs . After a throat swab had confirmed her to be COVID-19-positive, the patient was transferred to an isolated ward.
After the first 3 days of hospitalization, she was treated with the anti-viral agent umifenovir (Arbidol™) in the isolation ward and administered non-invasive and invasive ventilation subsequently. However, her condition was rapidly deteriorating as she presented with a decrease in blood oxygen saturation, severe bradycardia, and became haemodynamic instability.
After consultation between members of the multidisciplinary team (MDT), the patient was cannulated for VV-ECMO . The right jugular vein was cannulated with an inflow cannula (17 Fr; Maquet, Rastatt, Germany). The right femoral vein was cannulated with a draining cannula (21 Fr; Maquet). Heparin was pumped continuously for anticoagulation during ECMO cannulation. The rotation speed of the ECMO system was regulated to 2500–3000 rpm according to the blood oxygen saturation and blood pressure. Blood flow was controlled to about 3.0–4.0 L/min. Blood–gas analyses were undertaken every 4 h. PCO2 was maintained at 5.32 KPa and pulse oxygen saturation at 95%; the oxygen concentration of the ECMO system remained at 100%. The patient also received ultraprotective lung ventilation [positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) = 10 cmH2O; vital volume = 6 mL/kg; respiratory rate = 6–8 b.p.m.], deep sedation, daily awakening, and assessment of consciousness and brain function, and was positioned prone every 6–12 h. Finally, the oxygen flow in the ECMO system declined to 2.0 L/min and the oxygen supply was closed for observation for 24 h at 52 days after CT re-examination of the chest and 35 days after ECMO cannulation. When pressure-control mode (pressure support = 16 cmH2O; PEEP = 10 cmH2O; FIO2 = 50%) was given simultaneously, her oxygen saturation could be maintained at >97%.
During hospitalization, the patient was also administered therapy (hormone, anti-viral, convalescent plasma, continuous renal replacement) and underwent tracheostomy . The efficacy of these therapies was observed by measuring various blood parameters . Heart function was assessed by bedside echocardiography .
Notably, several complications occurred during ECMO cannulation. Pneumothorax was the first and occurred on Day 19 of hospitalization. Pneumothorax disappeared after carrying out 14-day closed thoracic drainage . Then, nasal haemorrhage and haemoglobinuria (indicating haemolysis) occurred successively; long-term anticoagulation and mechanical destruction of red blood cells were thought to be the main causes. Therefore, the heparin dose was reduced appropriately through the dynamic monitoring of the activated clotting time of whole blood to ensure that neither bleeding nor clotting affected ECMO efficacy. Also, we replaced the centrifugal pump and oxygenator twice during ECMO cannulation to reduce mechanical destruction of red blood cells.
This patient was maintained on ECMO before she had fully recovered from the condition that necessitated ECMO use and had a negative test for the nucleic acids of SARS-CoV-2 twice. After 49 days, this patient was weaned from ECMO. At the most recent follow-up (3 months after ECMO decannulation), she received respiratory and cardiac rehabilitation and did not complain of any discomfort.