A 46-year-old female with hemoglobin of 6.6 at her primary care physician's office was referred for admission at a community hospital. Past medical history includes hypertension, mental disability, uterine fibroids, hypothyroidism, small bowel obstruction, anemia and constipation. Patient's family history was significant for cancer, however the type was undetermined. On physical examination, the patient's abdomen was distended with tympany in the upper and central abdomen, tenderness in the lower abdomen, in addition to an enlarged and irregular uterus. Patient did not allow for a digital rectal examination. On blood test, there was leukocytosis, anemia, thrombocytopenia. The levels of the tumor markers were elevated as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen, 21.9, CA 19–9, 66, CA 125, 39.
A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed innumerable heterogenous hypodense lesions within the liver and mildly enlarged periportal and pelvic lymphadenopathy concerning for metastatic nodal disease (, ). She subsequently underwent a colonoscopy for anemia that showed a malignant appearing, mass approximately 6 cm in size, close to the anal verge. The biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma associated with a villous adenoma.
Immunohistochemically the tumor was positive for Cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and p16, synaptophysin 4+ and Ki67 85%. The size of the villous adenoma prevented complete excision during the colonoscopy. Due to the risk of progression of adenoma to a rectal adenocarcinoma, the patient was planned for a transanal excision by an experienced general surgeon. Examination under anesthesia with proctoscopy revealed a sessile, friable, wide based anorectal mass measuring 4.5 cm × 3 cm wide. The mass was infiltrating deep to the submucosa and located in the right anal canal. The histopathology report revealed a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma with glandular differentiation. The staining pattern supports a Collision tumor with a malignant neuroendocrine and features of a collision tumor with a smaller adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemically positive for synaptophysin, CD56, and CDX2 in the glandular area but negative in the solid tumor and Ki67 95%.
The patient also underwent an ultrasound guided biopsy of liver lesions. The pathology report revealed the masses were metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma which were consistent with the history of neuroendocrine collision tumor from the rectum. Patient was subsequently readmitted to the ICU for altered mental status and sepsis. Her admission course was unremitting, and she unfortunately passed away prior to receiving chemotherapy consisting of Etoposide and Carboplatin.