A 34-year-old Indonesian man reporting 3 days of high fever, weakness, and flatulence was admitted to the emergency room of a small, peripheral hospital. He had no medical history of comorbidities. The internist suspected DHF-based on laboratory results indicating a platelet count of 86,000 cells/μL, increased monocytes of 20%, an Alanine transaminase (ALT) level of 161 U/L, and an Aspartate transaminase (AST) level of 52 U/L due to a hyperinflammation condition. A radiologic evaluation revealed no abnormalities in the heart and lungs, and COVD-19 was not suspected. The patient was treated for DHF and was given intravenous fluids, oxygen, antipyretic, and hepatoprotector.
After 4 days of DHF treatment, there was no improvement, and saturation tended to decrease. Therefore, the patient was referred to a pulmonologist in the main hospital. There, the patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 based on a positive result from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) nasopharyngeal swabs with CT value of ORF1ab Gen 19.14, Gen N 19.21. The patient received hepatoprotector to decrease the ALT and AST levels, azithromycin, N-acetylcysteine, and multivitamins. Laboratory examination showed that leukocytes were 12,300 cells/μL (normal value: 5.000–10.000 cells/μL), lymphocytes were 12% (normal value: 20%–50%), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 40 mm/h (normal value: 0–15 mm/h), monocytes were 11% (normal value: 4%–8%), Neutrophil Lymphocytes Ratio (NLR) was 6.24 (normal value: <5), AST level was 278 U/L (normal value: 7–41 U/L), ALT level was 315 U/L (normal value: 12–38 U/L), and potassium level was 3.16 mmol/L (normal value: 3.7–5.2 mmol/L). The posteroanterior chest X-ray results did not show any radiological abnormalities in the heart and lungs.
On day 5, the D dimer examination was carried out, the sample was sent outside the hospital, and the results came 4 days later. Hospital facilities were limited and, at that time, the national insurance did not cover the test cost. While waiting for the D dimer and PT results, the patient was given low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). The patient was experiencing hypoxemic respiratory failure and was in a hypercoagulable state due to the hyper inflammation process associated with COVID-19.
On day 7 of the treatment, the patient’s condition still did not improve. He experienced shortness of breath. The oxygen saturation was 90%–92% room air. Subsequently, he was subjected to oxygen therapy using a non-rebreathing mask of 15 L/min. Laboratory tests revealed an ALT level of 87 U/L and AST level of 91 U/L. Chest radiographs indicated no radiological abnormalities in the heart and lungs. The patient was given Azithromycin, Dexamethasone, Remdesivir, Ondansetron, Omeprazole, and supplements (e.g., Vitamin C, Zinc, and Vitamin D3), N-acetyl cysteine, multivitamins, and other supporting medications.
On day 13, the patient’s condition declined. He experienced shortness of breath and suffered from fever, abdominal bloating, headache, and tingling of limbs. The oxygen saturation was 84% room air, requiring intensive care unit (ICU) treatment using high flow nasal cannula FiO2 100% flow 60 L/min.
Intubation was recommended as a next step; after communication with the patient’s family about this procedure, they refused based on the belief that intubation would further harm the patient. Although the patient was on heated high-flow oxygen and could communicate, the patient’s family, especially the patient’s elder sister, determined the treatment decisions. The patient deferred all decisions regarding medical treatment to the elder sister.
The laboratory tests revealed ESR of 95 mm/h, lymphocytes of 3%, NLR of 30.7, fibrinogen >500 mg/dL, D-dimers of 11,110 mg/L, ferritin of 2553 ng/L, and quantitative CRP of 75 mg/L. The chest CT scan without intravenous contrast revealed large GGO in both lungs, such as Segment 1 (S1) and S2 left; S2, S3, and S6 right; S4, S5, and S6 left; S4, S5, S7, S8 right; S10 right and left , representing anterior and posterior views of the pulmonary lobes and segments. The placement of the pulmonary segments and lobes on the anterior surface of the right and left lungs are depicted in a schematic drawing superimposed on a three-dimensional surface reformatted picture produced with a multidetector CT scanner. The apical (S1) and anterior (S3) segments of the right upper lobe, the lateral (S4) and medial (S5) segments of the right middle lobe, and the anterior basal (S8) segment of the right lower lobe make up the anterior surface of the right lung. The apicoposterior segment (S1 + S2), anterior (S3) segment, superior (S4) and inferior (S5) lingular segments of the left upper lobe, as well as the anteromedial segment (S6), the lateral basal (S9), and posterior basal (S10) segments.
The patient was then given additional medications, including Meropenem, Dexamethasone, Remdesivir, Ondansetron, Omeprazole, and supplements (e.g., Vitamin C, Zinc, and Vitamin D3). The patient’s condition worsened, and the family still refused intubation. On the 15th day, the patient passed away. The cause of death was hypoxemic respiratory failure, a hypercoagulable state due to the hyper inflammation process of COVID-19. A post mortem exam was not conducted because the family did not approve it.