A 72-year-old Caucasian man with a history of Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, immunoglobulin M (IgM) paraproteinemia with high titer of myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) IgM antibody, and associated neuropathy was being effectively treated with maintenance rituximab and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) when he was started on pembrolizumab for progression of metastatic urothelial carcinoma 31 months after surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine, carboplatin, paclitaxel). Of note, he also had a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, atrial flutter, and diverticulosis. His family history included melanoma (mother and father), non-Hodgkin lymphoma in his mother, breast cancer in his mother, and adrenal gland cancer in his sister. He was a former smoker for 30 pack-years and had quit 18 years prior to presentation. He also had prior heavy alcohol use, but had been sober for 15 years prior to presentation. At the time of this treatment, he was smoking marijuana several times per month.
He tolerated five total cycles/doses of pembrolizumab (200 mg/dose), initially only experiencing transient neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count 120) and thrombocytopenia (platelet count 121,000). However, after his third dose, he noted a new rash on his chest and two lip lesions. The rash consisted of red/purple blistering papular rash with associated pain, most predominant in the distal extremities . Over the next month, he had persistent skin changes and new onset of significant diarrhea. Pembrolizumab was discontinued and his symptoms improved after 2 weeks of prednisone 60mg daily.
However, when the prednisone dose was tapered to 40 mg daily, and over the span of another month, he had a dramatic resurgence of his diarrhea, new painful penile and oral lesions, and a blossoming diffuse rash. He underwent skin biopsy 10 weeks after his last dose of pembrolizumab after another taper to 20 mg daily prednisone, and pathology revealed bullous erythema multiforme . Attempts to taper prednisone dosage further continued to be challenging, with refractory ICI toxicity, and azathioprine was utilized for additional immunosuppression and steroid-sparing effect. The patient was, however, admitted with a necrotizing right upper lobe pneumonia that persisted despite broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy revealed AFOP .
Due to persistent symptoms, concern for active infection, and likelihood that these events represented refractory irAEs, azathioprine was stopped and tacrolimus was initiated for broader anti-T-cell inhibitory activity. He was initially on 1 mg twice daily for 1 month and noticed significant improvement in his skin lesions as well as a decrease in his ongoing diarrhea. His respiratory status was stable on room air. His tacrolimus dose was increased to 2 mg every morning and 1 mg every evening and prednisone was weaned to 10 mg daily, with further improvement in his rash to near resolution, and no new skin lesions developed. He continued on a stable dose of tacrolimus for four more months and then it was able to be discontinued with sustained resolution of his irAEs. His malignancy did eventually progress, but only 2 months after discontinuation of the tacrolimus. With almost 1 year of systemic steroid therapy, our patient developed adrenal insufficiency without signs of immune-related hypophysitis, now managed with replacement-dose hydrocortisone.