A 27-year-old female patient with a known case of triple-negative breast cancer admitted to the emergency room complaining of documented fever 40°C at home which was relieved with an antipyretic. She was status post 4 cycles of neoadjuvant dose-dense AC regimen which consists of doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 administered every 14 days. She was prescribed primary prophylaxis filgrastim after all cycles. Physical examination was unremarkable apart from her fever. The patient was admitted to the hospital having febrile neutropenia with no focus of infection and started on empiric antibiotics and filgrastim. She had a low white blood cell (WBC) count with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 1100 cells/microlitre on day 11 after cycle 4 despite being on appropriate filgrastim dose at 300 μg per day for 9 days. On the second day of her admission, she recovered from neutropenia but continued to have persistent high-grade fever for almost two weeks despite escalation of the antibiotics and addition of an antifungal agent. She underwent series of investigations to identify the cause of her unexplained fever. She had extensive blood and urine cultures after each spike of fever, which all came back negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan ruled out infectious focus and showed hepatosplenomegaly with multiple splenic hypodensities and minimal perisplenic fluid which did not appear in the baseline scan . Infectious disease team advised for a splenic biopsy which showed splenic infarction only with no evidence of bacterial, fungal, viral, or malignant involvement . She also underwent an echocardiogram study, sinoscopy, and series of rheumatologic investigations that were normal. General surgery team was consulted and did not recommend any surgical intervention since the follow-up CT scan turned out negative for splenic abscesses with interval improvement in the previous splenic wedge-shaped hypodensities . Eventually, the patient was discharged on oral antibiotics with infectious disease and oncology clinic follow-up after being afebrile and asymptomatic for more than 72 hours.