A 32-year-old healthy woman presented to our hospital with sudden onset of painful proptosis and decreased vision in her right eye. These symptoms had appeared 30 minutes prior to arrival. She had undergone cosmetic forehead augmentation with autologous fat injection at another clinic. An approximately 10-mL fat graft was harvested from her right medial thigh and injected into her right forehead under local anesthesia. During the procedure, she developed painful bulging of her right eye with blurred vision. The injection was terminated and the patient was immediately referred to our hospital. She denied a history of surgery or trauma.
Upon arrival at our hospital, the patient was fully conscious and afebrile. She had no tachypnea, dyspnea, or petechiae on her skin. Physical examination revealed needle marks with bruits on the right side of her forehead. Her vital signs were stable. Ophthalmologic examination demonstrated visual acuity of 20/40 with a positive relative afferent pupillary defect in her right eye. The patient exhibited right eye bulging and droopiness of her right upper eyelid . The intraocular pressure of her right eye was 44 mmHg. Anterior segment and fundus examination findings were within normal limits. Extraocular movements were limited in all directions. Decreased sensation was present in the right forehead and right upper eyelid regions. Ophthalmic examination of the left eye was unremarkable. Her muscle strength was grade 5 in all extremities. Initial management involved immediate administration of oral acetazolamide at 500 mg followed by 250 mg every 6 hours, 0.5% timolol eye drops every 12 hours, 0.15% brimonidine-P eye drops every 12 hours, and intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanic acid at 1.2 g every 8 hours. Her intraocular pressure gradually improved after beginning these medical treatments. Therefore, further canthotomy and cantholysis were postponed.
Emergency contrast-enhanced orbit computed tomography revealed intraluminal hypoattenuation filling defects, which were suspected to be fat attenuation (−60 HU), in the dilated right superior ophthalmic vein and right cavernous sinus. Right eye proptosis, right retrobulbar fat reticulation, and enlargement of the right extraocular muscles were also demonstrated . The brain parenchyma was normal without acute infarction, acute hemorrhage, or abnormal enhancing lesions. T1-weighted and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hyperintense lesion, which was similar in intensity to the adjacent orbital and subcutaneous fat, in the right superior ophthalmic vein with loss of its normal flow void . Postcontrast fat-saturated T1-weighted MRI demonstrated complete suppression of fat signal intensity within the lesion. Magnetic resonance venography revealed filling defects in the right superior ophthalmic vein and right cavernous sinuses . The bilateral optic nerves exhibited normal signal intensity.
The diagnosis of superior ophthalmic vein occlusion was made based on the patient’s clinical examination and radiologic findings. After a multidisciplinary conference, vascular recanalization via a transfemoral transvenous embolectomy of the right superior ophthalmic vein was scheduled. 14 hours after hospitalization while the procedure was being prepared, the patient’s symptoms spontaneously improved. She felt less pain in her right eye, and the swollen eyelid and proptosis slightly decreased. Her visual acuity recovered to 20/20 with a negative relative afferent pupillary defect in her right eye. Extraocular movements were unrestricted in all directions with the exception of only a 20% limitation in the right upward gaze. Because her condition gradually resolved, plans for endovascular treatment were abandoned.
Despite her clinical improvement, the patient was additionally given intravenous methylprednisolone at 1000 mg and was thereafter treated with oral prednisolone at 1 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks. She was discharged without serious sequelae after 5 days of hospitalization.
At the 1-month follow-up, the patient had made a complete clinical recovery . Repeat MRI showed a decrease in the amount of filling defects in the right superior ophthalmic vein and right cavernous sinus with a significant reduction of right orbital congestion .