A 30-year-old female presented with dysphagia. She was obese, with a height of 157.8 cm and a weight of 86.8 kg. Her body mass index (BMI) was 34.9.
She had been aware of the dysphagia for approximately 6 months before presentation. During a medical check-up for work, a chest X-ray showed a shadow on the mediastinum, so the patient visited a doctor. The chest CT showed a 55-mm circular shadow. Three years ago, an upper GI endoscopy revealed a raised lesion in the left anterior wall of the oesophagus. At that time, the lesion was 1/3 of a circle and approximately 25 mm in size. This lesion was diagnosed as leiomyoma and was monitored. The patient had no medical history and no specific mention of a family medical history.
Blood tests showed a slight increase in white blood cell count and CRP. CEA, CA 19-9, NSE, SCC, and p53 levels were within the reference ranges. The chest X-ray showed shadows in the right mediastinum . Barium fluoroscopy revealed a semicircular raised lesion in the lower oesophagus . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 1 oesophageal tumour centred on the posterior wall 26–35 cm from the incisors . The surface was ulcerated, and the tumour was exposed . The tumour was hard and white. The affected area showed no iodine uptake. The EUS showed an isoechoic mass. The CT scan showed a mass of 71 × 61 × 55 mm in the beginning of the lower oesophagus with low density mass and swelling of the right recurrent nerve lymph node to 12 mm . On FDG-PET, the tumour showed an SUVmax of 11.05, and no abnormal accumulation was found in lymph nodes or other organs . The MRI showed a hyperintense mass on the T2WI, which had prolonged contrast enhancement, and no findings of invasion into surrounding tissue were found. The endoscopic biopsy showed cascading spindle cells with different-sized nuclei , and immunostaining showed S-100 (+) , keratin (−), CD34 (−), and desmin (−) staining. The MIB-1 LI was approximately 25% , which led to the diagnosis of malignant schwannoma.
We performed right thoracotomy and open thoracic oesophagectomy. There were no pleural effusions or adhesions in the pleural cavity. The swollen right recurrent nerve lymph node was negative for tumours by rapid pathological diagnosis during the operation. We dissected all of the thoracic oesophagus with tumours to achieve radical resection. We placed a gastric tube through the intrathoracic route for reconstruction. Intrathoracic oesophagogastric anastomosis was performed using the circular stapling technique. The resected tumour was white, hard, and 75 × 45 × 45 mm in size . A large bulging lesion in the neck with degenerative necrosis was observed in the specimen. The raised part of the tumour was covered with normal mucosa .
Histologically, spindle cells with different-sized nuclei were mixed throughout the tissue . Some regions showed nuclear polymorphism or a storiform pattern, and locally, there were approximately 7 mitoses/10 HPFs . The MIB-1 LI was approximately 25% . The margin was relatively clear, but spindle-shaped tumour cells infiltrated the surrounding interstitium and basal myoepithelium, and the patient was diagnosed with MPNST . Immunostaining showed S-100 (+) , CD34 (−), and HMB-45 (−) staining. These results led to a diagnosis of MPNST. In this case, the postoperative course was good, and 16 months after the operation, the patient is currently under observation at the outpatient stage without recurrence.