A 52-year-old male with severe abdominal pain was presented to emergency in November 2021 after several days of increasing abdominal bloating, distension, and intermittent diarrhoea. The patient had a history of similar episodes in the past year and a half; however, previous investigations, including a colonoscopy after a positive faecal occult blood test in December 2019, noted some polyps but did not find any malignancies. At the time of admission to the hospital in November 2021, the patient’s blood test results revealed mild microcytic hypochromic anaemia with low mean cell haemoglobin (MCH = 24 pg, reference range 27–34 pg) and low mean cell volume (MCV = 75 fL, reference range 80–100 fL) and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP = 160 mg/L, reference range <1 mg/L), while the gastroscopy appeared normal.
A computed tomographic scan showed a thickened distant terminal ileum and small bowel obstruction . Due to the patient’s severe symptoms, a colonoscopy was performed shortly after and found a malignant-appearing lesion protruding from the terminal ileum extending into the cecum, consistent with cancer. Biopsies were taken and pathology confirmed colon cancer, specifically G1 low-grade adenocarcinoma arising from a tubulovilous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia. The patient underwent right hemicolectomy surgery by laparotomy, with the extraction of adjacent lymph nodes. Suspected malignant adhesions of the tumour to the abdominal wall and retroperitoneal soft tissue were noted. Involvement of two out of 20 lymph nodes led to the initial diagnosis of T4bN1M0 Stage-III colonic adenocarcinoma arising from the cecum (November 21) .
Immunohistochemistry on the biopsied tumour revealed proficiency in mismatch repair proteins, including MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6. Further investigations using transcriptomic DNA microarrays identified mutations in proto-oncogenes, including KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS. Blood cancer markers of carcinoembryonic antigen were in the normal range (<8.5 μg/L). Immunocytochemistry on cancer cells with monoclonal antibodies of a range of 18 chemotherapy agents identified bevacizumab as the most potent agent in this case (30% vs. 15% ramucirumab vs. 0% for all other agents tested; Onconomics Plus Test by RGCC, Switzerland; ) .
The patient recovered well with a soft abdomen, was back to usual activities and diet, and had normal bowel motions 1 week after surgery. The patient was advised by his oncologist in December 2021 on follow-up chemotherapy and subsequent resection of liver metastases. Suggested chemotherapy would have involved FOLFOX for 6 months or 3 months of CAPOX, but the patient declined chemotherapy. Around the same time, the patient sought advice on other treatment options and discussed an integrative treatment approach .
The integrative treatment approach included a package of (a) intravenous nutrients and herbs such as high-dose vitamin C, curcumin, quercetin, and artemisinin [, ], (b) anti-angiogenesis therapy with IV bevacizumab , (c) the Repurposing-Drugs-in-Oncology (ReDO) protocol combining daily oral intake of 16 repurposed prescription medications and nutrients and herbs , and (d) EMF, Rife frequency treatment [, ]. , and online supplementary Tables S1–S2 (for all online suppl. material, see ).
outlines the treatment details, including dosages, frequency, duration, and total number of treatment sessions. Online supplementary Table S1 lists the EMF frequencies used in this case study. Online supplementary Table S2 provides mechanisms of action and references for the 17 medications and supplements used in the ReDO protocol.
The integrative therapies were provided in two stages, with the first 16-week long treatment stage (December 2021–May 2022), including IV therapies and the ReDO protocol, while EMF therapy was added to the treatment regime at a later stage . During the first treatment period, 3 months after initial diagnosis, the patient underwent a restaging MRI scan, which revealed numerous (n = 5) metastases in the liver, mostly subcapsular and confined to the right lobe. The diagnosis was updated to metastatic colon cancer T4bN1 stage-IV (February 23, 2022) ( left, panel/before treatment).
EMF, also known as “Rife frequency therapy” or “pulsed electromagnetic field therapy,” was added to the treatment regime after 4 months of integrative therapies, to target the metastatic liver lesions. EMF therapy was provided as part of a research study ( ACTRN12620000986976) using the Spooky-2 Frequency Generator with a plasma bulb. EMF uses low-energy waves in the radio frequency spectrum up to 5 MHz, and frequencies were chosen from the Spooky-2 database to target colon cancer, liver cancer, and digestive system cancer ( and online supplementary Table S1).
To assess the treatment effect of EMF, we used the circulating tumour cell (CTC) blood test, also known as liquid biopsy, to compare CTC count before and after EMF/Rife frequency treatment. We specifically utilised the cytology-based internationally validated ISET (Isolation by SizE of Tumour)-CTC system developed by Rarecells Diagnostics . CTCs are useful biomarkers to assess cancer risk and stage, with higher CTC counts indicating a greater risk of seeding further metastases distant from the primary tumour [, ].
In this case study, the CTC count in a sample of 10 mL of blood taken immediately before Rife treatment was compared to the CTC count 1 day after Rife treatment. CTC analysis revealed that the frequencies used for EMF treatment were effective in reducing the CTC count by 75% and therefore metastasising potential. Subsequently, EMF/Rife frequency therapy was included in the treatment regime, and the patient received 2–3 Rife frequency treatments weekly over the next 4 months to a total of 40 sessions.
A check-up was performed in July 2022, after 8 months of integrative therapies and including four months of EMF/Rife frequency treatment following the updated diagnosis of metastatic colon cancer T4bN1 stage-IV (February 23, 2022), and revealed substantial tumour response to treatment. While five lesions of 6–12 mm in size in the liver were visible on the MRI on February 23, 2022, the follow-up MRI on July 22, 2022, showed only one remaining visible lesion of reduced size (12 mm–>9 mm) in segment 7 of the liver. illustrates comparative MRI scans of the liver at time of diagnosis before and after treatment. Furthermore, a positron emission tomography scan provided no evidence of metabolically active disease recurrence or metastasis.
Integrative therapies continued until September 2022, plus additional weekly injections with mistletoe (Helixor) and normobaric oxygen therapy for a month (5 L/min for 1 h) . A follow-up low CTC count in October 2022, 11 months after initial diagnosis, supported the findings of a substantial tumour response to treatment. The patient tolerated the integrative therapies well, did not experience any adverse effects of the integrative treatment regime, and enjoyed an overall high level of wellbeing without restrictions in social or physical activities.
The partial remission of metastatic colon cancer with liver lesions achieved by primary tumour resection and an 8-month treatment regime of integrative therapies remained stable half a year later (March 2023), evident by a follow-up MRI scan of the liver, suggesting a long-term treatment effect. The CARE checklist was completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material.