The patient is a 13-year-old female who visited the clinic for the weakness of both lower limbs for 10 years. More than 10 years ago, the child developed weakness in both lower extremities, easy fatigue, unstable gait, easy falling when walking, difficulty standing up after falling or squatting, and difficulty climbing stairs, and she was unable to run and jump. These conditions were not obvious to the family at the beginning of the illness, and her condition gradually worsened. She suffered from delayed motor development since childhood. She attained head control at 3 months, moved into a sitting position at 10 months, and walked at 2 years. Her intellectual development was normal before and after the onset of the disease. She was G5P2, delivered naturally at term, and there were no abnormalities during pregnancy or the perinatal period. Her parents were in good health and denied any consanguinity. The 11-year-old sister had similar muscle weakness since childhood. The patient had clear consciousness, good orientation, verbal expression ability and memory. Her neck was soft, cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations were normal, distal muscle strength of both upper extremities was grade V, proximal muscle strength of both upper extremities was grade IV, distal muscle strength of both lower extremities was grade V, and proximal muscle strength of both lower extremities was grade IV. She had normal muscle tension of the extremities, normal temperature and pain, positive Gower sign, slightly unstable gait, stable finger-nose test, and stable heel-knee-shin test. Romberg sign was negative, the bilateral knee reflex was not elicited, and pathological reflex was negative. Her serum creatine kinase level was normal. EMG examination revealed myogenic damage changes, accompanied by mild neurogenic damage changes. Echocardiography indicated no abnormality. EKG revealed sinus tachycardia, occasional ventricular premature contraction, occasional atrial premature contraction and ST-segment changes. A plain MRI scan of the bilateral thigh muscles revealed that both hips and thigh muscles had fatty infiltration with mild edema .
Gene sequencing revealed that the child had SPEG gene mutations, and the mutation sites were c.3715 + 4C > T and c.3588delC, which are located on exon 13. The two mutations identified in our case are marked in the SPEG schematic . Neither of these two sites has been reported so far. Further family genealogical verification revealed that her sister carried two identical mutation sites, c.37 15 + 4C > T and c.3588delC from the father and mother, respectively . Both parents were heterozygous carriers, and the child had a compound heterozygous mutation, which conforms to the law of autosomal recessive inheritance. Among them, c3588dL was rated as suspected pathogenic variation by ACMG, while 371544CT was rated as clinically unknown. Through the prediction of Mutation Taster, it was found that the mutation of c.3588delC led to a change in the amino acid sequence. Compared with wild type, expression of the amino acid sequence was significantly reduced, and the corresponding protein structure prediction was found based on Mutation Taster analysis.
The child had a biceps muscle biopsy. The main pathological change showed the nucleic (> 20% of fibers) were located in the center of the cell, the average diameter of type I myofibers was slightly smaller than that of type II myofibers, and the pathology of type I myofibers was dominant. There was no inflammatory cell infiltration, myofiber necrosis, or other characteristic structural change in the myofibers, and these analyses agree with the pathological changes of centronuclear myopathy . There was no histologic evidence of inflammatory myopathy, myodystrophy, or fat or glycogen accumulative myopathy.