A Caucasian man in his 70s was admitted to his local hospital because of fever, diarrhea, and abdominal pain for the previous 10 days. His past medical history was significant for diverticulosis, and he was also being treated for locally advanced prostate cancer with goserelin and for chronic back pain with prednisolone 2.5 mg once daily.
On admission, his blood pressure was 134/85 mmHg, body temperature was 38.7 °C, heart rate was 87 beats/minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation was 92% without oxygen support. He was slightly overweight with a body mass index (BMI) of 27 kg/m2, but the findings of his physical examination were otherwise normal. His laboratory test values, presented in Table , showed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), thrombocytopenia, and moderately elevated ferritin. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed respiratory alkalosis with hypoxemia and normal lactate. A radiographic examination showed scattered consolidations in the right lung.
The patient had a positive test result for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) based on real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of a nasopharyngeal specimen. Empirical treatment with cefotaxime and ciprofloxacin was prescribed for suspected bacterial superinfection as well as an antiviral regime of lopinavir-ritonavir and hydroxychloroquine according to local guidelines at the time.
Twelve hours later, the patient’s condition deteriorated, with rapidly progressing respiratory failure, oxygen saturation at 86% on 12-L oxygen, and a respiratory frequency of 40 breaths/minute. This prompted transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) and intubation. A new chest x-ray revealed extensive bilateral coalescent opacities qualifying as severe ARDS (ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen [FiO2], ≤ 100 mmHg).
During the first 36 hours in the ICU, the patient was in unstable cardiopulmonary condition. He required high FiO2 and norepinephrine in moderate doses, and he developed supraventricular tachyarrhythmia that was treated with repeated electrical and pharmacological cardioversion. By day 7, he had accumulated significant amounts of fluid (positive fluid balance of 8 L). His creatinine levels were rising, and he responded poorly to diuretics. Continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration was initiated to ensure a negative fluid balance.
The antiviral drug regimen was discontinued after 3 days due to a national agreement that all SARS-CoV-2 viral drug treatments should be administered through randomized controlled studies. Due to rising CRP and leukocyte counts, the antibiotics were changed to meropenem.
One week after admission, the patient achieved circulatory stability and exhibited a slowly decreasing oxygen demand, but his ferritin had risen markedly to 36,023 μg/L. This was accompanied by occasional fever and marked increases in CRP (334 mg/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (1074 U/L), neutrophil count (20.3 × 109/L), and triglycerides (5.27 mmol/L). His triglycerides were analyzed during parenteral nutrition and must be interpreted with caution.
This raised concern that the patient had developed HLH secondary to SARS-CoV-2. His soluble IL-2 receptor level was considerably elevated at 6809 U/ml (> 623 U/ml indicates immune activation and T-cell activation in particular), and a bone marrow smear demonstrated hemophagocytosis. Flow cytometry of peripheral blood showed a significant decrease in circulating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (161/μl and 32/μl, respectively) but an expanded population of clonal B cells that expressed kappa, CD5, CD19, CD20 (weakly), CD43, CD45, and CD200. Due to the absence of lymphocytosis, and after a review of laboratory records, this was classified as monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) and not as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), which requires > 5000 cells/μl. A trephine biopsy confirmed MBL but no other lymphoproliferative disorders.
The patient fulfilled five of eight HLH-2004 diagnostic criteria, and his H-score estimated the probability of HLH to be 96–98% [, ]. A decision was made to give the patient tocilizumab 800 mg intravenously, a monoclonal antibody against the IL-6 receptor that is used when cytokine release syndrome (CRS) is seen following the infusion of chimeric antigen receptor T cells.
The following day, the patient’s CRP declined rapidly, followed by a significant but slow decline in ferritin and LDH levels . After the administration of tocilizumab, no fever was observed. Three days later, the patient also received one dose of intravenous immunoglobulins pending the result of protein electrophoresis, which was normal. His clinical state improved 5–7 days later, and he was successfully extubated.
After the patient’s improvement, we analyzed serum levels of selected cytokines on the same day as tocilizumab was given (samples taken before administration) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Interestingly, his IL-6 levels were markedly elevated at 84 pg/ml (< 5 pg/ml), whereas TNF and IL-10 were moderately elevated at 55 pg/ml (< 20 pg/ml) and 38 pg/ml (< 5 pg/ml), respectively. His IL-8 (66 pg/ml) and IL-1β (< 5 pg/ml) were within the normal range of the laboratory that did the tests (Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden).