In March 2015, a 17-year-old man was referred to our hospital by infectious disease specialists for the evaluation of fever for over 20 days. He was treated for viral infection at first by infectious disease specialists. Then antibiotic therapy was conducted due to painful oral and skin lesions on scrotum. Patient suffered from bilateral vision loss and photophobia initiated 3 days before admission to hospital. His body temperature was 38.8 °C, systolic/diastolic blood pressure was 115/70 mmHg and heart rate was 96 bpm when physically examined.
The heart sounds were normal without any murmurs and the lung fields were clear to auscultation. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. The chest X ray was normal. We noted an inflammatory syndrome in the laboratory results (white blood cell count: 113,000 mm3, neutrophil: 60%, C-reactive protein: 62 mg/l, erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 71 mm/hour). Therefore, antibiotics were started due to endocarditis. Blood cultures and serology tests for fever, Legionella, Bartonella, Tropheryma whipplei, Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, and Brucella were negative. The transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a left ventricle ejection fraction of about 65% and a mobile mass seen in RV apex which was hyperechoic and well circumscribed .
A thoracic multi detector computed tomography (MDCT) confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral segmental pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) and infarction. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) did not show the nature of RV mass. Three differential diagnosis were introduced for RV mass including fever including infection, malignancy and clot. Thus, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and showed that the nature of mass was clot in RV trabeculae .
Oral ulcers had a nonspecific pathology with a variable infiltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils at the base of the ulcer that showed autoimmune disorder in histopathologic examination. We started treatment with anticoagulant since the patient was at risk of PTE and RV clot caused by leukocytoclastic and lymphocytic vasculitis which may also be seen in severe inflammation. The thrombophilia study did not show any abnormalities, and antinuclear antibody, anti-DNA antibody, anti-extractable nuclear antigen (anti-ENA) antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests and tumor markers were all negative. We noted a positive HLA-B51 and HLA-B5 serologic typing. Taking these findings together, the patient was diagnosed with BD.
Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone 1 g per day for 3 days and followed by oral prednisone 1 mg/kg) with cyclophosphamide (1 gram monthly) treatment was started. In addition, warfarin was administered to maintain the international normalized ratio (INR) at 2.5 or above. Two months later, the RV clot had disappeared on TTE.