A 57-year-old man, with asthma diagnosed 20 years previously by a general practitioner, presented to clinic with diarrhoea and weight loss. He was smoking 12 cigarettes a day and was drinking 8 units of alcohol per week. His asthma was well-controlled on inhaled corticosteroids (Beclometasone 200 μg twice daily) and inhaled salbutamol 100 μg when required via metered-dose inhaler. He worked as a baker. Initial investigations included a colonoscopy which was reported as normal and a CT scan of his abdomen demonstrated a pancreatic cyst in keeping with chronic pancreatitis. A surveillance CT scan was arranged to monitor for malignant changes in the cyst.
Two months later, he developed peripheral oedema and was found to have a urine protein creatinine ratio (uPCR) of 12.5 g/g, serum albumin of 1.1 g/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 133 mm/1st h, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of <1 mg/L. A renal biopsy showed features of early MN with subepithelial electron dense deposits on electron microscopy . A comprehensive autoimmune panel (including anti-PLA2R) was negative, except for a positive rheumatoid factor of 296 IU/mL. Eosinophil count was raised at 0.88 × 10−9 cells/L (reference range 0.00–0.40). Further imaging revealed a pancreatic cyst, simple liver cyst, enlarged lacrimal glands, enlarged ocular recti muscles, and striation in the kidneys. Investigations revealed no malignancy. At this stage, he was commenced on doxazosin, furosemide, ramipril, warfarin, human albumin solution 20% (HAS) infusions, and fluid restriction.
He developed diplopia and proptosis of the right eye, and an MRI scan with contrast showed orbital infiltration. Orbital biopsy revealed IgG4-related sclerosing dacryoadenitis and serum IgG4 subclass level was raised at 768 mg/dL. A bone marrow biopsy performed was reported as normal. A diagnosis of IgG4-RD was made as the constellation of symptoms and findings met the 2019 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for IgG4-RD .
Treatment with prednisolone and cyclophosphamide induced remission, with successful tapering of prednisolone achieved with azathioprine as maintenance therapy. Renal function stabilized with creatinine of about 1.30–1.47 mg/dL, serum IgG4 subclass level fell to 123 mg/dL, and eosinophil count returned to baseline at 0.03 × 10−9 cells/L.
Serum, retrospectively assayed for anti-THSD7A using ELISA, was strongly positive at 2,543 U/mL (reference range <66 U/mL). Anti-THSD7A levels returned to reference range after treatment. The renal biopsy was positive for THSD7A on immuno-peroxidase staining confirming the association with serum antibodies in MN .
Sixteen months later, he presented with a rise in his creatinine to 2.29 mg/dL and subclinical proteinuria (uPCR 0.743 g/g). During this second presentation, his eosinophil count remained within normal limits. A second renal biopsy showed evidence of resolving MN. In addition, a small area of lymphocytic interstitial inflammation with few plasma cells was present. A small proportion of these cells stained positively for IgG by immunohistochemistry with many more staining positively for IgG4 (shown in Fig. ). His serum IgG4 subclass level was found to have increased from 286 mg/dL to 593 mg/dL, and serum antibodies to PLA2R or THSD7A were undetectable during this episode. Remission was achieved with combined prednisolone and rituximab therapy with an improvement in the serum creatinine to 1.69 mg/dL, uPCR to 0.274 g/g, and IgG4 subclass level to 95 mg/dL .