A 32-year-old Asian woman, who was on treatment for hypothyroidism and primary infertility presented to our hospital in the year 2016 with left-sided hemiparesis and systemic hypertension. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed an acute ischaemic stroke involving the right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) territory . Clinical examination was normal except for a grade 2/6 short systolic murmur at the mitral area. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with non-specific T waves inversions in leads V5 and V6 . The inflammatory markers were unremarkable.
Holter monitoring was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a vegetation-like mass of size 13 × 0.5 mm attached to P2 of the mitral valve leaflet. Even though the blood cultures were negative for infective endocarditis, she was empirically treated with intravenous antibiotics (Ceftriaxone 2 g intravenously (IV) once daily (OD) for 4 weeks and gentamycin 150 mg IV OD for 2 weeks). Although she had a complete neurological recovery, the vegetation remained the same. The patient declined to undergo surgery, and so was discharged. As per the neurologist's advice, she was continued on antiplatelets.
After three years, she presented to us with recurrent stroke (right-sided hemiparesis). Brain MRI examination revealed an acute ischaemic stroke involving the left PCA territory, left parietal cortex and left superior frontal gyrus . Blood investigations for young stroke including autoimmune and connective tissue disorders were negative. There was no family history of premature coronary artery disease and/or stroke. Detailed TTE and TEE (see ) showed masses over the anterior mitral leaflet (AML) and posterior mitral leaflet of the mitral valve. She was again treated empirically with IV antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g IV OD for 4 weeks and Gentamycin 150 mg IV OD for 2 weeks) even though blood cultures were negative. Although her recovery from stroke was complete, mitral valve lesions remained the same. This made us suspect papillary fibroelastoma (PFE) of the mitral valve. An intra-cardiac excision of mitral valve mass with ring annuloplasty including the surrounding endocardium was done in February 2020. The post-operative period was uneventful. She was discharged on the seventh post-operative day and she was on regular follow-up. During her regular follow-up visit in November 2021, TTE revealed a mass of size 14 ×11 mm on the P2 of the mitral valve along with severe mitral regurgitation . TEE revealed masses over the mitral leaflets (see ). She underwent mitral valve replacement in December 2021. Histopathological examination of the mass revealed papillary excrescences by haematoxylin and eosin staining along with fragmented reticulin fibres in elastin van geison staining , which confirmed the diagnosis of PFE. Our patient had a complete neurological recovery with a well functioning prosthetic mitral valve. The recurrence of PFE, although rare, can occur. This patient highlights the importance of follow-up echocardiogram in patients after resection of PFE even if the patient is asymptomatic.