On December 15, 2022, a 42-year-old male who had been treated with obinutuzumab on November 18, 2022, for primary immune thrombocytopenia developed a fever. His nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 antigen test was positive. He had received three doses of COVID-19 vaccine (recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S-protein receptor-binding domain vaccine, ZF2001, China) in 2021. The body temperature became normal two days later and his nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 antigen test turned negative. He developed cough and white sputum in January 2023. Chest CT performed on day-64 post-infection revealed multiple GGOs in both lungs, predominantly in the left lower lobe . Follow-up CT (day-70) revealed that the original GGOs in the left lower lobe resolved, and multiple GGOs emerged in the left upper lobe . On day-76, the patient was admitted to a local hospital. On physical examination, his body temperature was 38.6°C; blood pressure, 121/80 mmHg; pulse, 83 beats/min; respiratory rate, 19 breaths/min, and pulse oxygen saturation, 99% on room air. Laboratory tests showed a moderately elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (42 mm/h), as well as a reduced lymphocyte count (400/μL). Other routine blood tests were within normal range. The nasopharyngeal swab was negative for the SARS-CoV-2 antigen. Moxifloxacin (day-76) and high-dose methylprednisolone (up to 80mg daily, day-81) were administered successively without obvious clinical remission. During this period, chest CT showed rapidly changing migratory pulmonary infiltrates .
On day-120, he was transferred to our hospital because of the persistent fever and undiagnosed pulmonary infiltrates. Laboratory analysis showed an average lymphocyte count (1500/μL), while the peripheral blood B-cell count was zero. Blood eosinophil count, C-reaction protein (CRP), ESR, and rheumatoid factor were all within normal ranges. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and antinuclear antibodies were negative. Blood and sputum cultures for bacteria and fungi were negative. No SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies were detected in the serum. The nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 antigen test was negative. However, the nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA (Cycle threshold, Ct value of 38.67), and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) testing was also positive (Ct value of 31.72). The differential cell counts of BALF revealed remarkably lymphocytic inflammation (lymphocyte percentage 57.5%). Considering the possibility of secondary organizing pneumonia associated with prolonged SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patient received antiviral therapy (nirmatrelvir/ritonavir), infusion of convalescent plasma and oral methylprednisolone (up to 48 mg daily), resulting in rapid improvement of clinical symptoms. Chest CT (day-141) revealed significant dissipation of previous GGOs, and no new infiltrates were detected .