A 61-year-old male patient with no past medical histories and family histories was admitted to our hospital due to right shoulder pain and back pain for a few months. No history of injury was recorded. He had a good performance status and there were no palpable mass at the shoulder joint and no definite neurologic deficits. Shoulder joint MRI detected an abnormal contrast-enhanced mass of about 3×3 cm in size which was located near his right scapula and invaded the bone . Blood tests showed mild anemia with a hemoglobin of 120 g/l, normal while blood count and normal liver, kidney function, and LDH (lactate dehydrogenase). The serum protein concentration was elevated with 84.3 g/l, in which the level of albumin and globulin were 38.7 g/l and 45.6 g/l, respectively. There was no evidence of monoclonal gammopathy in the free light chain test as well as the protein electrophoresis. A bone marrow biopsy was performed at a previous hospital which showed no abnormalities. The patient was also checked with a PET/CT scan, which showed a tumor at the corresponding position on the MRI with high FDG-uptake (SUV max of 12.0) and multiple FDG-avid lesions in the lungs, mediastinal lymph nodes and L4 vertebra. His PSA level was normal, and thyroid ultrasound, lower and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy showed no abnormalities. A core needle biopsy of the shoulder mass was obtained, which showed a nonspecific malignant tumor composed of diffuse, large cells with round or irregular nuclei, vesicle chromatin, prominent nucleoli and abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm. The immunohistochemistry examination was positive with Vimentin, CD68, CD163, lysozyme, and negative with LCA (leukocyte common antigen), MPO (myeloperoxidase), CK (cytokeratin), and S100 . Based on the clinical features and immunohistochemical findings above, the patient was diagnosed with advanced stage HS.
He was initially treated with an ICE chemotherapy regimen (ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide). After two cycles, the pain worsened, mostly in the lumbar and right shoulder regions, and the patient could not lift his right hand. He also did not tolerate chemotherapy well. A re-evaluation PET/CT scan showed an increase in size and FDG-uptake level of the primary tumor (SUV max of 18.0) and metastatic lesions . PD-L1 test was done to explore further treatment of immunotherapy, which showed a strong positivity in 90% of tumor cells. Due to the rapid progression on chemotherapy, we decided to start immunotherapy with pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks. Palliative radiation therapy to the right shoulder joint was also discussed with the patient but he refused radiotherapy. After three cycles of immunotherapy, the pain gradually decreased. PET/CT scan after three cycles found a very good response in all sites with a dramatic drop of the SUV max of bone lesions . After six cycles of pembrolizumab, the patient achieved maximal remission in all lesions, in which no clear high FDG-uptake lesions were recorded on a PET-CT scan. The patient had pembrolizumab maintenance, reaching over 30 months without disease progression until now.