A 42-year-old right-handed female presented with a longstanding history of migraine headaches, which had worsened over the 2 months leading up to her hospitalization. She was otherwise healthy with no additional past medical history, taking only rizatriptan and fenoprofen. Her neurological examination was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 1.7 × 1.3 × 1.6 cm intensely enhancing lesion originating in the pineal gland and inseparable from the superior aspect of the tectum inferiorly. The lesion appeared slightly hyperintense relative to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on T1-weighted images (WI) and resulted in inferior displacement of the tectum causing partial obstruction of the aqueduct of Sylvius with associated dilation of the lateral and third ventricles. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences demonstrated paraventricular hyperintensity suggestive of transependymal flow due to early obstructive hydrocephalus. Serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin and α-fetoprotein were negative.
The patient initially underwent successful endoscopic third ventriculostomy for relief of obstructive hydrocephalus. CSF glucose and protein were 38 and <10 mg/dL, respectively. Surgical resection took place 18 days later through a supracerebellar, infratentorial approach with the patient in the sitting position. The tumor seemed to arise from the pineal gland itself with areas of calcification along the dorsal surface. Gross total tumor resection was obtained and the patient was sent to the intensive care unit in satisfactory condition.
Postoperatively the patient did well with a transient mild Parinaud syndrome and gait disturbance that resolved over the following 2 weeks. Follow-up MRI on postoperative day 3 demonstrated complete resection of the tumor .
On hematoxylin and eosin stain , the tumor cells exhibited highly pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei. Frequent multinucleated and enlarged cells with giant, bizarre-shaped nuclei were seen. There were many vessels with hyalinized walls, but no areas of vascular proliferation or necrosis. Rare mitotic figures were seen with a low Ki67 proliferation index reaching up to 1.6% in some areas. Reticulin staining did not reveal peri-tumoral reticulin fibers. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for and synaptophysin and class III β-tubulin with diffuse, weak epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) staining. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining primarily demonstrated focal positivity resembling a reactive process but there were discrete areas of diffuse positive staining of tumor cells. There was scattered positive immunostaining for p53, Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), and Olig2, while staining for IDH-R132H mutation, CK, HMB45, and CD34 were negative.