A 43-year-old female was admitted to a German Hospital in August 2012 for hypokalemia (lowest K+ value 2.4 mmol/l) muscle weakness, palpitations and sleeplessness. Patient history and clinical examination showed arterial hypertension controlled by three antihypertensive drugs and peripheral edema. Hyperaldosteronism was excluded, and oral potassium supplementation was started. Symptoms resolved spontaneously after 1 month and the patient did not undergo further examinations. In January 2013 the patient was hospitalized for hypokalemia (lowest K+ value 2.6 mmol/l) and uncontrolled arterial hypertension despite three antihypertensive drugs. She complained of weight gain, muscle weakness and oligomenorrhea. Physical examination revealed mild hirsutism and oral candidiasis. Renal arterial stenosis and pheochromocytoma were ruled out. Elevated fasting blood glucose, elevated ACTH (74 pmol/L with normal values 1.98–11.4 pmol/L) and cortisol levels (1648 nmol/L) were documented. A suppression test with 2 mg dexamethasone showed lack of cortisol suppression. Serum cortisol after 8 mg dexamethasone was 513 nmol/L (normal: < 50). An ACTH-dependent CS was suggested. Two months later signs and symptoms of hypercortisolism disappeared, and biochemical remission was documented . Pituitary MRI did not identify a pituitary adenoma, while a bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling (BIPSS) performed in the off-phase was indicative of central ACTH production because of a strong ACTH increase after corticotrophin release hormone (CRH) injection (100 μg i.v.) in the right petrosal sinus and a central to peripheral gradient of 7.3 at 15′ . The patient remained without symptoms for around 5 months. During this time, arterial blood pressure was medically controlled and potassium levels were normal without supplementation. In August 2013 a new episode occurred. The worsening of glucose metabolism required insulin therapy. Basal serum cortisol and 24 h urinary free cortisol (UFC) levels were highly abnormal. A suppression test with 8 mg dexamethasone confirmed lack of cortisol suppression and a new pituitary MRI identified a suspected pituitary lesion. Only 4 weeks later Cushing’s symptoms disappeared, and diagnosis of cyclic CS was established. A 68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT was negative. The patient underwent explorative transsphenoidal surgery that showed no pituitary adenoma but a Crook’s cell hyalinosis in the pituitary gland. In January 2014, after 4 months, hypercortisolism recurred. A systematic selective venous sampling of all major veins did not identify an ACTH gradient. A CRH stimulation test showed no increase in ACTH and cortisol levels, suspicious for ectopic CS. Four weeks later symptoms disappeared. An 18-FDG-PET CT was negative and the patient was referred to our University Hospital. During this symptom-free interval, midnight salivary cortisol, 24hUFC and 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test remained slightly abnormal (midnight salivary cortisol 121 nmol/L (normal range: < 41); 24hUFC 1051 nmol/24 h; serum cortisol after 1 mg dexamethasone 215 nmol/L (normal range: < 50). In May 2014, the fifth episode occurred lasting for 2 weeks . CRH levels were low (8.4 pg/ml), excluding an ectopic CRH secretion. Another BIPSS was performed and was now in line with ectopic CS . Abdomen MRI and CT, angio MRI and 68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT were all negative. An 18F-DOPA PET/CT identified a lesion close to the pancreatic head, which was subsequently confirmed by an endoscopic ultrasound, showing a 13x12mm hypoechoic lesion in the pancreatic head. Subcutaneous pasireotide was administered for 4 days with immediate normalization of cortisol levels, which remained normal thereafter suggesting a spontaneous remission rather than a therapeutic effect. In August 2014, the patient was again symptomatic. Daily salivary cortisol monitoring documented the rapid and steep increase in cortisol concentrations, which reached peak levels in 5 days. The patient was treated with intravenous continuous etomidate to control life-threatening cortisol levels. After discussion in a multidisciplinary tumor board a Whipple’s intervention with extended lymphadenectomy was performed. Surprisingly, histopathology did not confirm the pancreatic lesion but identified several ACTH-positive lymph node metastases. The Ki67 staining was limited due to the strong fragmentation of the tissue and the presence of numerous intratumoral lymphocytes. On average, Ki67-positive tumor cell nuclei were less than 20%. Only in single hot spot region, areas with up to 25 to 30% positive tumor cell nuclei were identified. Together with the clinical data (no further primary suspect focus detectable in the DOPA and DOTATATE PET/CT and MRI), the findings were suggestive for an occult, possibly pancreatic, NET WHO grade II with accompanying loco-region lymph node metastasis, located in the retro-duodenal tissue close to the pancreatic head. The tumor infiltrates reached the broken surface of the specimen, indicating an incomplete tumor resection. Post-surgical ACTH levels dropped from 182 to 82 pmol/L and remained stable between 44 and 66 pmol/L for around 1 month. Because of the incomplete tumor resection, the patient underwent bilateral adrenalectomy, resolving symptomatology. The primary tumor remained occult and, 2 years after adrenalectomy, ACTH levels started to increase progressively, reaching values of 2676 pmol/L in January 2018. At the same time, chromogranin A raised to 1586 μg/L, compared with 418 μg/L in July 2017. Dopa PET/CT and MRI of the spine, performed in November 2017 and January 2018 respectively, showed multiple sclerotic lesions suggestive of bone metastases. A suspected lesion of the fifth thoracic vertebra underwent percutaneous transpedicular biopsy. Pathology report documented an ACTH-, synaptophysin- and chromogranin A-positive metastasis of the NET tumor with a proliferation rate of 80%. After discussion in multidisciplinary tumor board, the patient started therapy with carboplatin and etoposide and, since then, has received 12 cycles of chemotherapy. Imaging studies documented unchanged number and size of target lesions, reflecting stable disease. Chromogranin A levels dropped down to 554 μg/l in February 2018, but reached again a peak of 2657 in June 2018. The last value, in January 2019, is 1213 μg/L. ACTH levels continued to increase over the time, reaching in October 2018 values of 11,257 pmol/L.