A 61-year-old male patient with a history of hypertension was admitted to the ICU, with loss of consciousness and dyspnea. He had a toothache 15 days ago, and got some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in local pharmacy. However, the condition was not improved and mandible and neck begun to swell 10 days ago, and the situation deteriorated in the following days until he was admitted. The patient’s vitals were as follows: radial artery blood pressure was 112/77 mmHg, axillary temperature was 36.8℃, heart rate was 90 bpm, oxygen concentration was 45% with high flow oxygen inhalation, and blood oxygen saturation was 99%. Lung breath was clear, with no audible dry or wet rales. Blood test results: the leukocyte count was 4.05 × 109 /L with high percentage of neutrophils and low percentage of lymphocyte (90.4% and 4.3%, respectively), C-reactive protein (CRP) was > 200 mg/L, and procalcitonin (PCT) was 9.32 ng/ml . CT scan showed gas-like images in the left submandibular tissues and neck, cervical lymph node enlargement, obvious pleural effusion, and normal lungs . Clinical examinations and CT results indicated the presence of infection with aerogenic bacteria.
On the first day of hospitalization, the patient's blood oxygen saturation dropped to 80%, he was treated with tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) was also applied for the debridement and drainage of the infected area. Symptomatic treatment was also conducted, such as nutritional support and maintenance of water-electrolyte balance. Vancomycin (VAN) was treated for suspected gram-positive cocci infection. On the second day of hospitalization, the inflammatory indexes were still high with wet rales in both lungs. Therefore, imipenem (IPM) was administered to treat gram-negative bacteria infection. However, on the third hospital day the temperature rose to 38.3℃, indomethacin suppository was administered rectally to bring down a fever. Drainage fluid from the lesions and blood were drawn to culture for microbes, an aliquot of the drainage fluid was also sent to the clinical laboratory for mNGS. On the 5th day of hospitalization, the patient’s temperature returned to normal, but the percentage of neutrophils, CRP, and PCT levels were still high (87%, > 200 mg/L, 9.77 ng/mL, respectively). A second CT scan showed that the gas content in the tissues and extent of neck inflammation were reduced, but inflammatory lesions had appeared in the lungs, with increased bilateral pleural effusion volume . The result of mNGS revealed mixed infection by Streptococcus anginous, Prevotella oris, Prevotella denticola, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Alloprevotella tannerae . Thus, the antibiotic therapy was adjusted to piperacillin/tazobactam (TZP) and tinidazole (TNZ) based on positive results of mNGS.
On the 6th day of hospital stay, Streptococcus anginous was retrieved by culture of the drainage fluid, without any anaerobic bacteria detected. The isolated strain was sensitive to TZP according to antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) results. Hence, TZP and TNZ were continued for the treatment. The interpretive criterion of AST was established according to the latest edition of performance standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing updated by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed through fiberoptic bronchoscopy to remove secretions of respiratory, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was sent to the microbiology laboratory for culture. On the 7th day of hospital stay, ultrasound-guided thoracic puncture was performed to drain pleural effusion fluids. On the 8th day of hospital stay, A methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative (MRSCN) Staphylococcus hominis strain was identified by blood cultures, and VAN was added to the antibiotic regiments according to the AST result . On the 9th day a strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa which sensitive to TZP was recovered from BALF by culture, thus change in antibiotics was not necessary . The patient’s general condition was improved and the mechanical ventilation was switched to high-flow oxygen inhalation. On the 11th day of hospital stay, the percentage of neutrophils returned to normal, CRP and PCT levels were significantly lower than before, indicating reduction of the infection. A third CT scan showed that the gas content in the inferior space and mediastinum cavity decreased, the infection symptoms of the neck and mediastinum relieved, the lung infection decreased, and the amount of pleural effusion was less extensively than before . Based on the patient’s improved clinical conditions and previous AST results, the antibiotic treatment was changed to Levaquin (LEV) and TZP. The patient was discharged out of ICU after obtaining a negative result of the drainage fluid bacterial culture .