In August 2021, a 78-year-old Caucasian man using Apixaban presented to the emergency department with mild aphasia associated with balance disorders for 36 h. The direct-acting oral anticoagulant (DOAC), which was an anti-Xa inhibitor, had been implemented many years ago because of a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The patient stated that he used Rivaroxaban until November 2019. At that time, anticoagulation had to be briefly stopped so he could undergo elective resection of a perineal lipoma. The morning after stopping treatment, the patient woke with dysarthria, left labial ptosis, weakness of the left arm, and clumsiness. Computed angiotomography of the brain showed a right opercular cardioembolic stroke. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a right sylvian multiembolic stroke with right opercular and insular lesions. Because this first infarction was possibly promoted by suboptimal anticoagulation, Rivaroxaban was changed to Apixaban without further investigations. The patient showed complete neurological recovery.
On admission in August 2021, the patient was hemodynamically stable with a regular cardiac sinus rhythm. Neurological examination findings included production aphasia and discrete ataxia.
Routine blood test results showed a slight decrease in the platelet count (90 × 106 g/L) and prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (44 s) . The inflammatory parameters were in the normal range.
Computed angiotomography of the brain did not reveal any new stroke. The brain MRI, which was performed the day after admission, showed an acute left sylvian stroke . Because of the new cerebrovascular event occurring with efficient anticoagulation, further investigations were warranted. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a fluctuating mobile pedicle mass (31 × 14 mm) attached to the aortic valve and inducing moderate aortic insufficiency (grade 2 to 3/4). The hemato-immunological results were as follows: Lupus antibodies were negative for SLE [Antinuclear antibodies – ANA (< 160 1/DIL): (indirect immunofluorescence assay – high sensitivity, low specificity). Anti-dsDNA, anti-Smith, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anti-U1RNP and anti-histones: all negative (enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) - low sensitivity, high specificity)] ; aCL (Anticardiolipin antibody) (IgG < 20 U): ; anti-β2GPI (Anti-beta2 glycoprotein 1 antibody) (IgM < 20 U): ; anti-β2GPI (IgG < 50 U): (ELISA) - signing a moderate to high risk of APS . Blood culture and bacterial serology results were sterile (Coxiellea burnetti, Brucella sp, Bartonella sp, Legionella).
Because of the large size of this intracardiac mass and the related occurrence of embolic events, short-term valvular surgery was indicated . The cardiac surgery team proceeded with biological aortic valve replacement. Exposure of the aortic valve revealed a tricuspid valve of normal morphology except for a prolapsed noncoronary leaflet creating the insufficiency. The vegetation was gelatinous and had an elongated teardrop shape, with an approximate length of 4 cm and a maximum width of 1.5 cm that was attached to the free edge of the right coronary leaflet . A small amount of similar material was also found on the left leaflet. The valve could not be preserved because of insufficient coaptation of the noncoronary leaflet and strong adherence of the mass to the cusp surface. After excision of the leaflets, a biologic aortic valve prosthesis, Edwards Inspiris Resilia 27 mm ® was implanted. The intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography image of the vegetation is illustraded on Fig. . International guidelines for APS therapy do not recommend to use Apixaban. Therfore the postoperative heparin was bridged with vitamin K antagonists (VKA) – Acenocumarol. The histological examination revealed a fibrin cluster without acute inflammation that suggested marantic endocarditis.
Subsequent echocardiography confirmed normal functioning of the aortic prosthesis, and the patient was released from the hospital without any postsurgical complications. The aphasia resolved and, at the time of re-evaluation, the neurological deficits were absent.
A few weeks before admission, a bulging skin lesion appeared on the sternum . It was removed in January 2022, at 5 months after heart surgery, and was observed to be solid BCC. In March 2022, residual BCC of the ear was identified and removed . At 6 months postoperatively, there was no clinical thromboembolic recurrence.