A three-day-old girl presented with an abdominal mass lesion that was noted during routine prenatal ultrasound screening. At 26 weeks, the prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and showed a defined mass lesion in the right abdomen compressing the adjacent small bowel loops . She was born at 39 weeks via vaginal delivery and weighed 3,142 g. There was no family or parental history of inherited vascular disorders. Physical examination revealed mild hemihypertrophy of the left lower extremity and red lesions on the left thigh .
A follow-up MRI of the abdomen was obtained after delivery, and this showed a 6.3 cm × 2.7 cm × 5.5 cm cyst-like lesion in the upper abdomen. Some possible calcified spots with high T1WI signals and low T2WI signals were also noted within the mass . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was consistent with an ill-defined cystic mass with small calcifications and encasement of mesenteric vessels. Lymphatic-venous malformation (LVM) was strongly suspected .
An MRI of the left lower extremity revealed a tubular structure at the anterior subcutis of the left lower leg that extended to the lateral thigh subcutis and into the ipsilateral gluteus muscle, connecting with vessels at the left pelvic sidewall. The tubular lesion displayed a signal void and homogeneous strong enhancement, compatible with a vascular malformation .
A CT scan of the left lower extremity also revealed a vascular structure with no significant enhancement in the arterial phase but gradual contrast filling in the delayed phase, indicating venous rather than arteriovenous malformation. Reconstructed images revealed one engorged incompetent vessel on the lateral aspect of the left lower extremity that extended from the lower leg to the gluteal and pelvic regions. This vessel is known as the lateral marginal vein or vein of Servelle . Subcutaneous soft tissue stranding and edematous change from the left thigh to calf were also noted. A biopsy of the left thigh lesion was performed and the pathology revealed capillary–lymphatic–venous malformation (CLVM) . The findings of above were consistent with a diagnosis of KTS.
At 29 days old, the patient was therefore referred to the cardiovascular surgeon and the pediatric hematologist for treatment consultation. Initially, she only received oral beta-2 antagonist and compression therapy of lower extremity as management for KTS after discussing with patient's family. She regularly underwent follow-up at cardiovascular surgeon and the pediatric hematologist departments every three months, but no obvious improvement found during the follow up period. At 10 months old, she started to receive Sirolimus simultaneously. After several sessions of combination treatment (beta-2 antagonist, Sirolimus and compression therapy), regression of the left lower extremity edema was observed. The abdominal mass lesion exhibited a slight reduction in size during the ultrasound follow-up conducted after three months. At the time of writing, the patient was 18 months old and in regular follow-up at these out-patient departments every three months.