A 61 year-old man was admitted with a 103 ° F fever, confusion, weakness and slurred speech after hemodialysis. He had a history of viridans streptococcal mitral valve endocarditis, end stage renal disease on hemodialysis, atrial fibrillation not on anticoagulation due to GI bleeding, and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. He had a productive cough for a week without any identifiable sick contact. Physical examination was notable for an agitated edentulous man with a left central facial palsy, severe dysarthria, and a systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border. His lungs were clear to auscultation and there was no stigmata of endocarditis.
The patient was initially treated empirically for pneumonia and worked up for stroke. However, the treatment plan was quickly modified when a transthoracic echocardiogram on day two of admission revealed two echogenic structures consistent with vegetations: 0.4 × 0.4 cm on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, and the other 0.7 × 1.8 cm attached to left coronary cusp of the aortic valve . There was also thickening of the aortic root suggestive of abscess formation. Two sets of blood culture grew Gram-positive rods after 37.5 h incubating in anaerobic bottles , and after 86 h in aerobic bottles. The organism was identified as A. neuii by MALDI-TOF MS on day five of admission. Serial brain MRI scans revealed multiple bilateral infarcts on day two with increased number of infarcts and a small focus of hemorrhage on day five. The patient was diagnosed with infective endocarditis by A. neuii complicated by aortic root abscess and presumed cerebral septic emboli.
The patient was initially treated with vancomyin and piperacillin/tazobactam until A. neuii was identified. Subsequently, he was treated with ampicillin and gentamicin for two days, followed by ampicillin for the rest of his hospitalization. The choice of ampicillin was based on a large series that studied susceptibility to antibiotics of Actinomyces species , and a previously successfully treated A. neuii endocarditis case . Antibiotic susceptibility was not tested for our patient because he responded to the treatment well, and repeat blood cultures were all negative. A CT angiography of the brain and neck on day six ruled out mycotic aneurysm. It was concluded that the risk of further septic embolization outweighed the risk of intracranial hemorrhage, and the patient underwent aortic valve replacement, debridement of aortic root subannular abscess, mitral valve repair, and repair of a fistula between the aorta and left atrium on hospital day fourteen. A 2.5 × 0.6 cm vegetation on the aortic valve and a vegetation on the mitral chordae tendineae were removed. There was no microscopic evidence of bacterial elements on the aortic valve based on histopathology with Gram stain, and culture did not grow any organisms. The patient’s post-operative course was complicated by shock requiring intraaortic balloon pump, and a cardiac arrest from ventricular fibrillation 10 days after surgery. He recovered without further neurological deterioration, and was discharged to a nursing facility two months after heart surgery. He received 12 weeks of IV ampicillin followed by 11 months of oral doxycycline.
One year after the diagnosis of A. neuii endocarditis, while on chronic doxycycline, the patient had a fever and a bacteremia with coagulase negative Staphylococcus and group B Streptococcus. The bacteremia was sterilized after the initiation of antibiotic therapy and there was no growth from subsequent blood cultures. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a small, mobile echogenic density on the non-coronary cusp of the bioprosthetic aortic valve. The patient refused to undergo transesophageal echocardiogram to further evaluate the prosthetic valve, so he was treated empirically for possible prosthetic valve endocarditis. The patient was cured from infection after two weeks of IV vancomycin and gentamicin, followed by four weeks of IV vancomycin. He had been taking oral doxycycline in addition to his IV antibiotics.
The patient eventually died of a sudden cardiac arrest after hemodialysis. This was 15 months after the diagnosis of A. neuii infective endocarditis, and four weeks after discontinuation of oral doxycycline. The family declined autopsy.
Primary infective endocarditis caused by Actinomyces spp. is rare. After PubMed (search term ((actinomyces spp) OR actinomyces) AND ((infective endocarditis) OR endocarditis)) and additional bibliographical search, we found 26 human cases dating back to 1939 , after excluding four reports, two with bacteria that have been subsequently reclassified to different genera [, ], one report with possible direct extension of pulmonary actinomycosis to the endocardium , and one with primary IUD-associated actinomyosis and secondary endocarditis . Cases were reported at all ages (6–87 years old). Two thirds of patients were men. The most commonly identified species were A. israelii (19%) and A. viscosus (15%). Twenty-two cases involved left-sided valves (mitral 9; aortic 5; prosthetic aortic 3; both mitral and aortic 4; undetermined 1). Risk factors included valvular disease (41%), poor dental hygiene or dental procedure (36%), and prosthesis (14%). All four right-sided cases were associated with intravenous drug use [, , , ].
Most left-sided endocarditis patients had indolent courses. This did not seem to vary over time. However, the mortality and complications have improved significantly over time. Five of eight patients reported before 1990 died and five had embolic events (brain, spleen, kidneys, small bowel and skin), whereas only two of 14 cases reported after 1990 died, and only one had emboli to skin. Despite temporal courses of a subacute endocarditis, where stigmata of endocarditis are more common, only one report described Roth’s spots . It is unclear whether this was related to virulence factors from Actinomyces spp., or simply the rarity of these complications . Right-sided endocarditis cases had more acute and fulminant courses, and were all complicated by septic emboli to the lungs. Two (50%) of them had polymicrobial endocarditis [, ], which might have contributed to more complicated clinical courses. All four right-sides cases survived and all were reported after the year of 2000. Irrespective of the side of endocarditis, most patients were treated with a prolonged course of penicillin or β-lactam antibiotics. Four cases had surgery (three aortic valves [, , ] and one Eustachian valve , an embryologic remnant of the valve of the inferior vena cava).
Two cases of infective endocarditis by A. neuii were previously reported [, ]. Both were in older men with preexisting aortic valvular anomalies (one had a bicuspid valve and the other a prosthetic valve). Both presented with subacute endocarditis, large aortic vegetations (2 cm) and root abscesses. The patient with a native valve underwent surgery . Both patients were cured from the infection. One was initially treated with ampicillin, then ceftriaxone due to interstitial nephritis, and finally doxycycline for 9 months . The other was treated with penicillin, followed by amoxicillin for 12 months .