A 75-year-old woman presented to an orthopedic clinic with right hip pain caused by a misstep. Her height was 156 cm and her body weight was 63 kg, giving a body mass index of 25 kg/m2. She had no history of steroid treatment or alcohol consumption.
On X-ray examination, an osteophyte on the acetabular fossa and subchondral sclerosis of the acetabulum were observed , but a crescent sign and collapse of the femoral head were not seen. A center-edge angle of 17°, a sharp angle of 43°, and an acetabular head index of 70% were noted. The patient was diagnosed with acetabular dysplasia for the first time. T1-weighted images on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a low-intensity band parallel to the articular cartilage at an anterolateral site on the right femoral head ( and ). The length of the low-intensity band was 11 mm, and the band ratio (ratio of weight-bearing portion length to band length) was 35%. A T2-weighted image on MRI showed diffuse high signal intensity around the low-intensity band . The bone mineral density (BMD) was not measured at this time. The patient was diagnosed with SIF involving bone marrow edema based on previously reported diagnostic criteria [, ]. The patient was treated non-operatively, including the administration of NSAIDs, and was allowed to walk according to the degree of pain. The pain disappeared 3 months after the onset .
Subsequently, the patient experienced ipsilateral hip pain while lifting her husband during nursing care, 5 months after disappearance of the first hip pain. X-ray examination revealed a 1-mm collapse at a lateral site on the femoral head and osteophyte formation at the lateral head-neck junction of the femoral head . The osteophyte on the acetabular fossa and subchondral sclerosis of the acetabulum were more clearly observed on the X-ray, and the minimum joint space was 1 mm narrower than that observed 5 months previously . The progression of osteoarthritis was observed. T1-weighted images on MRI showed a new low-intensity band at a posterolateral-to-medial site on the femoral head ( and ). The length of the low-intensity band was 10 mm, and the band ratio was 32%. A T2-weighted image on MRI showed diffuse high signal intensity around the low-intensity band . The high signal intensity area revealed in the first SIF had disappeared in the second SIF. The patient was diagnosed with a recurrence of SIF at a different sites on the ipsilateral femoral head from the first SIF. Osteoporosis was also diagnosed after dual X-ray absorptiometry demonstrated a BMD of 0.675 g/cm2 (T-score: −1.0) in the right femoral head and a total BMD of 0.792 g/cm2 (T-score: −1.8) in the lumbar spine (L1–L4). Administration of teriparatide was prescribed for the second SIF. The patient was treated non-operatively and was allowed to walk with a T-cane according to the degree of pain. At 5 months after the onset of the second SIF, the pain had gradually alleviated but was still present . In particular, walking pain remained, but the patient was able to walk with a T-cane. An X-ray showed progression of osteoarthritis of the hip at 3 years after the first SIF onset .