We present a case of a 22-day old boy who was admitted to the pediatric ward at the North Denmark Regional Hospital in Hjoerring, Denmark, with an active COVID-19 infection.
The boy was born at term, after an uncomplicated pregnancy, with a birth weight of 3470 g, and a normal APGAR score together with an otherwise normal perinatal period. The boy was bottle-fed and well-being with a normal weight gain.
At 21 days of age, the family contacted the pediatric ward because the boy’s father and oldest sister were tested positive for COVID-19, and the boy had been irritable for 2 hours and had a temperature of 38.3 °C. A few hours later, the temperature had dropped to 37.8 °C, and the boy was no longer irritable. Both the father and sister were asymptomatic.
At admission, the boy presented no respiratory difficulties, however, he had tachycardia of 200 beats/minute and was pale. He had a body temperature of 37.3 °C, respiratory rate of 48 breaths/minute, small intercostal retractions, normal stethoscopy of the lungs and heart, and an otherwise normal neonatal examination and vital values. The child underwent a COVID-19 pharyngeal PCR-test, a chest and abdomen x-ray as well as screening blood analyses, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) .
The x-ray and ECG were normal. For laboratory findings, see Table . Overnight, his heart rate normalized without intervention, and along with this a normalization of skin color was seen. In the morning, the COVID-19 test came back positive. A grade 1/6 heart murmur on the left side of the sternum was found, and a pediatric cardiologist was consulted. It was decided to repeat the ECG and take blood samples for heart enzymes to rule out MIS-C . The pediatric cardiologist concluded that there were no signs of heart failure biochemically or clinically. After the first hours, the heart rate was stable at 130-160 beats/minute, although slightly higher when he showed signs of irritability, and he was normothermic. The boy was discharged in a habitual state after three days of admission. A follow-up echocardiography one month after admission was normal. Two days after the boy was discharged, the mother tested positive for COVID-19. To our knowledge, the second sister remained negative.
Due to the positive COVID-19 test, the boy was enrolled in a clinical study (N-20200036) at the North Denmark Regional Hospital, examining rectal shedding of SARS-CoV-2. During hospitalization, an extra pharyngeal and two rectal swabs were collected. Prior to discharge, the mother was thoroughly instructed in how to perform pharyngeal and rectal swabs, and was asked to continue sample collection at home, until two consecutive negative pharyngeal and rectal swabs were obtained. Figure shows the number and frequency of samples taken.
Pharyngeal swabs were positive for 11 days after initial diagnosis, and the collection of pharyngeal swabs was stopped after two consecutive negative results on day 25. After this, the mother was instructed to continue with the rectal swabs only. The boy was SARS-CoV-2 positive in his rectal swabs for 45 days, and the sample collection ended on day 53 with two consecutive negative results. Thus, the boy remained positive in his rectal swabs for 29 days after his first negative pharyngeal swab.
At inclusion, the mother completed a questionnaire regarding the boy’s demographic and medical information, including height, weight, symptoms, contact with SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals, risk factors, etc. In addition, the mother completed a questionnaire about the boy’s symptoms at each sample collection time point. After discharge, the boy remained asymptomatic during the whole pharyngeal and/or rectal swab follow-up period. The boy had an average weight gain of 37.6 g/day during the first month after the positive COVID-19 test, hence, the prolonged shedding of virus did not affect the boy’s well-being.