A 44-year-old Chinese man presented to Longhua Hospital with a history of left-sided UC for more than 6 years. He received oral treatment with mesalazine at a dose of 3 g/d (occasionally 2 g/d due to forgetting to take the medicine). Bowel movements were maintained 2-3 times a day, with a small amount of blood and mucus in the stool less than half of the time. Mesalazine suppository therapy and glucocorticoid enema were also administered briefly during this period, but the symptoms were not relieved. In the previous 6 years, colonoscopy was repeated annually, with results revealing a Mayo endoscopic score of 2 (erosion of the rectum and sigmoid colon covered with purulent secretions).
The patient suffered from recurrent bloody mucous stool. After another colonoscopy was conducted at a local hospital on October 30, 2019 , which suggested a diagnosis of active left-sided UC, he was admitted to our department on November 09, 2019. He reported bowel movements twice a day; mild, dull pain in the left lower abdomen that was relieved after a bowel movement; relapsing mucous discharge; and rectal bleeding when he was fatigued. We observed his tongue to be red with light yellow fur and a thin pulse.
The patient had no significant previous medical history.
The patient had no significant family history.
Physical examination showed no obvious abnormalities, except for slight tenderness in the left lower abdomen.
No sign of inflammation was found in the blood analysis, and the leukocyte level was low, at 3.55 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophils (67.1%) and normal hemoglobin and platelet counts. The prothrombin level, partial thromboplastin times, and d-dimer levels were normal. The serum C-reactive protein level was also within normal limits, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2 mm/h. The blood biochemistry and urine analyses were normal. The ECG results were also normal.
Mild inflammation, characterized by hyperemia, edema, erosions and friability was detected in the sigmoid colon and rectum , 20 cm from the anus. Normal mucosa was noted in the remaining colon.