A 57-year-old Caucasian man with a history of psoriasis, for which he was taking topical steroid preparations, fell while walking down stairs. Initially, his left leg gave way, and he landed on his hyperflexed right knee. He had been unable to bear weight on his legs since then and presented to our Accident and Emergency Department with painful swelling over both knees.
His physical examination revealed that both knees were very tender to touch over the suprapatellar region and had massive suprapatellar swelling. He was unable to perform a straight leg raise on both sides, although active quadriceps contraction was seen. On palpation, a defect in the continuity of both quadriceps tendons was found.
Plain radiographs of both knees revealed joint effusion, patella baja, and disruption of soft tissues superior to the patella. An avulsion fracture of the patella on the left side was suspected . Bilateral ultrasound scans of the thighs confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral quadriceps tendon rupture at the osseotendinous junctions and a calcified fragment indicating a possible avulsion fracture within the detached end of the left quadriceps tendon.
The patient underwent bilateral surgical exploration of the knees with longitudinal incisions. The peri-operative findings were complete rupture of the tendons bilaterally from the superior pole of the patella . Bilateral quadriceps surgical repairs were performed using mid-line incisions over the knees, and the ruptured ends of the quadriceps tendons were identified. The ruptured ends were freshened and repaired using Vicryl 2-0 sutures through drill holes in the patella to the tendons. Medial and lateral retinacular repair was performed using Vicryl 2-0 and 1-0 sutures.
Post-operatively, the patient was immobilized first in bilateral cylinder casts for six weeks, then in knee braces for the next four weeks. His knees were actively mobilized during physiotherapy. The physiotherapy protocol was initially active knee range of motion exercises, which were followed by passive assisted and polymeric exercises. The patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery and was able to perform straight leg raises without a lag by the time of his three-month follow-up examination . His final knee range of motion was 0° to 125° in both legs after a full course of physiotherapy. He was discharged from the clinic after six months and returned to work.