A 44-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a rapid growth mass in her right breast, measuring 20 cm. The breast skin appeared dark with ulceration . Her family history and past history were unremarkable. One year prior to admission, she incidentally palpated the tumor, and noted gradual growth 2 months prior to the hospital visit. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a hemorrhagic giant mass with a well-defined border. The axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes were swollen, but there was no sign of chest wall invasion or distant metastasis . A diagnosis of PT of borderline malignancy was established on the basis of the core needle biopsy findings. Subsequently, the patient underwent mastectomy of the right breast and axillary lymph node dissection. During surgery, the surgeons detected invasion of the pectoralis major; thus, the partial muscle adhering to the tumor was resected. Because the skin defect was large, artificial dermis was grafted to remedy for the defect . Twenty days later, latissimus dorsi muscle flap and free skin grafting were performed. The histopathological examination demonstrated that the tumor was composed of atypical spindle-shaped cells with enlarged nuclei and exhibited a fibrosarcoma-like morphology which included ill-defined invasion into the adjacent breast tissue, the overlying skin, and the pectoral muscle . Numerous mitoses were noted (10/10 high-power fields) and necrosis had occurred . A degenerated leaf-like structure was observed in the center of the lesion . Three lymph node metastases with a maximum diameter of 25 mm. were noted. Based on these findings, a final diagnosis of malignant PT was established.
Because 1 month after the mastectomy the tumor had re-grown in the surrounding skin graft and right pleural effusion had appeared , as an alternative treatment, we administered two courses of doxorubicin–ifosfamide (AI) therapy (30 mg/m2 doxorubicin on days 1–2 and 2 g/m2 ifosfamide on days 1–5) including Mesna (sodium 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate) and sufficient infusion volumes to prevent ifosfamide-related hemorrhagic cystitis. Grade 4 neutropenia and anemia (as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events) occurred during AI therapy, thus, to prevent the advancement of neutropenia, filgrastim, a granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor, was administered, and transfusion was performed. The local tumor was temporarily reduced after one cycle of AI therapy ; however, after two cycles of AI therapy, the chest wall recurrence and pleural dissemination progressed rapidly . The patient died 4 months after the mastectomy because of respiratory failure.