A 63-year-old Hispanic man presented to the neuromuscular clinic with a 2-3-month onset of electrical shock-like pain in all extremities, worse in his arms, as well as progressive, left greater than right, hand weakness. He also endorsed a 30-pound unintentional weight loss over the course of several months. He was recently diagnosed with hypertension but had no other medical problems. He did not have other neurological symptoms, flank pain, hematuria, or dysuria. There was no family history of similar neurological symptoms or any other neurological disorders. Blood pressure on presentation was elevated at 162/90mmHg. Neurological exam on initial presentation demonstrated weakness and atrophy confined to median-innervated muscles of the left forearm and hand; strength graded by Medical Research Council scale was 3/5 thumb opposition, 3/5 finger flexion of digits 1 and 2, and 3/5 pronation. All other upper and lower limb muscles had normal strength. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the upper extremities and normal in the lower extremities. There were patchy sensory deficits to pin prick in the upper extremities. Initial laboratory testing was unremarkable. Serum angiotensin converting enzyme was 38 U/L. Creatine kinase was 28 U/L. Serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen and liver enzymes were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 17 mm/hr and C-reactive protein was 1.0 mg/L. Serum protein electrophoresis showed no M component. Cryoglobulins were negative. Anti-nuclear antibody, double-stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic autoantibody vasculitis panel, Lyme antibody, and HIV were negative as well. Nerve conduction study of the left median compound muscle action potential (CMAP) showed normal amplitude with decreased conduction velocity. The left median palmar mixed response had prolonged peak latency and reduced amplitude while the left ulnar palmar mixed response showed a reduced amplitude. The right median and ulnar palmar mixed responses were normal, as well as the right median and ulnar CMAP. Needle electromyography showed active denervation in the left abductor pollicis brevis and left pronator teres. Reinnervation changes were seen in the left abductor pollicis brevis. This pattern was consistent with an active, multifocal, sensory and motor polyneuropathy. He was started on Prednisone 1mg/kg daily due to clinical concern for an inflammatory vasculitic neuropathy with no benefit. Over the course of the next 3 weeks, his weakness progressed rapidly to involve the lower extremities leading to multiple falls, prompting an admission to the hospital. Repeat examination revealed new areas of weakness of left wrist flexion and extension 4/5, finger extension and abduction 4/5, right finger extension and abduction 4+/5 as well as bilateral hip flexion weakness 4/5. He had patchy loss of sensation to pinprick in all extremities with diminished reflexes throughout.