A 47-year-old woman presented to our department with cough and fever for 1 day. The diagnostic and treatment process of the entire course of the disease is shown in Fig. . She had a past medical history of hypertension, depression and type II diabetes. Her home medications included telmisartan, deanxit, and sertraline for 2 years and metformin for 1 year. She had allergies to cefotaxime-sulbactam, as the skin test was positive. She was recently diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia. She was started on oral moxifloxacin 17 days prior to admission. On physical examination at admission, she was noted to be febrile (38.6 °C) and had a cough. There was no evidence of rashes, renal injury, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly or pneumonia. The chest CT scan (D1) in the emergency department was normal and revealed that the previous inflammation in the left lower lobe (D-17) was resolved. Her laboratory tests were suggestive of infection, with a leukocyte count of 11,370/mm3 (neutrophils: 81.1%) and an absolute eosinophil count of 20/mm3 (within the normal range). She was admitted for possible bronchitis and placed on parenteral moxifloxacin. Six days after starting treatment with parenteral moxifloxacin, these laboratory tests were retested. However, her symptoms did not improve. Her temperature fluctuated between 37.2 and 37.9 °C during the treatment. Her cough and sputum production did not improve, and she then gradually developed shortness of breath.
Nine days after treatment with parenteral moxifloxacin, she was referred to the Department of Rheumatology and Respiratory Medicine because of unexplained fever and shortness of breath. Chest CT showed random pulmonary nodules, a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion, multiple areas of ground glass opacity, thickening of bronchovesicular bundles, bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Laboratory tests showed possible liver disease with ALT (alanine amino transferase) at 304 IU/l (7–40), AST (aspartate amino transferase) at 82 IU/l (13–35), ALP (alkaline phosphatase) at 425 IU/l (35–100), TBIL (total bilirubin) at 42.3 µmol/l (5.1–19), DBIL (direct bilirubin) at 26.1 µmol/l (0–7), and γGT (γ-glutamyl transferase) at 981 IU/l (7–45). The workup for autoimmune diseases was negative and included myeloperoxidase antibody (< 20 IU/ml), proteinase 3 antibody (< 20 IU/ml), anti-CCP < 7 U/ml, HLA-B27 (-), ANA-IIF < 1:100, and ANA + ENA antibody spectrum (-).
Ten days after treatment with parenteral moxifloxacin, she developed a new morbilliform rash on her chest, abdomen, back, waist, buttocks and bilateral thighs. The rash faded under pressure, and the rash was accompanied by itching . Then, treatment with parenteral moxifloxacin was stopped.
Four days after parenteral moxifloxacin was stopped (D14), she was admitted to the inpatient department. After admission, routine laboratory examinations were completed. Blood gas analysis without oxygen inhalation showed hyperventilation and hypoxemia (pH 7.445, PCO2 27.8 mmHg, PO2 74.9 mmHg, HCO3 19.3 mmol/l). Routine blood examinations showed that leukocytes were significantly increased (16,020/mm3). Peripheral blood cell image analysis showed that the leukocytes had reactive changes and that the proportion of eosinophils was increased (36%) . Approximately 2% of the lymphocytes were atypical. To rule out blood diseases, we performed bone marrow puncture, and the bone marrow cell morphological analysis showed that 1% atypical lymphocytes were present .
The patient had screening tests for infection: serology for hepatitis A, B, C, HIV and syphilis were negative. Sputum acid-fast staining and sputum culture were both negative. PCR testing of pathogens in the sputum was negative. Respiratory pathogen antibody testing was negative (including IgM of respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, influenza virus type A, influenza virus type B, parainfluenza virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Pneumophila Legionella type 1–7). Cytomegalovirus IgM antibody was negative, cytomegalovirus IgG antibody was 257.7 IU/ml (< 0.5). Antibodies and PCR for Epstein–Barr virus were negative.
The supplemental autoimmune antibody screening was negative, including mitochondrial antibody subtypes (AMA-M2, AMA-M4, AMA-M9) and anti-liver and kidney microsomal antibodies. The total IgE level was normal (3.09 U/l).
Her electrocardiogram was normal, and her echocardiography was also normal, with an ejection fraction of 64%. Multiple oval lymph nodes could be seen on both sides of her groin on B-ultrasound. The largest one on the left was 2.0 cm × 0.9 cm, and the largest one on the right was 2.3 cm × 0.9 cm. Pulmonary function tests (D18) were characterized by bronchial asthma with a positive bronchial relaxation test. In addition, it revealed a pattern of diffusion abnormality with decreased values of DLCO. They improved significantly after stopping moxifloxacin.
After admission, the patient was given drug withdrawal and antiallergic and conventional liver-protecting treatment, which led to improvement. Therefore, systemic corticosteroid treatment was avoided in this patient. The changes in chest CT, routine blood tests, liver function, and pulmonary function tests were recorded . On D21, CT showed that most of the lesions were absorbed . The patient developed pharyngeal herpes, which was clinically considered to be related to virus infection, and hyperesthesia in her distal extremities, which was clinically diagnosed as peripheral neuritis. However, testing for human herpesvirus has not been carried out since this institution has no detection capability. A skin biopsy was performed to exclude alternative diagnoses . On D54, the outpatient was rechecked, the symptoms were completely alleviated, and chest CT returned to normal.