A 70-year-old male presented to the emergency department with complaints of sudden onset of severe pain in his left hip while getting up from bed. He was unable to bear weight on his affected lower limb since the episode. The patient had undergone left-sided cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty for subcapital neck femur fracture 3 weeks ago . On examination, there was well-healed surgical scar over posterolateral aspect of hip showing no sign of infection. His left lower limb was shortened, adducted, and internal rotated with diffuse severe tenderness over anterior and posterior aspect of his left hip joint without any neurovascular deficit. Pelvis and hip radiographs were ordered in suspicion of dislocation of prosthetic joint. The radiographs reveal posterior dislocation of non-modular bipolar prosthesis . The patient was taken for urgent closed reduction under general anesthesia. During closed reduction with Allis maneuver under image intensifier, sudden clunk was felt and limb length and alignment improved, though not to the full. Image intensifier images revealed separation of outer head of the bipolar prosthesis from inner head stem assembly. The inner head slipped and got reduced in acetabulum while the separated outer head of prosthesis was floating outside the acetabulum . The procedure abandoned and the patient and his attendants were counseled for revision surgery in the form of hemiarthroplasty or total hip joint replacement in elective setting.
The hip joint was approached from posterolateral approach utilizing the previous surgical scar. The short external rotators and capsule were found to be torn. The prosthesis (INOR Inc., Mumbai, India) outer headliner assembly, which was floating posterior to acetabulum, retrieved and examined. There was no sign of erosion of polyethylene liner or damage to locking mechanism at outer head . The inner head found to be intact but the stem found to be loose as there was debonding of cement at bone-cement interface. The anteversion of stem found to be around 10° though there was no fracture around acetabulum or proximal femur.
We noticed that there were focal cartilage loss and inferior osteophyte in acetabulum; hence, a decision of total hip joint arthroplasty was done. The bipolar stem was removed and total hip arthroplasty was done with cemented acetabular ZCA cup (Zimmer Inc., Warsaw IN, USA) and cemented femoral components with CPT stem (Zimmer Inc., Warsaw IN, USA).We used extended offset femoral stem to restore adequate tension in hip joint abductors and increased femoral anteversion to 15°and kept acetabular cup anteversion around 20°making combined anteversion angle around 35°. We repaired joint capsule and short external rotators meticulously for the prevention of recurrent dislocation. Post-operative radiographs were satisfactory .
The patient was mobilized full weight-bearing on the 2ndpost-operative day and advised to use hip abduction brace at rest for 8 weeks post-surgery. The patient was followed up at 6 weeks, 3 months, at 6 months and 1 year post-surgery and had no complication in meantime.