A 39-year-old Japanese woman, who was a household helper, presented to a community hospital with hemoptysis and dyspnea. Other symptoms, such as cough and chest pain, were not presented. She reported a family history of stomach cancer (her father). She had smoked one or two cigarettes daily for the last 19 years. There was no history of asbestos exposure or tuberculosis. She had undergone wide resection of an adamantinoma of the right tibia and limb salvage with an uncemented megaprosthesis (Howmedica Modular Replacement System; Howmedica International, Limerick, Ireland) 15 years previously (Figure ). Her vital signs and clinical examination results were unremarkable. A general survey revealed no clubbing and no palpable cervical or axillary lymph nodes. Sputum was negative for acid-fast bacilli. The serum tumor marker levels were within their respective normal ranges.Chest radiography demonstrated a mass in the right lower field without pleural effusion. Computed tomography (CT) of the lung revealed a mass measuring 2.5 × 3.0 cm that had no contact with the pleura, main bronchus, inferior pulmonary vein, or right atrium (Figure a). Bronchoscopy did not reveal any abnormalities. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed mild FDG uptake, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 2.0 (Figure b).
Because the tumor was suspected to be a pulmonary metastasis from the earlier adamantinoma, we surgically resected it without prior biopsy. The procedure was as follows. The pulmonary nodule was marked with 0.4 mL of Lipiodol® (Laboratoire Guerbet, Roissy, France) under CT guidance. The visceral pleura near the nodule was marked with 1 mL of a mixture of atelocollagen and methylene blue. During the thoracoscopic surgery performed 1 day later, the marked nodule was grasped with ring-shaped forceps under C-arm fluoroscopic guidance and resected
[, ].
Histopathologically, the tumor showed densely proliferated spindle cells with a high mitosis rate (Figure a). The immunohistochemical workup revealed that the spindle cell component was positive for B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2), pancytokeratin (MNF116) directed to cytokeratins 5, 6, 8, 17, and 19, transducin-like enhancer of split 1 (TLE-1), and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). It was negative for CD34 (Figure b-d). The synovial sarcoma, X breakpoint 1 (SYT-SSX1) fusion gene was detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using ribonucleic acid samples from the tumor tissue. Hence, the final diagnosis was PPSS. Resection margins were negative.
The patient’s hemoptysis and dyspnea resolved after the surgical procedure. Because the patient had factors indicating a poor PPSS prognosis, including her age (>20 years), sex, and the presence of the SYT-SSX1 variant gene, we recommended chemotherapy with a combination of ifosfamide and doxorubicin. She refused further treatment, however. Follow-up visits were undertaken every 3 months after the surgery. She has remained well without evidence of recurrence or metastasis of the PPSS or the adamantinoma at the 30-month follow-up.