FG is a 74-year-old right-handed man. He has a grade eleven education and worked as an auxiliary nurse. He had suffered from a chronic bipolar disease since 1982, with multiple episodes requiring many hospitalizations. He came to our attention in July 2005 for acute exacerbation of a bipolar disorder with suspected psychotic features requiring inpatient treatment. At admission, symptoms were compatible with manic exacerbation. Psychotic features were not confirmed. Mental status examination revealed signs of his primary psychiatric disorder. Moreover, a foreign accent, English-sounding, was noted. FG had learned to deal with this long-lasting symptom so he did not report it spontaneously. However, on explicit questioning, he reported that this accent was socially invalidating and completely impossible to control or repress. FG is a native speaker of Quebec French but people who met him thought he came from somewhere else, most often Acadia (French-speaking areas of Eastern Canada (New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia) where the accent is markedly different from Quebec French), France or an English-speaking foreign country. Apart from this foreign accent, he also reported some German- or Spanish-sounding words occasionally and spontaneously coming to his mind. No meaning is associated with these words and the patient easily controls their occurrence with no anxiety. Neurological examination completed during the index hospitalization was unremarkable except for an observed inability to turn back on one foot (decomposition of the half-turn) when walking, slight incoordination of the left arm on the cerebellar testing, and slight micrographia. Snout and palmomental primitive reflexes were also noted.
FG's past medical records reported the presence of this foreign accent in January 2003. It was first noticed at the psychiatric outpatient clinic consultation, shortly after he was discharged from the inpatient service, which was required for manic exacerbation of his bipolar disorder in the fall of 2002. The presence of agrammatism was also recorded during the same period. Psychological factors were suspected because of the patient's psychosocial background (abuse by his father and emotional closeness to his mother, who was English-speaking). Even though he was exposed to English as a child, he never spoke or learned this language. Without any other neurological symptoms, his psychiatrist ascribed the foreign accent to a psychological phenomenon operating at an unconscious level.
His neurological history is noteworthy for epilepsy between the ages of 6 and 14 but without any other symptomatic seizures thereafter. He also suffered from delirium due to lithium intoxication 6 months before the onset of the foreign accent. Finally he has been treated for an essential tremor for many years and has neurosensory hypoacusia. Otherwise, there was no prior history of stroke, cranial trauma or encephalitis. When he developed the language disorder, he was on stable doses of lithium, valproate, quetiapine and perphenazine.
Although they appeared approximately 3 years earlier, the functional origin of the FAS and agrammatism was explored in FG through an extensive neuropsychological and brain imaging study.
Neuropsychological testing showed no impairment in tasks exploring orientation to time and space. FG's performance was normal on the task exploring concentration and selective attention . He showed good face recognition and presented no clinical signs of visual agnosia . There were no signs of unilateral neglect. Praxis abilities were well preserved . FG performed normally on tasks exploring episodic memory. His performance was within the normal range for the three recalls of the DMS-48, a visual forced-choice recognition test , as well as for the pictorial recognition memory test and the short recognition memory test for faces . The patient's short term memory was normal in the visuospatial modality (forward span = 5; backward span = 4) as well as in the verbal modality (forward digit span = 4; backward digit span = 3; forward word span = 4). FG presented with deficits on tests exploring working memory and executive functions. He presented with a severe impairment on the interference condition of the Brown-Peterson task , a test that taps the ability to encode, maintain, and manipulate information in working memory (see Table ). His performance on the Stroop Test , an instrument designed to evaluate inhibition abilities (i.e. inhibition of a habitual or more automatic response in favour of an unusual one), was influenced by interference. He obtained normal scores in the word reading and colour naming but his performance was impaired in the colour-word conditions. FG also showed abnormal performance on the Trail Making , a test exploring mental flexibility (ability to manage more than one stimulus at a time and to shift the course of an ongoing activity). He made no mistakes but was slow on part A and his performance was poor on Part B (alternated switching between numbers and letters). Finally, FG's performance was impaired (2 SD below the normal range) on the D-Kefs Tower Test , a complex task that measures the executive functions of spatial planning, rule learning, and inhibition of impulsive responding.
With regard to language, speech output was fluent and well articulated, with no signs of word-finding difficulties. The patient however presented with mild agrammatism. There were no phonemic or verbal paraphasias but speech was sometimes telegraphic with omissions of function words and grammatical bound morphemes as well as impoverished syntactic structure. Auditory and visuo-verbal input components were largely preserved. Comprehension abilities at the lexical-semantic level as well as at the syntactic-semantic level [,] were normal (see Table ). Reading and immediate and delayed repetition were flawless for both words and nonwords. Written spelling of nonwords was flawless but the patient's performance on word writing to dictation was canonical of surface agraphia with exclusive production of phonological plausible errors and performance affected by orthographic regularity and lexical frequency. However, the patient did not completely master the written language so that these results cannot be interpreted as actual deficits. FG's performance was normal in confrontation naming but he showed difficulties in letter and semantic category fluency tasks (see Table ), a performance that could be attributed to the deficit in executive functioning. FG showed many characteristics usually reported for FAS. There were no signs of dysarthria (no slow, slurred, groping or laboured articulation) or apraxia of speech (no dysfluency and no problems with phoneme sequencing) but acoustic analysis performed on speech samples recorded in Digital Audio Tape showed the presence of abnormalities at the segmental and suprasegmental levels. Unfortunately, we had no premorbid recording of the patient's speech. However, FG himself as well as one of his close friends, who has known him for over 30 years, confirmed that he never had this particular strange accent before its sudden appearance in January 2003.
Neuroimaging studies were performed while the patient was in euthymic condition. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study including sagittal FLAIR and T2-weighted sequences and axial FLAIR, proton density, T1 and T2-weighted sequences was performed on December 8, 2005 using the standard protocol. The first interpretation was normal except for slight diffuse cerebral atrophy considered normal for his age (see Figure : serie 3 31/10 = axial T2-weighted sequence showing diffuse cortical atrophy predominating at the left sylvian fissure).
An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose brain positron emission tomography was obtained with a dual-head coincidence camera (Vertex MCD-AC, Phillips). After a 30-minute rest, 111 MBq 18F-FDG were injected in a veinous catheter. There was another 30-minute rest before starting the acquisition (64 × 64 × 16 matrix, 64 steps, mean of 25 seconds/step with decay correction). Measured attenuation and scatter correction were applied to the iterative reconstruction method.
The reconstructed images showed diffuse hypometabolism in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes bilaterally whereas the cerebellum, occipital lobe and subcortical structures were spared. There was also a focal deficit in the area of the anterior left temporal lobe with prominence of the sylvian sulcus (see Figure ). When compared to the MRI, these deficits were related to asymmetric atrophy, which was retrospectively seen in the left temporal and frontal opercular/insular region without a focal lesion.