A fifty-two-year-old Sri Lankan female with end stage kidney got admitted with five days of fever and a painful red right eye. She was receiving regular haemodialysis via a right subclavian tunnelled catheter. The chronic kidney disease was secondary to long standing, poorly controlled diabetes and hypertension. Her diabetes was complicated with proliferative retinopathy and right sided vitreous haemorrhage which occured 2 weeks ago. The visual acuity in the right eye following the haemorrhage was 20/70. Over the last five days the vision deteriorated to complete blindness. She had a left sided brachio-cephalic AVF created one month back. There was a purulent discharge from the surgical site over the past 3 days.
On examination she had a right sided red eye with a hypopyon, suggestive of endophthalmitis. The surgical site was dehiscent with foul smelling pus discharge. A thrill was felt at the fistula site. The left hand had Osler’s nodes, Janeway lesions and splinter haemorrhages . The right hand and feet were normal. There were no cardiac murmurs.
Three blood cultures from different sites, vitreous sample cultures and surgical site swab cultures were persistently positive for methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). The in-vitro incubation periods were similar for blood cultures from the peripheral veins and the tunnelled catheter. The tunnelled catheter was removed, and the tip culture did not grow any organisms. No valvular vegetations, insufficiency or abscesses were noted in the trans-oesophageal echocardiogram. There was no evidence of a patent foramen ovale. A diagnosis of ‘left brachio-cephalic AVF surgical site infection and right endophthalmitis due to systemic embolization’ was arrived at. The relevant biochemical and haematological parameters on admission are given in Table .
She was treated with high dose IV flucloxacillin for 4 weeks and intra vitreous vancomycin. A temporary vascular catheter was inserted to the right internal jugular vein after 3 days of IV antibiotics, by which time the fever had settled; for haemodialysis every third day. The temporary catheter was changed every 6th day. The surgical site was explored, irrigated and the fistula was excised. The excised tissue did not grow any organisms; probably because the excision was done 1 week after the initiation of IV antibiotics. The infection was completely treated, but the patient continued to be blind in the right eye.