We present the case of a 21-year-old Greek woman who presented to the Emergencies Department of our hospital with breast pain, abdominal distension, and weakness of approximately 1 week’s duration. Her individual, gynecological, and family history were unremarkable.
She had a high breathing rate (~ 22 breaths/minute), tachycardia (~ 110 beats/minute), hypotension with mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 55 mmHg, lethargy, swollen and painful breasts, abdominal dilatation with diffuse sensitivity to palpation and dullness on percussion, and low grade fever (~ 37.5 °C).
She was directly subjected to ultrasound (U/S) of her upper and lower abdomen that showed enlarged ovaries as well as a large amount of free ascitic fluid. Complete laboratory testing and blood gases were obtained and an urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of her upper and lower abdomen was performed, confirming the findings of the U/S: enlarged and inflammatory ovaries, pleural effusions, and large amount of free ascitic fluid . Laboratory tests showed neutrophilic leukocytosis with white blood cells (WBC) 30,000/μL, polymorphonucleocytes (PMN) 95%, and thrombocytopenia with platelets (PLT) 90,000/μL with signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), increased urea (U) and creatinine (Cr) levels, increased bilirubin (Bil), increased serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) and serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT), and severe lactic and metabolic acidosis. Control for viral and human immunodeficincy virus (HIV) infection was negative. With these data and due to further deterioration of our patient’s clinical condition, it was decided to conduct a research laparotomy.
Intraoperatively there were found enlarged and inflamed ovaries, a large amount of ascitic fluid, and an inflamed appendix, which was removed and sent for biopsy. The peritoneum was clear and free of any visible implants. A biopsy was also obtained from both her ovaries and cytology and ascitic fluid cultures were sent, a suprapubic fluid drainage tube was placed and due to the reproductive age of our patient it was decided not to remove her ovaries. After surgery, she was transported to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), intubated, and mechanically ventilated; she was hemodynamically unstable, presenting hypoxemia with partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood/fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) of 150 and severe metabolic and lactic acidosis.
The differential diagnosis included ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) and other ovarian tumors. OHSS is a systemic disorder attributed to the release of vasoactive agents released from the ovaries after overstimulation . The pathophysiology of OHSS is characterized by increased capillary permeability leading to large fluid extravasation, accumulation in the third space, and intravascular dehydration . The serious manifestations of the syndrome include thrombosis, renal and hepatic insufficiency, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which cause severe morbidity . Mortality from the syndrome is fortunately rare, with only sporadic references in the literature . Women should be aware that mild forms of OHSS are common and complicate 33% of in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles, while moderate and severe forms occur in 3–8% of cases of OHSS . The majority of serious OHSS cases occur after IVF cycles, but the syndrome may also occur after any form of ovulation induction, such as clomiphene and gonadotropins . The incidence of the syndrome, particularly the complex form, is higher in young women, women with polycystic ovaries, and in gestational cycles. Laboratory tests may show high hematocrit levels (> 55%), hypoproteinemia, and leukocytosis . The treatment of OHSS is initially supportive until the situation resolves .
She was initially treated as severe septic shock; blood cultures were obtained and broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment was administered. Due to acute renal failure, she was placed in continuous venous-venous hemofiltration (CVVHDF).
While she was in our ICU she showed progressive clinical, gasometric, and hemodynamic improvement, draining ~ 2000 ml of ascitic fluid/day; on the third day of admission an attempt was made to wean her from the ventilator, pending the results of the cultures and ovarian and appendix biopsies. She was febrile (~ 38.4 °C), hemodynamically stable with normal hourly diuresis, and improved laboratory testing, therefore CVVHDF was removed. Severe leukopenia (WBC 2000/μL) was evident, for which she received subcutaneous granulocyte growth factor. On the fourth day of admission, the results of blood and ascites fluid cultures were negative and biopsy results showed high-grade Burkitt lymphoma of the ovaries and the appendix. With these data our patient was transported to a specialized oncology center for immediate onset of chemotherapy and further treatment.
She was gradually weaned from mechanical ventilation and was successfully extubated on the 12th day of her hospitalization. On the sixth day she received a combined chemotherapy regimen intravenously. On the 15th day she left the ICU and on the 28th day she was discharged from hospital, presenting improved clinical and laboratory condition, waiting for further cycles of chemotherapy.