A 38-year-old middle eastern married female from southern Syria (rural Damascus) was admitted to the hospital with low back pain associated with gait difficulties. The pain started 4 months earlier and radiated to the anterior sciatic region, the right groin, and the posterior region of the right thigh, unceasing during night or resting time. The pain was not exacerbated by coughing or changing posture. It was associated with tingling and redness along the right thigh. Before admission, the patient was administered intramuscular dexamethasone at a dose of 8 mg three times a week for 3 months. This was done to treat the suspected arthritis and its related back pain. The patient had no significant medical history. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the right paraspinal muscles, associated with right hip movement limitation, while the proximal right thigh strength could not be evaluated due to excessive pain, and no swelling was found above the inguinal ligament. The rest of the examination was within normal limits. Laboratory tests were normal apart from white blood cell count of 12,000/µl, neutrophils 89%, hemoglobin 10 g/dl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCV) 70 fl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 87 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 86.7 mg/l (reference range (RR) up to 6 mg/l). Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test was negative, urinalysis was normal, and the Quantiferon-TB test was within normal range, being considered as an exclusion test in immunocompetent patients in an endemic country.
Although there was no history of previous trauma, and also considering that the iliac bone is an unlikely site of hematogenous seeding, the pelvic X-ray showed remarkable necrosis in the wing of the right ilium . Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) showed that the right kidney was slightly pushed anteriorly due to an abscess in the right psoas muscle measuring 7 × 4 cm2 and extending to the right femur adductor muscles, the right obturator muscle, and the right piriformis muscle, with another abscess in the right gluteal muscles as shown in Fig. .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a cyst above the right iliac bone, necrosis of the wing of ilium, and joint subluxation between the right head of the femur and the acetabulum suggesting osteomyelitis .
Contrast chest CT scan was done to extend the pathology workup and determine whether the abscess was primary or secondary. The scan showed a peripheral nodule in the lateral upper lobe of the right lung with collapse of the lateral segment in the inferior lobe of the right lung . Both CT scan and X-rays revealed no evidence of vertebral destruction.
A CT-guided biopsy of the abscess showed bloody fluid that contained leukocytes and phagocytes with accumulations of scantily epithelioid histiocytic clusters suggestive of granulomatous tuberculosis. No neoplastic changes were seen. Gram staining on the same sample was negative, and bacterial culture was sterile. Ziehl–Neelsen stain and TB culture on Löwenstein–Jensen medium for 60 days were also negative twice.
A new sample from the iliopsoas lesion was obtained by surgical ablation. The histopathological examination concluded the diagnosis of granulomatous tuberculosis, and Xpert-MTB test came back positive on the second repetition. As a result, the patient was treated with (isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampin 600 mg daily, pyrazinamide 1600 mg daily, and ethambutol 1100 mg daily) for 2 months, followed by isoniazid and rifampin for 7 months. The patient recovered by the end of the planned treatment with normalization of ESR and CRP values. Necrotizing of the right ileum was the only remaining damage .