A 39-year-old female, diagnosed with SLE nine years prior, was referred to our breast clinic as a case of recurrent right breast fungal infections manifesting in the form of abscesses that started four years ago. Upon presentation, she was having her fourth attack and was already started on fluconazole and responded to it with no active complaints. The patient had three previous episodes of breast fungal infections confirmed by multiple cultures from the lesions, all were treated successfully with fluconazole. The patient had no milky, purulent, or bloody nipple discharge before. Interestingly, she did not complain nor exhibit symptoms or signs of SLE before apart from arthralgia and was not on any immunosuppressive medications to trigger the episodes. The activity of SLE was only managed with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg once daily. Moreover, she was not breastfeeding nor pregnant, and her past history was only significant for recurrent abortions. Local examination revealed no skin changes, tenderness, or presence of any palpable masses in the breast or axilla.
Laboratory investigations obtained upon presentation are summarized in , including relevant autoantibodies. Previous fine needle aspiration cultures revealed growth of Candida Albicans sensitive to fluconazole. Right breast ultrasound (US) performed on the first attack demonstrated the presence of a fluid filled collection measuring around 1.7 x 3.6 cm located at 1 o’clock, as shown in . The lesions were noted to respond to fluconazole in this attack and subsequent ones.
Mammography of the right breast revealed a heterogeneously dense breast parenchyma, representing type C breast density according to American College of Radiology classification, as illustrated in . Multiple well-circumscribed right inner breast masses, the largest measuring 10 x 9 mm, were also noted with no evidence of microcalcification. These lesions present at the right breast were hence labeled as Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System 4A; therefore, a histopathological diagnosis was required. US-guided core needle biopsy of the right breast mass revealed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with presence of fungal hyphae and spores. Acid-fast bacilli stain was negative, and tissue aerobic culture showed no growth.
Considering the size of the lesion, a conservative approach was followed thereafter, utilizing antifungal alone to manage the patient’s symptoms.