A 72-year-old man with a history of angina pectoris was admitted with severe pain and tenderness in the right upper quadrant. The body weight was 64 kg, and the body mass index was 23.1. Computed tomography (CT) showed many diverticula and wall thickening in ascending colon and hepatic flexure. He was admitted to our hospital with the diagnosis of diverticulitis. Fasting and CTRX at a dose of 2 g/day for 6 days were indicated. CT revealed no signs of gallstone or cholecystitis before starting CTRX therapy . The patient was discharged after a good response to treatment. Twelve days after discharge, the patient had severe pain in the abdominal right upper quadrant with rebound tenderness and was readmitted to our hospital. The blood tests showed an increased inflammatory response characterized by leukocytosis (white blood cell count 11,400/μl), neutrophilia (88.2%), and high level of C-reactive protein (12.1 mg/dl). There were also signs of polycythemia (hemoglobin 18.0 g/dl, hematocrit 55.2%) probably due to dehydration and mild liver dysfunction (alanine aminotransferase 34 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 37 IU/L). The biliary enzymes and renal function (blood urea nitrogen/creatinine 16.6/0.84 mg/dl) were normal.
Abdominal ultrasonography performed before starting CTRX showed no stones in the gallbladder. However, the ultrasonography upon readmission showed enlargement and thickening of the gallbladder wall and numerous biliary sand-like stones in the neck. The abdominal CT showed dilated gallbladder containing calcified gallstones after CTRX therapy . A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed a mild dilation of the common bile duct, but no obvious common bile duct stones .
The diagnosis was acute cholecystitis with gallstones. Intravenous drip infusion, fasting, and flomoxef (FMOX) 2 g/day were indicated. However, on the 5th day of hospitalization, peritoneal irritation symptoms in the right upper quadrant worsened, and the blood test showed an increased inflammatory response (C-reactive protein 22.4 mg/dl) and liver dysfunction (alanine aminotransferase 135 IU/L/aspartate aminotransferase 126 IU/L). The patient underwent cholecystectomy. Intraoperative findings revealed a tense and dark-red gallbladder. The resected gallbladder showed wall thickening and the presence of sandy stones. Histopathological findings revealed necrosis, edema, and moderate inflammatory cell infiltration with neutrophils and eosinophils, indicating necrotizing cholecystitis. However, the histopathological study showed no malignant findings . No stone was detected in the common bile duct. A comparative analysis of the infrared spectroscopic pattern of the composition of gallstones collected during surgery with that of the CTRX powder revealed that both have very similar infrared spectroscopic patterns . The patient had a good postoperative course and was discharged on the 19th day of hospitalization.