The patient was a 29-year-old man. He had pigment spots at birth and neurofibromas all over the skin. His father also had cutaneous neurofibromatosis, and NF1 was diagnosed according to skin findings and his family history at the age of 28. During follow-up of NF1, systemic computed tomography (CT) was performed to detect neurological tumors, such as neurofibromas in the brain, spinal cord, and gastrointestinal tract. The CT scan showed a swollen appendix, and an appendiceal tumor was suspected. He was referred to our department for diagnostic treatment. He was 165 cm tall and weighed 55 kg. Physical examination revealed multiple neurofibromas and café-au-lait spots on the skin of the trunk and extremities. He did not have any abdominal symptoms. His white blood cell count was 8540/µl, and his CRP level was 0.00 mg/dL, showing no increase in the inflammatory reaction. There were no notable findings in terms of other blood counts, biochemistry, or coagulation in laboratory examinations. The tumor markers were carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 1.1 U/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) 5.1 U/mL, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 3.0 ng/mL, neuron-specific enolase (NSE) 9.0 ng/mL, and pro-gastrin releasing peptide (pro-GRP) 44.3 pg/mL, all within the normal range. A CT scan revealed an enlarged appendix with a diffusely thickened wall. The thickened wall was well enhanced in the delayed phase . There were no other findings in the abdominal cavity that suggested malignancy tumor or enlarged lymph nodes. Other than neurofibromatosis in the skin, there were no neurological tumors in the brain, spinal cord, or any other part of the body. Colonoscopy revealed hyperplasia of lymphatic tissue of the terminal ileum, and no obvious findings were found at the orifice of the appendix. Barium enema imaging also showed no obvious abnormal findings, such as dilation of the appendix .
Then, we performed laparoscopic appendectomy according to the diagnosis of an appendiceal tumor. Under general anesthesia, three trocars were placed, and a pneumoperitoneum was made with 8 cm H2O. The markedly swollen appendix was located on the dorsal side of the cecum . There was no adhesion or dissemination around the tumor. The wall of the cecum was excised with a linear stapler at a sufficient margin from the root of the appendix. Intraoperative diagnosis with frozen sections showed that there was no malignant epithelial tumor, and the resected margin was negative. Then, the operation was finished without lymphadenectomy. Macroscopic findings showed that the tumor was 50 × 35 mm in size and had thick solid white tissue on the cut surface . Histopathological examination showed short spindle-shaped cells (neuron component) and round-shaped cells (ganglion cells) diffusely infiltrated into the proper muscle layer, and fibrous tissue had grown around the nerve cells . According to the immunostaining results, the ganglion cells were positive for both S-100 and synaptophysin, and the neurons were positive for S-100 only . Pathologically, the cell population was a mix of ganglion cells and neurons, so the finding was ganglioneuroma.
His postoperative course was good, and he was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. He was doing well at 13 months after the operation.