A 66-year-old woman presented at our Department with chest-, and abdominal pain. During work-up, contrast enhanced chest- and abdominal computed tomography (CT) verified a large mass (10 × 6 × 5.5 cm) located in the left diaphragm, suggesting infiltration of the fundus of the stomach and the left lobe of the liver. An exophytic mass measuring 1.5 cm in diameter was seen at the posterior wall of the stomach, with low amount of calcification. A 13 mm large lymphnode, on the left side, posterior to the crus of the diaphragm was visible, otherwise there were no pathologically enlarged lymphnodes in the abdomen, or the pelvis . The patient had no history of malignancies, and at initial presentation no distant metastases were confirmed on imaging. Left sided atelectasis and pleural fluid were also described on chest CT. Gastroscopy was negative. Ultrasound guided fine needle biopsy of the mass suggested a malignancy consisting of epithelial cells. On the basis of these findings, primary surgical approach was indicated in concordance with our tumor board.
After video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) exploration excluded pleural dissemination, a left sided posterolateral thoracotomy was performed in the 9th intercostal space. The tumor was located in the left diaphragm with infiltration of the left lower lobe of the lung and left lobe of the liver. Regarding pulmonary involvment, the lesion was situated at the base of the left lung, in close proximity to the pericardium, with medial border reaching the diaphragmatic crura and lateral border on the thoracic wall. There were no potential cysts, or pseudocysts identified during the surgical procedure.
Multivisceral resection was carried out, involving resection- and reconstruction of the left diaphragm (Gore-tex® Dualmesh®), wedge resection of the left lower lung lobe and resection of the left liver lobe. The tumor did not involve the stomach. Postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 7 days. Histology revealed the following findings: (1) resected lung specimen (wedge-resection): BOOP (Bronchiolitis Obliterans Organizing Pneumonia)-like picture: intraalveolar, organizing fibrotic tissue, with significant interstitial chronic cell inflammation. Secondary vascular pulmonary hypertension, without presence of malignancy in the specimen. (2) Peritoneum: fibrotic pseudocysts without inner epithelial lining, PAS-AK dying suggested the presence of mucus, rich in acidic mucosacharids. There was no detectable vital tumor tissue in the sample. The presence of necrotic metastases was suggested. (3) Resected diaphragm: Previously mentioned pseudocysts detected besides striated muscle-, and liver tissue, with extended necrosis, accumulated neutrophil granulocyts, and focal vital tumor tissue. A well-moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with a papillary pattern was confirmed, with high amount of polysacharids and mucin. Immune-phenotyping showed focal positivity for CK7, MucAc (3 +), Ki67 (3 +), p53 do-7 clone (3 +) and CDX2 and negative reaction for TTF1 (Transcription Termination Factor 1), CK20, Napsin A, Thyreoglobulin, and Surfactant protein immune acid . On the basis of the above findings, a well-differentiated, low-grade adenocarcinoma arising from a foregut cyst was confirmed. Surgical resection margins proved to be clear, resulting in complete, R0 resection.
After the procedure, no postoperative chemotherapy was initiated due to both clear surgical resection margins and strong patient preference. Follow-up CT one month after surgery showed a tumor-free state .
Six months after surgery, during regular follow-up, novel hepatic and splenic lesions have been detected on abdominal CT. After a further two months, additional disease progression was confirmed involving both hepatic and splenic metastases . PET-CT (positron emission tomography-computed tomography) showed distant metastases within the left liver lobe and left supraclavicular lymph nodes. A splenic lesion has been described involving the gastric wall at the lesser and greater curvature with neighbouring lymphnode enlargement. As the next treatment approach, palliative FOLFOX4 chemotherapy has been initiated. After 5 cycles of treatment (2.5 months) due to the lack of any physical symptoms and stable disease confirmed on follow-up CT, the patient refused further oncological treatment, thus a drug holiday was initiated with regular follow-ups and tumor staging. After 19 months without any chemotherapy (drug holiday), the patient started complaining of worsening abdominal pain and cramps. Urgent CT confirmed disease progression, hence capecitabine monotherapy was started. After initiation of this treatment, symptoms rapidly improved. Three cycles (2 months) were delivered, and new imaging (CT) was carried out, confirming further, slight increase concerning the splenic lesion. We suggested continuing chemotherapy with an enhanced regimen, the patient however refused to continue treatment on the grounds of lacking symptoms. After a 7.5 month drug free period, follow up CT confirmed considerable progression of splenic metastases. The patient expressed clear preference for oral therapy, thus capecitabine was reinitiated . After finishing 7 new cycles (5 months), progression was once again detected on imaging. Afterwards, the patient was succesfully convinced to accept intravenous chemotherapy, so treatment regimen could be enhanced to FOLFOX4. With this regimen, stable disease was achieved after 6 cycles (3 months) although treatment was once again discontinued due to patient request. Considering the fact that on one occasion capecitabine improved tumor related symptoms and both capecitabine and FOLFOX4 stopped further disease progression, both regimens seemed to be effective in the management of the disease. Throughout the oncological management, the best presumed therapy was taken into consideration, in concordance with patient preference, and taking the course of the disease with best achievable response into account in maintaining a relatively stable patient condition and tumor stage. Facing a rare occurring tumor without established oncological treatment options, and patient rejection of cytotoxic chemotherapy, in order to identify potentially targetable driver mutations, next generation seqencing (NGS) was requested as a subsequent step. The FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved FMI CDx (FoundationOne® Companion Diagnostic) assay was applied which analysed 315 genes as well as introns of 28 genes involved in rearrangements. The following relevant genomic alterations were identified: ATM E522fs*43 mutation, KRAS Q61K mutation, PBRM1 rearrangement intron 10. The loss of functional ATM results in a defective DNA damage response and homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair, and may predict sensitivity to PARP inhibitors such as olaparib, rucaparib, and niraparib. Preclinical evidence suggests that KRAS activation may predict sensitivity to MEK inhibitors, such as trametinib and cobimetinib. There are no targeted therapies available to address genomic alterations in PBRM1. On the basis of these findings and with confirmed disease progression, the application of one of the PARP inhibitors was intended, however, despite detailed description of potential health benefits, the patient refused to accept recommended treatment. After 39 days the patient was eventually admitted to the 1st Department of Medicine with acute hematemesis. Controll gastroscopy confirmed a large tumorous infiltration inside the fornix of the stomach without acute bleeding at the time of intervention. However one day after admission, general patient condition showed rapid progression with cardiac- and respiratory insufficiency and the patient passed away on the following day [nearly 4 years (1389 days) after surgery] .