A 38-year-old male initially presented to the Medicine Outpatient Department in a tertiary care center of Nepal with a complaint of loss of consciousness (LOC) for 4–5 min. Loss of consciousness was associated with clenching of teeth, up rolling of eyes, vacant stare, and frothing from the mouth, which was suggestive of a seizure. He had experienced similar episodes of symptoms a year back. In addition, he also had painless swelling over the ventral aspect of the anterior 1/3rd of the tongue as shown in Figure . He denied bowel and bladder incontinence, or change in his behavior. He is a diagnosed case of hypertension under amlodipine and losartan. Regarding dietary habits, he is a nonvegetarian who has been consuming pork meat for 10 years as well as he is an active smoker and drinker.
There was no history of hoarseness of voice, dysphagia/odynophagia, nonhealing oral ulcers, or weight loss. There was no history of headaches, localized sensory/motor deficits, parasthesias, and personality changes.
Local examination of his oral cavity revealed swelling of ~2×2 cm which was firm, mobile, nontender with a diffuse margin, and normal mucosa with unrestricted tongue movement. On chest examination, multiple nontender erythematous lesions were present as shown in Figure with normal other systemic examinations.
His blood reports were within the normal range. A chest radiograph showed multiple grain like lesion present all over the chest muscles as shown in Figure . On doing further work-up for his seizure, MRI of the brain showed various stages of neurocysticercosis involving neuroparenchyma and tongue as shown in Figure . T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense foci were seen in the neuroparenchyma with a central dot confirming neurocysticercosis. Some of the cysts showed edema in the surrounding parenchyma and some did not. Finally, this case was diagnosed as a mixed infection of neurocysticercosis and cysticercosis of the tongue. For this, he was started on low-dose prednisolone of 50 mg tapered over 6 weeks and levetiracetam of 500 mg BD continued for his seizure episodes. On follow-up, he was found to be compliant and responding well with the medications. The patient had disseminated neurocysticercosis and pre-existing edema and cysts throughout the brain parenchyma in different stages of maturation. So, patient is planned to start antiparasitic agent only after the perilesional edema decreases.