A 45-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our clinic because she developed bilateral SRD with blurred vision. The patient experienced occasional tinnitus after high fever had subsided several weeks before the initial visit to our hospital. Her visual acuity was 20/70 OD and 20/20 OS with mild myopia OU, and her intraocular pressure was normal OU. Slit-lamp microscopy did not detect any inflammatory findings, including iris nodules, keratic precipitates and anterior vitreous cells, except for the presence of occasional anterior chamber cells OU.
Fundus examination showed bilateral SRD and mild optic disc swelling but no vitreous opacity OU . Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed multiple pinpoint leakage, dye pooling and optic disc staining OU . Enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) demonstrated SRD and markedly thickened choroid filled with hyper-reflective interstitial materials OU . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) detected a fuzzy choroidal vascular pattern of large stromal vessels in the mid-venous phase OU , which was a consistent finding with typical VKH disease. However, sharply marginated hypofluorescent lesions in various sizes were clearly observed throughout the mid-venous and late phases OU , which seemed to be atypical for the finding of VKH disease, i.e., vaguely marginated hypofluorescent small dots. Laser speckle flowgraphy (LSFG) showed a cold-color (hypoperfused) pattern in the macular area OU , which agreed with the typical finding of VKH disease at the acute stage .
Lumber puncture detected 4 cells/μL in the cerebrospinal fluid, indicating the absence of pleocytosis. Routine blood test yielded no apparent abnormal findings, except for lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level (2645 U/L). Although the results of ICGA and lumber puncture were not suggestive of VKH disease as the causative etiology of bilateral SRD, the combined findings of all the other imaging modalities (FA, EDI-OCT and LSFG) were totally compatible with the inflammatory manifestations of acute VKH disease. The patient was started on oral prednisolone (PSL) at 40 mg/day; however, these ocular findings were unchanged for 7 days. The patient was then administered corticosteroid pulse therapy with 1000 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by 60 mg/day of PSL, which also failed to improve her ocular symptoms.
During the treatment, the patient complained of severe pain in her left knee and lower back, leading us to perform additional blood sampling that newly revealed marked elevation in LDH (4702 U/L) and soluble interleukin (IL)-2 receptor (3814 U/mL) levels together with leukocytosis (18,100/μL). Because the patient was suspected of having a hematological malignancy, she was referred to the hematology department of our hospital. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography detected 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose accumulation in her bones, pancreas, and lymph nodes. Bone marrow biopsy and subsequent histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses led to a definite diagnosis of CD5-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
The patient underwent 8 courses of chemotherapy, including 1 course of rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and PSL, 5 courses of rituximab with dose-adjusted etoposide, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and PSL, 2 courses of high-dose methotrexate. The series of chemotherapy achieved complete remission of her systemic lymphoma as well as rapid resolution of SRD and choroidal thickening back to the normal range, concurrently with improvement of visual acuity to 20/16 OU.
However, EDI-OCT performed in the next few months detected progressive thinning of the choroid beyond the normal range and impairment of the outer retina (ellipsoid and interdigitation zones) , along with reduction in visual acuity (OU). Choroidal hypoperfusion in the macular area on LSFG persisted without any improvement of mean blur rate (MBR) values, the relative index of blood flow velocity, during the follow-up period . No major difference in ocular perfusion pressure values was observed throughout the entire course. The combination of EDI-OCT and LSFG findings after treatment contrasted distinctly with the inflammatory pattern of acute VKH disease, i.e., the restoration of choroidal circulation in parallel with normalization of choroidal thickness .