A 69-year-old man with ascending colon cancer and multiple liver metastases was treated with cetuximab plus irinotecan as third-line chemotherapy. Because of bowel obstruction symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting, he had undergone laparoscopically assisted right hemicolectomy with D3 lymph node dissection followed by chemotherapy. The pathological finding revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Sequential treatments were carried out, including XELOX (capecitabine 2000 mg/m2/day p.o., twice daily for 14 consecutive days; oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1) plus bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg on day 1) as first-line chemotherapy and XELIRI (capecitabine 2000 mg/m2/day p.o., twice daily for 14 consecutive days; irinotecan 150 mg/m2 on day 1) as second-line chemotherapy. Cetuximab (initial dose 400 mg/m2, subsequent doses 250 mg/m2 weekly) plus irinotecan (150 mg/m2, on days 1, 15, and 29) were introduced in 7-week cycles as third-line chemotherapy. For the premedication of cetuximab, dexamethasone sodium phosphate (6.6 mg), dl-chlorpheniramine maleate (5 mg), and famotidine (20 mg) were administered for about 30 min, accompanied by magnesium sulfate (40 mEq). The adverse events associated with the skin were well controlled, and Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4 grades 1–2 were managed by prophylaxis with oral intake of minocycline and steroidal external agents. The patient’s serum magnesium level was checked each time to prevent hypomagnesemia induced by the cetuximab treatment. At first, no oral prophylactic supplementation of oxidative magnesium was needed. At the sixth administration of cetuximab, his serum magnesium level decreased to 1.6 mg/dL (grade 1 hypomagnesemia). At the 12th administration of cetuximab, his serum magnesium level decreased to 0.9 mg/dL (grade 2 hypomagnesemia). Intravenous supplementation of 20 mEq magnesium sulfate was administered at each treatment despite the lack of clinical symptoms. The dose of cetuximab plus irinotecan was reduced to the second level due to bone marrow suppression. The serum magnesium level remained at 0.9 mg/dL, and an ECG showed grade 1 prolonged QT or QTc intervals . His serum magnesium level remained at 0.9 mg/dL, and no hypomagnesemia symptoms were observed by the 17th administration of cetuximab. After the treatment, however, he suddenly lost consciousness and fell down to the floor when he stood up to leave the bed. He did not respond to a verbal stimulus. He was pale with cold limbs and without a radial pulse, but no symptoms related to infusion or allergic reactions were observed. Circulatory collapse following dermatological reactions and respiratory events, such as airway obstruction and edema, were not evident. Intravenous supplementation of magnesium sulfate was administered again. He awakened 2 min after the onset of temporary LOC without any other symptoms related to hypomagnesemia, such as lethargy, tremor, tetany, and seizures. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 128/74 mmHg and pulse 52 beats/minute. No hemorrhage or infarction was observed in a computed tomography (CT) scan. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a complete right bundle branch block with sinus rhythm. The grade 1 QT and QTc intervals did not significantly change before and after the onset of LOC . Laboratory data showed hypermagnesemia (2.8 mg/dL) due to the prophylactic administration of magnesium sulfate after drip infusion of cetuximab . Cardiac ultrasonography displayed normal left ventricular contraction without vulvar disease, visual ejection fraction over 50%, no mitral valve relapse, no atrial valve relapse, no focal asynergy, no D-shaped left ventricle, 16 mm of fair collapse in the inferior vena cava (IVC), and an 11.6 transtricuspid pressure gradient. He was admitted for observation and further examination. One day after the onset of LOC, his serum magnesium level was 1.5 mg/dL and his clinical symptoms had completely disappeared. The patient was then discharged. No significant arrhythmia was detected by Holter ECG; thus, paroxysmal arrhythmia was excluded as an associated reason for the LOC. His serum magnesium level was checked regularly, and intravenous supplementation (40 mEq magnesium sulfate) was administered twice weekly for 2 weeks and once weekly for 5 weeks (nine times total) in the outpatient unit. Afterwards, administration of cetuximab was discontinued. The serum magnesium level returned to a normal range (1.7–2.5 mg/dL) after approximately 6 weeks. Follow-up CT scans detected enlarged metastatic lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular and para-aortic region and newly emerging lumbar vertebral metastasis, showing progressive disease. Regorafenib and TAS-102 (trifluridine tipiracil hydrochloride) were introduced sequentially for 6 months. Five months after the final treatment of TAS-102, he died of his primary disease, which reflected a survival period of 4 years and 6 months since the beginning of treatment.