A 13 year-old adolescent boy visited his family physician complaining of mild pain and swelling around his right knee. In the suspicion of a cutaneous infection, he was prescribed oral cefuroxime and analgesics. Because the pain and edema were gradually worsening, MRI of his right knee was conducted illustrating a fluid collection on the posterior aspect of the distal femur, diffuse soft-tissue edema, elevated metaphyseal periosteum, and mild bone marrow heterogeneity . These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of osteomyelitis or bone tumor.
Therefore, the patient was referred to our orthopaedic department for additional investigation and adequate treatment. He denied any recent injury, and he was free of any known hereditary or acquired disease. His parents also had no remarkable medical history. Physical examination revealed a significantly swollen right knee with painful, restricted range of motion. The body temperature was normal; however, the patient reported low-grade fever (37.4°C) on the day before admission. His blood test results were notable for anemia (hemoglobulin: 10.9 gr/dL, hematocrit: 32%) and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (55 mm/hr, normal: <10 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein (1.65 mg/dL, normal: <0.5 mg/dL). Distal right femur and knee radiographs were notable of the “Erlenmeyer flask deformity” of the distal femur . His right lower extremity was immobilized in a posterior long leg splint, and he was hospitalized for further investigation.
A CT scan of the right knee illustrated a medium-density structure at the posterior surface of the distal femur, possibly full of fluid, without any bone erosion . In the scanogram, the Erlenmeyer flask deformity of the distal femur was also recognized bilaterally.
An abdominal ultrasonography was also conducted. The only noteworthy finding was spleen size near the highest normal values (nv), measuring 12.2 cm.
A Tc99m-HDP bone scan was conducted, where a “hot spot” at the posterior surface of the right distal femur with a “cold” center was detected. Osteomyelitis with sequestrum was the most likely diagnosis; however, a rapidly progressive tumor could not be excluded.
Because of all these findings, an open biopsy of the distal femoral lesion was conducted. The specimen was sent for cultures and histologic examination. The cultures were negative for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial growth. The patient was discharged from the hospital and prescribed antibiotics (cefixime and clindamycin). A week later, he was examined at the outpatient clinic and his symptoms had markedly improved, with slightly painful weight bearing, no edema, and full range of knee motion.
Histologic examination of the bone biopsy specimen revealed mixed inflammatory infiltrates in the marrow spaces, composed of histiocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils . These were accompanied by a fibroblastic reaction, necrobiotic material, loss of osteocytes, and bone resorption. A cluster of histiocytes with features suggestive of Gaucher cells was noticed . Microorganisms were not identified on PAS, Giemsa, and Ziehl-Neelsen stains. Therefore, a histologic diagnosis of an inflammatory process was made, and the possibility of underlying GD was considered.
Additional investigation was decided, although the patient's clinical status had fully improved, because it was important to confirm or reject the possible diagnosis of GD. First, the serum enzyme chitotriosidase was measured because it is increased in patients with GD. A sample was sent to a laboratory specialized in GD diagnosis, and a very high value of 6696 nmol/mL/h (nv: 0 to 150 nmoles/mL/h) was found.
Subsequently, the enzyme β-glucocerebrosidase was measured, and the result of 4 nmoles/mg of protein/h (nv: 6 to 23 nmoles/mg of protein/h), that is, a decreased value, confirmed the diagnosis of GD. DNA testing for the mutation of the GBA gene was also done. PCR revealed two heterozygous mutations, N370S and L444P. Thus, the diagnosis of GD was confirmed, and the patient was referred to a pediatric hematologist for follow-up and treatment.
Finally, 2 months after the onset of symptoms, the patient underwent a new MRI which confirmed a decrease in the quantity of fluid at the posterior aspect of the distal femur, decreased soft-tissue edema, and residual elevated periosteum. However, more distinct heterogeneity of the bone marrow was obvious .