The index patient was a 7-year-old girl from a non-consanguineous family, and she was admitted to our hospital with abnormal walking posture. Her growth and development assessment indicated height of 107 cm(< 3rd) and weight of 20 kg(10th-25th). The patient was able to walk normally at 1 year old, one year later, she appeared abnormal gait, and was prone to wrestling. Therefore, she was misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy, and her symptoms did not improve significantly after rehabilitation. When she was 3 years old, she showed repeated facial eczema, suppuration, and finger abscesses (see Fig. A, B). Physical examination showed eczema-like rashes and abscesses on the face, and the fat under the skin was thin. Her muscle tension of both lower limbs was high, and tension of ankle joint was high. Muscle strength was normal, ankle clonus was positive. Foot inversion, knee extension, and gait instability were observed when walking. Since last year, the patient had 6 times unilateral peripheral facial paralysis, which is a clinic feature not seen in previous reports. Her parents had no clinical symptom as same as the patient. This patient's blood routine results suggested elevated eosinophils, the serum IgE was more than 3200 IU/ml (≤ 90 IU/ml). The results of serum lymphocyte subsets suggested that total T lymphocytes were low and total B lymphocytes were normal; helper T cell/suppressor T cell (Th/Ts) fluctuated between 0.21 and 0.42, which were significantly lower than normal levels (1.03–2.09); the percentage of assisted/induced T lymphocytes fluctuated between 9.26%-14.75%, which were lower than the normal level (18.2%-30.6%); the NK cells ranged from 18.01% to 31.79%, which was higher than the normal level (6.9%-19.3%). Compared with the first admission 2 years ago, the recent MRI of patient suggested that myelin dysplasia and the cerebellar atrophy was aggravated (see Fig. ), the MRI-DWI of her head was shown in Fig. .
There were two splice-site mutations (c.1868 + 2 T > C, c.5962-2A > G) of DOCK8 gene in the patients’ WES (see Fig. ). His father and mother carried the same heterozygous mutation as the patient, respectively, which were consistent with compound heterozygous mutation. According to ACMG criteria, the two splice-site mutations were classified as possibly pathogenic (PVS1 and PM2).
To date, more than 130 mutations have been reported in DOCK8 gene all over the world, gross deletions are the most mutations among them. There are 11 different mutations of DOCK8 gene in Chinese patients with autosomal recessive high IgE syndrome [–]. Among the 11 patients, 3 patients had atopic dermatitis, 8 patients had eczema, 10 patients had a certain degree of infection and allergy symptoms. Among these 10 infected patients, 3 patients had repeated respiratory infection, 3 patients had sinusitis, 8 patients had otitis media, 5 patients had stomatitis, 2 patients had conjunctivitis. For pathogens, including herpes simplex virus (HSV), human papilloma virus (HPV), cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, measles virus, candida, hepatitis B virus. It is worth noting that none of the 11 patients had neurological symptoms. Now we found a compound heterozygous mutation (c.1868 + 2 T > C, c.5962-2A > G) of DOCK8 gene, which was not reported in previous Chinese cases, in addition, the patient had neurological symptoms.