A 44-year-old male with underlying chronic rhinosinusitis for 20 years presented with painless bilateral neck swellings for 8 months and bilateral axilla and inguinal LNs swelling for 2 months. The swellings were gradually increasing in size. These were associated with loss of appetite and weight, intermittent fever and lethargy. He had had frequent bilateral nasal blockages, rhinorrhoea with occasional blood-stained mucus, hyposmia and facial congestion for 20 years. The symptoms were temporarily resolved with an oral and topical decongestant. He also complained of bilateral tinnitus for 2 months without other otological symptoms, such as hearing loss, otalgia, otorrhea and vertigo. He had developed lower back pain in the preceding month, which restricted him in work and daily activity. It was associated with bilateral lower limb numbness but no weakness. There were no upper aerodigestive tract obstructive symptoms, such as shortness of breath, noisy breathing or dysphagia.
He had sought medical attention at other centres, where nasoendoscopy and fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of right neck swelling had been performed. Nasoendoscopy revealed chronic sinusitis features without any obvious mass visible. FNAC results showed the presence of atypical lymphoid cells but could not provide a definitive diagnosis.
Full blood picture showed normochromic normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 6.6g/dL), leukocytosis with neutrophilia and monocytosis (white blood cell count 24.4 x 109/L, absolute neutrophil count 20.1 x 109/L, absolute monocyte count 1.7 x 109/L) and pseudothrombocytopenia (platelet count 92 x 109/L). Given that the presentations were more suggestive of lymphoma with generalised lymphadenopathy and the presence of ‘B-symptoms’, computerised tomography (CT) scans of the neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis were performed for staging purposes.
The CT neck showed multiple enlarged cervical LNs at level Ia, bilateral level Ib, right level II and III and left level V . The largest LN was at the right level II, measuring 3.7 cm x 2.1 cm x 5.0 cm, appearing matted and with a necrotic centre. There was a presence of air-fluid level in the right maxillary and sphenoid sinuses. No enhancing lesion was seen in the nasopharynx , oropharynx or laryngopharynx. Major salivary and thyroid glands appeared normal. Multiple enlarged LNs were also seen at the paratracheal and para-aortic regions on the thorax CT, without any suspicious lung nodules or mass . Abdomen and pelvis CTs also revealed significant findings with hepatomegaly and multiple ill-defined hypodense lesions at segments III, V and VII. In addition, multiple enlarged LNs were seen in the para-aortic and aortocaval regions . Overall, imaging features were suggestive of lymphoma Ann Arbor stage IV.
The patient was admitted to the haematology ward due to worsening lethargy and was subsequently referred to the otorhinolaryngology team for excision biopsy for definitive tissue diagnosis. Examination revealed the presence of multiple enlarged LNs at bilateral sides of the neck, namely right level II, III, IV and V and left level III .
The LN at right level II appeared matted, firm in consistency, immobile and attached to overlying skin. The other LNs were also firm in consistency but mobile and not attached to the overlying skin. In addition to the cervical LNs, there were also multiple enlarged LNs in the bilateral axilla and inguinal regions. Nasoendoscopy revealed mucopus at the bilateral middle meatus and nasopharynx regions, without any obvious mass seen, particularly at the FOR. Another ear, nose and throat examination showed unremarkable findings, and all cranial nerves appeared intact. Examination of the abdomen revealed hepatomegaly, 2 cm below the costal margin, with a smooth surface.
Subsequently, the patient was subjected to an excision biopsy of the right level V cervical LN under local anaesthesia. Surprisingly, the histopathology examination (HPE) result showed metastatic carcinoma that was arranged in sheets formed by moderately pleomorphic round-to-oval vesicular nuclei with large nucleoli and eosinophilic cytoplasm. At the periphery of the tumour, clusters revealed many reactive lymphocytes. The surrounding stroma showed desmoplastic reactions. These tumour cells were immunoreactive to cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, CK 5/6, CK 19, epithelial membrane antigen, P63 and CD 117 . The positivity of these markers indicated that the tumour cells were of squamous carcinoma in origin and not of lymphoid cell phenotype. Other immunohistochemical stains were negative, including CK20, CK7, TTF1, p16 and synaptophysin. These findings could suggest that the primary tumour originated from either the head or neck region rather than the lung or thyroid. Despite the absence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) markers in the centre, NPC was high in the list of differential diagnoses based on the morphology and immunohistochemistry features. A bone marrow trephine biopsy was performed on the same day and showed metastasis of the primary tumour into the marrow .
A multidisciplinary discussion was conducted to discuss the next management option for the patient. Subsequently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the base of the skull up to the upper thorax was performed to identify the origin of the disease. The MRI showed abnormal signal intensity at the right nasopharynx with obliteration of the right FOR . The lesion extended anteriorly to the soft palate, posteriorly abutting prevertebral muscle, laterally to tensor and palatini muscles, superiorly to the foramen ovale, inferiorly to oropharyngeal mucosa and posterolaterally to the carotid space, with involvement of superficial and deep lobes of the parotid .
In view of the positive MRI findings, enhanced nasoendoscopy was repeated using the Storz Professional Image Enhancement System (SPIES), revealing suspicious irregular mucosa at the centre of the nasopharynx . A targeted biopsy was taken and confirmed as non-keratinising differentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma . The patient was planned for palliative chemotherapy due to the advanced disease (stage IVB).