A 63-year-old female presented to the emergency department with throat pain following ingestion of a fish bone. Unbeknownst to any of the hospital staff, the patient was assuming the identity of another 57-year-old female. There was no suspicious behaviour at the time to suggest that the patient was committing identity fraud. She spoke an uncommon Chinese dialect and was accompanied by her niece who was able to assist minimally with English translation. The patient described odynophagia, which started immediately after accidental ingestion of a fishbone. She had a CT chest arranged by her GP prior to coming to hospital, which showed a 25 mm opaque foreign body in the upper oesophagus at the T2/3 level associated with a small, contained perforation.
Examination revealed a hemodynamically well patient with a midline laparotomy scar and mild epigastric tenderness. The patient was unable to provide a surgical history consistent with her midline laparotomy. This was assumed to be due to language barrier preventing accurate translation from the patient’s niece to the attending doctor. The patient’s electronic medical record was extensively reviewed and did not reveal any previous surgeries. It was noted however that she had a documented history of chronic hepatitis B and had been attending the hospital’s gastroenterology clinic with regular abdominal ultrasounds to assess her liver. Besides this, the patient did not have any other significant history recorded.
The patient underwent a gastroscopy where a foreign body resembling a fishbone was removed endoscopically by a surgeon . She tolerated the procedure well and remained clinically stable post-procedurally. She was kept fasted for three days before a progress CT chest confirmed that the oesophageal perforation had healed. The CT chest incorporated the upper abdomen down to the L4 vertebra. The spleen was notably absent on the CT scan , raising the possibility that the patient may have had an emergency splenectomy in the past, which would explain her midline laparotomy scar. However, her previous abdominal ultrasounds including one performed as recently as three weeks prior to her admission demonstrated that she still had her spleen . This imaging discrepancy raised suspicion of possible medical identity fraud.
The patient was directly informed of the discrepancy seen in her imaging. She confessed to committing medical identity fraud, stating that she was an international visitor hoping to avoid the out-of-pocket cost associated with hospital admission. The seriousness of her actions was emphasized to her and she agreed to pay the full cost of her hospital stay. Following consultation with the hospital’s medicolegal department in conjunction with the victim of identity fraud, a decision was made not to press any charges. A telehealth follow-up appointment at four weeks demonstrated that the patient was at her baseline health. She was tolerating solid foods and denied having any chest pain. The patient expressed sincere regret at having committed identity fraud and provided a verbal apology to the hospital.