A 69-year-old man was referred to our department with proteinuria and edema of the lower limbs in July 2012. His urinary protein excretion was 7.8 g/day and serum creatinine level was 2.10 mg/dL. He was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome, and a renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed glomerular capillary thickening with periodic acid-Schiff staining , and a bubbly appearance and spike formation in the glomerular capillary walls, with periodic acid silver-methenamine staining . Immunofluorescence staining showed granular 2 + deposition of immunoglobulin G and complement C3 in the glomerular capillary walls . Electron microscopy demonstrated subepithelial deposits. MN was diagnosed as stage II (Ehrenreich-Churg classification) . Examinations for collagen disease and malignancy were performed and were negative. Additionally, he did not use any drugs that could cause nephrotic syndrome. Based on these results, he was diagnosed with idiopathic MN.
During hospitalization, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation occurred, and oral warfarin was started. Steroid therapy was initiated for MN, and complete remission was achieved. However, the nephrotic syndrome relapsed while the patient was on prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 5 mg per day. As hypoalbuminemia and edema were manageable by conservative treatment, the dosage of the steroid was maintained, and 2.5 years after the onset of MN, steroid therapy was discontinued.
Four years after his MN diagnosis, he lost consciousness at home, and he was subsequently admitted to our hospital. His consciousness level on the Glasgow Coma Scale was E4V2M5. The patient did not have a fever. His blood pressure was 60/30 mmHg. His pulse rate was 90 beats/min and irregular. Physical examination showed lower extremity edema and petechiae on his front chest. Laboratory blood data on admission were as follows; white blood cell count, 8200 /μL; hemoglobin, 4.8 g/dL; platelet count, 1.7 × 104 /μL; direct bilirubin, 1.4 mg/dL; indirect bilirubin, 4.5 mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase, 1477 IU/L; C-reactive protein, 2.85 mg/dL; fibrinogen, 275 mg/dL; and fibrin degradation products, 15.9 μg/mL. A direct Coombs test was negative, and schistocytes (4.4%) were detected. As a result, he was diagnosed with thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA).
The patient’s serum creatinine level at the latest visit was 1.83 mg/dL, and it had worsened to 3.76 mg/dL on admission. On the day after hospitalization (day 2), fever was observed, thus his medical condition was consistent with TTP. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), and secondary TMA were considered as differential diagnoses. However, his blood, urine, and sputum cultures were negative. In addition, whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed no cancer or a focus of infection. Although diarrhea was observed before admission, his stool culture and serum anti-lipopolysaccharide antibodies were negative, and no bloody stool was observed. Therefore, the possibility of HUS was excluded. Furthermore, he had no history with medications that could cause secondary TMA, and there were no laboratory results suggestive of collagen disease. From these results, acquired TTP was strongly suspected, and plasma exchange was started on the day of admission (day 1). On day 13, his ADAMTS13 activity was found to be undetectable (< 0.5%) and his ADAMTS13 inhibitor level was 1.2 Bethesda U/mL on the admission blood sample. Thus, he was diagnosed with acquired TTP. On the same day, 1 mg/kg (55 mg) per day of PSL was started. On day 23, we withdrew the plasma exchange because the ADAMTS13 inhibitor level became undetectable and the ADAMTS13 activity was 30.2%. On day 68, he was discharged from our hospital.
The urinary protein creatinine ratio (g/gCr) at the onset of TTP was 1.8 and thereafter increased to a maximum level of 26.6, then decreased to 7.9 at discharge. The anti-PLA2R antibody level was 89.3 RU/mL at the onset of TTP, and 6.6 RU/mL at the end of the plasma exchange. On day 175, the anti-PLA2R antibody level became undetectable. The ADAMTS13 activity was 23.0% and the ADAMTS13 inhibitor level kept undetectable. On day 259, complete remission of MN was achieved with 10 mg /day of PSL, and his serum creatinine level recovered to 0.96 mg/dL. Since then, there has been no recurrence of either disease . Anti-THSD7A IgG level was undetectable.