A 69-year-old man (height 165 cm, weight 72 kg, body mass index 26 kg/m2) came to our hospital with a complaint of right medial knee pain and no apparent cause. Medical history was unremarkable, and there was no history of previous trauma, alcohol use, or intra-articular steroid use. The initial physical examination showed no effusion of the right knee, full range of motion, and normal tibiofemoral alignment (femorotibial mechanical axis angle of 177°). After about 5 months of conservative treatment, including intra-articular injection (hyaluronic acid), the knee pain had worsened. We found no ligamentous instability. McMurray’s test was positive medially, with tenderness to palpation at the medial joint line. Initial radiography was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a horizontal tear in the middle and posterior segments of the medial meniscus. Articular and osseous anatomy was unremarkable (A,B).
We conducted arthroscopic surgery of the right knee 7 months after the onset of pain. Ordinary infusion of normal saline solution was used to distend the joint. A tourniquet, inflated to 300 mmHg was used for 90 min total during the procedure. MRI findings of a horizontal tear in the middle and posterior segments of the medial meniscus were substantiated, and basket forceps and a radiofrequency assisted shaver (DYONICS ELECTROBLADE, Smith & Nephew, London, United Kingdom) were used to perform a partial medial meniscectomy (C). Radiographs from 10 months after the index surgery showed a small radiolucent area in the medial femoral condyle of the right knee (medial side of weight-bearing area) (A). Computed tomography was used to create a multiplanar reconstruction image showing a sclerotic band at the same part of the radiograph (B). T1-weighted MRI, performed immediately after the radiographic check-up, showed a low-intensity rounded band within the weight-bearing area of the medial femoral condyle and surrounded by a diffuse low-intensity area (C). T2-weighted MRI showed the same band, surrounded by an edematous lesion in the bone marrow (D). The weight-bearing area of the medial femoral condyle appeared to be slightly flattened. We judged that the posterior root of the medial meniscus had been preserved as described in the classification by Robertson et al. (E), and we diagnosed stage 2 SONK based on to the classification by Koshino . Thirteen months after index surgery, the patient had unicompartmental knee arthroplasty.
During surgery, we noted slight irregularities in the cartilage surface of the medial femoral condyle but no detachment of the osteochondral lesion (A). A hook test showed no obvious instability of the drawing the medial meniscus, and no posterior root tears were noted. Pinching showed the stiffened area in the middle part of the meniscus to be much harder than other parts of the resected meniscus (B). The subchondral fracture of the medial femoral condyle was located at just over the stiffened area of the medial meniscus (C). Histopathologically, prominent callus formation was seen comprising reactive woven bone and granulation tissue on both sides of the fracture. Fracture-related bone debris was focally observed on the osteochondral side of the fracture (A,B). There was no histopathological evidence of any antecedent bone infarction, such as creeping substitution or bone marrow necrosis. The resected meniscus showed a proliferation of fibroblasts and collagen fibers corresponding to the stiffened area (C,D).