A 12-year-old boy was introduced to our institution because he displayed visual disturbance and was described as having an intracranial mass lesion by another hospital. His family history was unremarkable. His past history included a right neck mass lesion: this had expanded to 40 mm in 1 month and was histologically suspected to be associated with sarcoidosis by another hospital 2 years ago. Subsequently, he was followed up at that hospital, but there was no obvious abnormality until 3 months ago when visual disturbance was identified at an annual school medical checkup.
His consciousness level was clear and neurological examinations demonstrated no abnormalities except for the ophthalomological problem. Neurological examinations, including the I and III – XII cranial nerves, detected no abnormality. Ophthalomological evaluations revealed concentric contraction of the visual field and diminished visual acuity of the right eye. His best corrected visual acuity was 0.2/20 (n.c) in the right eye and 4/20 (1.2pxS-1.5D) in the left eye. The pupils were semidilated and the pupillary light reflex was sluggish on the right side, while a normal size and normal reaction were evident on the left side. In a fundus examination, his right optic disc was found to be pale.
Routine laboratory tests including renal function and hormonal tests demonstrated no obvious abnormalities. As a marker for sarcoidosis, his serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was slightly increased at 22.5 U/L (8.3 to 21.5 U/L). His chest X-ray performed on admission showed no obvious abnormalities, but a subsequent chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed small scattered pulmonary nodules in the bilateral lungs.
A CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head demonstrated that a leaf-shaped extra-axial mass of about 73 mm in length was present around the right cavernous sinus, straddling the sella turcica, frontal, middle, and posterior cranial fossa, with dural thickness to the tentorium cerebrii . The greater part of this lesion showed iso signal intensity on T1 weighted images and low signal intensity on T2 weighted images, while homogeneous enhancement was evident after contrast medium administration. Perilesional edema was not obviously found in the adjacent brain except the right temporal lobe. Furthermore, an enhanced nodular shadow of 12 mm in size was detected in the lower part of the fourth ventricle. Spinal MRI revealed no abnormality throughout the spinal cord. Right internal carotid artery and external carotid artery angiographies showed week staining where the mass was located on the MRI, although it was difficult to locate the origin of these feeding arteries. The above imaging findings indicated an extra-axial large tumor of the right skull base suggesting meningioma, solitary fibrous tumor, etc.
The patient underwent surgical resection (biopsy) via a frontotemporal craniotomy to establish a definitive diagnosis based on the histopathology, since neurosarcoidosis remains a very difficult diagnosis to establish from neuroradiogenic imagings.
The intraoperative findings indicated that the tumor was hard, and visually and tactually resembled like a meningioma. The lesion was found immediately after opening the sylvian fissure, and was easy to separate from the surrounding brain parenchyma in the frontal cortex, but had no distinct boundaries in the temporal cortex. When reaching deeply into the sylvian fissure, the internal cerebral artery was seen to be involved within the lesion. The immediate pathology revealed that the specimen consisted of a proliferation of short spindle cells without necrosis, with multinucleated giant cells. Surgical exploration was therefore terminated at this stage.
The definitive histopathology of the resected mass lesion showed epithelioid cell granulomas and Langhans type multinucleated giant cells that were rich in dense fibrous tissue with lymphocytes and plasma cells. Necrosis was not clear in the granulomas observed in the specimen . Grocott-positive fungi and Ziehl-Neelsen staining positive anti-acid bacteria were not clearly found. Non-caseating granulomatous inflammation consistent with neurosarcoidosis was diagnosed.
Based on the histopathology of the resected mass lesion, neurosarcoidosis was diagnosed. Although steroid therapy was planned, the start was delayed due to epidural abscess of the surgical wound, which required a surgical procedure and antibacterial therapy. Three months after the biopsy, the patient was started on steroid therapy (prednisolone at 1.0 mg/kg body weight per day; reduction of the prednisolone was made at 5 mg every 4 weeks). Fortunately, during this delayed time, his neurological examinations did not change and brain MRI also indicated no local growth of the lesion where the mass lesion was left.
On follow-up after 3 months of steroid therapy, the patient displayed a good response on the imaging studies. MRI revealed that the preexisting mass lesion had regressed extremely. The enhanced small nodular shadow in the lower part of the fourth ventricle had disappeared. Only around the right cavernous sinus, did the findings show a residual small mass of iso signal intensity on T1-weighted images and an extremely low signal intensity on T2-weighted images with no enhancement effect after contrast medium administration .
When the prednisolone reaches 25 mg/day, additional treatment using methotrexate in combination with prednisolone is planned for the patient.