A 23-year-old North African woman, with no past personal or familial medical history, requested a consultation for acute abdominal pain and deterioration of her general status.
After a physical examination, she was found to be afebrile with a whole abdominal tenderness but no signs of peritonitis. A vaginal examination found a mobile tender mass in the pouch of Douglas. The remaining part of the physical examination was normal. A pelvic ultrasound showed a 22 × 15 cm simple left ovarian cyst. In view of her acute abdominal pain, she was scheduled for an emergency cystectomy. A 25 cm left ovarian tissular mass with external vegetation associated with a moderate ascites and peritoneal implants were observed; the rest of her abdominal cavity appeared normal.
A left adnexectomy was also conducted. The frozen section showed a malignant germ cell tumor. The surgery was completed by omentectomy and excision of all the peritoneal implants. A final histologic examination showed a mixed MOGCT associating a seminomatous component to a yolk sac tumor. The peritoneal implants were metastatic.
It was at that time that she was referred to our center.
She underwent chemotherapy consisting of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP), with a complete clinical and radiological response after four courses of BEP. Finally, she underwent six well-tolerated injections of BEP with no chemo-induced amenorrhea.
She was then contacted for follow-ups for the next 16 years. They were initially conducted every 4 months, including physical examinations and tumor markers. Two years post-treatment, follow-ups were conducted every 6 months for the next 3 years. She then received annual follow-ups for the remainder of the time. An abdominopelvic sonography was also conducted annually. The tumor markers were negative during all follow-ups and there have been no signs of relapse to this date.
She also reported three full-term natural pregnancies, occurring respectively 4, 6, and 10 years after the end of the treatment.