A 39-year-old HIV-positive male presented to the Emergency Department complaining of severe, sharp pain diffusely across the abdomen that had awoken him from sleep at 01 : 30 AM. He had been experiencing milder, intermittent abdominal pain for 2 months before. Additionally, he admitted to chills, weight loss, loss of appetite, nausea, and occasional diarrhea and vomiting for 1 month. There was no reported hemoptysis, hematochezia, melena, or fevers. He had a cough with green sputum for 2 months as well.
He had a past medical history significant for HIV due to IV drug use diagnosed 10 years earlier that he had neglected to treat. He has hepatitis C as well. He previously has abused alcohol but had quit 2 months ago, and quit IV drug use 11 years ago. He has less than 10 pack/year smoking. He has been in a monogamous relationship with his girlfriend for multiple years and denies any history of risky sexual behaviors including having polygamous or homozygous relationship. He has lived in southern Texas his whole life, an area of the US known to be mildly endemic with histoplasma species. He had no significant travel history.
He was afebrile with a temperature of 98.2° Fahrenheit, stable blood pressure, tachycardia, and tachypnea with a heart rate of 110/bpm and respiratory rate of 22/min. Physical exam revealed a malnourished man in distress due to abdominal pain. On abdominal exam, he was very tender with diffuse guarding and rigidity in all quadrants. Initial lab work revealed white blood cell count of 2.95/103/μL. Absolute CD4 count was 26, and viral load was 162,000. His remaining initial lab work (with normal values) was as follows: WBC 2.95 × 103/microliter (4.8–10.8 × 103), absolute neutrophil count 2.57 × 103/microliter (1.8–7.7 × 103), absolute lymphocyte 0.20 × 103/microliter (1.0–4.8 × 103), absolute monocytes 0.18 × 103/microliter (0.0–0.8 × 103), eosinophils 0.00 × 103/microliter, and basophils 0.00 × 103/microliter. Hemoglobin was 11.4 g/dl (12.0–16 g/dl), hematocrit was 35.4%, and platelet count was 248 × 103/microliter (150–450 × 103/microliter).
CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed gas bubbles scattered throughout the left mesentery, multiple areas of small bowel thickening and edema, evidence of free fluid in the abdomen, and mesenteric masses . These findings supported bowel perforation. Additionally, workup included CT angiogram (CTA) of the chest, to exclude the pulmonary embolism. The CTA showed 16 mm right lower lobe nodule , as well as a 6 mm left upper lobe nodule. No hilar or mediastinal adenopathy was seen.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed. This revealed numerous nodular implants throughout the small bowel as well as numerous masses in the mesentery. There was an obvious perforation in the mid to proximal jejunum associated with a nodular lesion that had caused a stricture. The perforated segment was resected along with a representative mesenteric mass. Primary anastomosis was performed noting that the extent of disease involvement in the small bowel prohibited complete resection of all lesions.
Histological examination of surgical specimens showed necrotic tissue with yeast consistent with histoplasmosis . Urine histoplasma antigen was markedly positive at >25 ng/ml (0.00–0.49).
In regard to his pulmonary nodule seen on the CTA, the patient underwent bronchoscopy. Minimal diffuse inflammatory changes and thick whitish secretions were seen in the right lower lobe and right upper lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed from left upper and right lower lobe. Gram stain of the BAL fluid showed 3 + WBCs with rare Gram negative rods, 1+ Gram positive cocci, and few coryneform Gram positive rods which was felt to be consistent with normal upper respiratory flora. Cultures grew rapid growing candida species. Pathological examination of the BAL fluid revealed inflammatory debries with yeast forms seen on the silver stain. No biopsies were performed.
The patient was started on oral itraconazole, 200 mg orally TID for 3 days, and then changed to 200 mg orally BID anticipating 12 months of treatment. In addition to prophylactic, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 800 mg/160 mg one tablet orally and azithromycin 1500 mg orally once per week were started. He was not immediately started on antiretroviral therapy due to lack of inpatient access to these medications.
His hospitalization was complicated by high output drainage from his surgical JP drain. This eventually decreased to a more manageable level, and the patient was discharged home with his JP drain in place on day 17 of hospitalization. On discharge, he was referred to a local clinic for treatment of AIDS. He failed to follow-up there, citing financial hardship.
The patient returned to the hospital 1 week after discharge with fever, chills, constipation, and abdominal discomfort with partial small bowel obstruction, which was managed conservatively and good resolution was achieved. Repeat bronchoscopy with BAL was negative except for growing yeast in the BAL. Patient was changed to liposomal amphotericin B intravenously with good clinical response. After 2 weeks of intravenous liposomal amphotericin B, he was switched back to itraconazole 200 mg orally BID, anticipating 12 months of therapy with close follow-up. He was discharged home with an instruction to follow-up at the HIV clinic to be started on antiretroviral therapy and follow-up CT scan of chest in 4 weeks.