A 16-year-old male of Asian ethnicity presented with insidious onset anterior knee pain for the past 2 years. To begin with, the pain was intermittent and mild; however, it increased progressively in intensity and frequency. At the time of consultation, he had moderate-to-severe continuous pain, which was worse at night. He had only modest response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications. Examination did not reveal any specific tenderness; there was minimal effusion in the suprapatellar pouch, full range of motion of the knee, and wasting of the quadriceps. Serum biochemistry parameters were with normal limits. Plain radiographs of the knee did not reveal any significant abnormality. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a hypointense, punctate lesion surrounded by a small hyperintense zone (edema) was noted at medial aspect of patella, close to its articular surface . A CT scan was done next, which showed the lesion with a central nidus, surrounded by a sclerotic rim, confirming the diagnosis of osteoid osteoma .
The patient was planned for percutaneous CT-guided radiofrequency ablation. Dispersive grounding pads were placed under both thighs with good skin contact. Under spinal anesthesia, the lesion was localized on multidetector CT scan. A 1.2 mm K-wire was gradually advanced from the dorsal surface of the patella into the lesion under CT guidance using a combination of drilling and gentle hammering. Care was taken not to breach the patellar articular cartilage. Once the K-wire was in place, it was replaced with a radiofrequency ablation probe, 0.7 cm in diameter and 14.4 cm long (Cool-tipTM, Medtronic) .
Radiofrequency ablation was carried out at 90° for 5 min. No post-procedural complications were noted. The patient was administered analgesics for the next 3 days and permitted full weight-bearing. The patient was pain free a few days after the procedure. At 14-month follow-up, there was no recurrence of symptoms. The quadriceps wasting had improved significantly and he had full range of motion .