We present the case of a 30-year-old woman with diarrhea and acute onset of upper abdominal pain. She had no personal or family history of cancer. There weren`t any previous interventions known. Subsequent ultrasound examination revealed a strongly echogenic lesion in liver segment VI. A computed tomographic scan of the abdomen performed with the intravenous administration of contrast medium showed a pericholecystic fluid collection measuring 12 cm x 9 cm and an irregular thickening of the gallbladder wall, so the presumptive radiological diagnosis of acute cholecystitis complicated by gallbladder perforation and abscess formation was made. Clinical differential diagnoses included liver abscess, cystic echinococcosis, and neoplastic disease, so following tumor board decision, the patient was admitted to open procedure resection with cholecystectomy and liver segment V / VI resection of the lesion.
At gross examination, liver resection showed a tumor-forming lesion of 13.5 cm in size with an irregular, grey surface, with partly crumbling and suppurating, partly indurated texture in close proximity to the gallbladder. The gallbladder was of 6.7 cm length with a thickened wall of up to 3 cm and contained yellow concretions. Histological examination revealed a highly pleomorphic, highly proliferative, overtly malignant tumor with hyperchromasia, atypical mitotic figures, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli . Besides, geographic necrosis, multinucleated tumor giant cells and abundant neutrophilic infiltrate were present. The tumor infiltrated the gallbladder wall and adjacent adipose tissue, as well as the liver. In the proximity of the tumor, the gallbladder epithelium displayed atypia with an increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromasia, and loss of nuclear polarity, characteristic of high-grade biliary intraepithelial neoplasia. Focal gland formation was observed, reminiscent of an adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemistry of the carcinoma revealed positivity solely for cytokeratin 8 and vimentin. Immunohistochemical stains against TTF-1, HepPar1, PAX8, OCT3/4, CEA, BerEp4, estrogen receptor, cytokeratins 7 and 20, as well as CDX2 and ErbB2 were negative. Ki-67-proliferation rate (MIB-1 labeling index) was over 95 %. PBRM1- and SMARCA2-expression were lost in the carcinoma but retained in the associated high-grade biliary intraepithelial neoplasia. SMARCA4, SMARCB1 (INI-1), and ARID1A were retained. PDL-1 was strongly expressed in 80 % of tumor cells as well as in some inflammatory cells. Next-generation-sequencing with the Oncomine-Comprehensive Assay v3 detected a KRAS mutation (p.Gly12Asp; allele frequency 29,5 %), a deleterious splice-site mutation in the POLE-gene (NM_006231:c.4729-1G > A; allele frequency 7,3 %) and a TP53 splice site mutation (allele frequency 17,9 %). Besides, a variant of unknown significance in the SMARCA4-gene (NM_003072:p.Leu1063Val; allele frequency 14,5 %) was discovered. In addition, PBRM1 and ARID1B mutations were detected, among others (see Table and Supplemental ). The mutations were also verified using another NGS panel (Illumina TruSight Tumor 500-Panel) using two different tumor areas. A comparative analysis of biliary intraepithelial neoplasia and invasive tumor was not possible due to the spatial proximity and tumor spill-over. The mutational burden was increased (12.53 and 11.01 mutations per megabase) . The tumor was microsatellite stable and showed tumor heterogeneity.
In the postoperative course, elevated serum CRP levels declined under systemic intravenous antibiotics. The patient died within ten months of the diagnosis.