A 19-year-old girl presented to our hospital with a history of right lumbar pain and discomfort for 2 months and aggravated for 2 days. The patient felt the right waist pain 2 months ago, which was persistent dull pain, and increased right-sided back pain after running 2 days ago. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed right renal hamartoma with hemorrhage in the local hospital. The patient had no significant medical history and was not receiving any medication at the time of referral. Of note in the history was that the patient discovered facial swelling, increased acne on the face and back, and scanty menstruation six months ago. Upon admission, physical examination revealed concentric obesity and positive percussion pain in the right costal horn.
Routine blood tests showed elevated infection indicators, abnormal renal and liver function, elevated thyroid hormone and female hormone levels, and abnormal cortisol rhythm and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) rhythm .
Abdominal imaging with contrast-enhanced computed tomography and computed tomography angiography (Sep 5) showed right upper pole occupancy (size 9.4 cm * 9.9 cm) with subepithelial hemorrhage, right renal artery branch supplied blood, and the right portal lymph node enlargement .
Re-examination of the patient’s blood routine, renal function and protein level showed that the infection index further increased, and the renal function and protein level decreased. The patient received double J tube implantation under left ureteroscope plus right radical nephrectomy plus clearance of right perirenal hematoma plus lysis of right perirenal adhesion under general anesthesiaon Sep 8. The patients were transferred to ICU monitoring and treatment after surgery. The blood routine, renal function and protein levels of the patients showed a trend of improvement for three consecutive days after surgery, ACTH and plasma total cortisol (PTC) decreased to normal, and thyroid hormones tended to normal. The patient’s facial swelling was reduced and the acne on her face and back subsided. Three days later the patient was transferred to the general ward and discharged on Sep 14. However, three weeks after surgery, the patient died while preparing for further chemotherapy.
The maximum diameter of the tumor was 8.0 cm. The tumor involved renal parenchyma, perirenal adipose tissue and adrenal gland, and a carcinoma thrombus was seen in the vasculature. Under light microscope, the tumor cells were nested and sheet-like, composed of a large number of small round cells with relatively uniform morphology and little cytoplasm . The immunohistochemical results were positive for CD99 (diffuse membranous positivity) and Ki67 (about 10%), while Vim, Syn, FSH and ACTH were negative . EWSRI gene fusion was detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) . According to the results of postoperative pathology and molecular pathological examination, the finally diagnosed was renal small round blue cell tumor (consistent with PNET).