A 47-year-old female (body weight 49.6 kg, height 159 cm) suffered from acute liver failure due to alcoholic hepatitis. The patient was a heavy drinker and was hospitalized due to mental changes two months prior to LT. She received steroid treatment for severe alcoholic hepatitis, but it was tapered due to lack of response. Treatment for hepatic encephalopathy and endoscopic variceal obturation for gastric variceal bleeding was performed as well. One week before LT, she was intubated due to dyspnea caused by pulmonary edema, probably due to excessive transfusion and fluid treatment after hematemesis.
She was transferred to our hospital six days prior to LT. Initial laboratory results were hemoglobin 8.7 g/dl, hematocrit 26%, platelet count 2,000/µl, prothrombin time (PT) 29.0 s with an international normalized ratio (INR) 2.73, and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 49.9 s. Computed tomography revealed liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and multiple collateral vessels in the abdominopelvic cavity. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed large gastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy. Echocardiography was normal. The patient had very severe thrombocytopenia; despite daily transfusion of 6 to 18 units of leukocyte-depleted platelet concentrate (LDPC), platelet counts remained under 10,000/µl. However, there was no spontaneous bleeding despite persistent severe thrombocytopenia. In the intensive care unit (ICU), along with transfusion, ventilator care and continuous renal replacement therapy was done until LT.
A deceased donor liver was allocated and the intubated patient was transferred to the operating room. After standard monitoring, general anesthesia was induced with intravenous thiopental sodium 50 mg, atracurium 50 mg, and sevoflurane. The right radial artery, right femoral artery, and right femoral vein were cannulated for monitoring and sampling. A 9-Fr catheter (ARROW® MAC, Teleflex, USA) was inserted into the right internal jugular vein and a pulmonary artery catheter was inserted to monitor pulmonary artery pressure, continuous cardiac output, and mixed venous oxygen saturation. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen, air, isoflurane, and atracurium.
On the day of surgery, only 2 units of single donor platelets (SDPs) were available in the hospital. Therefore, we planned to transfuse the 2 units of SDPs throughout the surgery. Perioperative coagulation profiles and non-activated thromboelastometry (NATEM) results are shown in . Despite continuous transfusion of platelets, platelet count remained at 3,000–4,000/µl. Although platelet count was very low, no diffuse oozing was observed in the operating field and blood loss expressed as lost red cell mass was 860 ml . Crystalloid 3,050 ml, 5% albumin 550 ml, 4 units of packed red blood cells, 550 ml of autotransfusion, 7 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 2 units of SDPs were infused during the 300-min LT procedure. Continuous infusion of norepinephrine (0.01–0.2 µg/kg/min) was maintained throughout the surgery and the recipient was transferred to the ICU.
Postoperatively, there was no active bleeding or oozing, and the recipient received only 1 unit of SDPs on the day after surgery. Although thrombocytopenia due to peripheral sequestration and destruction by splenomegaly was suspected, laboratory tests and consultation with the department of hemato-oncology were performed to determine the cause of persistent very severe thrombocytopenia. Many spherocytes and schisticytes (2–3/high-power field) were observed in peripheral blood smear. Positive direct antiglobulin test and increased D-dimer suggested immune hemolytic thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow biopsy was recommended to confirm whether thrombocytopenia was peripheral in origin rather than from production failure. Also, consultation recommended that if thrombocytopenia persists, splenectomy may be required. However, without further treatment, platelet counts started to increase from postoperative day (POD) 4 and spontaneously recovered to over 100,000/µl on POD 10 . On POD 20, the patient was discharged without major complications.