A 33-year-old woman was admitted to the psychiatric acute ward with the following symptoms: delusions of persecution, auditory hallucination, impulsive behavior, and emotional instability.
For 6 mo, the patient showed hostility towards her colleagues, firmly believing that they wanted to harm her. She could hear abusive voices of colleagues when she was alone. The false belief and voice interfered with the social relations and behavior of the patient, leading to outrunning behavior. In addition, the patient exhibited impulsive acts and temperamental behavior, such as tearing people's clothes, smashing things, standing outside naked when she became excited, and running around at midnight. She also experienced severe depression for several days, with crying and expressing a desire to commit suicide by euthanasia.
According to her mother, the patient has been weak and obtuse since childhood and was unable to pass primary school exams. She required supervision and care from her family in her personal life. Despite being able to work, she could not perform her job well and did not get along with her colleagues, leading to her dismissal from several companies. At age 18, she underwent cataract surgery, and at age 26, she underwent cholecystectomy for cholestasis.
A review of the patient’s medical records revealed that she presented with swelling in her left Achilles tendon, pain, and skewed walking to the right side 5 years ago. Three years ago, she was admitted to the neurology department, where biochemical tests revealed an elevated total biliary acid level of 11.2 µmol/L (normal value ≤ 10.0) and decreased levels of chenodeoxycholic acid and ursodeoxycholic acid. Subsequently, a biopsy of the left Achilles tendon was performed, revealing numerous lipid crystals and a few foamy macrophages . The patient underwent genetic analysis, which identified two mutations in the CYP27A1 gene associated with CTX: c.1263 + 3G>C and c.379C>T. On the basis of these findings, the patient was ultimately diagnosed with CTX and prescribed chenodeoxycholic acid (750 mg/d) and rosuvastatin (10 mg/d).
There was no family history of psychiatric diseases.
During hospitalization in the psychiatric ward, the patient’s brief psychiatric rating sale (BPRS) score was 40, her Wechsler intelligence scale score was 65, and the total biliary acid returned to normal levels. Nervous system examination showed normal muscle tone in the extremities, grade 5 muscle strength, instability in the heel-knee-tibia test of the right lower extremity, and a positive Romberg sign. In the mental status examination, the patient exhibited the following: verbal auditory hallucination; delusions of persecution; negative perceptions; irritability; childish emotions; poor general knowledge, understanding, judgment, and calculation; impulsivity; and lack of insight.
After nearly 3 years of adequate chenodeoxycholic acid treatment, the total biliary acid level returned to normal.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed symmetrical patchy abnormal signals in the dentate nuclei and deep medulla of the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres. These signals exhibited a slight decrease in signal intensity on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and a slight increase in signal intensity on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) . Left-ankle-joint MRI showed that the inhomogeneous area had a considerable local thickening of the left Achilles tendon. The area displayed clear boundaries measuring approximately 6.6 cm × 1.2 cm and exhibited a slightly elevated signal intensity on T1WI and a similar slightly elevated signal intensity on the proton density weighted image, accompanied by linear hypointensity within . Brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed decreases in N-acetylaspartate (NAA) intensities and increases in lactate and lipid signals .