The patient was a 65-year-old woman (height 159 cm, weight 63 kg, body mass index 25.2). She sought care from our orthopedic surgery department, where was treated for lumbar spinal stenosis with oral tramadol hydrochloride (75 mg/day). In addition, postherpetic neuralgia in the right upper extremity was treated using the right stellate ganglion xenon irradiation and oral pregabalin (150 mg/day). Six months ago, she experienced right hip pain after a long walk and was diagnosed with bilateral hip joint OA. Following 2 months of celecoxib therapy, the pain improved, prompting her to discontinue the medication and undergo subsequent follow-ups. Three months before the presentation, a fall resulted in left hip pain. A post-fall X-ray examination did not find fractures, other anomalies, or observable joint alterations. Although she resumed taking celecoxib, the pain remained. The main painful site was the left groin area, with maximum pain intensity of 8 on the numerical rating scale (NRS) while walking. This persistent pain prompted her to use a cane or other ambulatory aids.
To precisely determine the source of pain and alleviate severe pain, a left PENG block using 15 mL of 0.5% lidocaine was administered under ultrasound guidance. During the procedure, the patient was positioned supine. Briefly, an ultrasound probe was placed transversely, and the anterior inferior iliac spine, iliopubic eminence, and psoas tendon were identified . Subsequently, a needle was inserted via a lateral in-plane approach to guide the tip within the myofascial plane, positioned between the psoas tendon anteriorly and the ilium posteriorly. Thereafter, 15 mL of 0.5% lidocaine was gradually injected. No complications or side effects associated with PENG block were observed, except for transient quadriceps weakness. Following the initial block, pain improved during ambulation. Following five subsequent block applications at intervals of 2–4 weeks, the pain stabilized at NRS 1–2, facilitating independent walking. To date, pain has not recurred even after 6 months .