A 30-year-old man was admitted to our ophthalmology department due to red eye and blurred vision in the right eye (RE) for more than 1 year. No nevus flammeus was observed in the eyelid or skin, and he also denied undergoing laser surgery. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) finding did not confirm leptomeningeal hemangioma. Intraocular pressure was 16.3 and 16.8 mmHg in the RE and the left eye (LE), respectively. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.2 and 1.0 in the RE and LE, respectively. Slit lamp examination showed diffused pinkish discoloration related to the increased conjunctival and episcleral vascularization. Vascular in the conjunctiva or sclera showed brush-like dilation, proliferation, and occasionally was hemangiomatous . The iris was brown, with no abnormal neovascularization or hyperpigmentation. Gonioscopy revealed that the angle was open in both eyes. The pupil showed a brilliant red reflex in the RE in contrast to the normal reflex in the opposite pupil. The presence of a diffuse red-orange color appearance (tomato catsup) of the fundus with respect to the LE was detected by ophthalmoscopy. There were scattered, yellow-white lesions on posterior pole of the fundus, involving the macular area . Enhanced depth imaging (EDI) using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) of the RE showed diffuse choroidal thickening, and diffuse elevation of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) with a dome-shaped, especially around the optic disc. In some areas, the choroid-scleral junction was out of the range of the instrument and could not be measured due to the technical limitation of the instrument. There was cystic edema in the neuroepithelial layer of retina, and subretinal liquid cavities in the fovea and RPE hyperplasia were also observed . Color Doppler ultrasound displayed placoid choroidal thickening with increased internal reflectivity, from the posterior pole to the peripheral choroid, especially around the optic disc. In the color mode, it can be observed that the choroid blood supply is very rich, presenting a high-speed and low resistance spectrum. At the same time, the superior ophthalmic vein is dilated . The patient underwent indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) on the same day. ICGA revealed rapid filling of the diffuse choroidal hemangioma’s vascular network in the early stages. The vessels were fine, lacy and showed a web configuration, and were diffusely distributed over the posterior pole . Orbital MRI revealed that the anterior edge of the posterior wall of the RE was thickened, with a slightly higher signal-intensity on T1-weighted image (T1WI) and a slightly lower signal-intensity on T2WI. Enhanced scan showed obvious uniform enhancement compared with the LE . Contrast-enhanced scan showed an obviously uniform enhancement in the RE compared with the LE. Contrast-enhanced cranial MRI illustrated no obvious abnormality. The final diagnosis was DCH in the RE, conjunctival and scleral hemangioma, which would be assumed as a variant of SWS.