A 50-year-old woman with the chief complaint of exertional dyspnoea (functional class III) from 8 months ago and suspicious intracardiac shunt referred to Tehran Heart Center, a referral educational hospital in Tehran, Iran, for further evaluation. At the time of admission her vital signs were as following: blood pressure 128/68 mmHg, heart rate 93 beat/minute, and respiratory rate 19/minute. Her O2 saturation in ambient air was 94% with no sign of peripheral or central cyanosis. Cardiorespiratory examination revealed a continuous murmur at the left parasternal border. No rales or crackles were heard. Electrocardiogram was unremarkable (sinus rhythm with heart rate of 93 beats per minute and no significant ST-T change). Chest computed tomography (CT) scan was normal. Based on initial physical examination, the diagnosis of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and VSD was considered. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricle function (ejection fraction 55%), mildly dilated right ventricle, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation with no PDA or VSD. An important finding was diastolic turbulent flow from right coronary cusp (RCC) of aortic valve to RA at the level of tricuspid valve septal leaflet, suggestive for RSV. On- admission Chest CT scan was normal.
Past medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension. Left heart catheterization revealed non obstructive coronary artery disease. Right heart catheterization results were as follows: pulmonary artery pressure (PAP): 53/22 mmHg, RV pressure: 50/12 and RA pressure: 12 mmHg. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) showed rupture of RCC with continuous flow shunt to RA . The aortic and RA orifices were 8 and 6 mm, respectively. The distance between aortic valve to right coronary artery was 12 mm. Cardiac catheterization showed significant flow from aorta to RA in aortic root injection . The Qp/Qs ratio was 2.3 in favour of significant left to right shunt (aorta to RA).
The patient was discussed in the heart team committee (including structural interventionalist, general surgeon, echo-cardiologist, and anaesthesiologist). She was planned for device closure at the next session with PDA device.
After aortic root injection, wiring (0.035 wire) was done through sinus rupture to pulmonary artery and was snared and externalized via right femoral vein. Delivery sheath was inserted through rupture and Occlutech PDA occluder 12–15 was deployed to close the rupture . Afterwards, aortic root injection and TOE showed successful closure of the rupture with mild residual shunt.
The patient was transferred to the critical care unit and monitored closely. However, she had ongoing dyspnoea on eexertion nd also frequent coughing was added to her symptoms. Two days after the procedure, chest CT scan was repeated. Peripheral densities with ground glass appearance in favour of COVID-19 appeared. Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) test was sent and came back positive the next day. Symptom therapy and also anti-viral drug were initiated. In our hospital at that time Remdesivir was the antiviral choice for in hospital management of COVID-19 among patients with low O2 saturation and baseline comorbidities. Coughing improved however exertional dyspnoea persisted. The new important finding was the difference in O2 saturation in supine and upright position. In supine position the O2 saturation was 86% which fell down to 79% while the patient was upright. Another finding was the resistance of hypoxia to O2 therapy; even 100% O2 did not increase the level of O2 saturation. Transthoracic echocardiography afterwards showed patent foramen ovale (PFO) with significant shunt on colour Doppler study. Hence, this platypnoea–orthdeoxia, with severe orthostatic hypoxia, was thought to be related to PFO. General situation of the patient was getting better but she was still symptomatic. The pulmonary pressure after the procedure was near normal and lung disease did not solely justified the POS. Therefore, POS was attributed to PFO shunt in the presence of COVID pneumonia. This was a challenging decision however the heart team arrived at the decision to perform the second procedure (PFO closure).
After 5 days of the first procedure, she was then, planned to undergo PFO device closure.
The next day (6 days after the first procedure), she transferred again to the cath-lab for the second procedure. The right to left shunt was visible in intracardiac echocardiography (ViewFlex Xtra ICE Catheter, St. Jude Medical) . Cardiac oximetry was done before device closure. The O2 saturation in pulmonary vein was 97%, however, significant step-down to 88% was seen in the left atrium. In addition balloon closure of PFO resulted in rapid increase of systemic saturation up to 95%.
At first, PFO closure device FigullaFlex 23–25 mm (Occlutech GmbH, Jena, Germany) was used but retrieved due to significant residual shunt. Then the Amplatzer ASD occluder (AGA Medical Corp, Golden Valley, MN, USA) 14, was successfully deployed without any significant residual shunt in contrast injection . The oximetry showed immediate improvement (89–94%).
Fortunately, the POS was relieved after the procedure and the patient was discharged from hospital with Aspirin (81 mg daily) and Pantoprazole (40 mg daily) in good condition (and negative PCR test for COVID-19) after a week.