A 67-year-old woman presented to the emergency department at our university hospital complaining of constipation and right flank pain. She suffered from uncontrolled hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Additionally, the patient claimed that she was diagnosed with an adnexal cyst 7 years ago. Her previous gynecologist did not manage to determine exactly whether the cyst was ovarian or abdominal in origin and no further surgical interventions or sonographic imaging follow-up were carried out. On presentation, the patient was hypertensive and tachycardic. She was afebrile and her oxygen saturation was normal. Upon clinical examination, her abdomen was distended and non-tender. Her cardiac auscultation revealed arrhythmic arrhythmia. The laboratory tests were unremarkable except for a raised blood glucose level of 201 mg/dL. Her complete blood count, electrolytes, liver and kidney function tests were within the normal limits. A 12-leads electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. A computed tomography scan (CT scan) of the abdomen revealed the presence of a large multilocular cystic mass measuring 17 X 26 cm in its anterior-posterior and transverse diameters respectively. The cyst occupied most of the abdomen and caused bowel obstruction and right sided hydronephrosis .
The initial differential diagnosis was either an omental cyst or abdominal abscess. The patient went preoperative optimization regarding the hypertension, hyperglycemia, and atrial fibrillation. The patient underwent a midline laparotomy. A large abdominal cyst adhered to the greater omentum was found. The cyst received its extensive vascular blood supply form the greater omentum . The uterus and both ovaries were unremarkable and were separate from the cyst. After ligating the cystic feeding vessels, an en-bloc cystectomy was performed successfully . Gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a large cystic mass measuring 45 cm in its longitudinal diameter and weighting 4.5 Kilograms. The cyst was multilocular and was filled primarily with clear fluid. Additionally, some cystic cavities were hemorrhagic.
Microscopic examination of the cyst revealed a columnar endometrial lining with underlying endometrial stroma and siderophages . Based on the cyst’s characteristics, an abdominal endometrioma was diagnosed. The patient was hospitalized for 4 days and her postoperative recovery period was uneventful.