A 45-year-old male presented with a history of restricted movements in the right shoulder for 1 year. There was no history of trauma. Patient was a known case of Type 2 diabetes mellitus for 5 years and is on regular medication. On clinical examination, rotator cuff strength was under normal limits, his forward elevation was 100°, lateral elavation was 90°, external rotation – 45°, abduction external rotation 30°, and abduction internal rotation 40°. X-ray shoulder was normal as in . MRI shoulder was showing features of adhesive capsulitis. There was a history of intra-articular steroid therapy along with physiotherapy 6 months ago. (The patient was suffering with pain since more than a year not 6 months. There was a history of intra articular steroid 6 months ago which did not relieve the pain. Since the pain and stiffness are since more than a year and MUA has a potential complication of fracture, we gave the options to patient and he opted for nanoscopy capsule release). Patient had a brief period of pain relief after which there was a recurrence of pain and stiffness.
Position: Beach chair as in .
Anesthesia: Skin infiltration with 2% xylocaine and joint infiltration with 0.5% xylocard.
Arthroscopy: Bony landmarks of spine of scapula, acromion, clavicle, and coracoid were marked with a marker. Posterior skin infiltration was done around the posterolateral corner. After confirming the effect of local anesthesia, 17-gauge spinal needle was introduced into the joint, at a point 2 cm inferior and 1–2 cm medial from the acromion posterolateral corner. After confirming Intra-articular placement of the needle by injecting normal saline, joint was infiltrated with 10 mL of 0.5% xylocard and waited for 5 min for its action on capsule. A nitinol guide wire was passed through the needle. The needle was withdrawn securing the guide wire. Without making any skin incision, nanoscope was introduced over the guide wire as in and diagnostic arthroscopy was done. Rotator cuff and labrum found to be normal, long head of biceps was showing mild tenosynovitis.
Anterior skin infiltration was done around the lateral margin of tip of coracoid. After confirming the effect of local anesthesia, 17-gauge needle was inserted just inferolateral to the tip of coracoid process and confirmed its intra-articular position just above the subscapularis with nanoscope. Nitinol guidewire was passed through needle and needle withdrawn. Cannula with its dilator was inserted over the guide wire. The dilator was withdrawn and sharp trocar which was provided along with nanoscope is inserted into the cannula and multiple pokes at different levels were made in the rotator interval capsule under vision like pie-crusting of MCL. After removing the trocar, nano punch was inserted through cannula and making use of the pokes made earlier, capsule was cut as in . With nanopunch, middle glenohumeral ligament and anteroinferior capsulotomy were done. A 2.5 mm shaver was introduced and capsule debris was removed (yes, we injected steroid at the end of procedure).
A simple dressing was applied and a gentle manipulation was done.
Patient was discharged on the same day about 2 h after the surgery. A supervised physiotherapy was advised.
The pre-arthroscopy and post-arthroscopy radiographs are as in and . At 1 year follow-up, patient was painless and had full range of movements as in .