A 54-year-old female presented to Ear, Nose, and Throat Outpatient Department with complaints of left-sided anterior neck swelling for the past 10 years and recently developed dysphagia and foreign body sensation in throat for the past 3 months. There was no history of fever, significant weight loss, night sweats, change in bowel habits, sleep pattern disturbances, palpitations. She is a known case of hypertension under amlodipine tablets 5 mg once a day over last 5 years. There was no past history of TB, thyroid diseases, and no family history of TB and thyroid disorders. On physical examination, a single nodular, round-shaped nontender swelling of size 2×3.5 cm with regular margin, firm consistency was detected on the left anterior neck which moves with deglutition . The overlying skin appeared normal with no signs of inflammation. Lymph nodes were not palpable. Her vital parameters and systemic examination including chest, cardiovascular, and per abdominal examinations were normal.
Thyroid function test was normal. Ultrasonography (USG) of the neck revealed a single solid cystic lesion (16×20 mm) in left lobe with evidence of echogenic contents within cystic portion, however, no vascularity was noted (TIRADS-3). Bilateral thyroid lobe showed few variable sized isoechoic to hypoechoic solid lesions without peripheral or central vascularity.
USG-guided FNAC of the left thyroid lobe was performed which showed atypical thyroid follicular cells in monolayer sheet and papillary arrangements with scanty and viscous colloid. Each atypical cell showed nuclear crowding, overlapping, nuclear grooving and Hurthle cell changes. These findings increased suspiciousness of papillary carcinoma of thyroid, Bethesda category V. Since our institution does not have the protocol to do the core biopsy for thyroid lesion due to lack of expertise, we did USG-guided FNAC.
Taking into account the sudden onset symptoms of dysphagia and foreign body sensation in the throat, clinical finding of firm nodular thyroid swelling, US finding of solid cystic lesion, and FNAC findings suggestive of papillary carcinoma of thyroid, surgical treatment was undertaken. Total thyroidectomy with central compartment neck dissection was performed. Intraoperatively, enlarged thyroid gland (right lobe>left lobe) with multiple nodules on right lobe largest measuring 2×2 cm and on left lobe largest measuring 1.5×1 cm were noted. The final diagnosis was established through definitive histopathological examination. Histological evaluation revealed well-formed granuloma comprising of multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes and epitheloid histiocytes in the background of caseous necrosis. Zeihl–Neelsen stain showed that specimens from both thyroid tissue and lymph nodes were positive for acid-fast bacilli . The final diagnosis made was primary tubercular thyroiditis.
There were no postoperative complications. l-thyroxine, calcium, and vitamin D supplements were given. Mantoux test, sputum test, high-resolution computed tomography chest and interferon gamma radioassay were done. Mantoux test showed 20 mm induration which showed strong positive and interferon gamma radioassay was also positive, however, sputum test and high-resolution computed tomography chest were normal. Thus, patient was treated with antitubercular therapy (2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, and 4 months of isoniazid and rifampicin). At present, she has completely recovered.