A 58-year-old female with major depressive disorder, bronchiectasis, and osteoporosis and without a relevant cardiovascular history was admitted to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status after generalized tonic–clonic seizure at home. History obtained from the patient’s family revealed that the patient had been taking alprazolam for over 10 years, but she had discontinued the prescribed dose of this drug (3 mg two twice daily) 3 days prior to admission, after which her condition began to deteriorate. Additional history provided by family members indicated that the patient was taking additional alprazolam, acquired without a prescription (20–30 mg/day).
On initial examination at home, the patient was found to be tremulous and somnolent, having received 10 mg of IV diazepam and 500 mg of levetiracetam. Physical examination on admission at the ED revealed a decreased level of consciousness, a pulse rate of 127 b.p.m., temperature of 37.4°C, blood pressure of 153/87 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 27 breaths per minute with decreased oxygen saturation to 87% on room air. The remaining physical examination and thoracic radiographic examination revealed the presence of acute pulmonary oedema (rales and pulmonary interstitial oedema, respectively). Following initial treatment, including non-invasive pressure support ventilation and administration of intravenous boluses of furosemide (60 mg) and isosorbide dinitrate (2 mg), the patient showed rapid improvement with led dependency on oxygen supplementation therapy and resolution of tachycardia and arterial hypertension. Blood analyses performed in the ED were overall unremarkable, except for a slightly elevated troponin I concentration (5407 ng/L; normal ≤ 16 ng/L), creatinine kinase (CK) total (5607 U/L; normal: 10–149 U/L), and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) (1627 pg/L; normal ≤ 100 pg/mL). Additional laboratory analyses showed elevated acute phase reactants (mild leucocytosis and C-reactive protein of 7.7 mg/L). Investigation for cerebrovascular accident and infectious aetiologies was also unremarkable. Urine analyses with toxicology screen were positive for benzodiazepines. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, anterior ST-segment elevation with Q-waves, and T-wave inversion with prolonged QT interval. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed ballooning of the left ventricle (LV) apex with dyskinesia of the mid and apical segments (see , ). The overall LV ejection fraction was estimated of 15%. Given the suspicion of a ST-elevation myocardial infarction, an emergency coronary angiography was performed showing no abnormalities, and left ventriculography showed severe LV systolic dysfunction with akinesia of the mid and apical LV segments and hyperdynamic basal segments (see , and ). A presumptive diagnosis of Takotsubo syndrome secondary to benzodiazepine withdrawal was made. Moreover, a gradual return to baseline was noted with administration of diazepam 10 mg intravenously three times daily. No heart failure prognosis-modifying drugs were prescribed, given the patient’s low blood pressure profile (systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg) and her favourable evolution. Medication at discharge was only alprazolam (2 mg/day).
At discharge, after 7 days of hospitalization, the ECG showed normalization of the QT interval, the TTE showed improvement of LV function with complete resolution of the wall motion abnormalities (see , ), and the diagnosis of Takotsubo syndrome secondary to benzodiazepine withdrawal was confirmed. After 6 months, the patient remained asymptomatic with a normal biventricular function, and a beta-blocker was successfully introduced as part of a lifelong plan.