A 20-year-old woman with abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant presented to hospital. Vital signs were stable. Physical examination revealed tenderness of the right lower abdomen, but she showed no muscle defense or rebound tenderness. Laboratory data showed no inflammation or anemia. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a 56 × 35-mm cystic mass with no enhancement in the ileocecal area . MRI revealed a 56 × 43-mm, T1-hypointense, T2-hyperintense mass attached to the cecum . Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) or duplication cyst was suspected. After obtaining informed consent regarding the risk of rupture, and the possible need for an additional port or conversion to open surgery due to the risk of rupture, ileocecal resection with Japanese D3 lymph node dissection was performed as an SILS .
A 4-cm zig-zag incision was placed in the umbilicus. An EZ access (Hakko-medical, Tokyo, Japan) was then inserted, and two 5-mm ports and one 12-mm port were placed (one for the scope, two for the energy device). The tumor was seen as a round, whitish mass arising from the cecum . Mobilization was started from the right-side colon using a medial approach. The pedicle of the ileocecal artery and vein was grasped by an organ retractor (B. Braun, Tokyo, Japan) to maintain a good operative field, as previously reported . After the ileocecal artery and vein were transected, mobilization of the colon was completed by dissection of the lateral attachment. The lesion was removed from the body via the umbilicus. Functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed using a Signia purple 60 stapling system (Covidien, Minneapolis, MN). Operation time was 162 min and intraoperative blood loss was 10 ml.
Macroscopic examination showed a 56 × 45-mm elastic-hard, whitish, round mass arising from the cecal wall .
Microscopic examination revealed the cyst wall was lined with keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. No malignant findings were apparent .
The final diagnosis was epidermoid cyst of the cecum. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. As of 6 months postoperatively, no evidence of recurrence has been identified.