A previously healthy six-month-old girl who was born full-term following an uncomplicated pregnancy presented with persistent high fever and was found to have pyuria and bacteriuria. Prior to this, she had no significant medical history. No obvious gross malformations were observed on physical examination nor was any pertinent family history noted. Ultrasonography revealed multilocular cysts in the right kidney; of note, no abdominal abnormalities had been observed at her four-month medical examination.
Abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a multilocular cystic mass accompanied by septal wall formation pressing on the normal kidney parenchyma . The tumor had not directly infiltrated the renal pelvis and there was no coexistence of hydronephrosis. Renal dysplasia was ruled out due to the presence of adjacent normal kidney parenchyma. Because the cystic septa was thickened, cystic NB was deemed the most likely entity, preoperatively. One month later, right nephrectomy was performed. Unfortunately, the cyst wall ruptured during surgery. An intraoperative cytological evaluation by rapid Papanicolaou staining of peritoneal fluid confirmed three components of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial cells. The findings were interpreted on-site as NB .
Cytologically, the blastemal cells were dyshesive, exhibiting naked nuclei with scant to absent cytoplasm and were the most predominant cell type. The spindle-shaped stromal cells were arranged in fascicles, showing a fibroblast-like configuration. And epithelial cells formed tubular structures. Macroscopically, the resected cystic tumor measured 80 mm in maximum diameter involving the upper pole to middle portion of the right kidney and the cystic wall was predominantly thin. A portion of the cystic wall was ruptured by the surgical procedure and was associated with hemorrhage in the surrounding tissues. On the cut surface of the tumor, the cystic septum within the tumor had disappeared . Instead, hemorrhage and muddy, degenerative necrotic tumor tissue was found within the cystic space. Solid areas were observed within the cyst walls.
Histologically, the tumor was diagnosed as cystic NB (blastemal-predominant) displaying a triphasic pattern. The blastemal cells showed a solid growth pattern, whereas the epithelial cells showed tubular structures . The spindle-shaped stromal cells resembled embryonic mesenchyme, displaying differentiation into smooth muscles and fibroblasts . The cystic wall was lined by blastemal cells . Some solid areas were present within the cyst wall. There were no anaplastic cells or atypical mitoses. Degenerated hyperchromatic nuclei and apoptotic bodies were found in some areas. Immunohistochemically, the blastemal cells and epithelial cells were positive for WT1 (WT49, Leica, diluted 1:1), but the stromal cells were negative. The Ki-67 (MIB-1, BioGenex, diluted 1:30) labeling index of the tumor was as high as 90%, while the degenerated necrotic tumor cells showed decreased staining properties. Nephrogenic rest, a precursor lesion of NB, was not identified in the remaining renal parenchyma. The clinical stage classification of the Japanese Wilms Tumor Study (JWiTS) group was 3. The patient was treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy and tumor recurrence and metastasis have not been observed in the 8 months since surgery.