A 59-year-old male was admitted to Chongqing Shapingba District Chenjiaqiao hospital, Chongqing, China. He suffered the fractures of left femoral neck after falling to the ground . On July 16, 2017, the left total hip replacement was conducted and prosthetic hip in position was shown under X-ray . Cefazolin sodium (1 g IV q8h) was started for prophylactic administration. His indwelling urinary catheter was removed after 24 h. On the 8th day after surgery, however, the patient presented with left hip pain and clinical signs of infection, including fever (38.5 °C), redness and swelling around the surgical site , and he also reported local tenderness. His blood examination demonstrated the white blood cell (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) significantly increased during postoperative period, as shown in Fig. . Furthermore, the screening tests for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections were non-reactive, and no abnormality in liver or renal function tests was observed. His T-lymphocyte subsets and gamma-globulin analysis were within normal range.
On July 25, 2017, approximately 400-ml light-yellow, odorless subcutaneous fluid was punctured at surgical site, and forwarded to the microbiological laboratory for bacterial smear and culture. A large amount of polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) were detected but no microorganism on gram-staining smear. Moreover, there was a negative growth on the blood and chocolate agar plates. The repeated blood cultures using the BacT/ALERT 3D blood culture microbial detection system (bioMérieux SA, Marcy l’Étoile, France) were negative. The post-surgical infection was still under suspicion, and the wound was cleaned with iodophor and drainage gauze was placed. Cefepime (2 g IV q12h) was administrated. However, empiric therapy was still ineffective, the prosthetic hip infection deteriorated, fever persisted, and on July 26, the debridement of left prosthetic hip was performed and the seroma, superficial fascia, deep fascia, deep tissue, as well as subcutaneous fluid collected during the surgery were sent for culture on blood and chocolate agar plates. Unexpectedly, tiny colonies grew after 48 h, and they grew to approximately 0.5 mm colonies in diameter after 7-day incubation , and were identified as M. hominis by the bioMérieux® SA Mycoplasma IST2 kit (bioMérieux, France). The identification was also confirmed with 16S rRNA sequencing.
In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) revealed that the organism was susceptible to doxycycline, clindamycin and levofloxacin, but resistant to azithromycin by the bioMérieux® SA Mycoplasma IST2 kit (Biomerieux, France). Combination therapy with clindamycin hydrochloride (0.6 g IV q12h) and moxifloxacin (400 mg IV QD) was initiated, as shown in Fig. . The patient defervesced within 3 days. His infection site recovered gradually . Repeated X-ray scans before discharge showed marked improvement of his prosthetic hip. The patient was discharged on August 23, without further complications. No recurrence of symptoms and signs was reported during three-month outpatient follow-up.
After 48 h of incubation on blood agar at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere, pinpoint-sized, non-hemolytic, and transparent colonies were found on Columbia blood agar plate. The colonies were difficult to emulsify in saline water during the preparation of suspension solution for identification and AST. Both Gram stain and Wright-Giemsa mixed stain of the isolates demonstrated no bacterial morphology under × 1000 magnification, and only granular aggregates were detected. Fried-egg-type colonies of M. hominis growed on solid media (Zhongqisheng Hebei Bio-tech Co., Ltd.) 5 days after subculture .