A 7-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with decreased consciousness. Ten days prior to admission, when the patient was playing at a public restroom, she lost her balance and fell over with her head hit the floor that was made of cement. She had a skin laceration at her forehead; she was brought to a nearby primary healthcare facility, underwent wound suturing, and discharged with uneventful symptoms. Five days afterwards, she had a fever and purulent discharge from the wound; she was brought to the local hospital, underwent wound cleansing, and then discharged home. One day prior to admission, the patient looked drowsy and difficult to be awakened, accompanied with stiffness of her jaw; she was brought to another hospital. She received anti-seizure medication intravenously and then referred to our hospital.
The patient had never received any vaccination since birth because the midwife was uncertain about administering vaccinations to low-birth-body-weight babies. Another issue was that due to some religious view, her family also rejected any vaccination for her. At admission, her vital signs were within normal limits. There was a purulent wound at her left frontal scalp, 2 × 1.5 × 0.5 cm in size, and on palpation, there was bone discontinuity; from neurological examination, she exhibited nuchal rigidity, trismus > 1 fingerbreadth, and motoric spasticity. Other tetanus signs such as spontaneous spasm, provoked spasm, board-like abdomen, and opisthotonos were absent. There was no autonomic dysfunction; laboratory results were mainly unremarkable, except for thrombocytosis (718 × 109 cells/L). Skull x-ray demonstrates a double counter appearance at her left frontal scalp . Head CT demonstrates a depressed skull fracture .
The patient was diagnosed with an open depressed skull fracture and tetanus grade I based on clinical signs and symptoms, with the first sign being lockjaw followed by decrease of consciousness. For the tetanus treatment, the patient was given human tetanus immunoglobulin (HTIG) 3000 IU, ampicillin sulbactam 4 × 1 g IV, metronidazole 3 × 200 mg IV, and diazepam 4 × 2 mg IV. For the depressed skull fracture, she underwent craniectomy and debridement. The patient underwent general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation with a 5ID cuffed PVC endotracheal tube. The patient was premedicated with 60 μg of fentanyl, while the induction was performed with 50 mg of propofol and 20 mg of rocuronium. Throughout the operation, the patient was ventilated with O2 plus N2O (50:50) and 2% sevoflurane. The “lockjaw” trismus made intubating attempt to the patient challenging; hence, an extra dose of rocuronium (1 mg/kgBW) was given.
Intraoperatively, we found a fragmented interlocking fracture, with a dimension of 3 × 2 cm. Then, craniectomy was performed with boundaries of healthy bone. The dura mater was yellowish, intact, and not tense. The bone defect was not reconstructed, but rather the skin closed . Pus was then sampled from the fracture location and sent for staining examination and culture. However, both examinations showed no microorganism growth. Postoperatively, the patient was sent to the pediatric intensive care unit for 3 days with mechanical ventilation and then transferred to the ward. After 3 weeks post-operative, the patient showed remarkable clinical recovery. After being discharged from the hospital, the patient was recommended to get the tetanus toxoid vaccine and other immunizations in primary health care.