A 42-year-old male presented with complaints of low back pain for the past 4years and inability to walk for the past 3 years. He was apparently normal 4years back when he developed pain over the lower back which was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, intermittent in nature, radiating to bilateral lower limbs, aggravated on any movement of both lower limbs or turning sideways, decreased on restand medications. History of rest pain was present but no history of night cries or diurnal variations. He was mobilizing with walker during the first few years of pain but he developed complete inability to walk even with support for the past 1 year. There was no history of fever or trauma, loss of weight, or appetite. There was no history of loss of sensations in the upper or lower limbs and bowel or bladder incontinence. He also gave a history of intermittent diffuse pain in the chest and left elbow for the past 3years which was not progressive. Treatment history included medications for pain for the past 4years. There was no significant family history. General examination and systemic examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdomen showed no significant findings. There was diffuse tenderness over the dorsolumbar spine from D6-L4. Movements of both hips were severely painful with tenderness over the proximal femur. Neurological examination of the upper limbs was normal. Motor power of muscles acting on the hip and knee could not be assessed due to severe pain, but muscles acting on the ankle and foot were normal. There was no sensory blunting and perianal sensations were normal with normal anal sphincter contraction. Babinski response was normal. The findings suggested that there was no cord or cauda equina compression but the back and bilateral hips pain was causing a pain inhibition of the muscles acting on the hip and knee. On examination of the left elbow, swelling and tenderness were present over the proximal third ulna. Movements of the wrist and forearm were full but associated with mild pain. All routine blood investigations were done. X-rays of the spine showed scalloping of the end plates, X-ray of the pelvis showed bilateral Looser’s zone in the proximal femurs , andX-ray of the left elbow showed an old proximal 1/3 ulna fracture nonunion . He was found to have elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase (575 U/L) and low levels of phosphorus (1.1mg/dl) and Vitamin D 25OH (16.3ng/ml). 24 h urine phosphorus excretion was also found to be low (351mg/day). Hypophosphatemia was further evaluated by screening for FGF23 which was positive (>300RU/ml). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine showed compressed (biconcave) lumbar and dorsal vertebral bodies with multiple loose zones scattered along the ribs and spinous processes of dorsal vertebrae. Screening of hips and pelvis showed looser zones in the bilateral proximal femur, both iliac wings, sacroiliac joints, and pubic rami. Gallium DOTANOC scan done, as advised by the endocrinologist, suggested a well-defined sclerotic lesion with focal abnormal increased 68Ga uptake in the greater trochanteric region of the right proximal femur posteriorly - suggesting a possibility of oncogenic osteomalacia . Endocrinologist opinion was sought, and the patient was started on oral phosphorus supplements. Serial serum phosphorus levels showed improvement (1.1–2.0–3.1 mg/dl),but the patient’s symptoms did not improve. A computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy of the right proximal femur sclerotic lesion was done and was reported as spindle cell neoplasm consistent with PMT. Phosphaturic tumor was localized to be in the posterior aspect of the right greater trochanter. The intraoperatively patient was positioned in the left lateral position to facilitate access to the posterior aspect of the greater trochanter. An incision was made over the greater trochanter. Hip was initially rotated to facilitate the approach. A 2 cm × 1 cm oval cortical window was made in this region sparing the tip. The tumor was identified as a hard mass in the subcortical surface. The hard mass was burred and the cavity was packed with cement . Resected intraoperative specimen sent for histopathology showed features consistent with a PMT. Following surgery, back pain increased probably due to the positioning of the patient for spinal and epidural anesthesia. The patient was giventhoracolumbosacral orthoses, and oral phosphate supplements were continued. Pain over the back gradually improved over a period of 2–3 weeks. Patient was mobilized with spinal orthoses and walker support 3 weeks following surgery - the 1sttime the patient had walked after 3 years! He is now walking up to a 100 m with walker support. Oral phosphorous supplementation was gradually reduced with improving and sustained levels of serum phosphorus.