A 70-year-old male patient presented in January 2019 to the emergency department with diminished consciousness and disorientation, without any other relevant symptoms.
Neurological symptoms were first reported in May 2017 and asymmetric Parkinson’s disease diagnosed in June 2018 for which he received levodopa.
The patient had a medical history of high blood pressure, which was treated with diuretics. The patient denied use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs. He also had diabetes mellitus type 2 treated with metformin, without any other cardiovascular risk factors. He underwent a gastrectomy and Billroth II reconstruction in March 1993 for a gastric ulcer.
His oncological history started in 1993 when he was diagnosed with a metastatic midgut NET confirmed by a hepatic biopsy, in which the anatomic pathology reported a well-differentiated tumor with a Ki-67 expression of 1.26%, graded as a G1 tumor , and without hepatic enzyme alterations. He subsequently underwent two hepatic procedures: a single metastasis resection from the right hepatic lobe in July 1993 and a right hepatectomy was performed in 2002 to remove two hepatic metastases. There were no changes to laboratory data or computed tomography (CT) scans after both procedures.
In November 2003, the patient started first-line chemotherapy with streptozotocin and doxorubicin after a new hepatic lesion appeared. In 2004, the patient showed hepatic progression and began treatment with the biological agent octreotide. He achieved stable disease lasting until 2010, when a CT scan showed a new hepatic lesion in the surgical bed, three sub-centimeter hepatic lesions, and a new adenopathy in the hepatic hilum. The treatment was discontinued. Then the patient participated in the RAMSETE clinical trial evaluating the efficacy of everolimus at 10 mg daily in non-functioning extrapancreatic NETs, and was randomized to the active treatment arm. The lesions showed tumor shrinkage with a total reduction of 23%, corresponding to stable disease per RECIST v1.1. The only side effects were low platelet counts and grade 1 pneumonitis (CTCAE v5.0). After 5 years with stable disease, a CT scan showed progressive disease in July 2015, and he changed to a third biological treatment, lanreotide at 120 mg monthly, again achieving stable disease as the best response.
In June 2017, he presented to the emergency department with cholangitis due to extrinsic compression of the bile duct from hepatic lesions, and a choledochal stent was inserted by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. The CT scan showed progressive disease in the liver. A somatostatin receptor scintigraphy revealed liver, hepatic hilum and peritoneal uptake, and he started peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) with 177Lu-Dotatate for three sessions and 30 mg octreotide LAR monthly, achieving partial response as the best response. One year later in July 2018, the patient returned to the emergency room with a new episode of cholangitis. Hepatic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed extensive progression in the surgical bed, invading the biliary stent and causing partial obstruction. A new endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed to unblock the bile duct and antibiotic treatment was administered. At discharge, the patient continued on octreotide LAR, and had an ongoing best response of stable disease at the time of presentation to the emergency department in January 2019.
It should be noted that in May 2017, the patient began to complain of memory loss and distal tremor, but it was not until June 2018 that he was diagnosed with asymmetric Parkinson’s disease by a neurologist. At this time, the CT scan showed heterogeneous liver with signs of portal hypertension. The patient began treatment with levodopa for Parkinson’s disease, without a significant clinical response.
There was no relevant family history.
On physical examination, he presented with flapping, jaundice, facial amimia, and cogwheel rigidity in both arms. There were no signs of Kayser-Fleischer rings. All other neurological examinations were normal.
Blood tests showed low platelet count, low albumin and evidence of cholestasis, with no other relevant alterations. Urine sediment and blood culture were negative, ruling out an infectious cause. The patient presented with Child-Pugh B and MELD 8 at admission. Ceruloplasmin was within normal ranges. There were no findings of hypovitaminosis, dyselectrolytemia, hypothyroidism, hepatitis virus serologies, or autoimmunity tests.
A head CT scan performed with intravenous contrast material revealed no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage, mass, or acute territorial infarct. However, an abdominal CT scan and brain MRI shed light on our case. The CT scan showed signs of portal hypertension, describing splenomegaly and splenic dilatation with collateral circulation, as well as an intrahepatic portosystemic shunt without biliary tract obstruction . Surprisingly, brain MRI showed symmetric basal ganglia hyperintensity in a T1 alteration and asymmetric extension to cerebral peduncles, compatible with deposits of paramagnetic substances related to the intrahepatic shunt described in the previous CT scan. A video-electroencephalography was performed and showed neuronal dysfunction of metabolic-toxic origin. To complete our analysis, the patient underwent a gastroduodenoscopy, which showed grade 3 esophageal varices and the liver MRI revealed multiple irregular metastases .