A 41-year-old Japanese woman presented with a red granulation-like tumor on top of the nipple of the left breast (Figure a). The mass was soft and fragile and bled easily. The patient had noticed the mass 3 months prior to her visit, and during that interval the mass had increased in size and the patient had observed a nipple discharge. Mammography revealed a well-defined oval-shaped nodule with uniform density and no microcalcification (Figure a). Sonography revealed an oval, well-demarcated hypoechoic solid mass under the nipple of the left breast (Figure b). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that the mass under the nipple was continuous with the top of the nipple, showing adenoma of the nipple projecting out of the nipple (Figure c). There was no evidence of axillary lymphadenopathy. Nipple discharge showed papillary clusters of epithelial cells. A core needle biopsy revealed a papillary proliferation of glandular structures suggestive of a benign adenomatous process. The patient received local curative excision of the lesion through a periareolar incision under local anesthesia. The mass was enucleated retrograde from the nipple and resected at a latex duct opening on top of the nipple, similar to a microdochectomy (Figure b). Curative resection without excision of the nipple was possible, and the nipple was cosmetically preserved (Figure c,d).
The histological evaluation revealed a papillary tumor composed of relatively large epithelial cells with clear nuclei and a nuclear fission image, but there was little increase in nuclear chromatin. The tumor cells were in two layers with some apocrine metaplasia (Figure ). Myoepithelial cell staining also revealed myoepithelial cells arranged in an orderly manner. The papillary tumor was accompanied by moderate fibrosis, and a pseudoinfiltrative pattern was observed. Neither malignancy of the proliferative cells nor invasion was observed. These findings were compatible with adenoma of the nipple. Follow-up of the patient remained uneventful for 14 months.