We had a 19-year-old woman admitted to our hospital because she complained of epigastric pain for nearly 2 years, and vomiting and fatigue for 3 months, with a weight loss of 10 kg over the last 8 months. At one time, the patient was considered to have chronic gastritis at the local hospital in her hometown. ibuprofen and omeprazole therapy strategy for 3 months was performed, although there was no relief of gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient was a student with an unremarkable history.
There is no family history of gastrointestinal polyposis in the patient. Physical examination findings included anemia, upper abdominal tenderness (+), and loss of body weight (body weight: 40 kg). In addition, positive cardiac, pulmonary, and limb findings were found. Laboratory results revealed a hemoglobin level of 90 g/L. The biochemistry of the blood was potassium 2.66 mmol/L, sodium 130.8 mmol/L, chlorine 75.4 mmol/L, and albumin 31.5 g/L, whereas the rest of the blood biochemistry results were normal. Upper endoscopy demonstrated numerous finger-like polyps and nodular lesions that aggregated in the antrum, duodenal bulb, and extension of the gastric body into the cardia . Upper gastrointestinal barium contrast roentgenography (UGBCR) demonstrated that gastric mucosal destruction and an enormous filling defect were located in the stomach . Diffuse benign inflammatory gastric polyps also had significantly reduced gastric cavity volume. These polyps resulted in a subtotal gastric outlet obstruction. A single balloon enteroscopy was performed, and two were found in the ileocecal area and descending colon. Nodular polyps were 0.5–1 cm in size, with a mean of 0.5 cm. To obtain more histopathologic information, the patient, her siblings, and relatives were screened for relevant oncogenes and gastrointestinal tumor biomarkers. Thus, no clear mutations in related genes or abnormal indicators were identified. Furthermore, gastroscopy findings from the patient's parents and brother did not reveal any obvious abnormalities.
Upon review of all clinical findings, we initially diagnosed this patient as having diffuse gastric polyps with pyloric obstruction, moderate anemia, hypoproteinemia, and an electrolyte imbalance. We then placed the jejunal nutrition tube under the endoscope to the inferior duodenum and performed extensive enteral and parenteral nutrition therapy over the course of 1 month. After 1 month, a total gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y anastomosis were performed. At the time of surgery, the stomach was markedly dilated and filled with polyps . There was a slight dilatation of the descending portion of the duodenum. In addition, no obvious masses were affected in the small bowel and colorectum. On histopathologic examination, the gastric cavity was found to be covered with inflammatory villous and papillary polyps with a total extent of 2.3 cm × 1.6 cm. A coral plexiform change was observed in the polyps, with a protrusion length ranging from 1 to 6 cm and a diameter ranging from 1.3 to 2.0 cm.
The lesions of the polyps do not invade the muscularis muscle. There was still a clear boundary between the mucosal layer and the muscularis layer; in addition, infiltration of eosinophils into the local portion of the polyp was observed. On lateral examination, 26 lymph nodes next to the stomach showed reactive hyperplasia. In addition, microscopic findings revealed papillary villous inflammation polyp . At 12-month postoperative follow-up, the patient's nutritional status had significantly improved with an increase in weight of up to 10 kg.