A 13-year-old boy visited our hospital with persistent epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, loss of appetite, and nausea, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed ulcers extending from the gastric antrum to the duodenum and marked mucosal eosinophilic infiltration (288 /high-power field [HPF]). Helicobacter pylori was not detected in the mucosal tissue or stool, and serum Helicobacter pylori-specific IgG antibody testing showed negative results. The patient had no history of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) intake. He had comorbidities, including atopic dermatitis and allergic rhinitis, but had no family history of atopic diseases. At the time of the hospital visit, atopic dermatitis and allergic rhinitis were mild and well-controlled with topical and nasal steroids. His abdominal symptoms and duodenal ulcer improved with a six-food elimination therapy (eggs, milk, wheat, soybeans, seafood, and nuts), LTRA (montelukast), proton pump inhibitors (PPI, esomeprazole), and intravenous systemic steroids (prednisolone: 1.5 mg/kg/day, 60 mg/day). Based on the Japanese clinical practice guidelines for eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease in infants and adults, LTRA was administered orally. He developed steroid-induced glaucoma during systemic steroid administration. Oral steroids were thereafter tapered off for 2 months, and the decrease in mucosal eosinophilia and shrinkage of ulcers were confirmed by gastroscopy. A food challenge test was carried out by adding one of the six types of food, which was previously eliminated, every week (see Additional file : Fig. S1). As a result, on the 4th day after starting an egg diet, a clear recurrence of epigastralgia was observed, and the abdominal symptoms disappeared after the egg-free diet was resumed. For confirmation, the cancellation of egg elimination from the diet as described above was performed twice, but similar results were obtained. On the other hand, other foods have been successfully reintroduced. We did not perform additional gastroscopies and histopathological examinations and confirmed eggs as one of the possible causative allergens based on the abdominal symptoms. The lymphocyte stimulation test (LST) was performed at an external facility (Bio Medical Laboratories, Saitama, Japan) to quantify the extent of lymphocyte proliferation by culturing the whole blood of the patient with chicken egg, and the result was positive (2.5 times compared with no stimulation, reference value: < 1.8 times). The patient continued on an egg-free diet, PPI, and LTRA, and his gastrointestinal symptoms disappeared and remained in remission without recurrence for 3 months.
However, at the age of 15 years, he was referred to our hospital because he had upper abdominal pain again. At the time of consultation, epigastric and right upper quadrant tenderness was observed without muscle defense or rebound tenderness. He presented with itchy erythema, lichenification, and desquamation of the forehead, cheeks, scalp, neck, cubital fossa, and popliteal fossa, and was diagnosed with eczema. He had no history of NSAID intake at this time. Blood analysis showed normal white blood cell count (6010/µL), eosinophilia (1747/μL), thrombocytosis (43.2 × 104/μL), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (28 mm/h), and mild anemia (hemoglobin 10.5 g/dL). Decreased serum iron (11 μg/dL) and ferritin (13.9 ng/mL) levels and elevated total iron-binding capacity (440 μg/dL), suggestive of iron deficiency. No abnormal blood cell morphologies or atypical cells were observed in the peripheral blood. No coagulopathy, hypoproteinemia, hepatic dysfunction, renal hypofunction, or electrolyte abnormalities were observed. High serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (1.31 mg/dL), total immunoglobulin E (IgE) (768 IU/mL), and thymus and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC) (1030 pg/mL) were observed. Stool culture, parasite tests, and serum autoantibody were negative. No hypocomplementemia or hyperglobulinemia was observed. Bone marrow biopsy was not performed; therefore, malignancies such as myeloproliferative disease, chronic eosinophilic leukemia, and acute leukemia could not be completely ruled out. Computed tomography revealed no intestinal wall thickening or neoplastic lesions. Helicobacter pylori antigen was not detected in stool. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a well-demarcated punch-like duodenal ulcer with surrounding edematous thickening. Pathological findings of a mucosal biopsy of the ulcer site showed marked eosinophilic infiltration in the mucosal tissue centered on the lamina propria (96/HPF) with no evidence of inflammatory bowel disease, malignant lymphoma, or granulomatous vasculitis.
Thereafter, oral prednisolone (0.7 mg/kg/day, 30 mg/day) was started while the egg-free diet, PPI, and LTRA were continued since the initial diagnosis of the ulcer. However, epigastralgia and feeding difficulties persisted even after treatment initiation, making it difficult to reduce the oral steroid dose. Moreover, despite the daily use of potent-class topical steroids for exacerbated atopic dermatitis, no improvement in the dermatitis was observed for months. The systemic Eczema Area and Severity Index [EASI] and head-neck EASI scores were 15.1 and 3.2, respectively. Dupilumab was initiated because strong topical steroids were not effective and the eruptions accompanied by strong inflammation remained over a wide area; treatment with dupilumab was initiated with patient and parental consent (600 mg initially and 300 mg every 2 weeks thereafter).
Approximately 3 months after starting dupilumab, the epigastralgia subsided and the oral prednisolone dose was reduced to 15 mg/day. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed 5 months after starting dupilumab showed the disappearance of the duodenal ulcer and a decreased eosinophil count in the mucosa (22/HPF) . The prednisolone dose was tapered and discontinued after 6 months of dupilumab administration. During this period, no recurrence of abdominal symptoms was observed, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed 2 months after prednisolone discontinuation showed healing of the duodenal ulcer and eosinophil infiltration within the normal range (13/HPF). Additionally, the severity of atopic dermatitis also improved to a systemic EASI score of 1.6 and a head-neck EASI score of 0.2. No recurrence of abdominal symptoms was observed after stopping the egg-free diet for 2 weeks, and the egg-free diet was discontinued thereafter. Blood eosinophil counts, total IgE levels, and TARC levels remained elevated even after oral prednisolone initiation but decreased after dupilumab initiation . The duodenal ulcer remained recurrence-free for at least 6 months. Re-examination for egg-specific LST against chicken eggs was negative at 16 months after starting dupilumab. We measured serum levels of IL-5, IL-13, and eotaxin-3 using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), and these levels also did not decrease even after oral prednisolone initiation but declined after dupilumab initiation. Although the blood eosinophil count increased again after discontinuation of prednisolone, serum levels of IL-5 and eotaxin-3 remained within normal ranges. We also examined changes in fecal calprotectin levels over time; however, the levels increased after starting dupilumab administration, with no significant changes associated with the improvement in clinical symptoms.