An 18-year-old nulliparous woman (II:3) was referred to the Endocrinology Outpatient Clinic of the 1st Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Medical University of Warsaw, due to secondary amenorrhea. The patient’s most recent menstrual period had occurred 6 months prior. On admission, the patient was in a generally good condition, without any other remarkable symptoms, and with BMI 18.5 kg/m2 (174 cm tall and 56 kg weight), and Tanner stage V (breast and pubic hair). Menarche occurred at 13y. Previously to the amenorrhea, the patient had reported irregular menstrual cycles. Upon physical examination, acne and abnormal eyelid development with ptosis and microphthalmia (a corneal diameter of less than 10 mm and an antero-posterior diameter of the globe of less than 20 mm), were observed. Her past medical history was remarkable for several ophthalmic defects that had required surgical interventions. At 1 year old, the patient had received frontalis suspension surgery using an autogenous graft (fascia lata) to treat blepharoptosis and poor levator muscle function. A year later, this was followed by lateral canthopexy. Finally, in 2015, II:3 underwent canthoplasty to correct the epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus; however, BPES syndrome was not suspected at that time, despite the patient reporting a similar phenotype (concerning ophthalmic alternations, Fig. ) occurring in her father (I:1, Fig. ), sister (II:1) and half-sister (II:4).
Hormonal diagnosis was performed. The progesterone withdrawal test was positive. Serum hormone levels were measured on the 3rd day of the menstrual cycle. Due to low estradiol levels, hormonal replacement therapy was introduced (estradiol 2 mg daily between the 5th and 26th days of the menstrual cycle, and dydrogesterone 10 mg daily between the 15th and 26th days). Blood samples and laboratory tests were performed every 3 months. The results of the blood tests are presented in Table . Initially, elevated levels of FSH (21.9 [IU/L]), normal LH and decreased levels of estradiol (5.3 [pg/ml]) were detected. During the follow-up period these levels tended to normalize; however Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) concentrations decreased to below the critical threshold (0.52 ng/ml). These data are presented in Table .
Adrenal hormones were also measured during endocrine investigation. Elevated 17-OHP levels were observed. To exclude primary the authors performed conventional-dose short test with 250 μg of synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone (Synacthen test) . This test revealed appropriate adrenal function and the patient was scheduled for a follow-up observation.
The patient’s pelvic ultrasound results remained unremarkable (normal uterus and ovaries). The antral follicle count (AFC) was in the normal range, with 5 follicles in the right ovary and 9 in the left.
The other three family members (I:1, II:1 and II:4) with suspected BPES were also examined. In all of them signs of blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus were identified. No remarkable medical history was obtained. II:1 (34y) at the age of 14 underwent menarche and up to that age had had regular menses; while II:4 (14y) had not yet reached menarche. In this latter case, due to the suspected genetic background of those anomalies and a phenotype suggesting BPES, the patient was referred to a geneticist.