A 10-year-old male presented to the Human Motor Control Section at the National Institutes of Health with a complaint of “shaking of his hands,” exaggerated startle, low muscle tone, and lack of coordination. By observation, he was noted to have abnormal hand movements early in his life. These were described as “jerky” movements, said by his parents to be present when handling small toys and other actions around age 3. With more motoric activities these movements became more bothersome, and at the time of presentation in middle childhood, writing was particularly difficult. He noted some truncal movements that both he and his parents described as “jerky.” Movements were worse with stress or when he was cold. Parents reported that he was startled easily and extensively. He was previously noted to have weak core muscles by a physical therapist, as well as intermittent toe walking that was more prevalent at a younger age. He was startled by bodily touch, loud sounds, and minor stimuli. Parents reported difficulty standing on one foot, inability to hop, to do jumping jacks easily, or walk down a flight of stairs with alternate feet.
The patient was the product of a full-term and uncomplicated pregnancy, normal labor and delivery (normal Apgar scores), and was discharged home without complications. He had a history of delay in developmental milestones, walking at age 18 months, and speech starting at 3 years of age. Fine motor and social milestones were described as normal.
Prior history also revealed middle ear infections, placement of ET tubes, history of pneumonia × 2, and a history of childhood cyclical vomiting. These conditions subsequently resolved. He has 3 siblings who are in good health, as are his parents. The family has a history of migraine (mother), cystic fibrosis carrier (mother), and Parkinson’s Disease (great grandfather).
A general review of systems was unremarkable. Neurologic examination disclosed an awake, oriented, and appropriate appearing 10-year-old, well-nourished, slightly asthenic male with slight head flexed posture. Cranial nerve evaluation was unremarkable with normal ocular motility and no nystagmus. Full range of head and neck motions was present. Motor examination revealed diminished muscle bulk throughout but without weakness. Muscle tone was normal. He was on no medications at the time of evaluation. Previous diagnostic studies revealed normal brain MRI and normal EEG (awake). Laboratory studies were unremarkable.
Clinically, both postural and kinetic tremors were present. Myoclonic jerks in the eyelids, trunk, and bilateral upper extremities were present at rest and with posture (see ). Movements were also present in response to any stimulus, including touching the patient, moderately loud sounds, and eliciting deep tendon reflexes. Finger tapping and handwriting were interrupted by myoclonus. Tandem gait revealed impairment within the first few steps, which did not subsequently correct or improve (see ). Abnormal postures indicative of dystonia were not present. Sensory examination was normal to all modalities. No pathologic reflexes were elicited. This phenomenology was consistent with tremor and myoclonus, thought possibly to be cortical myoclonus and cortical tremor.