Abdominal pain, diarrhea and fatigue
A 50-year-old female with a long-standing history of uncontrolled type 1 DM, presented with fatigue and nausea for a day to a local hospital, where a basic workup was unrevealing, and she was discharged on symptomatic management. Her symptoms progressed and she began experiencing concomitant abdominal pain and diarrhea. Following this, she presented to our emergency room, with the above symptoms. Her abdominal pain was 6/10 in severity, cramping in nature that was relieved on lying down and predominantly on the left half. She did not have pruritus, jaundice, night sweats, fever, easy bruising, or bleeding. A review of systems was negative for headaches, chest discomfort, chest pain, shortness of breath, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. In an initial interview, she mentioned that she was admitted 6 mo ago with similar symptoms and at that time her appendix was removed. The prior hospital course was complicated by elevated liver function tests according to the patient. A list of medications at the time of admission included amlodipine, aspirin (low dose-81mg)), gabapentin, insulin glargine, and lispro (was not taking it for 2 days prior to presentation), metoprolol succinate, oxycodone, and pravastatin (taking a statin for several years, low dose).
Type 1 DM complicated by peripheral neuropathy, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic gastroparesis, coronary artery disease, deep vein thrombosis, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Personal history: Currently not working, Nonsmoker, never smoked, no vaping used, denied alcohol intake, denied recreational drug use.
Family history: Type 1 diabetes in aunt; Type 2 diabetes in both parents; Fatty liver disease in both parents and aunt.
The patient was obese, anicteric not in acute distress. She was afebrile; her pulse was 80 beats per minute, blood pressure 147/94 mmHg, BMI 31.39 kg/m², oxygen saturation 97% on room air. There was no elevation of jugular venous pressure. Examination of the heart and lungs was unremarkable. The abdomen was non-distended and soft, with normal bowel sounds. She had mild tenderness on palpation in the left lower quadrant with no rebound or guarding. Murphy's sign was absent. The liver was palpable 4 cm below the costal margin, with a measured span of 13 cm at the midclavicular line. The edge of the liver was smooth. The spleen was not palpable, and there was no evidence of ascites. There were no stigmata of chronic liver disease either including vesicular lesions, palmar erythema, pedal edema, or spider angiomata. The results of the neurologic examination, including mental status, were normal.
A workup for acute abdomen was initiated. Initial labs showed blood glucose: 610 mg/dL, AG: 13 U/L, CO2:23 ppm, pH: 7.35, and 1+ ketones in the urine. Diabetic ketoacidosis protocol ensued with insulin drip and IV fluids and frequent fingerstick glucose checks.
Hospital laboratory workup showed elevated liver enzymes viz. aspartate aminotransferase:1460 U/L, alanine aminotransferase: 682 U/L, alkaline phosphatase: 569 U/L, elevated LDH: 823 U/L, GGT:436 U/L total bilirubin 0.2 mg per deciliter, total protein 6.4 mg per deciliter, and albumin 3.7 g per deciliter. Levels of sodium were 135 mmol per liter, potassium 4.7 mmol per liter, chloride 103 mmol per liter, bicarbonate 20.9 mmol per liter, blood urea nitrogen 25 mg per deciliter, creatinine 0.85 mg per deciliter, and glucose 225 mg per deciliter. Amylase and lipase levels were normal. The white-cell count was 3900 per cubic millimeter, with an unremarkable differential count; hematocrit: 38.5%, hemoglobin: 10.9; and platelet count 221,000 per cubic millimeter. Levels of vitamin B12 and folic acid were normal. The international normalized ratio was 1.
Serum iron level was 76 µg per deciliter, total iron-binding capacity 384 μg per deciliter, ferritin 165 μg per liter, and thyroid stimulation hormone 0.71 μIU per liter. Her total cholesterol level was 122 mg per deciliter, triglycerides 104 mg per deciliter, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 49 mg per deciliter, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 52 mg per deciliter. The glycated hemoglobin level was 11.4%. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 34 mm per hour. Serologic tests for viral hepatitis were negative for hepatitis B surface antibody, negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and core antibody, negative for hepatitis C antibody, negative for cytomegalovirus IgM+IgG antibody, negative for herpes simplex virus PCR. Tests for antimitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth-muscle antibody, and antinuclear antibody screen were negative. The serum ceruloplasmin and urinary copper levels were normal, as were the results of an ophthalmologic examination. The level of alpha1-antitrypsin was also normal. Salicylates, Tylenol levels, and a urine toxicology screen were all negative.
CT abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast showed diffuse colonic wall thickening from previous involving the hepatic flexure, transverse colon, splenic flexure, and descending colon, suggestive of colitis. There was no pneumatosis or bowel obstruction or free air under the diaphragm. No focal hepatic lesions were seen either. There were post-cholecystectomy changes causing mild intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ductal dilation without significant interval change. No obstructing calculus or lesions were visualized in the hepatobiliary system. The size, shape, and morphology of the liver, spleen, and pancreas were normal.
Doppler ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen showed a surgically absent gallbladder. The common bile duct measured 10 mm. There was mild central intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation, likely cholecystectomy related with nil fatty infiltration or vascular abnormalities, and normal echogenicity. An echocardiogram of the heart showed regular biventricular size with an ejection fraction of 65-70%.
Further, an MRCP showed mild intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ductal dilation without evidence of choledocholithiasis. There were no focal hepatic lesions. No diffuse parenchymal signal abnormality.
During the course of the hospital, it was noticed that initial rise in transaminases on admission, there was a sharp drop without any specific intervention. Strict glucose control ensued and hepatotoxic medications were held.
By the third day, transaminases dropped to the mid 300-400 range .
Due to the above negative results, a liver biopsy was pursued to clinch the diagnosis.
Liver biopsy showed a subset of hepatocytes, slightly enlarged with PAS-positive glycogen, suggestive of mild glycogenic hepatopathy. No significant glycogenated nuclei were seen - portal tracts with minimal inflammation composed of mononuclear cells, neutrophils, eosinophils with occasional ceroid-laden macrophages. A minority of bile ducts show mild epithelial injury. Bile ducts were present with focal mild bile ductular reaction (CK7 immunostain examined). No steatosis, cholestasis, hepatocyte ballooning degeneration, acidophil bodies, congestion, or confluent necrosis were identified. Trichrome stain showed no increased fibrosis. PAS/D stain is negative for intracytoplasmic globules. Iron stain is negative for iron deposition. A Gomori methenamine silver stain was negative for fungal organisms. Immunohistochemistry for CMV, HSV-1, HSV2, and adenovirus was negative. EBV-encoded RNA in situ hybridization was negative. The copper stain was negative. Reticulin stain showed an intact reticulin framework.