A 24-year-old male patient was admitted at the emergency room with a 7 days history of fever, low back pain and bilateral lower limb radicular pain. Fifteen days prior to the clinical presentation, the patient underwent a L5-S1 CT-guided NRB due to a disc herniation at that level that was refractory to conservative treatment . Physical examination showed increased lumbar tenderness, positive bilateral Lasegue, paresthesia in the left plantar region and no motor deficit. Laboratory analysis showed a white blood cell account of 21,500 cells/dl (84% polymorphonuclear), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 48 mm/h, and C-reactive protein of 233 mg/dl. After these findings, blood cultures were requested, which were later positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus Aureus (MSSA), and emergency imaging studies were requested.
Lumbosacral spine radiographs showed a narrowed L5-S1 intervertebral space. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium showed a posterior epidural collection from T12 to L5 and a left paravertebral collection related to the ipsilateral L5-S1 articular facet joint . Empirical antibiotic treatment (1g b.i.d. of vancomycin and 2g t.i.d. of ceftazidime) and emergency surgery were indicated.
The abscess was drained using two midline dorsal incisions, at L2-L3 and L5-S1 levels. The paravertebral collection was drained and the intracanal purulent material was debrided with a K-30 probe and saline solution, caudally and cranially until clear debit was obtained. Samples from collections were sent for culture. The left S1 root had a tense appearance as a result of the already known hernia, thus a microdiscectomy was performed. Two drains were left in place.
During the first postoperative days, the patient improved progressively. The cultures analysis resulted in positives for MSSA and antibiotic therapy was rotated to cefazolin 2g. b.i.d according to antibiogram results. On the 6th postoperative day, the patient recommenced with fever of 38.5º and chills. A new MRI showed the persistence of the epidural collection. Due to the persistence of the symptoms within antibiotic treatment, and other possible infectious locations ruled-out, a surgical re-exploration was conducted. Using the same incisions, decompression was extended at L2-L3 level. An intracanal hematoma with purulent areas was identified and drained. Antibiotic regimen was maintained, the patient evolved well and was discharged on the 5th day to complete intravenous treatment for six weeks with ceftriaxone 2g b.i.d. and rifampicin 300mg b.i.d.
At 12 months follow-up, the patient continued asymptomatic, no sequelae were found and serological parameters remained normal.