A 70-year-old female presented to the endoscopic surgical department of the A. V. Vishnevsky National Medical Research Center of Surgery in October 2022.
On admission, the patient complained of cough, dysphagia, discomfort in the throat, and the presence of large soft mass in the esophagus with episodes of its migration into oropharynx. The patient was examined.
During the last 5 years, a tumor was discovered during the examination and an episode of tumor migration into oropharynx.
The patient has consistently maintained a state of general well-being throughout her life, without encountering notable medical complications. Nevertheless, the patient mentioned that she has experienced persistent elevation of blood pressure, for which she received a diagnosis of stage 1 arterial hypertension (measuring between 140-145 mm Hg). In an effort to regulate her blood pressure levels, perindopril and indapamide in combination (marketed as Noliprel) were prescribed for her.
No allergies, recent infections, or harmful habits (such as smoking, alcohol consumption, or drug use) were reported. There is no family or personal history of genetic hypertension/cardiovascular issues; the elevated pressure seems to be linked to lifestyle factors. Apart from the prescribed anti hypertensives, the patient did not mention the use of any concurrent medications or supplements.
The patient is married and has two daughters. No significant family medical history of diseases or conditions pronounced.
The Patient observed without any signs of visible immediate discomfort. Upon admission, the vital signs were measured: blood pressure at 140/80 mmHg, heart rate at 72 bpm, temperature at 98.6°F (37°C), and oxygen saturation at 98%. A thorough examination of all organ systems was done, and no abnormalities were found.
During the palpation the abdomen was non-tender, without masses, and both the liver and spleen were non-palpable below the rib cage. No palpable lymph nodes were found in cervical, axillary, or inguinal areas. Patient reported no discomfort during palpation.
The blood count and coagulation assessment results revealed that all measured parameters resided comfortably within established normative reference intervals. The concentration of Albumin manifested at 3.73 g/dL, alanine transaminase at 8 g/dL, and Aspartate transaminase at 26 g/dL, as shown in Table .
The upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy showed a base of non-epithelial tumor right behind the upper esophageal sphincter (UES). Tumor continues distally throughout the esophagus, freely locating and occupying almost the entire space of esophageal lumen. The neoplasm was a 25 cm in length and 4-5 cm width in the distal part, covered by a normal mucosa of squamous esophageal epithelium. Also, there was significant dilation of the esophagus due to a large size of the tumor, maximum up to 6 cm in middle and lower thirds. The tumor had a complex configuration, the distal part of the tumor splits into two parts and it reaches the stomach cardia. On retroflexion the distal part of non-epithelial neoplasm is visible in the gastric lumen, size of the diaphragmatic crura is up to 5 cm with sliding of cardia and fungus above diaphragm during examination - signs of sliding hiatal cardiofundal hernia .
For identification of tumor features, type of growth and localization related to layers of the esophageal walls, an endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was done. An ultrasound scanning showed heterogeneous hypo-echoic neoplasm with a smooth, clear-contoured, irregular cylindrical shape. The base of the tumor is located right behind the UES and originates from the submucosal layer of the esophagus (3rd echo-layer), type 1 according to the classification of non-epithelial tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. The doppler color mode showed a hypervascular zone at the base of the tumor with multiple large feeding vessels, up to 4-5 mm in diameter, extending along the wall of the esophagus for 8-10 cm. Paragastric lymphatic nodes are not enlarged . EUS imaging, most likely, corresponded to a FVP of the esophagus.
Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast enhancement revealed an expansion of the esophagus up to 5-6 cm in the distal part, a hypervascular neoplasm in the lumen of the esophagus extending throughout the entire length from UES to the gastric cardia with a maximum diameter of up to 6 cm .