A 25-year-old male suffered an injury by a direct blow from the lower edge of steel cupboard, on the posterior aspect of his left ankle above the heel.
He presented to us on the same day, after initially being treated at a local subcentre, with pain and a bleeding lacerated wound over the retro calcaneal region of his left ankle, and a sutured wound of 2 cm linear dimension (suturing done elsewhere), 5 cm proximal to the open wound. The patient was unable to walk. On examination, a lacerated wound of 4 cm * 2 cm dimensions was seen, about 2.5 cm proximal to the insertion of the Achilles tendon of his left ankle, with a palpable gap between the visible ruptured ends of the tendon. Thompson squeeze test and Matles test were positive. Toe raise on the affected side was absent. A palpable gap was also felt over the proximal sutured wound and a real-time ultrasonography (USG) revealed a complete tear of Achilles tendon in the proximal site as well .
The patient had no history of any medical illness. His routine blood investigations were normal. Informed patient consent was obtained for treatment.
Both the wounds were explored on the operating table and a segmental Achilles tendon rupture was found . Initially, an attempt to repair without incising the intervening skin was tried; however, the skin was eventually incised along the midline preserving the cutaneous vascularity to facilitate better exposure. A dual level Krackow’s suturing was done ; along with augmentation of the distal repair with anchorage in the calcaneus using ethibond no. 5 sutures. To ensure the preservation of tendon segment vascularity, the para-tenon was maintained in its position. Skin was repaired without tension . Entire procedure was done applying tourniquet that was released after complete closure. An above knee plaster of paris slab with the ankle in 20 degrees of plantar flexion was applied for 4 weeks followed by a below knee plaster for another 2 weeks, to facilitate knee mobilisation.
At 6 weeks, the plaster was removed and non-weight-bearing range of motion exercises of the ankle was begun. However, 3 weeks later, the patient presented with restricted dorsiflexion, for which weekly manipulation followed by below knee plaster casts with ankle in maximum possible dorsiflexion was done for another 3 weeks. The patient was allowed weight-bearing as bearable from 12 weeks onward with weight-bearing range of motion exercises.
At 6-month follow-up, the tendon continuity was intact both clinically and radiologically ( and ), and the patient has been able to ambulate bearing full weight and with bilaterally comparable range of motion of the ankle .