We present the case of a 62-year-old Caucasian woman who is divorced and lives alone. Suspicious microcalcifications (BI-RADS 4A) were detected in her left breast. Subsequently, VABB was scheduled; the patient was informed about the procedure, including the clip placement, by the surgeon performing the intervention. During the course of taking the patient's history, she communicated excellently, her demeanor was normal, she disclosed no intake of psychiatric medication and had not been diagnosed with any psychiatric disorders. According to the standard practice of the unit, the patient gave her written informed consent without any problem.
Subsequently, the patient underwent VABB (Mammotome; Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc, Johnson & Johnson, Cincinnati, OH, USA). VABB was performed on a digital prone table (Mammotest, Fischer Imaging, Denver, CO, USA) using 11-gauge vacuum probes, under local anesthesia. The examination proceeded according to a standard protocol to ensure quality control. A radiologist was present to assist in the targeting. A mammogram of the specimens taken after VABB confirmed the excision of microcalcifications. A clip was placed at the biopsy site. The pathological diagnosis was sclerosing adenosis.
At the 6-month mammographic follow-up, the radiologist mentioned the existence of the metallic clip in her breast. Subsequently, the woman presented to our breast unit complaining about "being spied [upon] by an implanted clip in [her] breast" and repeatedly requested the removal of the clip.
From the interaction with the nursing and medical staff, it was apparent that she was irritable, dysphoric, very suspicious and verbally aggressive. The patient was referred to the specialized psychiatrist of our breast unit for evaluation.
The Mental State Examination found the existence of systematized paranoid ideation of persecutory type dominating the daily routines of the patient. At the time, she believed that the implanted clip was one of several pieces of equipment being used to keep her under surveillance.
During the psychiatric interview, the patient revealed symptoms originating 11 years previously, at the time of her divorce, when she felt that her ex-husband was paying some religious organizations to spy on her, especially when she was at home. She stated that this was being done through the telephone, cameras, television and other technologically advanced equipment using electromagnetic waves. The patient had never consulted a mental health professional.
The thought content of the patient was also positive for ideas of reference and her speech was of normal rhythm, rate and quantity.
The patient appeared depressed, but occasionally she expressed anger about what was happening to her and she reported anhedonia, helplessness, hopelessness and decreased concentration. She had no suicidal thoughts.
As far as her social life was concerned, she reported having gradually decreased her social contacts over the past 10 years, as she believed that all of her friends were under surveillance as well and that this seriously disrupted their lives. The patient did not have any disturbances in perception, or in her thought processes. She did not have any insight into her psychiatric condition.
It should also be kept in mind that the patient has never met criterion A of schizophrenia. In conclusion, with respect to chronicity, the paranoid ideation first appeared approximately 10 years ago and since then has been chronic.
The prevalent diagnosis was schizotypal disorder encompassing paranoid or bizarre ideas not amounting to true delusions, anhedonia, disaffection and a tendency toward social withdrawal; the differential diagnosis comprised delusional disorder of persecutory type, affective disorder with psychotic features or delusional disorder and comorbid major depression.