Our patient was a 33-year-old white woman with pain and tumor on the posterior face of the left knee. Three years earlier, she had twisted this knee and, since then, she had been presenting pain and progressive swelling. On physical examination, there was a large-volume soft tumor accompanied by varicose veins on the posterolateral face of the left knee. The varicose veins were painful but without signs of inflammation. She also presented difficulty in flexing the left knee, with pain on touching and when walking. The patient was HIV-positive without signs of AIDS.
Ultrasound showed an expansive heterogeneous mass, laterally to the left popliteal fossa, of 8 cm in diameter. Tomography revealed a heterogeneous lesion with lacy highlighting, affecting muscle and subcutaneous tissues in the distal third of the left thigh. Magnetic resonance characterized it as lipoma.
The patient underwent surgery with an incision measuring 1.5 cm on the posterior face of the knee. The lesion was excised with free margins. The material consisted of soft friable brownish-yellowish fragments that together measured 10 x 8 x 6 cm and weighed 80 g. Under the microscope, proliferation of fusiform cells without atypia was observed, with mature adipocytes. The specimen was permeated with abundant hemosiderin pigment, along with small vessels with hyalinized walls ( and ). At the center, there was an old hemorrhage. There was no invasion of vessels and nerves. The margins were difficult to assess because the material was fragmented. Immunohistochemistry was positive for vimentin and CD34, and negative for cytokeratin, desmin, smooth-muscle actin, HHF-35, protein S-100 and CD 99.
Fifteen months later, the patient presented with a swelling adjacent to the previous surgical scar measuring 2 x 1.5 x 0.5 cm. On re-excision, the lesion had the same features, except for more ganglionic and multinucleated cells. There were no free margins. Six months after the second excision, the patient continued to show no signs of recurrence or metastasis.