A 68-year-old female patient with a 10-year history of hypertension was hospitalized in our department due to recurrent chest tightness and palpitation for half a month, accompanied by limb edema and dizziness. She had a history of multiple ground-glass nodules in both lungs, pulmonary bullae in the lower lobe of the right lung, esophageal papilloma, reflux esophagitis, gastric body submucosal eminence, and erosive gastritis. On presentation, she was afebrile, with a heart rate of 75 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 175/90 mmHg, and normal oxygen saturation.
An electrocardiogram documented that the patient had sinus arrhythmia and intermittent atrial premature beats, with short atrial tachycardia. The levels of serum N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (20.59 pg/ml) were elevated. The glycosylated hemoglobin level was 6.5%. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a secundum ASD with a size of 12 mm × 13.2 mm, and the interatrial septum was significantly thickened (19.4 mm). The right atrium and right ventricle were dilated, with a pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs) of 2.0. There was mild tricuspid regurgitation, and the systolic pulmonary artery pressure was ≈49.8 mm Hg. The global left ventricle ejection fraction measured using the Simpson method was 63.4%, and grade I diastolic dysfunction was detected.
Two-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography revealed a “dumbbell”-shaped involvement of the cephalad and caudal regions with sparing of a single secundum ASD with a size of 9 mm × 13.2 mm. The maximal thickness of the interatrial septum was 20.7 mm, and the thinnest atrial septum was 1.6 mm from the view at 0°–180°. The atrial septum presented with a brightness feature, a rare condition characterized by the deposition of unencapsulated fat cells in this area . There was no obstruction in the superior and inferior vena cava. A two-dimensional color Doppler ultrasound evidenced a left-to-right shunt through ASD . The diagnosis of LASH with ASD was established based on the above findings. Real-time four-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography (RT4D-TEE) confirmed the lipomatous hypertrophy of the atrial septum and an oval-shaped ASD ( and ). In addition, a color Doppler ultrasound of RT4D-TEE demonstrated the defect appeared foraminal in a location with a significant left-to-right shunt, suggesting a “foraminal” or “fossa” ASD ( and ).
A cardiac computer tomography angiography (CCTA) scan was performed to further characterize the atrial septum and evaluate the status of the coronary artery. The CCTA images demonstrated a 9 mm × 13 mm defect on the atrial septum . The volume rendering image of the CCTA scan showed a non-enhancing, smooth, well-marginated mass with an appearance similar to subcutaneous fat . In addition, the CCTA scan revealed a myocardial bridge in the middle of the left anterior descending artery.
Myocardial perfusion imaging was performed to evaluate metabolic activity. Results showed no hypermetabolic lesions or abnormal myocardial blood perfusion in the heart. The left ventricular systolic and diastolic functions were normal.
The patient underwent an ASD percutaneous occlusion under the guidance of intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) . During the operation, the LASH with ASD could be visualized by ICE from different angles. After balloon sizing, an 18 mm septal occluder device (Pushi, Shanghai) was successfully deployed ( and ). The occluder embraced the thick lipomatous cephalad rim and the thin “normal” caudal rim of the fossa ovalis. The left-to-right shunt disappeared, and no procedural complications, such as erosion or embolization, were observed. The patient was asymptomatic postoperation and followed up in an outpatient clinic . The atrial septum no longer increased in thickness. The systolic pulmonary artery pressure was ≈25.8 mmHg after ASD closure.