A 37-year-old African woman with HIV infection diagnosed at age 13 years was admitted to the emergency department after experiencing backache, severe headache, acute aphasia and psychomotor slowing for one week. Nine weeks before admission to the hospital, HAART had been changed in this patient from 500 mg/d of zidovudine, 300 mg/d of lamivudine and 200 mg/d of emtricitabine to the fixed preparation of lopinavir/ritonavir (800 mg/200 mg/d) and saquinavir (2000 mg/d). HAART was necessary for 10 years in this patient and was started at a level of 255 CD4+ cells/mm3. Before admission to the hospital, the patient's CD4+ cell count had rapidly increased from 20 to 610 cells/mm3, and her HIV-1 viral load decreased from 63,200 to 120 c/mL. Twelve hours after admission, the patient developed severe psycho-organic syndrome and repeated generalized epileptic seizures. Therefore, anticonvulsive therapy with levetiracetam was initialized. Computed tomography of the skull showed generalized cerebral edema without focal lesions. Intensive osmotherapy using mannitol and glycerol to minimize cerebral edema was performed. Blood tests revealed normal C-reactive protein and a normal white blood cell (WBC) count; radiographs of the chest were normal. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed pleocytosis (36 WBC/mm3), an elevated protein level of 1120 mg/dL, a normal glucose level of 61 mg/dL and no oligoclonal bands. CSF microscopy yielded no bacteria or fungi. Virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results for JC-virus (JCV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), varicella zoster virus (VZV) and hepatitis B virus using whole blood were negative. PCR of the CSF did not detect JCV, HSV, CMV, EBV, VZV or Tuberculosis.
Twenty-four hours later, the patient fell comatose and needed mechanical ventilation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed parietal and occipital hyperintense white matter lesions on T2-weighted images on both sides. Using contrast medium, these lesions did not reveal any enhancement in the T1-weighted images. However, there was a strong enhancement in perivascular spaces . As salvage therapy, 1 g/d of methylprednisolone and the antimicrobial agents ampicillin, acyclovir, ceftriaxone and fluconazole were applied. Without any improvement, the patient died from brainstem herniation two days after admission.
With the patient's relatives' consent, autopsy of the brain was performed. The post-mortem study of the brain showed a diffuse swelling of the whole brain and leptomeningeal infiltration with lymphocytes. These changes were also documented by MRI and represented the explanation for the epileptic seizures. Severe inflammatory infiltration in perivascular spaces by T-lymphocytes of the CD8+ subtype was found . Reactive astrocytes were found in the white matter, but no macrophages were seen. Results of Gram, periodic acid-Schiff and Grocott staining and immunocytochemistry for CMV and toxoplasma were negative. Congestion bleeding in the brainstem was the result of herniation, leading to death.