A 60-year-old man came with the main complaint of feeling full in his stomach for 7 days, accompanied by non-radiating right lower abdominal pain. There are complaints of seepage from the stitch marks on the right stomach, such as yellow urine. There was spontaneous smooth urination. Before the complaints occurred, the patient had a history of transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) and bladder repair with 2 layers of bladder stitching. The bladder rupture was caused by an iatrogenic bladder rupture caused by the TURP procedure at a previous hospital. The first bladder repair was done 11 days before the complaint when admitted to the hospital at the referral hospital. Subcutaneous abscess, possibly from urine leakage from bladder rupture.
The physical examination showed a poor general condition characterized by mild decreased consciousness (14 scores on the Glasgow Coma Scale), anemia, and fever, with a temperature of 38.7 degrees Celsius. Hemodynamic parameters indicated a blood pressure of 90/54 mmHg, a heart rate of 100 bpm, and a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute. The abdomen was distended, and the suprapubic showed an empty bladder, post-operative scar (+) and urinary leakage (+) .
The patient underwent laboratory and radiological examinations. Laboratory results showed leukocytosis 20.12 and elevated procalcitonin 3.14. The results of the Kidney Ureter Bladder (KUB) examination showed an oval-shaped opacity, clear boundaries, and regular edges, measuring +/− 6.7 × 11.3 projected at the level of VTh 3 to the sacrum on the right side of the abdomen, which on the lateral photo appeared to form an air-fluid level (+). The Left Lateral Decubitus (LLD) examination showed that the shadow of intestinal gas was only visible and distributed in the left abdominal area. No pathological step ladder was visible. No shadow of free air was visible in the abdominal cavity. .
CT cystography results showed there was a defect in the right anterior wall of the bladder with a size of +/− 0.4 cm, which caused extravasation of contrast to the extraperitoneal, then filled the tract in musculus rectus abdominis to the right side abdominal subcutaneous, and some of the contrast enters through the intraperitoneal filling .
To avoid worsening conditions, the patient got ceftriaxone 1 g/12 h IV and metronidazole 500 mg/ 8 IV hours before surgical exploration. The patient underwent laparotomy exploration, midline infra umbilical incision was performed, and then a bladder rupture was found in the dome area size 10 cm and looked like it split; bladder repair and an open cystostomy were performed . Also, subcutaneous abscess was found in the right quadrant of the abdomen, then abscess drainage was performed, total 1500 cc of pus was found in the subcutaneous region of the right quadrant of the abdomen. A sample of pus was collected for culture and antibiotic susceptibility testing. A rectal tube drain was placed in the subcutis region in the right quadrant of the abdomen, installing a redon drain in the retzii cavity and placing a subcutis handschoen drain in the midline incision, then primary suturing was performed. The patient was maintained with cystostomy and followed up . The results of culture and antibiotic sensitivity revealed the growth of Enterobacter cloacae, which exhibited sensitivity to the administration of antibiotics Amikacin, Imipenem, and Meropenem. The administration of antibiotics with Ceftriaxone and Metronidazole was continued due to clinical improvement, characterized by the patient's resolution of fever and improved hemodynamic parameters. Additionally, there was an improvement in laboratory parameters, indicated by a decrease in leucocyte count, from 20.12 to 11.47 and procalcitonin levels, from 3.14 to 2.31. The broad-spectrum antibiotics were administered until the patient was discharged from the hospital at 5-day post-operative. At the two-week follow-up, the patient reported no complaints, the surgical wound healed well and no pus discharge was observed from the surgical wound.