A 15-year-old female presented to an outpatient headache clinic with a 10-year history of intractable headache, which had become daily over the past 3 months and also awakened her in the middle of the night. She noted the pain was frontal and radiated to her neck. She had migrainous characteristics including photophobia, phonophobia, nausea, vomiting but denied visual changes, numbness, tingling weakness, or focal deficits. She complained of three migraine headaches a week while the other days she described a tension type headache, which consisted of pain only. She did complain of dizziness, which typically occurred upon standing.
Her daily habits included at least 8-9 h of sleep during the school week but she reported nighttime awakenings, daytime sleepiness, and sleeping more hours on the weekends. She drank occasional caffeine and ate three regular meals a day.
She had a history of syncope, joint, and back pain over the past 2-3 years and had evaluations in cardiology and rheumatology. Rheumatology diagnosed her with hypermobility of her joints. Cardiology diagnosed her with vasovagal syncope and she was placed on a hyperhydration protocol. She had a history of a minute patent foramen ovale, which had undergone spontaneous closure per a recent echocardiogram. She had plain films of her cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine, which were unremarkable. She also reported easy bruising and occasional bleeding of her gums with oral hygiene. Recent labwork, including a complete blood count (CBC/diff), was unremarkable.
There was a strong family history of mental health disorders. The patient had previously been referred to a psychiatrist and was subsequently diagnosed with depression and anxiety but medication intervention had not yet been initiated.
The patient had a history of developmental delay and she did not walk independently until 2 years of age. She is now developmentally appropriate and is an A/B/C student in the 8th grade.
On general exam, she showed elasticity of her skin, joint laxity of her extremities but no atrophic scarring. Her neurological examination was unremarkable.
Due to a recent history of increased headache frequency and awakening in the middle of the night with headache, she underwent an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain that was unremarkable. She also revealed a history of snoring, nighttime awakenings, and daytime sleepiness. A polysomnography was ordered and demonstrated mild obstructive sleep apnea.
She had an appointment to see psychiatry and discuss medication intervention for her depression and anxiety. Often, treatment of underlying depression and anxiety can help alleviate headache, thus, it was agreed that medication intervention for headache be deferred and a trial of Mg was started.
Given the above history, she was referred to Genetics and, based on history and examination, the diagnosis of mild classic EDS was confirmed. Recommendations included hydrotherapy to strengthen muscles, Vitamin C and maintenance of good hydration. Genetics also noted and discussed with parents that if surgical intervention were to be considered for her apnea, she would need to be closely monitored due to an increased risk for postoperative bleeding.