A 44-year-old, previously healthy male came to the emergency room with repeated chills since 3 days, as well as arthralgia mainly affecting knee and hip joints. These symptoms were preceded by several days of unproductive coughing and a headache. The patient’s medical history was positive for smoking, but negative for alcohol or drug abuse. There was no family history of cardiovascular disease or cardiomyopathy. His last trip abroad was 2 months previously to Turkey and he did not take any long-term medication. Macrolide antibiotics and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) were administered 1 week before presentation by the family doctor because of the symptoms mentioned.
At presentation, electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, with a heart rate of 113 beats per minute and a first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block but was otherwise unremarkable . Blood pressure was 126/64 mmHg, oxygen saturation 98% and body temperature 38.5°C. The physical examination showed a sensitivity to pressure during palpation in the epigastric region. Auscultation did not reveal any pericardial friction rubs or pulmonal crackles. Laboratory results showed a total white blood cell count of 13.4 × 103/μL (reference 4.0–10.0 × 103/μL), C-reactive protein of 16.9 mg/dL (reference 0.0–0.5), and a high-sensitive troponin T of 656.2 ng/L (reference 0.0–14.0). No eosinophilia or abnormal cells were found in the whole blood count. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 95 mm in 1 h. Serum electrolytes, as well as liver and kidney function parameters were within normal ranges. In blood cultures and serology, no specific pathogen could be identified. Neither in serodiagnosis nor specifically with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) could any evidence of a microbial cause be found. Vasculitis associated autoantibodies were negative.
The first chest-X-ray showed only mild peribronchial cuffing . Echocardiography revealed preserved LV function without wall motion abnormalities, but a circular pericardial effusion of 9 mm and slightly dilated inferior vena cava. Obstructive coronary artery disease was excluded by cardiac computed tomography. Based on the above and on clinical findings, pneumonia with pericarditis was suspected and antibiotic therapy was extended to levofloxacin and tazobactam/piperacillin. Within 2 days, however, the patient developed signs of congestion and became increasingly short of breath, requiring non-invasive-ventilation with nasal high-flow and forced diuresis using furosemide . Pericardial tamponade and endocarditis were excluded by transoesophageal echocardiography. At this stage, LV ejection fraction was only 35% (Video 1).
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) performed on the 4th day of inpatient stay showed areas of late gadolinium enhancement, with both subepicardial involvement inferobasal (, arrow) and at the level of the midventricular to apical septum (, arrows), and subendocardial involvement at the basal anteroseptal level (, arrow). Native T1 map (T1 relaxation time septal 1211 ms) and T2 map (T2 relaxation time septal 65 ms) indicated areas of septal myocardial oedema. Accompanying pericarditis was diagnosed due to a circumferential pericardial effusion (, asterisk) with accentuated contrast-enhancing (, arrowhead) and oedematous (, T2 TIRM, arrowhead) outer pericardial sheet. On Day 8, the course of the disease was further complicated by syncopal complete heart block , which was managed by continuous isoprenaline infusion . Despite short-term stabilization, the patient went into a low-output state within the next hours, with the need for inotropic support (continuous intravenous infusion of Dobutamine 250 mg/50 mL). In addition, a temporary pacemaker was implanted because of repeated episodes of non-sustained Stokes-Adams attacks. Right heart catheter showed a low cardiac index of only 1.65 L/min/m2 and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary arterial pressure 56/31/41 mmHg, mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 34 mmHg). Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was 29 mmHg. A total of eight endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) were taken from the left ventricle.
Antibiotics were switched to Doxycycline and Meropenem due to persistently high C-reactive protein values and to cover Lyme disease. The evaluation of the EMBs showed moderate myocardial infiltration with inflammatory cell aggregates (red arrows). Additionally, multifocal eosinophilic granulocytes (blue arrows) were found with haematoxylin–eosin staining (HE, ) and Giemsa staining . Pathogen persistence in the myocardium was excluded by PCR.
Based on these findings, fulminant EM was diagnosed. High-dose steroid therapy (1 mg/kg/day) was initiated together with Azathioprine and subsequently tapered over the next 13 weeks (Prednisolone: 50 mg Weeks 1–2, 25 mg Week 3, 12.5 mg Week 4, 7.5 mg Weeks 5–12, 5 mg Weeks 12–20, 2.5 mg Weeks 20–21; Azathioprine 50 mg 2–0–1 Weeks 0–4 and 50 mg b.i.d. Weeks 5–13).
Pneumocystis carinii prophylaxis with Sulfametrole/Trimethoprim was administered and heart failure therapy with mineralocorticoid receptor-antagonist (Eplerenone 25 mg) and Sacubitril/Valsartan (24/26 mg) was started once the patient’s blood pressure was sufficient to tolerate it and gradually uptitrated to 50 mg and 49/51 mg, respectively. Repeated attempts to deactivate the temporary pacemaker resulted in asystole. Consequently, a permanent AV-sequential pacemaker system was implanted.
Haemodynamic stabilization was achieved within a few days after pacemaker implantation (DDD-R) and initiation of immunosuppressive therapy. In addition to the mentioned medications, the discharge regime included a proton pump inhibitor (Pantoprazole 40 mg), a osteoporosis prophylaxis (calcium 1000 mg + vitamin d 880 IU) and a loop diuretic (Torasemide 10 mg, with dose adjustment according to body weight).
At 1-month follow-up, the patient had a New York Heart Association functional class of I. Transthoracic echocardiography showed full recovery of LV function and only minimal residual pericardial effusion. The excellent result was maintained (Video 2), while the complete AV block persisted over time.