A 26-year-old male with a history of asthma initially presented to the emergency department with two weeks of progressively worsening constipation, early satiety, and a twenty-pound unintentional weight loss over less than 3 months. On presentation, patient was found to be febrile and tachycardic. Further workup showed severe iron deficiency anemia with hemoglobin below 5 gm/dl. Computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated a 20 × 10 × 15 cm abdominopelvic mass and extensive peritoneal disease . Ultrasound-guided core-needle biopsy was performed on the main mass, which showed a malignant epithelioid neoplasm. IHC studies demonstrated that the tumor cells were patchily positive for CD117, Melan-A and desmin, but negative for DOG1. Additional markers for hepatocellular carcinoma, lymphoma, and germ cell neoplasia proved negative. A definitive diagnosis could not be made. Given its minimal CD117 expression, a variant of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), such as succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)-deficient GIST, was also considered.
The patient was discharged but had to return one week later to the emergency department due to symptoms related to worsening anemia. Abdominal CT imaging at the time showed that the intra-peritoneal mass had grown to 23 × 10 × 17 cm, which substantially increased in size compared to initial presentation one week earlier. The mass now affected the bowel and there was bilateral hydronephrosis. Imaging also noted the tumor was highly vascular with extensive collateralization. A second ultrasound-guided core-needle biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed a high-grade malignant epithelioid neoplasm, similar to the previous biopsy. Additional staining with Cam 5.2, S100, Sox10, MyoD1, DOG1, ERG, and ALK1were negative. INI1 staining is retained. Again, the lack of lineage-specific immunophenotyping precluded a definitive diagnosis.
The patient was transferred to a tertiary care center for further evaluation. His fever, tachycardia, and leukocytosis were attributed to a systemic inflammatory response to intra-tumoral necrosis and hemorrhage. Unfortunately, persistent intra-tumoral hemorrhage and anemia necessitated 8 units of red cell transfusions over a span of 3 weeks. Due to transfusion requirements, poor nutritional status, rapid clinical deterioration, and the need for additional diagnostic material, palliative surgical resection was advised.
The patient underwent selective gel foam embolization of the omental artery and tumoral arteries from the right gastroepiploic artery. Following the embolization procedure, palliative omentectomy and tumor debulking were performed for symptom control. At surgery, the tumor appeared to arise from the transverse colon mesentery with multiple peritoneal nodules and malignant adhesions to the bowel and bladder wall. The tumor was noted to be friable and highly vascular. The resected portion of the tumor was sent to pathology for evaluation.
Gross examination of the resected tumor and serial sections showed a tan-red, fleshy mass, with significant areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. Histologic examination of the specimen demonstrated extensive necrosis and solid, sheet-like proliferation of large epithelioid cells with granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. There was also marked nuclear atypia, with prominent nucleoli, and nuclear pleomorphism . Brisk mitotic activity (> 100 per 50 HPFs) with atypical mitoses were observed. Additional IHC studies were completed in another attempt to make a definitive diagnosis for this tumor. The malignant cells showed focal patchy positivity for Melan-A, HMB-45, and desmin . There was also again focal weak staining for CD117 . The tumor cells were negative for AE1/AE3, Cam5.2, Sox10, S100, CD3, CD20, CD79a, CD30, CD138, CD56, DOG1, SMA, MyoD1, myogenin, chromogranin, synaptophysin, neurofilament, GFAP, ALK1, OCT3/4, inhibin, WT-1, calretinin, ERG, and GATA3. In addition, the tumor cells showed retained INI-1, BRG1/SMARCA4, and SDHB stainings. These findings were compatible with a high-grade sarcoma with epithelioid morphology. In light of these findings, a diagnosis of malignant epithelioid PEComa was favored. Other neoplasms with epithelioid morphology, including clear cell sarcoma of the GI tract, gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor (GNET), melanotic schwannoma, epithelioid sarcoma, germ cell tumor, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, are considered much less likely based on the IHC profiles. Epithelioid GIST and malignant melanoma were unable to be ruled out at that time.
The patient’s post-operative course was complicated by ileus, requiring nasogastric tube placement and total parenteral nutrition. Within 7 days of the debulking surgery, the patient was started empirically on oral sirolimus given that a diagnosis of malignant PEComa was favored with gross residual disease and a rapidly growing tumor. The plan was to reassess the definitive systemic therapy after molecular results were available. On post-operative day 9, CT scan showed significant jejunal obstruction caused by rapid post-operative disease progression from residual intra-abdominal disease. An endoscopic lumen apposing metal stent (LAMS) was placed to bypass the obstructed bowel and was successful. The patient was then able to tolerate a normal diet.
An in-house hotspot gene mutational panel for 30 selected cancer-related genes and a RNA-based next generation sequencing sarcoma/solid tumor gene fusion panel of 99 oncogenic genes were performed to support the favored diagnosis and help rule out other entities. The gene mutational panel demonstrated a pathologic TP53-p.R337C missense mutation, with an allele frequency of 52.5% (Supplemental Fig. A). Notably, lack of BRAF, NRAS, c-KIT, and PDGFRA hotspot mutations in conjunction with the histological findings above confirmed that melanoma and conventional GIST were unlikely. The gene fusion panel was negative for EWSR1, CIC, BCOR, and TFE3 translocations. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue was sent for next generation whole exome sequencing (Caris Life Sciences, Irving, TX). In addition to the TP53 mutation observed by the in-house gene mutational panel, the results from whole exome sequencing showed a pathologic TSC2-p.K1165fs mutation with an allele frequency of 58% (Supplemental Fig. B). Considering the clinical presentation, light microscopy, immunophenotyping, and molecular alterations, a definitive diagnosis of malignant epithelioid PEComa was rendered.
With this definitive diagnosis, the patient was switched to IV nab-sirolimus given poor reliance on oral drug absorption due to bypass of portions of his gastro-intestinal tract via the LAMS procedure. PET CT imaging one month after starting nab-sirolimus demonstrated stable residual abdominal disease . However, PET CT demonstrated progression of disease after 2 cycles of nab-sirolimus with 2 treatment breaks. Patient was subsequently switched to gemcitabine and docetaxel. After 2 cycles of the chemotherapy regimen, sirolimus was again added given the tumor’s prior response and the patient’s clinical status.