A 46-year-old male smoker with ccTGA and moderately impaired systolic function of the systemic RV, atrial septal defect (ASD) secundum closed with Amplatzer device at the age of 41 , diabetes Type 2 managed with dietary restrictions, dyslipidemia and a family history of premature CAD, presented with one week history of exertional chest pain with accelerating symptoms the last 2 days before admission. At the time of admission to the hospital, the patient did not take any prescribed medications. High-sensitive cardiac troponin T levels were 620 ng/L (reference: < 15 ng/L) at presentation and ECG showed novel anterior ischaemic changes . The patient was diagnosed with NSTEMI and received a loading dose of acetylsalicylic acid (500 mg) and ticagrelor (180 mg) within hours after presenting to the emergency department followed by 75 mg qDay and 90 mg q12 hr, respectively. A chest computed tomography scan excluded aortic dissection and pulmonary embolism. The patient was transferred to a tertiary heart hospital for further management including urgent coronary angiography (CA).
Upon arrival, a physical examination was unremarkable: Blood pressure was 110/78 mmHg, heart rate regular at 65 bpm, respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute and saturation 97% (without oxygen supplement). Body temperature was 36.9°C. High-sensitive cardiac troponin T was elevated with a clear rise and fall day 1–3 (620–580–20 ng/L). The patient remained highly symptomatic with recurrent chest pain already at light exertion for which he received nitroglycerin spray with prompt effect.
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed reduced systolic function of the systemic RV with right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) 29%, and global hypokinesia more pronounced in the apex, but the reduced image quality made it difficult to exclude regional hypokinesia in all segments. A previous TTE from 2018 showed RVEF of 30%, and right ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 60 mm. The present TTE was therefore considered unchanged compared with the one 2 years ago. Both TTEs also showed mild tricuspid valve regurgitation and normal longitudinal function of the subpulmonary LV.
An initial urgent CA with radial access did not display any obvious significant stenosis. CA was challenging due to the different way coronary arteries originated from the transpositioned aorta compared with individuals with normally aligned great vessels. The left main artery (LM) originated from the right sinus of Valsalva and was difficult to engage. LAD and its diagonal branch had atherosclerotic plaque formation of unclear significance and fractional flow reserve (FFR) attempts were unsuccessful due to engagement difficulty. LCX was rudimental and emerged from the left-handed LM (1R-2LCX according to the Leiden convention.) RCA emerged posteriorly from the right-handed sinus and could not be investigated selectively. Non-selective images and aortography images were taken instead and they did not show stenosis in the proximal segments of RCA . To better illustrate the coronary anatomy, we provide a schematic visualization of the coronary anatomy in normal hearts and our patient .
The procedure was abandoned at this stage. Since the patient was symptomatic and a conclusive revascularization strategy was not achieved, we decided to further evaluate the anatomical location and target vessel of any ischaemia using stress-perfusion cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (spCMR) with adenosine. spCMR was considered superior to other imaging modalities due to its capability to demonstrate the anatomical and functional burden of ischaemia in patients with complex congenital heart anatomy.
spCMR showed a recent anteroseptal infarction at the basal segment of the systemic RV and reversible ischaemia in two segments at the basal and mid-ventricular inferior segments of the systemic RV . The ischaemic region composed about 7% of RV which was mildly dilated and normotrophic with global hypokinesia (more pronounced in the septum) and RVEF 28%. At multidisciplinary heart team conference, it was decided to do another try with CA targeting the RCA.
A second CA with right femoral access could engage RCA selectively with a 6 french Judkins left 4 (JL4) catheter and revealed a large vessel with significant stenosis 90% in the distal RCA proximal of its bifurcation . RCA also had two right ventricular branches, of which the distal one had atheromatous changes in its orifice. Thin collateral flow from RCA to the left coronary system was also shown. The LM was engaged with left coronary bypass angiographic catheter and internal mammary artery catheter. FFR measurements were taken of both LAD and diagonal arteries and showed haemodynamically non-significant stenosis (LAD-FFR 0.85, diagonal-FFR 0.82). FFR measurement is a diagnostic method used in CA to determine the significance of a coronary artery stenosis by measuring the pressure differences at hyperaemia before and after the stenosis using a pressure wire, and it predicts the percentage improvement in flow with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) where values > 0.80 are associated with non-significant stenosis.
PCI was performed at the RCA stenosis using JL4 guide catheter. After balloon predilatation, a 3.5 × 16 mm drug-eluting stent was implanted and post dilated with non-compliant balloons 4.0 × 12 mm and 4.5 × 8 mm to 20–22 atmosphere. The final angiographic image of the RCA after PCI showed a flow of grade 3 according to the thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grading system . At discharge, the patient was offered smoking cessation counselling and prescribed acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg qDay, Ticagrelor 90 mg q12hr, atorvastatin 80 mg qDay, metformin 500 mg q12hr, empagliflozin 10 mg qDay, and enalapril 5 mg qDay.
The systemic RV dysfunction was unchanged compared with 2 years before the NSTEMI described in this case suggesting that the acute myocardial infarction was not solely responsible for systemic RV dysfunction. However, the poor systemic RV function is of concern, and follow-up plan for this patient included repeated cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) for quantification of RV function, NT-proBNP and symptom evaluation. Unfortunately, there is no evidence-based pharmacological treatment for RV dysfunction in ccTGA patients.
At six-week’s follow-up, the patient had a NT-proBNP of 188 ng/L (compared with 384 at admission), symptoms consistent with NYHA class II and no exertional chest pain. TTE showed RVEF 30%, right ventricular end-diastolic diameter 61 mm, normal longitudinal function of the subpulmonary LV, and mild tricuspid valve regurgitation.