A 26-year-old male with a past medical history of hyperthyroidism and thyromegaly presented to the ED with complaints of sore throat, fever, and diarrhea. He stated that nine days prior he began to have a progressively worsening sore throat, which prevented him from taking his prescribed methimazole (10 milligrams [mg] twice daily). Following the onset of his sore throat, he reported watery stools that occurred several times per day. He also complained of lesions to his chest, back, and oral mucosa that would appear periodically. The patient described three similar episodes over the prior year, which prompted visits to other hospitals, with the most recent episode 2–3 months earlier. He was told on his most recent visit that he would require a tonsillectomy and was discharged with outpatient follow-up.
Initial physical examination revealed an uncomfortable appearing male, visibly diaphoretic and lethargic, but oriented to person, place, and time. Vital signs were notable for a heart rate of 167 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 146/70 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 99% on room air, and a temperature of 38.6°C. He was found to have posterior oropharyngeal erythema and tonsillar edema without exudates. No goiter or thyroid masses were palpable. He was tachypneic with clear breath sounds and tachycardic with a regular rhythm and no appreciable murmurs. Skin examination was notable for multiple acneiform lesions at various stages of healing to the anterior and posterior neck and trunk.
We considered a broad differential, but our preliminary investigation favored TS as the primary diagnosis. Thyroid storm with concomitant infection was also a consideration. Diagnostic tests ordered included a complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel (CMP), electrocardiogram, blood cultures, urinalysis, strep A polymerase chain reaction (PCR), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARs-CoV-2) PCR, lactate, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (T3) and free thyroxine (T4), prothrombin time (PT), and international normalized ratio (INR). We calculated the Burch-Wartofsky point scale for thyrotoxicosis with a score of 60 (15 for temperature, 10 for agitation, 10 for diarrhea, 25 for heart rate), further supporting our leading diagnosis of TS.
Initial therapies ordered included propranolol 1 mg intravenously (IV), sodium chloride 0.9% one liter (L) IV, acetaminophen 650 mg orally (PO), and methimazole 20 mg PO. Shortly after initial orders were placed, the laboratory called regarding a critical CBC result, noting a white blood cell count of 0.5 × 109 cells per L (reference range 4.5–11.0 × 109/L). This raised concern for drug-induced agranulocytosis in the setting of TS. Upon receiving this information, we canceled the order for methimazole, and the patient was placed in a negative pressure isolation room. Broad spectrum antibiotics, including piperacillin-tazobactam and vancomycin, were administered given agranulocytosis and neutropenic fever. Additional studies were notable for a lactate of 5 millimoles (mmol) per L (0.5–2.2 mmol/L); TSH less than 0.015 international units per milliliter (IU/mL) (0.465–4.680 IU/mL); T4 greater than 6.99 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) (0.78–2.19 ng/dL); T3 greater than 22.80 ng/dL (2.77–5.27 ng/dL); PT 28.2 seconds (25.1–36.5 seconds); and INR 2.5 (0.9–1.1). Pertinent CMP findings included a sodium level of 130 milliequivalents (mEq) per L (135–145 mEq/L) and potassium level of 3.3 mEq/L (3.5–5.1 mEq/L).
The medical intensive care unit (MICU) was consulted for admission due to our diagnosis of TS and concomitant agranulocytosis with possible sepsis secondary to underlying bacterial illness. Clinical improvement was noted with the initial order of IV fluids and IV propranolol, including improvement of his tachycardia (110 bpm vs 167 bpm on arrival). Upon admission, the MICU ordered additional IV fluids, propranolol 40 mg PO, potassium chloride 10 mEq IV, magnesium 1g IV, and hydrocortisone sodium succinate 100 mg IV. While in the MICU the patient continued to receive beta-blockers (propranolol 60 mg PO four times daily), steroids (hydrocortisone 60 mg IV four times daily), and bile acid sequestrants (cholestyramine 4 g packet once daily). He continued to receive empiric antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g every eight hours, vancomycin 1.5 g every eight hours). He received a bone marrow biopsy, which was suggestive of methimazole-induced bone marrow suppression.
Both the endocrinology and otorhinolaryngology services evaluated the patient and determined that a thyroidectomy was required. He was subsequently transferred to another facility to have this procedure performed. Fourteen days following his initial ED presentation, he underwent a total thyroidectomy. He continued to improve clinically following the procedure and was discharged the next day with instructions regarding outpatient endocrinology follow-up.