A 67-year-old man complained of fatigue and loss of appetite. His symptoms gradually worsened for 6 days until he was brought to our emergency room for impaired consciousness. He had a history of smoking, hypertension, and diabetes. Upon arrival at the hospital, his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 11 (E3V3M5) and he was hemodynamically unstable (heart rate, 130 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 80/52 mmHg). The stabilization of hemodynamics was achieved with bolus fluid resuscitation and norepinephrine. He also had respiratory failure with a respiratory rate of 35 breaths/min and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 87% under reservoir oxygen mask at 10 L/min; hence, he was immediately intubated and mechanically ventilated. Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe metabolic acidosis with pH 6.90 and base excess −22.5, and severe respiratory failure, with partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) of 85 mmHg and partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 52 mmHg under fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0. Chest X-ray and computed tomography showed extensive consolidation and ground-glass opacities in the lung fields bilaterally. Laboratory tests indicated acute systemic inflammation and hepatic/renal injury, characterized by elevated white blood cell count, and levels of C-reaction protein, liver enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase, and creatine.
The patient’s clinical course during hospitalization is shown in Figure . After admission, tracheal aspirate of the patient was harvested, and it tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid by the fluorescence quantitative reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction method. He was treated with meropenem (2 g/day), levofloxacin (0.5 g/day), and nafamostat (300 mg/day). Nafamostat was used as a potential inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nevertheless, the patient’s respiratory failure continued to be severe, with a PaO2 of 60 mmHg under ventilator setting of FiO2 1.0 and positive end-expiratory pressure of 15 cmH2O. We initiated veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO) on day 2. The procedure was safely carried out with no complications. The devices used for our VV-ECMO system were CAPIOX Oxygenators (Terumo Instrument, Tokyo, Japan) and HLS Cannulae (draining cannula, 25 Fr 38 cm; reinfusion cannula, 17 Fr 15 cm) (Getinge, Gothenburg, Sweden). The draining cannula was placed in the right internal jugular vein and the reinfusion cannula was placed in the right femoral vein. Initial blood flow was 4.5 L/min with 2000 pump rotations. Continuous renal replacement therapy (blood flow, 100 mL/min; polyethylenimine-coated polyacrylonitrile (AN69ST) membrane hemofilter) was also initiated on the same day. During ECMO support, we reduced both the tidal volume and the plateau pressure of the ventilator following the lung rest strategy. The patient received deep sedation and occasionally neuromuscular blockade to reduce patient–ventilator desynchrony. We continued ECMO support for 2 weeks; however, his respiratory failure did not improve. From day 16, we initiated prone-positioning care for 20 h per day, three times a week. The combination of VV-ECMO and prone positioning is known to improve oxygenation and respiratory compliance without absence of serious adverse events. At least five medical staff members, including physicians and mechanical engineers, were required for the procedure. A physician was in charge for the safety of the location of the tracheal tube and others managed the catheter of the ECMO or the positioning. We followed the suggested protocol for prone positioning under VV-ECMO. Despite this intensive treatment, oxygen saturation and consolidation on chest X-ray showed no improvement. On day 20, we decided to use adjunctive steroid therapy to suppress the hyperinflammation of the lung injury; 500 mg methylprednisolone was given for 3 days, followed by 80 mg prednisolone. On day 23, lung opacity on chest X-ray and oxygen saturation improved significantly . We could successfully remove ECMO on day 27. We are successfully tapering steroids without serious adverse events, including recurrent respiratory failure, nosocomial infection, or gastrointestinal bleeding. Mild controllable hyperglycemia was observed during the clinical course. The patient was removed from the ventilator on day 51. At the time of publication, he was able to stand up unassisted without any difficulty and continues rehabilitation to discharge to his home.