A 29-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the hospital with 2 weeks of progressively worsening yellowish discoloration of her eyes and skin associated with anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diffuse abdominal discomfort, increasing abdominal girth, dark urine and pale stools. Past medical history was significant for prior episodes of hospitalization for acute alcoholic intoxication including an episode a few months prior. Imaging at that time showed hepatic steatosis but no features suggestive of hepatic cirrhosis or portal hypertension. Family history was significant for hereditary hemochromatosis. The patient’s father was heterozygous for C282Y and the paternal grandmother was homozygous for C282Y. The patient reported drinking about 1–2 glasses of wine every day, and denied smoking and illicit drug use. Vitals signs were as follows: pulse rate 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 per minute, blood pressure 112/78 mmHg, temperature 36.9 °C and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. Physical examination showed scleral icterus, distended abdomen with hepatomegaly and mild generalized tenderness.
Laboratory results were as follows : white blood cell count 31,600/μL, hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL, platelets 172/μL, ferritin 539 ng/dL, transferrin saturation 58.23%, peripheral blood smear showing stomatocytosis , total bilirubin 8.7 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 7.4 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 90 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 30 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALKP) 420 U/L, prothrombin time (PT) 18.6 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.5, blood urea nitrogen 1.0 mg/dL, serum creatinine 0.5 mg/dL, Alcoholic Liver Disease/Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (ALD/NAFLD) Index (ANI) 2.6, suggesting a 93.2% probability of alcoholic liver disease, and phosphatidyl ethanol level 537 ng/ml (levels > 20 ng/ml indicate moderate–heavy ethanol consumption). Genetic testing results revealed that the patient was heterozygous for the HFE C282Y mutation and the normal allele, as well as negative for H63D and S65C. Imaging showed features suggestive of parenchymal liver disease, portal hypertension and generalized anasarca . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was negative for bile duct pathology. Workup for other causes of liver disease including autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson’s disease, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, celiac disease, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), viral hepatitis, tick-borne illnesses and leptospirosis all returned negative results. Biopsy of the liver was considered but was held due to the patient’s worsening general medical condition.
The patient was diagnosed with acute alcoholic hepatitis, and Gastroenterology was consulted. The patient’s Maddrey’s discriminant function was 46.4 (a score > 32 indicates poor prognosis and that the patient might benefit from glucocorticoid therapy), so orally administered prednisolone 40 mg/day was started. Although the patient’s total bilirubin (TBIL) and INR initially improved after initiating steroidal therapy, a rebound increase was noted , raising concerns for impending liver failure. Also, her creatinine increased from 0.5 to 4 mg/dL. Nephrology was consulted, and a diagnosis of hepatorenal syndrome type 1 was favored. In addition to worsening TBIL, INR and creatinine, the patient developed encephalopathy, succumbed to the disease and died.