A previously healthy 23-year-old Saudi woman presented with massive hemoptysis a day before she was admitted to our hospital. She had a six-month history of recurrent fever, cough, dyspnea, and recurrent oral ulceration. Her physical examination was within normal limits. An initial blood work-up showed that she had mild leukocytosis (14.7 × 109/L) and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (85 mm/hr). Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an ill-defined rounded infiltrate in her right lower lobe . Contrast-enhanced CT scans of her chest demonstrated a right lower lobe pulmonary artery aneurysm .
Because she complained of intermittent headache over the past six months, a CT scan of the brain with contrast was done. It revealed no abnormalities. However, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain showed increased high-intensity signals bilaterally especially in the gray/white matter junction (>4 foci) in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images. This was highly suggestive of vasculitis.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a 1.8 cmx1.6 cm non-mobile right ventricular mass attached to her interventricular septum. Transesophogeal echocardiography showed the same mass having a texture similar to her papillary muscle. A cardiac MRI was subsequently done, which showed a right ventricular mass with the same signal of the cardiac muscle. An aneurysm in her right interlobar pulmonary artery was also seen . Further laboratory workups ruled out other connective tissue diseases except for elevated lupus anticoagulant level (LA1 = 54.9, normal = 30 to 44; LA2 = 37.2, normal = 26 to 32).
Our patient underwent pulmonary angiography to rule out other aneurysms. The procedure showed a single aneurysm of her right interlobar pulmonary artery. .
She then underwent right thoracotomy with the removal of her right lower lobe. Pathological examination revealed multifocal arterial thrombosis with marked luminal narrowing, partial destruction of her arterial wall, and marked intimal fibrosis (fibroelastosis).
Our patient's postoperative course was uneventful. A few days later, however, she developed swelling in her right lower limb. Doppler sonography revealed deep vein thrombosis in her right iliac, right common femoral, right superficial femoral and right popliteal veins. Spiral CT scan of her chest showed a small filling defect in her right apical segmental artery consistent with pulmonary embolism. She was thus commenced on intravenous unfractionated heparin followed by oral coumadin.
An ophthalmologic examination of our patient showed no evidence of iritis or retinal vasculitis. However, she was found to have optic disc swelling (papilledema). She was thus diagnosed with Hughes-Stovin syndrome, which is a variant of Behcet's disease. She was treated with methylprednisolone 1 gm intravenously for five days. She then had 50 mg/day of oral azathioprine. Her dosage increased gradually to 150 mg/day, with 0.5 mg bid of colchicines. A repeat MRI of her brain three weeks after the treatment showed complete resolution of the high intensity signals in FLAIR images, thus indicating her favorable response to treatment. Repeat spiral CT scans of her chest for the succeeding 12 months revealed no recurrence of pulmonary aneurysm.