A 23-year-old female presented to our hospital who had undergone uneventful LASIK in both eyes 3 years prior. The patient had suffered a blunt trauma in her right eye in a severe car accident. Multiple and irregular lacerations with active bleeding in the right upper eyelid were noted in the emergency room. Our ophthalmologist was consulted for blurred vision in her right eye. Direct ophthalmoscope revealed a late-onset corneal flap displacement with the flap being folded in the superior and inferior portion. In addition, the bare stroma was exposed. The connection between the nasal hinge of the corneal flap and the cornea was still intact .
Surgical intervention was performed 12 hours after injury. Under an operating microscope, surface debris was thoroughly scraped by a sterile surgical sponge with continuous irrigation of BSS. The margin of the corneal flap which was still in situ was then demarcated, followed by dissection of the central portion from the stromal bed. Finally, the whole corneal flap was refloated by a LASIK spatula. To expose the whole stromal bed, the corneal flap was lifted and reflected. Meanwhile, the superior and inferior folds of corneal flap were unfolded and flattened using a sterile surgical sponge, followed by vigorous irrigation with BSS at the end. In addition, the epithelial cells and remnants adherent to the underside of the corneal flap and stromal bed were carefully removed. The corneal flap was repositioned and stretched using surgical sponges in order to avoid folds and wrinkles. At last, a bandage soft contact lens was placed on the cornea for protection .
Topical antibiotic (0.3% ciprofloxacin) and corticosteroids (1.0% prednisolone acetate) were given postoperatively. Two days after the operation, the displaced corneal flap was found to be well attached smoothly on the stromal bed without folds and wrinkles. The bandage contact lens was removed 7 days after the operation. The best-corrected visual acuity was 6/6 with refraction of –0.75–1.0×175° in her right eye at 1 month. Four months later, the uncorrected vision of her right eye was 6/6 with residual refraction of +0.25–0.25D×175°. The corneal flap was clear and smooth in situ without epithelial ingrowth .
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. The ethics committee of …… did not require written informed consent be obtained from the patient because ……