We presented a case that a 28 year-old woman, gravida 2 para 1, had a history of 2.5 years secondary infertility. Her first pregnancy was full-term normal delivery 6 years ago. The second was spontaneous right fallopian ectopic pregnancy with right-side salpingectomy treatment 3 years ago. Then the patient underwent IVF treatment and had 2 implantation failures in the first cycle of IVF. During her second IVF cycle, she was given a GnRH antagonist regimen for controlled ovarian stimulation. The protocol for the preparation for cryopreserved embryo transfer was hormone replacement treatment (HRT). Afterwards, 2 good quality embryos were transferred into the patient’s uterus under ultrasound guidance. The procedure of embryo transfer was uneventful with soft-tipped catheter, without touching the uterine wall. The serum β-hCG was 42.49 mIU/mL at the 13 day after transfer. The patient presented with no obvious symptoms, just slight protracted dripping. At 7 weeks’ gestation, serum β-hCG rose to 2174.04 mIU/mL but the transvaginal ultrasonography scan revealed an empty endometrial cavity with no sign of fetal pole or yolk sac. However, a suspicious ill-defined hypoechogenic structure with 14*13 mm in size, without sigh of gestation sac nor fetal pulsation, was observed from the ultrasonography. It was seemingly between the right ovary and the uterus contour . Since the patient described the history of right fallopian pregnancy and right salpingectomy treatment, we suspected a right adnexa ectopic pregnancy, especially the right interstitial fallopian or right uterus corneal pregnancy. Decision was made to proceed with exploratory laparoscopy and hysteroscopy. Under hysteroscopy, no sign of gestation sac was found. Both ostiums from fallopian tubes were seen. There was also slight intrauterine adhesion in the fundus and some decidua tissue hyperplasia. Under laparoscopy, the uterus was enlarged as 7 weeks’ gestation size. The product of conception was discovered embedded in the myometrium and protruding out from the right side of the posterior uterine wall, under the right ovarian ligament, with seemingly no connection with uterine cavity nor fallopian tubes . The serosa and myometrium above the conception was compressed thin, but not ruptured. The right fallopian tube was missed. The left fallopian through its entire length and both ovaries appeared grossly normal. There was no active bleeding in pelvic cavity. We first injected 5 ml arginine vasopressin with the concentration of 0.6 U/ml into the myometrium. An incision was made over the buldging myometrium from the posterior uterine wall, dark red tissue suggestive of the conception was showed and carefully explored, confirming the conception was not connected to the endometrium cavity. Since the patient described the history of right salpingectomy treatment, we couldn’t confirm if the conception was connected to the right fallopian tube. The diagnosis of intramural pregnancy was suspected during the operation. Then we excised the lesion followed by repairing the defect with careful electrocoagulation. The estimated blood loss during the operation was around 100 ml. The β-hCG level dropped to 4.36 mIU/ml 14 days after the surgery. The pathological report confirmed the presence of chorionic villi in the uterine myometrium, validating the diagnosis of an intramyometrial pregnancy. There was no adenomyosis found from the tissue resected.
Five months later, the patient was undertaken another 2 good quality embryos transfer, but it ended up with chemical pregnancy. 7 months later, the patient was undertaken another 2 embryos transfer. Transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated a right corneal pregnancy at 6 weeks gestation, suggestive of the recurrence of intramural pregnancy . The lesion was resected and hysteroplasty surgery was performed under laparoscopy. The serum β-hCG was monitored at intervals until it dropped within normal range.