A 58-year-old male presented with a complaint of 4 days of fever, chills, worsening dry cough, generalized body aches and dark-colored urine. He was initially evaluated at a local urgent care center where he tested positive for Flu-A using rapid antigen test. Patient was referred to our hospital for further management due to hypoxia. He had no known history of liver or kidney disease and was not on any medication. He denied alcohol or drug use. Physical examination revealed a well-nourished, diaphoretic male in moderate distress. He was febrile (102 F) and tachypneic. Blood pressure and pulse were normal. Oxygen saturation was 92% on 2L oxygen by nasal cannula. He had bibasilar crackles with scattered rhonchi. Generalized weakness and diffuse muscle tenderness were noted.
Initial laboratory evaluation revealed leukocyte count of 12900/μL, hemoglobin of 17.3 g/dL, platelet count of 203000/μL, creatinine of 3.6 mg/dL and potassium of 4.6 mmol/L, No urine analysis was obtainable since patient was anuric. Creatinine kinase was elevated >1,000,000 IU/L. Chest radiograph demonstrated increased interstitial markings. CT scan of the chest showed subtle right lower lobe consolidative changes. Patient was started on Oseltamivir 75 mg twice daily and broad-spectrum antibiotics for suspected influenza pneumonia. His sputum and blood cultures were negative.
Work up for his renal failure included a negative renal ultrasound and serology for autoimmune etiologies. Despite aggressive hydration and intravenous sodium bicarbonate, his kidney function continued to deteriorate and creatinine rose to 8.7 mg/dL. On the third hospital day patient developed respiratory insufficiency requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. His arterial blood gas revealed combined respiratory and metabolic acidosis. He was started on hemodialysis. Nevertheless, he had worsening hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and metabolic acidosis. On the fourth hospital day patient went into cardiac arrest and died despite aggressive resuscitation.