The proband (III 6 in the family tree in the Figure ) was a 51-year-old woman, from italian origin, with a longstanding history of gastric pain and symptoms of gastro esophageal reflux. She also complained of chronic cough. Previous upper endoscopies reported erythematous gastritis without helicobacter pylori infection and a bulbar ulcer. She was treated by proton pump inhibitors without success. One month later, control upper endoscopy showed persistent erythematous gastritis and biopsies revealed abnormal mucosal deposits characterized by positive Congo red stain with the pathognomonic birefringence under polarize light evoking amyloidosis. The patient also reported ocular and oral sicca syndrome and clinical examination revealed mild hepatomegaly. Neurological examination was normal. Serum protein electrophoresis and serum free light chains analysis excluded a monoclonal gammapathy and C reactive protein was normal. The patient had no proteins in the urine, urine blood casts and blood creatinin level were both normal.
On thoraco-abdominal CT-scan, only multiple inflammatory infracentimetric and centrimetric mesenteric lymph nodes with homogeneous hepatomegaly were noted. Echocardiography was normal. Genomic DNA analysis of the LYZ gene revealed a heterozygous single base-pair mutation (T to A substitution, TGG/AGG) in the codon 82 of exon 2 leading to the change of the amino acid from tryptophan to arginine (p.Trp82Arg in the new nomenclature, corresponds to the previously called Trp64Arg variant). After 4 years of follow up, the patient remained stable.
Clinical, biological, morphological and histological findings of the patient’s were then recorded.
Clinical, biological, morphological and histological findings of the patient’s were recorded prospectively or retrospectively. Gene analysis was part of standard care and was proposed to all the family’s member after obtaining their informed and written consent. This retrospective and descriptive study required no additional investigation to standard care and therefore did not require a specific statement of our ethical committee. All the patients were seen for physical examination in our clinical center and written consent was obtained for publication of the data.
Tissue biopsies, when available, were analyzed with the classical Congo red stain for amyloid deposits. Immunohistochemistry was only performed on the proband’s tissue biopsies using antibodies against amyloid A protein, kappa and anti lambda light chains and against lysozyme protein. Irrelevant monoclonal antibody and normal immunoglobulins were used as controls.
Tissues were obtained for 7 patients; five gastric biopsies, 4 colic biopsies and one gall-bladder, as showed in the family tree . All gastric biopsies and 3 of 4 colic biopsies showed amyloid deposits on red Congo stains. The gallbladder obtained after surgery for gallstones in patient IV4 showed also amyloid deposits in the gallbladder walls with the red Congo stain. Immunohistochemistry for amyloidosis typing was done only for the proband because of the unavailability of specific antibodies to Lyzozyme in all centers.
Genomic DNAs were extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by a standard procedure after informed consent of the available family members. The five exons and flanking introns of the lysozyme gene were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using previously published primers and conditions . Each PCR product was directly sequenced on both strands using a dye terminator cycle sequencing kit (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT, USA) and the sequencing products were resolved on an automatic fluorescent DNA sequencer ABI Prism 377 (Applied Biosystems, Valencia, CA, USA). The nucleotide sequences of each exon were then compared with the published sequence of the lysozyme cDNA and the identified mutation was numbered according to the published cDNA sequence .
Nine subjects of the kindred (not including the proband) accepted after informed consent to be screened for the ALys mutation. Sequence analysis of lysozyme exon 2 revealed a heterozygous single base-pair transition from T to A of the first nucleotide position of codon 82 (TGG/AGG), in 9/10 tested members. This nucleotide substitution modifies the amino acid at position 82 in the mature protein from tryptophane to arginine. p.Trp82Arg in the new nomenclature, wich was previously called Trp64Arg variant).
Both parents of the proband were born in the Piedmont region in Italy (without known consanguinity). Her mother (II2) died aged of 52 years from meningeal hemorrhage and was not known to have gastrointestinal tract symptoms. The proband’s father was still in good health. The cause of death of her maternal grandmother (I2) and grandfather (I1) was unknown. The first symptoms, the clinical manifestations, the results of digestive investigations and follow-up of the 9 affected members of this family (including the proband) are shown in Table . All presented with GI symptoms. The most frequent symptom was heartburn related to endoscopic findings of non specific gastritis, ulcers (antral or bulbar) or oesophagitis. In all patients with endoscopic evaluation (7/9) typical amyloid deposits were shown on gastric or duodenal tissue biopsies with the red Congo staining. Interestingly, three members of this family had the diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease: a proband’s sister (III9) who complained of rectal hemorrhage and chronic diarrhea. Lower endoscopy revealed left inflammatory erosive rectocolitis which led to the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. She was treated with mesalazine. She also had chronic erythematous gastritis and colon polyps. In biopsies, amyloid deposits were observed in stomach and duonenum and in rectocolic biopsies. The second was a 27-year old woman (IV7) who presented with a history of abdominal pain and rectal hemorrhage with pancolitis leading to the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. She improved under mesalazine. The third was a 24-year-old man who presented ileal ulcers on lower endoscopy suggesting the diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease (IV5), biopsies only revealed amyloid deposits on ileal and colic biopsies without inflammatory lesions. Moreover, erythematous gastritis was noted on upper endoscopy with amyloid depositis in the antrum. Magnetic resonance imaging of ileon and fecal calprotectin were both normal. Three of the proband’s daughters were affected, all complained of gastro esophageal reflux symptoms. One of these suffered from gastric ulcer (IV4) and had surgery for gallstones at age 37. Typical amyloid deposits were found in her gall-bladder mucosa. The half-sister of the proband’s mother (II1) and his son (III2) were also affected. The 71-year-old aunt of the proband (II1) presented with a long history of gastro esophageal reflux symptoms and sicca syndrome. Iterative upper endoscopies noted peptic esophagitis, non hemorrhagic gastritis, antrum atrophy and duodenum diverticulitis. Amyloid depositis were found in the antrum and duodenal biopsies. Lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy showed colon tubular polyposis and amyloid deposits. His son aged 41 (III2) presented only gastro esophageal reflux symptoms without gastritis on upper endoscopy. However, amyloid deposits were noted in the stomach. All the affected patients had normal echocardiography, normal kidney function, no inflammatory biological state, negative proteinuria and normal urine blood casts. None presented with neurological symptoms or abnormal neurological evaluation. All affected patients were alive with five years of follow up. Of note another sister (III4) and brother (III7) were known to have had chronic pancreatitis but they refused genetical testing. No further information could be obtained for II3, III5, III8 and III10.