The patient is a 20-year-old man who noticed a swollen testis about a year ago after falling off a motorcycle, which was painful but did not follow-up due to the lack of continued pain. A year later, he referred to a urologist again, who on examination, noticed swelling and a mass in both testes, and requested ultrasound and tumor markers for the patient. On ultrasound, a 26 × 21 × 26 mm hypoechoic mass containing echogenic foci suggesting calcification in the left testicle and another hypoechoic foci measuring 8 ×8 × 8 mm in the lower pole of the right testis and another small foci of 2 mm diameter was observed in the upper pole of the same testis, which primarily indicated a testicular tumor. In measuring tumor markers, BHCG, AFP and LDH markers were within the normal range.
Due to the ultrasound and larger and painful left testicular mass, he became a candidate for left orchiectomy. In preoperation examinations, ultrasound was performed again and then computed tomography (CT) scan was requested for the patient. Complete abdominopelvic ultrasound before operation, reported bilateral adrenal hyperplasia was observed which eventually was recommended to perform CT scan. Examination of the testicles showed diffuse microlithiasis in both testes. At least two masses were seen in the left testis, the largest of which was 27 × 27 mm hypoechoic containing calcified foci with vascular flow. At least 4 hypoechoic masses with vascular flow were observed in the right testis, the largest of which was 5 × 3 mm. CT scan showed bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and two lymph nodes with maximum SAD of 7 mm in the para-aorta and aortocaval.
The patient underwent a radical left orchiectomy and the pathology of removed testis reported consistently with sex cord stromal tumor in favor of Leydig cell tumor and in immunohistochemically (IHC) evaluation, calretinin was positive and CD99, WT1 and Melan A were weakly positive. After the operation, due to adrenal hyperplasia, hormonal tests were requested and the patient was referred to the endocrinology outpatient clinic. The patient has no history of hospitalization in infancy. He states that he was taller than his peers at the age of 7, but he has not increased in height compared to his peers since he was 10 years old. He did not mention the history of allergies to drugs and food and any sort of drug consumption. The parents were not related and his brother died at a young age (possibly a stroke). On examination of the patient, hair growth was sufficient and had a masculine pattern. He did not have gynecomastia on chest examination.
The patient did not have a history of hypertension and on examination, the patient's blood pressure was normal. The patient is 154 cm tall and weighs 60 kg. The patient's BMI was measured at 25.2kg/m2. Due to the presence of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia in the imaging, the patient underwent laboratory tests due to suspicion of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The laboratory tests showed high levels of aldosterone (1234, 1 pg/mL, 30-400), ACTH (219 pg/mL, 5-46), Renin activity (131,8 u/mL, 4,4-46,1) fasting ACTH (179,7 pg/mL, 5-55), plasma renin activity (10, 2 ng/mL/hr , 0,06-4,3), and 17-OH progesterone (2520 ng/mL , 5-30) and then due to the patient's age, adrenal hyperplasia on CT scan, history of precocious puberty and high levels of ACTH, the patient was diagnosed with CAH. Patient was then diagnosed with TART and was treated with corticosteroids for one year, which reduced the number of right testicular masses. The patient is still in the follow-up period.