A 33-year-old man attempted suicide 4 h ago because of taking an unknown dose of dichlorvos, and was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital.
The patient was hospitalized due to acute severe phosphorus poisoning. He drank before oral dose of unknown dichlorvos and was found foaming at the mouth and sweating, with cyanotic lips and no response to calls. Gastric lavage and atropine treatment were administered at a local hospital. He was later transferred to our hospital.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had no personal and family history.
On examination, the vital signs showed an unmeasurable body temperature, heart rate of 127/min, blood pressure of 61/39 mmHg, and SPO2 of 82%, invasive ventilator assisted ventilation, slight coma, moist skin and mucous membrane, no light reflection, a garlic smell in the mouth, a thick breathing sound of both lungs, a little damp rale in the left lower lung, a soft and flat abdomen, and normal bowel sounds.
Auxiliary examination showed a cholinesterase level of 0.26 kU/L.
Gastroscopy performed on September 3, 2018 showed that there were a large number of dark green secretions and membranous substances in the stomach cavity , and there were many bulges in the mucosa of the stomach cavity, purulent secretions at the top, and obvious congestion in the surrounding mucosa . It also showed congestion and edema in part of the descending duodenum . Computed tomography (CT) of the upper abdomen performed on September 18, 2018 showed acute pancreatitis and multiple pancreatic pseudocysts , as well as descending duodenal edema and pneumatosis . From September 3, 2018 to October 3, 2018, repeated CT of the upper abdomen showed no sign of intestinal perforation. However, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed on October 2, 2018 revealed that iohexol, a contrast agent, had been distributed around pancreatic pseudocyst through a drainage tube and the descending duodenum , which confirmed duodenal perforation.