An otherwise healthy 50-year-old gentleman consulted us for his radiating pain at the right leg. The pain, which was triggered by 10-h driving 1 month ago, started from the right buttock and radiated down to the sole of the foot. The leg pain was rather severe, intolerable sometimes, and he cannot stand or walk when the pain attacked. He sought for treatment at a local hospital, and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed an osseous lesion in the L5 vertebra. He was suspected to have lumbar metastasis and was referred to us for further treatment. He had no fever, no weight loss, and no bowel or bladder problems since he had the pain.
On physical examinations, he rated the leg pain as visual analogue scale (VAS) 7 points. His right straight leg raising test was positive. There was haphalgesia on his right calf, but no obvious sensation loss in the right leg. Manual muscle tests (MMT) revealed slightly decreased muscle power in his right tibialis anterior, gastrocnemius, and ankle dorsiflexors (grade IV+). His bilateral knee and ankle reflexes were normal. Pathological reflexes were negative for both legs.
On computed tomography (CT) images, the right portion of the L5 vertebra, including the vertebral body, pedicle, and transverse process, was destructed . Contrast CT revealed a mostly non-enhanced lytic lesion at the right L5 vertebral arch and body . The lesion, which was hypo-intense on T1-weighted (T1W) and hyper-intense on T2-weighted (T2W) sequences, mainly involved the right portion of vertebral body and arch and was moderately enhanced on gadolinium contrast sequence . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed a single site of increased uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) at the right portion of the L5 vertebra .
The patient underwent percutaneous needle biopsy. Histological studies reported the presence of some Langerhans cells in the tissue sample. Yet, histological evidence was not sufficient to make a conclusive diagnosis of LCH, and spine metastasis cannot be completely excluded due to some atypical cellular characteristics. The surgical team discussed with the patient and his family further treatment options, including repeated percutaneous biopsy, open biopsy, surgical curettage, vertebral resection, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and some other possible interventions. After comprehensive discussions, the patient selected surgical removal of the vertebral lesion.
A modified L5 en bloc vertebral resection via anterior and posterior approaches was designed. As the lesion merely involved the right portion of the L5 vertebra, the left 1/3 portion were kept in situ to enhance segmental stability for the use of short instrumentation. First, a transabdominal approach was used to detach the right psoas and soft tissues from the L5 vertebra , remove the right portion of L4/5 and L5/S1 intervertebral discs, and sagittally split the L5 vertebral body at the junction between right 2/3 and left 1/3. Then, a posterior approach was used to perform laminectomy, and remove the disassociated L5 vertebral body , pedicle screw (L4, S1, and the left L5 pedicle), and cage (with autologous lamina bone graft) instrumentation . There was 1500 ml blood loss in the surgery.
The patient’s leg pain disappeared immediately after surgery. There was a generally decreased muscle power in his right leg (MMT grade IV) and consistent numbness in his right calf and foot. These symptoms, however, did not impair his mobility. With a brace, the patient walked independently 2 weeks after the surgery. A throughout histological study of the removed vertebra revealed numerous typical Langerhans cells, which were positive for S-100β and CD-1a . Ki-67 immunochemistry staining demonstrated that the Langerhans cells are active in proliferation . A pathological diagnosis of LCH was soundly established. The patient further accepted 1 cycle of low-dose radiotherapy (7 days) to eliminate potential remaining lesions in the surgical site. Mecobalamine was given for 12 months during his rehabilitation.
At 18-month follow-up, the patient had minor numbness in his ankle. His right calf was a bit thinner than the left, but no power weakness was noticed. He has returned to previous work and normal life 1 year ago. CT scan of the lumbar spine revealed that L4–S1 vertebrae were fused through the titanium mesh . No sign of reoccurrence was noticed in the lumbar spine.