An 84-year-old female patient with a body mass index (BMI) of 26.2 kg/cm2 was admitted to the hospital due to the mucus and bloody stool. The patient had a 20-year history of hypertension and a 10-year history of atrial fibrillation. She was taking betaloc 25 mg and aspirin 100 mg daily. Two years ago, she suffered a stroke which left her with speech impairment. Upon admission, her blood pressure was 135/70 mmHg and her heart rate was 105 bpm. The preoperative diagnosis was pelvic mass with invasion of the uterus and rectum. The preoperative transthoracic electrocardiogram (TTE) showed that the left atrial transverse diameter was 4.7 cm, the left ventricular mass (indexed to body surface area) was 130 g, the left ventricular end-systolic diameter was 2.8 cm, and the left ventricular end-diastolic diameter was 4.3 cm. Meanwhile, the TTE report indicated that the patient had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mild regurgitation of the mitral and tricuspid valves, and a slight increase in pulmonary artery pressure (estimated at 42mmHg). The preoperative D-Dimer level was 572 ng/ml. The planned procedure involved hysterectomy with double adnexectomy, rectal resection, and enterostomy.
After a comprehensive assessment and preparation including low-molecular-weight heparin bridging therapy (enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily for 5 days), the patient had been scheduled for surgery. The electrocardiogram upon admission to the operating room exhibited atrial fibrillation with heart rate of 98 bpm and blood pressure of 132/65 mmHg. Following appropriate local anesthesia, arterial and central venous catheterization were performed. Thereafter, anesthesia was induced with 1.5 mg of midazolam, 14 mg of etomidate, 30 ug of sufentanil, and 8 mg of cisatracurium besylate. Taking into account the patient’s hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, following induction, an esophageal ultrasound probe (6TC-RS GE Medical Horton, Norway) was gently inserted orally to meticulously monitor ventricular function. To routine inspect the left atrial appendage, no significant thrombus or spontaneous echo contrast (SEC) were observed . However, subsequent examinations revealed myocardial hypertrophy, the hypertrophy segment of which was in apical segment. (Video ), mild mitral and aortic regurgitation (Video ), and moderate-to-severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR Vmax was 276 cm/s, Fig. and Video ). The patient’s blood pressure was mildly reduced and maintained between 110–140/50–70 mmHg with minimal vasopressor support, while the heart rate was kept below 90 bpm. However, 3 h into the surgery, the patient’s heart rate significantly increased (over 100 bpm), and the blood pressure dropped, necessitating higher doses of vasoactive medication. At this time, TEE examination revealed a significant jelly-like fresh thrombus in the LAA with a peak LAA emptying velocity of approximately 20 cm/s by Pulse Wave Doppler . As the surgery was concluding, we only slightly increased the heart rate to reduce blood stasis in the LAA and did not perform any other treatment. Approximately half an hour later, after hemostasis was achieved, anticoagulation therapy was recommended by anesthesiologist, and 2500 IU of heparin (about 40IU/Kg) was administered intravenously. After 20 min, the size of the thrombus decreased and the shape became blurred (Video ). The left atrial appendage views before and after anticoagulation therapy are depicted in Fig. . Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where extubated two days later without any complication. Following the administration of standard anticoagulation therapy, involving a transition from low molecular weight heparin to oral medication, the patient was discharged from the hospital 10 days post-surgery. And the patient has been advised to take 3 mg of warfarin orally per day after the surgery for the long term.