A 67-year-old woman, referred from a peripheral secondary care center, with a diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma originating from the common hepatic duct was admitted to the Hepato-Biliary Surgery Division of San Raffaele Hospital, Milan. At admission, laboratory values were within normal ranges except for hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin levels: 15.6 mg/dl; normal range < 0.25 mg/dl) and cholestatic liver enzymes abnormalities (alkaline phosphatase levels: 450 U/L, normal range 33–141 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transferase levels: 160 U/L, normal range 6–40 U/L).
Preoperative CT scan showed a mass arising from the middle third of the common hepatic duct. The cranio-caudal extension of the lesion caused a marked narrowing of portal vein’s caliber which was suspect for tumor encasement. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance confirmed CT scan findings and did not reveal further hepatic lesions.
Preoperative management included endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP) plastic stenting resulting in effective biliary decompression and jaundice resolution. The preoperative management of this patient, including preoperative imaging and ERCP, was entirely planned and executed before referral to our center.
Upon referral, the case was discussed at our weekly multidisciplinary meeting specifically dedicated to biliary tumors and including surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, radiotherapists, and pathologists to define the treatment strategy within a patient-tailored management. Common bile duct (CBD) resection was planned, taking into consideration the possibility to extend the resection longitudinally in case of biliary involvement at intraoperative frozen section (i.e., to perform liver resection or pancreatic resection) and to perform a portal resection in case of radial vascular involvement.
Considering tumor’s location and vascular encasement, extemporaneous histological examination, of both proximal and distal margins, represented the turning point in guiding the resection’s extent. In case of intraoperative evidence of cranial extension, en bloc resection of common bile duct, biliary confluence, gallbladder, and liver segments 4b-5, possibly leading to a former major hepatectomy (e.g., in the presence of further cranial involvement), was planned, whereas, in case of intraoperative evidence of caudal extension, a Whipple procedure was planned.
This study was approved by the institutional review board. The need for written informed consent was waived.
A right hypochondrium square incision was performed to open the abdominal cavity. At careful surgical exploration, the gallbladder appeared overdistended due to neoplastic tissue embedding the common hepatic duct and infiltrating both the infundibulum and the superior duodenal flexure. Intraoperative liver ultrasound confirmed portal trunk narrowing above the spleno-mesenteric confluence. Station 8 and 12 lymphadenectomy was performed and full access to the hepatic arterial axis was obtained. The common hepatic duct was followed until the confluence; it was then dissected at his root and sectioned below the confluence. Cross section of both ducts’ stumps was obtained, and intraoperative histological examination was performed to assess bile ducts margins (negative margin status). After duodenal kocherization and exposure of the aortocaval area, the gastroduodenal artery was identified and sectioned. The lesser sac was entered, and left gastroepiploic vessels were isolated and sectioned along with the gastric body. The inferior pancreatic border was detached from the transverse mesocolon until full exposure of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) was obtained; subsequently, pancreatic transection was performed. During careful detachment of the pancreatic head from the portal plane, the anterior wall resulted infiltrated by neoplastic tissue. Anterior mesenteric artery was identified and pancreaticoduodenectomy en bloc with gallbladder and segment 4 resection was completed. Due to the longitudinal extent of portal trunk invasion not allowing an end-to-end vessel reconstruction, total portal vein replacement with parietal peritoneum graft interposition seemed the best viable option. This strategy ensured both safe portal reconstruction and complete tumor excision with negative margins at final pathology. Whipple’s procedure ended with pancreatico- and gastro-jejunostomy. Biliary tract reconstruction was performed through a double termino-lateral hepaticojejunostomy Roux-en-Y anastomosis with PDS 4/0.
A 4 × 3 cm section of diaphragmatic parietal peritoneum was harvested from the right subcostal area. The section obtain was tubularized, using a 10-mm trocar as support model, by a running 6/0 prolene suture. Before portal clamping, intravenous heparin (3000 units) was administered. The portal vein was entirely reconstructed with the interposition tube graft obtained and cut to length .
Ultimately, an end-to-end graft to portal vein anastomoses was completed with 6/0 prolene suture .
Adequate portal flow and patency were proven using intraoperative Doppler ultrasound.
The postoperative course was uneventful. A combination of daily low-dose aspirin (100 mg) and LMWH heparin (1 mg/kg every 24 h) were prescribed since the first postoperative day. After 1 week, contrast CT scan was performed to confirm anastomotic patency . No clinic signs of portal hypertension or thrombosis were recorded, and the patient was discharged after 16 days. Preoperative and postoperative laboratory values are shown in Table . Biliary tract carcinoma (pT3 (L1,V2,On1), pN2 (13/33), G3, R0) resulted at final pathology .