A 42 years-old female patient was admitted to a reference center for Neuromuscular Disorders in northeast of Brazil with a 7 year history of progressive proximal upper limbs weakness. Five years after symptoms onset, she also noticed proximal lower limbs and distal upper limbs weakness associated to proximal muscle atrophy, specially of shoulder girdle. Strenuous exercise and cold exposure induces myalgia and worsening of weakness.
There were no complaints of fluctuating symptoms, diplopia, eyelid ptosis, dysphagia, dysphonia, dysarthria, dyspnea or abnormal urine color. Past medical history was negative for other conditions as well as substance abuse. Family health history was also negative for neuromuscular diseases.
Clinical evaluation confirmed proximal weakness of four limbs, moderate on pelvic girdle and severe on shoulder girdle, the calf’s muscle had a mild level of pseudohypertrophy with increased tonus . with atrophy and handgrip myotonia. Fasciculations, joint contractures or sensory impairment were not present. Deep tendon reflexes were globally reduced.
Serum laboratory analysis disclosure hyperCKemia (CK 1280 mg/dL) and excluded others abnormalities (electrolytes disturbance, thyroid, kidney and liver dysfunction), infectious diseases (retrovirus, syphilis, hepatitis B and C) and serum biomarkers of collagenosis or inflammatory myopathies. Serum protein electrophoresis was normal.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and needle EMG were performed, which showed normal motor and sensory nerve conductions studies parameters and myopathic pattern: increased and early motor recruitment, decreased duration and amplitude of motor unit potentials (MUP) with short polyphasic potentials. The EMG abnormalities were more evident on proximal upper limb muscles and with a mosaic pattern (myopathic/normal) on lower limb muscles. Furthermore, signs of membrane instability (fibrillations and positive sharp waves) were identified on upper and lower limbs and paravertebral musculature as well as electrical myotonia in some muscles of upper and lower limbs and paravertebral musculature . Slow repetitive nerve conduction study was normal.
Patient underwent a whole-body 1,5 Tesla magnetic resonance image to assess the pattern of muscle impairment. Fat replacement degree was measured using modified Mercuri scale by Fischer et al., 2008 – Fig. . Then, we found the following pattern of fat replacement: soleus, medial head of gastrocnemius and posterior tibialis (grade 2), semimembranosus and long head of biceps femoris (grade 2), gluteus minimus (grade 4), gluteus maximus (grade 3), deltoid (grade 2), biceps brachii and brachii (grade 4), supraspinatus and infraspinatus (grade 4). It also showed a hyperintense signal on STIR sequence involving soleus, medial head of the gastrocnemius and posterior tibial, showing signs of muscle edema.
Given the initial suspicion of inherited metabolic myopathy, a genetic myopathy panel was collected using the NGS technique, which identified pathogenic variants on Gene NM_020376.4(PNPLA2):c.792del(p.Leu264fs) and NM_000083.3(CLCN1):c.1453A > G(p.Met485Val) genes supporting two different diagnosis: NLSD-M and Thomsen congenital myotonia. Peripheral blood smear analysis showed as Jordan’s anomaly , a hallmark of NLSD-M.
We also performed a multisystemic evaluation with electrocardiogram, transthoracic echocardiogram, abdominal ultrasound, ophthalmological evaluation and lipid and glycemic profile that were normal.