A 15-year-old female visited the emergency service because she presented with blurred vision for 1 month, dizziness, fatigue, polydipsia and polyuria, and had lost 4 kg in weight. Upon physical examination, the patient had normal vital signs, with a BMI of 17 kg/m2. She was mildly dehydrated, with no other abnormal findings. During admission, blood glucose was above 1000 mg/dl, and glycated haemoglobin (A1C) was 12.8%, with no acute metabolic disorder (no ketosis). Biochemical analysis reported triglycerides of 858 mg/dL, total cholesterol of 255 mg/dL, HDL of 48 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 26 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 15 U/L, basal insulin of 8.1 mU/mL and C-peptide of 0.9 ng/mL. Anti-acid decarboxylase (GAD65), anti-insulin, insulinoma-associated protein 2 (IA-2), and anti-zinc transporter 8 (ZNT8) autoantibodies were all negative. A continuous insulin infusion regimen was initially prescribed with subsequent progressive dose reduction due to the normalization of blood glucose control.
She had regular menstrual cycles with a history of left renal hypoplasia, bilateral diminished corticomedullary differentiation and simple renal cysts, with no remarkable changes in the follow-up and conserved normal renal function.
Her mother had a history of cystic kidney disease, hypertension, and hypotonic bladder with recurrent urinary tract infections, as well as possible irritable bowel syndrome, but there was no associated hyperglycaemia disorder. Moreover, her mother had 5 pregnancies but only 2 live births; the first one was due to a blighted ovum, the second was a miscarriage and the third was lost due to multiple malformations including a horseshoe, polycystic and duplex kidney. The patient’s grandfather had a history of irritable bowel syndrome and was diagnosed at age 35 with type 2 diabetes due to blood glucose above 700 mg/dl, without ketoacidosis. Furthermore, there was a remarkable history of early diabetes, classified as type 2, in her family, and her great aunt had a moderate neurocognitive deficit (see Fig. ).
Based on early diabetes development, the absence of type 1 diabetes (T1D) antibodies, the presence of renal dysgenesis and a relevant history of atypical diabetes in her family, MODY5 was suspected and sequencing of the hnf1b gene was requested.
The analysis of a trio exome detected the heterozygous variant c.1149delinsTGGCC, p.Arg351Leufs*10 (NM_000458.3) in the hnf1b gene. It was identified in the index case and her mother. This variant was classified as being likely pathogenic. It has not been described in this disease, nor is it present within the ClinVar dataset, and is absent from the gnomAD global population dataset.
A protein sequence alignment was performed (NCBI BLAST) evaluating the level of conservation of individual amino acids. The amino acid arginine at position 351 of the HNF1B protein is highly conserved through species, so it is likely to have an important role in the function of the protein (see Table ). The variant c.1149delinsTGGCC, p.Arg351Leufs*10 in HNF1B creates a shift in the reading frame, which will probably result in the nonsense-mediated decay of the mRNA transcript with functional consequences. A prediction in silico was performed using five bioinformatics tools (MutationTaster, Polyphen2, SIFT, MutPed2, and PMut). All these tools reported that the mutation is pathogenic. The stop codon in the wild type protein is at amino acid residue 558. In contrast, in the mutated protein, the stop codon is at amino acid residue 360, resulting in a truncated protein with an altered function. This mutation locates on the transactivation domain of the HNF1B that is Ser/Pro/Gln-rich, we consider the variant c.1149delinsTGGCC, p.Arg351Leufs*10 in HNF1B to be pathogenic and the cause of MODY5 in the patient.
After three years of follow-up after initial diagnosis, blood glucose control was found to be within acceptable levels following a diet with carbohydrate counting and frequently performed physical activity. Her weight is 45 kg, with a body mass index of 17.5 kg/m2. During follow-up, serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels were normal, and a low 24-h urine calcium (16.3 mg) was identified. A fasting plasma glucose of 118 mg/dL, A1C of 6.2%, total cholesterol of 221 mg/dL, HDL of 85 mg/dL, triglycerides of 230 mg/dL, uric acid of 6.45 mg/dL, and serum magnesium of 1.28 mg/dL was reported. The liver and renal function was, normal but enalapril was prescribed because of a positive microalbuminuria of 273 mg/g. Faecal elastase was 133 μg/g (reference value > 200 μg/g), so pancreatic enzyme supplements were initiated. Total abdominal ultrasound follow-up showed a reduce pancreas body, a right subcapsular simple renal cyst and left diminished corticomedullary differentiation with caliectasis (see Fig. ).