A seventy-year-old male patient with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, and concomitant arterial hypertension was referred to our institution for LA circumferential ablation. The preprocedural TEE described an aneurysm of the IAS (See : TEE.mpeg for the TEE), however the left heart catheterization was deemed feasible. ICE performed at the electrophysiology laboratory (catheter Ultra ICE 9900, 9 MHz, EP Technologies, Boston Scientific Corp., San Jose, CA, USA connected to a console ClearView Ultra, Boston Scientific Corp., San Jose, CA, USA) as a routine part of the transseptal puncture showed more detailed picture of the intracardiac anatomy – dilated aortic root, enlarged right atrium displacing the IAS towards the LA free wall, and small oval fossa with flapping motion of the fossa ovalis membrane. The distance between the IAS and the LA free wall during the atrial diastole was small . During the atrial contraction the LA cavity appeared almost obliterated and the fossa ovalis membrane virtually touched the LA free wall, thus making the transseptal puncture potentially dangerous (See : ICE1.mpeg for the unusual intracardiac anatomy). The fossa itself was abouting anteriorly to the non-coronary aortic sinus of Valsalva and although the fluoroscopic position of the transseptal needle was apparently correct, ICE showed that it was always sliding to the junction between the IAS and the aorta and that the needle tip was pointing towards the aortic root. Several unsuccessful attempts were made to change its direction towards the oval fossa. That was also deemed a condition predisposing to complicated transseptal puncture (See : ICE2.mpeg for the sliding of the transseptal needle towards the aorta). During the procedure two echocardiographers, including the one, which had performed the TEE, re-evaluated the videotaped TEE and agreement was achieved that the initial interpretation of the TEE needed correction. Although the patient was symptomatic and the arrhythmia episodes could not be suppressed effectively with antiarrhythmic drugs, after considering all pros and cons we decided not to perform the left atrial procedure and thus to avoid serious and potentially fatal complications. Only a cavotricuspid isthmus ablation was done.