We report a unique case of a 13-year-old female who had presented with a history of pain and recurrent swelling for 5 years. On physical examination, the swelling was of size 4.4 cm × 3.7 cm × 4 cm, non-tender, non-mobile, two in number, non-cystic without any redness or sinus discharge, no visible pulsations, and no dilated veins. A 10 cm previous scar mark was present and the brachial artery pulsations were felt just over the swelling with a previous history of swelling at the same place, for which she was operated in 2018 . The patient provided with discharge card and radiological investigation of previous surgery of a tertiary hospital from which OCE was diagnosed. CT reports were suggestive of a large well defined broad-based exophytic diaphyseal lesion in the medial side of the proximal humerus extending posteriorly (, ). It measured approximately 4.4 cm × 3.7 cm × 4 cm in size. Another similar morphological lesion measuring approximately 9 mm × 7 mm was noted involving the posterior humeral shaft . The minimal distance between the lesion and the brachial artery was 2 mm just anterior to the posteriomedial growth.
A cardiovascular thoracic team was involved for the dissection and a 6 cm incision was taken on the previous scar. The tumor was first dissected posteriorly . A first interval was made between biceps brachii muscle and triceps brachii muscle. Then, the neurovascular bundle was identified and retracted followed by a second interval made by splitting the biceps brachii muscle. The anterior tumor was identified, after which the brachial artery was isolated and posteromedial exostosis was removed with the help of an osteotome of size 6 cm × 4 cm × 3.7 cm. This was followed by anterior exostosis of size 1 cm × 1.2 cm and of the whole cartilage cap was excised and electrical cauterization of the base was done to prevent further reoccurrence and a requirement of second surgery. Postoperatively, the patient was started on broad spectrum antibiotics and shoulder and elbow range of motion exercises were started post-operative day 1. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 5 and suture removal was done on post-operative day 14. Immediate post-operative X-Ray and post-operative 6 months X-Ray were done (, ).