A 79-year-old male with a history of smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypertension, was transferred early in the morning to our emergency department (ED) due to syncope. A few hours earlier, the patient had visited the on-call ED for persistent hiccups that had been interfering with his sleep. A new onset atrial fibrillation was found during that visit, and the patient was given chlorpromazine for symptomatic management of hiccups and he was discharged with a prescription for rivaroxaban. At presentation to our hospital, the patient had low blood pressure (60/40 mmHg) which was attributed to chlorpromazine as no other cause was found. An echocardiography did not reveal any findings that could explain the hypotension, the electrocardiogram had no findings of ischemia and serial serum troponin measurements were normal.
The patient’s lab tests were normal (WBC 8200x109/L, neutrophils 60%, lymphocytes 29%, eosinophil count 100/μl, normal liver function tests, sodium 136mEq/L, potassium 4.3 mEq/L, glucose 87 mg/dl, normal arterial blood gases: pO2 92 mmHg, pH 7.404, pCO2 33.5 mmHg, HCO3 20.5 mmol/L) except a slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP=3 mg/dL, upper limit of normal=0.5 mg/dl) and acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.61 mg/dl from a baseline of 1.1 mg/dl) which was attributed to the patient’s hypotension. The chest x-ray revealed a retrocardiac consolidation .
The patient had no fever. When asked, he reported cough, but not more than usual. During his hospital stay, low-grade fever was recorded (axillary temperature up to 37.3oC) and CRP rose up to 8.38 mg/dl.
Given the patient’s smoking history, a brain and chest CT were performed.
The brain CT was normal, but the chest CT revealed a left lower lobe consolidation and smaller consolidations in the right upper and middle lobes . The patient was prescribed levofloxacin for 5 days and baclofen as a temporary symptomatic treatment for hiccups as several physical maneuvers were unsuccessful.
At follow-up, one month later, a second chest CT scan showed almost complete resolution of previous findings . The patient reported that hiccups had persisted for about a week and then gradually resolved.