A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to sudden-onset amnesia. She had no past medical history, except for dyslipidemia, had taken no medicine, including pills and nutritional supplements. She had neither smoked nor drank. She was an elementary school teacher. Before developing amnesia, she visited another elementary school for a workshop. She did not clearly remember the situation at the onset of TGA. At the first medical examination, she presented with no neurologic deficit, except for amnesia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), electroencephalogram, and laboratory findings were normal. We diagnosed the patient with TGA. The patient’s symptom disappeared after about 6 hours. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) carried out the next day revealed a high-density spot in the left hippocampus , which indicated TGA. She was discharged two days after onset.
Several hours after discharge, the patient had a sudden terrible headache. The patient had strained at stool just before onset. She came back to our hospital immediately. At the time of the second admission, the patient was alert and had a blood pressure of 140/88mmHg. Her heart rate and oxygen saturation were normal. She had a throbbing headache, but exhibited no signs of neurologic deficit, including amnesia. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI revealed convexal subarachnoid hemorrhage (cSAH) in the right frontal lobe . The signal in this lesion was hyperintense on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and T2-weighted images, and hypointense on T2* susceptibility-weighted images . This indicates hemorrhage and not thrombosis. There were no signs of leukoaraiosis or microbleeds on MRI and no vessel abnormalities, such as aneurysms or arteriovenous fistula/malformation on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV). Laboratory findings, including those regarding the coagulating system, were normal. On day 2 of the second admission, a strong headache re-occurred when the patient strained at stool. CT and MRI revealed another cSAH in the right frontal lobe . There were no findings such as aneurysms, anomalies, or sinus thrombosis on DSA. However, DSA revealed hypoplastic left transvers sinus and congestion in the left temporal lobe. Left carotid artery angiography in the last part of the venous phase revealed reflux from the inferior petrosal vein into the cavernous . Left vertebral artery angiography revealed that hypoplastic left sinus caused venous blood flow into supplementary path, that is, the basilar venous plexus in addition to normal flow into bilateral transverse sinus , which indicated the left temporal venous congestion. However, perfusion-weighted imaging did not show distinct congestion in the lesion of cSAH.
Jugular vein ultrasonography revealed reflux only with the Valsalva maneuver in left internal jugular vein . Reflux was confirmed according to a previous report . The internal jugular venous valve was not found. The other examinations, such as electrocardiography, Holter electrocardiography, transthoracic echocardiography, carotid artery ultrasonography, leg venous ultrasonography, whole-body CT scan, and electroencephalogram were normal.
The headache steadily improved and the patient was discharged. Repeated brain imaging tests, including CT, MRI, MRA, and MRV indicated no relapse of cSAH, new lesion, reversible lesion, contraction, or thrombosis. The left internal jugular venous reflux following the Valsalva maneuver on ultrasonography disappeared four months later. Medical history and the test results are summarized in the Additional file .