A 56-year-old asymptomatic female was referred to The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University (Hebei, Shijiazhuang, China) after a routine physical chest X-ray screening revealed a nodule in the left lower lung field. Physical examination showed no obvious positive signs. The patient had no history of surgery or trauma. There was no family history of hereditary diseases. The patient was presented with no respiratory symptoms and had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. The patient was diagnosed with hypertension five years ago and has been maintaining normal blood pressure by taking medicine. There was no record of any past surgical procedures or traumatic incidents, and the patient had no family history of hereditary diseases. The results of blood tests and tumor marker analysis were within the normal range.
The patient underwent pre-contrast and dual-phase (35 seconds in the arterial phase and 70 seconds in the venous phase) contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) scans of the chest five days before the operation. Pre-contrast CT image revealed a well-defined round soft-tissue mass in the lower lobe of the left lung, with a size of about 3 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm . No evidence of cavitation, fat, or calcification was found. The mass showed significant heterogeneous enhancement with an “adherent vessel sign” on the proximal side of the hilum in the arterial phase. Multiple areas of marked enhancement of the lesion were observed within the tumor . In the venous phase, the enhancement further increased with multiple foci of hyperenhancement . The CT value of the mass on the pre-contrast CT image was 26.52 ± 8.24 Hounsfield units (HU). The mass was markedly and heterogeneously enhanced, and its CT number increased to 79.12 ± 28.12 HU in the arterial phase and 96.87 ± 19.23 HU in the venous phase. Axial lung window setting image showed a clear interface between the tumor and the lung . Coronal CECT images clearly depicted the relationship between the mass in the lung tissue and bronchovascular bundles . No pleural effusion or enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes were found.
The MRI scan was performed with a 3.0 T MRI scanner (MAGNETOM Skyra, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) using a body phased-array coil (18 elements). The patient was scanned in the supine position throughout the examination. Pre-contrast MRI sequences included in-phase T1-weighted image (T1WI), out-phase T1WI, T2-weighted image (T2WI), fat-suppressed T2WI, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI; b value =0 s/mm2 and 800 s/mm2). Then, the patients underwent a pre-contrast volume interpolated breath-hold gradient-echo examination (VIBE), followed by the free-breathing dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-VIBE sequence, started 20 seconds after a bolus injection of gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist, Bayer HealthCare) at a dosage of 0.1 mmol/kg through a cubital vein at a rate of 3 mL/s by an MRI-compatible automated injector pump, followed by a saline chase of 20 ml at the same injection rate. The free-breathing DCE-VIBE sequence included 37 phases, with a total imaging time of 250 seconds.
On the in-phase T1WI image, the mass presented iso-to-high signal intensity (SI) than that of muscle and mixed with some low-SI foci within the mass . On the out-phase T1WI image, the mass still showed iso-to-higher SI with no areas of SI reduction within the tumor compared to the in-phase T1WI image . On the T2WI image, the mass also presented iso-to-higher SI than that of muscle and with some small low SI foci . On the fat-suppressed T2WI image, the mass exhibited heterogeneous signal intensity (SI), characterized by predominantly high SI with scattered regions of low SI within the tumor . On the fat-suppressed T2WI image, the SI was not reduced and became relatively higher . On the DWI image and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) image , the mass exhibited significant high SI and a measured ADC value of (2.36 ± 0.22) × 10−3 mm2/s. These findings suggested that the mass was more likely to be a benign tumor rather than a malignant one. Contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T1WI revealed noticeable marked heterogeneous progressive enhancement throughout the mass . The mass showed early enhancement on DCE-MRI images without a significant peak, followed by a plateau pattern .
The mass was surgically resected two days after the MRI examination. Local resection was infeasible after evaluation, so basilar segmentectomy of the left lower lobe was performed using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Grossly, the excised specimen was a gray-red, solitary, well-circumscribed round mass measuring about 3.0 cm in diameter. Microscopically, the tumor was well-defined and composed of cuboidal surface cells and round stromal cells, with mixed multiple growth patterns and consisted of a solid pattern (20% of the total area, ), a papillary pattern (10% of the total area, ), a sclerotic pattern (40% of the total area, ), and a hemangiomatous pattern (30% of the total area, ). Immunohistochemically, thyroid transcription factor-1(TTF-1), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and Vimentin were positive for both cuboidal surface cells and round stromal cells . AE1/AE3 was positive in cuboidal surface cells but negative in round stromal cells , while progesterone-receptor (PR) exhibited a negative result in cuboidal surface cells but a positive result in round stromal cells . The Ki-67 index was below 2%, indicating a low proliferation rate . Finally, the pathological and IHC findings of the tumor illustrated the final diagnosis of PSP.
The patient had a total stay length of 12 days. No apparent complications were noted, and the patient recovered well. The patient was followed up for 44 months without recurrence or metastasis until January 2023 (the date of the last follow-up).