A 36-year-old woman presented with a two-month history of painless but puritic perineal lump which she noticed was gradually enlarging. The patient’s past gynecological history included frequent vaginitis owing to bad health habits and the lack of professional treatment. Because of discomfort, the patient often scratched the vulva including the lesion of the episiotomy scar for many years. In addition, her past obstetric history was significant. She had a history of a forceps delivery 20 years ago. The postoperative recovery of perineal wound was slow. Several months after delivery, she experienced cyclic perineal pain and swelling of the episiotomy scar. Mifesterone and Medroxyprogesterone acetate injectable suspension (DMPA) were used and the pain was relieved. She had undergone surgical excision of a mass in the episiotomy scar 9 year ago and resequently histological type of endometriosis. DMPA was administrated for one year and then mifesterone for half a year. Medical treatment with Chinese traditional medicine was prescribed after that.
Physical examination revealed a 10 × 5 cm soft, purple scar which is closely related to the apex of the episiotomy. Pelvic examination and trans-vaginal ultrasound did not detect other signs of pelvic or extra-pelvic endometriosis. We underwent a local excision of the mass for a biopsy . Microscopically, pathological result was clear cell adenocarcinoma . Endometriotic focus was seen at the side of the cacinous area . We clearly noticed transitional dysplastic zone between the endometriotic focus and the clear cell carcinoma . The second surgery performed after one cycle of paclitaxel and cisplatin (TP) to permit clearance of tumor while preserving normal vaginal function. The patient underwent radical vulvar excision with skin graft and inguinal lymphadenectomy. The pathologic result showed the deep and lateral margins are clear. The patient was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization without any complication. Two cycles of TP adjuvant chemotherapy were administrated after surgery. The patient has returned to work at the time of manuscript preparation.