A 60-year-old short-statured woman experienced the lumbar scoliosis for more than 20 years, suffered from progressive lower back pain for 4 years (since from 2013). Besides, she also performed the lower limbs malformation for more than 50 years. She was diagnosed as rickets in her childhood but did not receive any regular effective treatment because of her previous poor family condition. Since her back pain initially occurred, she began receiving the oral administration NSAIDs, physical therapy, and facet joints injection treatment successively and repeatedly in our hospital. However, the symptom relief from above ways was temporary and limited. The painful gradually became intolerable (VAS = 8) that brought her back to our clinic found help through spine surgery. No leg pain, numbness, or claudication accompanied with her back pain all the time.
Physical examination showed her weight of 37 kg and height of 138 cm. The obvious scoliosis with curve convex to right side was found. Tenderness existed in her lumbar spinous process and paravertebral muscles. Both lower extremities, especially the right femur and left tibia, were bow appearance. Left leg is about 2.5 cm longer than the right one. The neurology function exam is normal. And bilateral hip and knee joint activity are almost normal.
Standing full-spine and full-lower limbs X-films are collected by the multi-purpose Digital R/F System (Sonial Vision Safire 17, Shimadzu Corporation). A-P film showed double structural curves : the main thoracolumbar (TL) curve with Cobb angle from T10-L3 was 72.5° (43.1° in reduce position, Fig. S), the lower semi-lumbosacral curve with Cobb angle from L3-S1 was 44.9°. C7-CSVL distance was 0. The lower limbs films showed clearly her bowed femur and tibia deformities. And the left leg was valgus deformity with the right leg was varus deformity that often been called as windswept deformity. Lumbar CT and MRI showed the L5-S1 segment is good .
In March 2017, a posterior correction (multilevel SPO) and fusion was performed at T9-L5. After surgery, her painful was great relieved (VAS = 3). The main TL curve was corrected to 21.0°, the coronal balance to 2.0 cm and the SVA to − 1.0 cm after surgery. She was asked to wear a thoracolumbar brace strictly for 3 months due to the relatively lower internal fixation density. At the 2 years follow-up, she had almost no pain (VAS = 2) and been very satisfied to the surgery. CT scans showed the bone graft has already fused . No screw loose or hardware failure happened. The main scoliosis correction was well maintained (TL Cobb = 19.5°), but the posterior coronal imbalance seems appeared with standard C7-CSVL distance equal to 4.0 cm . In fact when we artificially eliminate the pelvic tilt angle, the true spine coronal balance was very good (modified CB line in Fig. ). Given the coronal imbalance was asymptomatic and can be improved by standing posture . We advised her shoe lifts (2.5 cm high, on right foot) and asked her keeping follow-up.