A 29-year-old man came to our hospital for treatment because of abdominal dis-tension and abdominal pain for three months and vomiting for two days.
Three months before the visit, the patient developed intermittent abdominal distension and pain without obvious causes, especially in the upper abdomen, occasionally accompanied by belching and acid reflex. The patient’s symptoms could not be relieved after rest, and the above symptoms were aggravated by eating. During the period, the patient's weight was reduced by 10 kg compared with the previous period, but the patient still did not pay attention to it. The patient developed vomiting 2 d before the visit, and the vomit was of the stomach contents.
The patient was previously healthy.
No relevant disorders were identified.
Upon admission, the patient's vital signs were stable. Abdominal physical examination: the abdomen was flat and soft, no gastrointestinal peristalsis wave was observed, slight tenderness in the upper abdomen, no obvious rebound pain and muscle tension, and obvious succussion splash could be heard.
His preoperative laboratory findings were normal.
The patient underwent endoscopic gastroscopy in the outpatient department of our hospital, which revealed submucosal masses in the antrum and incomplete pyloric obstruction . The enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a cystic density shadow within the initial cavity of the duodenum, measuring approximately 6.78 × 4.7578 × 6.94 centimeter in size, exhibiting smooth edges and a slightly thickened cyst wall. Furthermore, the enhanced CT scan demonstrated enhancement of the cyst wall. No enlarged lymph nodes were detected within the abdominal cavity or retroperitoneum . For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient underwent (EUS). Ultrasound doppler showed that there was an anechoic homogeneous oval lesion (69.7 × 44.9 millimeter) originating from the submucosa in the gastric antrum . The cyst wall was smooth, and there was no obvious blood flow signal in the cyst wall. The results of imaging examinations provided an important basis for the final diagnosis.