A 32-year-old Iranian healthy man presented to us with sudden vision loss in the right eye 3 hours following 100 mg sildenafil consumption. The history for thrombophilia, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension was negative. No familial history of hypercoagulative diseases was noted. The patient reported no vigorous exercise and severe dehydration. Visual acuity was 20/200 OD and 20/20 OS. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 12 mmHg OD and 14 mmHg OS. Ophthalmic examination revealed a three-plus positive relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) in the right eye. In fundus examination, a diffuse retinal hemorrhage, cotton-wool spots, subretinal exudation, dilated and tortured veins, and prominent optic disc swelling were evident. The extreme severity of exudation and retinal edema resulted in macular folding . Examination of the contralateral eye was unremarkable, and the cup–disc ratio was normal . Fluorescein angiography depicted blockage of the fluorescence due to extensive retinal hemorrhage and peripheral retinal hypoperfusion, and vascular staining, probably due to ischemia, was appreciated . Due to clinical examination, severe peripheral nonperfusion, and occluded retinal arterioles in periphery, the diagnosis of combined central retinal vein occlusion and central retinal artery occlusion was made for the patient. Since recently, a few cases of retinal vascular accidents following severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2) have been reported; we asked him about his recent history of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) or recent vaccination, which were negative.
To rule out undetected underlying systemic disease, we conducted ancillary laboratory tests oriented to hypercoagulable states including the level of serum protein–S &–C, homocysteine of the serum and urine, antithrombin–III and factor V–Leiden, where none of the tests were significant. The plasma level of sildenafil was not measured because the test was not available. The patient was treated with intravitreal bevacizumab (Avastin) injection for severe macular edema and hemorrhage. After three monthly intravitreal bevacizumab injections, the macular edema resolved but the vision did not improve due to severe macular ischemia and optic disc atrophy. To assess the ADR probability, we implemented the Naranjo algorithm and the scores for each item related to our case is bolded.