A 21-year-old woman visited an emergency room with acute abdominal pain that commenced 2 days prior to her presentation. A specific history of the woman was nonexistent, but she had anemia for 1 year for which iron supplements had been taken; it was suspected that the patient had panperitonitis. Thereafter, a computed tomography (CT) scan was notable for a small-intestine perforation, and huge masses were observed in the small intestine and the mesentery. Also, free air was detected around the small intestine and numerous seeding nodules were found in the abdominal cavity, but no other solid-organ metastasis was evident. She underwent an emergency operation with a segmental resection of the small intestine and a partial omentectomy. The mass that was located at the ileum site is approximately 100 cm above the ileocecal (IC) valve, and while it is located on the antimesenteric border and it seems that luminal narrowing had occurred, an obstruction is absent. Also, a same-nature mass is on the mesentery. A fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan was performed after the surgery to confirm the primary lesions and to identify any additional lesions; no lesions other than those of the abdomen were found. The pathologic reports confirmed a small-cell-type NEC with a mass size of 7.5 × 6.5 cm. The mitotic count is up to 24/10 high-power fields (HPFs), the results of the immunohistochemical stain are positive for CD56 and synaptophysin, and the Ki-67 level is over than 50%. After the operation, she was treated with Etoposide-Cisplatin (EP) chemotheraphy. Stable disease was seen during Etoposide-Cisplatin chemotheraphy. However, CT scan was performed after 12 cycles of Etoposide-Cisplatin chemotheraphy, and the intra-abdominal mass was enlarged. In addition, 3 cycles of chemotheraphy with Adriamycin were performed. Liver metastasis was also confirmed after Adriamycin chemotheraphy. For this reason, Irinotecan and cisplatin were used for 3 cycles, but progression of disease, neutropenic fever, thrombocytopenia, general weakness persisted. Eventually, she died 1 year and 6 months after surgery.