The patient is a 78-year-old man referred to our department for splenomegaly seen on abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. Eight years previously, the patient underwent extended thymectomy and postoperative radiation therapy for a thymoma (WHO classification, AB type; Masaoka classification/TNM classification, stage II) with subsequent follow-up. Five years after resection, a low density, isolated nodule in the spleen was seen on CT scan. Although follow-up continued for three years thereafter, the lesion was noted to continually increase in size, and the patient was then referred for further examination and treatment.
The patient underwent appendectomy for acute appendicitis at the age of 23 years, treatment for hypertension since he was 61 years old, extended thymectomy at age 71 years, and laparoscopic left hemicolectomy for cancer of the descending colon (stage I) at age of 73 years of age. The remainder of the history and physical examination were unremarkable, except for healed surgical scars from the previous thymectomy and the laparoscopic left hemicolectomy. Laboratory studies showed no abnormalities. Serum tumor marker levels were within normal limits (CEA 1.9 ng/ml, CA19–9 12 U/ml, SCC 1.5 ng/ml, CYFRA 2.0 ng/ml, PSA 1.29 ng/ml).
CT scan showed a sharply circumscribed 50 mm tumor slightly hypodense and heterogeneous enhancing lesion in the spleen with no intraperitoneal lymphadenopathy . On Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), T2-weighted images, the tumor had high intensity, equivalent to or slightly lower than that on T1-weighted images, and no decrease on diffusion-weighted images. The tumor was multinodular and had a low-signal spoke-wheel sign in the margin, enhanced gradually on the dynamic study . Follow-up CT scan showed the tumor gradually increased in size over three years. On positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, the tumor had relatively low accumulation .
Based on these diagnostic imaging studies, we considered metastatic thymoma, hemangioma or lymphangioma with bleeding and organization, and sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation in the differential diagnosis. Surgical resection was then recommended to the patient and undertaken. The lesion was visually confirmed intraoperatively. No extracapsular invasion was observed. A laparoscopic splenectomy without lymphadenectomy was performed.
Pathological examination showed that the spleen was 12 × 7 × 6 cm in size. A lobulated medullary tumor was seen, 6 × 5 × 4.5 cm in size, yellow-brown in color on cut surface . The capsular structure of the spleen was maintained. Histologically, spindle to slightly epithelioid-shaped cells homogeneous in size with abundant nuclear divisions were growing in a medullary manner with blood vessels. The lesion was morphologically similar to the previously resected thymoma . Pancytokeratin and p63 were positive, while CD5 and c-Kit were negative histochemically. Vascular endothelium markers (CD31/CD34/factor VIII) were negative. TdT-positive lymphocytes were not discovered on immunostaining. Based on its histological appearance, the splenic mass was unlikely to be a primary splenic tumor or related to a hematological disease. The lesion was not consistent with a metastasis from the previous colon cancer. The histological appearance of the tumor was similar to the previously resected thymoma, and the final pathological diagnosis was metastatic thymoma .
The patient is now three years status post resection of the spleen and is followed every three months. He is in good condition without recurrence or any other symptoms.