A 50-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with the main complaint of a fast-growing thyroid node and appearance of a right cervical lymph node.
The patient was previously under levothiroxine treatment due to sub-clinical hypothyroidism, and subsequent thyroid function was normal.
On November 2014, the patient had undergone anterior rectal resection and mesorectal total excision due to a previous history of rectal bleeding, and was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the rectum on September 2014.
Prior to surgical treatment, the patient had received neoadyuvant radiation (50 Gy) and capecitabine. Histological examination of the specimen confirmed adenocarcinoma of the rectum T3N0M0. She was discharged on the eighth postoperative day after a non-complicated postoperative course and received adjuvant chemotherapy. After the third session of Xelox (capecitabine and oxaliplatin), she presented with a cutaneous adverse response, and thus was switched to Tomudex (Raltitrexed), finishing on July 2015 after eight cycles.
A year after achieving complete remission, 13 mo after diagnosis of the primary tumor, during routine follow-up, a positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed bilateral lung metastases, and also unspecific and diffuse hyper-metabolism on both thyroid lobes .
A new adjuvant Folfiri (folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil, and irinotecan) therapy was administered, but unfortunately had to be suspended during the second cycle due to toxicity. Metastasectomy of the left lung was performed in October 2017, followed by subsequent lobectomy and linfadenectomy of the right lung in December 2017. After surgical treatment, the patient rejected more chemotherapy. At 1.5 year after lung surgery and 43 mo after diagnosis of primary tumor, the patient noticed a right thyroid nodule and hoarseness, which were confirmed by physical examination.
Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed. Cytological analysis revealed epithelial cells, nuclear atypia, and oncocitic changes, indicative of a papillary thyroid carcinoma (Bethesda V). Ultrasound confirmed a hypoecogenic nodule, and CT scan confirmed an enlarged thyroid gland and suspicious cervical right lymph node .
The patient underwent surgery on May 2019, finding an enlarged thyroid gland in contact with the trachea, esophagus, and right recurrent laryngeal nerve. A frozen section informed metastatic infiltration of the thyroid gland by adenocarcinoma of gastrointestinal origin. Total thyroidectomy, central lymph node dissection, and right lateral neck dissection were performed. During the postoperative course, the patient developed a clinical hypocalcemia and right vocal cord palsy. The patient was discharged 4 d after surgery.
Histological analysis of the specimen confirmed metastasis of adenocarcinoma of gastrointestinal origin, infiltration of 3/9 of central lymph nodes, and 4/9 of laterocervical lymph nodes. Immunological examination showed positive for CDX2 and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) expression (suggestive of gastrointestinal origin), and negative for CK7 and thyroid transcription factor 1 (suggestive of thyroid primary tumor, papillary type) .
The patient (5 mo after thyroidectomy and 61 mo after diagnosis of the primary tumor) is currently under oncologic follow-up, and a new type of chemotherapy based on raltitrexed, oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab has been proposed.