The present paper adheres to the CARE guidelines . The patient gave informed consent, and the ethics committee of ICS Maugeri IRCCS approved the using of his clinical data (in anonymous form) for the present scientific report.
A 50 year-old male worker was referred to our Institute by his company physician for diagnostic in-depth investigations aimed at job fitness evaluation, in accordance to the Italian Legislative Decree n. 81/2008 (article 39, paragraph 5). The subject and his working environment were evaluated using an interdisciplinary protocol: occupational medicine, physiatry, occupational therapy, and ergonomics.
Nothing relevant in family, physiological and remote pathological anamnesis. After completing his university studies (economy degree), the patient worked for four years as a nursing home educator. Since age 32, he was working as “center technician” at a national energy company which transports natural gas on Italian territory. The job mainly consisted in the management of eventual interferences on the pipelines by other subjects or companies (for example, earth moving for agriculture or subterranean works, construction of buildings). The activity was carried out exclusively in the office, full time, by telephone or e-mail, spending many hours at the video display terminal.
At the age of 25, following the onset of spasms in the neck, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic cervical dystonia at another hospital, where intramuscular botulinum toxin therapy was started, with good control of symptoms. After seven years (more or less concurrently with the hiring at the gas company), this treatment became ineffective due to the appearance of neutralizing antitoxin antibodies. Since then, the patient has been on biperiden and clonazepam, with benefit. The clinical picture began to worsen from the age of 41, after a car accident (rear-end collision) that provoked a cervical sprain.
At the time of our evaluation, the subject complained of persistent involuntary cervical movements, with neck and shoulder ache. He reported that the symptomatology worsened during working shifts, with fatigue and difficulty in maintaining the sitting position, preventing him from performing his job properly. Physical examination revealed anteflexion of the head, laterocollis to the right, raised right shoulder, with painful contracture of the neck and shoulder muscles, bilaterally. Efficacy indicators were: Barthel index 95/100; Neck Pain Questionnaire 36%; QuickDASH 27%; Tinetti balance scale 11/16; Tinetti gait scale 9/16.
The Barthel index is an ordinal scale (graded 0-100) used to measure performance in activities of daily living (ADL). Each performance item is rated on this scale with a given number of points assigned to each level or ranking. It uses ten variables describing ADL and mobility. A higher score is associated with a greater likelihood of being able to live at home with a degree of independence .
The goal of the Neck Pain Questionnaire is to find out how bad the neck pain is and how it affects the ADL or the ability to manage in everyday life. It is divided in nine five-part sections: 1) neck pain intensity, 2) neck pain and sleeping, 3) pins and needles or numbness in the arms at night, 4) duration of symptoms, 5) carrying, 6) reading and watching television, 7) working and/or housework, 8) social activities and 9) driving (not always applicable). At the end there’s a tenth question which aims to compare the current state to the state when the questionnaire was last completed. Each parameter is divided in five answer possibilities with points from 0 till 4. Zero is significant for no pain and four is significant for worst pain. The minimum score is 0. The maximum score is 36 if all nine questions were answered, and 32 if only the first eight questions were answered. The percentage ranges from 0% to 100%. The higher the percentage, the greater the disability and the pain .
The QuickDASH (DASH: Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand) is a 11-item self-report questionnaire (on a 5 point Likert scale) that looks at the ability of a patient to perform certain upper extremity activities. The score ranges from 0 (no disability) to 100 (most severe disability) .
The Tinetti test assesses gait and balance, as well as the perception of balance and stability during ADL and fear of falling. It has 2 sections: one assesses balance abilities in a chair and in standing; the other assesses dynamic balance during gait on a 5 m even walkway. The test has a gait score and a balance score. It uses a 3-point ordinal scale of 0, 1 and 2. The lower the score, the higher the risk of falling .
The working environment was inspected by a team composed of an ergonomist, a physiatrist with experience in occupational therapy and an occupational physician. Both the general work environment and the specific workstation of the patient (performing his ordinary duties) were examined, making measurements and photographic surveys. The assessment revealed several inadequacies, schematized in . In particular, the patient was sitting at the computer screen with the body turned to the left, to compensate for the right laterocollis . This prevented him from resting his back properly on the chair, and his forearms on the desk surface. In addition, he did not have enough space for the lower limbs, and no footrest . In accordance with the employer and the company physician, the workstation was redesigned, with several ergonomic adjustments .
The subject was provided with a personalized work desk and chair, with the computer positioned on the right , allowing him to adequately rest his back and limbs. He was confirmed fit for the job, with the prescription to introduce frequent rest breaks during the working day.
At six months follow up, the subject reported improvement of symptoms, and good adaptation to the changed working conditions. Efficacy indicators were: Barthel index 95/100; Neck Pain Questionnaire 27%; QuickDASH 18%; Tinetti balance scale 11/16; Tinetti gait scale 9/16.