A 50-year-old Caucasian man presented with progressive dyspnoea and palpitations for two days. He also complained of lower extremity swelling for a week and fatigue, anorexia, and weakness for two months. He denied fever, chills, and cough. Two months prior to his current presentation, he was evaluated for worsening shortness of breath. Chest computed tomography angiography (CTA) at that time showed a filling defect in the main pulmonary artery which was thought to be pulmonary embolism (PE), as well as evidence of cancer progression with development of bilateral pulmonary metastases and left pleural metastases. Rivaroxaban was switched to enoxaparin 80 mg BID due to concern for rivaroxaban failure. Two weeks prior to current presentation, he had presented at an outside hospital with shortness of breath and weakness and was treated for presumed pneumonia with oral amoxicillin clavulanic acid. His symptoms got progressively worse, and he presented to the emergency room.
On admission, he had a temperature of 37°C, heart rate of 147 beats per minute, blood pressure of 115/80 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute. Examination was notable for uncomfortable appearance, tachypnoea, irregularly irregular rhythm, tachycardia, bilateral pitting oedema, and elevated jugular venous pressure of 12 cm water above right atrium. There was no murmur, cyanosis, clubbing, or peripheral stigmata of endocarditis.
The patient’s past medical history was notable for a mediastinal thymoma diagnosed 17 years prior to presentation, which was detected during work-up of myasthenia gravis (please see Timeline for details). He continued to develop progressive metastatic disease and was treated with various chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin, etoposide, pemetrexed, selinexor, and everolimus), most recently with gemcitabine and capecitabine. He was also being treated with eculizumab for myasthenia gravis, and he was on rivaroxaban for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Differential diagnosis for the current presentation included evolving pulmonary embolism despite anticoagulation, further progression of metastatic disease or endocarditis. Laboratory investigation revealed white blood cell count 26.5 K/μL (neutrophils 85%) (normal 4–10.8 K/μL), haemoglobin 10.7 g/dL (normal 12.5–16.5 g/dL), platelets 162 K/μL (normal 145–400 K/μL), creatinine 1.32 mg/dL (normal 0.6–1.1 mg/dL), total bilirubin 3.3 mg/dL (normal 0.3–1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 1.5 mg/dL (normal 0–0.3 mg/dL), aspartate transaminase 175 units/L (normal 0–33 units/L), alanine transaminase 45 units/L (normal 10–49 units/L), B-natriuretic peptide 1070 pg/mL (normal 0–99 pg/mL), and international normalized ratio of 1.3 (normal 0.8–1.2). Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and right bundle branch block. Two sets of blood cultures were obtained at admission before administration of antibiotics. He was then treated empirically with intravenous cefepime while awaiting culture results, which were negative. Chest CTA showed interval enlargement of a large central filling defect within the main pulmonary artery (PA) in the expected region of the pulmonic valve, multiple focal opacities with peripheral distribution in the left upper lobe of the lung, patchy ground glass opacities in right lung, and small bilateral pleural effusions ( and ). The filling defect was thought to be atypical for PE given progression despite anticoagulation and location in the region of pulmonary valve, hence alternate imaging modality was sought. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an echogenic mass measuring 3.5 × 1.4 cm, extending from the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) into the main PA encasing the pulmonic valve, mild to moderately dilated right ventricle (RV) with moderate RV dysfunction, moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation, and severely elevated RV systolic pressure due to RVOT obstruction (, , , and Supplementary material online, ). The patient was treated with enoxaparin 80 mg BID. Despite therapeutic anticoagulation, antibiotic administration, adequate rate control and diuresis, he remained dyspnoeic, and the pulmonary mass persisted. Due to high suspicion of malignancy and RVOT obstruction resulting in RV dilatation and dysfunction, he was referred for cardiac surgery, and he underwent excision of the pulmonary artery mass and pulmonary valve replacement with a 25 mm Magna Ease bioprosthetic valve . Due to persistent RV dysfunction, he required haemodynamic support with venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation post-operatively. His post-operative course was also complicated by severe coagulopathy and bleeding requiring multiple transfusions. Follow-up echocardiogram on post-operative Day 3 showed severe biventricular dysfunction. Intraoperative cultures of the mass grew Aspergillus terreus, and histologic evaluation revealed a fungal ball with fibrin and acute inflammation consistent with aspergillosis . He was treated with amphotericin B after the intraoperative cultures grew Aspergillus (Day 9 of presentation). Despite surgical and antifungal treatment, his hospital course was complicated by respiratory failure, renal failure, bowel ischaemia, perforation and pneumomediastinum, and lower extremity ischaemia. Unfortunately, he died from multisystem organ failure due to invasive Aspergillus infection. Sensitivity results were available after he died and showed that minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for amphotericin B was 4 μg/mL suggesting that the organism was not sensitive to amphotericin B (MIC > 2 μg/mL associated with treatment failure). The organism was sensitive to other antifungals like itraconazole, voriconazole, micafungin, and caspofungin (MIC < 0.06 μg/mL).