A 66-year-old female patient with the chief complaint of an anterior neck mass sought consult from our surgical department.
The mass was located midline to the right side. It was first noticed a few months ago. She claimed that it rapidly grew one month prior to consultation.
She had a 4-cm scar from her previous right thyroid lobectomy ten years ago. At her initial visit for the thyroidectomy, an irregular ill-defined mixed hypoechogenic nodule with internal calcification was found on the mid pole of the right thyroid . FNAC along with CNB using a 20-gauge Franseen needle was performed at the time of diagnosis, there found a hematoma after procedure . A pathologic report revealed an 8-mm papillary carcinoma with focal extension to perithyroidal soft tissue without resection margin involvement and lymph nodal metastasis. The patient was lost to follow-up for 115 months until she noted a soft tissue mass on anterior neck.
She was taking medication for hypertension and hyperlipidemia few years ago, except that there were no other diseases diagnosed.
She did not have any other family members that have thyroid cancer, or other type of cancers.
The 1.4 cm × 0.65 cm nodule was palpated 5 mm away from previous operative scar. The nodule was not, in any way or form, connected to the previous scar. The mass was located subcutaneously, slightly movable, and tense. Excisional biopsy without FNAC or CNB was performed under local anesthesia with an elliptical excision using previous scar. After excision, the mass was revealed to be a papillary carcinoma on soft tissue. Her previous medical records were reviewed.
On the laboratory test before the second surgery, thyroid hormone test including TSH, free T4, T3 were within normal range. Serum thyroglobulin level was 13.8 ng/mL (3.5-77 ng/mL), and the antibody to thyroglobulin was 11.9 IU/mL (0-115 IU/mL).
Additional imaging studies were preformed to find out another metastatic lesion. A suspicious metastatic lymph node measured 5 mm on level IV was observed on the right cervical area through ultrasound and computed tomography imaging . Furthermore, FNAC confirmed the presence of a metastatic lymph node. Thyroglobulin level were greater than 500 ng/mL in the aspirate.