A 43-year-old woman visited our hospital with suspected stenosis caused by upper rectal cancer. She had a 2-year history of constipation with neither melena nor abdominal pain. She was nulliparous and had a stable menstrual cycle. A physical examination revealed no abnormalities. She had neither anemia nor an increased inflammatory reaction. Her carcinoembryonic antigen level was 2.5 ng/ml, and her cancer antigen 19-9 level was 31.6 U/ml.
An abdominal upright X-ray revealed a large amount of intestinal gas. Colonoscopy revealed a circumferentially elevated lesion in the upper rectum. The raised lesion extended to the inferior valve of Houston, and a normal mucous membrane covered the lesion . We obtained endoscopic biopsies twice, and histopathological examination revealed nonspecific inflammation. A barium enema examination revealed a stenosis with a smooth surface. The examination findings suggested the presence of an extramural mass predominantly on the left side of the stenosis . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed wall thickening from the upper to lower rectum. There were no findings of ileus. A 4-cm cyst was found in the left ovary . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography revealed a slight increase in FDG uptake in the wall of the rectum. No abnormal FDG uptake was observed in the left ovary . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed thickening of the left wall of the upper rectum . We performed diagnostic laparoscopy to observe the lesion directly. Neither peritoneal dissemination nor liver metastasis was observed. A small amount of ascites was observed in the pouch of Douglas. A chocolate cyst was present in the left ovary and the rectum had mild adhesions, but no endometrium was found on the rectal surface or abdominal wall. An induration was found in the upper rectum and was considered to be a tumor . Neither ascites cytology nor washed ascites cytology showed any malignant findings.
Because the possibility of malignant diseases such as type 4 rectal cancer or a gastrointestinal stromal tumor could not be denied and the patient desired removal of the lesion, she underwent robot-assisted laparoscopic low anterior resection with D3 lymphadenectomy. The duration of surgery was 429 min, and the blood loss was 175 ml. The left wall of the rectum was firmly adhered to the left ovary and pelvic cavity wall and was difficult to remove . The anastomosis was about 3 cm from the anal verge, and a large amount of stool had accumulated in the oral side of the colon. A temporary ileostomy was constructed. The patient had Clavien–Dindo grade IIIa anastomotic leakage that was treated conservatively, and she was discharged home 37 days after surgery. The temporary ileostomy was closed 3 months after surgery. The resected specimen showed a submucosal tumor. Histopathological examination revealed a 75-mm extension of thickened rectal wall with many islands of endometrial glands, and stroma was present through the submucosa to subserosa . Immunohistochemically, the glandular cells were positive for estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, and the stromal cells were positive for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and cluster of differentiation 10 . Rectal endometriosis was confirmed by pathological diagnosis. The chocolate cyst in the left ovary was not removed, and the patient was attending a gynecological department for hormone therapy at the time of this writing.