A 79-year-old Japanese man who had been on continuous hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease since 2004 visited an outpatient clinic complaining of a unilateral cervical mass and intermittent fever of more than three months’ duration. An examination at the clinic revealed three palpable right cervical lymph nodes. His body temperature was 37.4°C, with no chills or night sweats. Key laboratory data upon admission are shown in Table . The findings of the lab test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. Computed tomography of the neck and chest revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes measuring 40mm×20mm with low central attenuation predominantly along the lateral margin of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle . In addition, several enlarged lymph nodes measuring 29mm×30mm in the supraclavicular region were also noted . The result of an assay for interferon γ release was positive .
Suspecting TB lymphadenitis, we performed fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of the para-sternocleidomastoid nodes. The obtained specimens were examined by microscopy (smears for acid-fast bacilli and fungi), microbiological culture and cytology. The smears were negative for acid-fast bacilli, and the cytology was determined to be class II, partly due to the presence of a mass of neutrophils. Among the diagnostic procedures we used, only the six-week culture for tuberculosis with the BacT/ALERT® three-dimensional microbial detection system (bioMérieux, Nürtingen, Germany) was positive, and M. tuberculosis DNA was unequivocally identified in the positive culture by means of the COBAS® TaqMan® MTB assay (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) .
In this case, we reached a definitive diagnosis of TB lymphadenitis in an efficient manner by using a commercially available LAMP kit (Eiken Chemical, Tokyo, Japan) to amplify an M. tuberculosis-specific gene and a PURE kit (Eiken Chemical) to isolate the DNA target of interest . Cutaneous swab samples were obtained by wiping the surface of an ulcerated lesion with a sterile cotton swab and placing it into 960μL of DNA extraction solution. The suspension was incubated on a heat block at 100°C for 10 minutes, and DNA was rapidly extracted with the PURE kit in 30μL of solution . Amplification of the M. tuberculosis–specific gene was achieved by LAMP at 64°C for 40 minutes according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and a positive LAMP result was indicated by the color change observed under ultraviolet light . On the basis of these results, we diagnosed TB lymphadenitis.
The patient subsequently received anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy consisting of isonicotinic acid hydrazide (300mg/day), rifampicin (450mg/day) and ethambutol hydrochloride (500mg/day after dialysis). Two weeks later, he became afebrile and had no signs of exacerbation, and his painful lymphadenopathy eventually subsided.