A 60-year-old Asian man with a smoking history of more than 120 pack-years presented to our department with complaints of intermittent dry cough, hemoptysis, suppression of chest, and dyspnea for 3 months. He denied fever, weakness, or weight loss. Two months before admission to our department, the patient received a 2-week course of antibiotic therapy that showed no effectiveness.
On presentation, the patient was a well-nourished man with temperature of 36.5 °C, blood pressure of 105/60 mmHg, pulse rate of 65 beats/min, respiratory rate of 19 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 92 % on ambient air. Arterial blood gas analysis showed PaCO2 43 mmHg, PaO2 66 mmHg, and SaO2 92 %. Auscultation of his chest revealed decreased breath sounds and fine crackles bilaterally, but more notably in the left lower lung. He showed no evidence of suspicious pigmented lesions of the skin, mucosa, or eyes; the rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
His complete blood count showed a mild anemia level of hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL and mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 10.46 × 109/L and neutrophils at 7.72 × 109/L. Metabolic panel was normal except for a serum potassium level of 2.89 mmol/L. Serum tumor markers, including CEA, SCC, CYFRA21-1, NSE, AFP, CA19-9, and CA72-4, were all normal. Serum antinuclear antibody test, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test, thyroid function test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and T-SPOT were also all negative, as were tests for hepatitis, syphilis, and HIV. Serum lactate dehydrogenase was not detected. A pulmonary function test showed that his pulmonary ventilation function and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLco) were in normal reference ranges. Fractional exhaled nitric oxide concentration was 3.6 ppb.
A postero-anterior chest radiograph showed bilateral nodules and bilateral fibrotic lesions . An enhanced CT scan of the chest showed bilateral consolidations with a 28-mm × 24-mm nodule on the right upper lobe and a 33-mm × 43-mm subpleural nodular mass on the left lower lobe, accompanied with surrounding bilateral “paving” lesions . Increased and enlarged lymph nodes in the right hilar, mediastinum, and left axillary fossa were noted. The CT scan also showed bilateral pleural thickening, fibrotic changes, and bilateral pleural effusions. The CT scan taken at the local hospital two months before admission to our department presented a similar imaging but with smaller nodules (A 27 mm * 24 mm nodule on the right upper lobe and a 30 mm* 21 mm mass on the left lower lobe) surrounded by “paving” lesions.
On presentation, the patient was treated with cefoperzone sodium/tazobactam and levofloxacin in case of pulmonary bacterial infection, which eventually showed no effectiveness. He then underwent a CT-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy from the left lung, which revealed pleomorphic cells with components of pigment granules. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was positive for human melanoma black-45 (HMB-45), Melan-A, and Ki-67 (LI 30 %), whereas staining for S-100 protein , cytokeratin (CK5/6, CK7), CD68, CD56, P63, TTF-1, P40, Napsin A, ALK D5F3, ALK D5F3 N, Syn, and CgA were negative.
On establishing the diagnosis of melanoma, the patient refused chemotherapy or surgery for lack of money. He died two months later.