A 31-year-old white woman presented with severe burning pain with tingling sensation and asymmetric weakness of the lower limbs that, over a six-month period, gradually worsened and progressed to involve the upper limbs; she was then unable to walk or eat alone. She had been diagnosed with HIV infection five years earlier at another tertiary care hospital but refused follow-up.
On admission, she was undernourished and her neurological examination revealed: lethargy, disorientation and psychomotor slowing; asymmetrically diminished motor strength (Medical Research Council Scale) in the four limbs (grade 2/5 in right upper limb extension; grade 3/5 in bilateral lower limb extension; grade 4/5 in the remaining); symmetrical deep tendon reflexes apart from absent right brachioradialis and bilateral patellar reflexes; impaired pin-prick sensibility in the right ulnar and radial distribution. The remainder physical examination was unremarkable.
Brain MRI was consistent with HIV encephalopathy and electromyography (EMG) with the diagnosis of MNM (severe confluent multifocal demyelination and axonal loss in both upper and lower limbs).
CD4 cell count was 75 cells/μL (8%) and HIV RNA was 633000 copies/mL. CMV DNA in blood was 64000 copies/mL; CMV antigen was negative. CMV IgG antibodies were positive and IgM antibodies negative; furthermore, electronic medical records from five years earlier confirmed prior CMV IgG seropositivity, suggesting CMV reactivation. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed 7 cells, protein of 1.19 g/dL and glucose of 49 mg/dL; negative bacterial and fungal cultures; positive CMV DNA (14400 cp/mL) and HIV RNA (184222 cp/mL). Gastrointestinal involvement (esophageal and colonic) by disseminated CMV disease was histologically documented, even though the patient reported no related symptoms; retinal involvement was excluded.
With disseminated CMV disease as the most likely cause of MNM, she started IV ganciclovir (5 mg/kg every 12 h). Due to no significant clinical improvement, treatment was intensified 7 days later with the association of IV foscarnet (90 mg/kg every 12 h). Combination therapy was maintained for three weeks, after which CMV DNA became undetectable in blood (she refused a new lumbar puncture) and oral valganciclovir 900 mg/day was started as maintenance therapy. She initiated ART with emtricitabine/tenofovir and dolutegravir following two weeks of combination therapy targeted at CMV disease and slow, but obvious, clinical response. Her neurological symptoms, both neurocognitive and motor, gradually improved and she began a rehabilitation program. She was transferred to a rehabilitation center and discharged after two months.
Follow up at three months of ART initiation showed CD4 cell count improvement (313 cells/μL (27%)) and undetectable HIV RNA. After 6 months of sustained immune recovery (CD4 cell count 722 cells/μL (24%)) and virologic suppression, maintenance therapy with valganciclovir was stopped.
At 12 months of initial symptoms, she showed no neurocognitive impairment and was able to return to her normal daily activities. Motor strength improved globally to normality besides grade 4/5 in right-hand fingers extension and in the lower limb extension; pin-prick sensibility remained impaired in the right upper limb. She reported neuropathic pain in the lower limbs, which was managed with pregabalin 225 mg twice daily. EMG was consistent with nerve regeneration in the upper limbs and, to a lesser extent, in the right lower limb.