A 70-year-old Japanese female was referred to our hospital for the evaluation of a small bowel obstruction. She presented with nausea and loss of weight two months before she consulted her family doctor. An upper gastrointestinal barium study and stoppage of ileus tube movement demonstrated a tumor in the jejunum near the ligament of Treitz. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge uterine myoma. During surgery, we found the jejunal tumor located 20 cm away from the ligament of Treitz. We performed an enterectomy, including the regional mesentery and a hysterectomy.
The jejunal tumor was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, penetrating the small bowel wall. None of the 10 resected lymph nodes were positive for metastasis. The tumor was diagnosed as stage II according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system. Although the usefulness of adjuvant chemotherapy for SBA has not been confirmed due to the lack of RCTs, recurrence after curative resection of SBA is very high [,,]. We therefore decided to administer S-1 (Taiho Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan; 80 mg/day, 2-week administration with 2-week interval) and polysaccharide K (PSK) for 12 months as adjuvant treatment. S-1 has been confirmed to be an effective reagent for gastric cancer after curative surgical resection . PSK has been confirmed as an effective adjuvant for gastric cancer as well as colorectal cancer (CRC) after curative resection [,].
Nine months after the surgery, the serum tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated to 6.1 ng/mL (normal, <5.0 ng/mL). Although body CT and contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed no sign of recurrence, the CEA level was elevated to 8.9 ng/mL the following month. A careful evaluation of her medical history disclosed a hematuria. We consulted a urologist and a bladder tumor was discovered using a cystoscope. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed fludeoxyglucose accumulation in the ascending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum and bladder. The histology of the bladder tumor resected transurethrally revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading from outside the bladder. A colonoscopy showed tumors in the sigmoid colon and rectum but not in the ascending colon. A histological analysis revealed that these tumors were well-differentiated adenocarcinomas, indicating peritoneal dissemination of SBA. We performed a laparotomy to confirm peritoneal dissemination and to reduce the number of disseminated tumors as cytoreductive surgery has been shown to be useful in some cases of peritoneal carcinomatosis from SBA [,].
During surgery, we found two sigmoid colon tumors, one rectal tumor and one bladder tumor, identical to the preoperative diagnosis . Besides these tumors, nodules in the larger omentum and intestinal mesentery were recognized. The nodule in the larger omentum was confirmed to be an adenocarcinoma by intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis. We resected these tumors, including a total cystectomy, rectosigmoidectomy and omentectomy. An immunohistochemical examination of cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK20 exhibited CK7 (+)/CK20 (-) tumors in the primary and metastatic lesions. This result differed from the profile of CK7/CK20 in CRC and was compatible with the profile of CK7/CK20 in SBA reported previously . Peritoneal carcinomatosis of the colon and bladder was confirmed by histological analyses .
The effectiveness of palliative chemotherapy for advanced SBA has been described in a number of retrospective studies [,-]. We therefore used folinic acid/fluorouracil/oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) and folinic acid/fluorouracil/irinotecan (FOLFIRI) as these regimens are useful for patients with advanced or recurrent CRC. After the second operation, the patient received 12 cycles of FOLFOX with PSK until the peripheral neuropathy became severe. After this regimen, five cycles of FOLFIRI with PSK were continued until no sign of recurrence was confirmed by PET, CT and laboratory data 12 months after the second operation. We combined PSK with FOLFOX/FOLFIRI because we expected PSK to enhance the efficacy of these chemotherapies. The patient survived with no sign of recurrence 42 months after the second operation.