A 12-year-old girl was admitted to the Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes for evaluation of her brachydactyly and right fibular fracture. She was born after a full-term pregnancy and normal delivery with an Apgar score of 10 as the only child in a non-consanguineous Chinese family. No prenatal investigation was performed, and the motor development was normal. Upon birth, her fingers and toes were significantly stubby with obvious shortening of the fourth metatarsal, although neither hyperdactylia nor syndactylism was observed. No intellectual impairment or multiple exostoses were noticed. Pubertal development was normal. She experienced a minor fall 1 month before being admitted to our department, and she was diagnosed with a fracture of the upper fibula in the right lower limb, which was treated by fibula internal fixation and fibula bone grafting in the Department of Pediatric Orthopedics. To investigate the reason for the brachydactyly, the patient was referred to the Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes.
Upon admission, a routine clinical examination revealed that the patient’s standing height was 144 cm, with her upper portion measuring 72 cm and her lower portion measuring 72 cm, and her arm span was 131.3 cm . Clinical examination also revealed sparse scalp hair, a high-bossed forehead, thick eyebrows with lateral rarefaction, a characteristic bulbous pear-shaped nose, a long philtrum and a thin upper lip, pointed chin, and large, protruding ears . Examination of the extremities showed brachydactyly with significant shortening of the fourth metatarsal, flat feet, thin nails and koilonychias . Radiography of both hands showed brachydactyly and cone-shaped epiphyses of the middle phalanges of the digits of both hands with deviation of the phalangeal axis. Similarly, cone-shaped epiphyses were also spotted in the proximal phalanx of the toes of both feet .
Radiography was performed, and an osteolytic lesion was observed in the proximal right fibula before surgery. Radiography was performed 1 and 10 months following the surgery to monitor the recovery of the osteolytic lesion . Prior to the surgery, a large lesion protruding into the medullary cavity was found in the proximal right fibula with a pathologic fracture. A whole-body bone scan showed increased focal uptake only at the osteolytic lesion of the proximal right fibula .
A pathological cytological examination of the osteolytic lesion revealed that it was composed of benign spindle-shaped cells (fibroblasts) and histiocytes, with a scattering of xanthoma cells . Laboratory tests showed that the serum levels of calcium, inorganic phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, free T4, TSH, PTH, GH and IGF-1 were all normal.
The proband’s father presented with short stature (160 cm) , diffuse alopecia with fine hair, absence of lateral eyebrows, a large beaked nose and a long philtrum with a thin upper lip . He also presented with short metacarpals with brachydactyly, axial deviation of the middle finger and racket nails . No radiological examination was performed. The father declined radiological examination of his extremities.
Genetic analysis was performed using blood samples collected from the girl and her parents. A heterozygous variant, p.Ala932Thr, was identified in exon 6 of the TRPS1 gene in the girl . Subsequent targeted mutation analysis of exon 6 of her father confirmed the segregation of the variant in the girl. The healthy mother did not carry the sequence variant. Timeline depicting key milestones of diagnosis process and follow-up information was provided in the Additional file .