An 11-year-old male neutered French Bulldog with a history of chronic vomiting was referred to our hospital. A physical examination revealed abdominal pain and swelling. Blood analysis showed mild elevation of creatinine kinase (229 U/L; range 10–200 U/L). Abdominal radiography revealed a caudal displacement of the gastrointestinal tract by mixed fat and soft tissue opacity in the cranial to mid abdomen. No radiographic evidence of intestinal obstruction was noted. Ultrasonography revealed a mass with a mixed-echo pattern between the stomach and the intestinal tract, with a small amount of ascites . Corrugation of the jejunum and ileum was observed. Cytological examination of the ascites revealed a modified transudate, mainly composed of neutrophils and macrophages (specific gravity, 1.020; total protein: 2.2 mg/dL). The bacterial culture of ascites was negative. Following these tests, CT and laparoscopy were performed under general anaesthesia.
Pre- and post-intravenous contrast CT were reviewed by a ACVR board-certified radiologist (M.M.) which revealed a moderate amount of non-enhancing fluid attenuation in the peritoneal cavity surrounding and displacing the mesentery and omental fat from the abdominal wall . In addition, there was mild thickening of the soft tissue attenuating and mildly contrast-enhancing rims of the mesentery, omental fat, and fat along the linea alba adjacent to the peritoneal effusion. The left limb of the pancreas was enlarged with an irregularly rounded margination and homogeneous parenchyma, which iso-attenuated to the rest of the pancreas.
Laparoscopy revealed a large nodular lesion occupying the central portion of the abdomen, with sanguineous abdominal fluid. The nodular lesion was continuous with the falciform ligament. The parietal peritoneal surface was diffusely white and rough . Under laparoscopy, biopsies were obtained from the surface of the tumour, the abdominal wall around the tumour, and the serous membrane of the stomach. Histological examination of all samples showed proliferation of fibroconnective tissue with a chronic inflammatory reaction . The fibroblasts in these tissues showed no atypia. Based on these findings, the dog was presumptively diagnosed with early phase SEP.
Oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg, q24 h) was initiated to reduce fibroplasia and inflammation. Tramadol (5 mg/kg, iv, q12h) was used for pain management. Ascites was drained once per week (1000–1500 mL at each occasion). Two weeks after the initiation of these treatments, the dog exhibited decreased activity, anorexia, and weight loss. Physical examination revealed a marked swelling at the previous laparoscopic port insertion sites. The prednisolone dose was increased to 1.5 mg/kg q24 h. A week later, the dog showed a slight improvement in activity and appetite. Tamoxifen (1 mg/kg, PO, SID) was added to ameliorate peritoneal fibrosis in accordance with a previous report on canine SEP . Despite these treatments, the dog’s condition progressively deteriorated, and the dog died 61 days post-diagnosis.
A full autopsy of the refrigerated carcass was performed 52 h post-mortem by an ACVP/JCVP board-certified anatomic pathologist (I.M.) with the consent of the owner of the dog. Turbid, 800 ml, dark brown ascites was present. Mildly turbid, orange thoracic fluid (180 mL) was observed. The parietal and visceral peritoneum was diffusely white to pale tan and severely thickened by up to 2 mm. This markedly thickened peritoneum encased the liver and small intestinal loop, resulting in immobilisation of these organs . During autopsy, close evaluation of the pancreas was restricted by peritoneal fibrosis. The subcutaneous tissue at three previous laparoscopic ports insertion sites (right and left flank and left to the prepuce) was replaced with solid white tissue . The noncollapsing lung lobes were mottled orange, dark red, and rubbery on palpation. There was a cloudy red serous fluid discharge from the cut surfaces of the lung lobes. A small amount of similar fluid was present in the trachea.
Histopathologically, the intestinal loop was diffusely covered by up to 2-mm-thick dense fibrous connective tissue (desmoplasia), with scattered neoplastic foci . The neoplasm was characterised by haphazardly arranged ducts and tubules of atypical cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells, with secretion of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive mucus . Mitosis was 1 × 2.37 mm2 (10 HPFs). Similar neoplastic epithelial cells proliferated around the pancreatic ducts, with desmoplasia. Greater atypia and pleomorphism of the tumour cells were observed among neoplastic cells in the metastatic lesions, such as the lung, right periadrenal tissue, and subcutis of the previous laparoscopy ports insertion sites, than in the pancreatic and peritoneal regions . Tumour-associated desmoplasia was a consistent feature of this dog’s neoplasm. No inflammatory infiltrates were observed within or around the neoplasms. The differential diagnosis of this dog’s neoplasm included pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour, and malignant mesothelioma. Advanced characterisation of the tumour cells was performed by a panel of immunohistochemistry (IHC) tests. Information on antibodies and immunohistochemistry results are summarised in Tables and , respectively. Briefly, the tumour cells within the pancreas and peritoneum were reactive to CK, while they did not show reactivity to vimentin, CEA, WT1, CGA, or amylase . Based on these results, the dog was diagnosed with SEP secondary to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Septicaemia and pulmonary oedema were suspected to be the cause of death, possibly due to bacterial translocation through the small intestinal mucosa, for which peristalsis had most likely been hampered by SEP.