A 33-year-old Indian male developed sudden upper limbs weakness with neck pain while talking to his family on the phone. Emergency medical services (EMS) were called by one of his friends. On arrival of EMS, Glasgow coma score (GCS) dropped to 10/15 and oxygen saturation (SpO2) 82%. On the way to hospital, GCS dropped to 3/15, blood pressure (BP) was 198/110, and he was intubated by EMS.
On arrival to emergency, BP dropped to 60/40 and heart rate (HR) 38 SpO2 85%, he received atropine 0.5 mg and was started on dopamine 5 mcg/kg/min. His blood gases were pH 7.155, PO2 61.2, PCO2 53.2, HCO3 18. Patient vitals stabilized BP 104/70 h 85 and SpO2 98%. Computed tomography scan showed evidence of linear hypodense area noted in the visualized portion of the upper cervical spine. Chest X-ray showed bilateral diffuse infiltrates suggestive of early signs of pulmonary edema. The patient suddenly became bradycardic HR 36 followed by asystole which was revived by atropine and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for 4 min according to ACLS guidelines. He was sent to the intensive care. Upon arrival at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), he was resuscitated with fluids and central venous catheters line and pulse induced continuous cardiac output (PiCCO) line inserted. He had another episode of bradycardia HR 30 followed by asystole, being stabilized after atropine 3 mg and 4 min of CPR. Neurological assessment by GCS on admission was 3/15 (E1, M1, VT), pupils right 4 mm, left 5 mm, and reacting to light. The patient had no cardiac problems in the past and his electrocardiogram following both the episodes showed no abnormalities other than sinus bradycardia. Aminophylline, dopamine 5–10 mcg\kg\min, dobutamine 2.5 mcg\kg\min intravenous infusions were started. PiCCO® study results confirmed pulmonary edema and low cardiac index .
On the same day, echocardiogram was done which showed diffuse hypokinesia, mild impairment of left ventricle with apical wall motion abnormality ejection fraction (EF) of 40–45%, right ventricle systolic pressure (RVSP) of 41 mmHg. On the 2nd day, the patient was spontaneously opening eyes but complete quadriplegic though he was able to communicate with eyes and lips movements. It was documented as incomplete SCI as perianal sensation was intact. Magnetic resonance imaging study done showed sized area of hemorrhaging within the cervical cord extending from C1 to C4 secondary to rupture AVM [Figures and ]. On day 3, he developed severe ARDS requiring high ventilator support. Sputum Gram stains were negative. His electrolytes were within normal limits. On day 3, Holter monitoring showed the dominant rhythm of sinus bradycardia without any other critical arrhythmias. HR was varying from 35 to 89. On the 4th day, during routine ICU care, he again developed one episode of severe bradycardia responded to 3 mg of atropine. He continued to be on ventilator support at positive airway pressure. On the 5th day, he was weaned off from dopamine but continued on dobutamine and aminophylline infusion. Again on the days 6 and 7, he had oxygen desaturation (up to 77%) followed by bradycardia cardiac asystole resuscitated with atropine and CPR for 4 min. Neurologically, he did not improve, had repeated episodes of bradycardia. Surgical tracheostomy was done on the day 7. He developed high-grade fever, sputum Gram stains, and cultures showed Haemophilus influenza on the day 8, treated with meropenem. He had 12 episodes of severe bradycardia and asystole with desaturation which required prompt treatment with atropine, CPR and high ventilator support during his stay of 21 days in ICU. This bradycardia was during routine ICU care, tracheal suctioning, and hypoxic induced. We decided to insert permanent cardiac pacemaker, but family wishes to transfer him to his home country for further management. He was escorted with a transcutaneous pacemaker. He remained quadriplegic and ventilator-dependent.