An 83-year-old woman presented with neuralgic pain and the appearance of clusters of vesicles over the right shoulder and chest. She was diagnosed with herpes zoster and treated with intravenous valaciclovir every day for 2 weeks. Scabs gradually formed after treatment. However, progressive limb weakness, difficulty swallowing food, and disturbed consciousness occurred 4 weeks after the onset of herpes zoster.
Upon examination, the patient was somnolent. She presented with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13 (E3V4M6). Her pupils were round, with the same diameter (3.0 mm), and pupillary response to light was preserved. However, the ocular movements, in all directions, were limited. Strength in all four limbs was grade 3. The muscle tone in all limbs was increased and the deep tendon reflexes were bilaterally increased. The Babinski sign was positive bilaterally. Unfortunately, the impairment of consciousness prevented the assessment of ataxia.
MRI showed abnormalities. FLAIR sequences revealed high signal intensity in the pons and bilateral thalamus suggestive of inflammation . T1-weighted images revealed low signal intensity in the pons and bilateral thalamus .
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on day 2 after admission showed normal pressure and was clear with no pleocytosis. CSF revealed a white cell count of 4 cells × 106/L, protein level of 329 (normal range: 200–400 mg/L), chloride level of 124 (normal range: 120–130 mg/L), and adenosine deaminase level of 0.4 (normal range: 0–8 U/L). CSF Gram staining, cryptococcal antigen, and acid-fast staining were negative. CSF cultures did not show any evidence of growth of bacteria, acid-fast bacillus, or fungi. Related autoimmune antibodies, including IgM and IgG antibody tests for sulfatide, GM1, GM2, GM3, GM4, GD1a, GD1b, GD2, GD3, GT1a, GT1b, and GQ1b (by enzyme-linked immunospot assay) were measured. The test results revealed a high anti-sulfatide IgM titer in the serum. We also used cell-based assays to measure IgG antibody for aquaporin-4, NMDAR1, AMPA1, AMPA2, LGI1, CASPR2, GABABR1, DPPX, lgLON5, GlyRα1, GABAARα1, GABAARβ3, mGluR5, D2R (DRD2), neurexin-3α, and GAD65, and results were all negative. Routine hematology and chemistry blood tests showed no evidence of metabolic disturbance, infection, or inflammation. The ultrasound of the abdomen and urinary system, computed tomography of the chest, and tumor marker investigations [including CEA, AFP, CA125 (glycoprotein), CA19-9, CA15-3, CA72-4, CYFRA 21-1, NSE, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen)], found no evidence of tumor.
Electroencephalography on day 4 revealed predominantly slow wave activity, suggesting an underlying encephalopathic process.
On day 4 after admission, the patient was given methylprednisolone intravenously, 80 mg/day for 5 days. After 5 days, the methylprednisolone dose was reduced to 40 mg/day. Oral methylprednisolone was tapered gradually and then stopped after 2 months.
By day 9 of her hospital stay, the patient’s consciousness level had significantly improved, and Glasgow Coma Scale was recorded as 15 (E4V5M6). Dysphagia and ophthalmoplegia had entirely resolved, and strength in all four limbs was grade 4. However, there was no significant change in muscle tone, deep tendon reflexes, or the Babinski sign.
By 2 weeks of her hospital stay, muscle tone in all limbs and the deep tendon reflexes were normal and the Babinski sign was negative bilaterally. No symptoms had recurred at her 3-month clinic follow-up.