A 25-year-old male patient presented to our center with pain in the right buttock and groin region for the past 8weeks. The pain was insidious in onset, non-progressive, pricking type, mild to moderate in intensity, and increased on sitting, particularly on hard surfaces or on the ground and relieved by lying down. There was no diurnal variation. A shopkeeper by profession, he had difficulty in doing activities which involved sitting for longer than 2–5 min. He did not have any history of recent trauma before the onset of symptoms. There were no associated systemic symptoms or bowel and bladder symptoms. The patient had a history of a road traffic accident 5 years back when he sustained anL1-L2fracture-dislocation (AO Type C) with weakness in both lower limbs (left>right) and urinary retention for which a short segment pedicle screw fixation from L1toL3 was done ( and ). He had complete recovery of motor power and bladder control within 3 months of surgery and resumed his activities of daily living as well as his profession by3 months post-surgery.
Physical examination revealed a hard and sharp localized swelling with well-defined margins in the right buttock region. The swelling was non-tender, non-fluctuant,not compressible, and non-pulsatile. The skin overlying the swelling and the surrounding region was normal. The swelling was slightly mobile and the skin was freely mobile over the swelling. There was a healed midline scar at the thoracolumbar junction. The neurological examination was unremarkable. The range of motion of the spine and hips was within normal limits. There were no clinical signs of infection and the blood tests (total blood counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein) were within the normal range. Anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the pelvis revealed a rod in the right sacral region with partial migration into the pelvis . X-raysof the lumbar spine showed that the rod piece on the right side was missing . The fracture had completely healed and there was residual kyphosis at the fracture site. On this surprising finding, the patient was advised surgery to prevent possible skin damage by the tip of the rod or possible migration into the pelvic cavity. Written informed consent was taken. After a complete pre-operative workup, the patient was taken to the operation theater. The residual screws and rod at the site of the previous surgery were removed using the same previous incision. The set screws on the side of rod migration were found to be tight. The migrated rod was removed using a separate incision over the buttock at the site of projection of the rod through the skin . There was fibrosis around the rod which was released. He had complete resolution of symptoms and returned to his normal activities in 2 weeks.