A 59-year-old woman came to our hospital with a chief complaint of a painful lump in the right breast. She regularly visited her primary doctor for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. She was treated with metformin, olmesartan medoxomil/ azelnidipine, and pravastatin for less than 5 years. She had no family history associated with breast cancer. Reviewing her past history, she had received total hysterectomy at age of 47 for a uterine leiomyoma. A tumor with an unclear boundary was palpable in the upper-outer region of the right breast, about 30 mm in diameter along the major axis. Mammography revealed a mass with a clear boundary, 19 × 18 mm in size, in the middle outer portion of the right breast . Ultrasonography revealed a smooth, round mass measuring 20 × 18 × 18 mm in size, in the upper-outer quadrant of the right breast. Subcutaneous fat tissue around the tumor appeared as a highly echogenic, edematous region . In pathological findings from needle biopsy, the tumor was diagnosed as solid-type invasive ductal breast carcinoma. Partial coagulation necrosis was generated in estrogen receptor-negative, HER2-negative, and AE1/AE3-positive ductal carcinoma without infiltration of lymphocytes . Thirteen days after core needle biopsy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. MRI showed a smooth, round mass measuring 20 × 16 × 15 mm in size with slight hyperintensity on T1-weighted MRI and with high intensity on T2-weighted MRI. Only the marginal region of the tumor was enhanced . Ring-type dedicated breast positron emission tomography showed a ring-shaped fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the right breast . We performed ultrasonography just before surgery, showing that the tumor remained the same shape as before, although the size had decreased to 12 × 10 × 11 mm and the edema around the tumor had disappeared . Right partial breast resection and sentinel lymph node biopsy was performed 53 days after core needle biopsy. On histological examination of the surgical specimen, the tumor was showed lymphocyte infiltration, coagulation necrosis, and fibrous tissue spread with hemosiderin deposition. The tumor formed a solid nest, 3 mm in diameter, suggesting the possibility of SR . A significant aggregation of lymphocytes was observed around tumor cells. These lymphocytes comprised CD3-positive, CD4-positive, or CD8-positive T cells accompanied by aggregations of CD20-positive B-cells , but few CD56-positive natural killer (NK) cells . In addition, residual tumor cells in the surgical specimen did not express PD-L1 .
Adjuvant radiation therapy (50 Gy in 25 fractions) to the whole breast was performed. The patient is being followed-up closely, with examinations every 3–4 months, and is undergoing regular breast examinations, breast ultrasonography, mammography and tumor marker evaluations (carcinoma antigen 15–3 and carcinoembryonic antigen). After 16 months of follow-up, we have not observed any signs of cancer relapse, and the patient has remained free of the disease.