A 28-year-old female presented with medical, physical, and sexual polytrauma. At 6 months of age, she was diagnosed with hip dysplasia, resulting in 14 corrective surgeries by age 7. This was compounded by scoliosis and associated chronic pain. The patient was maternally neglected, frequently left without care, adequate food, and supervision. At age 9, she was sexually abused, on multiple occasions, by her mother's boyfriend. This intensified through repeat sexual abuse by a high school partner, persisting until 15 years of age. Overtime, the patient developed a constellation of symptoms, including excessive fear, debilitating anxiety, and negative affect.
According to psychiatric records, she was diagnosed with PTSD plus comorbid anxiety and major depression. The patient first partook in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), followed by internal family systems (IFS) therapy and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). These interventions targeted relational trauma, distressing internal experiences, and attachment deficits, respectfully; however, each resulted in poor symptom relief. She was then prescribed various antidepressants, namely sertraline (Zoloft®), escitalopram (Lexapro®), and bupropion (Wellbutrin®). Yet, the patient did not respond to multiple trials of adequate dose and duration. Six years later, she obtained a medical cannabis card to self-manage her chronic pain and PTSD symptoms. This was issued by the Utah Department of Health under the Utah Medical Cannabis Act (House Bill 3001). Despite initial improvement, the patient discontinued use following increased fear and paranoia. Her disease state consequently worsened, leading to agoraphobia and functional disability: “I couldn't leave my house. I couldn't think or clean or make food. I couldn't take care of myself. Everything was too much. Too hard. I was scared all the time, even to use the bathroom at night.” She further reported death anxiety with acute panic attacks: “The thought of dying was overwhelming. It constantly interfered with my daily life.” This decline in mobility and cognition motivated her to re-consider cannabis use, this time with therapy. The patient's prior experience with cannabis, showing signals of improvement in chronic pain and trauma-related symptoms; the market availability and legality of cannabis in the state of Utah; and the accessibility of specialized, clinician-guided services utilizing cannabis, also influenced her decision to seek CAP.