We present the case of a 13-month-old female infant with a diagnosis of TS who was born term at 37 weeks gestation to a healthy mother who had an uncomplicated pregnancy. At 3 months of age, she presented with new-onset seizures characterized by leftward head deviation and rhythmic facial, oral, and extremity movements. Further evaluation revealed ash-leaf hypopigmented macules, subependymal tubers on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and rhabdomyomas on echocardiography. A diagnosis of TS was made and the seizures were treated with levetiracetam for almost 1 year. Subsequently, the patient developed myoclonic activity with an EEG pattern consistent with modified hypsarrhythmic activity leading to the diagnosis of infantile spasms. She was then treated with adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
The patient presented now at 13 months with new onset of left third cranial nerve palsy, ptosis, and mydriasis, consistent with ipsilateral third cranial nerve palsy. MRI now showed the interval development of a left cavernous sinus lesion suspicious for an aneurysm . Magnetic Resonance Angiogram (MRA) of the brain revealed an 18-mm-diameter left cavernous internal carotid artery (ICA) aneurysm that further extended into the petrous and distal cervical ICA .
Due to the size of the aneurysm and its rapid development, it was decided that the aneurysm required treatment to prevent hemorrhage. Surgical intervention was deemed high risk for an aneurysm in this location at the skull base and within the cavernous sinus. Endovascular treatment was deemed to be the safer approach. However, because of the patient's age, combined stent–coil embolization with subsequent antiplatelet therapy in a child with a seizure disorder was deemed unsafe. Therefore, the treatment plan was to perform a balloon test occlusion (BTO) of the ICA, with or without extracranial-to-intracranial arterial bypass, followed by endovascular occlusion. If she passed the BTO with hypotensive challenge, then immediate coil embolization would be performed to occlude the entire aneurysm sac from the paraclinoid ICA segment distally to the cervical ICA proximally. If she failed the BTO, then a direct common carotid-to-M1 segment direct arterial bypass with radial artery grafting would be performed, followed by endovascular occlusion of the paraclinoid ICA segment distally to the cervical ICA proximally, to treat this aneurysm.
Under general anesthesia and using intraoperative neuromonitoring (somatosensory and motor-evoked potentials), the BTO was performed using a 3 × 7 mm HyperForm Occlusion Balloon System (ev3 Neurovascular, Irvine, CA, USA) positioned and inflated in the proximal ICA with 10 min of normotension followed by 10 min of hypotension (systolic blood pressures reduced to 70% of baseline) without changes in neuromonitoring signals . At this point, it was determined that a surgical common carotid artery-to-M1 bypass would not be needed, and the left ICA was sacrificed by coil embolization positioning thick oversized coils (Penumbra Coil 400; Penumbra, Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) just distal to the aneurysm sac to ensure occlusion of the aneurysm outflow zone to prevent retrograde aneurysm filling from the supraclinoid ICA. Additional Penumbra coils were inserted from distal to proximal, until the aneurysm sac and the cavernous, petrous, and distal cervical segments of the ICA were completely occluded with coils. Serial angiography through the left ICA confirmed complete occlusion and isolation of the aneurysm (Aneurysm Embolization Grade “A” and Raymond-Roy Occlusion “1”) from anterograde flow . The right common carotid artery was then accessed, and angiography confirmed the absence of retrograde aneurysm filling via the anterior communicating artery with preserved flow into the left anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
There were no complications during the procedure and no changes in neuromonitoring signals during the embolization. The patient awoke with her baseline neurological examination and recovered in the pediatric ICU. A few days after the procedure, the patient was discharged home in stable condition with resolving third cranial nerve palsy. At 3-month follow-up visit, she was neurologically intact with no third nerve palsy, and MRA demonstrating durable aneurysm occlusion.