A 59-year-old man with a history of open cholecystectomy (2013), acute necrotizing pancreatitis, complicated with pancreatic fistula, distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and pancreaticojejunal anastomosis (2014), causing type 3C DM (2016) and adhesive small bowel occlusion (2017) was admitted for weakness, fever, and abdominal pain. Upon arrival, he had tachycardia (heart rate of 102 bpm) and tachypnea (respiratory rate of 32 rpm). He referred pain at the right hypochondrium and having uninvestigated intermittent melena for the past 2 years. Alcohol, intravenous drug abuse, or herbal product use was denied. Physical examination revealed a well orientated, mildly dehydrated patient with generalized jaundice. Bowel sounds were decreased in frequency and intensity, and the abdomen was tympanic at percussion. Laboratory tests showed white blood cells 24.8 x 103, neutrophils 89.7%), anemia (hemoglobin 8.8 g/dL), diabetic ketoacidosis, acute kidney injury (AKI), and hypertransaminasemia with a cholestatic pattern (total bilirubin, 1.51 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 0.94 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 0.57 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase, 52 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 127 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 435 IU/L); CRP 20.65 mg/dL; Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e-antigen, and hepatitis C virus antibody and HIV screening tests were all negative.
Acute cholangitis was suspected and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed , showing a non-cirrhotic liver with a cephalocaudal length of 18 cm, with multiple heterogeneous lesions in both hepatic lobes, with attenuation in liquid ranges, compatible with liver abscesses, the largest measuring (14.5 cm × 6.5 cm) in the left lobe and segment VIII with bile duct dilation in segments II, III and VIII, ascites and chronic portal vein thrombosis with cavernomatous degeneration.
The patient developed progressive hypotension and hyperlactatemia requiring norepinephrine infusion (maximum dose of 0.19 mcg/kg/min). He was hospitalized and empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was immediately initiated with intravenous meropenem and vancomycin. Septic shock secondary to liver abscesses was diagnosed. The largest hepatic abscess, localized on liver segment VIII, was managed by CT-guided percutaneous drainage and 100 ml of purulent material was obtained and sent for culture. Blood cultures were also obtained at admission. After 48 h, both the liver abscess culture and blood cultures revealed lactic-acid forming bacteria with a subsequent characterization of Lactobacillus gasseri by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Antibiogram unveiled susceptibility to Penicillin G, thus the antimicrobial regimen was modified to intravenous penicillin G, 24 million IU QD.
An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed revealing a Los Angeles grade “A” esophagitis and mild portal gastropathy, without esophageal varices. A double-dose proton pump inhibitor was continued (omeprazole 40 mg every 12 h). A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed without any findings of IE. A subsequent CT of the abdomen showed an adequate response to treatment with a significant decrease in the size of the three abscesses. The patient remained afebrile, without signs of gastrointestinal bleeding or evidence of a systemic inflammatory response. Four weeks after admission a third CT was performed , showing an additional decrease in the size of the abscesses. Due to clinical stability, after source control and 24 days of effective intravenous treatment the patient was discharged. Oral amoxicillin was given for a 4-week period with total clinical recovery and imaging improvement.