A 68-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 4-month history of progressive abdominal pain and distention. She began with mild abdominal discomfort and did not care about it at first. Abdominal pain was then aggravated gradually to moderate level and restricted to the right lower abdominal region. She was awake and denied any additional symptoms such as headaches, nausea, vomiting, decreased appetite, constipation, fever, or chills. In addition, no neurological change was observed. A VP shunt with Strata® (Medtronic) programmable valve system was placed 15 years earlier to treat idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus and the valve pressure was 1.5. The patient had no history of abdominal blunt trauma, malignancy, pancreatic or liver diseases. No other abdominal surgery or shunt revision was performed.
Physical examination revealed an elastic palpable mass in her right lower abdomen, which was dull to percussion. Her abdomen was minimally tender in the right lower abdominal quadrant, but no rigid or tense. No skin changes overlying her shunt catheter and no signs of intracranial hypertension were found. A lumbar puncture was performed to analyze CSF. CSF pressure, nucleated cells and protein count were normal; culture of the CSF was also negative for microorganisms. In addition, no evidence of infection was found on other laboratory examinations.
Unenhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a large cystic collection of homogenous iso-density fluid in the right lower abdominal region with clear margins . The distal segment of the peritoneal shunt catheter was located within the cystic mass . The cystic mass, independent from the abdominal viscera, was nonloculated and 25–30 Hounsfield units in attenuation. There was no colonic obstruction. Dilation of the ventricular system was found on the cerebral CT imaging and the Evans Ratio (ER) value was 0.4 . Although the ventricular system was enlarged, interstitial cerebral edema and hemorrhage in brain or along the catheter were not found . Moreover, the trajectory of the shunt on the skull and abdomen–thorax X ray did not show the catheter breakage, disconnection or migration . Abdominal CSF pseudocyst was highly suspected as a preoperative diagnosis.
Laparoscopic cyst drainage with excision of the whole cyst was performed, 15-cm cyst which found with thick walls and organized chronic hematic content . The cyst was tense and had mild adhesions. More than 2 L of the hematoma fluid was drained off. The CSF in the cyst or dripping from the end of shunt catheter was not found, and the shunt malfunction was diagnosed during operation. The distal side of peritoneal shunt catheter within the cyst was cut and then removed from her abdominal cavity. Responsible vessels associated with the cyst hemorrhage were not identified during operation and there was no definite feeding artery for the cyst. No further shunt revision was performed. A thick-walled capsule collecting hematoma fluid was further demonstrated post-surgical gross pathology specimen .
Culture of the intracystic content was negative for microorganisms. Histological examination showed that the cyst wall consisted of outer fibrous tissue and inner granulation tissue without epithelial lining, and the cystic content was chronic hematoma. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and remained asymptomatic for 8-mo follow-up.