A 40-year-old man with hemoptysis, and aortic coarctation was referred to our hospital. His medical history included smoking, hypertension, and uncorrected aortic coarctation. On clinical examination, a holodiastolic murmur was heard along the left margin of the sternum in the fourth intercostal space. The femoral pulses were weak, and a radial-femoral delay was observed. Blood pressure in the right and left arms was 140/80 mm Hg and 160/80 mm Hg, respectively. There was a systolic pressure gradient of about 60 mm Hg between the upper and lower extremities.
First, two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (2D-TTE) was performed and showed a restrictive perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) with peak gradient 119 mmHg, bicuspid aortic valve with severe insufficiency, and dilatation of the ascending aorta (approximately 46 mm) associated with a typical aortic coarctation at typical site . There was maximal gradient of 70 mm Hg on Doppler study. Subsequently, the patient underwent two-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography (2D-TEE) in the presence of a cardiac anesthesiologist. In order not to put the patient at risk, we used adequate sedation during the two-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography. In addition to the above findings, a large pseudo-aneurysm was observed at the coarctation site with intra-cavity mural thrombus. The aortic pseudo-aneurysm (APD) measured 54.4 mm × 52.6 mm and with a small neck communicated to the aortic lumen . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography angiography confirmed the diagnosis of coarctation and APD, and there was no evidence of contrast leakage from the aorta .
Due to various malformations and considering that the patient had become unstable due to hemoptysis, it was discussed in the heart team, and it was decided that the patient would undergo staged surgery. In the first stage, the left common carotid artery was bypassed by means of an 8-mm-Dacron graft to the left subclavian artery. After bypass, a 24–24–130-mm-JOTEC stent graft was deployed at the site of aortic coarctation and APD. The second stage of surgery, which is related to the correction of aortic insufficiency and VSD, has not been performed yet.