A 54-year-old woman presented at the neurology department of the Hengshui People’s Hospital with unconsciousness, fever, nausea, and vomiting for one day. In the past ten years, the patient had been hospitalized repeatedly with the same symptoms and complained of suffering from chronic headaches. On admission, her unconsciousness was graded as GCS 7 (2 + 1 + 4), and further examination revealed positive meningeal irritation. Blood tests returned normal results for renal function, liver biochemistry, and white blood cell count. Head computed tomography (CT) found no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture was performed yielding a pressure of 200 mm H2O (100–180 mm H2O); 374 white blood cells (lymphocytes 20%, neutrophils 80%) (0–10); protein, 324.6 mg/dL (15-45 mg/dL); glucose, 0.91 mmol/L (2.5–4.4 mmol/L) and chloride, 109.5mmol/L (120–130 mmol/L). The CSF cultures was negative, while CSF mNGS did not reveal specific pathogenic microorganism. Patient was started on isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ceftriaxone, based on a possible diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis and pyogenic meningitis. On the 12th day of admission, the patient’s symptoms gradually resolved, and her vital signs normalized. Typical results included: lumbar puncture pressure,190 mm H2O; white blood cells, 20; protein, 80.8 mg/dL; glucose, 2.18 mmol/L and chloride, 119.6 mmol/L.
However, the patient developed various symptoms 17 days after admission, including persistent fever, headache, nausea, and vomiting. Lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure greater than 300 mm H2O, with the CSF adopting a rice soup-like appearance. The WBC count was 2911; protein,178.2 mg/dL; glucose, 1.82 mmol/L and chloride, 118.6 mmol/L. The CSF cultures showed hemolytic streptococcus. Subsequently, we used meropenem and norvancomycin to treat patient with possible bacterial meningitis. In the meantime, we embarked on searching for the cause of recurrent meningitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain showed multiple symmetrical abnormal signals around the white matter of the fourth ventricle, brainstem, bilateral posterior limbs of the internal capsule, and both cerebral hemispheres. In addition, a partially empty sella, tortuous optic nerve sheaths, flattening of the optic papilla, and narrowing of the ventricle was evident. The previous findings were consistent with chronic idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH). Coronal T2 MRI revealed right meningoencephaloceles with herniation of the temporal lobe and surrounding CSF . Then, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the brain demonstrated dysplasia of the left transverse sinus and slow venous return with no definite vascular malformation. Eventually, bacterial meningitis, IIH, and meningoencephalocele were diagnosed. However, the patient did not consent to surgical repair and CSF shunting procedure.
Consequently, she was treated with acetazolamide. On day 28 of admission, the lumbar puncture had an opening pressure of 180 mm H2O and 10 white blood cells; protein, 60.8 mg/dL; the glucose (3.82 mmol/L) and chloride (121.6 mmol/L) were within normal values. The patient continued taking regular oral acetazolamide without reporting recurrent meningitis six months after being discharged from the hospital.