A 59-year-old Korean female came in with a chief complaint of palpable mass present in shoulder and upper back regions . She had not previously received any diagnosis of disease except for psychiatric conditions. Height, weight, and BMI of the patient were 158 cm, 63 kg, and 25.2, respectively. Physical examination was done, and other than the presence of palpable protruding mass, no clinical signs or specific symptoms (e.g., pain or numbness) have been found. Ultrasonography was the first imaging study performed , which revealed characteristics of lipoma. Computed tomography (CT) images and magnetic resonance images (MRI) were obtained to evaluate the depth and distribution of mass. Diffuse non-encapsulated adipose tissues were found in subcutaneous layers of suboccipital and posterior neck. There was no mass surrounding the tracheal area . Partial excision of the mass was planned because the patient wanted it removed for cosmetic reasons and physical discomfort. There were no apparent brain lesions in MRI and no specific findings in neurologic examinations. The preoperative evaluation included plain radiography of the thorax, electrocardiography, and blood analyses. Our patient had impaired fasting glucose levels and elevated aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and uric acid levels. The values for total cholesterol and rheumatic factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides, and antinuclear antibody levels were within the reference ranges. The laboratory findings are presented in Table . Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) and Homeostatic Model Assessment for beta-cell function (HOMA-B) scores were 2.6 and 68.7% respectively, which meant that the patient had early insulin resistance. Additional history taking revealed that she had a history of high alcohol consumption. The patient consumed 48.6 g of alcohol daily, which is a high risk for alcohol consumption according to WHO criteria [, ].. Abdominal ultrasound and liver CT were performed in order to determine any existing hepatobiliary problems. Mild gallbladder edema was found in ultrasound. The CT scan found liver cirrhosis with mild splenomegaly. Consequently, the patient received a diagnosis of compensated alcoholic liver cirrhosis (Child-Turcotte-Pugh Classification B) due to heavy alcohol consumption. Under general anesthesia, excisional biopsies were performed via lipectomy at accumulated areas . The histological findings revealed large dystrophic adipocyte morphology. However, there were no findings of any sarcomatous changes . There were no problems with wound healing (e.g., infection, hematoma, or seroma formation) during the post-operative period. There was no recurrence or obvious enlargement of the remnant mass during the 3 years of follow-up observation.