Our patient was around 55-year-old female, postmenopausal women, who was hit by a bull resulting into pain and swelling with restriction of movement of the right elbow. On examination, her right elbow was tender, and the tenderness was deep seated into the anterior aspect of the right elbow joint. The bony prominences around the elbow joint were not tender. Right elbow range of motion was 5–80° approximately in the flexion – extension plane. The pronation and supination movements were not reduced but the motion was painful. There was no open injury and the patient came to our OPD 4 days after the injury. She was hypertensive and on anti-hypertensive medication; otherwise, there was no comorbidities present.
We did the anteroposterior (AP) and lateral (Lat) radiograph of the elbow. In the AP view, the fracture was hardly detectable. One has to be very careful while reading the X-ray, the Lat. View did show the fracture ( and ). Hence, we did the CT scan with 3D reconstruction study which showed the true picture of the fracture (-).
After proper counseling of the patient regarding the possibility of post-operative stiffness of the elbow and need for prolong physiotherapy, we operated the patient. She was kept in the left lateral position with arm support and general anesthesia was inducted. A posterior approach to the elbow through the olecranon osteotomy was utilized. The ulnar nerve was properly identified and isolated and protected. The fracture was identified and freshened and then temporarily fixed with K-wires ( and ). Then, it was definitely fixed with 2.4 mm headless titanium screws. After that the osteotomy was fixed with 4.0 mm long cannulated cancellous screw and SS wire in figure of 8 configuration ( and ). The ulnar nerve was checked for any possible compression. The elbow range of motion was checked in flexion extension plane and supination pronation plane, they were satisfactory. The wound was closed and plaster of paris posterior slab was applied with elbow at 90 flexion. The post-operative period was uneventful, wound healed nicely and stitches were off on 14th post-operative day. Elbow range of motion was started and posterior slab was discontinued.
The most common problem which we encountered during the post-operative period was the elbow stiffness. The olecranon osteotomy also added to the problem. However, gradually with persisting and dedicated elbow range of motion physiotherapy our patient has able to achieve 5–100° range of motion in the flexion extension plane and full supination pronation. She had also complained of tingling and numbness in the ulnar nerve distribution that has gradually subsided with oral methylcobalamine substitution. Any sort of massage was strictly discouraged around the elbow.