The patient was a 19-year-old pregnant woman without any prior abnormalities during her pregnancy. A decrease in fetal motion was noticed at 35 weeks. Fetal ultrasound showed dilated fetal bowel and the whirlpool sign . The patient was referred to our hospital the same day. Cardiotocography showed a decreased variability and absence of deceleration. Because of fetal indications, such as bowel ischemia, an emergency cesarean section was performed. A girl was delivered at 35 weeks with a birth weight of 2752 g. The Apgar scores were 3 and 7 at 1 min and 5 min, respectively. The neonate’s abdomen was dark and severely distended . The neonate was intubated immediately. The abdominal X-ray was gasless with a distended abdomen . In the blood test, the white blood cell count was 37,520/μL, and the hemoglobin level was 9.6 g/dL. The patient’s aspartate transferase and alanine transferase levels were elevated at 185 U/L and 41 U/L, respectively. There were no findings of renal dysfunction or coagulopathy.
We performed a laparotomy on the newborn 2 h after birth (5 h after the mother arrived at our hospital). We observed massive ascites with dark fluid, and almost the entire small intestine was twisted around the axis of the dilated intestine. . While de-twisting the ileum, a cord-type intestinal atresia (Type II) was detected in the dilated terminal ileum . We resected only the obvious necrotic ileum (40 cm) while excluding uncertain ischemic regions. Bilateral intestinal stamps were temporally closed and returned to the abdominal cavity. Then, 24 h after the initial surgery, a second-look surgery was performed, and we resected a 5-cm necrotic proximal intestine and a cord-type atretic portion on the distal intestine. Consequently, the remaining small intestine was 52 cm. Nearly the entire jejunum and approximately 2 cm of the terminal ileum were preserved after resection. We anastomosed these segments end-to-end to avoid an ileostomy and to preserve the ileocecal valve and intestine. The pathological findings of resected intestines were hemorrhage within mucosa and inflammation in all layers. No other abnormalities were noted . The neonate’s respiratory function worsened due to elevated bilateral diaphragms, and the abdominal wall was treated using the silo procedure with an open abdomen. Respiratory function improved 1 week after the second surgery, and the abdominal wall was closed.
The patient started feeding at 2 weeks after the anastomosis. There were no surgical complications, and the patient was discharged 3 months later without requiring total parenteral nutrition or fluid infusion. The patient showed growth beyond the growth curve, and at 5 months of age, her height and weight were within the − 2 standard deviation range.