A 71-year-old Caucasian man, known as a HLA B27 carrier complained of progressive dyspnea for 4 months without any other respiratory or cardiovascular symptom. His medical history revealed a metabolic syndrome and migratory joint pains for the past 2 years without signs of local inflammation. Extensive investigations failed to identify a precise diagnosis and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were empirically prescribed. He was not known for past history of cardiopulmonary disease and the rest of his past medical history was noncontributory. On physical examination, systolic and diastolic heart murmurs were heard at the precordium. An outpatient transthoracic echocardiography revealed aortic and mitral regurgitation and vegetations of both valves were suspected. Our patient was admitted to a regional hospital. On admission, he complained of dyspnea at rest (New York Heart Association Functional Classification class IV) and orthopnea and reported a single episode of fever (38.8 °C) without chills a week before. On clinical examination, our patient presented signs of acute heart failure with bilateral crackles on pulmonary auscultation, elevated jugular venous pressure and peripheral edema. Cardiac auscultation revealed a 3/6 decrescendo diastolic murmur over the aortic and a 2/6 holosystolic murmur over the mitral region. The routine laboratory workup was unremarkable with a white blood cell count of 4.1 g/L, and a C-reactive protein level of 21 mg/L (normal value <10 mg/L). Four pairs of blood cultures were drawn, which remained negative. Transesophageal echocardiography showed severe aortic regurgitation due to left coronary leaflet perforation , significant mitral regurgitation due to rupture of the chordae tendineae , and the presence of vegetations on both valves (size <15 mm) . The left ventricle (LV) was hypertrophied and enlarged with mild systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 53 %). A computed tomography scan of his brain was negative for distant septic emboli. Our patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with the diagnosis of a possible endocarditis with severe bivalvular regurgitation. Empirical antibiotic therapy was initiated with amoxicillin-clavulanate and gentamicin. In addition, intravenous furosemide and oxygen were administered to treat heart failure. As blood cultures showed no growth after 14 days of incubation including for HACEK (Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella species) bacteria, a search for fastidious bacteria by serology and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed. Moreover, the antibiotic spectrum was widened by the addition of ciprofloxacin and doxycycline.
The patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. Coronary angiography was normal. Our patient underwent successful replacement of the aortic and mitral valves by biological prostheses with an uneventful recovery. Gross examination of the valves revealed multiple yellowish vegetations on the ventricular side of the mitral and aortic valve. Histology showed confluent areas of foamy macrophages on hematoxylin and eosin , strongly colored by periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Warthin-Starry staining . The rest of the valves showed minor degenerative changes in the form of light fibrosis, myxoid stroma and focal calcifications, without neovascularization. Both valves were positive for T. whipplei with specific PCRs adapted from Fennolar et al. with 18,000,000 copies/mL on the aortic valve . In addition, the same T. whipplei-specific PCR of the stools was positive with 32,000 copies/mL; however, the T. whipplei PCRs of saliva and blood returned negative. No upper gastrointestinal investigations were performed given the absence of symptoms. PCR and serology results for Coxiella burnetti and Bartonella henselae were negative. The antibiotic treatment was switched to ceftriaxone and gentamicin for 2 weeks and then relayed by doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine orally for lifetime.
At his 3-month follow-up, our patient had no cardiac complaints except a mild dyspnea at exercise. Echocardiography confirmed a good function of both prostheses without leakage but persistence of a systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 45 %). Interestingly, our patient reported the complete disappearance of his arthralgia since the introduction of the antibiotic treatment.