The proband (II-2 in ) was a 12-year-old boy diagnosed with AS coexisting with WD at the age of 11 years. The patient was the second child of a non-consanguineous couple of Chinese Han ethnicity. The visual and auditory functions, hepatic and renal functions, and urinalysis of the patient's parents (I-1, I-2 in ) and younger brother (II-3 in ) were normal. However, the patient's elder sister experienced severe ascites and liver dysfunction with a clinical suspicion of WD and died at the age of 7 years. The patient underwent a medical checkup following the death of his elder sister when he was 4 years and 8 months. Laboratory tests revealed elevated liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase >100 IU/L), decreased serum ceruloplasmin (122 mg/L), and elevated 24-h urinary copper excretion (93.3 µg/24 h), but the K–F ring was not observed on a slit lamp examination. In addition, a variant in the ATP7B gene was found, but specific information related to the mutations was unavailable. The patient was diagnosed with WD and treated with D-penicillamine (DPA) and vitamin B6 combined with zinc salt at local hospitals. At 4 years and 10 months of age, his liver function recovered to normal levels, but he presented with microscopic hematuria. Because his doctor believed that hematuria was caused by DPA, DPA was replaced with dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA). However, the patient's hematuria persisted and he presented with severe proteinuria at the age of 8 years, despite discontinuing DPA. The symptoms of hematuria and proteinuria persisted and there was no improvement in his condition. Liver enzyme levels were maintained about twice the upper limit of normal under DMSA and zinc salt treatment in the following years.
At the age of 11 years, the patient was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation. On admission, his physical examination showed a body temperature of 36.3°C, pulse rate of 120 /min, respiration rate of 28 cycles/min, blood pressure at 85/50 mmHg, and weight of 38 kg. Percussion pain was noted in the left kidney area, with no other abnormalities on examination of the abdomen. The patient did not have edema or a yellow-tinged skin, and the results of cardiac, pulmonary, and neurological examinations were normal. Laboratory tests after admission showed an abnormal liver function and blood lipid level: albumin (29.5 g/L, normal range: 40.0–55.0 g/L), alanine aminotransferase (111.6 U/L, normal range: 9–50 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (47.3 U/L, normal range: 15–40 U/L), cholesterol level (6.41 mmol/L, normal range: 2.9–5.2 mmol/L), and triglyceride levels (4.25 mmol/L, normal range: 0.0–1.71 mmol/L). Further workup due to chronic abnormal liver enzymes showed a serum ceruloplasmin level of 40 mg/L, and 24-h urinary copper excretion was 251 µg/24 h. In addition, routine urine tests showed proteinuria (3+) and red blood cells (2+), and 24-h uric protein quantity was 3,823.3 mg/day. Renal function was normal. Other laboratory examinations showed a slight decline in IgG (6.06 g/L, normal range: 8.60–17.40 g/L) and a mildly elevated complement C3 (1.61 g/L, normal range: 0.70–1.40). His serum electrolytes, C-reactive protein, serum complement C4, antistreptolysin O, immunoglobulin levels (IgA, IgE, and IgM), coagulation function, antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-GBM antibody, interferon-gamma release assay, and serologic hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus testing were all normal. No obvious abnormalities were noted upon ophthalmologic and hearing screening. In addition, the results of routine chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, color echocardiogram, double kidney color ultrasound, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging were normal. Color ultrasound of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas indicated intrahepatic fat deposition and gallbladder stones. Renal biopsy was performed to identify whether there was kidney disease. An analysis of renal biopsy specimens using light microscopy showed the formation of annular cellular and fibrous crescents in three glomeruli (3/16 glomerulus) , hypertrophy of other glomeruli, increased number of intrinsic cells, lobulation of glomeruli with mesangial hypercellularity, segmental thickening of the mesangial matrix and a small amount of redophilic deposits in the mesangial area, vacuolated renal tubular epithelial cells and the presence of casts in the tubular lumen, interstitial focal inflammatory cell infiltration, interstitial fibrosis, and mild edema . Immunofluorescence staining of kidney tissue revealed granular deposition of IgM (++) within the mesangium and showed negativity for IgG, IgA, C3, C4, C1q, and Fibri. Detection of the α5 collagen chain of the basement membrane was not performed. Copper staining was negative. Electron microscopy showed a mild to moderate proliferation of the mesangial matrix, occasionally seen as electron-dense deposits in the glomerular mesangial area. Electron microscopy also revealed an abnormal glomerular capillary basement membrane thickness, which was uneven (ranging from 350 to 900 nm) or layered, focal torn, and endothelial cell insertion; and multiple lysosomes in the podocyte cytoplasm, with widely fused foot processes . The prominent renal pathological changes observed suggested that a diagnosis of AS needs to be considered.
At this point, peripheral blood samples collected from the proband were sent to the MyGenostics Medical Laboratory (Beijing, China) for whole-exome sequencing and for further confirmation of the results by Sanger sequencing. A hemizygous c.1718G > A (NM_000495) coding variant (p. Gly573Asp) in exon 24 of the COL4A5 gene located on the X-chromosome and a homozygous variant c.2975C > T (p. Pro992Leu) in exon 13 of the ATP7B (NM_000053) gene located on chromosome 13 were identified. Familial verification was performed by using Sanger sequencing. The results showed that the same heterozygous COL4A5 variant was detected in his mother . The same heterozygous missense mutation of ATP7B was detected in his parents and younger brother . This p. Gly573Asp variant in the COL4A5 gene has been reported previously . It is listed in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) and is believed to cause AS (accession number CM983307). The p. Pro992Leu variant in ATP7B is located in the hot spot region and is one of the common ATP7B mutations in Chinese patients with WD (autosomal recessive) . These two variants showed an extremely low frequency in the general population cohort, and the Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) was used to predict possible damage to protein function. Thus, the c.1718G > A (NM_000495) and c.2975C > T (NM_000053) variants were classified as “likely pathogenic (PS4 + PM2 + PP3)” and “pathogenic (PM1 + PM2 + PM3_Strong + PM5 + PP3),” respectively, according to ACMG/AMP guidelines and the Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group general recommendations for using ACMG/AMP criteria .
Based on the clinical manifestations, renal pathological characteristics, and gene sequencing results, the patient was diagnosed with AS and WD. The patient was treated with DPA (125 mg orally twice a day), zinc gluconate (210 mg orally twice a day), and enalapril (10 mg orally once a day). Follow-up urinalysis showed proteinuria between 1 + and 2 +, urinary erythrocyte between 1 + and 2 + , and urine protein–creatinine ratio between 0.2 and 1.0 mg/mg during the 1-year follow-up period after genetic diagnosis. Biochemical analyses showed that liver enzymes were between one and two times the upper normal limit, and renal function was normal. The treatment was well tolerated, with good compliance. No adverse events were observed. The patient was able to maintain a good quality of life. A timeline of the clinical course, diagnostics, and treatment regimen of the patient are summarized in .