A 61 year old female with a history of diabetes and hypertension, from Padaviya, Sri Lanka, presented to the Colombo North Teaching Hospital with a history of fever with chills and rigors of one month’s duration. She had developed an abscess over her left upper arm which ruptured into a non-healing ulcer coinciding with the onset of the fever.
On examination she was febrile and had an ulcer over her left upper arm which appeared unhealthy. Abdominal examination showed a smooth hepatomegaly 3 cm below the costal margin and a splenomegaly of 18 cm. Her respiratory, cardiovascular and neurological examinations were normal.
Investigations revealed a neutrophilic leukocytosis with elevated inflammatory markers (C - reactive protein – 149 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate – 122 mm in first hour). The blood picture was in favor of an acute bacterial infection with neutrophils with toxic changes. Serum electrolytes, serum creatinine, and liver function tests were all normal. Her first two blood cultures did not grow any organisms but the third was positive for B. pseudomallei cultured in MacConkey and blood agar separately. The patient’s serum was positive for melioidosis antibodies by the indirect haemagglutination (IHA) test at a dilution of >1/10240 which was highly significant. The ultrasound scan and the contrast enhanced computerized tomography scan of the abdomen showed hepatosplenomegaly and mild pancreatitis but the serum amylase level was normal. There was no evidence of intra-abdominal abscesses. Fasting blood sugar level was 110 mg/dl and the capillary blood sugar levels during the hospital stay were well controlled with metformin 1 g 12 hourly and gliclazide 40 mg 12 hourly.
Since the ulcer remained non-healing, two slit skin smears were done, both of which showed Leishmania amastigotes . However, serum antibodies against the Lc-rK39 antigen (using Kalazar Detect™ kit produced by Inbios International Inc.) of the organism was negative, excluding systemic infection. Wound swab for bacterial culture showed no growth.
The patient was initially commenced on intravenous ceftazidime 2 g six hourly but did not respond even after five days. She developed multiple abscesses all over the body one week into the hospital admission. However, pus cultures were negative for B. pseudomallei. She was then switched to a three week course of intravenous meropenem 1 g 8 hourly to which the fever responded. She was transferred to the Anuradhapura Teaching Hospital for continuation of meropenem for a further week and was subsequently discharged on eradication therapy with oral co-trimoxazole 960 mg (160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfamethoxazole) 12 hourly for six months and referred to the clinic for follow up.
The skin lesion was cauterized and no further treatment was administered since it was a local infection with the Leishmania parasite. The ulcer had healed almost completely by the time of discharge.
At 3 months’ follow up she remains afebrile, the ulcer healed completely and the hepatosplenomegaly absent.