A 41-year-old woman visited with fever and pain in the transplant kidney. She had end-stage renal disease due to unknown cause and underwent peritoneal dialysis for 7 years. The patient was diagnosed with azotemia 14 years ago. During her first visit, both her kidneys presented with decreased size (approximately 7.8 cm) and increased echogenecity, and her serum creatinine level was 397.8 μmol/L. Considering these, we diagnosed her with end-stage renal disease and did not perform renal biopsy to confirm any underlying disease. Before dialysis, we performed autoimmune studies, checking for anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-strand DNA antibodies, C3, C4, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, or anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies, but all of them showed no evidence of autoimmune disease. In addition, the patient did not present any symptoms or signs associated with coagulopathies; her bleeding time was 1.3 min (reference range: 1–4 min). Six years ago, she underwent kidney transplantation from a deceased donor. After kidney transplantation, she received 5 mg prednisolone, 4 mg tacrolimus, and 1500 mg mycophenolate mofetil as immunosuppressants and 2.5 mg amlodipine for hypertension. Her tacrolimus trough level remained stable between 6.2 and 8.7 nmol/L. There was no rejection history. Her serum creatine level was 71.6 μmol/L, and renal graft function was normal on outpatient examination.
At 6 years after the transplantation, she visited the hospital, complaining of fever and pain in the grafted kidney. Her blood pressure was 80/50 mmHg, and her body temperature was 39.5 °C. She had direct and rebound tenderness over the grafted kidney. The urine output on the first hospital day was only 100 cc/day. She was admitted to intensive care, and her electrocardiogram showed tachycardia with normal sinus rhythm. On admission, laboratory analysis showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 1381 × 109/L, hemoglobin level of 134 g/L, platelet count of 90 × 109/L, and C-reactive protein level of 32.0 mg/dL. Her blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels were 10.7 mmol/L and 435.8 μmol/L, respectively. The lactate dehydrogenase level was 607 IU/L (reference range: 150–550 IU/L). Urine microscopy showed 5–10 WBCs/high power field (HPF) and 3–5 red blood cells/HPF. Her tacrolimus level on admission was 6.2 nmol/L. BK virus were determined on admission and the virus titer then was < 100 copies/mL in her urine or whole blood. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone and free T4 levels were 1.66 mIU/L (reference range: 0.34–4.25 mIU/L) and 10.35 pmol/L (reference range: 10.3–21.9 pmol/L), respectively. Her basal adrenocorticotropin and cortisol levels were 3.5 pmol/L (reference range: < 26 pmol/L) and 423.7 nmol/L (reference range: 138–690 nmol/L), respectively. Non-enhanced computed tomography was performed immediately after admission and revealed acute pyelonephritis (APN) . In addition, our center performed a multiplex PCR for her using a nasal swab, which is performed for detecting respiratory virus in patients with a septic condition; the PCR kit detects respiratory viruses, including influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, human coronavirus, human enterovirus, human bocavirus, parainfluenza virus, and human rhinovirus . All viruses were not detected in our case.
Based on clinical and laboratory tests, we used ceftriaxone 2 g per day and inotropics for septic shock and APN. On the first hospital day (HD1), she had oliguria (100 cc/day), and we started emergency hemodialysis. We treated her with IVIG (Liv Gamma; SK Chemical Life Science, South Korea) for septic shock (300 mg/kg/day for 3 days). On HD2, her blood pressure stabilized with use of inotropic agents and fluid therapy, and urine output increased to 400 cc/day. However, on the second day (HD3) of IVIG administration, she abruptly developed gross hematuria and urine output decreased to 100 cc/day. At that time, we performed additional laboratory tests to differentiate the other causes of hematuria. Her platelet counts were normal at 174 × 109/L, and prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time also showed normal values of 10.4 s and 34.1 s, respectively. On peripheral blood smear, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia finding was not seen. The patient underwent continuous electrocardiogram monitoring during IVIG infusion; however, there was no evidence of arrythmia. In addition, on HD 3, further heart problem was evaluated using electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without ST-T changes, whereas the echocardiogram revealed left ventricular ejection fraction decreased to 34%, and a borderline enlarged left ventricle. Echocardiogram also showed abnormalities in the basal to upper middle left ventricular regional wall motion, which is more likely to cause stress induced cardiomyopathy than acute coronary syndrome. Her abnormal echocardiographic findings were considered transient, caused by stress induced cardiomyopathy owing to septic shock.
IVIG treatment was terminated at HD4, but oliguria and gross hematuria persisted. We considered a kidney biopsy to evaluate oliguria and hematuria, but could not proceed because her serious condition. The fever was persisted so the antibiotic was changed to meropenem. On HD 4, vancomycin added due to persistent fever following antibiotic change. On HD7, the fever disappeared, but oliguria persisted. LDH levels on HD 9 and 14 increased to 1704 and 1258 IU/L, respectively, compared to 607 IU/L at the time of admission. Blood and urine cultures were repeatedly performed since she was admitted, but no growths were identified in the two specimens. Her first transfusion was performed due to her low hemoglobin level of 76 g/L at HD 22. On HD 14, we performed conventional kidney sonography, which showed thickening of the renal pelvis and urethral wall; it did not show abnormal focal lesions and hydronephrosis. However, on HD 29, we performed doppler ultrasonography to confirm renal infarction and observed a lack of renal parenchymal and hilar vascular flow . We also performed renal biopsy and reveal that renal infarction with diffuse ischemic changes in the glomeruli but no rejection or other pathology . In addition, we performed SV40 staining using the renal biopsy specimen, and the staining results were negative for SV40. The biopsy specimen did not include medium or large vessels, and arteriolopathies, such as hyalinosis in small arteries or arterioles, were not detected within specimens. After discharge, oliguria and azotemia persisted and she is still on hemodialysis. Follow-up echocardiogram after discharge showed normal wall motion and improved left ventricular ejection fraction (71%). Her bleeding time and autoimmune studies were performed again 2 months after discharge. Her bleeding time was 2 min, and autoimmune studies once again showed negative findings. These results also did not show any evidence of coagulopathies or any autoimmune diseases as underlying comorbidities. Contrast enhanced computed tomography showed markedly atrophied transplant kidney after 4 years of renal infarction .