We report a case of an African baby girl, who died at 7-months old, who was first seen in our hospital during the first 6 hours of life; she presented with a generalized cracked skin all over her body. She was delivered at 37 weeks’ gestation by caesarean section due to breech presentation; she weighed 2.5 kg, her length was 51 cm, and head circumference was 35 cm. Her Apgar score was 8 and 10 at first and fifth minutes, respectively. During pregnancy, her mother received reasonable prenatal care including screening for HIV and syphilis, which were all negative; however, a prenatal ultrasound was not done. She had no history of taking alcohol, drug abuse, or use of other medicines apart from hematenics and malaria prophylaxis.
The baby is the first born to the 24-year-old mother and 27-year-old father; there is no history of consanguinity or similar dermatological condition in the family.
On examination she was alert, her temperature was 37 °C, she had no difficulty in breathing and she was saturating well in room air, her respiratory rate was 49 breaths/minute, and her heart rate was 123 beats/minute. She was noted to have a thick parchment-like skin all over her body with peeling and varying degree of fissures, eversion of eyelids (ectropion), her mouth was wide open like a fish (eclabium), and she had hypoplastic digits and nail dystrophy, and swollen feet and hands. She also had scaling alopecia and her ear canals were filled with glue-like material. She also had a restricted range of movement in her extremities especially extension of both upper and lower limbs. The rest of the systemic examination was essentially normal.
Initial baseline investigations taken 6 hours post admission revealed random blood sugar 8.4 mmol/dl, serum sodium 154mmlo/l, creatinine 138.3 μmol/l, and normal potassium. Laboratory tests repeated 2 days later revealed normal creatinine, blood glucose, and sodium. A sepsis workup was performed on the day of admission, a report from blood culture and swab from a fissure showed no bacteria growth, and C-reactive protein (CRP) as well as complete blood count (CBC) were normal. Genetic testing was not done because it is not available in our setting.
Empirical antibiotic therapy of Ampiclox (ampicillin and cloxacillin) 125 mg 12 hourly and gentamycin 12.5 mg once daily was initiated and was continued for 5 days while awaiting results of the sepsis screening test. In addition, intravenously administered fluid (dextrose normal saline) at 175 ml per 24 hours was administered on the first day; on the second day, orogastric tube feeding was started, the baby received 25 ml (increased by 1 ml/day) of expressed breast milk every 3 hours until her seventh day of life when she was able to suck from the breast.
In the first few days of life her eyes were covered by gauze soaked in normal saline and from the third day chloramphenicol eye ointment was applied twice daily to keep her eyes lubricated. Conservative skin management was started using Vaseline (petroleum jelly), which was applied to her skin every 3 hours; strict infection prevention control that included isolation was adhered to and the baby was monitored for signs of hypothermia, dehydration, and sepsis.
While the baby was still in our hospital, by the 24th day of life, a significant shedding of the collodion skin had taken place. During this time she was noted to have a constricted band on her lower limb necessitating band release .
A dermatologist, otorhinolaryngologist, ophthalmologist, and pediatric surgeon were consulted and provided their multidisciplinary expertise for both short-term and long-term management of this newborn. To allow for adequate chest expansion and to prevent respiratory insufficiency on the second day of life, a pediatric surgeon made an incision along the collodion membrane on the anterior chest wall (sternal region).
A multidisciplinary team reached a decision to discharge the baby on her 35th day of life. The family was advised that the baby should attend follow-up clinics: neonatal; ophthalmology; dermatology; physiotherapy; and ear, nose, and throat (ENT).
By the time she was discharged, there was some improvement in ectropion, eclabium, and there was relief in contracture of her fingers and toes; however, extension of knee and elbow joints were still limited .
The mother and family were given counselling about the diagnosis, which involved clinicians, nurses, and a social worker; this was started on the day of admission and continued throughout the hospital stay. In addition to the care provided in the hospital, during the hospital discharge, the mother was advised on the care of the baby at home including breastfeeding, skin care, eye care, and care of joints. The baby received initial vaccines before discharge; continuation with the remaining vaccines according to the immunization and vaccine development program in Tanzania was advised.
The baby’s weight initially decreased to 2.25 kg during the first 2 weeks, then she started to gain weight; on discharge she weighed 3.2 kg and 2 weeks later when she came for a follow-up clinic she weighed 3.4 kg. She continued attending follow-up clinic for the first 6 months; however, she suddenly died at home at 7 months of age.