A 75-year-old woman had received treatment for herpes zoster on her trunk in a family clinic for 1 week. Thereafter, she repeatedly began to vomit blood and had melena and was referred to our hospital. She had undergone thyroidectomy for thyroid adenomas 20 years ago and had a history of hypertension and cerebral hemorrhage 10 years ago. However, she had no history of abdominal surgery. On presentation, her blood pressure was 116/69 mmHg, heart rate was 78/min, and transcutaneous oxygen saturation was 96%. A blood test revealed anemia (red blood cells 331 × 104/μL and hemoglobin 9.2 g/dL) but normal levels of white blood cells (6800/μL), platelets (21.2 × 104/μL), prothrombin activity (101%), and tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 19-9). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a thickened wall in the antrum of the stomach . There was no lymph node swelling around her stomach, but pulmonary nodules were suggestive of tuberculosis, primary lung cancer, or metastatic lung tumor. Computed tomography also showed gallbladder stones, and she had a previous history of colic pain. Because her T-SPOT test was positive, she was isolated until tuberculosis could be ruled out.
Endoscopic hemostasis was urgently attempted to stop the bleeding. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a submucosal ridge on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum and eruptive bleeding from a central ulcer . There were no atrophic changes in the gastric mucosa. Her gastric tissue was fragile, which made it difficult to stop the bleeding by clipping. Finally, the bleeding was temporarily stopped by electrocoagulation . However, after a blood transfusion, her anemia worsened and melena persisted. Surgery was considered necessary to control the gastric bleeding. Imaging findings suggested the presence of a small submucosal tumor such as a gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Based on the lesion localization, partial gastrectomy was considered to cause postoperative gastric deformity and stenosis, and therefore, laparoscopic distal gastrectomy was chosen in this case. In addition, laparoscopic cholecystectomy was also proposed for treatment of the gallbladder stones.
Under laparoscopy, there were few intraperitoneal adhesions and reduced visceral fat. A thin white cord was present that connected to the lesser curvature of the antrum from the hepatoduodenal ligament . The cord was separated by laparoscopic coagulation shears (Harmonic Scalpel, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA). Laparoscopic distal gastrectomy comprising 2/3 stomach resection with D1 lymph node dissection, Roux-en-Y reconstruction, and no preservation of the vagus nerve and laparoscopic cholecystectomy were performed safely. The stomach specimen showed the ulcer area to be soft, and the mass was not palpable. Although it was unknown whether sealing of the cord by laparoscopic coagulation shears was adequate, her postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 14 days after the operation. On pathological examination, no tumor cells were found, and the same structure as a duodenal papilla was pointed out in the raised part of the anterior wall of the gastric antrum . The thin white cord was connected to this structure posteriorly. Magnetic resonance imaging performed 1 month after the operation revealed a variant bile duct originating from the left hepatic duct and proceeding to the stomach . Therefore, the ectopic bile duct was not included in the Goor and Ebert classification of double bile ducts , and was classified as type IIIb by Saito et al. . In retrospect, an annual endoscopic examination at her family clinic had shown a bulge in the same portion of the antrum. She has been free of complications for 1 year after the operation.