A 25-year-old male student, right hand dominant, was referred to our clinic by a family physician with a major complaint of pain in his right shoulder and feeling of instability. Shoulder pain exacerbated with overhead activities which interfered with his ability to perform weightlifting exercises. The patient sustained shoulder dislocation after falling on an outstretched arm three years ago which was treated conservatively with a closed reduction followed by 2 weeks of immobilization and physical therapy. The patient denied the use of any medications except occasional use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for pain and reported no history of allergies. Family history was unremarkable. Upon physical examination, the patient looked overweight with a body mass index of 28.3. Both shoulder girdles looked symmetrical with no atrophic changes being noticed. Passive range of motion revealed no limitation (anterior elevation, 180°; external rotation, 80°; internal rotation, T10; and abduction, 180°). The pain was elicited by external rotation, generalized ligamentous laxity was not observed. The shoulder apprehension test was positive. Load and shift test Showed an anterior-posterior subluxation of the shoulder. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed, which revealed a right bucket-handle tear of the labrum with intact biceps anchor, a type III SLAP lesion, and a Hill-Sachs lesion (A, B). Based on these findings, surgical intervention was considered necessary for shoulder instability. An elective standard shoulder arthroscopy was performed by a senior shoulder surgeon under general anesthesia in the beach chair position. The intraoperative arthroscopic findings included (1) inflamed biceps tendon with mild fraying (2) Banker lesion (3) a tear of the superior labrum into an upper band and a lower band (double bucket handle tear, however, the biceps anchor was intact (A). The upper and lower bands of the labral tear were debrided (B), and after the preparation of the glenoid rim, two suture anchors were used for labrum fixation. The perioperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged home on the same day. Postoperatively, the patient was placed on an abduction orthosis for six weeks and a wound check was performed at 2 weeks. At 6 weeks follow-up, pendulum, and periscapular muscle activation exercises were performed for restoration of range of motion. Abduction, internal rotation, external rotation, and resistive exercises were not allowed at 10 postoperative weeks. During the early postoperative period, the patient was adherent to the physical therapy protocol and reported no issues. At 6 months follow-up, the patient reported a resolution of pain and absent sense of instability. The patient achieved full range of motion and stable painless shoulder at his final follow-up 2 years after surgery.