A 56-year-old woman presented to our center due to dyspnea at rest (New York heart association [NYHA] functional class III-IV), tachycardia, tachypnea and hemoptysis. Physical examination showed a systolic murmur of grade II/VI at left sternal border, sinus tachycardia and tachypnea.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with normal axis and no Q wave or ST-T changes . Chest X- ray showed marked cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio = 70%) and right costophrenic angle was blunted . In lab data, HCT = 8.5, CRP = + and ESR = 50 were demonstrated.
Her symptoms started six months prior to her presentation to our center. She had fever, night sweating, weight loss and anorexia in the recent weeks. Six months before admission, she had a thoracic back pain in the right paravertebral region. It was a localized intermittent pain with no exacerbation on exertion. She was initially evaluated in another center. First, a chest x ray was performed showing right sided pleural effusion.
Further investigation including diagnostic thoracocentesis, bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed an inflammatory process and could not establish a definite diagnosis.
The patient underwent colonoscopy and abdominal sonography without any characteristic findings. An angiography was performed for her but no specific findings were reported. After ten days, patient was discharged with recommendation for outpatient following to define the etiology of this inflammatory process.
Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography (TTE and TEE) demonstrated very large size (more than 10 cm diameter) multilobulated mass with mobile particles extended from the right atrium to the right ventricle and the right ventricular outflow tract which destructed the right atrium (RA) wall and penetrated to the pericardial space (highly suspicious of intracardiac malignant tumor). The tumor obstructed inflow of tricuspid valve. Moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation was seen .
The previous angiography was rechecked and a mass with vascular pattern in the right atrium (tumor blanch view) was reported. Moreover, it was detected that the left circumflex artery origin was in the right coronary cups .
Lung and mediastinum (computed tomography) CT was performed for patient and demonstrated a large size tumoral lesion (approximately 15 × 8 cm) that its origin was in posterior wall of the right heart cavities. Multiple metastatic lesions in subpleural space of both lungs, multiple lymph nodes (approximately size = 10 cm) in mediastinum and right axillary and one lymph node in aortocava region (approximately = 18 cm) were seen. Those findings were highly suspicious of malignant cardiac tumor (high probable diagnosis was angiosarcoma and low probable diagnosis was rhabdomyosarcomas) .
The patient was in a poor condition, she had symptoms of metastatic emboli, so she underwent surgery. Surgeon reported one polypoid mass that exited from pericardium with severe adhesion to pericardium and cardiac wall and extended from RV to hilum of the right lung. In appearance, tumor had vascular nature. Unfortunately the tumor was unresectable and just an incisional biopsy was performed.
Pathology reported a malignant mesenchymal neoplasm composed of poorly differentiated atypical cells with vascular channels and slit-like spaces between them containing numerous RBCs. Tumor cells had spindle or polygonal vesicular nuclei with frequent mitosis. Large areas of necrosis and hemorrhage were also reported. To confirm the diagnosis, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was recommended. At the end, primary cardiac angiosarcoma was proved by IHC . She received a course of palliative chemotherapy at the hospital and set to continue her chemotherapy course with her oncologist.