The patient was a 77-year-old woman with HCM, AS, and paroxysmal AF diagnosed 2 years ago. She was taking oral β-blocker, cibenzoline, and anticoagulants. She had experienced palpitation, which became more frequent. Aortic stenosis was considered moderate with annual echocardiography and treated with medication. One day prior to admission, she experienced general fatigue and visited the hospital. Electrocardiography showed sinus bradycardia, which recovered after hydration and isoproterenol (ISP) administration; however, ISP induced rapid AF, and she developed cardiogenic shock [systolic blood pressure (BP) declined to <60 mmHg]. Sinus rhythm was restored after emergent electric cardioversion. She was referred to our hospital for mechanical circulatory support and emergent intervention for HCM.
Her vital signs on arrival were as follows: BP, 141/60 mmHg; heart rate, 121 b.p.m. (sinus tachycardia); oxygen saturation, 100% (intubated, 5 L/min of oxygen). She had neither jugular venous distension nor pretibial oedema. Systolic murmur was audible at the fourth left sternal border. Coarse crackles were audible bilaterally. Blood tests showed no abnormalities except for a serum brain natriuretic peptide of 622.9 pg/mL. The blood concentration of cibenzoline was normal. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia . Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly (the cardiothoracic ratio was 61% with bilateral lung congestion) . With respect to echocardiographic parameters , the left ventricular ejection fraction was 73.7% and the diameter of the left ventricle (LV) was 30 mm in diastole and 18 mm in systole. The diameter of the ventricular septum was 22 mm, and the posterior wall was 14 mm. The left atrium diameter was 42 mm. The pressure gradient (PG) at the LVOT was 122.8 mmHg, and the peak flow velocity was 5.5 m/s. The aortic valve area (AVA) index was 0.74 cm2/m2 with tracing. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed no thrombus in the left atrium or tricuspid aortic valve and 0.59 cm2/m2 of AVA index with tracing. Computed tomography (CT) also showed hypertrophic septum and calcified aortic valve .
Soon after arrival, rapid AF and cardiogenic shock recurred, and electrical cardioversion was required. We attempted to taper ISP because it could deteriorate LVOT obstruction and induce AF. However, sinus bradycardia and junctional rhythm resulted in low BP with the decrement of ISP. Thus, the pacer was temporarily introduced at the catheterization laboratory. Coronary angiography revealed no stenosis. Right heart catheterization under sinus rhythm revealed that the mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure was 25 mmHg, and the cardiac index was 3.41 L/min/m2. The PG was remarkably higher between the aorta and LV apex (the peak-to-peak pressure was 109 mmHg) and mid-LV (118 mmHg) but lower at the subaortic valve (19 mmHg). Multipolar electrode catheters were placed in the coronary sinus (CS) and right ventricle. Measurement of the PG between the aorta and LV under several pacing modes revealed that PG was lowest in AAI pacing . Finally, the patient was managed under AAI pacing of 70 pulses per minute (ppm) (the pacing site was at the proximal CS). Then, ISP was discontinued and landiolol was initiated to improve LVOT obstruction. However, rapid AF and cardiogenic shock recurred the following day. Even with high-dose landiolol and intravenous administration of amiodarone, AF reinitiated soon after multiple electrical cardioversion . Following NIF administration (0.2 mg/kg bolus infusion with 0.2–0.3 mg/kg/h continuous infusion) and atrial pacing at 90 ppm, AF was completely suppressed and her haemodynamic state stabilized (systolic BP was >100 mmHg). This strategy was effective and enabled the treatment of decompensated heart failure with careful use of diuretics. Cardiac surgery was performed on Day 11. Excessive muscles on the ventricular septum and around the papillary muscles were excised via trans-aortic and trans-apical approaches. From the finding of low PG between the aorta and subaortic valve, AS was considered not severe. However, aortic valve replacement was also performed because (i) the AVA index met the criteria for severe AS, (ii) calcified aortic valve was found on CT, and (iii) AS could be treated simultaneously during cardiac surgery. Pulmonary vein isolation and left atrial appendage resection were performed. No LVOT obstruction and valve dysfunction were observed in the echocardiogram after surgery . She had been free from symptoms related to AF recurrence and been visiting the outpatient clinic for 6 months.