A 14-year-old male was admitted with blood pressure of 165/100 mmHg, generalized edema, ascites, serum albumin of 1.4 g/dL, 24-h proteinuria of 5.42 g, hematuria 1+/4+ and serum creatinine of 0.73 mg/dL, reflecting an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 138 mL/min/1.73m2 using the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) formula. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-nuclear and anti-DNA antibodies were negative, as well as serologies for hepatitis B and C, syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). C3 and C4 levels were normal.
Renal biopsy showed all glomeruli with mesangial hypercellularity and large amounts of eosinophilic fuccinophilic deposits, while are negative for methenamine silver and Sirus red in mesangium and subendothelium . Some capillary loops had basement membrane double contour. Absence of Congo red staining excluded amyloidosis, and immunofluorescence for IgA, IgG, IgM, Kappa, Lambda Transmission-electron microscopy (TEM), C1q and fibrinogen were negative. Analysis revealed massive electron-dense deposits, granular and globally present in mesangium, occasionally subendothelial and rarely subepithelial. There were foci of mesangial interposition, duplication of basement membrane and foot process effacement . Immunohistochemistry showed marked fibronectin staining in glomerular deposits, establishing the diagnosis of GFND . No consanguinity was identified and treatment was initiated with angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi). Renal function remained stable but daily proteinuria persisted between 3.0–5.0 g after three years.
To fully characterize his medical condition, whole exome sequencing was carried out and detected the novel c.5962_5964del:p.1988_1988del variant in FN1. This variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Mutation Taster and SIFT softwares were used to assess its potential pathogenicity, however were not robust enough to yield clear results given the in-frame deletion pattern. This variant, however, was not found in the ExAC, 1000G and our local databases, and the deleted aa is conserved in mammalian and several non-mammalian species. In addition to the Ile1988 deletion, such programs also brought a less likely possibility of splice change, with uncertainty about potential protein sequence changes/truncations. Since the Ile1988 deletion is present in both situations, and the last possibility includes additional changes to the protein, pathogenicity analysis directed to p.1988_1988del was the essential evaluation to be performed.
Given the limitations of the prediction softwares based on DNA sequence, we performed primary amino-acid sequence analysis directed to the Ile1988 deletion in three levels of complexity to assess the variant likely deleterious effect. The first one was based on sequence alignment. Ile1988 deletion is positioned in the 15th fibronectin type III (FN3) domain at the C-terminus. 1273 FN1 relative sequences available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Reference Sequence database were clustered into 66 representative sequences and aligned . The resulting alignment showed a hydrophobic residue at position 1988 in far most sequences, revealing that the Ile1988 residue is highly conserved among all FN1 sequences. At the second level, the pathogenicity of this deletion was evaluated with PROVEAN , yielding a deleterious effect score of − 7.053. Score values below − 2.5 are consistent with prediction of a deleterious effect. The third level and more complex analysis included tertiary FN3 structural analysis using molecular mechanics. This evaluation included wild-type and mutated models, modeled with Yet Another Scientific Artificial Reality Application (YASARA) suite using the human FN3 crystal structure as template (PDB 3R8Q) and submitted to simulations in explicit solvent. 16,000 trajectories of 100 ps were calculated with the Yet Another Model Building and Energy Refinement force field 3 (YAMBER3 force field) and recorded for each wild-type and mutant molecule. Comparison analysis revealed that absence of Ile1988 leads to replacement with Val1987 at the molecular level. As consequence, the upstream Leu1977-Val1986 residues had their main chain trace completely altered, losing their beta-strand conformation present in the original molecule. In the native FN3 domain, the β-sheet conformation, composed of four anti-parallel β-strands, is maintained by a hydrogen bond network and hydrophobic interactions which are partially disrupted in the absence of Ile1988. The simulation shows, in fact, that in the mutated FN3 domain several hydrogen bonds between the strand main-chain nitrogens and the adjacent strand main-chain oxygens are lost or assumed a non-optimal distance, disrupting a series of hydrophobic contacts, increasing the flexibility of the whole domain and jeopardizing the domain structural stability . These results are consistent with a floppy mutated subunit, which may affect the folding of the complex and result in a defective molecule. Altogether, these results strongly support that the functional activity of the mutated FN1 might be impaired or lost.
The patient’s father was found to have proteinuria of 4.98 g/day, hematuria and hypertension at 47 years of age, being placed on the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) losartan. Search for secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome was negative. After losing his nephrology follow-up and two years after his son diagnosis, proteinuria was 5.0 g/day and serum creatinine 1.2 mg/dL (eGFR of 72 mL/min/1.73m2). Renal biopsy showed similar findings to his son’s. Marked fibronectin staining coincided with mesangial and capillary loop deposits, especially in subendothelial space, also establishing the diagnosis. He is currently on a higher dose of losartan and remains with similar levels of proteinuria. As expected, the c.5962_5964del:p.1988_1988del variant was also found in the father but not detected in the non-affected mother, two brothers and sister . No proteinuria or renal dysfunction was detected in the patient’s mother and three siblings.