A 64-year-old man was referred to the orthopaedic service with right hemidiaphragm paralysis. He had initially presented to his general practitioner reporting subjective shortness of breath after stand-up paddleboarding. His past medical history was significant for asbestos exposure and polio. Chest radiograph revealed an elevated right hemidiaphragm . A previous chest radiograph taken five years before showed normal diaphragmatic contours. He was subsequently referred to the respiratory physicians where workup included a chest CT scan (which revealed no intrathoracic abnormality) and dynamic fluoroscopic sniffing test (which confirmed complete right hemidiaphragm paralysis). He reported innocuous injuries to his neck in the past and intermittent neck pain for which he had previously consulted both a chiropractor and an osteopath. An MRI scan was undertaken which showed right-sided cervical foraminal stenosis (with uncovertebral and facet joint osteophytic changes at C3/4 and C4/5) . He was therefore referred to the orthopaedic service. On examination, he had no focal cervical spine tenderness with a well-preserved range of motion. He did have some generalized right shoulder girdle and upper limb wasting and weakness compared to the left (presumed to be secondary to his postpolio syndrome). His upper limb reflexes were intact and symmetrical with the contralateral side.
The underlying cause for his hemidiaphragm paralysis, whether it was related to his cervical foraminal stenosis or postpolio syndrome, was indeterminant .
After obtaining multiple subspecialist opinions, a decision was made to proceed with posterior right C3/4 and C4/5 foraminotomies accepting that this may not have any effect on his shortness of breath. Surgery proceeded uneventfully as did postoperative recovery. By three months postoperatively, his hemidiaphragm paralysis had completely resolved on chest radiograph, and his shortness of breath had also improved . Comparison of preoperative and postoperative spirometry lung function showed significant improvements in all parameters tested: increases in FVC from 3.88L to 4.86L, FEV1 from 2.44L to 3.13L, TLC from 5.11L to 7.65L, FRCpl from 2.61 to 3.63, and RV from 1.23L to 2.58L. A graphic representation of these findings is shown in . A satisfactory outcome was thus achieved.