A 72-year-old white man with a history of coronary artery disease status/post coronary artery bypass graft, noninvasive urothelial carcinoma treated with transurethral resection without intravesical therapy, and localized prostatic adenocarcinoma on surveillance was diagnosed with “limited” stage IE ENKL, nasal-type involving the left nare/maxillary sinus in 2013. EBV titer was <1000 IU/mL at diagnosis. He was treated with SMILE for two cycles, though L-asparaginase was omitted after the first cycle because of transaminitis. He then completed consolidative chemoradiation with cisplatin to 45/50 Gy, using intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and two additional cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy . He achieved and remained in complete molecular and radiologic remission for over 4 years. In April 2018, he presented with left anterolateral leg pain, erythema, and swelling. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed left proximal tibial cortical erosion with marrow signal abnormality from the knee joint to the mid tibial diaphysis and prominent soft tissue abnormality involving the musculature. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) showed the left proximal pretibial mass measuring 9.4 × 9.7 cm (SUVmax 9.6) with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid lymph nodes in the left inguinal and external iliac regions (SUVmax 4.82) .
Morphologic examination of the left tibial biopsy showed extensive areas of coagulative necrosis, angioinvasion, and destruction. Focally preserved areas showed diffuse infiltrate of small-to-medium-sized atypical lymphocytes and scattered large lymphocytes with destruction of associated skeletal muscle. Immunohistochemistry showed atypical lymphocytes variably positive for CD2 and CD3 and negative for CD5, CD7, CD20, and CD68. The cells showed strong expression of CD56, TIA-1, and granzyme B. In situ hybridization for EBV-encoded small Ribonucleic acid (RNA) (EBER) was strongly positive. Immunohistochemistry for PD-1 was positive in a subset of atypical lymphocytes . Concurrent flow cytometry showed an aberrant cell population that was small to medium in size by forward scatter with the following immunophenotype: CD2(+), surface CD3(−), CD4(−), CD5(−), CD7(−), CD8(−), CD30(−), CD34(−), CD45( bright +), CD56(bright +), TCRαβ(−), and TCRγδ(−). Quantitative PCR for serum EBV was markedly elevated (17,072 IU/mL). PD-L1 expression by IHC (22C3 pharmDx, Dako) showed high expression with a tumor proportion score of 70%.
As he was symptomatic, he was initially treated with 30 Gy radiation over ten fractions to the left lower extremity followed by pembrolizumab (100 mg intravenously every 3 weeks). PET-CT after four cycles showed new FDG-avid lesions of the left foot and right proximal tibia but interval decrease in size and FDG avidity of the originally identified tibial lesion. The left foot lesion was biopsied, revealing EBV-negative, CD56-negative reactive lymphoid tissue. Given these biopsy findings representing “pseudoprogression,” pembrolizumab was continued. He then received consolidative radiation to the left pelvis and inguinofemoral basin, 36/40 Gy in 20 fractions. EBV quantitative PCR decreased rapidly and became undetectable after eight cycles . PET-CT showed continued decrease in FDG avidity of left leg anterior compartment consistent with response to treatment (Lugano 2-3) and no new FDG avid lesions [Fig. d). The patient has had no immune-related adverse events (irAEs) and has completed 40 cycles of pembrolizumab to date.