A 26-year-old female presented with hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia (hemoglobin level 5.8 g/dL, platelet count 26 × 109/L, white blood cell count 2.3 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count 1.1 × 109/L; ). Flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood showed that 71.9% and 15.3% of the granulocytes and erythrocytes were GPI (–) . The bone marrow biopsy at diagnosis showed decreased myelopoiesis and megakaryopoiesis without significant evidence of dysplasia. G-banding of BM cells revealed the presence of del (13q) in five of the twenty metaphases. The patient was diagnosed with PNH with non-severe aplastic anemia (AA). Deep-targeted sequencing covering 390 different genes of GPI (–) granulocytes revealed three different PIGA mutations (p.I69fs, variant allele frequency (VAF) 24.2%; p.T192P, VAF 5.8%; p.V300fs, VAF 5.1%; ) and no other mutations . Copy number alteration analysis of flow cytometric-sorted granulocytes revealed del(13q) in wild-type granulocytes but not in GPI (–) granulocytes . Details of materials and methods are provided in the . The treatment included six cycles of eculizumab and oral cyclosporine. Although the patient’s serum lactate dehydrogenase level decreased to 267 units/L and her reticulocyte count increased to 110 × 109/L after treatment, she remained dependent on red blood cell transfusions, probably due to extravascular hemolysis. Her platelet count and absolute neutrophil count were still low at 29 × 109/L and 0.9 × 109/L regardless of cyclosporine therapy. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from her monozygotic twin was therefore considered necessary to achieve hematologic remission. It was found that the patient’s healthy twin did not harbor GPI (–) cells. Six months after diagnosis, syngeneic BMT was performed following an immune ablative conditioning regimen (cyclophosphamide (CY) 200 mg/kg and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) 10 mg/kg). Calcineurin inhibitors were not used. Neutrophil and platelet engraftment occurred on days 12 and 20, respectively, and the patient’s blood cell count normalized on day 341. However, flow cytometry performed on day 341 revealed 0.35% granulocytes and 0.33% erythrocytes to be GPI (–). At that time, we expected that the PNH clones would expand sooner or later, leading to relapse of PNH because they were thought to have an intrinsic growth advantage, given the high percentage of PNH-type granulocytes before syngeneic BMT. However, the percentages of GPI (–) granulocytes and erythrocytes remained almost the same thereafter . At four and a half years, the patient’s blood cell counts were normal, without any signs of hemolysis. Chromosomal analysis of BM showed a normal karyotype. The percentages of GPI (–) granulocytes and erythrocytes were 0.04% and 0.05%, respectively . Deep sequencing of the sorted GPI (–) granulocytes using amplified PIGA exons revealed the same three PIGA mutations at proportions similar to those before transplantation (p.I69fs, VAF 36.1%; p.T192P, VAF 3.7%; p.V300fs, VAF 8.6%; ) in the small PNH clones that persisted after transplantation. Although donor/recipient chimerism could not be measured due to the syngeneic nature of the transplant, donor chimerism is estimated to be very high considering the disappearance of del(13q) and the very low fraction of residual PNH clones. The patient is happy with her current condition, as she was told by her physician that her PNH could eventually relapse because small PNH clones persisted after BMT.