An 84-year-old Caucasian man with a history of hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetic nephropathy was admitted with progressive dyspnea, abdominal distention, and pedal edema for one week. Serum K was 6.9 mmol/L, creatinine 300 μmol/L and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 22 mmol/L. His baseline serum creatinine was 265 μmol/L. His hemoglobin was 98 g/L; international normalized ratio (INR), 1.5; partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 34.0, and liver function tests were normal. A chest radiograph showed pulmonary congestion. Our patient was treated with intravenous furosemide resulting in improvement of congestion and ascites. He remained normotensive throughout the admission and his serum creatinine decreased to 221 μmol/L. He was referred to a vascular surgeon for creation of a permanent vascular access for hemodialysis. Unfavorable vascular anatomy precluded AVF creation, and a right upper arm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) graft was inserted between the brachial artery and the proximal brachial vein. After placement, no complications were noted and our patient had a palpable thrill. He was discharged home the following day. 24 hours later our patient presented with complaints of decreased urine output. Examination showed blood pressure 75/45 mmHg, clear lungs, ascites and no peripheral edema. His right arm arteriovenous graft had no palpable thrill. Serum creatinine was 326 μmol/L and BUN 27 mmol/L. Hemoglobin was 10 g/L; INR, 2.0; prothrombin time (PT), 27.5 s; PTT, 36.5 s; total bilirubin, 27.3 μmol/L; AST, 123 unit per liter (U/L); alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 88 U/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 121 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 704 U/L. Chest radiograph was normal and electrocardiogram (EKG) showed paced rhythm without ischemic changes. Abdominal ultrasound revealed ascites, normal gallbladder with intra-hepatic and common bile ducts of normal caliber. Intravenous dopamine, fluids and antibiotics were started and our patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). On day two he remained severely oliguric and hemodialysis was started via internal jugular catheter. On day three he developed respiratory distress with fever and was intubated. Chest radiograph showed right lower lobe infiltrate. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed dilated left atrium, infero-septal hypokinesia, left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, moderately reduced LV function with ejection fraction of 40% and severe tricuspid regurgitation. His blood cultures were negative. Our patient's liver function continued to decline with total bilirubin rising to 100.9 μmol/L; direct bilirubin, 92.3 μmol/L; AST, 445 U/L; ALT, 398 U/L; LDH, 1033 U/L; PT, 31.8 s; PTT, 43 s on the sixth hospital day. Our patient's condition deteriorated and he died on the seventh hospital day.