The patient was a 23-year-old white male driving a motorcycle with no safety helmet. He was brought to emergency department by emergency medical services (EMS) after head-to-head collision with another motorcycle. The patient was agitated and was not able to move his left upper extremity. At arrival, his vital signs was blood pressure (BP):130/85, pulse rate (PR):86, RR:19, BT = 36.7oC, with SpO2: 96% and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS):13. In primary survey, his airway was intact and cervical collar was in place. In neck exam, trachea was in the midline with no lacerations, and neck veins were not distended. He was receiving O2 by mask. In chest exam, there was no obvious chest trauma and lung sounds was normal. In cardiovascular exam, heart sounds was normal and distal pulses were ++ and symmetric. Abdominal exam was unremarkable and pelvic exam was normal. Left upper extremity had a deformity and was splinted.
Chest, pelvic and spinal x-rays were normal. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) was done with no positive findings. Sub-arachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and contusion were found at brain CT scan. In left upper extremity x-rays, there were ulnar and wrist fracture. Past medical history was unremarkable.
The patient was admitted to the trauma ward due to brain injury findings. Brain function and consciousness was improved after 3 days and he was transferred to the orthopedic ward. Surgical repair of the left forearm fracture was done under general anesthesia.
One week after discharge from the orthopedic ward, he developed exertional dyspenia that was progressive. The patient was re-evaluated for chest lesions, with a finding of left side pleural effusion. A chest tube was placed. In bed-side echocardiography, a large VSD (connection site of moderator band to inferior vena cava (IVC), size =9 mm in diameter, 2 cm) with left to right shunt was found . There was no right ventricular hypertrophy or sign of Eisenmenger syndrome at the echocardiography.
He was admitted to the cardiac surgery ward. Open heart surgery was done the next day. There was no pericardial effusion. The 2.5 by 2.5 cm ventricular septal defect was found and repaired by Dacron patch. Tricuspid valve anterior leaflet chordae tendineae were torn which were re-implanted. At the end of operation, there was no detectable VSD or tricuspid valve regurgitation at trans-esophageal echocardiography. The patient was discharged with good outcome and was doing well on the follow-up visits.