An 8-year-old female neutered domestic shorthair cat presented to the Small Animal
Hospital, University of Glasgow, UK for investigation of enlarged mesenteric lymph
nodes that had been detected as an incidental finding on an abdominal ultrasound
scan 6 weeks earlier.
The cat had experienced an acute kidney injury of unknown origin as a kitten from
which it had recovered; consequently, it had routine serum biochemistry performed
annually. At the most recent annual vaccination and assessment, mild azotaemia (when
evaluated using the International Renal Interest Society [IRIS] guidelines of
creatinine <140 µmol/l) had been detected (creatinine 158 µmol/l [reference
interval (RI) 71–212] and urea 9.6 mmol/l [RI 5.7–12.9]). Subsequently, a focused
ultrasound of the urogenital tract showed bilateral structural changes consistent
with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Incidentally, a cluster of enlarged mesenteric
lymph nodes was detected during the scan, with the largest node measuring
approximately 2 cm. As the cat was clinically well, further investigation was not
performed until 6 weeks later when the cat developed weight loss, hyporexia and mild
lethargy.
The cat had been diagnosed with allergic dermatitis causing head and neck excoriation
6 years prior to presentation, which was being managed with long-term ciclosporin
administration (Atopica; Elanco) at a dosage of 30 mg q24h (equivalent to ~7 mg/kg)
given per os (PO). In addition, the cat had recently been started on telmisartan
(Semintra; Boehringer Ingelheim) at a dosage of 1 mg/kg q24h PO for IRIS stage 2
CKD, substage borderline proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine ratio 0.3).
The cat was indoor-only, and was fed on a commercial cooked cat food and had never
been fed raw meat or given unpasteurised milk. There was no known access to rodents
and the only hunting history was between the ages of 4 months to 5 years old, when
the cat had had access to a bird nest in the owner’s loft.
On physical examination, the cat was in good body condition (body condition score
4/9) and weighed 4.1 kg. A small-to-medium-sized mass was palpable in the
mid-abdomen; otherwise, physical examination was unremarkable.
Haematology and serum biochemistry revealed several abnormalities, detailed in . Of note was the
absence of the previous azotaemia. The cat was negative for feline immunodeficiency
virus (FIV) and feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), and urine specific gravity was
1.044.
Abdominal ultrasound examination confirmed enlargement of the mesenteric lymph nodes
, measuring
almost 3 cm. Aspirates yielded a specimen containing large numbers of macrophages
with intracellular non-staining rods when stained with May–Grünwald Giemsa . Ziehl–Neelsen
staining showed large numbers of acid-fast bacilli with morphology consistent with
mycobacterial infection . Thoracic radiographs (–) showed a bronchial pattern and sternal and tracheobronchial
lymphadenomegaly.
At the follow-up assessment 5 days later, the abdominal masses were subjectively
larger on palpation and the cat had lost >10% of its body weight in that time
(weight now 3.65 kg). Fine-needle aspirates from the mesenteric lymph nodes were
submitted for mycobacterial PCR to the Department of Microbiology, Leeds Teaching
Hospital. Antibiotic therapy was initiated with azithromycin (Zithromax; Pfizer) at
a dosage of 15 mg/kg q24h PO and pradofloxacin (Veraflox; Bayer) at a dosage of
5 mg/kg q24h PO, pending results. Maropitant (Cerenia; Zoetis) at a dosage of
1 mg/kg q24h PO was dispensed to address azithromycin-related nausea. Ciclosporin
therapy was continued owing to the potential welfare implications of stopping
treatment. Telmisartan treatment was stopped as it was deemed less necessary at this
time. An oesophagostomy tube was placed under general anaesthesia to facilitate
patient management and to ensure better owner compliance with antibiotic
administration.
Four days after treatment was initiated, the cat was reportedly more hyporexic and
lethargic. Azithromycin-related nausea was suspected and the dosage was reduced
(12 mg/kg q24h), maropitant was continued and mirtazapine (0.5 mg/kg q48h PO) was
prescribed. Supplementary feeding was provided via the oesophagostomy tube.
The cat re-presented 9 days after starting initial antibiotic therapy with
progressive and severe ataxia and paraparesis. Neurological examination revealed
severe ambulatory paraparesis. Cranial nerve examination was normal and there was no
obvious neck or spinal pain. Thoracic limb withdrawal reflexes were poor/weak and
pelvic limb proprioception was markedly decreased. Neurolocalisation was to either
the cervical spine or representative of a multifocal process. Considering the
guarded-to-poor prognosis, the cat was euthanased.
Post-mortem examination revealed moderate-to-massive lymphadenomegaly with
granulomatous inflammation affecting multiple lymph nodes: retropharyngeal,
mediastinal, peribronchial, perisplenic, pancreatic and mesenteric lymph nodes, with
the largest mesenteric lymph node measuring 70 × 50 × 30 mm . The tonsils were also enlarged.
Histologically, many lymph nodes had >90% of the tissue effaced by sheets of
epithelioid macrophages and multinucleate cells engulfing negatively stained
bacilli. Granulomatous inflammation was also detected in lungs, liver, spleen,
pancreas, intestine/colon, skin, diaphragm and bone marrow, with intrahistiocytic
acid-fast bacilli (with morphology consistent with mycobacteria) confirmed by
Ziehl–Neelson stain in multiple tissues (–). Focal involvement of the kidneys was
also observed. The right caudal lung lobe had a focally extensive area of complete
obliteration of the parenchyma and the medium-sized bronchus, shown by epithelioid
macrophages containing acid-fast bacilli. The bone marrow had approximately 60–80%
of the marrow tissue effaced by extensive and coalescing infiltrates of epithelioid
macrophages and moderate numbers of Langhan-type multinucleate cells engulfing
acid-fast bacilli.
Pathology findings provided no clear explanation for the paraparesis. Rare
macrophages with intracytoplasmic acid-fast bacilli were found in the brainstem,
cerebellum and pons, and the cervical and lumbar spinal cord (in the subdural space
and adjacent to nerve roots). The brain/cerebellum and spinal cord had no obvious
parenchymal granulomatous inflammation, and no granulomatous inflammation or
acid-fast bacilli were found in other neural tissues examined.
At this time the results of the pre-mortem mycobacterium PCR confirmed
Mycobacterium avium infection from the aspirates taken from the
mesenteric lymph nodes.
The other, unrelated, cat in the same household, a 9-year-old male neutered domestic
shorthair (also indoor-only and fed the same diet as the other cat) was assessed for
infection. No lesions were detected on thoracic or abdominal imaging. Blood was sent
for interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) assessment (Biobest Laboratories), the
result of which was suggestive of infection with non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM).
Considering the absence of clinical signs in this case, this likely represented a
latent infection and regular monitoring was recommended.