A 76-year-old woman being treated for primary biliary cholangitis, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, and type 2 diabetes mellitus underwent contrast-enhanced CT. She was referred to our department for closer examination and treatment of a liver tumor serendipitously discovered by CT, although she had no liver symptoms. She had no history of alcohol consumption or smoking, and there was no family history of note. Vital signs and abdominal examination findings were normal. Blood was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody. Elevated levels of anti-mitochondrial antibodies M2 and IgM were recorded. Tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were all within reference ranges . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid-enhanced MRI (Gd-EOB-DTPA-MRI; EOB-MRI) showed a 16-mm lesion in hepatic S8 with high signal intensity in the arterial phase, washout from the portal venous phase, low signal in the hepatocellular phase, and high signal on diffusion-weighted images (a–e). CT during arterial portography (CTAP) showed no contrast of the mass (f). CT during hepatic arteriography (CTHA) showed that the mass was entirely contrasted in the early phase and had a coronal-like enhancement in the late phase (g, h). Other than the lesion, there were no findings suggesting HCC. On abdominal ultrasonography, the lesion appeared as a high echoic mass with a marginal hypoechoic zone and was clearly detected. Based on the above imaging findings, a diagnosis of HCC simple nodular type cT1, cN0, cM0, cStage IA (UICC TNM 8th edition) was made. We performed RFA of the lesion. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day. EOB-MRI 6 months after surgery showed no evidence of recurrence in the liver. However, although the same imaging 13 months later still showed no intrahepatic recurrence, a 26-mm lesion was observed in the right lower lung . During the initial stage of imaging, use of a contrast agent revealed that the mass exhibited a prominent and intense signal on diffusion-weighted images (a–d). CT showed a single nodular lesion of 26 mm in S10 of the right lung (e). Bronchoscopy failed to obtain a tumor sample, and it was difficult to distinguish benign from malignant tissue. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) showed no other findings implicating malignancy. Fifteen months after RFA, a thoracoscopic resection of the lower lobe of the right lung was performed. Histopathological findings showed polygonal tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm proliferating in a cord-like to full-blown focal pattern. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), NapsinA, cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin 20, but weakly AFP-positive. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of pulmonary metastasis of HCC was made. Because there was no residual disease, the patient was followed up without further treatment. More than 3 years have passed since the lung surgery, and the patient has not had any recurrence .