A 27 year old African lady, from Bungoma County in Western Kenya, was admitted with generalized tonic clonic seizures lasting 5 to 10 min. This was associated with loss of consciousness for 10–20 min and left sided hemiparesis that lasted nearly 30 min after the convulsion. These symptoms had lasted one day but had been preceded by severe frontal headache radiating to the occiput and neck, chills, and photophobia for three days. Her past medical history was significant for peptic ulcer disease and allergic rhino-sinusitis for which she uses omeprazole, antacid and celestamine intermittently. Social history is notable for a diabetic twin sister who had been on insulin. The twin sister had died of pneumonia three days to the patient’s admission. The patient’s mother died ten years ago due to complications associated with diabetes. She is separated from her husband but she stays with her six year old daughter. The patient runs a small pharmacy business. She had travelled with her twin sister to a funeral before they fell sick.
The patient had been sickly for a month before this admission. She had had severe frontal headaches associated with chills and photophobia. She had also complained of frequency of micturition and increased intake of water. There was no weight loss. She was treated with artemether-lumefantrine (AL) at a health center for malaria (blood slide was positive for P. falciparum). There was improvement for two weeks. However, the headache and photophobia recurred while polyuria and polydypsia persisted. She sought medical attention in a different health center where she was diagnosed with severe malaria and diabetes. Metformin was instituted in addition to quinine and AL. She developed the convulsions on the third day of treatment and was brought to our facility.
Her vital signs was notable for tachycardia (pulse was 112 beats/min). Her blood pressure (BP) was 114/75 mmHg, saturations 93%, respiratory rate was 15 cycles/min, and temperature was 36.7 °C. She had bites on the lateral aspects of her tongue, an equivocal neck and positive Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs. Reflexes and remainder of her physical exam was normal.
Her initial lab results showed 20 malaria parasites/200WBCs on a blood slide, a random blood sugar of 19.1 mmol/l, HIV non-reactive, ESR 87 mm/hr., cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF): turbid, 60 cells/mm3, pandy test negative, Indian ink positive, gram stain: no organism isolated, Ziehl–Neelsen stain (ZN) negative, venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL): negative; full hemogram (FHG), urea, electrolytes and creatinine (UEC) & CT scan: patient did not do these because of lack of funds; urinalysis: ph = 7.0, glucose +++, blood ++, SG 1.010, ketones nil, deposit: nothing seen; abdominal ultrasound: normal abdominal scan, no renal or splenic abscess. Fundoscopy neither revealed malarial retinopathy nor papilledema. We could not get a CT scan, urea/electrolytes/creatinine and a full hemogram/complete blood count done due to the patient’s financial status.
The patient was started on diazepam 10 mg PRN, artesunate: 180 mg at 0, 12 and 24 h, ceftriaxone 2 g BD for 10 days, paracetamol 1 g tid and metformin 500 mg bd. Fluconazole 1200 mg od for 2 weeks was initiated due to the unavailability of amphotericin B and flucytosine. Convulsions ceased on the third day. There was improvement over the next few days but on the eighth day there was severe headache, neck stiffness and positive Kernigs sign. Serial tapping was done to relieve the headaches.
After 2 weeks and with marked improvement, the patient was allowed home on metformin 750 mg bd, fluconazole 800 mg od for ten weeks. A repeat CSF analysis was negative for Indian ink after two weeks of treatment. She has been free of symptoms since she was allowed home. Metformin dose was reduced to 500 mg bd because her blood sugar was controlled and ranging between 5 and 8 mmol/l. She was counseled on lifestyle modification, particularly on diet and exercise to enhance control of diabetes. Other findings during her follow up are as outlined in the ‘Timeline’ table.