Ethics approval and consent were not applicable in this case because the case was reported retrospectively without personal information and the patient underwent no non-routine procedures.
A 64-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of repeated right waist pain and a 1-month history of nausea, vomiting, and frequent and urgent urination. A previous computed tomography (CT) scan had revealed a huge renal mass. The patient was admitted to the urology department of our hospital for further treatment. Her medical history also included diagnoses of coronary heart disease (cardiac function grade II, high blood pressure (level 3, high-risk group), and calculous cholecystitis. Physical examination showed percussion tenderness over the kidney region but no superficial lymph node enlargement. Laboratory tests revealed the following: red blood cell count, 3.72 × 1012/L; hemoglobin concentration, 102 g/L; white blood cell count, 2.39 × 109/L; generally normal coagulation function, liver and renal function, electrolyte levels, and brain natriuretic peptide concentration; 24-h urine free cortisol level, 827.3 nmol/24 h; supine position plasma renin activity, 30 ng/L; supine position angiotensin II, 367 ng/L; supine position aldosterone, 192 ng/L; standing position plasma renin activity, 202 ng/L; standing position angiotensin II, 91 ng/L; standing position aldosterone, 297 ng/L; high aldosterone-to-renin ratio; and neuron-specific enolase, 62.57 ng/mL. A CT scan of the urinary system and CT angiography of the renal vasculature revealed a huge mass that was primarily considered to be RCC at the upper pole of the right kidney. The mass invaded the renal pelvis, narrowed the right renal artery, and constricted the inferior vena cava and liver . Additionally, the presence of a large gallbladder stone was suspected . A comprehensive evaluation with MDT consultation (including radiologists, vascular surgeons, anesthesiologists, general surgeons, urologists, and intensive care unit doctors) was completed. This evaluation revealed that the tumor was closely related to the inferior vena cava, liver, gallbladder, and other surrounding tissues and that careful preparation was needed for repair of the damaged inferior vena cava. Because the tumor was next to the gallbladder stone, cholecystectomy during the surgery was suggested. The MDT concluded that the patient should be sent to the intensive care unit after the surgery for intensive nursing. Generally, the operation was considered difficult and high-risk.
The urologists, vascular surgeons, hepatobiliary surgeons, and cardiothoracic surgeons all played an important part in the collective effort of radical nephrectomy, cholecystectomy, inferior vena cava repair, diaphragm repair, and regional lymph node dissection. During the surgical exploration, the tumor was measured as 10 × 9 × 6 cm and was located close to inferior vena cava, liver, diaphragm, and surrounding structures. The tumor had an incomplete capsule and brittle quality, and some fish-meat-like sections were present. The pathology specimens were evaluated in our hospital , and the examination findings confirmed right renal DLBCL (non-germinal center type). Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, CD20, bcl-2, and PAX-5; negative for CK, CD23, CD21, CD5, bcl-6, CD10, cxcl-13, Mum-1, cyclin D1, CD30, TdT, EMA, and EBER; and equivocal for CD3 and C-myc. The Ki67 labeling index was 70%. The four removed lymph nodes were negative. After the surgery, the patient received the first course of chemotherapy comprising cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP regimen), and she was undergoing follow-up at the time of this writing.