A 44-year-old Japanese woman with a 6-year history of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and an 11-year history of central diabetes insipidus presented with a pain in the genital area worsening over 2 weeks, general fatigue, and loss of appetite. Two months earlier, patient underwent a urinary catheter insertion as a management for urinary frequency, but it was removed during the previous hospital stay, a month before her recent hospitalization, for possible urinary infection. She has had frequent hospital admissions (6 times/year) and was hospitalized 3 months before her recent admission because of edema of the pelvic area and lower limbs. The patient developed diabetes mellitus after undergoing total pancreatectomy for nesidioblastosis, a surgical procedure which involved the removal of patient’s pancreas including the spleen and gallbladder. Her sister was also diagnosed with idiopathic central diabetes insipidus; thus, a family etiology was suspected. The patient had a surgery for suspected tongue cancer 2 years ago and was also suspected of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis with episodes of hepatic encephalopathy. Although she was on multiple medications including subcutaneous insulin injections and desmopressin tablets, her glycemic and hydration status were poorly controlled.
Four days prior to the present admission, she visited a gynecologist for her inguinal pain. No uterine tenderness or exudate was observed, and she was prescribed gentamicin and lidocaine ointments for possible local infection. She developed edema in the pelvic area with loss of appetite, and her home doctor consulted the university department 1 day before the present admission.
Upon admission, the patient appeared weak but was alert and had low-grade fever (37.4 °C) under a regular use of acetaminophen (1500 mg/day) and diclofenac (75 mg/day). Her blood pressure was not significantly different from previous measurements (88/42 mmHg) but a sinus tachycardia (heart rate 125/min) was noted. She complained of continuous abdominal pain and tenderness in all four quadrants. No abdominal guarding or rigidity was observed, but she had severe edema in the pelvic and bilateral femoral areas without necrotic skin discoloration. Laboratory investigations revealed a white cell count of 16,310/μL with neutrophilia (90.8%), elevated C-reactive protein of 22.18 mg/dL, and no serum sodium or potassium abnormalities. Serum aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase were elevated at 466 U/L and 148 U/L, respectively. The patient’s international normalized ratio was high (2.26), but disseminated intravascular coagulation score did not meet the criteria. The patient’s HbA1c level was 8.8%, and blood sugar at admission was 316 mg/dL. She had low serum albumin concentration (1.7 g/dL), elevated serum ammonia concentration (154 μg/dL), and elevated lactate level (10.3 mmol/L). No ketonuria was noted, but significant pyuria was observed.
The abdominal ultrasound was unrevealing; thus, an intravenous treatment with ceftriaxone (1 g every 8 h) was initiated empirically after obtaining the blood and urine culture samples. A CT scan performed the following morning revealed the presence of air in the soft tissue of the inguinal and pelvic areas, such as pectineal and psoas major muscles . Immediate infectious and surgical consultations were made, and the antibiotics were changed to meropenem (1 g every 8 h), vancomycin (1 g every 12 h), and clindamycin (600 mg every 8 h). Gram-positive cocci and gram-positive rods were found in the initial blood cultures. In the evening of hospital day 2, a surgical debridement of the extraperitoneal pelvic tissue with colonostomy was performed, and the CT image after the operation suggested a complete resection of the affected tissue. However, hypernatremia (a serum Na concentration of 160 to 170 mEq/L) ensued as the use of nasal desmopressin could not effectively control the patient’s central diabetes insipidus after the operation.
No bacteria could be cultured from the debridement tissues . The blood culture isolates were finally identified as Streptococcus constellatus using superoxide dismutase A sequencing and C. ramosum by 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing . The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics were tested using Etest for C. ramosum and the broth microdilution method except imipenem and meropenem (Etest) for S. constellatus . These results were interpreted using the Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute M11-A8 document for C. ramosum and M100-S24 document for S. constellatus. Both strains were susceptible to penicillin, meropenem, and clindamycin. Despite the continued use of susceptible antibiotics and intensive care, disseminated intravascular coagulation and pancytopenia developed, and the patient died on hospital day 8.