A 59-year-old woman, previously healthy, developed eye related symptoms, swelling and itching, nightly fever and muscle weakness during vacation in Spain. She had a fever of 40 degrees and received antibiotics. A relapse was treated with intravenous antibiotics and steroids for suspected pneumonia. Anti-nuclear and anti-Sjogrens-syndrome antibodies were positive. She was intubated due to respiratory insufficiency and developed multi-organ failure, thrombocytopenia and bleeding in lungs and stomach. Multiple lung infiltrates on computed tomography scan with progressive hypoxemia resulted in an emergency call to a mobile extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation team, who flew to Spain, initiated veno-arterial ECMO and transported her back to Sweden. She was later converted to veno-venous ECMO and eventually diagnosed with dermatomyositis. Her kidney function was low with a measured glomerular filtration rate of 12 ml/min and she required hemodialysis. She was tracheotomized in order to manage airway secretions. Over time , her situation stabilized and she was fully awake, mentally adequate, drinking champagne on her wedding anniversary and exercised with bed cycling. She was highly motivated but found to have at least one contraindication for lung transplantation due to chronic renal replacement therapy. Despite multiple assessments after which she was turned down on multidisciplinary board it eventually became unethical not to accept her for lung transplantation listing. After 229 days on ECMO she underwent double LTx. She needed veno-venous ECMO for 2–3 days post-operatively and weaned thereafter. She stayed in the intensive care unit for 33 days, and had an otherwise uneventful albeit long recovery. She was eventually discharged after another 9 days and continued to recover slowly at her referring hospital. After 14 months she was kidney transplanted. She is now clinically stable and lives a normal life.
A 34-year-old man with Diabetes Mellitus contracts influenza A (H1N1) virus and develops a secondary sepsis with PVL-toxin-producing Staphylococcus aureus, causing necrotizing pneumonia with destruction of the lungs. Combined respiratory and circulatory failure occurred and he required veno-arterial extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation. He was tracheotomized in order to manage airway secretions. The left lung was completely destroyed and bleeding necessitated finally pneumonectomy. He was awake on ECMO and learns during his hospital stay that his wife was pregnant with their first child. He was turned down for LTx several times, but when he finally stabilized, the decision was changed and he was listed for LTx . After 281 days on ECMO he received single LTx on the right side. The operation was carried out through sternotomy and was complicated by severe adhesions. It was also noted intraoperatively that fibrotic transformations around the vessels had progressed during waiting time compared to work-up and resulted in great difficulties to identify the anatomic structures. Parts of the lower lobe had to be left in situ, and the patient died of bleeding intra operatively.