An 82-year-old, nonsmoking man with no history of VTE presented to an emergency department (ED) with a complaint of left lower extremity redness and swelling of 3 days duration. The patient had Castleman’s disease [, ], and was being treated with tocilizumab (Actemra™, Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.) 370 mg per 3 weeks and predonisolone 4 mg daily . He was also taking acyclovir, voriconazole and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (Baktar Combination Tablets™, Shionogi & Co., Ltd.) for immunodeficiency, a side effects of tocilizumab, in addition to clopidogrel 75 mg daily for a history of cerebral infarction. The serum D-dimer levels in the ED was 5.2 μg/mL, and VTE was suspected. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT)-scan revealed prominent swelling in his left extremity and contrast deficits in the inferior vena cava (IVC) at the level of the lower lobe of kidney and from the left external iliac vein to the left superfacialis femoral vein. There was no evidence of pulmonary embolisms. The patient was diagnosed with VTE and admitted to our department. On admission, his blood pressure was 161/95 mmHg and his heart rate was 63 beats per minute. An arterial blood gas revealed an oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 95%. His body mass index was 23.0 kg/m2. Anticoaglation therapy, with a DOAC, edoxaban (Lixiana® and Savaysa®, Daiichi Sankyo, Inc.) 30 mg daily was initiated. An IVC filter was not inserted consistent with the latest guideline . Magnetic resonance venography demonstrated that the bifurcation of the left common iliac vein was compressed between the right common iliac artery and the fifth lumbar vertebral body , confirming a diagnosis of IVCS. A hypercoagulability work-up revealed that protein C, protein S, antithrombin, and antiphospholipid antibodies were within normal limits. After 7 days, a follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a reduction in the size of the thrombosis . The patient was permitted to discharge to home.
Anticoagulation therapy with edoxaban was continued for 3 months according to recent guidelines , and the VTE was reevaluated. A follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed that the thrombosis had completely resovled . Moreover serum D-dimer concentration levels was negative. Edoxaban treatment was then discontinued according to a guideline , his clinical symptom, physical examination and D-dimer levels were monitored every month. The patient received treatment with no hemorrhagic complications during clinical course.
The patient gave his consent for the publication of this study.