A 27-year old man presented to the emergency department with acute chest pain for 2 h. Blood pressure was 115/78 mmHg and heart rate 113/min. Heart and lung sounds were clear and radial and pedal pulses symmetrically palpable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-elevation in leads II, III, avF, V4-V6 . The patient admitted consumption of alcohol, cannabis and N2O in the hours before symptom onset. His medical history was notable for Hodgkin-Lymphoma treated with curative radio-chemotherapy 3 years previously. Differential diagnosis of ST-elevations and chest pain in a young male include myocardial infarction due to a non-atherosclerotic origin (i.e. coronary embolism, cocaine induced vasospasm), spontaneous coronary artery dissection, peri-myocarditis, early repolarization, or pneumothorax. The patient was referred for urgent coronary angiogram, which revealed a thrombotic lesion in the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) . Intracoronary OCT yielded no plaque rupture, but adhesive non-occlusive predominantly white thrombi superimposed on a fibrous plaque, suggestive of plaque erosion . Distal embolization of the thrombus material was suspected to be the correlate for the concomitant inferior ST-elevations observed on initial ECG. Left ventricular function was 55% with apical akinesia. Laboratory analysis yielded normal hemoglobin and thrombocyte count, normal INR, an alcohol plasma level of 1.7 per mill and newly diagnosed dyslipidemia (total cholesterol 5.3 mmol/l, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) 3.9 mmol/l). High-sensitivity troponin T on admission was 180 ng/l and peak level 896 ng/l. Screening for anti-phospholipid syndrome was negative and urine toxicology confirmed the consumption of tetrahydrocannabinol, but was negative for other illicit drugs including cocaine. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal biventricular function, normal dimensions of all cardiac cavities, no thrombi, and normal valve function.
The lesion in the LAD was successfully treated with direct implantation of a XIENCE Sierra™ 4.0/18 mm drug-eluting stent and postdilatation with a 4.0/15 mm non-compliant balloon with good result on angiography . Dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin long-term and the potent P2Y12 inhibitor prasugrel for 1 year, as well as high-intensity lipid lowering therapy, betablocker (IIaB recommendation ) and ACE-inhibitor (IIaA recommendation ) were initiated, in accordance with current recommendations . The patient underwent lifestyle change counseling with emphasis on smoking cessation and information on the adverse effects of cannabis and N2O consumption. The course of hospitalization was uneventful and the patient was discharged to home after 48 h rhythm monitoring.
At 6-months follow-up, the patient reported good recovery after STEMI with no complaints of chest pain or dyspnoe. He had been actively engaged in an outpatient cardiac rehabilitation program 3 times per week and been able to abstain from drug consumption and reduce smoking .