A 13-year-old male presented to the outpatient department with complaints of pain in the right thigh and limp for the past 3 years. He had visited several centers and conservatively management without any success. The patient was afebrile with good general condition on the presentation without any skin changes (redness, edema, or discharging sinus) over the thigh. The radiographs showed a pan-femoral involvement on the right side (, ) with the widening of the bone (compared to opposite side), thickening of the cortices, and some IM lucent areas. The part was subjected to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which displayed T2-weighted hyperintensity extending along the whole length of the femur without any cortical breach (-). The patient parents were counseled for the need for surgery. He was planned for intraosseous debridement using serial IM reaming and insertion of an antibiotic-impregnated Kuntscher (K) nail. In lateral position, the entry was made from the pyriformis fossa and progressive reaming was done. There was no purulent outflow and reaming was tough. Vancomycin-mixed cement augmented K-nail of size 7 mm (width) was inserted into the canal, but midway it got jammed and needed to be cut flush at the entry point . The reamed tissue was sent for culture and biopsy. Intra-operative cultures were negative, and the biopsy showed chronic inflammatory changes. The patient postoperatively received empirical antibiotics in the form of injection Linezolid and Clindamycin for 6 weeks.
Nevertheless, 2 months after the index surgery, he complained of discharge from the entry site with granulation tissue. The cement-impregnated-antibiotic K-nail was then removed, which had become loose this time. However, at follow-up, some remnants of broken cement particles were seen in the X-ray and the ooze from the wound continued . Subsequently, he was taken to the operating theatre for the 3rd time. An extended trochanteric osteotomy was done to remove all the cement pieces, followed by an aggressive curettage of the medullary canal. The osteotomy was closed using three cerclage wires (, ). His intra-lesional culture was yet again negative. He received the same empirical antibiotics for further 12 weeks with serial monitoring of acute-phase reactants. This time the wound healed and the patient became pain and limp-free.
At 2 years’ follow-up, the patient is entirely pain-free, walking normally, and performing all daily life activities. The blood acute phase reactants were normal levels, and there was no progression of the cortical thickening . We could not get a repeat MRI as the stainless steel (SS) wires precluded the MRI and the patient was unwilling to undergo another surgical procedure.