A 14-year-old boy, who presented with left scrotal bulging, was referred to our hospital. He had a past medical history of left inguinal hernia surgery when he was one. According to the initial operation record, two vasa deferentia were confirmed, and one of them was significantly thick at 4 mm. The general operation for inguinal hernia could not be performed, and high ligation of the hernia sac could be performed at long last after detaching a severe adhesion of “some” spermatic cords. There were thus far no complications after the inguinal hernia surgery. During the initial physical examination, the patient had an egg-sized, smooth, and painless translucent solid mass in the left scrotum. No tumor was palpable in the groin, and both the silk glove sign and pump tests were negative. Ultrasonography revealed a large hydrocele (10 cm) around the left testis.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. A skin incision was performed along the previous surgical wound, and the inguinal canal was opened. The intestinal tract and a hernia sac were not shown in the inguinal canal. After detaching a severe adhesion of the spermatic cord, we detected an unfamiliar elastic soft tubular structure (thickness 4 mm; length 5 cm) which emanated from the internal inguinal ring separately from the spermatic cord and returned to the internal inguinal ring . We opted only to incise and open the hydrocele in the scrotum; as we reasoned that the hydrocele showed no patency in the inguinal canal and was diagnosed as a noncommunicating scrotal hydrocele. Judging from its shape, the unusual tubular structure was most likely to be a ureter, but it was unrecognizable at that time. We adopted a policy to leave the tubular structure in the inguinal canal to avoid needless damage due to the detachment procedure and did not close the defect considering the risk of some obstruction in the inguinal canal.
Postoperative drip infusion pyelography-computed tomography (DIP-CT) was performed to confirm the urinary system abnormalities. DIP-CT showed no abnormalities in the shape and position of both kidneys and no hydronephrosis. Nevertheless, the left ureter reached the inguinal canal via the internal inguinal ring, looped around, changed direction, and then connected to the bladder . Based on the above DIP-CT findings, the patient was diagnosed with an inguinal ureteral hernia. He presented with slight hematuria immediately after the operation, but his urine gradually returned to normal. The patient was discharged on postoperative day one, without renal dysfunction. Follow-up in the 5th postoperative year showed no recurrence of hydrocele and complications associated with ureteral obstruction. This work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .