A 30-year-old primigravida with monochorionic diamniotic (MCDA) twin pregnancy was referred to our Fetal Medicine Unit at 12 weeks and 6 days for a second opinion due to a low-risk for chromosomal abnormalities first trimester screening scan showing a tubular anechoic area posterior to the bladder in one of the twins. Our gynecologists’ scan detected normal anatomy for gestational age in both twins. The following ultrasound (US) scans showed normal anatomy as well as amniotic fluid volume and Doppler studies in both twins, while fetal growth gradually dropped to the 17th and 7th centiles, respectively.
The twins were born by urgent caesarean section due to a preterm labor at 34 weeks' gestation, weighing 1900 and 1780 g, respectively.
Twin A was the first-born twin. Owing to mild respiratory distress at birth, the newborn was assisted with non-invasive ventilatory support, with progressive improvement of respiratory function. Anal atresia was discovered at birth and the infant was subsequently admitted to our Center’s neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). The initial physical examination also revealed peculiar facies (prominent forehead, sparse eyebrows, hypertelorism, depressed nasal root) (Suppl. Fig. ), bilateral postaxial polydactyly of the hands with right IV-V digit syndactyly (Suppl. Fig. ), and micropenis, without any additional genital abnormalities. Due to the prematurity and the presence of minor facial anomalies, on day 1 CUS was performed by an experienced neonatologist using an Aplio i700 Canon scanner (convex probe PVT-712BT, Frequency Range 4.3–11 MHz) . A mid-sagittal scan through the anterior fontanel demonstrated a round mass-like lesion (21.2 × 10.8 mm) in the suprasellar region, anterior to the brainstem, isoechoic to the surrounding parenchyma. The third ventricle floor was superiorly displaced, with a patent Sylvian aqueduct. Use of color Doppler imaging showed vascularization around - but not within - the lesion. A HH was suspected. Aside from axial hypotonus and overall hyporeactivity, Twin A’s neurological examination was unremarkable. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed a relatively well-organized activity pattern, and the newborn did not present seizures. Other relevant clinical features are described in Table . On post-natal day 10, a brain MRI was performed using a 3 T scanner (Achieva, Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) with pediatric-dedicated coil (Sense Ped, Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands). The newborn was scanned during spontaneous sleep and monitored by pulse oximetry and electrocardiography. The MRI confirmed the presence of an expansive lesion (32x28x16 mm) in the hypothalamic-tuber cinereum region, with craniocaudal development from the third ventricle to the peripontine cisterns. The lesion was isointense with cerebral parenchyma. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed a mild reduction of N-acetylaspartate (NAA) within the lesion, compared to normal parenchyma. The basilar artery and its branches appeared to be included in the lesion as well as both carotid siphons. The basilar artery had normal flow void signal, as if by progressive adaptation to the lesion. All things considered, the lesion was deemed compatible with a diagnosis of HH. The presence of a HH in a newborn with dysmorphic features supported a clinical diagnosis of PHS.
Twin B was the second-born twin. He developed mild respiratory distress at birth requiring non-invasive ventilatory support for the first hours after birth. Similarly to his brother, anal atresia was discovered at birth and he was admitted to our NICU. Peculiar minor facial anomalies similar to Twin A’s were noted. However, Twin B presented polydactyly only of the right hand. Comparison between the main clinical features of the twins is summarized in Table . The main differences were observed from a nephrological and endocrinological point of view. Interestingly, CUS and MRI findings were superimposable .
The clinical diagnosis of PHS was confirmed in both twins by whole exome sequencing (WES), which showed the same variant p.Thr694fs in heterozygosity (NM_000168:c.2080del), caused by a deletion of a base in exon 13 of the GLI3 gene. Sanger sequencing of peripheral blood DNA from the parents did not detect the GLI3 variant.
The twins underwent sequential CUS scans and at 50+ 6 weeks of corrected age brain MRI was performed to assess the HHs’ size and potential associated complications. In both twins, the known expansive lesion appeared enlarged (approximately 50% on the antero-posterior and latero-lateral diameter), causing a more relevant mass effect on the surrounding structures. In Twin B, an initial displacement of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum was observed . The lesions still appeared isointense to the surrounding parenchyma. Myelination-like aspects within the HHs and thickening of the intra-lesional cortical component could be recognized. Compared to the previous exam, on MRS NAA content appeared physiologically increased within the periventricular white matter. A slight increase in NAA, although less marked, was detected within the lesions, as well.