A 55-year-old man developed severe lower back pain after heavy lifting. Over the next 5 days he experienced paraesthesiaes in the feet, progressing to the torso, and reduced sensation when passing urine. On day six he presented to hospital after waking and noticing a left facial droop. On presentation he also reported a 3 day history of constipation. There was no history of headache, neck stiffness, or trauma. He was a current smoker (15 cigarettes per day) and drank 70 units of alcohol per week. There was no significant past medical history and he used no regular medications.
His vital signs on admission revealed hypertension (blood pressure 160/92 mmHg) and tachycardia (heart rate 103 beats per minute), but were otherwise within normal limits. Glasgow coma scale was 15. On examination there was left-sided facial weakness (House-Brackmann grade IV) with no forehead sparing (lower motor neurone pattern). The remainder of the cranial nerve examination was normal. Tone was normal and there was no clonus. Pyramidal drift was present in the right upper limb, but muscle power was Medical Research Council grade 5/5 in all muscle groups. Deep tendon reflexes were elicited (normal) apart the ankle reflex, which was absent bilaterally. The plantar response was downgoing bilaterally. Light touch and pain sensation were reduced, but present, to T6 bilaterally - most notably across L4-S1 and S3-S4 (saddle anaesthesia) – and vibration sense was reduced to the ankle bilaterally. Gait was unsteady and the patient was unable to tandem walk. There was no limb ataxia. Anal tone was normal, there was no significant residual volume on urinary catheterisation, and the patient could feel a catheter tug.
The presentation of lower back pain with bladder and bowel symptoms led to the emergency department (ED) team making an initial diagnosis of Bell’s palsy and cauda equina syndrome and arranging magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbo-sacral spine. This demonstrated only a small disc protrusion at L5/S1 abutting the transiting right S1 root .
Due to the facial nerve palsy, imaging for a central cause was performed. MRI of the brain showed diffuse subarachnoid fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensity concerning for blood, including in the basal cistern and Sylvian fissures. There was also a focus of cortical/subcortical high signal in the left superior parietal lobule . MRI of the cervico-thoracic spine did not demonstrate SAH. The SAH was confirmed by computed tomography (CT). To investigate for a cause, CT angiography (CTA) was performed which demonstrated some prominence of the left-sided parafalcine cortical vessels. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrated a left VAD , with a dissection flap within a fusiform dilatation of the left intradural vertebral artery.
When SAH was confirmed, nimodipine 60 mg 4-hourly for 21 days, analgesia, euvolaemia and bed rest were commenced. Given the facial palsy, eye protection was ensured. The patient was discussed at the neurovascular multi-disciplinary team (MDT) meeting where conservative management of the VAD was advocated based on a delayed and atypical presentation, treatment risking vessel occlusion, and patient choice.
The patient was monitored on the Intensive Care Unit following the DSA, and was later transferred to the neurosurgical ward. During the admission the patient had headache, intermittent confusion, and poor memory. Repeat CTA at 2 weeks showed stable appearances of the dissection and the patient was discharged with outpatient follow-up,
Clinic review at 12 weeks revealed the patient had returned to full-time work with resolution of most symptoms, apart from intermittent paraesthesiaes in the toes. Cranial nerves were intact with full recovery of facial nerve function, and peripheral neurological examination was normal. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) at 12 weeks showed stable appearances of the dissecting aneurysm, with no new parenchymal abnormalities nor other adverse features. Repeat MRA at 9 months demonstrated no change in the aneurysm. Imaging surveillance is to continue, with repeat MRA planned after a further 6 months.