We present the case of a woman in her 80s with a GEKA who presented with a 6-month history of extremely pruritic lesions. Informed consent was obtained from the individual participant included in the study. She reported the sudden onset of hundreds of 1- to 3-mm scaly papules located on her legs, arms, and trunk, without any identified trigger. A few days after an emotional shock, some of the lesions had evolved into large crateriform tumors . She had no familial medical history but had a personal history of hypertension, depression, and sun exposure. She had been previously treated with antihistamines, topical corticosteroids, and 20 sessions of phototherapy without success. The phototherapy was initially prescribed for suspected prurigo but was followed by a worsening of the skin lesions.
There were numerous follicular papules with keratotic centers, erythematous nodules on the legs, arms, and trunk, and ten 1.5- to 3.5-cm-diameter crateriform tumors of the limbs. The physical examination did not show mucosal involvement, sclerotic skin changes, or lymphadenopathy. There was no deterioration of her general condition. A full-body computed tomography (CT) scan was within normal limits. Blood work revealed negative results for her human immunodeficiency virus serology and a normal complete blood cell count. A biopsy specimen was obtained from one of the skin tumors . Histopathological examination of the specimen obtained from the patient’s leg revealed a crater-shaped squamous proliferation connected to the epidermis and penetrating the dermis, with a central keratin plug . The keratinocytes were large and surrounded by a moderately abundant inflammatory infiltrate .
Molecular detection of HPV was performed on the skin sample by polymerase chain reaction using degenerate primers, followed by Sanger sequencing . One α-HPV was detected: HPV type 39.
No genetic alteration was found in the genes usually altered in SCC (including NOTCH1, NOTCH2, CDKN2A, TP53) on a lesional skin biopsy using a homemade next-generation sequencing panel covering skin carcinoma genes (90 genes). The patient was not screened for mismatch repair gene alterations (MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6) because she had not developed any other neoplasm associated with Muir–Torre syndrome. In particular, there was no history of sebaceous tumors.
The largest skin lesions were surgically removed and oral acitretin was started (0.5 mg/kg/day), allowing a decrease in pruritus and the disappearance of numerous lesions . No new KA appeared under acitretin. She has been successfully treated with acitretin for 1 year.