A 71-year-old Moslem Arab man with a 29-year duration of type 2 diabetes mellitus, with diabetic neuropathy and nephropathy, presented to our outpatient clinic, after a three-month period of severe neuropathic paresthetic pain in four extremities and his buttocks (saddle paresthesia). The pain estimate was 10/10 visual analog scale (VAS). Concomitantly, he had lost 20kg of weight, felt anorectic, nervous and sad, had insomnia, tremors, a feeling of general coldness, and was suffering from new constipation and orthostatic complaints. Consequent to orthostatism, his antihypertensive medications were reduced to minimum; ramipril was stopped and atenolol was decreased.
At admission, he complained of dry mouth, fatigue, lethargy and a feeling of suffocation. Recent hemoglobin A1c (9.1%) was achieved on 30 unit/day premixed insulin and metformin 850mg trice daily. Other laboratory findings revealed moderate anemia and chronic mild/moderate renal failure .
A few weeks prior to his visit, he completed negative thorough endoscopic gastrointestinal testing, as well as whole-body computed tomography (CT) scans searching for neoplastic findings. Except for incidental sporadic lymphangiectasis and an arteriovenous (AV) malformation found in the small bowel and a thyroidal nodule, all test results were within normal limits.
He could not recall any changes in facial features, neither had he noticed an increase in shoe size; he attributed his rounded thick fingers to years of manual carpentry.
On physical examination he was pale and distressed. His blood pressure was 124/63mmHg; pulse, 107 beats per minute; body weight, 86.9kg; height, 171cm; and body mass index (BMI), 29.7kg/m2. His facial features were coarse with thickened lips and wide nostrils; he had a palmar fine tremor and a systolic murmur of 2/6. Diminished tendon reflexes were observed in four extremities. There was glove and sock hypoesthesia, and distal weakness of the hands with normal strength of the lower extremities. His current illnesses were arterial hypertension; hearing loss; right carpal tunnel syndrome; obstructive sleep apnea; hyperlipidemia; hiatus hernia with reflux; and benign prostatic hypertrophy.
With negative thorough weight loss investigation, major neoplastic disease and inflammatory bowel disease were ruled out. Absent relevant complaints of malabsorption rendered these diagnoses unlikely.
A thyroid nodule was confirmed by sonography, which was 3.3cm in diameter. His thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 0.19 was reported one month prior to the repetitive CTs (with iodinated contrast media). It became suppressed thereafter, with elevated thyroid hormone levels . The thyroid technetium scan showed asymmetrical goiter and low isotope uptake. Thyroid radioiodine uptake (RAIU) was 1% and 10% after 2 and 24 hours, respectively. Thyroidal fine needle aspirate (FNA) was consistent with normal thyroid follicular findings.
Normal findings were detected in his complete blood count, liver and kidney functions tests, B12, rheumatic diseases profile, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin, C-reactive protein and transferrin tests.
We hypothesized that this grave neuropathic suffering underpinned a catabolic and inflammatory mechanism to drive significant emaciation, and to finally result in weight loss, anemia and disrupted acute phase reactants (ferritin and iron). Ferritin was high in contrast to a low correspondent iron level. Ferritin levels observed over time showed a prominent decline before iron stores were replenished .
Neurological consultation included physical examination, electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies to the lower extremities. Electrophysiological studies revealed a pattern that was consistent with sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy. Gastric solid emptying scintigraphy revealed minimal isotope passage to the small intestine 3.5 hours after ingestion of a labeled meal.
Biochemical parameters, including growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) levels, established acromegaly ; a head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a small gadolinium-enhanced pituitary mass of 3 × 5 × 3mm.
The patient’s depressed mood appeared to be mainly attributable to his remarkable neuropathic pains. Hence, we attributed his weight loss to the rare diagnosis of DNC, which accounts for profound weight loss, anorexia, orthostatism, disordered mood and sleep disturbances.
We posted control of the neuropathic suffering as the first priority, and ameliorating hyperthyroxinemia as a secondary requirement; we decided that establishing the cause of acromegaly and its respective treatment to be the lowest of the three priorities.
Weight loss investigation was concluded as negative, after the comprehensive work-up our patient underwent in his local community-based hospital, he denied alcohol intake or past porphyria attacks. Our patient reported a satisfying increase in appetite and gained weight parallel to the decrease in neuropathic suffering . However, infrequently he experienced protracted post-meal vomiting, which did not hamper his weight regain. The gastric emptying test was found to be prominently prolonged as a result of gastroparesis; later on, he experienced an increase in protracted post-meal vomiting once he had been started on a somatostatin analog for acromegaly.
Neuropathy was treated by maximal pregabaline (75mg daily adjusted to serum creatinine) and achieved a pronounced clinical response in respective neuropathic pains. Our patient’s pain estimate dropped to 4 to 5/10 VAS, concomitantly.
Glycemia treatment, including premix insulin doses, was increased up to 70 units in order to keep glycemia relatively under control. This control was achieved parallel to the clinical and laboratory improvement. A hemoglobin A1c of 7.5% three months after admission enabled reconstitution of oral antidiabetics, once glucotoxicity had abated. Metformin was reinstituted and vildagliptin added; both treatments were modified according to the patient’s renal status. Hypoglycemic events prompted a decrease of insulin dosage, and a switch from premix to basal insulin (daily dosage 28 units). Subsequently, our patient experienced a gradual increase in glycemia, which was ascribed to active acromegaly, and the iatrogenic effect of somatostatin analogs on glucose homeostasis (suppressed endogenous insulin).
Hyperthyroxinemia was ascribed to contrast media iodide load, on a preexisting autonomous nodule. His RAIU uptake was respectively low. His thyroid FNA and follow-up function test results were consistent with a benign thyroid nodule. Moderate renal failure was projected in long-term iodide load disposal. However, thyroid function indices dropped spontaneously back to the normal range after eight weeks. His TSH level reverted to pre-evaluation level 16 weeks later.
Acromegaly was hormonally established as a pituitary adenoma-related acromegaly (by MRI). Echocardiography demonstrated negligible mild intraventricular septal hypertrophy.
Our patient preferred a somatostatin analog over transsphenoidal adenomectomy. He was started on lanreotide Autogel® 60mg/month several months after his first visit. Lanreotide failed to achieve good metabolic control: his IGF-1 remained elevated (437ng/ml). Our patient was asked to reconsider pituitary adenomectomy subsequent to the failure of lanreotide, as well as due to the untoward effects of lanreotide (aggravated glycemia deterioration and aggravated gastroparesis-related post-meal vomiting).