The patient was a 44-year-old woman, a known case hypothyroidism who has been under treatment with levothyroxine, propranolol, and clonazepam since 13 years ago. The patient was referred to the emergency ward, with uremia symptoms (weakness, nausea and vomiting) and oliguria. In the preliminary management, the patient was placed under hemodialysis treatment due to high blood urea nitrogen and creatinine (BUN=112 mg/dl, Cr=10 mg/dl), electrolyte imbalance (K=6.5 mg/dl) and uremia symptoms. Patient stated a history of vague abdominal pain since the last year. In paraclinical evaluations, conducted during hospitalization, patient suffered with chronic anemia (Hemoglobin=9.8 g/dl) as well, bilateral fullness of pelvicalyceal system was reported on ultrasonography of the kidneys. In the next phase, spiral abdominopelvic CT-scan without intravenous contrast was performed that showed bilateral mild hydronephrosis. Moreover, a dense fibrotic plaque was observed, surrounding the central abdominal vessels. JJ stents were placed for the patient in the ureters on both sides, since, it was suspected inflammatory process surrounding the ureters and considered the probability of the two-sided obstructive factor led to increased creatinine and oliguria. After JJ stent insertion, diuresis was established and BUN/Cr decreased. The patient did not require dialysis anymore. The medial deviation was clearly observed in both ureters after placing stents on KUB. Propranolol was stopped; the patient was left out with prescription of corticosteroid drugs (prednisolone 50 mg daily). After 5 weeks, patient’s stents were removed. However, anuria occurred and creatinine increased. Stents were placed in both ureters and diuresis established again. After 3 weeks, despite corticosteroid therapy and ureteral catheterization oliguria and rising in BUN/Cr occurred. Thus, the patient was candidate for surgery. Ureterolysis was done and ureters were placed in peritoneum.
Samples obtained from the fibrotic tissues and were sent to the pathology laboratory, however, no evidence of malignancy was found. After the fourth week, JJ catheters were removed, but the patient showed a gradual increase in creatinine level after about a week (1.2 to 3.1). Two options were proposed for the patient’s management. One of them was inserting ureteral stents again or beginning treatment with corticosteroid that the second option was adopted. Serum creatinine was declined to 1.5 mg/dl and remained constant after consumption of prednisolone 50 mg/day. After one month of treatment, drug tapered gradually and was interrupted after 4 months. After 6 months of follow- up, patient had not any complaint and serum BUN/Cr levels remained constant.