We present the case of a 37-year-old male with a history of HIES, diagnosed at 2 years of life due to recurrent episodes of cold abscess on his back and groyne caused by a Staphylococcal infection. The patient belonged to an under-resourced area and had limited access to healthcare as well a lack of awareness in parents resulted in the delay in diagnosis. Also, physicians provided symptomatic care in the earlier years of life as this diagnosis being rare was not considered. IgE levels were 10 000 IU/ml with eosinophilia. In this case, a bone marrow biopsy was not performed. The patient was not born to consanguineous parents and the mother denies any use of alcohol, drugs, or tobacco during pregnancy. The patient has had multiple cold abscesses since then, however, only three have required incision and drainage. The patient was started only on supportive treatment and antibiotics, nothing specific for HIES. The karyotype of the patient is presented in Figure and the pathway through which HIES increases susceptibility to infections is presented in Figure .
Past medical history was significant for multiple hospitalizations, rapid weight loss, hyperpigmentation on the skin, autism and Down syndrome, dermatitis, and Globulinemia that is HIES. The patient was administered the following medications: ascorbic acid, ferrous sulfate, megestrol acetate (for weight gain), and tylenol.
The patient first presented to the infectious disease physician in 2012 because of abscesses on both of his buttocks. He was already on IV antibiotics which he accidentally removed. On physical examination, hyperpigmentation, rash on the face, groyne, and buttocks, and neurological examination were indicative of autism and Down syndrome, while the rest of the physical examination was normal. The patient was repeatedly removing the IV antibiotic line by accident.
In 2013, the patient presented with an abscess accompanied by foul-smelling oozing pus, along with fever and chills. They experienced a similar abscess presentation again in 2014 and 2016. Starting in 2017, the patient began to have a loss of bowel and bladder control, necessitating the use of adult diapers. In 2018, they presented with fever and chills attributed to multiple cysts and rhinitis.
In 2019, the patient presented with a dry cough and was prescribed new medications, including azithromycin 500 mg, promethazine 6.25 mg/5ml, augmentin 500–125 mg, and miconazole nitrate for a fungal infection. They also started taking ergocalciferol. Follow-up visits with an infectious disease physician occurred in 2020. In 2021, the patient sought a dose adjustment of Hydrocortisone tablets, leading to a gradual tapering of the 20 mg dose. They were advised to continue taking 5 mg of Hydrocortisone on a long-term basis.
In 2022, the patient presented with swelling in the right armpit, which was not accompanied by fever or pain. Upon examination, a 5×7 cm lesion was identified in the right axilla and diagnosed as an abscess-draining yellow discharge with a foul odour. Additional findings included pressure ulcers stage II over bilateral buttocks, which were also draining yellow discharge with a foul odour. The patient completed antibiotic therapy and reported poor appetite, resulting in the initiation of Megestrol to promote weight gain.
After a few months, the patient returned with a draining sinus located at the sacrum and was initiated antibiotic treatment. Subsequently, the patient has been receiving regular follow-up care through telehealth services. It is important to note that the patient belongs to an underserved population and is actively seeking clinical trials that could provide additional treatment options for IgE-related conditions. Due to limited available information, the available reports mainly consist of blood test results, chest X-ray findings, and cardiology reports. HIES was diagnosed using the Invitae Hyper IgE Syndrome Panel, which revealed a STAT3 gene mutation. The diagnosis was supported by the patient’s clinical features and serum IgE levels of 10,000 IU.
The blood test results and clinical abnormalities are identified and summarized in Table .
The chest X-ray revealed pulmonary peri-bronchial thickening and the presence of multiple small nodules in the right lung. No signs of focal pulmonary consolidation, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, or cardiomegaly were observed. Hyperinflation of the lung fields was noted, along with mild scoliosis. The presence of very small nodular infiltrates in the right lung confirms the diagnosis of bronchitis or pneumonitis. Cardiac echo showed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 55–60%, and mild thickening of the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets.