An 84-year-old woman suddenly noticed a lump in her left breast, so she visited our hospital. Physical examination revealed a large tumor with redness approximately 8 cm in the maximal dimension, which was occupying the entire left breast. Laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (49,760 cells/μL with 87% neutrophils) without fever and a high G-CSF level (498 pg/mL). Tumor markers were normal (CEA 1.0 ng/mL, CA15-3 13.8 U/mL). Mammography revealed a large, high-density mass in her left breast . Ultrasound examination revealed a lobulated, inhomogeneous, blood-rich mass. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large lobulated mass without apparent infiltration to the pectoral major muscle . Computed tomography showed no enlarged axillary lymph nodes. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed no distant metastasis, although mild-to-moderate and homogeneous FDG uptake were detected in the spine, pelvic bone, and long bones, suggesting bone marrow hyperactivity . She did not present splenomegaly. Histological diagnosis was difficult to confirm using core needle biopsy. These results suggested that this tumor was malignant, such as carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, or sarcoma of the breast. Bone marrow biopsy showed no evidence of bone metastasis. According to the standard treatment of breast cancer, we performed total mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy. There was no lymph node metastasis. Macroscopic findings of excised specimens showed a huge and lobulated tumor, which was 8 cm in size . The tumor cells showed no expression of the human epithelial growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Histologic examination with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain revealed many poorly differentiated and highly atypical cells . Immunostaining of the tumor cells was negative for AE1/AE3, EMA, and desmin. In addition, it was positive for G-CSF, indicating that the tumor was a G-CSF-producing malignant phyllodes tumor of the breast . After surgery, her WBC count had decreased to a normal level within 7 days. She was discharged 10 days after surgery and treated with no adjuvant therapy. She is alive without recurrence 13 months after surgery.