We report the case of a 69-year-old Sri Lankan Tamil man from Kandy who presented to the toxicology unit following a wasp sting. He was stung by three wasps in the evening and was brought to the toxicology unit of Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya with acute onset slurring of speech, deviation of mouth to the left side, with right-side weakness of his body. He had mild local reaction at the sites of wasp sting, but no anaphylaxis. He was apparently well before this event without any chronic medical illnesses.
On admission to the toxicology unit he was conscious and rational. He was neither pale nor plethoric. He had a regular pulse of 80 beats per minute and blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg. On clinical examination he had no cardiac murmurs or carotid bruits. He had expressive aphasia, right-side upper motor neuron-type facial nerve palsy, with grade four weakness of the right side of his body.
Random blood sugar on admission was 121 mg/dL. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain revealed an acute infarction in the left posterior frontal white matter, which was compatible with the clinical presentation . His complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 13.6 g/dL and platelet count of 350 × 109/L. Clotting profile was within normal limits. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was in sinus rhythm and two-dimensional echocardiogram was normal with good left ventricular systolic function. Carotid duplex showed anatomically normal carotid arteries. Fasting blood sugar was 4 mmol/L. Total cholesterol was 148 mg/dL (< 180) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol was 90 mg/dL (< 130). His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 11 mm in first hour. His renal functions were normal.
He was started on aspirin and atorvastatin. Rehabilitation was arranged with physiotherapy and speech therapy. His place of residence was visited by the authors and the members of the wasp species were found and identified as Vespa tropica of family Vespidae . On discharge, he had a mild right facial droop but normal strength in his right arm and leg.