A 34-year-old female patient visited our hospital on March 13, 2018, with manifestations of abdominal pain and bloody mucopurulent diarrhoea for 2 mo.
Two months prior, the patient had experienced abdominal distension without obvious inducement; paroxysmal dull pain in the whole abdomen that was aggravated at night; bloody and, thin stool; approximately 3-4 times/day; reduced pain after defecation; chills; and fever, with a maximum temperature of 38 °C. On January 9, 2018, the patient attended the local hospital for a colonoscopy, which suggested UC . On January 22, 2018, the patient was hospitalized in the Department of Gastroenterology of the local hospital for paroxysmal abdominal pain, mainly on the left side, with bloody, sparse stool, approximately 5-6 times/day. She began to be treated with: Mesalazine sustained release granules combined with mesalazine (suppositories). After 1 wk, she improved and was discharged, thereafter continuing outpatient treatment for 5 wk. However, the patient's condition did not improve further. She produced sparse stool 1-2 times/day, and coffee-like stool, abdominal pain and abdominal distension were noted during defecation, accompanied by chills, night sweats, fatigue, poor appetite, and anaemia. Consequently, she came to the outpatient department of our hospital on March 13, 2018, to seek TCM treatment.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient’s temperature was 37.0 °C, the heart rate was 78 beats/min, the respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and the blood pressure was 122/78 mmHg.
Laboratory tests showed inflammation (73.4 mg/dL of C-reactive protein) and anaemia (9.7 g/dL of haemoglobin) at the time of visit. See Table for further relevant results.
Colonoscopy results showed that the mucosa of the whole colon and rectum was congested and oedemtous, showing patchy haemorrhagic foci, with purulent moss on the surface and partial erosion; the right colon and rectum were the most seriously affected . Pathological diagnosis: Acute and chronic inflammation of the large intestinal mucosa with crypt abscess formation, consistent with ulcerative colorectal inflammation .