In May 2016, a 38 year-old nulliparous woman at approximately 16 weeks’ gestation sought care for a one-day history of fever, rash, myalgia, arthralgia, and headache. Her only significant medical history was well-controlled high blood pressure. Diagnostic testing for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (i.e., TORCH) performed at 10 weeks’ gestation was negative. At the time of her visit, the patient agreed to participate in an ongoing study of acute febrile illness, which collected blood, urine, and nasopharyngeal specimens for diagnostic testing .
ZIKV RNA was detected in serum by RT-PCR one day after symptom onset; serum IgM testing and urine RT-PCR were both negative. The patient was enrolled in the Zika virus Persistence study , for which serum, whole blood, urine, saliva, and vaginal secretions were collected weekly for 1 month and subsequently every 2 weeks thereafter. Collected serum specimens were tested for ZIKV, dengue virus, and chikungunya virus nucleic acid by RT-PCR , and for anti-ZIKV IgM and anti-dengue virus IgM and IgG antibodies by ELISA .
ZIKV RNA was detected in serum on days 1, 15, 22, 29, 36, 50 and 54 post illness onset (i.e., 18 – 24 weeks’ gestation) . The patient was referred to a maternal-fetal medicine (MFM) specialist at 20 weeks’ gestation due to a positive quadruple screen test, 1:8 suggestive of Down syndrome, and a positive test for ZIKV infection. At approximately 24 weeks’ gestation, a level II ultrasound demonstrated generalized edema predominantly localized to the upper portion of the fetus’ body, a small amount of ascites, a single umbilical artery, and the absence of cardiac activity consistent with fetal demise. The patient was admitted to a hospital the following day for labor induction. TORCH testing was repeated, testing was performed for Lupusanticoagulant, and urine and serum were screened for drug and toxins, all of which were negative. The fetus was delivered vaginally at 24 weeks’ gestation in breech position approximately 8 hours after the initiation of labor induction. No cardiac or respiratory activity was present in the fetus at birth consistent with the diagnosis of fetal demise. Fetal weight was 3,289 grams. The fetus was edematous and macerated, and skin desquamation was present in the upper and lower extremities. The abdomen had skin discoloration suggestive of possible hematoma. Thinning of the umbilical cord at insertion site was noted. No dysmorphic features or neural tube defects were observed, and no clinical stigmata of Down’s syndrome were present. A retained placenta requiring a dilation and curettage complicated the mother’s clinical course. She recovered satisfactorily and was discharged home the following day. Parental consent was not provided for fetal autopsy; however, consent was given to examine the umbilical cord and placenta.
The placenta weighed 213 grams and measured 12 × 11.3 × 2.8 cm. The fetal and maternal membranes were well vascularized and the umbilical cord was inserted at the margin, measuring 23 × 1 cm, with two blood vessels present. The maternal surface had complete cotyledons, and transverse sections revealed spongy tan parenchyma. Upon microscopic evaluation, the placenta had patchy villous edema. Karyorrhectic debris was present around vessels within edematous villi, and larger sclerotic, avascular villi often had associated perivillous fibrin deposition. Stippled, deeply-basophilic calcifications were scattered within multiple villi. Multifocal aggregates of plasma cells were present within the decidua. Histologic findings were nonspecific, consistent with findings seen with intrauterine fetal demise and/or circulatory issues within the placenta, though the presence of plasma cells and other mononuclear cells within the decidua has been described as a sign of chronic antigenic stimulation . ZIKV RNA was detected by RT-PCR in a specimen of placenta; however, ZIKV antigen was not detected by immunohistochemistry.
The patient was followed as part the Zika Virus Persistence study protocol. RT-PCR testing did not detect ZIKV RNA at 64, 78, and 92 days post-illness onset . On day 120 after illness onset, ZIKV RNA was detected at low levels in a serum specimen. All serum, urine, saliva and vaginal secretions collected thereafter were negative by RT-PCR. Anti-ZIKV IgM antibody was first detected in serum on day 15 post-illness onset and was last detected on day 78 post-illness onset . The same specimens were also tested by anti-DENV IgM ELISA, and all were negative. Anti-DENV IgG antibody was detected by ELISA in the specimen collected on the first day of acute febrile illness (week 16 gestation), demonstrating previous DENV infection. Further analysis of neutralizing antibodies by plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) on the same specimen demonstrated high titers against DENV−2, low titers to DENV−1, −3, and −4, and no titers against ZIKV, which together suggested prior infection with DENV−2. Specimens collected in the weeks following the initial infection demonstrated a robust neutralizing antibody response to ZIKV, including greater than 4-fold increase in titers against all DENVs, consistent with antibody response to secondary flavivirus infection .