A 34-year-old male driver who was suffering from myasthenia gravis presented to the medical emergency department of Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, India, with increasing fatigability, ptosis, and diplopia for seven days. The patient was a native from the same city. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for using his clinical information and images for the academic and research purposes.
The patient had undergone thymectomy four years ago for myasthenia gravis and was on tablet prednisolone 40 mg once daily, tablet pyridostigmine 90 mg six-hourly for five years, and tablet cyclosporine 200 mg twice daily for the last one year. The patient had also developed steroid-induced diabetes mellitus one year ago and had received insulin therapy. His vitals were stable. There were multiple painless swellings in the right leg region for the preceding one month; the biggest swelling measured 10 × 7 cm near the knee region and multiple small swellings were noticed between the knee and ankle. There was no history of previous similar swellings. His random blood sugar at the time of admission was 345 mg/dl and HbA1c 10.7%. Insulin dose was adjusted and it reduced to 135 mg/ml on the fifth day of admission.
Ultrasound of the swelling near the right knee showed multiloculated collections with moving echoes in the knee joint. The pus was yellowish, not foul smelling and not blood stained. The 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) mount showed thin, septate, hyaline, and branched hyphae . The pus was inoculated on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA) and incubated at 25°C in multiple tubes. All the culture tubes grew flat, densely floccose, and velvety lilac colour colonies and the reverse was off-white within seven days of incubation . Lactophenol cotton blue stain (LPCB) preparation of the growth revealed thin hyaline septate hyphae with irregularly branching conidiophores. Phialides were more elongated and densely clustered and had a tapering end. The conidia were elliptical, in long unbranched chains, and phenotypically identified as Purpureocillium lilacinum .
Purpureocillium lilacinum was again isolated from two more pus aspirates, which were sent at varied intervals over the next one week. Antifungal susceptibility testing could not be performed because of logistic reasons. The fungal culture was confirmed by National Culture Collection of Pathogenic FungiCentre of Advance Research in Medical Mycology, WHO Collaborating Centre, Chandigarh, India (ID no. IL2892) by sequencing of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region. The sequence was submitted to the gene bank database with the accession number MH714911.
The patient was started on antifungal tablet itraconazole 300 mg once daily. The swellings were surgically excised and histopathological examination of the excised tissue revealed thin septate hyaline hyphae. After three months of itraconazole therapy, the patient had no new swellings but complained of a serous discharge at one of the excision sites. The discharge was collected and 10% KOH mount of the discharge was negative for fungal elements, but the culture grew Purpureocillium lilacinum again. Itraconazole therapy was extended for another month at the same dose, but the patient had recurrence of small swellings. Treatment was changed to tablet ketoconazole 200 mg once a day for three months. The swellings responded well to ketoconazole. He remained asymptomatic and swelling regressed after one month of ketoconazole therapy.