A 46-year-old Turkish woman presented to our institute with a red, well-demarcated plaque on her left arm. She said the lesion had appeared when she was 4 years old. A doctor who our patient had visited when the lesion first appeared had said that the lesion was a birthmark. After that, our patient did not see any doctor with regard to this lesion. However, over the last 2 years, the lesion had started to enlarge, and she consulted a doctor again; this time she was told that it was a harmless vascular lesion, described as a hemangioma.
A dermatological examination revealed an erythematous, nontender, 5×7cm in size, well-defined plaque present over the medial part of her left arm. Some erythematous satellite papules, 0.5×1cm in size were scattered around the main lesion . The lesion did appear to resemble a hemangioma at first sight. Diascopy of the lesions revealed an apple-jelly appearance. There was no lymphadenopathy. A systemic examination was normal. No bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) scar was visible. An incisional biopsy of the plaques showed the formation of a tuberculoid granuloma composed of epithelioid cells, lymphocytes, and Langerhans-like giant cells located in the upper dermis . A Mantoux test was positive with an induration of 6mm after 48 hours.
Laboratory tests showed a normal blood count. Sputum, stool and urine cultures were negative. The results of venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) tests were negative. Fungal and standard bacterial cultures from the skin biopsy were negative. Ziehl-Neelsen and periodic acid-Schiff stains did not show any acid-fast bacilli. Culture from the biopsy specimen was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assay of the biopsy specimen gave a negative result for Mycobacterium. Chest radiography and an abdominal ultrasound did not show any pathologic finding. Underlying bone and joint disease was excluded by radiography. Lupus vulgaris was diagnosed in our patient on the basis of the clinical and histopathologic findings.
Our patient was treated with isoniazid (5mg/kg), rifampin (10mg/kg), ethambutol (25mg/kg), and pyrazinamide (15mg/kg) daily for 2 months, followed by isoniazid and rifampin for 7 months. The cutaneous lesions started to regress within 3 months and had completely healed with atrophic scarring and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation after 9 months .