A 54-year-old Chinese man of Han nationality, a retiree, went to a local hospital because of hematuria. He had an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showing right renal mass and bilateral adrenal nodules. He was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He denied any medical history, except for a 4-year history of hypertension. He took 5 mg amlodipine besylate every day. He was married and living with his family; he had smoked tobacco for 30 years and denied alcohol consumption. Members of his family had no history of endocrine diseases or malignant tumors.
At the time of admission, his temperature was 37 °C, the pulse was 80 per minute, and his blood pressure was 161/75 mmHg. His height was 168 cm and weight 64 kg. There was no physical sign of Cushing’s syndrome, such as central obesity, skin atrophy, buffalo hump, red striae of skin, or moon face. The results of his cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal, and neurological examinations were all unremarkable. A laboratory examination showed an electrolyte disturbance, in particular, a very low serum potassium level. His 24-hour urinary free cortisol was elevated. The function of his thyroid gland, parathyroid hormone, metanephrine, and normetanephrine were in normal range.
The endocrine findings showed high plasma aldosterone level and low plasma renin concentration. He then underwent a captopril challenge test which did not show suppressed level of plasma aldosterone concentration. A diagnosis of PA was of no doubt. On the other hand, the circadian rhythm of cortisol disappeared, and his serum cortisol level was not suppressed by an overnight dexamethasone suppression test (ODST) and low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST). He was diagnosed as having SCS.
An abdominal CT scan revealed a mass in the parenchyma of his right kidney and there was a rounded, low-density mass in his right adrenal gland and a rounded, low-density mass in his left adrenal gland ; the larger adrenal mass was approximately 2.6 cm × 2.3 cm on the left adrenal gland. These findings indicated the possibility of a renal tumor and bilateral adrenocortical adenomas.
Sequential adrenal venous sampling (AVS) without adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation was performed next. The result of AVS reminded us that the right adrenal gland was responsible for aldosterone hypersecretion, and, quite possibly, the left was responsible for hypercortisolism.
Right nephrectomy and right partial adrenalectomy were performed first. The golden-yellow nodule in the right adrenal was approximately 2.5 cm × 2 cm × 0.8 cm macroscopically. The pathological diagnosis of the right adrenal nodule was adrenocortical adenoma. The right kidney tumor was proven to be a fibroma. Three days after operation, our patient’s serum potassium was 4.5 mmol/L without any supplementary treatment. The hypertensive drug was changed to 2 mg terazosin every day.
A laparoscopic left partial adrenalectomy was conducted 1 month later. When admitted to hospital, his blood pressure was 127/83 mmHg controlled by 2 mg terazosin every day, and his level of potassium was 4.9 mmol/L without any supplementary treatment. We examined his cortisol at 8 a.m. before operation, which was 344.81 nmol/L. The operation was successful and the level of cortisol at 8 a.m. had reduced to 192.01 nmol/L 2 days after operation. The nodule in the left adrenal was golden-yellow; it was approximately 3 cm × 2.5 cm × 2 cm. The pathological diagnosis of the left adrenal gland nodule was proven to be adrenocortical adenoma. After the second operation, doctors advised 30 mg hydrocortisone should be taken once a day with a weekly reduction of 10 mg until withdrawal, and 2 mg terazosin should be taken once a day.
During postoperative follow-up, terazosin was gradually stopped, and blood pressure and serum potassium remained normal. Approximately 2 months later, his ACTH concentration was 98.73 pg/ml which was above the reference value. This meant our patient had adrenocortical insufficiency, and he continued to take hydrocortisone. Months later, hydrocortisone was stopped, the concentration of cortisol and ACTH were 233.46 nmol/L and 49.43 pg/ml, respectively. The plasma aldosterone concentration was 104 pg/ml and plasma renin concentration was 3.1 uIU/ml. Normalization of aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR), cortisol, and ACTH were reached and our patient did not complain of any discomfort.
Immunohistochemistry of the two adrenal nodules revealed that the right one had positive immunostaining for CYP11B2, which is essential to synthesize aldosterone, and the left one had positive immunostaining for CYP11B1, which is essential to synthesize cortisol. These results confirmed the right nodule was responsible for the secretion of aldosterone and the left nodule was responsible for the secretion of cortisol. Somatic KCNJ5 mutation (Leu168Arg) was found in the right adrenal tumor , and there was no KCNJ5 mutation in the left adrenal tumor.