A 24-year-old Thai male initially presented with recurrent sinopulmonary tract infection and chronic diarrhea since the age of 11 months old. Investigation of his immune status revealed an IgG level of 330 mg/dL (normal range, 344–1180 mg/dL) while absolute B cell (CD19) count was 1883 cells/mm3 (normal range, 171–465 cells/mm3). His IgM and IgA were undetectable. The absolute CD4 and CD8 counts were 3050 cells/mm3 (normal range, 1000–4600 mm3) and 2773 cells/mm3 (normal range, 400–2100 mm3), respectively. Genetic testing revealed a transmembrane activator and calcium-modulator and cyclophilin-ligand interactor (TACI) mutation.
The diagnosis of CVID was established at the age of 1.25 years. He had been receiving intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) replacement therapy ever since then. The trough level of serum IgG ranged between 750 and 1200 mg/dL. However, he had occasional lower respiratory tract infection episodes until he developed bronchiectasis at 15 years old.
At 22 years old, he developed an intermittent and remittent fever for 1 month. No causative organism was identified. Diagnostic workup including paranasal sinus films and nasal endoscopy were negative for sinusitis. Computed tomography (CT) chest and abdomen suggested an active infectious process. Sputum AFB and sputum PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (PCR-TB) were negative. However, tuberculosis is common in Thailand, so empirical treatment with anti-tuberculous (Anti-TB) drugs was prescribed. Two months later, a repeat CT chest suggested improved pulmonary pathology. However, incidental findings of numerous nodular arterial-enhancing lesions in the liver were demonstrated. Multiphasic CT liver imaging and mild splenomegaly suggested NRH with early portal hypertension . He was non-alcoholic and did not take any non-prescribed drugs. Viral hepatitis profiles (HBsAg, Anti-HCV IgM and IgG) were all negative. Seven months later, he was hospitalized with pneumonia. His IgG level was 890 mg/dL. On day 16 of the admission, he developed sudden hypotension. Physical examination revealed marked anemia and tense abdominal distension. Ultrasound-guided abdominal paracentesis yielded bloody fluid. Emergency CT angiography of the abdomen showed NRH with internal hemorrhaging and intramural pseudoaneurysm . Newly detected multiple areas of intrahepatic hemorrhage with rupture of the overlying Glisson’s capsule caused a large amount of hemoperitoneum. Although emergency angiography with gel foam embolization at the right and left hepatic artery was successful, the patient died from hemorrhagic shock and multiple organ failure.
The trends of serum IgG, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, ALP, and platelet count are summarized in Fig. .