This case report was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of Santo Amaro according to protocol number CAAE 09095619000000081, and the patient read and signed the informed consent form.
A male patient, 56 years old, came to the dental office with the main complaint of absence of teeth #21 and #22. In the initial clinical and radiographic evaluations, it was found that tooth #23 was indicated for extraction. The initial bone and gingival appearance can be seen in , which shows a depression beneath teeth #21 and #22 indicating a volumetric bone loss in this region.
Computed tomography was used to analyse the bone structure, showing that there was extensive resorption of the alveolar bone in the anterior region of the maxilla, making it impossible to place implants and requiring a reconstruction to increase bone volume and height. For analysis of the linear bone measurement, the patient's upper arch was imaged with TCX Prexion (X Trillion Inc., Tokyo, Japan). To obtain the best image quality, scans were performed at cubic field of view of 8 cm3, 90 kVp, 4 mA, and 37-second exposure. Next, the images were exported in Diagnostic Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DICOM) format with a voxel size of 0.160 mm. All files were individually exported to a DICOM directory to allow their visualization by using the OnDemand 3D Dental™ software (Cybermed Co., Tustin, CA, USA) for taking measurements. First, the images were captured and saved in the DICOM system for analysis of the angulation position of the patient's head (axis and reslice), followed by tracing over the region with the Arch/Curve tool to select the area of interest and obtain the measurements. A perpendicular line was also drawn along the slope of the residual bone, and three horizontal lines were recorded in width. This measurement was taken at a distance of 7, 11, and 13 mm from the crest.
The initial thickness was 2.60 mm, and the height was 16.75 mm. The patient did not present any systemic alteration contraindicating the surgical procedures.
A reconstructive surgery was performed by using Bio-Oss® bone graft (Geistlich Pharmaceutical, Wolhusen, Switzerland) as a biomaterial associated with Intralock titanium mesh (i.e., Ti Mesh-Lock® surgical mesh with 0.15 mm thick and spaced 0.8 mm holes designed for allowing cuts without edge) and PRF for obtaining the necessary amount of bone in the region for later placement of the implants and rehabilitation of the patient.
Peripheral blood was initially collected in five vacutainer tubes, in which the white one (VACUETTE® Interlock, Intra-Lock, Brasil) was centrifuged in a centrifuge (IntraSpin™, Intra-Lock Iberia, IntraSpin, Intra-Lock, FL, USA) for 3 minutes at a rotation of 2700 rpm. Next, 3 mL of the supernatant was pipetted and stored in a sterile syringe. The other four red tubes (BD Vacutainer®, UKMolt 2/4 Hu-Friedy - Brasil) were centrifuged for 12 minutes at 2700 rpm for preparation of PRF membranes according to the Choukroun technique .
The surgical procedure started by infiltrating anesthesia with articaine 4% (Ultracain D®, Sanofi-Aventis, Paris, France) in the region before performing a crestal incision with relaxing incisions for total detachment of the flap and full visualization of the defected region . Next, the recipient area was prepared with small perforations by using #2 spherical drill to allow better vascularization of the bone. Once the PRF membranes were obtained, two ones were perforated and mixed with DBBM before adding 3 mL of the supernatant to this biomaterial mixture. This biomaterial was adjusted to the region by using a molt peeler (Molt 2/4 Hu-Friedy®), and then a 0.15 mm thick Ti mesh-Lock® titanium mesh with 0.8 mm holes was placed onto the region and attached with screws measuring 1.4 and 6 mm. Next, the PRF membranes were placed over the mesh . Suture with 3.0 nylon thread was performed avoiding tension in the operating region . The patient was medicated with amoxicillin 500 mg, anti-inflammatories, dexamethasone 4 mg, and dipyrone 1 g. No changes were observed in the postoperative follow-up, and the suture was removed after 10 days .
After six months, the patient underwent a new computerized tomography scan for evaluation of the bone reconstruction and implant planning . The amount of bone was obtained by measuring the bone graft preoperatively and after six months approximately. Tomographic evaluation showed a thickness of 7.54 mm, height of 17.24 mm, and gain of 4.94 mm in thickness .
The titanium mesh was removed for performing the surgery of implant placement, and it was observed that the grafted biomaterial particles were well incorporated into the new bone . Three Straumann bone level osseointegrated implants measuring 4.1 mm × 13 mm were inserted , after preparation of the implant placement site with a trephine drill of 2 mm in diameter and 10 in height to remove bone for histological analysis. After six months, a reopening surgery was performed by placing healing caps on each implant. Next, the patient was rehabilitated with metal-ceramic prostheses .
For volumetric analysis, the patient's DICOM files obtained before and after the surgery were exported to the Slicer 5.0.3 software (2022). The images were saved as a DICOM file before being selected for allowing a multiplanar view. Four slices were selected (i.e., axial, coronal, sagittal, and volume), and the volume limit was adjusted according to the area of interest to obtain the volumetric measurement and after creating the surface. These data were obtained from DICOM files before and after the bone grafting surgery, with the difference being the volumetric gain. Therefore, it was possible in which the initial volume was 12.796 mm3, the volume was 54.090 mm3 after 6 months, and the volume was 61.913 mm3 on the final evaluation after 5 years .
At the histological analysis, a newly formed bone was observed in intimate contact with the remaining particles of the biomaterial, where many osteocytes were distributed in fully integrated areas, thus demonstrating biocompatible patterns. No inflammatory cells and multinucleated giant cells were found at the interface with new bone formation . shows the radiographic images of the implants installed after 5 years of follow-up.