A 30-year-old woman attended an outpatient clinic in September 2018 with a one-month history of 5 attacks of orgasmic headaches. The headaches commenced right at the point of every orgasm, gradually building up in severity over several minutes. In its peak, the intensity of the pain was 5–6 out of 10 as described on a numerical rating scale, subsequently diminishing over about 30 minutes. The pain was located in the right parietal area, dull in quality with occasional throbbing component and, was unrelated to any other accompanying symptoms. Higher level of sexual excitement correlated with higher pain intensity. Orgasmic headaches resulted in decreased satisfaction with her sexual relationship. She began to avoid sexual activity in fear of subsequent headaches. Since the age of 20, the patient suffered from episodic headache (1–2 attacks per month, 2–4 monthly headache days) in the right parietal area. Since the age of 29 after her third delivery, the severity of pain increased to 7–8 out of 10, and accompanying symptoms (photo/phonophobia, osmophobia, nausea, and vomiting) became very intense. These attacks were unsuccessfully managed by ibuprofen 400 mg. The patient’s history indicated obesity since the age of 23 (Body mass index (BMI) 37). Physical examination revealed elevated blood pressure (142/98 mmHg). Neurological examination, fundoscopy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with angiography, and ultrasound of extracranial arteries were unremarkable. Primary HSA and migraine without aura was diagnosed. Oral sumatriptan 50 mg for migraine attacks and nebivolol 5 mg o.d. for prophylaxis of HSA were prescribed. She was also recommended to continue her diet and exercise regime for weight reduction. After 1 month of follow-up HSA remitted and the good control of migraine attacks was achieved. The clinical course of disease is shown in .
In October 2020, the patient visited the outpatient clinic complaining of headache worsening – orgasmic headache relapsed, monthly migraine days (MMD) increased from 1–2 to 7–10, migraine attacks became uncontrolled. In April 2019, the patient underwent bariatric surgery that resulted in losing a substantial amount of weight (BMI decreased from 37 to 21) and developing intolerable hypotension with nebivolol, which was discontinued in September 2019. Due to COVID-19 pandemic restrictions from March 2020, the patient stopped her regular exercises. In addition, chronic stressors at home and work caused almost constant anxiety. These major changes in patient’s life together with the discontinuation of prophylaxis resulted in gradual worsening of migraine and relapse of HSA. MRI was performed again, but the results were unremarkable. The patient was prescribed amitriptyline 25 mg, and due tachycardia worsening, symptomatic hypotension, and no efficacy after almost 2 months of treatment, it was changed to propranolol 40 mg b.i.d. One month treatment with propranolol managed tachycardia but was inefficient for the prophylaxis of migraine and orgasmic headache. The propranolol dose was not increased due to hypotension, and in December 2020 erenumab 70 mg was added. In 2 weeks, patient reported significant improvement of migraine frequency and severity, and disappearance of HSA. The sustained efficacy of continuous erenumab treatment on both headache disorders was observed at the 3- and 9-months follow-up visits: 0–1 MMD, no HSA . There were no side effects associated with erenumab.
In October 2021, due to technical prescription errors at the pharmacy erenumab was unintentionally discontinued. Despite the use of propranolol 40 mg b.i.d. recurrence of severe uncontrolled migraine attacks and HSA started in 6 weeks after the last dose of erenumab. On the 8 of November 2021, erenumab therapy was restarted. In 2 weeks after erenumab resumption the patient documented discontinuation of HSA, as well as migraine improvement .