A 49-year-old male presented with dizziness and slurred speech for two days.
Two days before admission, the patient experienced sudden dizziness and nausea, followed by slurred speech, dysphagia, and choking. Before the onset of the illness, he did not suffer from fever or cervical pain.
He suffered from hypertension for seven years. There was no other vascular risk factor or family history.
On admission, his neurological examination revealed right peripheral facial palsy, right abducens palsy, and left hemihypesthesia, suggesting the presence of MGS. Besides, dysarthria, absent gag reflex, and positive bilateral Babinski’s signs were also detected. The other cranial nerves and motor exam were normal. On admission, his blood pressure was 141/85 mmHg.
The laboratory tests showed elevated plasm cholesterol (7.83 mmol/L), glycosylated hemoglobin (9.0%), and homocysteine (15 μmol/L), and normal low density lipoprotein (1.4 mmol/L). For the routine blood test, his white blood cell was mildly elevated (10.63 × 109/L) and other items were normal.
The chest X-ray film showed mild pneumonia. The parameters of MRI examination using a 3-Tesla system (Discovery MR750, GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wis., United States) were as follows: MR angiography (MRA) (repetition time 21 ms; echo time 3.4 ms; slice thickness 0.9 mm), axial T2-weighted (repetition time 5838.7 ms; echo time 107.3 ms), axial T1-weighted imaging (repetition time 1800 ms; echo time 27.7 ms), axial diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (repetition time 3000 ms; echo time 65.3 ms, b value 1000), and coronal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences (repetition time 7500 ms; echo time 121.1 ms). Brain MRI revealed acute multifocal infarctions in the pons, ventral medulla oblongata, right middle cerebellar peduncle, and left occipital lobe . Brain MRA without contrast agent indicated the occlusion of the left vertebral artery and severe stenosis of the proximal right vertebral artery . The high-resolution MRI with contrast enhancement showed luminal irregularities with eccentric periluminal hematoma, indicating the dissection of the basilar artery and left vertebral artery .