A 35-year-old man presented with a one-year history of low back pain, and limited movement at the waist without any neurological deficit. He had no history of fever, night sweats, or weight loss, and was unable to recall any recent injury. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable for trauma or other bone diseases. A physical examination showed localized tenderness and percussive pain over the L1 spinous process, and restricted movement at the waist without any motor or sensory abnormalities. Laboratory tests including blood cell count, serum electrolytes, renal and liver function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) did not reveal any abnormalities. Plain lumbar spine X-ray revealed a radiolucency at the L1 vertebral body . Computed tomography (CT) showed a defined osteolytic lesion involving the left side of the vertebral body and pedicle of L1 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed low-signal intensity changes on T1-weighted images and high-signal intensity changes on T2-weighted images of the L1 vertebral body . On the basis of the radiological features, there was a high possibility of a neoplastic lesion. A fluoroscopy-guided needle biopsy of the L1 vertebral body was performed. Histopathology showed proliferation of Langerhans cells arranged in sheets, with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and indentations on the nuclear membrane. Immunohistochemistry confirmed LCH with diffuse immunoreactivity of S-100 and CD1a . No other lesion was found by bone scan. The patient was treated conservatively with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and allowed to walk. 3 months after biopsy, bone remodeling of a destructive lesion of the L1 vertebral body was detected by CT. 2 years after biopsy, he was free from low back pain. Notably, follow-up CT revealed significant bone remodeling one year after biopsy, but the height of the vertebral body remained stable without further collapse, and lumbar kyphosis did not occur . No evidence of recurrence or neurological deficit has been detected.