A Caucasian 35-year-old man was referred to our Cardiology Unit for a cardiac evaluation before non-competitive sport activity (gym), as required by a general practitioner, because of his highly abnormal family history. His mother underwent a heart transplant for end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy and his brother had just received a diagnosis of non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy with mildly reduced ejection fraction. At presentation, no family genetic or histological data were available. The patient was asymptomatic and his medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination showed no abnormalities. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus bradycardia at 50 b.p.m. The P-wave duration was 130 ms with a bimodal morphology in the inferior leads and a negative terminal component in the V1 of 60 ms . These findings suggested a diagnosis of partial IAB, potentially related to left atrium enlargement. The standard transthoracic echocardiography showed no significant abnormalities; however, strain imaging revealed a segmental longitudinal strain impairment involving the basal and medium segments of the interventricular septum (−7%) and determined a mild reduction of left ventricular global longitudinal strain (GLS; −13.9%; ). Both the peak atrial longitudinal strain and the peak atrial contraction strain reduced, compared with normal ranges (stratified for sex and age).
The 24 h ECG monitoring revealed a sinus bradycardia with a day-time mean heart rate of 56 b.p.m., 2 day-time episodes of Type 2 second-degree atrioventricular block with a maximum pause of 2.92 s, frequent premature ventricular complexes, and a ventricular triplet followed by a 4 min-long episode of AF at a high ventricular rate . With the clinical suspicion of a familiar cardiomyopathy, we performed a comprehensive genetic testing, which revealed the frame shift variant c.1367 (p.Asn456Thrfs*24) of the LMNA gene, a frame shift variant characterized by the replacement of asparagine at Position 456 for a threonine, terminating at Position 24 with a termination codon. The same variant was later found in the patient’s brother. This clinical case was evaluated and discussed by a multidisciplinary team involving a medical geneticist, an electrophysiologist, and a cardiologist specialized in echocardiography. Considering a definite diagnosis of LMNA-related cardiomyopathy in the presence of conduction disturbances and an estimated 5-year risk of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) of 51.3% (based on the risk calculator on ), a dual-chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted.