A 43-years-old male of Japanese Brazilian with hypesthesia from the right lower lip to the mental region consulted a hospital for the first visit. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a round radiolucent area in the right mandibular body, and biopsy was carried out, leading to a diagnosis of schwannoma. He was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Gunma University Hospital, for detailed examination and treatment for the first time in March 2015.
His physical status was moderate and nutritional status favorable. There was no other notable factor. On visual inspection, there was no tumor lesion in the oral cavity . Hypesthesia extending from the right lower lip to the mental region was noted, and the perception level was approximately 50% of that on the unaffected side. CT imaging revealed dilation of the mandibular canal , and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregular high signal intensity on horizontal sections of short inversion time inversion recovery (STIR). On sagittal sections, dilation of the right mandibular canal was observed around the mandibular foramen. Dynamic images showed crescendo enhancement .
Preoperative biopsy findings carried out at the first hospital visited by the patient suggested a schwannoma involving the Antoni A region. Briefly, the lesion was immature, suggesting the presence of an active potential. Considering the risk of future tumor growth, the tumor was extirpated under general anesthesia in late April 2015. A macroscopically observed intraoperative finding was a cystic tumor (3.2 × 1.0 cm) associated with the inferior alveolar nerve and vessels; hence, the inferior alveolar nerve was ligated/cut and extirpated as a mass . Intraoperative rapid diagnosis confirmed the absence of tumor cells at the margins of the resected nerve specimen. During the 2-year postoperative follow-up, radiopacity was enhanced at the wound site after extirpation of the tumor, confirming favorable bone outgrowth . There have been no subsequent clinical findings or images suggestive of relapse.
In a hematoxylin-and-eosin (H-E)-stained specimen, bundle-like tumor proliferation was observed around the nerve fiber. In addition, outgrowth of tumor cells was noted around nerve fibers, separating the nerve fiber bundle .
Immunohistologically, the tumor cells were positive for Glut-1 and weakly positive for EMA and Claudin-1. The tumor cells were negative for S-100, but the residual nerve fibers were positive for S-100 . Based on these findings, the histopathological diagnosis was INPN. The MIB-1 expression rate of INPN, indicating its cell proliferation ability, was 1.6% .
To examine the pathogenesis of this tumor, FISH, which facilitates the detection of gene localization on the chromosomes, was carried out. In this procedure, a cloned gene or DNA fragment is labeled with a non-isotopic compound and hybridized with chromosomal DNA on a glass slide to directly detect the site of in situ hybridization, as a fluorescent signal, on a chromosome. FISH is safer and simpler than conventional autoradiography. In addition, it is advantageous as the results can be obtained in a short time. As standards, the fluorescent body of chromosome 9 (orange signal) indicates the ABL gene, that of chromosome 22 (green signal) indicates the BCR gene, and a yellow signal indicates the BCR-ABL fusion gene. Cellular signals on INPN were visually counted and classified. Measurement criteria for detecting the ALK fusion gene using the FISH method were quoted as diagnostic criteria. The principle is similar to that of BCR-ABL fusion gene detection. Samples with < 5 positive cells per 50 cells (< 5/50 or < 10%) were regarded as negative, and those with > 25 positive cells per 50 cells (> 25/50 or > 50%) were regarded as positive. The results showed that signals suggestive of BCR-ABL fusion gene formation were observed in 30 of 50 cells. In 12 of the 50 cells, the green signal of the BCR gene was present in the absence of fusion gene signals, suggesting deletion of the BCR region. Thus, 42 of the 50 cells were positive, suggesting chromosome 22 abnormalities. According to the above diagnostic criteria, our patient was regarded as having a chromosome 22 abnormality. Based on this finding, it was confirmed that this disease was a tumorous lesion .