A 60-year-old male patient came with complaint of pain and swelling over the left hip for 30 days. The patient had a history of fall in the bathroom 30 days back sustaining a trivial trauma to the left hip. The patient was weight-bearing for 1 week, after which pain was increased on walking. The patient was a known case of hypertension and diabetic on regular medications. On examination, tenderness was present at left hip region, left lower limb was externally rotated, shortened with no wound and distal neurovascular deficit.
Plain radiographs of the left hip with femur anteroposterior and lateral views revealed left subtrochanteric fracture with diffuse irregular cortical and trabecular bone thickening from the femoral head to lower third of the left femur (, ). The fracture was a complete transverse through both cortices without comminution at the subtrochanteric area of the femur. Right-sided femur appeared normal. Blood investigations showed increased ALP.
Magnetic resonance imaging of pelvis with femur showed pathological fracture secondary to Paget’s disease with significantly distorted bone matrix, profound hypertrophy and thickening of the bony trabeculae with significant obliteration of intervening medullary canal .
As the patient was elderly, needed early mobilization and had displaced pathological subtrochanteric fracture, we planned for surgical management with intramedullary nailing. The patient was operated under spinal anaesthesia, using traction table in the supine position. Incision of around 5 cm was taken from the greater trochanter extending proximally. The entry point was made over the tip of greater trochanter after dissecting the soft tissues. The guide was passed in the center of the medullary canal till the distal femur, gradual progressive reaming was done using flexible reamers. Long proximal femoral nail (PFN) was inserted (size 11 mm × 38 cm) with proximal and distal locking . The intraoperative sample was taken from the medullary cavity and was sent for histopathological examination. The wound was closed in layers.
The post-operative X-ray showed acceptable fracture reduction (, ), the patient was mobilized off the bed from the 2nd post-operative day with partial weight-bearing. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of Paget’s disease with no evidence of malignancy. Full weight-bearing was started at 6 weeks. The patient became completely symptomless by 6 months. Patient was able to wight bear initially with crutches, latter he started walking independently by 6 months with no pain. At present 1-year follow-up, the patient is comfortable with no pain and difficulty in walking and having good hip and knee range of motion. The X-ray showed the union at the fracture site (, ). We are still following up the patient regularly to check for implant failure and refracture.