A 68-year-old man presented to our institution complaining of fatigue with no other symptoms. The patient had a medical history of hypercalcemia and increased parathyroid hormone levels, as well as subclinical hyperthyroidism (multinodular goiter) for two years. The patient had a history of inguinal hernia repair and was allergic to lisinopril. He was hypertensive and was prescribed losartan 100mg (one tablet per day) to control his blood pressure. Family history was significant for lung cancer in his mother.
On physical examination, his neck had a normal range of motion with no masses, hoarseness, or adenopathy. The thyroid gland was normal to palpation. Laboratory tests showed slightly high calcium levels of 11.0 mg/dL (reference range 8.5-10.1 mg/dL), high parathyroid hormone (PTH)-1 level of 1,158.3 pg/mL (reference range 18.4-80.1 pg/mL), and low PTH-2 level of 11.5 pg/mL (reference range 18.4-80.1 pg/mL).
The patient had the following previous imaging workup at another institution:
Neck ultrasound (U/S) performed two years ago showed a multinodular goiter with the following dominant nodules: right middle lobe hypoechoic nodule (1.5 × 1.3 × 1.3 cm) (Bethesda IV) and left middle lobe heterogeneous nodule with hyperechoic areas (2.4 × 1.5 × 1.9 cm) (Bethesda II). Bilateral fine needle aspirations (FNAs) revealed a diagnosis of Bethesda II (benign) on the left and unremarkable parathyroid on the right;
20 months after the first thyroid U/S, a new U/S revealed a right thyroid lower pole, hypoechoic, heterogeneous, solid nodule with punctate calcifications measuring 2.6 ×1.7 × 1.6 cm and a complex, solid, and predominantly cystic, septated nodule in the left lower pole measuring 2.6 × 2.0 × 2.2 cm with peripheral vascularity. The findings were consistent with multinodular goiter;
Nuclear medicine (NM) parathyroid scan (Single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT)) done after the second thyroid U/S showed a hypoattenuating nodule measuring 2.4 × 1.9 × 1.8 cm in the right thyroid lobe compatible with parathyroid adenoma. A complex cystic lesion measuring 2.5 × 2.4 × 2.2 cm was also noted in the posterior aspect of the left thyroid lobe, consistent with a benign thyroid cystic nodule.
The metabolic, nuclear medicine, and imaging workup were consistent with a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism. Based on radiographic studies, an adenoma was presumed to be located in the right inferior parathyroid gland. Minimally invasive radiolocalized parathyroidectomy with laryngeal nerve integrity monitoring was planned. Potential risks and complications were discussed with the patient. Radiolocalization was done, revealing a hot spot on the right side. Intraoperative ultrasound revealed a 2 cm heterogeneous right-sided mass likely consistent with an abnormal right upper parathyroid gland . The latter was carefully dissected and excised. After 15 minutes, intraoperative PTH levels went down to 11 pg/mL, consistent with the resolution of hyperparathyroidism.
On gross examination, the resected parathyroid measured 1.3 × 1.3 × 1.2 cm and weighed 700 mg (normally, parathyroid glands generally weigh 20-40 mg each; abnormal glands usually weigh >60 mg). It was bisected to reveal a homogenous tan-brown hemorrhagic cut surface. Histopathologic examination demonstrated multiple endothelium-lined anastomosing vascular channels filled with blood without evidence of endothelial atypia or mitotic activity and atrophy of the adjacent parathyroid tissue .
The diagnosis of capillary hemangioma with fibrosis in the milieu of a clinical history of multinodular goiter and primary hyperparathyroidism was made. Immunohistochemical (IHC) stains for vascular markers CD31 and CD34 were performed, highlighting the endothelium lining, and supporting the diagnosis of hemangioma of the parathyroid gland (3B). Additionally, a minute focus (less than 1mm) of hypercellular parathyroid tissue was identified.
The patient was discharged on calcium carbonate 500 mg one tablet by mouth daily. At 3-month follow-up, the patient was doing well without any reported symptoms.