A 5-year-old boy presented to our institution with a complaint of pain, swelling, and redness in both legs. His parents stated that they had taken him to another health institution 40 days earlier because he had a fever and that a 10-day course of oral antibiotic therapy was prescribed. During a physical examination at our institution, swelling, erythema, and warmth were detected in both legs, and a purulent discharge was observed exuding from the proximal end of each tibia. He did not have a chronic illness or a history of a trauma. His laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 15,640/mm3, C-reactive protein of 5.29μg/mL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 63mm/h. The results of a Brucella tube agglutination test, Gruber Widal test (for Salmonella), and purified protein derivative test for tuberculosis (TB) (the TB test was previously done twice and was negative each time). The patient did not complain of a cough or fever, and his chest X-ray was normal. X-rays of his legs revealed cortical destruction and an increase in periosteal tissue in the proximal aspect of each tibia and the distal aspect of the left tibia . Additionally, magnetic resonance imaging revealed bone marrow edema throughout both tibias, an accumulation of purulent debris in the bone marrow and metaphysis, and pyomyositis contiguous with the site of osteomyelitis. On radionuclide imaging studies, we found an increased uptake of technetium at the site of infection (that is, in the metaphysis of each tibia).
After diagnosing his condition, we carried out open irrigation and surgical drainage in his legs. After opening cortical fenestrations in the metaphysis of each tibia, we performed curettage of the medullary canal, carefully avoiding the growth plate. Approximately 150cc of purulent fluid was drained from the left tibia and approximately 200cc from the right tibia. Microbiological and pathological samples were taken during surgery for Gram staining, blood and bone cultures, staining for acid-resistant bacilli, and a TB culture, all of which were negative. The results of a pathological examination were consistent with acute osteomyelitis. In our search for an underlying chronic disease, we carried out the following tests, all of which produced no indications of any abnormalities: urinalysis; a routine biochemical analysis; a peripheral blood smear; hemoglobin electrophoresis (to rule out sickle cell anemia); an abdominal ultrasound; immunoglobulin and complement factor analysis; tests for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, anti-Smith antibody, and anti-ribonucleoprotein antibody; intermittent Salmonella agglutination tests; VDRL; and urine and blood cultures.
After surgery, we initiated empiric parenteral antibiotic therapy using ampicillin-sulbactam and gentamicin following the recommendations of the Pediatric Infectious Disease Department. Because all cultures were negative, we continued this therapy for three weeks. During that time, the laboratory test results and the patient’s physical condition showed clear signs of improvement. At the end of the third week of therapy, we changed the antibiotic to amoxicillin-clavulanate and the route of administration to oral. At the end of the fourth week of therapy, the splints were removed from the patient’s legs, and protected weight-bearing was initiated.Three months later, the boy developed a fracture in the left tibia along the fenestration that had been opened for drainage. A titanium elastic nail was used for fixation, and the lesion was completely debrided during surgery . Defects that developed after the debridement procedure were corrected using corticocancellous grafting. Tissue cultures, biopsy, and Gram staining were carried out, all with negative results. At the end of the sixth week, the splints were removed from the patient’s legs and protected weight-bearing was initiated. The follow-up period passed without incident, and all signs of infection disappeared. The fracture was completely healed within 1 year, at which time we removed the titanium elastic nail. All blood test and radiographic findings were normal at the 18-month follow-up visit .