On 12 May 2021, a five-year-old boy initially came to our hospital for high myopia. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was limited to FC/30 cm in right eye and 20/100 in left eye. Cup-to-Disc (C/D) vertical was 0.6 in the right eye and 0.5 in the left, and vitreous degeneration was found in both eyes. Fundus color photography showed tigroid fundus in both eyes and macular coloboma in the right eye . Moreover, midfacial hypoplasia was noted in the patient, with a normal hearing. No relevant family history was reported in this case. The boy was delivered by cesarean section at a gestational age of 36 weeks, weighing 2,800 g at birth. He required oxygen inhalation shortly after birth, though the specific details were unavailable. Throughout the entire pregnancy, there was no history of congenital infection. A diagnosis of Stickler Syndrome Type I was highly suspected and DNA sequencing test was recommended, but declined by his parents. Finally, periodic fundus examination was recommended. Unfortunately, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, periodic follow-up was not available.
Two years later, he was referred to our ophthalmology clinic for a severe decreasing of vision in his right eye. Following comprehensive fundus examinations including indirect ophthalmoscope, ultrasound B scan, color retinal photograph and fundus fluorescein angiography (RetCam 3, Clarity Medical Systems, Inc., CA, United States), a RRD with dialysis of ora serrata was observed in his right eye. The BCVA was limited to light perception in the right eye and 0.2 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 20.1 mmHg in right eye and 21.2 mmHg in left eye. C/D vertical was 0.6 in the right eye and 0.5 in the left. Signs of high myopia were observed in both eyes and the macular coloboma was still present in the right eye. RRD with dialysis of ora serrata was noted in the right eye. Unlike other cases of RRD associated with Stickler syndrome, multiple retinal macrocysts were observed in the inferior retina and fluorescein leakage in the retinal vessels was observed in the right retina . DNA sequencing test identified a pathogenic point mutation variant (c.1693C>T; p.Arg565Cys) in exon 26 of the COL2A1 gene, confirming a diagnosis of Stickler syndrome type I. His parents underwent the same genetic test, but no variant was found indicating that it arose as a de novo mutation in the child.
After comprehensive evaluation, pars plana vitrectomy was performed after posterior vitreous detachment, and photocoagulation and cryotherapy were applied to the flattened retina to attach the neuroretina to the retinal pigment epithelium. Finally, silicon oil was injected into the vitreous. A mini-incision in the outer layer of each macrocyst was made for vesicular drainage and retinal reattachment. The procedure was performed by an experienced vitreoretinal surgeon (F.L.). The patient was instructed to maintain a face-down position after surgery for 1 month.
One-week after the operation, fundus color images (CLARUS 500, Carl Zeiss, Dublin, United States) showed reattached retina with silicone oil tamponade in the vitreous cavity . One-month after the operation, this right eye received additional laser coagulation on peripheral retina. Four-months after the operation, the silicone oil was removed and BCVA was 20/1,000 after surgery. Six-months after the operation, a fundus examination confirmed that his right retina remained attached and BCVA improved to 20/200 . During the follow-up, IOP of the right eye maintained about 10~21 mmHg and the C/D ratio remained stable.