A 57-year-old Caucasian man born in Spain was admitted to hospital with a two-month history of asthenia and diffuse abdominal pain that was most intense over the left flank. His medical history was unremarkable, and there was no family history of cancer or Parkinson's disease. Abdominal distension was observed on clinical examination. Blood samples were taken to measure the full blood cell count and general biochemical parameters. Moderate anemia was detected (hemoglobin 8 g/dL). Further tests, including colonoscopy, revealed a bleeding polypoid mass that was partially obstructing the lumen of the sigmoid colon. A biopsy confirmed non-mucinous adenocarcinoma.
A computed tomography (CT) whole-body scan detected multiple nodules in both lungs and in the liver, as well as the presence of multiple enlarged lymph nodes in all visible compartments.
Our patient was diagnosed with stage IV (TNM [tumor, node, metastases] of the American Joint Committee on Cancer sixth edition classification) advanced adenocarcinoma of the colon. He received a blood transfusion, and the surgical team performed a palliative ileocolic bypass with primary anastomosis.
Our patient's clinical signs and symptoms improved over the course of the pre-operative period, and he was discharged home one week after surgery. Four days after discharge, our patient developed pyrexia and testicular pain and tenderness. He was readmitted to hospital with suspected orchitis, and intravenous (IV) broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was commenced. Spontaneous drainage of a scrotal abscess relieved our patient's symptoms, and he was discharged from the hospital.
During the last three days of this second admission, our patient's wife had noticed that he had begun to walk with small steps, was slower in his movements, had become clumsy and that his posture was generally quite rigid. These neurologic signs worsened post-discharge, and our patient developed bilateral bradykinesia, postural instability and a wide-based gait with freezing. By this stage, he required assistance with the activities of daily living (ADLs). General physical and neurologic examination revealed a very debilitated patient. His facial expression was mask-like and impassive with slow eye movements, and he was dysarthric. A resting tremor of both hands was observed. He walked with extreme difficulty and required the assistance of two people.
His pace was very slow, and he took small, wide-based steps. He had a festinating gait with an absence of bilateral arm swinging. No obvious pulsion was observed, but he adopted a bilaterally dystonic posture. Generalized hyper-reflexia and plastic rigidity with bilateral cogwheeling were demonstrated, but no cranial nerve palsies were detected. No severe cognitive deficits could be elicited, although his responses were delayed, and he appeared disinterested.
All vital signs were unchanged. His family reported the occurrence of nighttime urinary incontinence and that he was now completely dependent regarding all ADLs. Because our patient had no history of neurologic disease or hypertension, brain metastases were suspected, and treatment with high-dose IV steroids started. This resulted in an obvious improvement in the neurologic signs. Our patient's thyroid-stimulating hormone level was found to be normal. Emergency CT of the brain revealed the presence of multiple brain lesions with contrast enhancement and mass effect, which were surrounded by dense vasogenic edema. These features are known to be suggestive of metastases . It was not possible to perform magnetic resonance imaging of the brain because of our patient's resting tremor. After a brief period of improvement in response to steroid therapy, his condition deteriorated rapidly, and it was not possible to begin radiotherapy or a trial of L-DOPA (a dopamine agonist). The rapidity of our patient's decline also precluded examination of a serum paraneoplastic autoantibody panel.