A 49-year-old woman of Han nationality was admitted to our hospital due to fatigue with increased nocturia for 3 years, which were worsen with decreased serum potassium for half a year. Three years ago, the patient appeared fatigued with increased nocturia and high blood pressure (BP, 170/140 mmHg). She was treated with a temporary prescription of nifedipine, captopril, spironolactone and metoprolol to control her BP. Six months ago, the patient's symptoms progressively worsened, and she was found extremely low serum potassium (2.8 mmol/L). Her serum potassium was still low even after potassium supplementation. Thus, she went to our hospital for further examination and treatment. The patient had a history of severe left hydronephrosis half a year prior and was treated with left kidney-bladder DJ tube placement. She denied using corticosteroids. Members of her family had no history of hypertension or malignant tumors.
At the time of admission, physical examinations revealed a BP of 124/82 mmHg, heart rate of 90 beats per min and respiratory rate of 20/min. Her body mass index (BMI) was 26.7 kg/m2. There was no physical sign of Cushing's syndrome, such as skin atrophy, buffalo hump, red striae of skin, or moon face. There were no specific findings on chest, heart or abdominal examination. The routine blood test showed that the hemoglobin concentration was 90 g/L. Biochemical tests showed low serum potassium (3.01 mmol/L). After stopping potassium supplementation, serum potassium was extremely low (2.58 mmol/L) with high urinary potassium (71 mmol/24 h). Kidney function tests showed normal serum creatinine (68.72 μmol/L) with a relatively low estimated glomerular filtration rate (89.914 ml/min/1.73 m2). The results of routine blood tests, liver function, blood lipids, blood glucose, thyroid function, plasma epinephrine and plasma norepinephrine were normal. No abnormalities were observed in the twelve-lead electrocardiogram, echocardiography, carotid artery ultrasound or extremity artery ultrasound. Double renal ultrasound showed severe hydronephrosis in the left, left renal atrophy (considering the stenosis of the pyeloureteral junction) and compensatory enlargement of the right kidney. Color doppler ultrasonography of renal arteries showed that there was no sign of stenosis in the trunk of both renal arteries, and there was no blood flow filling in the left kidney. An adrenal enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed one rounded, homogeneous, low-density and strengthenable mass in each adrenal. The mass in her right adrenal gland was approximately 16 × 13 mm, while the mass in her left adrenal gland was 20 × 18 mm .
Such a young woman with hypertension plus hypokalaemia was suspected of having PA. Further screening for PA was performed . The data showed a high plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) and low plasma renin activity (PRA) in the supine position. The PAC remained high in the standing position; however, the aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) did not exceed 3.7. She then underwent a captopril challenge test which did not show a suppressed level of plasma aldosterone concentration. The patient had hypokalaemia and left kidney atrophy, which caused false negatives for ARR. A diagnosis of PA was of no doubt.
The results of cortisol rhythm and dexamethasone suppression tests are shown in . the circadian rhythm of cortisol was blunted and the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) circadian was normal. The baseline of 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) was 524.03 μg (normal range: 370–539 μg/24 h). An overnight dexamethasone suppression test (ODMST) showed that the plasma total cortisol (PTC) level-8 am was > 1.8 μg/dL, suggesting PTC level was not suppressed. Low (2.25 mg) and large dose (8 mg) dexamethasone suppression tests (DMST) further revealed that the PTC level-8 am was > 1.8 μg/dL and UFC was > 20 μg/24 h, showing neither serum nor urine cortisol level was suppressed. She was diagnosed with ACTH-independent secretion of cortisol. Given the absence of Cushing's classical signs, She was diagnosed as having SCS.
Sequential adrenal venous sampling (AVS) without ACTH stimulation was performed. Catheters for venous sampling were placed through a median cubital vein puncture. Blood was collected from the right adrenal vein (AV), left AV, and a distal end of the inferior vena cava (IVC), respectively. The results of AVS are shown in . The concentrations of plasma cortisol, aldosterone and epinephrine were measured in specimens from both AV and IVC. The selectivity index (SI), cortisol of AV/cortisol of IVC, was > 2, suggesting successful adrenal venous catheterization. Notably, the aldosterone concentration in the right adrenal vein was markedly higher than that in the LAV. The ratio of aldosterone/epinephrine in the right adrenal vein to aldosterone/epinephrine in the left adrenal vein was 23.17, which was >2, suggesting excess secretion of aldosterone from the right adrenal mass. Additionally, the cortisol concentration in LAV was similar to that in RAV. According to Young's criteria, there was no dominant side of cortisol secretion. Thus, the findings of AVS showed that the right adrenal gland was responsible for aldosterone hypersecretion. Moreover, there was no dominant side of cortisol secretion.
A laparoscopic right adrenal tumor resection was performed half a month later. After the operation, the patient was rechecked with the captopril test . The postoperative PAC level decreased to 9.41 ng/dL and PRA was 12.2 mU/L. The high PRA and mild hypertension might be related to left kidney atrophy. Her BP was 125/80 mmHg controlled by 75 mg irbesartan every day. The operation was successful. Her serum potassium returned to normal without any supplementary treatment, and 24-h urinary potassium levels were significantly lower than that at admission, which suggested that the operation was successful. Postoperative cortisol rhythm and levels did not return to normal due to the non-dominant cortisol secreting side . Given the patient's absence of Cushing's classical signs, she did not receive medication. She was advised to follow up in outpatient clinics after discharge.
Pathological examination revealed that the right adrenal tumor was a 2 cm × 1.7 cm × 1 cm and bright yellow adenoma, consisting of both clear and compact cells, with the former cell type being dominant. Immunohistochemistry of the right adrenal mass revealed positive immunostaining for inhibin-α, Syn and negative immunostaining for CgA, which are the immunophenotypes of classic adrenocortical adenomas .
Two months after discharge, we followed up with the patient by telephone. The patient did not complain of any discomfort. Her BP remained in the normal range while taking irbesartan alone and serum potassium remained normal without any medication. Moreover, her preoperative and postoperative blood glucose and lipid were also normal.