A 59-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our unit after suffering from a 1 month history of progressive right upper limb weakness which was more prominent in the distal muscle groups. This was further complicated by an acute presentation of generalized tonic clonic seizures. He had a background history of resection of a malignant melanoma from his left external auditory meatus 1 month prior.
On computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain a 3 cm well circumscribed space-occupying lesion with associated vasogenic edema were seen in the left frontal lobe. No osseous changes of the calvarium and skull base were noted on imaging. The clinical history and radiologic features were highly suspicious for metastatic melanoma. The patient was started on sodium valproate and dexamethasone before operative resection of the lesion.
Intraoperatively, a left parietal mini craniotomy was performed with assistance of neuro-navigation. Scalp dissection down to the bone revealed black discoloration of the parietal bone as depicted in . The craniotomy bone flap was removed and on inspection showed hyperpigmentation of both the outer and inner tables and part of the diploe without involvement of the underlying dura. These findings are unique to our case as all previously reported cases have described outer cortex involvement only. The bone quality and consistency appeared to be unaffected. Gross total resection of the brain lesion was then achieved.
There were no intraoperative nor immediate postoperative complications. The patient’s focal neurological deficits improved with physiotherapy and no further seizures were noted during the admission. Further questioning and systemic examination showed no signs of hyperpigmentation elsewhere on the body, but of note, the patient admitted to a 3-year history of tetracycline use for adolescent acne vulgaris which we deduced to be the most probable cause of his calvarial hyperpigmentation. Immediate postoperative CT scans of the brain showed complete resection of the lesion with histology confirming the diagnosis of metastatic malignant melanoma. The patient was then referred to oncology for further management. We continued to follow him up closely in our outpatient department and at 2 months postoperatively he underwent a positron emission tomography scan which revealed no calvarial or intracranial hotspots.