A 72-year-old man was admitted to a hospital for dizziness, and an unruptured right SVA was observed on transthoracic echocardiography. Therefore, he was referred to the Kurume University Hospital for further management. Computed tomography (CT) showed an unruptured right SVA of size > 40 mm, which protruded into the right ventricular outflow tract . The aneurysm dilated up to 5 mm per year, and the left sinus of Valsalva (LSV) and non-coronary sinus of Valsalva (NCSV) also showed dilation.
There were no abnormalities on physical examination, and his vital signs and laboratory data were normal. Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm. Echocardiography revealed an enlarged RSV with a trivial grade of aortic valve regurgitation. The maximal diameter of RSV was 47 mm on CT . The diameters of LSV and NCSV were 38 and 37 mm, respectively . Coronary angiography showed no stenosis in the right and left coronary arteries. On the CT and coronary angiography, neither the coronary cameral fistula nor the rupture of the aneurysm into the right ventricle or right atrium was observed. He was thus diagnosed with an unruptured right SVA and was scheduled for surgery.
The surgery was performed via median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established as usual with cannulation of the ascending aorta and right atrium. The ascending aorta was transected above the ST junction, and the characteristics of the aortic sinuses and aortic leaflets were evaluated. RSV developed an aneurysm; its wall was fragile and so thin that the right ventricular myocardium appeared transparent. The right SVA was excised leaving about 5 mm of the aortic wall . We selected the 28-mm Gelweave Valsalva™ Grafts (TERUMO, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) according to the diameter of the aortic annulus. The graft was carefully placed as a sleeve over the aortic root, and the location of the left coronary artery was marked on the graft. The graft was removed from around the root, and a vertical slit was made at the positions marked. The length of the slit corresponded to the estimated distance from the aorto-ventricular junction to the bottom of left coronary artery, and a “coronary keyhole” was created by using an eye cautery, as previously described . Mattress sutures involving 2–0 monofilament polypropylene with spaghetti were placed at the commissure and midpoint of the left and non-coronary cusps, and two pairs of stitches were placed for the right coronary cusp. These were passed through the base of the graft. The left and non-coronary sinuses of the aortic root were covered with the graft. Each commissure was fixed to the graft with 5–0 monofilament polypropylene pledged with Teflon felt, and running sutures with 5–0 polypropylene were placed at the ST junction. The residual RSV wall was sutured with 5–0 monofilament polypropylene pledged with Teflon felt to reinforce the fragile aortic wall . The arterial wall around the right coronary artery was excised like a small button and was attached to the Valsalva graft using 5–0 polypropylene running sutures . After confirming adequate coaptation of the aortic valve leaflets, distal anastomosis was performed between the graft and distal ascending aorta. The aortic crossclamp time, cardiopulmonary bypass time, and total surgical time were 170 min, 195 min, and 326 min, respectively.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 18. Histopathological examination of the resected RSV was performed using Elastica van Gieson staining, and it was observed that the aortic wall included only thin collagen fibers. There were no elastic fibers or smooth muscles.
Two years after the surgery, trivial aortic regurgitation was noted, but there was no dilation of the sinus of Valsalva on echocardiography. In addition, CT showed no distortion or stenotic region associated with the covered graft at the left main coronary artery trunk, and the sinus of Valsalva measurements was 28 mm (RSV), 29 mm (LSV), and 26 mm (NCSV) .