In 2011, a 26-year-old Caucasian woman with concomitant coeliac disease underwent proctocolectomy and IPAA for refractory UC and adenocarcinoma of the colon. She did not undergo chemotherapy. Three months later, her ileostomy was closed. After 1 year, she suffered from acute pouchitis, which was successfully treated with ciprofloxacin and metronidazole.
She was admitted to our hospital 2.5 years after her proctocolectomy, with severe diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, discharge of blood, nausea, emesis, generalised malaise and chills with fever up to 38.5°C. Prior to admission, she was not taking any medication. The physical examination showed tachycardia (104 beats per minute) and tenderness of her lower abdomen. Laboratory data revealed high C-reactive protein (CRP 117mg/L: <5mg/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (424U/L: <248U/L) and slight leucocytosis (11.7/nL: <10.0/nL) with atypical lymphocytosis . Urine analysis, electrocardiography, abdominal ultrasound and X-ray of her chest were unremarkable. The result of the stool analysis for pathogenic bacteria and viruses was negative, as were bacterial blood cultures. As idiopathic pouchitis was suspected, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were administered. Antibiotic treatment resulted in a decrease of CRP, but no normalisation.
A pouchoscopy on day 2 revealed pronounced pouchitis with loss of vascularity, erythema, erosions, friability of the mucosa and profuse fibrin exudates . Microscopic analysis showed severe erosive inflammation with numerous granulocytes . CMV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from pouch biopsy (available on day 5) yielded a viral burden of 7.3×107 copies/mL. A hematoxylin and eosin stain revealed CMV inclusion bodies, while immunohistochemistry showed strong nuclear staining for CMV antigen . CMV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and CMV pp65 antigen in her blood were 10,300 copies/mL and 4/500,000 cells, respectively .
On day 5, intravenous (IV) antiviral therapy with ganciclovir (10mg/kg/day) was initiated. CMV pp65 in her blood was negative after five infusions of ganciclovir and remained so until she was discharged. Her symptoms resolved gradually, and CRP decreased. On day 10 of IV antiviral treatment, she was discharged in good clinical condition. Antibiotic treatment was stopped. Oral antiviral treatment with valganciclovir (2×900mg/day) was prescribed for another 10 days, followed by prophylactic treatment (2×450mg/day) until the scheduled follow-up.
To differentiate between primary CMV infection and reactivation, archived blood samples were analysed for anti-CMV antibodies. CMV PCR and CMV immunohistochemistry were performed on previously acquired formalin-fixed pouch specimens and the proctocolectomy specimen. Serum CMV IgM and IgG antibodies were detected for the first time during the patient’s hospital stay; they were found to be negative in retrospective analyses of archived serum specimens taken in 2009, 2010 and 2011. Avidity of CMV IgG was low, consistent with primary CMV infection. CMV also tested negative in the archived biopsies. Thus primary CMV infection could be confirmed for certain.
She reported, 25 days after she was discharged from our hospital, a sense of well-being, aside from a persistent dry cough and increasing dyspnoea which had started shortly after initiation of ganciclovir treatment. Examination of her lungs yielded expiratory wheezing on both sides. A pouchoscopy revealed normal findings except for a single small ulcer in the pouch corpus . CMV DNA in the pouch tissue (outside the ulcer) was <1000 copies/mL, whereas CMV pp65 and CMV DNA in her blood tested negative . Due to suspected pulmonary side effects of valganciclovir, treatment was paused. The patient reported decreased cough and dyspnoea 2 days later; because there was a primary CMV infection in a non-immunosuppressed patient, we decided not to resume therapy.
Ten days later, she reported increased frequency of bowel movements and abdominal pain. CMV DNA in her blood tested positive again, with 2500 copies/mL. We decided to readmit her to the ward for another 16 day course of IV ganciclovir treatment and concomitant treatment of her cough, which increased again after resuming antiviral therapy. There was no evidence of lung embolism, tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus infection or infection with Mycoplasma, Pneumocystis, Chlamydia, Legionella or Aspergillus. CMV PCR was negative in her sputum. The results of an X-ray of her chest and pulmonary function tests were unremarkable. A pouchoscopy on day 6 of readmission showed a very small healing ulcer in otherwise macroscopically and microscopically normal mucosa . A biopsy taken from the ulcer revealed positive CMV DNA with 83,700 copies/mL; another biopsy from macroscopically normal mucosa contained 1050 copies/mL. CMV PCR in her blood was already negative 3 days after restart of treatment. She was discharged in good clinical condition with ongoing valganciclovir treatment (2×900mg/day) and symptomatic therapy with salbutamol and codeine.
At the out-patient follow-up, she had completed another 14-day course of valganciclovir (2×900mg/day) and started prophylactic therapy (2×450mg/day) 3 days prior. She reported being well except for a cough which was treated with the above-indicated symptomatic medication. CMV PCR and CMV pp65 in her blood remained negative. Markers of humoral inflammation were nearly normal . Prophylactic valganciclovir therapy was continued. The next pouchoscopy 5 weeks later, with the patient still undergoing valganciclovir prophylaxis, showed no ulcerations. CMV DNA was detected at three different sites of the pouch (8860 copies/mL, 13,500 copies/mL and 34,900 copies/mL), but no inclusion bodies were identified, and immunohistochemistry was negative. CMV pp65 and CMV PCR in her blood were again negative. We decided to discontinue valganciclovir prophylaxis because there were no relevant symptoms of pouchitis at that time and, in addition to her cough, she developed pruritus, and we found elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (216U/L: <35U/L) in her blood. In response to an increasing number of bowel movements, we initiated oral rifaximin therapy (2×550mg/day for 2 weeks) with the intent to strengthen the mucosal barrier of the pouch and thus to support her immune response against CMV even without specific antiviral treatment. Her liver enzymes normalised quickly, and her cough improved, but did not resolve completely. Another pouchoscopy 3 weeks after the last one revealed macroscopically normal mucosa, negative CMV genome detection at three different sites of the pouch, and negative CMV immunohistochemistry, as well as no CMV inclusion bodies. During the visit at our outpatient clinic, she complained about symptoms of pouchitis no longer.