A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of a 1-month history of chest distending pain. He had no history of cutaneous malignancy. On admission, a chest CT revealed a giant lobulated mass with uneven density approximately 12 × 12 × 7.5 cm in size occupying the anterior mediastinum . There were no obvious calcification and fat density shadows. The mass showed a slight heterogeneous enhancement on a contrast-enhanced CT scan. The serum levels of tumour markers, namely alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), were within normal limits. A median sternotomy was performed. A giant circumscribed and partly encapsulated mass was found attached to the right thymus. The tumour occupied the anterior mediastinum and invaded the right mediastinal pleura. Scattered 2- to 4-mm nodules were found on the surface of the pericardium and the upper lobe of the right lung.
Grossly, the mass was well-demarcated, measuring 10 × 10 × 5 cm in size and yellow-grey on the cut surface. A massive necrosis was identified.
Histologically, the tumour demonstrated expansive growth and infiltrated the adjacent lung tissue . The tumour mainly consisted of epithelioid or polygonal cells arranged in sheets . Clusters of tumour cells were set in a fibrous stroma . These tumour cells had oval vesicular nuclei with prominent eosinophilic nucleoli and palely eosinophilic cytoplasm . A large necrosis was found . A proportion of the cells contained melanin .
Immunohistochemical studies showed a strong but diffuse distribution of the markers vimentin and HMB-45 . These cells were negative for Melan-A, S-100, CD117, CK19, CD56, CD99, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, CD34, TTF-1, CD2, CD5, CD20, and ALKp80. The Ki-67 index was about 30% .
Dual colour interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation utilising the EWSR1 break-apart probe was performed on a paraffin section. A clear separation of red and green signals within a single cell was identified in most cells, which demonstrated the presence of the EWSR1 rearrangement . No BRAF mutation was detected.
To date, 8 months after operation, the patient is well and without evidence of a recurrence or metastasis.