A-74-year-old Asian man with a history of ESD for early gastric cancer (EGC) was found to have a second EGC during a follow-up endoscopy examination, and was admitted to our hospital for endoscopic resection. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy examination revealed an 18 mm faded, superficial flat lesion on the posterior wall of the gastric antrum . A biopsy performed by a previous doctor resulted in the diagnosis of a signet ring cell carcinoma; therefore, we performed a negative biopsy to determine the excision range. ESD was performed using an insulated-tip (IT) knife 2 (KD-611 L; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The procedure took 1 hour and 40 minutes. The resected specimen measured 86 × 48 mm, which was histopathologically confirmed to be a signet ring cell carcinoma (28 × 25) limited to the lamina propria with no lymphovascular invasion. No intraoperative complications occurred , and the patient was asymptomatic during the operation. The patient developed a fever on postoperative day (POD) 1, but his general condition was stable. On POD2, the patient complained of a slight abdominal pain localized to the epigastric region and a small amount of melena. A computed tomography (CT) examination revealed the presence of free air in the peritoneal cavity, and a little fluid collection abutting the dorsal area of the stomach . Since upper gastrointestinal bleeding was suspected, an endoscopy was performed on the same day, but no source of bleeding was found. Instead, a 5-mm, deep ulcer with the accumulation of pus was observed, suggesting a perforation of the post-ESD ulcer . We could detect the purulent pus flow from the abscess cavity to the stomach during endoscopy; therefore, we were convinced that the abscess communicated with the inside of the stomach. As the perforation site was lined with peritoneum, it was considered to be a gastric penetration. We diagnosed a perigastric abscess caused by delayed perforation after ESD. Blood tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (5.24 mg/dl, normal value < 0.3 mg/dl), but other than the patient’s body temperature (BT), his vital signs were stable (BT, 38.4 °C; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per minute; blood pressure, 129/81 mmHg; heart rate, 81 beats per minute), and there were no signs of peritonitis. After consultation with the surgical team, we opted for conservative treatment, which included fasting with intravenous fluid therapy, the administration of a proton pump inhibitor, and empirical antibiotics. We intentionally did not close the perforation and instead left it open to allow spontaneous drainage from the abscess into the stomach. Thereafter, the patient’s fever and abdominal pain improved gradually. CRP levels were elevated up to 12.38 mg/dl on POD5, but decreased to 5.34 mg/dl on POD7 and 1.67 mg/dl on POD14. A follow-up CT examination revealed an encapsuled and localized perigastric abscess on POD5 , and the disappearance of the free air and the regression of the perigastric abscess on POD7 . A follow-up endoscopy examination on POD7 showed the closure of the perforation. Oral feeding was resumed at this time. Finally, surgery was avoided, and the patient was discharged on POD14 after a relatively short hospital stay. Oral antibiotic treatment was continued for 2 weeks after hospital discharge, and a CT examination on POD34 showed no recurrence of the perigastric abscess .