In the spring of 2001 a 51-year-old policeman consults his general practitioner (GP) with a painful, red spot on his upper limb. He is not ill, has no fever, has never smoked, uses a couple of beers each day and is known with hypertension, for which he is treated with atenolol ZOC 100 mg once daily. With a length of 1.86 meters and a bodyweight of 98 kilograms he is slightly over weighted.
The spot is there for a few days and looks like an oval shaped raised erythema. His GP diagnoses a superficial thrombophlebitis and prescribes conservative treatment: elevation of the leg and compresses. Within a few weeks the string disappears. Two years later the story repeats itself in exactly the same manner, but now the spot is located on the front of his left tibia. The GP again diagnoses superficial thrombophlebitis and prescribes a NSAID. The thromboflebitis again resolves itself in a few weeks.
A year later he consults again, this time with a swollen left calf, that started just above the ankle and a painful string at the inner side of the knee. Compression ultrasonography however shows no deep vein thrombosis, but again superficial thrombophlebitis. Treatment as before with NSAID. A year later he experiences a superficial thrombophlebitis for the fourth time (again diagnosed with compression ultrasonography) and a consulted specialist advocates screening on thrombophilia and possible malignancy. No thrombophilia is found, but PSA is slightly raised and because of a raised gamma-GT (123 U/l, which a month later spontaneously recovers to 63 U/l) a CT-scan of the abdomen is made. This reveals a solid mass in the left kidney and a solid mass in the suprarenal gland.
A partial nephrectomy and extirpation of the suprarenal gland is performed and biopsies of his prostate are taken. The pathologist diagnosis a renal cell carcinoma of the kidney, clear cell type with a diameter of 4.3 cm, Fuhrmann grade 111-IV, an adenoma of the adrenal cortex and adenocarcinoma of the prostate, Gleason score 6.
The patient recovers of the operation, distant metastases were not found. He is treated with prostatectomia for his prostate carcinoma. A year after the first operation a metastasis of the renal cell carcinoma is found in the right suprarenal gland, which is treated by extirpation. During the two years form his first to his third operation he suffered from deep venous thrombosis twice. Now, three years after the operation he has resumed working.
Retrospectively the renal mass was visible on a scan, made in 2001 because of his hypertension, that was difficult to treat at that time. This renal mass however was not noticed at that time.