A 59-year-old postmenopausal woman (gravida 3, para 3) was referred to our hospital with an abnormal endometrial cytology and thickening. Her medical history included obesity and partial thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer at the age of 49 years. Her social and family histories were unremarkable. An internal examination revealed that the uterus was the size of a goose egg, transvaginal ultrasonography showed an enlarged uterus with thickening of the endometrium to 19.5 mm, and deep myometrial invasion was suspected. Laboratory results showed elevated serum cancer antigen (CA) 125 and CA19-9 levels (129 and 117 U/mL, respectively). An endometrial Pap smear revealed suspected adenocarcinoma , while biopsy results confirmed the existence of endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen revealed a local, space-occupying lesion arising from the anterior uterine wall, while positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed the abnormal accumulation of 2-deoxy-2-(18F)fluoro-d-glucose (FDG) in the uterine corpus with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 16.9 as well as in the bilateral iliac and para-aortic lymph nodes (SUVmax = 4.1) .
The patient underwent extended hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, and pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy below the renal veins. A histopathological examination revealed grade 1 endometrioid carcinoma of the uterine corpus , with myometrial invasion of > 50% and metastases of the bilateral iliac and para-aortic lymph nodes . According to the International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians guidelines, the lesion was diagnosed as stage IIIC2 endometrial cancer. After surgery, adjuvant therapy with six courses of doxorubicin (45 mg/m2) and cisplatin (50 mg/m2) successfully inhibited disease progression.
The clinical course of the patient is shown in Fig. . Elevated levels of CA125 and CA19-9 gradually decreased and normalized after surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. However, fifteen months after the initial surgery, serum CA125 and CA19-9 levels spontaneously increased, and the recurrence of endometrial cancer in the para-aortic lymph nodes was confirmed by the abnormal accumulation of FDG (SUVmax = 19.44) on a PET/CT scan . The recurrent site in the para-aortic lymph nodes was located just under the left renal artery. Due to the potential influence of the proximal left kidney to limit the surgical resection of the tumor, the patient chose to undergo PBT at an advanced medical center that specializes in radiology. Thirty-six days after the diagnosis of recurrence, PBT was performed at a total dose of 68.2 GyE at 2.2 GyE per fraction for 51 days. No serious complications were observed during PBT. Serum CA125 and CA19-9 levels immediately decreased to within normal ranges of 8 and 9 U/mL, respectively, after PBT. The complete resolution of the recurrent lesion was confirmed in follow-up PET/CT . The patient did not receive any additional treatment after PBT. Complications related to PBT, including dermatitis, nausea, anemia, and leukopenia, did not occur after treatment. Careful follow-ups after PBT were performed every three months and involved a physical examination, transvaginal ultrasound, and laboratory tests (including CA125 and CA19-9). Follow-up CT was performed at least every 6 months. CA125 and CA19-9 levels have remained stable within normal ranges after treatment. The condition of the patient is good 7 years after PBT with no signs of recurrence.
All cytology and pathological images were obtained with an Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with 4 × , 10 × , 20 × , 40 × UPlanSApo objective lenses (Olympus), which equipped with a DP27 digital camera (Olympus) and model U-TV0.5XC-3 TV system (Olympus) on upper site of the microscope. These images were captured by the digital ruler of image analysis software cellSens standard version 1.16 (Olympus). All images were adjusted automatically about white balance and resolution in the software.