An 84-year-old female suffering from repeated palpitations for three days and aggravated for 5 h went to the Jiujiang University Affiliated Hospital on August 9, 2022.
Three days ago, the patient complained that there was no obvious inducement for repeated palpitation attacks, and each attack was mitigated for one hour. The attacks were characterized by sudden arrest, and no active diagnosis and treatment were made. The patient complained that there was no obvious cause for the re-occurrence of palpitations 5 h ago. The symptoms persisted and were not mitigated. Admission electrocardiogram (ECG): Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia with frequent ventricular premature beats. The patient was administrated with 150 mg amiodarone intravenously. It was observed that the patient’s heart rhythm did not revert to sinus rhythm, and frequent ventricular premature beats were observed. Subsequently, the patient was given amiodarone 1 mg/min for continuous pumping.
At 8:20 on August 10, 2022, the patient started to have lower extremity gastrocnemius tremor, accompanied by pain (muscle fiber necrosis) at a frequency of about 6 Hz. The patient was given an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate 1 mg, the symptoms were not mitigated significantly, the tremor symptoms persisted, and the tremor occurred after lower extremity activity It was aggravated and mitigated slightly after rest, but the tremor still persisted. It was considered to be drug-induced tremor. The patient only added drugs such as amiodarone. It was considered to be lower extremity muscle tremor caused by amiodarone. The tachycardia and frequent premature ventricular tachycardia persisted, combined with burst ventricular tachycardia, such that amiodarone was continued to be used, whereas the dose of amiodarone was adjusted from 1 mg/min to 0.5 mg/min. After 3 h, the patient complained. The pain and tremor of the lower extremities persisted and became unbearable, such that amiodarone was discontinued, and the patient was administrated with propafenone 70 mg intravenously, and sinus rhythm was well restored. However, the patient's lower extremity muscle tremors remained.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 20 years. She took amlodipine besylate 5 mg qd regularly to control the patient’s blood pressure, noting that the blood pressure level was controlled well. She did not take any other medications. The patient denied history of coronary heart disease, cerebral infarction, diabetes, rheumatism, and immune system. She also denied history of trauma.
The patient denied smoking, drinking history, and family disease history.
Body temperature, 36.5 ℃; breathing, 20 breaths/min; blood pressure, 94/56 mmHg; heart rate, 170 beats/min. The gastrocnemius pain of lower limbs was accompanied by muscle tremors; the strength of bilateral knee flexors and extensors reached 4/5 and 3/5, respectively.
Creatine kinase (CK) was 4504 µ/L after the onset of the disease. It evolved dynamically with the course of the disease . Blood routine, liver function, renal function, electrolyte, blood sugar, C-reactive protein, immune function, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and tumor indexes were not abnormal.
ECG: Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia and frequent ventricular premature beats . No significant abnormality was reported in lumbar magnetic resonance. The measurement result of nerve conduction velocity indicated that discharge was found in the bilateral tibial nerves after the F wave. The electromyography diagram indicated that the bundle fibrillation potential was seen when some muscles were relaxed . Lower limb muscle tremor image . Disease development timeline .