A 39-year-old man with aortic dissection was hospitalized for chest and back pain. Relevant preoperative examinations were performed and the patient underwent aortic arch replacement combined with stented elephant trunk implantation surgery under extracorporeal circulation. After exposure of the pericardial cavity, 50 mL of bloody pericardial effusion was detected. Dissection scale involving the ascending aorta and the brachiocephalic vessels of the aortic arch, diseased ascending aorta, and arch were then resected. Finally, four branch artificial blood vessels were installed. The whole operation procedure went well. The patient’s vital signs were stable and he was discharged from the hospital on the 7th day after operation. At home, he received continuous anticoagulant, diuretic, and antihypertensive therapy. On day 17 after surgery, the patient was sent back to hospital for chest pain, chest congestion, and poor appetite. His condition continuously worsened, and he died on day 18 after surgery.
Family members of the patient questioned his death, which led to disputes between them and his physician. When the family was preparing to sue the hospital, lawyers and clinicians were engaged to analyze the medical records. The clinical medical experts engaged by the family analyzed that the cause of death may be cardiac tamponade. They suspected that the sutures in the operation were not dense enough, which resulted in his postoperative bleeding and ultimately cardiac tamponade and death. This would explain why the patient had chest pain symptoms after surgery. His sudden death after a few days of chest tightness indicates that the bleeding caused compression of the heart, referred to as cardiac tamponade. The physician argued that there was nothing wrong with the surgical sutures because no bleeding was observed after the operation, even after repeated inspections. Because postoperative bleeding often emerges quickly and will not last for a few days, the patient’s death was likely from its own cause.