A 67-year-old man status post liver transplantation three months ago was found to have severe hyponatremia with sodium of 119 mmol/L during routine follow-up and was referred to emergency department on 7th of August, 2014 with constipation, fatigue and tremor. Patient had no history of fever, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Patient’s medical history was significant for uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus and liver cirrhosis secondary to HCV, which he underwent liver transplantation for on 7th of May, 2014. Post transplant medications included prednisone, cyclosporine, Septra, magnesium oxide, omeprazole, amlodipine, and insulin mixtard. On examination, the patient was afebrile with a blood pressure of 118/58 mmHg and heart rate of 115 beats per minute. Laboratory investigations revealed hyponatremia (115 mmol/L), hyperkalemia (6.9 mmol/L), serum osmolarity of 254 mOsmol/L (275 - 295 mOsmol/L), elevated urine sodium (70 mmol/L) and urine osmolarity of 503 mOsmol/L (50 - 1400 mOsmol/L), suggestive of SIADH. Intravenous normal saline was started in the emergency department, but sodium levels dropped further to 113 mmol/L with worsening of his presenting symptoms. Sodium was then corrected to 125 mmol/L during two days using hypertonic saline (NaCl 3%) at a rate of 30 mL hourly, and then, patient was discharged home.
Four weeks later, the patient referred again to the emergency department complaining of dizziness, confusion, ataxia, abnormal muscle movements, and leg pain. Patient denied any history of fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, weight loss, decreased appetite, sweating, travel or raw milk ingestion. On examination, he was euvolemic with altered sensorium.
Laboratory investigations revealed hyponatremia (122 mmol/L), despite correcting sodium levels to 130 mmol/L over 72 hours. His level of consciousness temporary improved but worsened again. He developed fever (39˚C) became drowsy, and was unable to follow commands with altered mental status (the Glasgow coma scale: 9)and positive meningeal signs.
Chest X-ray and ultrasound of abdomen were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed leptomeningeal enhancement in the superior cerebellar sulci suspicious for infection. Lumbar puncture was consistent with Cryptococcus neoformans infection: high white blood cell count (250 × 106/L; 43% neutrophils, 37% monocytes and 8% lymphocytes), high protein (1326 mg/L), low glucose (0.97 mmol/L), and positive cryptococcal antigen and India Ink stain. The patient’s hyponatremia was due to syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secondary to cryptococcal meningitis.
Amphotericin B was administered for six weeks followed by fluconazole for one year. His level of consciousness improved significantly, and his serum sodium level slowly returned to its normal baseline over three weeks after starting amphotericin B.
He underwent Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy for biliary stricture after failed percutaneous transhepatic cholangioplasty. He also, achieved sustained virologic response to 6-month therapy with Sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for treatment of HCV.