A 32-year-old woman presented to the emergency room for a one-month duration of nausea, fatigue, and recent onset of vomiting. Blood tests done at a peripheral hospital 3 days before presentation revealed AKI (creatinine of 2.3 mg/dL) and anemia. Intravenous fluids were administered without improvement of kidney function so she presented to our hospital for continuity of care.
Upon interview, the patient had a self-resolved upper respiratory tract infection two months earlier. She reports a recent onset of foamy urine with no other urinary symptoms. No recent weight loss, fever, chills, night sweats, arthralgias, bone pain, skin changes, easy bruising, or lower limb edema. She has no personal or family history of kidney disease. She reports rare use of NSAIDs and paracetamol as needed only. Her last creatinine was 0.6 mg/dL back when she was pregnant with her only child one year ago. The course of pregnancy and delivery was uncomplicated. No major interim events occurred since then.
The physical exam was unrevealing. Vitals signs were stable. Her blood pressure was 117/79 mmHg, heart rate 84 beats per minute, and temperature 36.7 degrees Celsius. Importantly, there were no rales or lower limb edema. No rashes, bruises, or petechia were noted.
Laboratory findings on presentation are shown in Table .
Ultrasound of the kidneys showed bilateral increased cortical echogenicity, suggestive of renal medical parenchymal disease with the right kidney measuring 13.8 cm in length and the left 14.6 cm in length. No hydronephrosis or stones were present.
Considering the rapidly progressive and unexplained kidney failure, and hematuria, , the decision was to perform a kidney biopsy to rule out a rapidly progressive glomerular disease.
The kidney biopsy is shown in Figs. and . It showed myeloma cast nephropathy. Up to six (6) glomeruli are identified in representative sections showing mild mesangial hypercellularity. Many tubules were plugged with eosinophilic PAS-negative fractured angulated casts with histiocytic reaction and lined by reactive/regenerative tubular epithelial cells. There was an associated acute tubular injury and mild tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis, involving approximately 30% of the sampled cortex. Patchy infiltration by chronic inflammatory cells was noted in the interstitium. There is no arterial intimal fibrosis nor arteriolar hyalinosis. No vasculitis or fibrinoid necrosis was noted. The Congo red stain was negative.
A few days later the paraproteinemia workup came back positive for IgA lambda monoclonality in both serum and urine. The free light chain ratio was 0 with a lambda level of 5064 mg /L and a kappa level of 10 mg/L. Beta 2 microglobulin was 15 mg/L.
Bone marrow biopsy was done and was pertinent for a low level of metamyelocyte of 4% and an elevated plasma cell level of 23%. The bone marrow and karyotype are shown in Figs. and . A total body magnetic resonance imaging revealed no focal bone lesions. A genetic workup revealed a positive sample for t (14;16) and one extra copy of TP53 ( Fig. ). No evidence of trisomies.
The patient was thus diagnosed with MM with Lambda IgA light chain predominance.
After the kidney biopsy, the patient was started on high-dose intravenous steroids with aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation. Her creatinine started to decrease thereafter.
She was then referred to hematology and treatment with daratumumab in combination with bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexamethasone was started.
The patient tolerated her treatment well. However, after the second cycle, she contracted a COVID-19 infection and received Remdesivir for 5 days with an unremarkable course of illness. Three months later, her creatinine value is 1.2 mg/dL and free lambda light chain levels have normalized to a value of 15.43 mg/dL. She was referred for bone marrow transplantation after 4 cycles of chemotherapy. At the last follow-up, she is 4 months post tandem autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) in complete remission on maintenance therapy.