A 65-year-old man showing acute kidney injury (AKI) was referred to the department of nephrology in our hospital. He has been treated for malignant melanoma. His malignant melanoma under the right first fingernail was diagnosed 2 years ago, and since then, he had shown persistent metastatic lesions at the dorsal side of the right first finger, right wrist, and left lumbar back. Each recurrence was carefully followed-up with extended resection and scheduled treatment using ICIs, nivolumab (anti-PD-1 antibody) 80 mg, and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4 antibody) 3 mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks for a total of 4 doses for aggravated metastatic malignant melanoma. His baseline serum creatinine (Cr) was 0.88 mg/dL and daily oral medication included carvedilol, doxazosin, bezafibrate, lafutidine, and ezetimibe.
About 1 week after the second dose of nivolumab and ipilimumab, AKI developed. His urinary protein excretion was 0.28 g/g urinary Cr. Urinary microscopic examination showed no erythrocytes/high power fields. The laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cells: 4.4 × 103/μL, hemoglobin: 10.8 g/dL, platelets: 168 × 103/μL, serum Cr: 3.51 mg/dL, urea nitrogen: 44.7 mg/dL, total protein/albumin: 5.6/2.5 g/dL, immunoglobulin G (IgG): 895 mg/dL, and IgA/M: 144/47 mg/dL. C-reactive protein level was 23.8 mg/dL, and hypocomplementemia was absent. The anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) titer for myeloperoxidase (MPO) and proteinase 3 (PR3) was within the normal range. Viral antibodies for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative.
On admission, a renal biopsy was performed and showed TIN and renal granulomatous vasculitis in interlobular arteries . Inflammatory cells infiltrated the interstitium with edema and fibrosis. Necrotizing and crescentic glomerular lesions could not be seen. The infiltrating inflammatory cells were mainly composed of mononuclear cells and a few eosinophils with mild tubulitis. The inflammatory cells had also accumulated within and around interlobular arteries without necrotic lesions, indicating the development of non-necrotizing granulomatous arteritis. Immunofluorescence staining showed no obvious deposition of immunoglobulins and complements in both glomeruli and tubulointerstitium. In the immunohistochemistry for vasculitis lesion and TIN lesion , the infiltrating cells were composed of high numbers of CD3+ T cells and CD163+ macrophages. Many of these cells had Ki-67 positive nuclei, indicating the proliferation in situ. Inflammatory cells were almost negative for PD-1, while they had a significant expression of PD-L1. Many CD3+ T cells demonstrated predominantly CD8+ T cells than CD4+ T cells, many of which were negative for CD25, but positive for granzyme B (GrB) and cytotoxic granule T cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA − 1), indicating antigen-independent activated CD8+ T cells. CD4+ T cells had a slightly fewer distribution than CD8+ T cells, and CD25 was negative, indicating no or a small number of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T (Treg) cells. In our case, many antigen-independent activated CD8+ T cells and CD163+ macrophages, and none or few CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells might be involved in the development of TIN and granulomatous vasculitis in renal irAE.
After the renal biopsy, nivolumab and ipilimumab were stopped and prednisolone 50 mg/day was started as a treatment for ICI-related AKI. Serum Cr levels recovered from 3.51 mg/dL to 1.07 mg/dL within 2 months after treatment, and his renal function was stable thereafter with gradually tapered prednisolone. Nine months after stopping ICI, nivolumab monotherapy 240 mg intravenously was started for metastatic melanoma, and stable renal function continued for 11 months with nivolumab monotherapy.