A 51-year-old man presented to our Surgical Emergency Department complaining of a mild diffuse abdominal pain, loss of appetite, and constipation that lasted 2 days. He has no medical history and no previous surgery. He had no allergies or medication use. He reported other 2 episodes of the same symptomatology in the last year. His physical examination revealed sluggish bowel sounds, whereas on palpation, his abdomen was tender on the right side and distended. His laboratory examination was within normal limits (white blood cell = 6.02 K/μL, neutrophil = 51.5%, hemoglobin = 14.6 g/dL, hematocrit = 41.6%, urea = 33 mg/dL, and creatinine = 0.61 mg/dL). In X-ray examination, dilated bowel loops with fluid levels were detected. Contrast-enhanced abdominal tomography (computed tomography [CT]) revealed diffuse intraperitoneal fluid with dilated small bowel loops. The patient has undergone an imaging examination (CT and magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) few months ago due to his symptomatology advised by a gastroenterologist, which findings were the same as our CT examination . In abdominal MRI, internal hernia of the small bowel in the omentum was reported, whereas small bowel was found clustered in the right upper quadrant of the peritoneal cavity . Gastroscopy and colonoscopy 1 month ago had no pathological findings. A nasogastric tube was placed, and an exploratory laparotomy was advised. The surgical findings were a large quantity of ascites, and the small intestine was encapsulated in a layer of the peritoneum . An adhesiolysis was performed, and the sac membrane was removed. Intestinal resection was not required. Both a granuloma, which was found in the sac and excised and part of the sac, were sent for histopathological examination. In the postoperative course, the patient had clinical signs of ileus that was conservatively managed successfully. He was discharged on tenth postoperative day with normal gastroenteric function. Six months postoperatively, the patient has a normal uneventful life. The histopathological examination reported fibrous connective tissue with collagen reaction and an infracted epiploic appendage and concluded to SEP.