A 57-year-old man presented to a secondary care hospital following 6 h of severe central chest pain accompanied by sweating and nausea. He was a smoker (37 pack-years) but was not diabetic or hypertensive. He was diagnosed with acute ST-segment elevation anterior wall myocardial infarction and was managed with thrombolysis (alteplase 100 mL over 90 min). However, his chest pain and heart failure symptoms persisted, and he was referred to our centre for further management. On arrival, 28 h after his first medical contact, he was haemodynamically stable with a pulse rate of 92 b.p.m. and blood pressure of 107/64 mmHg. His physical examination revealed bilateral basal crepitations and a pan systolic murmur at the left sternal border, radiating to the whole precordium. His jugular venous pulse was raised; further, his oxygen saturation was 96% while on 2 L/min oxygen via a nasal cannula. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with persistent ST-segment elevation in leads V1–V4, and chest X-ray revealed bilateral pulmonary congestion. Upon questioning further, the patient described chronic, gradually deteriorating exertional shortness of breath that persisted for ∼2 years.
Transthoracic echocardiography and transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a large (27 mm), serpiginous antero-apical VSR and a large (29 mm) secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) with left-to-right shunts. Left ventricular systolic function was severely depressed with an ejection fraction of ∼30%. The left ventricular apex, anterior wall and intraventricular septum were akinetic. The right ventricle was moderately dilated with a base diameter of 51 mm; however, systolic function was normal with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 18 mm. The right atrium was moderately dilated (volume index 38 mL/m2), whereas the left atrium was normal (27 mL/m2). There was moderate tricuspid regurgitation with severe pulmonary hypertension, with a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 72 mmHg. Coronary angiography revealed the left anterior descending artery was diffusely diseased with total mid occlusion. The other arteries showed non-obstructive disease.
The patient was initially stabilized with intravenous diuretics (frusemide infusion 10–15 mg/h), inotropes (dobutamine 5–10 μg/kg/min), anticoagulant [unfractionated heparin infusion targeted to maintain activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) at 50–70 s], and an intra-aortic balloon pump. Next morning, 14 h after presentation at our hospital, the patient underwent surgery for the simultaneous repair of VSR and ASD. The ventricular septum was approached through a transinfarct incision parallel to the left anterior descending artery. Ventricular septal rupture was repaired with a pericardial patch using an infarct exclusion technique . The ventriculotomy was closed with 3-0 proline over-and-over sutures buttressed with Teflon felt. Atrial septal defect was approached through the right atrium and closed with a pericardial patch . The left anterior descending artery could not be grafted towing to its small size and the distal diffuse disease.
Post-operatively, the patient remained stable and was extubated the next day. Post-operative echocardiography revealed no residual intracardiac shunt. However, there was moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and right ventricular function was moderately impaired. The patient was discharged 1 week after surgery.
At follow-up conducted at 2 weeks, he was haemodynamically stable, albeit he reported mild exertional dyspnoea (New York Heart Association functional classification I/II). His medication was adjusted. Two months after discharge, he was asymptomatic and could perform routine daily activities. Clinical follow-up and echocardiography have been scheduled for 6 months post-operatively.