A 26-year-old male patient was referred to our cardiology department by his general practitioner to exclude a cardiac origin of polycythaemia. The patient visited his general practitioner due to recurrent infections in the upper respiratory tract. He also reported a progressive increase in fatigue compared to individuals of similar age, particularly evident during physical activities with friends. Blood tests revealed polycythaemia with elevated levels of haemoglobin (20.7 g/dL) and increased haematocrit (60.4%), with no other abnormalities detected. The patient had a positive family history of secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) in his father. Physical examination revealed clubbing of the fingers . No audible heart murmurs were detected, and examination of the lips yielded no evidence of telangiectasis. The patient’s resting oxygen saturation was found to be 86%, indicating hypoxia, and arterial blood tests showed low oxygen levels (pO2 57 mmHg). A transthoracic echocardiogram did not show any signs of intracardiac right-to-left shunting. Despite its potential usefulness in further investigating the right-to-left shunting, contrast echocardiography was not feasible in this case as the necessary resources were not available in the clinic.
Subsequent chest X-ray revealed multiple nodular opacities, particularly in the lower lobe of the left lung . Further evaluation using chest computed tomography (CT) confirmed that these findings correlated with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (pulmonary AVMs) . No hepatic AVMs were found. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed several old ischaemic lesions in the frontal and cerebellar lobes, likely caused by embolization of blood clots through the pulmonary AVMs . Neurological examination did not reveal any abnormalities, and no AVMs were found within the brain on MRI.
To investigate further, a right heart catheterization was performed by femoral access. Angiography revealed four large pulmonary AVMs in the lower lobe of the left lung . Each AVM was successfully closed percutaneously using Amplatzer devices. The correct placement of the devices was confirmed using angiography. The patient was started on anticoagulant therapy with vitamin K antagonists (VKA) to prevent thrombus formation distally from the devices. In accordance with ESC guidelines, we also recommended the patient to initiate endocarditis prophylaxis when undergoing invasive dental procedures.
Follow-up evaluation 3 months after the closure of the AVMs, CT angiography showed no residual shunting. The patient’s resting oxygen saturation improved to 95%, while his blood work indicated a decrease in haemoglobin level to 17.7 g/dL. Genetic testing through whole exome sequencing revealed that the patient had a specific genetic mutation (c.1411C > T, p.Gln471*) in the ENG gene. Based on these findings, the definitive diagnosis of HHT was made.