A 10-year-old neutered female domestic shorthair cat was referred for an acute onset of cluster seizures. More than 10 seizures occurred in the 12 h prior to admission. No abnormalities had been noted by the owner prior to these seizures other than episodic sneezing for 2 weeks. Clinical signs described by the owners were: abnormal behaviour such as looking around and stopping of current activity; licking; salivation; facial twitching; turning of the head; and at one time also falling and displaying a rigid posture (this was considered to be generalised seizure activity).
Routine physical examination was unremarkable. The cat circled to the right in the consultation room. Incomplete loss of sensation of the left facial area and concave surface of the ear, as well as an absent menace response of the left eye, were noted. After the examination, when the cat was walking freely in the consultation room, it showed clinical signs consistent with earlier seizures, as reported by the owner. Specifically, the cat (chronologically) suddenly looked around as if some stimulus was noted, stopped in mid-walk and stopped sniffing the floor. Then mydriasis, salivation and licking were noted, facial twitching (right facial musculature) became apparent and a head turn (to the right and then left) developed. No signs of generalisation were noted.
These findings, in combination with the results of the neurological examination, were consistent with a forebrain lesion with right-sided lateralisation. Differential diagnoses considered most likely were neoplastic, vascular and infectious/inflammatory lesions (eg, empyema, Toxoplasma gondii, granulomatous lesion secondary to fungal infection).
Laboratory test results (complete blood count and serum biochemistry) revealed no abnormalities except for slightly elevated thyroxine levels (59.9 nmol/l; reference interval 13–52 nmol/l). Treatment was limited to intramuscular administration of midazolam to counter epileptic activity. Anaesthesia for MRI consisted of premedication with 0.15 mg/kg intravenous (IV) methadone, and induction was established with an IV infusion of propofol at 4 mg/kg. The cat was intubated, placed on mechanical ventilation and anaesthesia was maintained with a mixture of isoflurane and oxygen.
MRI of the head revealed an expansile soft tissue mass of about 3 cm in length in the caudal nasal passages (both sides, but predominantly right-sided) involving the ethmoid bone and extending through the cribriform plate into the cranial cavity affecting predominantly the right frontal lobe and temporal lobe and invading the skull . A mass effect on the right frontal lobe, the right temporal lobe and right lateral ventricle was present. T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images showed suppression of a hyperintense area in the mass seen on T2-weighted MRI, which was hypointense on T1-weighted MRI . These findings are consistent with a cystic component. Destruction of nasal turbinates was extensive . The mass showed marked and homogeneous enhancement after IV administration of gadolinium (0.1 mmol/kg; ).
Based on the MRI findings, the differential diagnosis list was narrowed down to primary nasal neoplasia (eg, adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, chondrosarcoma and other types of sarcomas), lymphoma and olfactory neuroblastoma. Primary intracranial neoplasms were also considered but deemed less likely. After discussing all treatment options, the owners elected euthanasia and the cat was submitted for necropsy.
Macroscopic evaluation revealed an irregular-shaped mass of 2 cm × 2.5 cm × 4 cm of friable, white-yellow tissue at the dorsal nasal concha extending into ethmoturbinates and ethmoid bone and protruding into the cranial cavity ( and ). Thus, it was morphologically extensive from the nasal cavity into the cranial cavity.
Histologically, the intranasal and intracranial mass was characterised by an infiltrative neoplastic proliferation of pleomorphic mesenchymal cells with a rounded-to-polygonal or somewhat spindeloid morphology. The growth pattern varied from sheets to bundles with occasional whirling around blood vessels. Several large, scattered multinucleated neoplastic cells were noted with atypical large nuclei. The mitotic rate was variable but low (1 per × 400 high-power field). The neoplastic cells contained a variable amount of pale, slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and the cytoplasm of some neoplastic cells contained nuclear structures and remnants suggestive of nuclei of neutrophils . Within the neoplastic area, a marked inflammatory infiltrate consisting of neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells was also noted.
After staining with an antibody against ionised calcium binding adaptor molecule (IBA1), a marker for cells of histiocytic lineage, the neoplastic cell population showed marked immunoreactivity . In addition, to analyse the nature of the lesion, immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), as well as the histochemical stains, periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and Fite-Faraco (acid-fast stain) were performed. The neoplastic cells were negative for cytokeratin and GFAP, and no infectious agents were noted in the PAS and Fite-Faraco stains.