A 60-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for further examinations of an abnormal shadow found on a chest CT. A CT scan demonstrated a homogenous, sharply-circumscribed mass in the posterior mediastinum . Additional file A (Video) showed preoperative DCR findings. Two points for measurements on the inspiratory frame of the dynamic-ventilation. One point was placed in the center of the targeted lesion (red point). The other point was the vertebra adjacent to the tumor (blue point). The software automatically tracked these two measuring points, and coordinates were recorded. The distance of the two points (Additional file B), movement in two directions (Additional file C) were not coincidence, which means no invasion or adhesion of the tumor to the chest wall.
The patient had a CT guided biopsy, and histopathology examination revealed benign solitary fibrous tumor. However, surgery was required for curative resection. The patient was administered under general anesthesia using one-lung ventilation and was placed in a lateral position. The 3 cm incision located of the midaxillary line at the level of the sixth intercostal space, and the Lap-protector (alnote LapSingleTM, Applied Alfresa Pharma Coroperation, Japan) was then placed through the incision . We applied CO2 gas insufflation to push the lung down. We start the CO2 insufflation at 3 l/min, with a pressure of 5 mmHg, while the CO2 still allows for a generous space which allows the surgery to be undertaken. A pedunculated tumor that protruded into the thoracic cavity from the visceral pleura was observed. The tumor was attached by its stalk to the left lower lobe, and moved freely . We believed that a single-port surgery was feasible for this type of lesion. The tumor stalk was resected using an articulating endostapler (Covidien) .
Microcopically, the tumor was characterized by spindle cells that were organized in short fascicles against a collagenous background. Areas of high cellularity and mitotic activity were absent . Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for CD34, STAT6 in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells. The final pathology was determined a benign SFTP. The patient was followed-up for 6 months, and no evidence of recurrence was observed.