A 53-year-old Japanese man suffered from UC for 34 years. He was initially diagnosed with UC in 1987 when he was 19 years old. Medications including oral prednisolone and azathioprine were transiently effective, but the disease frequently relapsed. During the follow-up, a surveillance colonoscopy with biopsy was repeated, and the recent colonoscopy revealed a flat lesion in the lower rectum, and rectal biopsy was done. Specimen of the rectal biopsy was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. He admitted to our hospital for treatment for the long-standing UC with rectal cancer. A total colectomy with the ileoanal anastomosis was performed. He has no recurrency for 4 months after the surgery.
Grossly, the resected flat tumor of the lower rectum was 2.5 × 2.5 cm in size . Histological examination showed that the tumor had a component of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with focal clear cytoplasm . The tumor cells predominantly arranged in glandular pattern, and most had hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent nucleoli . Immunohistochemistry revealed that the clear cells were positive for both GPC3 and nuclear SALL4 , indicating enteroblastic differentiation. They were negative for AFP . In addition to the glandular growth pattern, tumor had a component of solid and nested growth pattern . Those tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and focally positive for chromogranin A , indicating neuroendocrine differentiation. They were negative for CD56 . Thus, some tumor cells showed only enteroblastic differentiation, and some tumor cells did only neuroendocrine feature, but other tumor cells were positive for both enteroblastic differentiation markers and neuroendocrine differentiation markers, indicating amphicrine cells . Some tumor cells are both negative for enteroblastic differentiation markers and neuroendocrine differentiation markers . Diffuse and strong staining for p53 was observed in most of the tumor cells (data not shown), suggesting the presence of TP53 mutation. Ki-67 labeling index of the tumor cells was more than 90% (data not shown). The tumor cells infiltrated into the submucosal layer with lymphatic invasion and venous invasion. One out of the five dissected lymph nodes showed metastasis. No distant metastasis was found by imaging tests. Thus, the tumor staging was regarded as pT1bN1a(1/5)M0 according to TNM classification . The mucosa (5 × 3 cm) adjacent to the flat tumor showed low-grade dysplasia.