A 66-year-old man with a previously diagnosed giant arachnoid cyst presented at the memory clinic of the Department of Geriatric Psychiatry of the Central Institute for Mental Health Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany, for further assessment and therapeutic counseling of mild, gradual short-term memory deficits.
Clinical information were obtained by personal interviews and detailed medical records by trained psychiatrists. All previous clinical data were reviewed at the Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim. For neuropsychological assessment, the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD) test battery, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the Wechsler Memory Scale logical memory (WMS-LM) and the Verbal Learning and Memory Test (VLMT), the Clock-Drawing Test and the Rey Complex Figure Test were performed. For the CERAD and WMS, raw data were transformed in specific values and converted in z-scores adapted for sex, age and education for comparison to the general population. We interviewed the patient’s spouse based on the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study - Activity of Daily Living (ADCS-ADL) checklist. The Edinburgh Handedness Inventory was used to assess the patient’s dominance for handedness in everyday activities . A routine standard EEG recording using the 10–20 system was performed and analyzed visually. A detailed laboratory screening was performed to exclude secondary dementias according to the current guideline of the German Societies of Neurology and Psychiatry (DGN/DGPPN S3-guideline revision1, ).
The patient performed visually cued voluntary movements of individual digits in the scanner. The movement performed was a button press (=flex and extend back) on an optical response keypad (LUMItouch) with five response buttons, with the respective digit: digit 1 (D1: thumb), digit 2 (D2: index finger), digit 3 (D3: middle finger), digit 4 (D4: ring finger), and digit 5 (D5: little finger). Movements were performed after a visual signal. For each digit the patient received visual cues in the form of a hand drawing with the respective finger being colored. We used a block-design with movement blocks of 12 s and rest blocks of 10, 11, 12, 13 or 14 s (randomized) duration. The duration of the rest blocks was varied to avoid synchronization of stimulation and fMRI signals. During movement blocks, a visual cue instructed the patient to perform movements of a specific digit at 1 Hz (e.g., D2, D2, D2, D2.. .). Each movement block was separated by a rest block. Six movement blocks per digit were acquired (30 movement blocks in total). One block of all 5 digits was performed before any block was repeated. This was done to avoid timing effects on the BOLD signal. The order of blocks within one of these repetitions was randomized. In total the task consisted of 30 movement blocks (5 digits, 6 repetitions) and 31 rest blocks (1 in the beginning, 1 in the end of the experiment, 29 between movement blocks), summing up to a total of 12 min and 12 s, which equals 488 acquired EPI volumes (see below). This task was performed twice, once with the digits of the left and once with the digits of the right hand.
The magnetic resonance images for diagnosis were acquired on a 1 T MAGNETOM Harmony whole-body scanner (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) using a standard head coil. For diagnostic purposes, a sagittal T2 turbo spin echo (TSE) sequence (repetition time (TR) = 3420 ms, echo time (TE) = 91 ms, field of view (FoV) = 240 × 240 mm2, flip angle (α) = 170°, bandwidth (BW) = 150 Hz/px) was used. Nineteen slices were acquired (voxel size = 0.5 × 0.5 × 6.0 mm3). A coronal 2D T1-weigthed spin echo (SE) sequence (TR = 485 ms, TE = 10 ms, FoV = 230 × 201 mm2, α = 90°, BW = 100 Hz/px) was used. Twenty-three slices were acquired (voxel size = 0.5 × 0.5 × 6.0 mm3). Axial fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images were acquired using the following parameters: TR = 8000 ms, TE = 124 ms, inversion time = 2500 ms, FoV = 230 × 201 mm2, α = 150°, BW = 180 Hz/px. Twenty-four slices were acquired (voxel size = 0.5 × 0.5 × 6.0 mm3).
All diagnostic MR images were evaluated visually by an experienced neuroradiologist, medio-temporal lobe atrophy was measured by the semi-quantitative MTA-rating scale (Scheltens scale), the amount of white matter degeneration was rated using the semi-quantitative Fazekas scale .
All structural and functional magnetic resonance images were acquired on a 3 T MAGNETOM Trio whole-body scanner (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) using a 32-channel head coil. All T1-weighted images were obtained using a high-resolution magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (3D MPRAGE) sequence (TR = 1900 ms, TE = 2.72 ms, FoV = 250 × 250 mm2, α = 9°, BW = 200 Hz/px). Two hundred and twenty-four axially-oriented slices were acquired (voxel size = 0.8 × 0.8 × 0.8 mm3). Parallel acceleration technique (iPAT) with generalized auto-calibrating partially parallel acquisition (GRAPPA) reconstruction was used with an acceleration factor of 2. Before all measurements, shimming of the scanner was done to account for maximum magnetic field homogeneity. For acquisition of fMRI data, a gradient-echo echo-planar (EPI) T2* sensitive sequence (TR = 1500 ms, TE = 22 ms, FoV = 220 × 220 mm2, α = 90°, BW = 1262 Hz/px) was used. Twenty-two AC/PC aligned slices (voxel size = 1.8 × 1.8 × 1.8 mm3, no gap) were acquired in interleaved slice order using GRAPPA acceleration factor 3. For acquisition of diffusion weighted images, a spin-echo EPI (TR = 8400 ms, TE = 84 ms, FoV = 192 × 192 mm2, BW = 1930 Hz/px) was used. Seventy slices (voxel size = 2.0 × 2.0 × 2.0 mm3, no gap) were acquired in interleaved slice order using GRAPPA acceleration factor 2. Diffusion weighting was performed in multi-directional diffusion weighting (MDDW) mode along 64 non-collinear directions with b = 1000 s/mm2. Additionally, a single non-diffusion weighted volume (b = 0 s/mm2) was acquired. For image registration purposes, a single-volume high-saturation EPI whole brain image was acquired with the same parameters and slice placement as in the task EPI protocol described above but with different TR (4410 ms) and containing more slices (80).
A- PET scanning was performed using Florbetaben ([18F]FBB). The amyloid imaging was acquired with a Siemens ECAT-47 PET tomograph. The [18F] FBB PET data (47 slices; slice thickness 3.3 mm) was summed for 90 min p.i. followed by a static 3-dimensional emission-scan over 15 min. The acquired PET data underwent standard reconstruction and images were visually assessed for amyloid positivity by a specialist trained in nuclear medicine. An established binary (amyloid-positive versus amyloid negative) scoring system was used [, ].
For our analyses, we used Freesurfer software . First, using the structural T1-weighted image, we generated a model of the cortical surface —involving intensity normalization, skull removal, segmentation, and tessellation. The segmentation was edited using control point procedures in freesurfer (semi-automated editing), which were followed up by manual editing.
Second, for fMRI statistical map analyses, time-series data were first motion corrected in three spatial dimensions to reduce the effects of small head motion . To improve image registration the EPI images from the fMRI task were registered to the whole brain EPI image before registration to the high resolution anatomical image. Surface smoothing of 5 mm FWHM was applied and all the analyses were conducted within individual subject space. Activation in sub-regions was deemed significant at a threshold of p < 0.001. Cortical parcellation was performed with an automatic labelling of the cortical structures based on the Desikan-Killiany anatomical atlas. For results of cortical parcellation for pre- and postcentral gyrus see Additional file : Figure S1 and as illustration of the segmentation results see Additional file : Figure S2 and Additional file : Figure S3. For DTI analyses, we used FMRIB software library 5.0.10 . After eddy correction and rotation of b vectors, we used dtifit routine with weighted least-squares regression to calculate fractional anisotropy (FA) and eigenvector maps.
For a systematic review of literature we searched PubMed with the key words ‘arachnoid cyst’ and ‘cognitive impairment’/‘cognitive decline’/‘dementia’. This revealed a total of 44 references. We excluded studies in children (9/44), papers with no detailed information of cyst location and/or symptoms of the patients (14/44), other comorbidities (3/44) or without an English abstract available (4/44). We included 14 clinical studies and case reports , which presented subjects with frontotemporal arachnoid cysts and cognitive decline or other neurological symptoms. We thus evaluated the cases of 47 patients for symptomatic presentation, diagnosis and treatment.