A 31-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with the chief complaint of epigastric pain.
His symptoms started several days earlier and had worsened in the last 12 h.
He had been treated for alcoholic hepatitis about five years ago at another hospital, and since then he has reduced his drinking but has not stopped drinking.
Nothing in particular.
His temperature was 36.8 °C, heart rate was 58 bpm, respiratory rate was 12 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 118/72 mmHg, and oxygen saturation on room air was 98%. There was no abnormality on examination other than mild tenderness in his upper abdomen.
Blood tests showed only a slight increase in alkaline phosphatase, and no increase in inflammatory markers or pancreatic enzymes .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a 40-mm-diameter, hypovascular mass in the head of the pancreas. The inside was uneven, and there was a cyst-like, low-density area in some parts. The boundaries were relatively clear. The lesion was heterogeneously and slightly enhanced as the phase progressed. The main pancreatic duct upstream of the mass was severely dilated to 7 mm . The patient quickly improved with conservative treatment, but was evaluated further. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a well-defined, circular, hypoechoic mass in the head of the pancreas . Magnetic resonance imaging showed low intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images, with high intensity on T2-weighted image in some parts. The mass showed high intensity on diffusion-weighted images, and the main pancreatic duct upstream of the mass was extremely dilated on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography . 18F-fluorodexyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography also showed a strong increase in FDG uptake in the mass .
Although the patient was young, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma was the primary differential diagnosis, along with neuroendocrine tumor, adenosquamous carcinoma, anaplastic pancreatic cancer, mass-forming pancreatitis, etc. If this was pancreatic cancer, portal vein infiltration could not be ruled out, and he was a candidate for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. There were two ways to obtain a pathological diagnosis, by EUS-FNA and by pancreatic juice cytology from endoscopic retrograde pancreatography. EUS-FNA was chosen because of the risk of pancreatitis and the accuracy of diagnosis. A 22-gauge needle was used to puncture the mass from the descending duodenum . The pathological evaluation showed a pseudopapillary structure and a pseudorosette structure in some parts. Immunostaining showed that the tumor was β-catenin-positive and CD10-positive, suggesting a diagnosis of SPN .