A 45-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to hospital because of anterior chest pain for the previous 10 days. Our patient’s height and weight were 165cm, and 75kg, respectively. Her review of systems was unremarkable and her physical examinations and laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. An enhanced computed tomography (ECT) scan revealed a 2.4×1.4×2.8cm3 nodule under her left thyroid lobe, mild inflammation in both lungs and a 4×2.5cm2 mass in her anterior mediastinum. Both the nodule and the anterior mediastinal mass displayed higher density in enhanced image, just like thyroid tissue .
Her blood test revealed that levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone and free thyroid hormone were normal. Antithyroglobulin antibodies and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were also within normal range. An ultrasound of her thyroid revealed various hypoechoic nodules in her upper left lobe (the largest one measuring 0.6×0.4cm2) and in her lower right lobe (the largest one measuring 1.2×1.0cm2). Both the color Doppler flow image (CDFI) signals from these nodules were normal. There was another nodule (measuring 2.4×1.4×2.8cm3) under her left lobe and the CDFI signal was between level 1 to 2. No cervical adenopathy was detected and the ultrasound scan of her abdominal organs was normal .Technetium-99m was used to determine whether the anterior mediastinal mass was an ectopic thyroid. Compared with the higher density of radioactivity uptake in thyroid, the anterior mediastinal mass showed no increase in uptake of radioactivity in static imaging .
An anterior mediastinal mass resection was planned to be carried out under video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Total thyroidectomy was not performed as her thyroid function was normal.
The results of commonly ordered preoperative tests, including a laboratory test, pulmonary function and electrocardiogram, met with the requirements of the operation. The patient’s American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status was class II. Advances in anesthetic technique also facilitated proper preoperative management.
Our patient was placed into the right lateral recumbent (RLR) position after total intravenous anesthesia. A video thoracoscope was placed through the port in the seventh intercostal space along the left midaxillary line. Intraoperative exploration demonstrated the anterior superior mediastinum was occupied by the mass. The substernal tumor was located anteromedial to the left innominate vein, without signs of infiltration and well delineated by a capsule, measuring around 3×2cm2, and surrounded by blood vessels derived from intrathoracic blood vessels. The lower part of the mass was easily separated by a coagulation hook and ultrasonic knife, but the upper part was difficult to expose. A transverse neck incision was decided upon to assist the tumor excision as the nodule under her left thyroid was 0.5cm away from the lower part of the lobe, with a well-defined capsule and no obvious connection with the thyroid gland. The surgeon first removed the nodule and further intraoperative findings confirmed the encapsulated anterior mediastinum mass was behind the sternum. It had no connection to the cervical thyroid gland or to the nodule under her left lobe. The mass was separated and removed from the upper incision with thoracoscope assistance. The reports on the frozen sections of the two surgical samples were consistent with ectopic substernal thyroid tissue. A postoperative histopathologic examination of the masses, using hematoxylin and eosin, revealed both of the masses were multinodular goiters . Our patient had no chest pain after the mass resection. Her postoperative period was uneventful and she was discharged three days after surgery.