A 63-year-old female was referred to our clinic for treatment with a 1-week history of moderate pain in the right eye and ipsilateral headache in January 2020.
She underwent cataract surgery on her right eye two years ago and on her left eye one year ago. Her uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) in the right eye was LogMAR 1.70, and LogMAR 1.22 in the left eye. Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was LogMAR 0.70, and LogMAR 0.82 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) in the right eye was 43.2 mmHg and that in the left eye was 28.5 mmHg. Corneal macula was found in the right eye , and the corneal nebula in the left eye . However, there were no obvious corneal edema in both eyes, no significant inflammatory cells and inflammatory reaction in the anterior chamber, no exudation and bleeding was found except choroidal atrophy. The anterior chamber angle of the right eye was closed due to at least 300 degrees of irido-trabecular contact . For the left eye, the anterior chamber angle was closed about 30 degrees due to irido-trabecular contact , and a large amount of the pigment covered the anterior chamber angle.
We considered that the increase of IOP could be possibly caused by ocular inflammation, but what contributed the inflammation was not clear, so we prescribed eye drops for treatment: including tobramycin/dexamethasone and travoprost for both eyes, carteolol and brimonidine tartrate for the right eye. At first, the IOP for both eyes was well controlled, however, three months later, the IOP of the right eye was uncontrolled and increased to 48.4 mmHg, so the patient underwent ciliary body photocoagulation of his right eye after informed consent. The retinal and choroid were the same as before, and no obvious inflammatory changes were noticed. Unfortunately, four months later, the IOP of the right eye was out of control and increased to 45.5 mmHg again. Finally, the right eye accepted ciliary body photocoagulation. Additionally, it was found that bilateral corneal opacities gradually aggravated after cataract surgery., and both eyes showed ciliary hyperemia, especially the right eye .
When we discussed the condition with patient, she told us that the visual acuity of her both eyes had been poor since she was 20 years old. At that time, she suffered from ocular inflammation due to late congenital syphilis for which she received penicillin as treatment. This important information made us to consider that the occurrence of Interstitial keratitis and secondary glaucoma might be related to syphilis, so we carried out her syphilis serological results. In 2018, she received cataract surgery on her right eye in other hospital. Before this surgery, the serologic test for syphilis was positive in blood (Chemiluminescence analysis (CLIA): + ; Toluidine red unheated serum test (TRUST): + , titer was 1:1). In 2019, she received cataract surgery on her left eye in our hospital, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (TP-ELISA) was positive, but TRUST was negative. At that time, we rashly diagnosed her as suffering from inactive syphilis, and thus missed the past diagnosis of congenital syphilis. In June 2020 and August 2021, the serological test results of TP-ELISA were positive, and the results of TRUST were negative. After consultation, the dermatologists believed that the patient had no syphilis active lesions all over the body, and hence she was not administered penicillin treatment.
From January 2020 to August 2021, when there was ciliary hyperemia, corticosteroid eye drops was used to control the excessive inflammation, at a frequency of 4 times/day progressively reduced every week for a total duration of 2 months. Unfortunately, in August 2021, the IOP of her right eye increased to 45 mmHg again, the UCVA of her right eye had fallen to counting fingers/40 cm and could not be rectified, and the corneal stroma was severely opaque and formed corneal leukoplakia. The patient refused further serological examination and aqueous humor test for syphilis, so her right eye was given ciliary body photocoagulation again. At present, the cornea of the right eye has become seriously opaque , the IOP of her right eye is controlled at about 11 mmHg, whereas the IOP of her left eye has remained normal.