A 48-year-old Japanese man suffering from shock was transported by ambulance to our hospital. He recovered consciousness in the ambulance. His medical history included hypoglycemic encephalopathy sequelae, which led to poor performance status, namely disuse syndrome, type 2 diabetic neuropathy, constipation, and transient vasovagal syncope after defecation. He was treated with sitagliptin phosphate, voglibose, and a laxative, and did not take any medicines that could slow bowel movements, such as antidepressive drugs. The patient was unemployed and did not have any food or drug allergies. His family history contained nothing of note; specifically, there was no family history of any immunodeficiency disorder or other congenital anomalies.
The patient was 175 cm tall and weighed 47 kg. His vital signs were abnormal, with blood pressure of 82/52 mmHg, heart rate of 67 beats per minute, body temperature of 35.1 °C, oxygen saturation of 97% in ambient air, and respiratory rate of 16 per minute; his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15 (E4V5M6). Nothing abnormal was detected upon physical examination. The patient’s laboratory findings were normal, including complete blood count, biochemistry, casual blood glucose, ammonia, and urine tests. An abdominal X-ray and arterial-phase dynamic computed tomography revealed a thickened gut wall and an extremely dilated sigmoid colon and rectum filled with a massive amount of stool as well as gas, compressing other intra-abdominal organs . On the other hand, no apparent volvulus or peritonitis was observed. We diagnosed the patient with transient vasovagal syncope, together with abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS), due to extremely elongated sigmoid colon and rectum plus fecal impaction, caused by anorectal disturbance derived from disuse syndrome and diabetic neuropathy.
After discussion with his family, we first repeated stool extraction for bowel decompression, and he subsequently became symptom-free, after which we performed a colostomy on the 28th hospital day to prevent a recurrence. The operation was performed after the patient was symptom-free in order to reduce the risk of intraoperative or postoperative complications. The postoperative course was uncomplicated, and an abdominal X-ray on the 41st hospital day revealed relief of dilated sigmoid colon and rectum together with massive amount of stool . He transferred hospitals on the 44th hospital day in order to continue treatment, and we did not follow him afterwards.