A female 83 years old patient presented with progressively worsening dyspnea started in the previous 3 days associated with orthopnea, and without chest pain. After initial cardiologic screening, and with an abnormal ejection fraction (EF) value, assessed with echocardiography (EF = 31%), the patient was admitted for coronary angiographic evaluation. A right radial approach was used, and nevertheless repeated attempts, catheterization resulted impossible, and then the procedure was stopped, as soon as the patient complained severe pain in the right hemithorax, and marked hypotension and bradycardia were also detected at the same time. A Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) scan was therefore promptly performed that revealed the presence of ARSA, with pseudoaneurysm in the middle third of the artery with blood spreading in the upper posterior region of the mediastinum up to the carina of trachea, and also further downstream to the pseudoaneurysm, the presence of arterial dissection was also reported. It was also evident an abnormal origin of the right vertebral artery which raised from right common carotid artery (a-b).
The patient was therefore promptly transferred to the operating room: after local anesthesia, surgical isolation of the right humeral artery, at the cubital fold, was performed, from where an 8Fr valve introducer was inserted, through which an X-ray Angiography (Xr-A) was performed to confirm and locate the ARSA lesion. Thereafter, we positioned a GORE® VIABAHN® 9 × 100 mm endoprosthesis for the exclusion of the pseudo aneurysm. After 24-hs, the CTA scan revealed correct positioning of the endovascular stentgraft, in correspondence with the lesion of the ARSA and the reported intimal flap slightly further downstream. There were no more evident signs of active bleeding, and the mediastinal hematoma of the upper-posterior mediastinum appeared reduced with a consensual reduction of the compressive effect on the trachea (a-b). After 4 months, the follow up CTA showed correct positioning of the stentgraft and complete resolution of the dissection. At duplex ultrasound of the right upper limb, good arterial circulation was also detected.