A 13-year-old boy (height: 163 kg; weight: 54 kg) was admitted because of fractures of the left femur and ulna and the nasal bone as well as a blowout fracture after a car accident; he also had contusions to the chest wall, heart, and liver. According to his medical history, he had been diagnosed with DMD when he was three years old and had taken steroids. He had mild weakness in his lower limbs, but he could walk normally, and he did not complain of any respiratory distress. We referred the patient to the pediatric department for a preoperative evaluation, and he had no cardiac complications; his electrocardiogram (ECG) also showed normal sinus rhythm with right ventricular hypertrophy. Most of the laboratory findings were normal, but his abnormal findings were as follows: aspartate transaminase, 156.0 U/L; alanine transaminase, 215.7 U/L; creatine kinase (CK), 11196 U/L; CK-MB, 132.6 ng/ml. Mild rhabdomyolysis due to trauma was suspected, and the patient received hydration therapy. His K+ level was 4.00 mEq/L, and his urine output was more than 800 ml/day before surgery. The orthopedic surgeon planned to delay the operation until the swelling subsided and laboratory findings improved; however, he decided to conduct emergency surgery only for the femur fracture because of the risk of nonunion.
Three days after the accident, the patient was transferred to the operating room (OR) for the emergent surgery; baseline measurements were oxygen saturation (SpO2) 100%, noninvasive blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 120 beats/min, end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) 39 mmHg, and esophageal temperature 37.4oC. Anesthesia was induced using 250 mg of thiopental sodium and 35 mg of rocuronium and was maintained using 1% vol of sevoflurane with a fresh gas flow of 3 L/min of N2O/oxygen mixture. At the end of surgery, he recovered adequate respiration (train-of-four > 99%) with 10 mg of pyridostigmine and 0.4 mg of glycopyrrolate. The surgery time was 2 hours, and the administered fluid and estimated blood loss were 600 ml and 20 ml, respectively. All of his vital signs were maintained within 20% of the baseline, and there were no changes on the ECG or specific complications during the surgery. The patient’s mental state was clear, and he was transferred to the recovery room.
On arrival in the recovery room, the patient could answer questions, and he complained of pain in his leg. His vital signs were noninvasive blood pressure 119/70 mmHg, HR 90 beats/min, SpO2 98%, and ear temperature 36.3oC . Approximately 2 minutes later, he became cyanotic and apneic, and his HR on the ECG showed 7 beats/min; the ECG showed an irregular ventricular wide-complex sine wave without a p wave. CPR was started, and 1 mg of epinephrine was administered. During the CPR, the patient underwent endotracheal intubation and arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA), and the ABGA was repeated approximately every 15 minutes after the CPR. An arterial blood gas test revealed pH 6.530, PaO2 38.9 mmHg, PaCO2 97.8 mmHg, base excess (BE) −32.4 mEq/L, Na+ 132.8 mEq/L, K+ 9.60 mEq/L, and hematocrit 38% . Cardiac arrest due to hyperkalemia was suspected, and 20 ml of 3% calcium chloride, 10 unit of regular insulin, and 80 mEq of sodium bicarbonate were administered ; the patient achieved return of spontaneous circulation, and his blood pressure and heart rate became 80/35 mmHg and 40 beats/min, respectively. He was moved back to the OR for further monitoring and management and for effective CPR. External pacing was attempted, but there was no response. Continuous infusions of dobutamine, norepinephrine, and vasopressin were started, and mechanical ventilation (MV) was maintained with 5 L/min of 100% O2. However, cardiovascular collapse developed again about 5 minutes later and CPR was applied. Despite treatment with multiple doses of insulin, calcium chloride, and sodium bicarbonate, the patient’s K+ concentration did not reduce below 8.06 mmol/Eq, and the cardiovascular collapse repeated itself. Moreover, pulmonary edema developed, and peak inspiratory pressure increased more than 40 mmHg. The ABGA showed sustained acidosis (pH < 7.0), hypercarbia (PaCO2 > 90 mmHg), hypoxia (PaO2 < 50 mmHg), and hyperkalemia (K+ > 8.06 mEq/L).
After the fourth cardiovascular collapse, we decided to apply ECMO. We consulted with the cardiothoracic surgeon about using ECMO not only for cardiac and respiratory support but also to eliminate excess K+ using hemofiltration. The cardiothoracic surgeon suggested the use of in-line hemofiltration with ECMO and prepared for surgery; arterial and venous cannulas (Biomedicus®, Medtronic, USA) were inserted into the patient’s right femoral artery and vein. The hemofilter (Hemofiltration kit, Dideco, Italy) was connected between the pump and the arterial line of the ECMO circuit to remove excess K+ and water. ECMO was started 90 minutes after the first cardiac arrest, and blood flow was maintained about 3.0 L/min.
About 30 minutes after starting ECMO, laboratory results showed significant improvement and there was no further cardiac arrest ( and ). About 1 hour after the ECMO, ABGA showed almost normal pH (7.289), PaCO2 (38.9 mmHg), and PaO2 (200.8 mmHg), and lower serum K+ concentration (5.97 mEq/L). During the CPR and surgery for ECMO, 3,000 ml of fluids were administered, urine output was 300 ml, and estimated volume of bleeding was 200 ml. Then, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and sedated using dexmedetomidine and remifentanil. Under suspicion of severe rhabdomyolysis, the patient’s serum CK, myoglobin, and urine myoglobin were measured. CK had increased to 242,340 U/L after cardiac arrest and decreased to 539 U/L after 26 days of treatment , and serum and urine myoglobin had increased by more than 3,000 and 20,000 ng/ml, respectively, both of which exceeded the measurable value, and decreased to 2,359 and 1,438 ng/ml after 20 days, also respectively .
In the ICU, the patient remained on ECMO support for 3 days. Although he had suffered from pneumonia, his vital signs were improving, but AKI secondary to myoglobinemia developed. At first, the patient maintained urine output more than 500 ml/h, but urine output decreased to less than 80 ml/h on the 3rd day after the ECMO. Moreover, intra-arterial thrombosis of the right femoral artery developed. Thus, we weaned the patient from the ECMO and MV, performed angioplasty of the femoral artery, and applied continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) simultaneously because his vital signs stabilized. The patient was successfully weaned from ECMO and MV, and CRRT was started with a newly inserted central venous catheter in the left internal jugular vein. His condition improved daily, and all inotropics and vasopressors were stopped on the 5th day. After 10 days from the start of CRRT, the patient’s renal functions had recovered, and he was successfully weaned from CRRT.
The patient was discharged from the ICU after 21 days of treatment and moved to the ward. Unfortunately, he required surgical disarticulation of his right leg because of angiopathy following the ECMO and the long rehabilitation treatment. However, he successfully recovered from the cardiac arrest by hyperkalemia due to massive rhabdomyolysis with the combination of ECMO and in-line hemofiltration.