A previously healthy 20 year old African American female with T1DM (diagnosed at age 10, last HgbA1c = 7.8%) is referred to Pediatric gastroenterology for 2 months of nocturnal, non-bloody diarrhea, left lower quadrant pain, and nausea. Her review of systems was remarkable for normal daytime bowel movements. She also complained of lower extremity pains with numbness for which she had been referred to neurology for concerns of diabetic neuropathy.
Her past medical history was remarkable for T1DM without history of diabetic ketoacidosis (Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (13.1 U/mL) and Islet Antigen-2 Autoantibody were positive at time of diagnosis), IgA deficiency, and high risk for celiac disease with HLA DQ2 heterozygosity. Family history revealed a father with hyperlipidemia and hypertension and a maternal grandfather with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, but otherwise no family medical history of gastrointestinal or autoimmune pathologies. Psychosocial history, including HEADSS (Home, Education, Activities, Drug/alcohol use, suicidality, and sexual activity) assessment, was reassuring. Physical exam during her pediatric gastroenterology appointment was benign, including abdominal exam. A neurological exam was performed by pediatric neurology for her symptoms of lower extremity pain and numbness and was remarkable for slightly diminished sensation to vibration and pinprick in bilateral toes, but otherwise normal motor and strength testing, reflexes, and cranial nerve function. While undergoing further work-up with pediatric gastroenterology, the patient was trialled on Bisacodyl, which did not improve her gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient’s initial lab-workup was remarkable for a low total IgA of < 6.7 mg/dL . The selective IgA deficiency and lower tract symptoms increased the gastroenterologist’s concern for Celiac disease or ulcerative colitis. Irritable bowel syndrome was also considered as a potential diagnosis.
The patient underwent upper and lower endoscopy which was grossly unremarkable; however histology revealed a pattern consistent with autoimmune gastritis (as demonstrated in Fig. ). Biopsies were negative for Heliobacter pylori. Subsequent serum evaluation was consistent with pathologic diagnosis, demonstrating an elevated fasting gastrin level and an elevated parietal cell antibody level without macrocytic anemia or vitamin B12 depletion, further supporting a diagnosis of AIG. Celiac disease was excluded based on gold standard diagnostics, to include upper endoscopy with small bowel biopsies, which did not demonstrate the typical pathologic pattern of celiac disease (i.e. damage to or flattening of villi, increased intraepithelial lymphocytes, crypt hyperplasia).
The patient was subsequently initiated on B12 supplementation therapy, administered as a 1000 mcg injection once a week for 8 weeks, with subsequent resolution of her lower extremity symptoms, improvement in her gastrointestinal symptoms, and continued normal Vitamin B12 levels and complete blood counts. Thereafter, plans for further treatment were to be guided by the patient’s symptomatology and regular lab screening for vitamin B12 deficiency and anemia.