A 51 year old female was admitted to our hospital with complaints of dyspnea on exertion and chest pain radiating towards the back and right arm for 3 months. She was a known case of hypertension and osteoarthritis of both knees, and had a positive family history for ischemic heart disease. On examination, the first and second heart sounds were normal and a III/VI systolic murmur was heard at the apex with radiation to the left axilla.
Upon investigating, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed thickened rolled up and prolapsed anterior mitral leaflet with severe mitral regurgitation (MR). A Trans-Esophageal Echocardiography (TEE) revealed thickened anterior mitral valve leaflet with rolled up margins, forming an aneurysm, with severe mitral regurgitation but no rupture of sub-valvular apparatus . The posterior leaflet was also thickened with rolled up tips with mild prolapse of P1/P3. Mitral valve annulus measured about 42 mm. A diagnosis of mitral valve aneurysm along with severe MR was made, with prolapse of both leaflets and a grade II left ventricular diastolic dysfunction.
Subsequently, an elective surgery was scheduled for mitral valve repair +/− replacement. Median sternotomy approach was taken. Cardiac arrest was achieved with antegrade cardioplegia, under cardiopulmonary bypass and the usual state of moderate hypothermia was maintained. Mitral valve was approached through the left atrium and the findings of anterior mitral leaflet aneurysm were confirmed. The severely thickened valve was grossly evaluated again and assessed for repair but it was not possible due to severely distorted leaflets, hence most of the anterior leaflet and part of the posterior leaflet had to be excised , and replaced with a Hancock II 29 mm valve. On histopathological examination, the valve tissue revealed nonspecific degenerative changes microscopically, with no significant inflammation, atypia or malignancy. Post-operative course of the patient was uneventful; as of this writing, the patient has remained in good health, with regular follow-ups and echocardiography.