A 22-year-old immunocompetent female was referred to Ophir Loyola Hospital presenting a 6-day history of tetraparesis, which was worst in the left hemibody, appendicular tremor, and left upper eyelid ptosis. On admission, the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 13, and she presented tetraparesis, which was worst in left hemibody, ataxia, hypoesthesia of the left side of the face and the left hemibody, left upper eyelid ptosis, right 6th cranial nerve paresis, right peripheral facial paralysis, vertigo, and nausea. She could not walk and was using a nasogastric tube. No other alterations were observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed an encapsulated lesion with peripheral contrast in the brainstem (pons and midbrain), suggestive of abscess; after spectrometric study, the lesion measured 18.7 mm axially and 23.2 mm sagittally . In addition, chest computed tomography (CT) showed a right pulmonary intraparenchymal lesion suggestive of fungus, and biopsy of the collected pulmonary fragment demonstrated pulmonary tissue and bronchial mucosa without significant histological changes and with no granulomas or atypia. All bacterial cultures and serological tests were negative. The liquor was cloudy and purulent, with 15872 cells, 85 erythrocytes, 100% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and total protein: 149 mg/dL. Therapy with vancomycin (2 g/day), meropenem (3 g/day), and dexamethasone was introduced. On the 4th day of hospitalization, phenytoin was added to the therapeutic regimen. Every 15 days, MRI of the brain was performed to monitor evolution, and the images indicated a gradual decrease in the size of the abscess.
On the 42nd day of hospitalization, the patient underwent a new chest CT that showed improvement in lung injury, and a presumptive diagnosis of nocardiosis was established by a pneumologist. Thus, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg + 800 mg) was added to the antibiotic regimen.
On the 49th day of hospitalization, after 8 weeks of vancomycin and meropenem and 2 weeks of trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole, the patient was discharged. On physical examination, she was conscious and oriented, with GCS 15 and normal reflexes, presenting retardation of movement of the arm, strength graduated on 4/5 of the left arm, and hypoesthesia of the left hemibody. In addition, the patient presented with right 6th cranial nerve paresis and right peripheral facial paralysis and did not walk. The image examination showed a lesion measuring 4.9 mm (axially) × 11 mm (sagittally) . The patient was prescribed outpatient treatment with ciprofloxacin (500 mg/day) for 2 weeks and prednisone (40 mg/day) for 2 months, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg + 800 mg) was maintained for more 30 days.
After 2 weeks, she returned to the neurosurgery ambulatory service; she was walking with support and had right 6th cranial nerve paresis, right peripheral facial paralysis, diplopia, and GCS 15.