A 44-year-old Italian woman was diagnosed as having hiatal hernia, confirmed with a new endoscopic examination in January 2018 associated with grade A esophagitis. She has history of refractory GERD, which was treated 15 years ago with esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
She reported several failed attempts of proton pump inhibitor therapy. In the last 3 years, she had various admissions to the emergency room due to violent epigastralgia associated with dyspnea and dysphagia, tachycardia, and vomiting.
Her past medical history includes hypertension well controlled by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, asthma aggravated by tobacco smoking, and surgical treatment of endometriosis. She was subjected to gynecological and pneumological examinations during her hospital stay before surgery. There were no other surgical interventions abdominal or thoracic; there was no traumatic history. She had a familial history of arterial hypertension. She smoked approximately 20 cigarettes a day, consumed alcohol occasionally, she preferred carbonated drinks.
Physical and neurological examinations were not relevant, showing only a palpatory mild pain in the epigastrium and left hypochondrium, inferior liver margin at 1–2 cm below the ribs costal margin, and no other peculiar findings. On admission her blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg, breathing 18 breaths per minute, pulse 80 beats per minute, and temperature 36.5 °C. Complete blood count and liver and renal functions were within normal parameters.
Her imaging showed:
chest X-ray – “a coarse opacity area with a conspicuous air–fluid level in the inferior mediastinum attributable to the hiatal hernia”; upper gastrointestinal tract radiography – “presence of voluminous hernia of part of the gastric body with cardia in place, paraesophageal hernia with rotation of the stomach.”
Therefore, she was diagnosed as having hiatal PEH type II, and in September 2018 she underwent robotic Nissen fundoplication . The intraoperative findings showed a voluminous hiatal hernia comprising 75% of the stomach, with the gastric bottom and the gastric body herniated through the esophageal hiatus and rotated .
In our center at the Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences of the University of Foggia, we use the da Vinci® Xi™ Surgical System, an advanced tool for minimally invasive surgery. This system acts as a natural extension of a surgeon’s eyes and hands, through a combination of cutting-edge robotics, three-dimensional stereoscopic vision, and intuitive human-interface controls.
Our patient was positioned supine with both arms tucked in the anti-Trendelenburg position. The procedure was performed using five ports . An 8 mm Opt iView trocar with a 0° scope was placed in the supraumbilical position to obtain peritoneal access under direct visualization, and a pneumoperitoneum was created. Two other 8 mm trocars were on the left side of her navel: one at the right another 8 mm and a 12 mm AirSeal access port for the assistant. After this, the robot was attached to the left shoulder of our patient.
The surgeon then started the dissection at the surgeon’s console. The hernia contents were reduced to expose the hiatus. The gastrohepatic ligament was moved, and the right crus was exposed. The procedure was started at the right crus, and the sac was bluntly separated from the mediastinal tissue, while dividing the sac circumferentially at the hiatal orifice. The short gastric vessels were moved to expose the left crus and complete the circumferential dissection, and this completely reduced the intrathoracic sac and moved any remaining contents into the abdomen.
An anterior crural repair was then performed using multiple interrupted polyfilament suture with intracorporeal knotting. A 360° Nissen fundoplication was performed, with placement of tubular drainage.
Then, the robot was undocked after removing the liver retractor under direct vision. Fascial layers were closed. All port sites were then closed with subcuticular stitches.
Our patient presented a postoperative course without complications and was discharged on the sixth postoperative day.
One month after surgery our patient underwent upper gastrointestinal tract radiography, which highlighted: “normal esophageal transit with normal aspect of the walls, cardia in place without evident refluxes. Regular canalization of the stomach, pylorus, and jejunal loops” .
Six months after surgery we visited our patient, who denied nausea, vomiting, epigastralgia, and dysphagia and who noted a lifestyle improvement.
To investigate robotic PEH repair, a literature search was conducted using PubMed with the following key words: mini invasive surgery, robotic surgery, hiatal hernia, Nissen fundoplication. Only articles written in English were selected for primary review. The following data elements were extracted from articles that met the stated inclusion criteria: lead author, publication year, study design, inclusion and exclusion criteria, number of surgeries performed, morbidity, and mortality rates. Articles were excluded from the study if they focused on methods other than robotic surgery.