The patient, a 71-year-old man, was hospitalized for a second course of anti-PD-L1 + IP (durvalumab + irinotecan + cisplatin) treatment at the Department of Oncology of Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, (Shanghai, China) to manage lung cancer with liver metastasis, which was diagnosed 1 mo previously.
The patient originally presented with a cough that had lasted 2 mo and middle abdominal pain. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which showed a high-density mass in the middle lobe of the right lung, and chronic inflammation in the lower lobe of both lungs. An upper abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was then performed, showing the presence of abnormal signal foci in the liver, with a high probability of metastases . A pathological examination of right lung lobe puncture specimen was consistent with the presence of a poorly differentiated carcinoma (small cell carcinoma).
From January 10, 2022, the patient was treated with anti-PD-L1 + IP: Durvalumab (1500 mg, AstraZeneca) on day 1, together with irinotecan (115 mg, Pfizer) and cisplatin (50 mg, Teva Pharma) on days 1 and 8. No obvious adverse effects were recorded over the next 21 d. Therefore, the patient received the second dose on February 1, 2022. After 4 d of treatment, the patient presented mild diarrhea (3-4 times/d); however, there was no significant improvement in symptoms after taking antidiarrheal medication. The patient’s symptoms worsened, with dark-red bloody diarrhea (6-10 times/d) at a volume of about 50-100 mL each time, and moderate abdominal pain. The patient was transferred to the Department of Gastroenterology on February 6, 2022 for further therapy.
The patient had no notable medical history.
The patient had no specific personal or family history.
The patient weighed 61 kg and had a body mass index of 18.81. The patient’s temperature was normal. He had rough tracheal sounds, and there were no obvious lung rale (bubbling, clicking, or rattling). His abdomen was soft and flat, with tenderness in the left lower part.
The complete blood cell count revealed severe anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 69 g/L, and a normal platelet count. The patient had a high C-reactive protein level of 45 mg/L, and a high white blood cell count (10.4 × 109/L). The transaminases were slightly elevated (alanine aminotransferase, 62 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 59 U/L). Urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were normal. Blood electrolytes, prothrombin, and partial thromboplastin levels were normal. His electrocardiogram was also normal. Further investigation included evaluation for intestinal infectious diseases, such as Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. All results were negative based on blood serology. Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection was excluded by histocytotoxin testing.
Abdominal CT and mesenteric artery CT angiography (CTA) were performed to exclude colonic malignant tumor, colonic perforation, and ischemic enteritis. Gastroscopy showed the presence of chronic atrophic gastritis, while colonoscopy showed the presence of mucosal congestion, edema, and roughness, indistinct vascular texture, multiple diffuse superficial ulcers with a purulent discharge, and a white moss adhering to the surface below the transverse colon, 40 cm from the anus. Endoscopic examination diagnosed the presence of multiple ulcers in the colon (from the descending colon to the rectum) . Colonoscopic pathology showed the presence of multiple sites containing an intestinal mucosa with localized purulent exudate and necrosis. These features indicated multifocal ulcer formation, surrounding mucosal erosion, marked interstitial hemorrhagic edema, crypt atrophy, and focal glandular epithelium with mild heterogeneous hyperplasia. Immunohistochemistry showed that tissue samples were CMV (-) and EBER (-) .