A 65-year-old lady had a domestic fall following which she was taken to a private hospital nearby where she was diagnosed as having intertrochanteric fracture of the right femur and was operated the next day with short cephalomedullary nailing. The operation was uneventful, and she was recovering well with subsequent rehabilitation post-surgery. She started noticing a slowly enlarging painful swelling in her medial aspect of the right thigh after a month of surgery. She was also complaining of weakness and vertigo and, therefore, was taken to the index surgeon. After reviewing fresh radiographs, which was reported unremarkable, the treating surgeon referred her to a general physician. Her hemoglobin was found to be on the lower side (6.9 g/dl) for which she had undergone two units of packed red cell transfusion and was advised iron supplement. She remained fine for a few weeks, but again, her condition started deteriorating and was kept on symptomatic management and received two more units of packed red cell transfusion. Finally, she was referred to our institution for further management 3 months after the index surgery.
She was ambulatory with walker support. Past medical history included hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis. On examination, she looked pale and her vitals were stable. There was a tender, firm, ill-defined swelling over anteromedial aspect of the proximal part of right thigh; there was no erythema, overlying skin was intact, regional lymph nodes were not palpable, and hip range-of-motion of the affected side was painful. There was no pulsation or bruit felt over the swelling, and her distal pulses and capillary refilling were optimum. Routine laboratory, biochemical, and coagulation parameters were within normal range except for low hemoglobin levels (8.2 g/dl). Repeat radiographs of the extremity revealed satisfactory alignment and fixation of Intertrochanteric fracture with short cephalomedullary nail; there was a soft tissue shadow on medial aspect of the proximal femur with no evidence of calcification, cortical erosion, or periosteal reaction. Duplex ultrasound demonstrated an anechoic saccular lesion with characteristic “yin-yang” sign suggestive of PSA arising from right PFA . We, therefore, proceeded with right lower limb digital subtraction angiography (DSA) which confirmed PSA measuring 6.4 ×4.5 cm with a narrow neck. Selective embolization was performed at the same setting with 2 microcoils of size 18.2.0.2; post coiling image revealed complete occlusion of the PSA and good filling of the PFA proximal to the PSA . The procedure was uneventful; she had a speedy recovery and discharged after 5 days. Follow-up duplex ultrasound demonstrated thrombosed PSA sac. At 9 months following embolization, she is free from symptoms with the resolution of swelling and healing of fracture as well.