A 72-year-old female presented with a Fisher Grade 3 and World Federation of Neurological Societies Grade V aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and an acute left traumatic subdural hematoma (SDH) post fall [Figure and ]. Cerebral angiography showed a superiorly projecting 5.5×3.4×3.7 mm3 aneurysm arising from the supraclinoid internal carotid artery (ICA) . The aneurysm incorporates the origin of the right ophthalmic artery and has a 2.5 mm neck. A left ophthalmic artery aneurysm and bilateral cavernous ICA aneurysms were also found.
She underwent balloon assisted coiling of the right paraophthalmic aneurysm using microvention coils one day after the SAH . The right ophthalmic artery remained patent with partial contrast opacification of a loosely packed anteroinferior aneurysm adjacent to the ophthalmic artery origin.
Angiography one week post coiling showed severe vasospasm of the bilateral A1s and its distal branches [Figure and ]. The patient was treated with intra-arterial verapamil and nimodipine. Repeat angiography one day later showed ongoing severe stenosis in bilateral A1s and the patient was again treated with intra-arterial vasodilators with improvement in the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) vessel caliber and perfusion to the ACA territory. She remained clinically stable with ongoing mild left hemiparesis post-procedure.
Three weeks after the intra-arterial treatment, the patient became hemodynamically unstable and developed a right sided hemiparesis. CT scan showed evolution of the left acute SDH into a chronic SDH with mass effect. She underwent an uneventful burr hole evacuation of the left SDH with resolution of her right-sided hemiparesis.
Her post-treatment course was complicated by vasospasm requiring two take backs for endovascular intra-arterial treatment and evacuation of the left SDH. CT one month after admission showed a new 27×25 mm2 low density area in the right posterior frontal lobe suggestive of ischemia. She remained a febrile with no signs of meningism, however, developed worsening left-sided hemiparesis and confusion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed significant enhancement around the coil mass and multiple ring-enhancing lesions in the right frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes with surrounding edema [Figure -]. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed a small anterior protrusion into the supraophthalmic portion of the right ICA.
Intra-arterial blood distal to the coils was obtained for culture. Attempted biopsy of the emboli was abandoned after post sampling angiography showed a filling defect at the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation. Repeat right ICA angiography showed clearance at the MCA bifurcation with migration of the thrombus to a single M2/M3 branch. Thrombectomy was not attempted because of the risks of hemorrhage in the setting of possible infective arteritis. Peripheral and intra-arterial blood cultures were negative. White cell count WCC, C-reactive protein (CRP), and chest X-Ray (CXR) were unremarkable. Transesophageal echocardiogram was negative for valvular vegetations. She was commenced on dexamethasone and intravenous vancomycin 1g BD, ceftriaxone 2g BD, and fluconazole 400 mg. Tissue biopsy was not taken in light of antibiotic commencement and the likelihood of obtaining a sterile sample.
One month after the commencement of antimicrobial therapy, MRI brain demonstrated resolution of many of the enhancing foci with significant decrease in the size of the surrounding vasogenic edema [Figure -] despite corticosteroids being ceased two weeks prior. Patient remained clinically stable with significant improvement in her left-sided hemiparesis and was discharged to rehabilitation for further therapy.