An 18-year-old Arab male from Saudi Arabia, presented with headache and vomiting. The patient was irritable, confused, and febrile. He had neck rigidity and left sided hemiplegia. Investigations revealed a high white blood cell count. CT scan and MRI of brain showed extensive subdural collection of pus bilaterally, more so on the right side.
Subdural empyema was drained through bilateral burr holes. Patient received metronidazole and ceftriaxone. Pus was cultured but showed no growth even after 21 days. The patient’s condition improved and he was discharged after 3 weeks.
Three months later he was brought to the Emergency Room with headache and altered sensorium. CT scan of brain with contrast showed a ring enhancing lesion in the left temporo-parietal region. Keeping in view his past history and radiological features of the lesion, a diagnosis of cerebral abscess was made. The abscess was approached through a burr hole and thick yellow pus was aspirated. A drain was left in the abscess cavity. As before, there was no growth on bacterial or fungal cultures.
Cefotaxime, penicillin and metronidazole were given, but fever and neck stiffness persisted. After twelve days, antibiotics were changed to metronidazole, vancomycin and amikacin. The patient continued to deteriorate and a week later ceftazidime and teicoplanin therapy was begun, without any improvement.
After five days, intravenous chloramphenicol was given for three days and then orally for another four days, after which no more chloramphenicol was available at our institution. Following this short course of chloramphenicol therapy, the patient’s fever subsided, WBC count returned to normal, and there were clear signs of clinical improvement. CT scan was repeated and showed resolution of abscess cavity.
The patient continued to improve and became conscious. He became mobile and was discharged after a total of three months in-hospital stay. A follow up in clinic three weeks later, showed almost complete neurological recovery with mild weakness on right side and a slight limp on walking.