A 36-year-old male patient with no other medical conditions presented to our outpatient clinic with a history of weak urine stream, dysuria, frequency and urgency for the preceding 3 years. The patient was diagnosed in another hospital with prostatitis and given a full course of ciprofloxacin resulting in no improvement. His medical history was not significant in terms of previous urinary tract infections, urethral catheterization, perineal trauma or ejaculatory issues.
His International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was 22, while his score for quality of life due to urinary symptoms was 5. A digital rectal examination revealed a firm, nontender prostate without palpable nodules. Urine analysis results were normal, and culture was sterile. Urine cytology was not suggestive of malignancy. His serum prostatic-specific antigen (PSA) level was 0.875 mcg/l. Other biochemical laboratory examinations were within normal ranges. The maximum flow rate was 6 ml/s with a flat curve.
Pelvic ultrasound revealed a cyst measuring 1.5*1.2 cm that was most likely associated with the proximal part of the prostate gland. The full volume of the urinary bladder was 476 ml, and the postvoiding residual volume was 127 ml. The prostate gland was 38 g .
CT urography was performed to exclude an ectopic ureterocele. A prostatic cyst measuring 1.5*1.4 cm in size was present at the midline of the upper part of the bladder neck region .
MRI revealed a prostatic cyst measuring 1.6*1.3 cm with no clear communication with the urethra .
The patient was scheduled to undergo transurethral resection of the cyst. Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent cystourethroscopy with a 17 French flexible cystoscope. The cyst was obstructing and located at the bladder neck. Due to the age of the patient and the potential risk of retrograde ejaculation, a decision was made to incise the cyst. Retroflexion of the cystoscope clearly revealed the cyst (-B). Therefore, using retroflexion of the cystoscope, a transverse incision was performed in the superior part of the cyst using Holmium Laser. No intraoperative complications were observed (-C).
Postoperatively, the patient complained of minor hematuria and dysuria, which resolved a few days later. The patient’s lower urinary tract symptoms resolved immediately. His last follow-up examination at six months postoperatively showed no recurrence of lower urinary tract symptoms.