A 30-year-old male with no medical history was admitted to the nearby hospital with a worsening cough and low-grade fever that had persisted for a month. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed an abscess in the left lower lobe of his lung, and clinical laboratory tests showed elevated white blood cells of 13,200/μl (normal range, 4000–8000/μl) and C-reactive protein of 5.97 mg/dl (normal range, < 0.40 mg/dl). Treatment with sulbactam/ampicillin was initiated. Since no improvements were confirmed by the imaging and laboratory findings, antimicrobial treatment was changed to tazobactam/piperacillin on day 3 post admission, and was subsequently changed to meropenem (MEPM) on day 25 post admission. Treatment with voriconazole (VRCZ) was added on day 17 post admission because his β-D-glucan level reached to 123 pg/ml (normal range, < 20 pg/ml). However, it was discontinued 8 days later. Transbronchial biopsy and bronchoalveolar lavage performed to assess the mass did not detect malignancy or significant levels of bacteria, including mycobacteria and fungi. On day 27, the patient was referred to our tertiary center for further examination and treatment by specialists in respirology and infection and potential thoracic surgery. Since the definitive diagnosis could not be made, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further examination and treatment on day 27.
On admission, his vital signs were as follows: a body temperature of 36.6 °C, blood pressure of 120/66 mmHg, heart rate of 84 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 12 breaths per minute. The arterial oxygen saturation measured via pulse oximetry was 98% in the examination room. A physical examination including respiratory sound revealed no significant finding. Clinical laboratory tests showed that the patient had elevated C-reactive protein levels of 15.56 mg/dl (normal range, < 0.40 mg/dl) and his Aspergillus antigen test was positive (cut-off index of 3.5). Human immunodeficiency virus antibody and interferon-gamma releasing assay were negative. In addition, the β-D-glucan level decreased to a normal range (14.7 pg/ml). Chest X-ray and contrast-enhanced CT were performed on admission. Chest X-ray showed an infiltrative shadow in the left lower lung field , and CT showed a massive lesion in the left lower lobe of the lung, emphysematous changes, ectatic bronchi, and a nodular lesion that was thought to contain a mucoid impaction within its lingular segment. The bronchus was disrupted proximal to the mass lesion of the left lower lobe . Consequently, bronchial atresia in the inferior and anterior basal segments of the left lung was suspected based on imaging findings. Since the presence of a malignant lesion could not be excluded, bronchoscopy was performed on day 2 after transfer to our hospital. An endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration was performed on the small mass lesion near the left second carina . The disrupted bronchus could not be confirmed via bronchoscopy because the disrupted site was located too peripherally. Histopathological analyses revealed no malignant findings, but presence of a filamentous fungus was indicated in Grocott staining . Although cultures did not detect any microorganisms, based on these findings, a lung abscess due to Aspergillus spp. was suspected. Therefore, VRCZ was reintroduced on day 9 after transfer. To perform treatment and confirm the suspected diagnosis of a lung abscess due to an Aspergillus infection, the patient underwent surgical resection of the lingular and basal segments of the left lung on day 22 after transfer. The abscess formation was macroscopically confirmed , and histopathological examination revealed emphysematous changes and ectatic bronchi within the lingular and left basal segments . These findings were compatible with bronchial atresia , and no malignant lesions were confirmed. Although histopathological analyses did not reveal filamentous fungus, a tissue culture resulted in A. fumigatus growth. MEPM and intravenous VRCZ were continued for a total of 4 weeks and 3 weeks, respectively, and the patient was discharged on day 32 after transfer with continuing oral treatment with VRCZ. VRCZ was discontinued 5 months after the initiation of treatment because of poor medication compliance and the side effect of alopecia, and subsequent recurrence of the infection has not been confirmed.