In 2003, a 27-year-old woman was referred to our hospital due to limited exercise capacity and progressive fatigue. She reported on flulike symptoms 3-month before the first presentation and no full recovery since then. She had no history of palpitations or syncope, no chest pain, and the physical examination was without pathological findings. Particularly, she had no peripheral oedema, no heart murmur, and a normal respiratory examination. She had no history of malignancy, radiation, or diabetes, and denied alcohol abuse or intake of cardiotoxic drugs. Her only long-term medication at the first presentation was an oral contraceptive.
Family history up to the time of the first presentation revealed sudden cardiac death (SCD) in one grandmother, two aunts (22 and 60), and one cousin (26). The aunt deceased at age 60 had been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy with atrial amyloid deposition with severe diastolic heart failure. The past medical history of the other deceased family members was not known. The patient’s mother had a history of recurrent, therapy-resistant atrial fibrillation (AF), as well as a restrictive filling pattern with preserved systolic function in echocardiography. She had received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for recurrent syncopes due to ventricular tachycardia. One remaining cousin had been diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Laboratory measurements revealed elevated N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of 896 ng/L (normal 1–75 years: <125 ng/L). All other laboratory measurements were within the normal range, including D-Dimers and parameters of infection. Electrocardiography (ECG) was unremarkable. Echocardiography showed normal systolic function, normal biventricular chamber- and right atrial size, and normal wall thickness. The left atrium (LA) was moderately dilated (46 mm). Coronary artery disease was excluded in angiography. Haemodynamic tracing showed normal filling pressures at rest, but pathologically high pulmonary artery pressures at exertion [56/26/36 mmHg (Psys, Pdiast, Pmean)]. Screening for the three most frequent genes causing hereditary cardiomyopathy (MYH7, TNNT2, MYBPC3) was unremarkable.
Endomyocardial biopsy showed low-level inflammatory cell infiltration, ICAM-1 overexpression, and parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA was detected in one out of the three biopsy specimens. The patient was diagnosed with clinically mild inflammatory cardiomyopathy accompanying a recent upper respiratory tract infection and discharged with the recommendation for regular ambulatory clinical and echocardiographic follow-up at her city of residence to ensure early detection of possible progression.
Only after a symptom-free interval of 13 years, however, in 2017, the patient was readmitted to our centre due to rapid clinical deterioration. She now suffered from dyspnoea New York Heart Association III and palpitations. Electrocardiography showed AF and no Q-, ST-, or T-wave abnormalities. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide was now elevated to 5079 ng/L. All other laboratory measurements were within the normal range.
Echocardiography still showed near-normal systolic function and normal biventricular chamber size but a marked bi-atrial dilatation (LA Vol. 141 mL, right atrium Vol. 64 mL, ), evidence of compromised diastolic function with a restrictive filling pattern and a small circular pericardial effusion (8 mm max.). Strain rate imaging was unremarkable. There was no pericardial thickening or calcification.
Haemodynamic re-evaluation in angiography at rest now showed elevated LV end-diastolic pressure (18 mmHg) with a considerable difference to the right ventricular end-diastolic pressure (12 mmHg), pulmonary hypertension, and a restrictive diastolic filling pattern with a dip-plateau configuration in ventricular diastolic tracings. To exclude constrictive pericarditis as a differential cause for this haemodynamic pattern, LV-filling pressure gradients were measured during respiration phases and showed no discordance of intracavitary and intrathoracic pressures.
A working diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) was made. To identify the specific RCM-subtype, cardiac magnet resonance imaging and endomyocardial biopsy were undertaken. Neither identified an infiltrative- or storage disease, cardiac fibrosis or iron-overload as possible causative pathology. There was no residual inflammation. No (auto)antibodies were found.
Given the highly suspicious family history, genetic analysis by high-sensitive next-generation sequencing covering 218 genes clinically relevant to arrhythmias and cardiomyopathies was applied. A plausible candidate variant was located in one copy of the patient’s TNNI3 gene (NP_000354.4: p.Lys193Glu/NC_000019.9: g.55663258T>C, ). This variant is unknown and is to date unpublished. It is absent in the general population and located in a highly conserved, functionally critical region of the gene . The evolutionarily conserved C-terminal peptide of troponin I is an independently configured regulatory structure acting as a myofilament Ca2+ desensitizer and is important for the inhibitory activity of the protein. Other variants affecting this domain have frequently been associated with SCD. In a prior study of mutations in this region, 9 out of 50 cases presented with RCM and half had diastolic dysfunction. Although the new variant we describe has not been functionally evaluated directly, it thus seems a very likely pathogenic driver.
To date, there is no specific causal treatment for RCM. Guidelines recommend symptomatic treatment including management of heart failure symptoms and, if possible, treatment of the underlying cause. From 2004, the patient had received an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (Ramipril, 5 mg once daily, to date) prescribed by her home physician. At the first manifestation of AF, oral anticoagulation with an anti-Xa inhibitor (Rivaroxaban, 20 mg once daily, 2017–18) was initiated. A beta-blocker treatment with Bisoprolol (1.25 mg once daily) was not tolerated due to symptomatic bradycardia. To avoid future decompensation after several relapses of haemodynamically unfavourable persistent AF, radiofrequency pulmonary vein isolation was conducted in 2018. Significant fluid congestion became clinically apparent in 2018. To reduce volume overload, the patient received low-dose diuretic medication (Torasemid, 5 mg, to date). As cardiac output in RCM-patients relies on high filling pressures, this was especially carefully monitored to avoid excessive diuresis. After restoration of a stable sinus rhythm and under careful diuretic treatment, the patient’s haemodynamic situation and clinical state ameliorated significantly. As of now, she is symptom free. In late 2018, the patient suffered an ischaemic stroke under oral anticoagulation with a factor Xa inhibitor (Rivaroxaban, 20 mg once daily). Atrial fibrillation was never detected in electrocardiogram after ablation, but as the patient reports short episodes of palpitations, it was interpreted as likely cardio-embolic due to recurrent AF. Fortunately, she was discharged free from any neurological deficit. Oral anticoagulation was changed to a factor IIa inhibitor (Dabigatran, 150 mg twice daily, to date).