Here we report a 36-year-old female nurse, working full-time 12-h night shifts in a busy intensive care service, with generalized (MGFA IIb) auto-immune MG, symptomatic and dependent on cholinesterase inhibitors. Past medical history includes eczema in her teens, she is a carrier for sickle disease (sickle cell trait (SCT)) and she carried two pregnancies to term. Red blood cells have slightly reduced mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, 75.5 fl and 25.7 pg, respectively. She has no clinical symptoms of anemia and no specific treatment or monitoring. Surgical history includes 1 cesarean (2004), linea alba repair (2011) and breast implant (2014). She is a nonsmoker and does not drink alcohol. She is right-handed. She has a normal body mass index, 20.3 kg/m2, weighing 52 kg for 1.60 m.
Despite already experiencing abnormal weakness, she began running a year before being diagnosed with MG. Prior to running, she played amateur level basketball however this became incompatible with working night-shifts. MG diagnosis was based on clinical signs (right hand weakness - difficulty brushing teeth and hair, carrying light loads, cutting meat, a heavy head, nasal voice, ptosis, diplopia, dysphagia and difficulty masticating and articulating), serum auto-antibodies against nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChR) (> 100 nmol/l) and significant decrement on repetitive nerve stimulation (3 Hz) EMG (50% right trapezius, 24% right anconeus, 15% left anconeus, 43% tongue/mouth (CN V/XII)). Myasthenic muscle score (MMS) was 65/100. Initial treatment consisted of intravenous immunoglobulins (2 g/kg over 3 days (100 g)) and 60 mg pyridostigmine (t.i.d). Thoracic CT scan did not show thymoma but was in favour of thymic hyperplasia. Thymectomy was not performed as per the patient’s request.
Despite the patient being informed at diagnosis that sport was contra-indicated, she kept running. Training consisted of 1–2 10 km weekly runs with the beginning being the most difficult. MG symptoms persisted including fatigue, dysphagia and episodes of diplopia at the end of pyridostigmine dose thus aziathoprine (100 mg) was introduced. She performed a half marathon 2 months later, followed by a full marathon and another half marathon. No major difficulty was experienced and performances significantly improved: 5h13mins (8.1 km/h) for a marathon pre-diagnosis to 4h51mins (8.7 km/h) post diagnosis (and treatment), Figs. & .
On clinical evaluation 1 year after MG diagnosis, she had above average respiratory strength (MIP and MEP 135% and 144% of theoretical) and normal respiratory function (FVC 95% of theoretical). On maximal voluntary testing, limb strength was normal (knee extensors and elbow flexors: 128% and 101% of theoretical, respectively and right handgrip strength: 88%). Walking endurance was also considered normal (92% of theoretical 6MWD). The MMS suffered from a ceiling effect with the patient achieving the maximal score of 100 and a score of 4 on the MG-ADL due to episodes of dysphagia, dyspnea with effort and UL fatigue with brushing her teeth and hair. She reported recurrent MG symptoms including loss of hand dexterity (difficulty manipulating medication at work), bulbar symptoms such as dysphagia on her own saliva, a nasal voice and ocular symptoms (ptosis and diplopia). MG-specific quality of life (MGQOL-15-F) was reduced (17/60) particularly with regards to professional and social aspects, reflected in the WHO-QOL Bref with the social relationship and physical health domains being reduced, 11/20 and 13/20 respectively [, ].
She continued regular running without any particular changes in her MG, recurrent right hand weakness persisted and she experienced occasional ocular and bulbar symptoms primarily at the end of pyrodistigmine dose. Quality of life improved significantly over time and strength remained stable (knee extensors and elbow flexors: 128% and 100% of theoretical, respectively, right handgrip strength: 93%). She discontinued aziathoprine (treatment duration 14 months) and remained exclusively treated with cholinesterase inhibitors (60 mg, b.i.d).