Eighty-three years old woman following a fall was put on conservative management at another hospital. Initially her physical examination was mostly normal other than spinal tenderness and she had no neurological (Sensory or motor) deficit. A week later she started having severe back pain and two weeks later she also developed bilateral buttocks pain, bilateral lower limb weakness and had diminished sensation in the sacral area.
Revealed severe tenderness at thoracolumbar junction and neurologic examination demonstrated grade 4/5 strength in the lower extremities. Sacral sensation decreased, bladder and bowel function was intact.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed vertebral compression fracture of L1 body without burst and no canal compromise . One week later the MRI and computed tomography (CT) revealed compression fracture with intravertebral cleft and beginning of the burst of the vertebral body. A fragment was retropulsed into the canal . An MRI two weeks from initial fall shows aggravation of the burst fracture and thecal sac compression . A diagnosis of Kummell’s disease at L1 vertebra with burst fracture of the body with spinal canal compromise and neurological deficit was made.
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) augmented posterior compressive, short segment percutaneous pedicle screw (PA-SSPPF) fixation was done at T12, L1 and L2 vertebrae levels. Postoperatively the height of L1 body was restored and thecal compression disappeared . The patient experienced significant pain relief (Preoperative VAS 8 and postoperative VAS 3) and could ambulate with a brace on first postoperative day. Three months later the vertebral body height, stability was well preserved and patient had no neurological deficit .
Is a novel concept in minimally invasive spine surgery (MISS). In our case the left pedicle screws of the T12, L1 & L2 were inserted first followed by the right screw of the L1 vertebra. Using the inserter the rod was slide through the pedicle screws on right side. Rod blockers of T12 pedicle screw was tightened first then T12 & L1 pedicle screws compressed and with the help of the compressor placed horizontally a cranially distractive force applied using left L1 pedicle screw as pivot points and the rod blockers of the right L1 pedicle screw tightened. This maneuver is repeated with of L1 and L2 where a caudally directed distractive force was applied using L1 pedicle as pivot. The cumulative result of this maneuver was ligamentotaxis and reduction of the retropulsed fragment Figs. d, d, and a & b). This was followed by insertion of remaining two contralateral pedicle screws and fixation. As described earlier all the screws were PMMA augmented inserted using minimally invasive screw insertion technique.