A 45-year-old male motorcyclist with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and coronary artery disease was brought to the emergency department after being struck by another car on the highway at speeds of at least 40 miles per hour. Upon presentation, the patient was evaluated using Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) principles. He had a patent airway on arrival and was breathing spontaneously on room air. His initial heart rate was 87 beats per minute, and his blood pressure was 124/63 mmHg without signs of significant hemorrhage. He had an initial Glasgow coma score (GCS) of 15 with equal and reactive pupils. The patient admitted to consuming alcohol and had a serum alcohol of 243 mg/dL. A later CT of the head demonstrated a subcutaneous hematoma without any intracranial abnormalities. His remaining physical examination revealed left lower quadrant abdominal pain without signs of peritonitis, ankle deformities bilaterally, pain with hip range of motion, and blood at the urethral meatus. Given his physical examination findings, subsequent imaging confirmed an unstable pelvic fracture with diastasis of the symphysis pubis of 6 cm, widening of the left sacroiliac joint, a left ischial pubic ramus fracture, and a urethral injury . He also had a left ankle dislocation and a right compound fracture of the distal tibia and fibula. No intraabdominal injuries were identified on CT imaging of the abdomen. The pelvis was stabilized with a binder by the orthopedic surgeons with subsequent emergency irrigation, debridement, and open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the open ankle fracture as well as reduction of the left ankle dislocation. He was extubated after the procedure and monitored in the ICU while the remaining preoperative medical workup was completed including X-rays and CT scans with 3D reconstructions of the pelvis reconstructions. A hydromorphone patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump was utilized for pain control.
On hospital day 2, the patient was deemed fit for surgery and was taken to the operating theater for a combined operation by the orthopedic surgeons for ORIF of the pubic diastasis, sacral fracture, and sacroiliac joint followed by the trauma surgeons to reconstruct the abdominal wall and inguinal canal. The trauma team performed the exposure of the pubic symphyseal region and the pubic diastasis. A Pfannenstiel incision was made, and the planes were dissected exposing the left spermatic cord. The orthopedic team then performed a gentle open reduction of the pubic diastasis taking care to ensure that the bladder and urethra were not incarcerated. The Asnis III cannulated screw system and a Matta pubic symphyseal plate (Stryker GmbH, Switzerland) were utilized under C-arm fluoroscopic guidance with appropriate alignment of the AP and inlet and outlet pelvis views. Once the Mata plate was in place and the orthopedic reduction was completed, we proceeded to reconstruct the anterior abdominal wall. Since the Cooper ligament was destroyed, it was dissected to allow direct visualization of the pubic rami. The abdominal wall defect was measured to be 10 × 12 cm. We then used a modified Stoppa technique by placing the 6 × 6 in Prolene mesh under the damaged internal inguinal ring, making sure the spermatic cord on the left side was not injured or pinched, securing it in place using sutures, including direct suturing to the periosteum of the repaired pubic symphysis and the plate as needed. The medial borders of the mesh were tucked inside the opened rectus sheath on the right side and secured laterally with fires of a 5 mm Covidien Endotack (Medtronic, MN, USA) to the remnants of the conjoint ligament. The midline was then repaired with sutures, including the mesh as reinforcement. The patient did well postoperatively with postreduction films demonstrating appropriate alignment . He was discharged to rehab on postoperative day 5. There were no recurrences during the follow-up period of 10 years.