A 70-year-old Asian man had a “rollover” accident in which the cultivator he was driving overturned. Due to the accident, he presented with hemothorax and flail chest on the first to eighth ribs on the left side of his chest. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan taken at an emergency room (ER) revealed multiple ribs fracture and hemopneumothorax with subcutaneous emphysema of the left side of his chest and atelectasis of the right side of his chest .
He was transferred to the ER of our hospital. The hemothorax and the condition of his chest wall indicated surgery and we performed emergency surgery of open reduction for fractured ribs and primary repair for lacerated lung. Due to the flail chest, he needed the support of a mechanical ventilator for stable respiration. As part of postoperative ventilator care, tubal feeding was started on the fourth postoperative day (POD). On the next day (fifth POD), a chest X-ray showed a large amount of right pleural effusion . A small-bore chest catheter (16 gauge) was placed in right pleura. Approximately 880 ml of pleural fluid was initially drained and in total 3390 ml was drained for 24 hours. The color of the fluid changed from pinky to creamy . Laboratory analysis of the fluid showed high triglycerides (>1000 mg/dl) and low total cholesterol levels (6 mg/dl). The amount of drainage increased to 3000 to 4000 ml/day on the fifth day after the initiation of non-oral feeding (NPO) and total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Because of the extremely large amount of drained fluid, thoracoscopic thoracic duct ligation and pleurectomy on the right was performed the next day (sixth POD). We decided to do early-phase surgery because our patient was an elderly patient with trauma and a long period of fasting would be likely to cause problems with nutrition. His chest was explored, but no obvious leak was identified. The pleura between his aorta and esophagus was dissected at the base of his diaphragm and the dissection continued toward his right-sided thorax between his posterior aorta and the vertebral bodies. There was a mass-like lesion combined with pericardial fat and chyle . After this finding, surgical ligation of his thoracic duct was decided and a pleurectomy was performed to reduce the risk of recurrent malignant effusion. Immediately postoperatively, the drainage changed to serosanguineous fluid, without any evidence of chyle. Two days after the operation, the drains were serous and the amount of drainage was reduced to less than 100 ml/day. He started a fat-free diet after surgery and then his diet was changed to fat content and medium-chain triglycerides diet.
Although the removal of the chest tube was indicated after surgery, the removal of the chest tube was delayed because of the risk of malnutrition. The chest tube was removed on the 14th POD after amount and characteristics of drainage were examined and the effusion had completely resolved; he was then uneventfully discharged. He is on follow-up without any sign of recurrence a year after surgery .