A 58 year old female presented with hematuria and left flank pain that radiated to the abdomen. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a heterogeneous 8.3 X 6.5 X 4.9 cm fat-containing mass arising from the lower pole of the left kidney . CT also demonstrated an asymmetrically enlarged left psoas muscle , soft tissue stranding , mild hydronephrosis, and splenomegaly . Further evaluation of the CT scan goes on to reveal extensive fascial thickening involving the anterior and posterior left renal fascia. Based on these findings, hemorrhagic angiomyolipoma was felt to be the most likely condition. Past medical history was significant for bipolar disorder and chronic right foot wounds associated with contiguous spread of chronic osteomyelitis of the 5th metatarsal.
Physical exam was remarkable for enlarged body habitus (BMI 34.7), limited ROM in right shoulder, arm, and neck. Laboratory abnormalities included an elevated glucose (186 mg/dl) and calcium (6.9 mg/dl). White cell count, BUN, and creatinine levels were within normal limits. Urine culture demonstrated no growth in 18–24 h and showed < 10,000 col./ml.
The decision was made to treat the patient with open left partial nephrectomy. Intraoperatively, the mass was easily found along the inferior portion of the kidney. The mass had a large desmoplastic reaction surround it from a prior bleeding episode. Adhesions surrounding the vascular pedicle were released. The pedicle was then clamped and cold ischemia was induced after mannitol injection. Resection of the mass was performed by scoring the mass with Bovie electrocautery and carefully dissecting the mass from the normal parenchyma by blunt dissection with a Penfield nerve retractor. All bleeding vessels were ligated. There was 36 min of cold ischemia time and 200 ml of estimated blood loss. After appropriate closure of the surgical sites, the mass was sent to pathology and because of considerable need for pyelocaliceal closure a double J ureteral stent and foley were placed. Postoperatively, the patient experienced urinary retention after foley catheter removal. Once stable, she was discharged back to skilled nursing facility with a catheter in place that was later removed.
At 10 day postoperative outpatient follow up, the patient was doing well and asymptomatic. BUN and creatinine levels were within normal limits but calcium remained low. Ureteral stent was easily removed during office cystoscopy. Eight months later the patient reported no signs of flank pain or hematuria and has remained at her pre-operative baseline.