A 48-year-old female presents with two weeks of painless jaundice eight weeks after her last dose of nivolumab.
Along with painless jaundice, she also had generalized pruritus, dark urine, and pale-colored stool. She denied fever, chills, or any other relevant symptoms.
She had a history of well-controlled human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and asthma. She had presented with constipation, hematochezia, and an associated prolapsing anal mass a few months prior to current presentation. Excisional biopsy of the anal mass confirmed the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The patient completed Nigro protocol chemotherapy along with 27 fractions of radiation which was followed by 6 cycles of nivolumab.
She was an ex-smoker who had quit around 10 years ago. She had no notable family history.
Physical examination revealed jaundice with no other significant findings.
Serum total bilirubin was 9.2 mg/dL with direct fraction of 5.8 gm/dL, Alkaline phosphatase of 442 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase of 63 U/L and 144 U/L, and lipase 65 U/L. Her serum glucose was 447 mg/dL with an HbA1c of 8.2%. Carcinoembryonic antigen was 3.5 ng/mL and CA-19.9 was 5 U/mL. Serologic evaluation for viral, autoimmune, and hereditary causes of transaminitis was unremarkable. IgG4 level was normal at 108 gm/dL.
Computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrated fullness of the pancreatic head with new extrahepatic and intrahepatic biliary dilation. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed, revealing diffuse hypoechoic changes, atrophy and lobularity affecting the pancreas diffusely, with peripancreatic lymphadenopathy. EUS-guided fine needle biopsy (FNB) of the pancreatic head revealed pancreatic acinar tissue with eosinophils and germinal center lymphoid aggregates. Features of malignancy were absent in pancreatic parenchymal and lymph node specimens as well as biliary brushings. A single localized biliary stricture was found within the distal common bile duct with upstream dilation which was relieved by a plastic biliary stent via endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography . Overall, the findings in these specimens were suggestive of acute pancreatitis, which was attributed to recent nivolumab. The patient’s total bilirubin improved to normal levels with resolution of symptoms after biliary decompression with the plastic stent. She underwent repeat EUS which had similar findings with repeat sampling by FNB only suggestive of pancreatic inflammation. Bile duct forceps biopsy of the stricture indicated features of acute and chronic inflammation and granulation tissue with no malignancy.