New onset Jaundice.
A 62-year-old Caucasian female, with Sjogren’s disease presented with generalized fatigue, arthralgias, pruritus and new onset jaundice. She denied any prior history of liver disease, alcohol intake, intravenous or intranasal drug use, blood transfusions or needlestick injuries. She did however endorse taking Skullcap supplements over for 1-2 months due to long standing history of anxiety and insomnia.
Sjogren’s syndrome; Anxiety; Insomnia.
Nonsmoker, No alcohol or illicit Drug use. No gastrointestinal (GI) related malignancy or Liver disease in the family.
General: Age appropriate female in no distress. HEENT: Atraumatic, normocephalic; scleral icterus present, moist mucous membranes. Cyclic vomiting syndrome: S1,S2+ RRR. Lungs: Symmetric chest rise seen. Abdomen: Soft, non-distended, non-tender, baroreceptor sensitivity present, no palpable hepatomegaly appreciated. Extremities: No edema or clubbing. Skin: Jaundiced. Neuro: Alert, Awake, oriented × 3. No gross neurological deficits appreciated.
The initial laboratory results on presentation that were pertinent: International normalized ratio (INR) 2.4, Alkaline Phosphatase (Alk Phos) 164 IU/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) 1091 IU/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) 980 IU/L, total bilirubin (T bili) 9.5 mg/dL. The R factor on initial calculation was 20.5, indicative of a primary hepatocellular injury pattern. Immunoglobulin G was elevated at 2573 mg/dL. Testing for Viral Hepatitis including - Hepatitis A, B, and C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and herpes simplex virus were all negative including serology and quantitative testing. ANA was positive given her history of Sjogren’s disease. Her baseline AST, ALT, Alk phos and bilirubin were within normal range 4 months before presentation.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography done at admission did not show any signs obstruction or primary hepatic pathology.
Given her prior history of autoimmune disease and new onset hypergammaglobulinemia in the context of suspected DILI, a liver biopsy was pursued. Her initial liver biopsy revealed resolving centrilobular necrosis with predominant eosinophilic inflammation. Over the next 72 h, the liver enzymes showed a strong downward trend. As such, the patient was discharged with outpatient follow-up. However, the patient was re-admitted a month later with worsening jaundice, acute kidney injury, and new onset ascites concerning for subacute liver failure. Her LFTs were Alk Phos 619 IU/L, AST 1222 IU/L, ALT 540 IU/L, and T bili 6.6 mg/dL. Infectious workup was unremarkable. In the next few days, the transaminases showed a downtrend. However, the T bili continued to rise, reaching its peak at 11.8 gm/dl. Paracentesis showed a serum ascites albumin gradient of 1.4 which was consistent with portal hypertension. A repeat liver biopsy was pursued which revealed extensive plasma cells consistent with new onset autoimmune hepatitis resulting from previous DILI . Unfortunately, the patient’s course was complicated by the development of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, GI bleed and acute tubular necrosis necessitating dialysis. As such, she was never challenged with steroids. Due to her worsening status, she was listed for a simultaneous liver kidney transplantation. However, the patient finally did improve following a long and protracted course with resolution of jaundice but remained on hemodialysis.