A 66-year-old female patient with KS, 150 cm in height and 47 kg in weight, underwent left-side diaphragmatic plication. She had undergone surgery for diaphragmatic palsy 18 years prior. Routine laboratory tests showed normal results, and atrial premature contractions were frequently observed during electrocardiography. The patient’s chest radiography and computed tomography revealed dextrocardia and bronchiectasis without situs inversus. In addition, patients had a tracheal bronchus of the apical segment in the RUL . Auscultation was normal, and the pulmonary function test showed a mild restrictive pattern. The day before surgery, we explained our plan for airway management and the risk of failure of OLV and got written informed consent. The written informed consent of publication for the use of photos and case details in this report has been obtained.
The patient received a 0.2 mg intramuscular injection of glycopyrrolate 30 min before the surgery. Baseline vital signs were checked upon the patient’s arrival in the operating room. The patient was placed in a left lateral decubitus position during the procedure. An epidural block was performed at the T4 level, with a test dose of 3 ml (2% lidocaine with 1 : 200,000 epinephrine) and a loading dose of 5.5 ml (fentanyl: 50 μg, 0.75% ropivacaine: 1 ml, and normal saline: 3.5 ml) administered through the catheter. A patient-controlled epidural analgesia device was set with a bolus dose of 3 ml, a lockout interval of 5 min, and a no-limit of 4 h. Anesthesia was induced and maintained using target controlled infusion of propofol at target concentration of 3–4 µg/ml and remifentanil at concentration of 3–6 ng/ml. The right radial artery was used for arterial line placement. We performed a fiberoptic bronchoscopy assisted intubation using a single-lumen endotracheal tube (SLT, size: 7.5, cuffed; TaperGuardTM, Covidien, Ireland). Results of the fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed a tracheal bronchus of the RUL apical segment that mimicked a normal carina . The tracheal bronchus had a smaller diameter compared to a normal carina and a sharp bifurcation angle at divergence. As the fiberoptic bronchoscope advanced into the main trachea, an actual tracheal carina was observed . Under the bronchoscopic vision, in which the endotracheal tube is placed above the tracheal bronchus, the EZB was lubricated and introduced until its distal ends reached the right and left main-stem bronchus . After the EZB was positioned properly, the endotracheal tube was readvanced carefully into the trachea not to obstruct the opening of tracheal bronchus. We disconnected the tube for 20 s to collapse the operated lung and reinflate the left-side cuff of the EZB. A pressure-controlled volume guaranteed ventilation mode was used. The patient received a tidal volume of 5–6 ml/kg with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.6–0.7. Furthermore, the inspiratory:expiratory (I:E) ratio was 1:2. The respiratory rate was adjusted to keep the end-tidal carbon dioxide partial pressure between 30 and 40 mmHg. The operation took 2 h and 45 min, and anesthesia was administered for 4 h. After extubation, the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit. To stabilize the patient’s vital signs, we administered 3 L/min of supplemental oxygen through a nasal cannula. The patient was discharged uneventfully on the fifth postoperative day.