When the 2-year-old patient was 2 months old, he was brought to the Hematology Department of Beijing Children's Hospital outpatient clinic due to “pale complexion for over 2 months”. Initial blood tests revealed the following results: red blood cells (RBC), 1.02 × 1012/L (Normal 3.5–5.6); hemoglobin (Hb), 29 g/L (Normal 99–196); hematocrit, 9.2% (Normal 29–57); mean corpuscular volume, 90.2 fl (Normal 73–105); MCH, 28.4 pg (Normal 24–37); mean corpuscular Hb concentration, 315 g/L (Normal 305–361); Reticulocyte %, 0.48% (Normal 0.5–2.5); Reticulocyte absolute value, 4.9 × 109/L (Normal 22–139). White blood cell and platelet counts were within normal ranges. The patient received blood transfusions to correct the anemia. The patient had normal development until 6 months old, followed by delayed motor development and sensory ataxia. At 1 year old, the patient had difficulty grasping, sitting, and standing without support and did not crawl. Due to the young age of the patient, some symptoms cannot be self-reported, and cannot cooperate with auditory and visual examinations. The mother had a history of preexcitation syndrome and was prone to syncope. Mild anemia developed during pregnancy with unknown etiology. A physical examination of the patient revealed severe anemia, with no enlarged superficial lymph nodes, liver, or spleen. Bilirubin and anemia-related indicators were normal, and the patient was negative for autoimmune antibodies. No pathogenic variants were found in the genetic screening of a blood system panel. Based on the onset of symptoms within the first year of life and test results, a diagnosis of pure red cell aplasia was considered. Due to the young age of the patient and the potential impact of hormones on growth and development, symptomatic blood transfusion therapy was temporarily initiated, requiring monthly transfusions when Hb levels dropped below 70 g/L. At 6 months old, the patient experienced breath-holding spells accompanied by cyanosis of the face and lips after crying. These lasted for a few seconds and resolved spontaneously. Occasionally, episodes of limb stiffness and termor manifested, which improved after sedative therapy. No fever or infection was observed during the interictal period and no abnormalities were observed in the electroencephalogram at that time.
During the evaluation of the 1-year-old patient, a follow-up bone marrow morphological examination revealed active bone marrow hyperplasia with relatively normal erythroid proliferation, mainly consisting of intermediate and young RBCs. The granulocyte-erythrocyte ratio was slightly higher, and the morphology was generally normal. Early erythroid cells accounted for 1% (Normal 0–5.8), intermediate erythroid cells for 8% (Normal 5–34), and late erythroid cells for 2.5% (Normal 1.6–21.5). A bone marrow biopsy showed reduced erythroid proliferation. Therefore, pure red cell aplasia was not ruled out. Chromosomal karyotyping revealed 46, XY, del(5)(q33)[2]/46, XY[18]. Comprehensive testing for myelodysplastic syndrome and myeloid leukemia-related genes did not reveal any pathogenic variants. Based on the patient's medical history, symptoms, signs, and auxiliary examinations, pure red cell aplasia was diagnosed. Therefore, starting on October 1, 2022, the patient was treated with prednisone 10 mg BID for 2 months, followed by methylprednisolone 16 mg QD for 1 month. On December 21, 2022, oral cyclosporine was added, and methylprednisolone was discontinued after 1 month. The cyclosporine treatment lasted 6 months, but the treatment was ineffective, and the patient still required transfusions. At the age of 22 months, the patient developed progressive upper limb weakness, especially in the hands. The patient was subsequently examined at the neurology outpatient departments of Beijing Children's Hospital and Beijing Xuanwu Hospital. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging showed bilateral symmetric punctate high signals in the midbrain and dorsal pons in T2W imaging, along with high signals in DWI and low signals in ADC. Additionally, there was bilateral ventricular dilatation and slightly elevated T2 FLAIR signal in the periventricular white matter (–). Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine showed patchy, long T1 and T2 signals in the spinal cord. Genetic metabolic screening revealed no significant abnormalities. Whole-exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous variants in SLC52A2: c.588C > G (variant inherited from the father, heterozygous variant) and c.593G > A (variant inherited from the mother, heterozygous variant). Previous genetic tests did not include analysis of SLC52A2 genes. According to the ACMG guidelines, the variant c.588C > G is of uncertain clinical significance (PM1, PM2, PP3_Supporting), whereas variant c.593G > A is suspected to be pathogenic (PVS1_VeryStrong, PM2). The REVEL protein function damage prediction for c.588C > G is 0.718, and for c.593G > A is 0. The patient was started on oral riboflavin (vitamin B2) at a dose of 10 mg/d (0.8 mg/kg/d) on July 17, 2023, gradually increasing to 75 mg/d (6.25 mg/kg/d). Consequently, the vitamin B2 blood concentration increased from 8.18 ug/L to 11 ug/L. After one week of treatment, the Hb level increased to 116 g/L and fluctuated between 126 and 137 g/L over the next two weeks. Upper limb muscle strength improved from grade 2 to grade 3+, with the ability to perform simple grasping. Unfortunately, nystagmus developed, indicating deterioration of the patient's condition. Due to difficulty in sedating the patient, electromyography could not be completed. The patient is currently under follow-up in the hematology and neurology outpatient departments.