A 41-year-old woman presented to our surgical outpatient clinic with hypermenorrhea, followed by amenorrhea and discomfort in the upper abdomen with nausea and emesis. Gastroscopy and histology revealed a poorly differentiated primary gastric mucus-producing adenocarcinoma with numerous signet-ring cells in the distal corpus and the antrum. CT scan showed extensive tumor in the lower abdomen, which appeared to be an ovarian tumor or, as a differential diagnosis, a Krukenberg tumor . Endoscopic ultrasound of the tumor resulted in a uT3, N+ stage. Elevated tumor markers like CA 19-9 (817.7 U/ml, normal range: 0.0–37.0 U/ml), CA 72-4 (92.4 U/ml, normal range: <4.0 U/ml) and CA 125 (151.4 U/ml, normal range: <30.2 U/ml) were also present. Virilization was absent at the time of the initial diagnosis. Surgery was not initially considered due to the advanced stage of the primary tumor. Adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated and the patient received six cycles of epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil, each cycle one week after the ECF regimen .
Side effects of chemotherapy consisted of appetite reduction, nausea and emesis, and a weight loss of 10 kg within three months. In addition, the patient developed a marked increase in body hair covering of her arms, legs, and face. A notably deeper voice and an androgenized body feature, with increased muscle strength, were also observed . Gynecological examination revealed no clitoral enlargement. Circulating levels of testosterone (1.33 μg/l, normal range: <0.62 μg/l), progesterone (52.29 nmol/l, normal range: 0.64–2.58 nmol/l) and 17-OH-progesterone (14.96 μg/l, normal range: 0.40–1.02 μg/l) were elevated, while other hormones like estradiol, androstendion, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate were in the normal range. Since the patient experienced increasing episodes of vomiting, a repeat gastroscopy was performed. An expanded stomach full of nutrients, due to gastric outlet obstruction, was found. An operative intervention to improve the patient's condition was scheduled. During explorative laparotomy, the two Krukenberg tumors displacing the small intestine were found. Tumors and ovaries were removed and intraoperative histology confirmed a Krukenberg tumor from a diffuse gastric carcinoma . In the upper abdomen an obstructive gastric carcinoma with a widespread peritoneal carcinomatosis was found. Since complete removal with R0 resection could not be achieved, a gastrojejunostomy bypassing the stenosis was constructed. The postoperative course was without complications and oral feeding was started successfully on the third day after surgery. Chemotherapy was reinitiated with a modified regimen using 5-fluorouracil (2000 mg/m2) and oxaliplatin (50 mg/m2), with a total of eight cycles in a weekly schedule. During the chemotherapy tumor markers dropped to 45.2 U/ml (CA 19-9), 13.7 U/ml (CA72-4) and 31.9 U/ml (CA 125). Expectedly, the hormone levels returned to normal levels. The patient survived for 6 more months before she died from tumor recurrence, without returning to her normal phenotype.