We here report the case of a 56 year old Caucasian female never-smoker, who was initially diagnosed with clinical stage IIIA adenocarcinoma of the lung in 2014. The patient underwent surgical resection of the primary and adjuvant therapy (4 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin/vinorelbine). Two years after the resection of the tumor, the patient developed distant metastatic disease and was eventually biopsied at the right iliac bone for pathological evaluation and genetic testing of druggable targets. We employed combined testing for fusions and mutations as described previously , and detected fusion of EML4 exon 13 with ALK exon 20, which is one of the most common fusion variants in lung adenocarcinomas (variant 1) . Consistent with this result, we neither detected mutated EGFR or KRAS, or fusions involving ROS or RET. In parallel, IHC staining for ALK was applied. While massive parallel sequencing showed 4163 fusion reads indicating expression of the fusion gene IHC staining was largely negative except for very few intermingled cells that may show exceedingly faint ALK expression at high magnification, which cannot be reliably subtracted from background signal in routine diagnostics . Repeated IHC staining for ALK yielded similar results (data not shown) and orthogonal FISH analysis showed impaired hybridization with only very few cells exhibiting probe signals including splits at low intensity . As the current guidelines require that at least 15% of the tumor cells show split (or single red) signals [, ], FISH data of the biopsy specimen were inconclusive and thus non-informative. HE-stained slides suggested crush and thermal artifacts that are known to influence IHC performance. These divergent findings prompted us to perform additional molecular profiling of the primary tumor that was resected two years earlier. In keeping with the results observed in the biopsy specimen, we detected the very same gene fusion at even higher read counts (9639 fusion reads; Fig. ). In accord with these genetic data, we detected clear-cut split signals in all cancer cells by FISH . Corresponding IHC staining of ALK showed weak ALK expression . Based on the integrated view of these results, we designated this case as positive for a fusion event involving ALK thus rendering the patient eligible to treatment with crizotinib.