A 45-year-old Persian man with recurrent urinary tract infection was referred to our clinic. He had a history of penoscrotal hypospadias in childhood, which were repaired, and obstructive and irritating symptoms in adolescence. The patient complained of recurrent urethral tract infection UTI (urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli) accompanied with purulent discharge from urethra and fever. He was also referred to other clinics several times over the years and underwent urethra dilatation owing to bulbar tract stenosis. In his last combined voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) and retrograde urethrogram (RUG), stenosis was observed in the proximal bulbar urethra along with a double urethra in the dorsal region of the main urethra . On main urethral cystoscopy, the mucosa was relatively pale and the opening of the second urethra was not visible in the penile and bulbar urethra. Stricture and paleness of the mucosa was also seen in the proximal bulbar urethra. On flexible cystoscopy, the opening of the second urethra was visible at 12 o’clock and a distance of 3 cm from the verumontanum in the bulbar urethra. The guidewire was first passed, and it was palpated along the penis at the dorsal level of the patient’s main urethra to a distance of 5 cm from the tip of the penis.
The patient was taken to the operation room with a diagnosis of double urethra and underwent general anesthesia in lithotomy position. Then a longitudinal incision was made in the perineal area, and the urethra was dissected from one side. Owing to the stenosis and adhesions caused by previous surgeries, it was released from the dorsal surface and from the corpus cavernosum. The guidewire was then palpated from the dorsal side of the urethra, a plane was taken between the two urethras, and the urethral duplication was dissected from the main urethra. It was removed from the proximal opening of the urethra, and its orifice was repaired with 4–0 vicryl suture. The distal urethra in the dorsal region was completely closed, so it was dissected and the double urethra (secondary) was removed with operation. The patient was followed for 1 month after surgery . Foley 18 F and 16 F cystostomy catheters were inserted to ensure urinary flow and prevent restenosis. Finally, the skin and fascia were repaired with 4–0 vicryl suture.
Finally, the operation site was bandaged, and the case was taken to the recovery ward with stable vital signs. During hospitalization, urine analysis (UA) and urine culture (UC) tests were performed regularly, which were all normal. The patient was discharged from hospital. He had no complaints of recurrence or urinary incontinence. One month after discharge, RUG showed no evidence of urinary leakage and the patient’s UA and UC were reported to be normal.