A 16 year old African American female with a past medical history of obesity, depression, irregular menses, presumed idiopathic rhabdomyolysis, currently taken no medications presented to the emergency department (ED) with one week history of myalgia and muscle weakness in bilateral upper arms, thighs, and buttocks. Patient also endorsed dark urine starting the morning of presentation. This was reminiscent of a prior rhabdomyolysis hospitalization prompting the patient and her mother to immediately go to the ED.
Patient arrived hemodynamically stable with physical exam rather unremarkable aside from diffuse myalgias and muscle weakness. The patient exhibited normal range of motion with pain with passive movement of the bilateral upper and lower extremities (UE/LE). Initially she had 4/5 strength in bilateral UE and LE with improvement to 5/5 strength in bilateral UE and LE by hospital discharge. Cranial nerves II-XII were grossly intact with bilateral knee deep tendon reflexes 2/4. Her cerebellar tests were unremarkable. Serum creatine kinase (CK) was measured at 153,000 IU/L with urinalysis showing large “blood” and protein (100 m/dL). No other serum electrolyte abnormality was noted. Ionized calcium was 4.4 mg/dL with serum calcium 7.2 mg/dL and albumin 2.7 g/dL. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with QTc of 443 ms.
Patient reported that she received her second dose of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine the week prior to presentation. There were reported expected side effects at time of injection (i.e. pain at injection site, headache, and fatigue). Several days later, she began experiencing myalgias in her bilateral arms, thighs, and buttocks unresponsive to acetaminophen and ibuprofen. Patient denied any fever, chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, rash, sore throat, dysuria, dizziness, headache. Patient also denied any recent strenuous activity including marathon, weight lifting, hiking etc. Reported family history was significant for thyroid disease and glaucoma in her biological mother as well as hypertension and congestive heart failure (CHF) in her biologic father.
Two years prior, the patient was hospitalized following febrile Group A Streptococcal (GAS) pharyngitis infection complicated by rhabdomyolysis. At that time, she presented with fatigue, lower extremity weakness, and dark urine. She was being treated with amoxillin-clavulanic acid (500-125 mg) and prednisone (10 mg) following a 1 week history of sore throat and fever. The patient’s inability to ambulate and diminished urinary output prompted her arrival to the ED. Vital signs were unremarkable except for “mild erythematous tonsils without exudate” and tenderness over “bilateral anterior thighs”. Initial laboratory studies showed a CK of 984,800 IU/L , potassium of 7.0 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen of 31 mg/dL, creatinine of 2.26 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 2550 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 601 Iu/L, calcium 4.9 mg/dL, white blood cell 15,700 K/mcL with polymorphonuclear cells 87%, 7% lymphocytes. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed peaked T waves. Patient was immediately transferred to pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) due to aberrant physiological parameters.
The patient’s hospital course included aggressive intravenous (IV) fluid resuscitation, IV penicillin, correction of electrolyte and metabolic acidosis derangements, and forced alkaline diuresis with sodium bicarbonate. Despite these measures, patient required multiple rounds of hemodialysis throughout her 24 day hospital stay along with intense physical therapy. There were no other major complications aside from simple cystitis urinary tract infection (UTI) treated with combination of IV/oral antibiotics. The patient was successfully discharged with normal range CK after being able to void greater than 1.5 L of urine for continuous 5 days before discharge.
Upon further history taking, patient reported that after her first quadrivalent human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine (Gardasil, 4vHPV) in 2014, she experienced similar symptomology: severe diffuse myalgia and muscle weakness. However, this incident did not require hospitalization and patient was unable to remember if her urine was dark.
The patient’s current rhabdomyolysis was treated in a similar fashion except no dialysis was needed during this hospitalization stay. Contemporaneously, an extensive work-up was initiated for possible etiology of this patient’s recurrent non-traumatic, non-exertional.
rhabdomyolysis. A multi-disciplinary team was consulted including nephrology, genetics, neuromuscular neurologists, and rheumatology. Per genetics recommendation, whole exome sequencing was ordered along with serum profiles of amino acids, urine organic acids, pyruvate levels, acylcarnitine, and carnitines. No electromyography (EMG), extended myositis panel, muscle biopsy or musculoskeletal MRI was performed while inpatient due to active rhabdomyolysis with low suspicion that results would change management.
Urine myoglobin was calculated at 12,700 mcg/L 15 h after ED presentation. CK up trended to over 200,000 IU/L by hospital day 3 , remaining there until hospital day (HD) 5. Throughout the hospital stay, patient had intermittent chest pain/ “muscle spasms” and tachypnea that the patient attributed to her anxiety. Cardiac evaluation with electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and transthoracic echocardiography was unremarkable.
Our patient was ultimately discharged after 10 days and CK = 5,848 IU/L in stable condition on amlodipine for hypertension with normal renal function. No etiology was present at that time to explain her recurrent rhabdomyolysis as the patient’s serum profiles of amino acids, urine organic acids, pyruvate levels, acylcarnitine, and carnitines were largely unremarkable with whole exome genome sequencing still pending. The patient overall adhered and tolerated inpatient treatment well, however did require inpatient psychotherapy for mood symptoms.
One month after discharge, the patient was seen by outpatient rheumatology where an autoimmune work up was unremarkable (+ anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) however low titer at 1:140) with a physical exam “reassuring for no other signs of possible rheumatic disease”. Two months after discharge, the patient was seen by nephrology with no interval changes per patient, normal physical exam, and small amount of blood and trace leukocytes on point of care urinalysis.
Three months after discharge, patient was seen by genetics where exome sequencing resulted with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in the DYSF gene (DYSF c.2643 + 1G > A). The DYSFgene, found on chromosome 2p31, encodes a 230 kDa skeletal muscle sarcomere protein called dysferlin . DYSF mutations have been associated with several autosomal recessive inherited conditions: limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B), Miyoshi myopathy (MM), asymptomatic hyperCKemia, and distal myopathy with anterior tibial onset (DMAT) .
Due to the presence of only one known pathologic allele variant, it does not yet establish a molecular diagnosis. One month after the genetics visit, the patient was seen by neurology where physical exam was unremarkable and CK and liver function tests were within normal limits. The patient and family was also advised to avoid strenuous physical activity while obtaining both a cardiology consult and targeted variant testing for first degree relatives .