A 58-year-old woman with ovarian cancer was electively admitted to our gynecologic oncology division for surgical debulking. CT showed a right ovarian tumor measuring 2.2X2.6 cm, ascites and an omental mass. The uterus and left ovary appeared normal. Her CA-125 level was 233 U/mL. CT-guided-biopsy from the omentum revealed high-grade-serous-carcinoma. Her past medical history included anxiety and fibromyalgia treated with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRI’s) and Tramadol. She had no other medical, family and psycho-social history including relevant genetic information.
Upon admission, she had no complaints with normal physical-examination and lab work. Upon entrance to the operating room (OR) and before any procedures were performed, she started to demonstrate convulsions in the face and rigidity accompanied by foam from the mouth and irregular eye movement. This episode lasted 10 min and was accompanied by increased blood pressure (maximal measurement of 190/100) and bradycardia. The blood pressure and bradycardia normalized within several minutes without any treatment.
As soon as the patient resumed consciousness, she complained of blindness, severe headache and appeared confused. A neurological examination performed in the OR demonstrated a positive bilateral Babinski sign as the only pathological finding.
Ophthalmologic and psychiatric evaluations were normal. Brain CT was normal with no signs of active bleeding or mass. During the hours that followed the acute onset, there was further deterioration in her confusion and blindness and the patient reported continuation of the severe headache which did not respond to analgesia. In addition, fever was measured (38.7 °C). The only abnormal laboratory finding was an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,200 103/μL with 93% polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs(.
Due to the possible diagnosis of meningitis/encephalitis, an empiric Acyclovir treatment was begun and lumbar puncture (LP) was done. The LP fluid was clear, with an opening pressure of 201 mmH2O, increased WBC count (37 cells/mm3, mostly PMN’s) increased protein count (125 mg/dl) with normal glucose level (72 mg/dl) and a decreased chloride level (123 mmol/L). Culture from the CSF was negative. In addition, since there was uncertainty regarding the origin of seizures, Valproic acid was initiated. EEG showed a non-specific sign of left temporal irregularity. No epileptic activity was demonstrated.
Brain MRI including T1, T2, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) sequences were performed before and after Gadolinium administration. Occipital cortical and subcortical T2 hyperintense signals were observed mainly on the left side and, to a lesser extent, on the right side . There was moderate hyperintensity on DWI in the left occipital cortex . There was no abnormal enhancement after Gadolinium administration . Mild diffusion restriction was demonstrated on the ADC maps .
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster virus and Enterovirus were negative. Urine and blood cultures were negative. Chemistry including creatinine kinase, liver function tests and electrolytes were normal. Urine toxicology yielded no abnormal findings.
During her hospitalization, the patient demonstrated a continuous improvement. Repeat neurological examination showed complete consciousness, intact visual fields and no neurological deficits. Virology results came back negative excluding viral encephalitis. No other treatments were given, including steroids.
As it is known that seizures can be a manifestation of paraneoplastic syndromes, specifically, paraneoplastic epilepsy, a panel of tests for the detection of paraneoplastic syndromes were obtained from the patient’s blood and CSF fluid according to latest recommendations . A neuronal autoimmune antibody (Ab) screen was performed including Abs against GABAB, NMDR, CASPR2, AMPAR1, AMPAR2, LGl1, Amphiphysin, CRMP-5 (CV2), PNMA2, Ri, Yo, Hu, Recoverin, SOX1 and Titin (see abbreviations).
All tested antibodies in the CSF and serum came back negative except for CRMP-5 Abs which tested positive in the CSF but was negative in the serum.
CRMP5 protein, also known as Neuronal CV2, is thought to be involved in neural development and antibodies to CRMP5 were found in some patients with paraneoplastic syndromes presenting with neurologic symptoms . As antibodies against CRMP5 are known to be associated with small cell lung carcinomas and thymomas , a chest CT was performed in our patient and came back normal. All other tested autoimmune antibodies were negative.
In view of all the clinical presentation, imaging and laboratory results, the woman was diagnosed with PRES.
The patient was discharged with complete resolution of her symptoms. Repeat MRI one month later showed complete disappearance of the previously described radiologic findings. She was started on Paclitaxel and Carboplatin chemotherapy. After 3 chemotherapy cycles she was doing well with no neurological complaints. Abdominal CT showed good response to the chemotherapy and the patient underwent interval debulking including bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, hysterectomy, omentectomy with transverse colectomy for complete cytoreduction. No neurological symptoms were observed prior or after the operation.