An 80-year-old man visited a primary care physician, complaining of pain in the lower abdomen on the right side and fever An evaluation of the blood sample showed an increased inflammatory response, and abdominal ultrasonography revealed fluid retention in the right side of the abdomen. After referral to our hospital, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and the fluid accumulation in the abdomen was diagnosed as a retroperitoneal hematoma.
Previously, the patient had been followed up at our hospital for chronic hepatitis C. In addition, he had undergone transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) and posterior segment resection of the liver for HCC (S6; Couinaud’s hepatic segment) 5 years before this visit and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) for intrahepatic recurrence (S8) 3 years ago. The pathological findings of primary HCC are as follows. It was nodular type and showed expansive growth, fibrous capsule formation, capsule invasion, and septum formation. There was no serous membrane invasion, vascular invasion, and bile duct invasion. The liver in the non-tumor area had chronic hepatitis, and surgical margin was negative.
He also achieved a sustained virological response to hepatitis C virus with Ledipasvir acetonate / Sofosbuvir 2 years ago. The patient’s medical history included surgery for appendicitis, the use of stents for acute myocardial infarction, transurethral resection of a tumor in the bladder, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, hyperuricemia, and osteoporosis. His medications included aspirin, losartan potassium, fenofibrate, benzbromarone, alendronate sodium hydrate, a proton pump inhibitor, and laxatives.
The patient’s blood pressure and pulse rate were stable, and mild anemia (hemoglobin [Hb] level, 9.8 g/dL) was observed during the first visit at our hospital; therefore, we assumed that the bleeding had stopped, and the patient was admitted to the hospital for follow-up. The symptoms seemed to improve for a while, but 1 week later, the patient experienced abdominal pain. The preoperative blood test showed a decrease in the Hb level to 8.2 g/dL. Contrast-enhanced CT at the time of visit showed a retroperitoneal hematoma centered in the right paracolic gutter . A ring-shaped contrast area was observed between the hematoma and the ascending colon. As colonic diverticula were also present, bleeding from the extramural tumor or diverticula was considered. Although there was no obvious enlargement of the hematoma , abdominal pain recurred in a short time and anemia progressed. Based on the above, it was judged that the bleeding could not be controlled by follow-up, and surgery was decided upon. Preoperative liver function was as follows. Total protein 6.4 g/dL, Albumin 3.5 g/dL, Total bilirubin 1.4 mg/dL, Direct bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL, Aspartate aminotransferase 33 U/L, Alanine aminotransferase 23 U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 104 U/L, Cholinesterase 166 U/L, Lactate dehydrogenase 240 U/L. Tumor markers were not measured preoperatively.
On laparotomy, a small amount of bloody ascites was observed from the pelvis to the left lower abdomen, but no peritoneal dissemination lesion was detected. Strong adhesions were found on the right side of the abdomen; the removal of these adhesions resulted in a retroperitoneal hematoma. The cause of the bleeding and he location of the tumor could not be identified intraoperatively because of the extensive hematoma. A hemicolectomy was performed on the right side, because we judged from the preoperative CT that the hematoma and tumor could be resected together . The total time of the operation was 217 min and the blood loss was estimated at 505 mL.
The patient was diagnosed with moderately differentiated HCC of the ascending colon, located mainly within the subserosal and muscular layers, where a continuous retroperitoneal hematoma was observed. This tumor was similar to the tumor resected 5 years ago and was diagnosed as metastasis of the ascending colon . The Elastica-van Gieson stain showed vascular invasion of the metastatic tumor, which was considered to be hematogenous metastasis.
The patient resumed drinking water and taking oral medications on the first postoperative day (POD). Paralytic bowel obstruction occurred during the postoperative course, but improved with conservative treatment, and the patient was discharged home on the 20th POD without any other complications.
After the patient was discharged from the hospital, he was followed up without postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy at his own request. However, 6 months after surgery, CT showed peritoneal dissemination, and lenvatinib 8 mg was started on a daily administration as a patient with unresectable HCC. Because of side effects such as decreased appetite, the dose was reduced and the administration interval was spaced accordingly. However, 15 months after surgery, he presented with intrahepatic, lymph node recurrence. The same chemotherapy was continued thereafter, but the progression of the disease could not be controlled. 26 months after surgery, he was switched to palliative care and his postoperative survival time was 30 months.