A 10-year-old Caucasian girl presented to our department with ongoing symptoms of vomiting, non-specific abdominal pain and hypertension. She had been admitted about 15 times over a three year period with episodic attacks of frequent and severe vomiting lasting for a few days. During some of her admissions she demonstrated neurological and autonomic signs and symptoms such as confusion, disorientation, occipital headache, visual impairment, staring look, lack of response, head and eye turning to one side with nystagmus, non-reactive pupils, left arm and leg stiffening, and fluctuating and raised BP.
Investigations included abdominal and chest radiographs, and abdominal and renal ultrasonography, which all gave negative results. Gastroscopy and barium meal studies did not reveal any abnormalities, but a urease breath test revealed Helicobacter pylori, which was treated with standard triple therapy. A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal any abnormalities; however, a magnetic resnonace imaging (MRI) scan (Philips Intera 1.5T) demonstrated patchy areas of mainly subcortical high signal without mass effect, contrast enhancement or associated diffusion restriction. These abnormalities were bilateral but asymmetrical, affecting the right cerebral hemisphere more than the left side. The high signal lesions were mainly located in the posterior brain, particularly the parieto-occipital lobes. No abnormality was seen in the posterior fossa or the basal ganglia. The radiological features were consistent with a diagnosis of PRES . An abdominal MRI was unremarkable.
Electroencephalographic (EEG) studies initially demonstrated marked right hemisphere slow wave disturbances; however, repeat studies showed no definite epileptiform abnormality, with slow and asymmetrical, frequent theta and slow activity consistent with non-specific focal organic disturbance of cerebral activity. The results of 24-hour BP monitoring (38 readings in total) revealed 10 systolic readings >118 mmHg (95th centile). Electrocardiographic (ECG) studies were also unremarkable. Midnight and morning cortisol levels were within the normal ranges. Other investigations such as urinary catecholamines, serum amylase, lactate, ammonia, cholesterol, chloride, and bicarbonate were all within normal ranges. Other investigations with normal outcomes included tests for urine porphyrin, anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASA), liver-kidney microsomal (LKM) antibodies, gastric parietal cell antibodies, carnitine and acylcarnitines, and a coeliac screen. A screen for orotic acid was also normal. No abnormality was detected in the urinary organic acids, but there was a slight increase in the urine amino acids. Investigations for porphyria were also normal.
Our patient was treated with the antiemetics ondansetron and cyclizine, and a trial of lorazepam was also given to try and abort the vomiting cycle. Electrolyte abnormalities were treated using intravenous fluids. At five months after her initial MRI, a repeat scan was performed and all the abnormal features had resolved. Her seizure-like symptoms settled and the vomiting episodes became shorter and less frequent. She continued to have ongoing symptoms of acute episodes of vomiting associated with hypertension for a further three months. Treatment included ondansetron, atenolol and clarithromycin. Her symptoms eventually settled and she has remained symptom free for a period of about 6 months.