A 22-year old male was admitted to our hospital with symptoms of diarrhoea, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Imaging revealed a mass in the liver with biliary compression and a recto-sigmoidal mass.
Further work-up revealed a colorectal adenocarcinoma with a solitary liver metastasis. Based on these findings, the multidisciplinary team (including gastro-enterologists, gastrointestinal surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, and pathologists) advised FOLFOX with curative intention; immunotherapy was not eligible.
The day after the first infusion of FOLFOX, the patient complained of severe epigastric and thoracic pain, refractory to opiates. Urgent imaging with chest X-ray and computed tomography chest abdomen showed no abnormalities. Biochemistry showed further decline in bilirubin without worrisome findings. The following day, shortly after termination of 5-FU infusion, pulseless ventricular tachycardia developed. Cardiac resuscitation was started without delay. Initial attempts to restore normal rhythm with defibrillation were unsuccessful. After the administration of amiodarone (300 mg), magnesium sulphate (3 g), and adrenalin, return of spontaneous circulation was obtained. Heart rhythm evolved to ventricular tachycardia with output. Another three attempts of defibrillation were unsuccessful; finally, lidocaine (70 mg) was administered with evolution to a slow idioventricular rhythm. Because of hypotension unreactive to fluid administration, vasopressors were started.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe biventricular dysfunction with left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) of 23%, a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 14 mm, and a moderate mitral insufficiency . There was no right ventricular dilatation and no pericardial fluid. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an accelerated idioventricular rhythm with the development of concordant ST-elevation .
Given his clinical condition, coronary vasospasm due to 5-FU administration was suspected. Nevertheless, no significant spasm or coronary stenosis could be seen on an urgent coronary angiography . Due to persistent hypotension, we decided to insert an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). Thereafter, the haemodynamic state initially stabilized and consciousness improved. However, despite administration of norepinephrine (0.15 µg/kg/min) and epinephrine (0.4 µg/kg/min), lactate remained high (19 mmol/L) and urinary output low. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level was 7061 ng/L. In spite of these interventions, the patient was in refractory cardiogenic shock, suspected due to acute toxic cardiomyopathy, with persistent hypotension and hypoperfusion despite medical and mechanical measures (IABP). Despite the active oncological status, we decided to start veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) given the young age of the patient and the curative intent of oncological therapy. After implantation, the patient was transferred to a tertiary university hospital. Despite initial stabilization, hypotension and ventricular fibrillation developed the next day, for which lidocaine, 2× biphasic shock 150–250 J, 300 mg amiodarone, 1 g calcium chloride, corticosteroids, and methylene blue were administered. An Impella CP device was placed in the left ventricle as a venting strategy, resulting in stable haemodynamics. During the next few days, vasopressors dose could be decreased, and after successful weaning, the VA-ECMO could be removed on Day 5 after implantation.
Echocardiography showed partially recovering biventricular function. The support provided by the Impella was gradually tapered, and eventually, the Impella could be removed on Day 8. Milrinone was continued for further inotropic support until Day 11.
Re-evaluation with transthoracic echocardiography 38 days after cardiogenic shock showed further recovery of the systolic function (LV EF 55–60%, TAPSE 21 mm). The patient was ultimately transferred to a rehabilitation department for further recovery. ECG after 6 months showed a new left bundle branch block .
The digestive oncology department decided to start oxaliplatin–Teysuno as a second-line chemotherapy regimen after sufficient rehabilitation. Nevertheless, oncologic progression was noted after three cycles and third-line chemotherapy with irinotecan–Teysuno was started. Despite these measures, there was further disease progression. The patient ultimately died 10 months after diagnosis.