The patient, a 68-year-old male, was admitted to our medical centre in November 2021 with 1 month of “draining watery stools”. More than 1 month prior, the patient had diarrhoea without obvious cause and passed yellow watery stools 7–8 times a day, more than 10 times a day. Half a month prior, the patient's diarrhoea did not improve and was accompanied by dull pain in the right lower quadrant. He went to a local hospital to consider “acute gastroenteritis or gastrointestinal dysfunction” and received “oral antibiotics” and other treatments, but the diarrhoea did not improve significantly. The patient developed oliguria 16 h prior and was referred to our hospital.
In 2011, due to high-grade urothelial invasive carcinoma of the bladder, he was treated in our centre and underwent "laparoscopic total cystectomy and “M” type ileal neobladder"; the catheter was removed 1 month after the operation. The voiding pattern was abdominal pressure voiding. During the 5-year follow-up period, the patient showed no local tumour recurrence by pelvic MRI or CT. After 2016, the patient did not visit the doctor for re-examination.
The patient's urine output was low due to severe diarrhoea, so routine urine tests could not be performed. A urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli. A faecal culture was negative for both Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae. A pelvic CT showed a large single stone in the bladder, with a small amount of gas in the cavity; it showed thickening of the bladder wall and inflammatory changes . No obvious fistula was found in the colon or rectum by electronic colonoscopy. The contrast medium flowed into the ileum through the neovesical ileum via an indwelling 14F catheter for retrograde cystography .
The patient was diagnosed with a "bladder stone, ileal neobladder fistula, and fistula located in the ileum". The patient underwent "fistulectomy, cystotomy, partial ileectomy, and end-to-end ileal anastomosis”. The abdominal longitudinal incision was opened, and the ileum and ileal neobladder were clearly adhered to the abdominal wall. A calculus was seen, its size was approximately 9.0 × 9.0 cm, and the surface was smooth; the bladder calculi were completely removed, and the fistula at the bottom of the neobladder was found to be connected with the end of the ileum. The oral segment was surgically severed and excised, and the severed end was subjected to ileal end-to-end anastomosis. The operation was successful, and the patient had no symptoms of diarrhoea after 3 months of follow-up. Colour Doppler ultrasound showed that the shape of the neobladder was intact, and no rupture was found 3 months after the operation.