A 13-year-old Saudi female was transferred from a local hospital as a case of recently-diagnosed systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with positive ANA and anti-dsDNA, had presented with an attack of loss of consciousness and convulsions, which was preceded by nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Prior to admission, she was having palpitations with echocardiography revealing pericarditis. Upon admission, investigations had revealed a severe hemolytic anemia with thrombocytopenia, and nephritis. The patient was in her usual state of good health until 3 months prior to the acute presentation. During these preceding 3 months, she was complaining of worsening loss of appetite, occasional dizziness, and intermittent fever unresponsive to antipyretics, associated with joint pain that was migratory in nature, initially involving the shoulders and knees and later extended to the wrists and ankles. Family history was significant for a second-degree consanguinity in the parents. On admission, the patient had menorrhagia and severe hemolytic anemia with thrombocytopenia for which she needed blood transfusion, as well as hypertension which was managed by amlodipine and labetalol infusion. The patient also had significant renal impairment which was managed by fluid challenge and mega dose(4mg/kg) of furosemide. Moreover, the patient had retinal detachment, albeit reversible.
summarizes the laboratory findings on admission and during the course of treatment. On admission the patient presented with microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin 8.22 g/dL, hematocrit 24.7%) and thrombocytopenia (platelet 18.6 × 10^9/L), and azotemia (urea 203.51 mg/dL and serum creatinine 2.96 mg/dL), schistocytes of 9.5% were present on the peripheral blood smear which was consistent with an ongoing thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) (schistocytes ≥1%). Interestingly, the patient had also had a severe ADMATS-13 deficiency (0.39 IU/dL). Moreover, the patient had prolonged prothrombin time (21.6 seconds) and an increase in the international normalized ratio (1.63), as well as increase in the D-dimer level (>40 mg/LFEU). However, she had normal levels of activated partial thromboplastin time (36.6 seconds) and fibrinogen (2.52g/L), which indicates that DIC is less likely. She had decreased levels of both serum complement 3 (48 mg/dl) and serum complement 4 (5.1 mg/dl). The patient had decreased albumin (3 g/dL). Moreover, the aspartate aminotransferase levels was high (94 U/L), whereas the alanine aminotransferase was within normal limits (29 U/L). Lactate dehydrogenase was (2755 U/L) and the uric acid level was elevated (14.10 mg/dL). In terms of serum electrolytes, sodium (138.6 mmol/L) and potassium (3.56 mmol/L) levels were normal. shows level of complements upon admission compared with after multiple regimens of treatment.
Renal biopsy was performed which revealed on light microscopy expanded glomerulus by fragmented red blood cells and amorphous material, as well as occlusion of small artery by fibrin thrombus with fibrinoid necrosis of the wall and fragmented red blood cells as shown in . Electron Microscopy showed deposits in the mesangium and a few in the glomerular capillary basement membrane, as well as amorphous subendothelial widening and endothelial cell swelling of a segment of a glomerular capillary as shown in . On immunofluorescence, IgA, Kappa and Lambda light chain showed prominent tubular cast staining, mild to moderate tubular protein droplet staining was observed for IgG and IgM, diffuse global granular glomerular staining was noted for C1q and C3.
The provisional diagnosis of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and SLE was made based on clinical and laboratory findings. During the first five days, the patient was treated with pulse methylprednisolone and IV antibiotics (piperacillin-tazobactam) on the suspicion of an underlying infectious trigger. Two days after admission, multidisciplinary team discussion including nephrologist, rheumatologist, hematologist and pediatric intensivist decided that the patient receives mycophenolate mofetil and the first plasma exchange session which continued for three consecutive days based on experties. On the sixth day, she developed sudden-onset of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and disturbed consciousness which was not controlled inspite of midazolam and prompted endotracheal intubation. She also received her first dose of eculizumab (900 mg). On the seventh day, she received cyclophosphamide treatment. Nevertheless, her renal functions were deteriorating with decrease in urine output for which she received furosemide. Fortunately, three days after receiving the eculizumab the anemia, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, as well as the albumin and total serum proteins have shown modest improvement as shown in , moreover clinically the generalized edema was improving. Five days after the 1st eculizumab dose, plasmapheresis was restarted for five cycles daily in addition to the previous 3 cycles, and she also took another course of pulse steroids due to worsening kidney functions. In spite of that, the patient was still deteriorating being anuric, hypertensive, anemic, and thrombocytopenic. Three weeks after admission, the patient started renal dialysis due to continued oliguria. Five days after starting the renal dialysis, the patient received rituximab, her renal functions, and urine output started to improve. One week after the renal dialysis, the patient's coagulopathy and hypertension started to resolve, and the urine output continued to improve. Five weeks after admission, a skin rash in the form of erythema and erosions appeared on the trunk and then extended to the legs, accompanied by periorbital dusky red erythema. Two days later, the patient developed periorbital maceration and scabbed bullae. However, the rash on the trunk and extremities was improving after discontinuing trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Another dose was of ecalizumab administered five weeks following the 1st dose of eculizumab, based on hematolocal experties to leave a gap following the administration of rituximab. Three days later, the patient showed significant clinical improvement, was interactive with the medical team and with her parents, as well as showed significant improvement in laboratory findings as shown in . However, after a few days the patient developed high grade fever and sepsis which prevented her from completing the ecalizumab as well as rituximab therapy regimen.