A 30-year-old healthy man came to our outpatient clinic with a two-year history of severe LUTS, including frequent voiding, hesitancy, weak urinary stream and the sensation of residual urine. Despite alpha blocker drug treatment, his symptoms had worsened. His medical history was not significant in terms of previous urethral catheterization, urinary tract infection, pelvic/perineal trauma or neurological deficit. He had two children and did not have any ejaculatory complaints or infertility.
His International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was 20, and his quality-of-life (QoL) score was 5. Digital rectal examination revealed a normal firm and nontender prostate without palpable nodules. A routine urine examination was normal and the culture was sterile. The urine cytology was not suggestive of malignancy, the serum prostatic specific antigen (PSA) level was 0.82 ng/ml (the reference value for PSA for the age range of 30-40 years is 0-2 ng/ml), and routine biochemical laboratory examinations were within normal limits. Uroflowmetry demonstrated a peak flow rate (Qmax) of 7.6 ml/sec with a voided volume of 230 ml, and the postvoid residual urine volume was 107 ml (the reference values are voided volume > 150 ml and Qmax >15 ml/s). TRUS showed an anteriorly positioned prostatic cyst arising from the bladder neck and obstructing the bladder outlet. The cyst diameter was approximately 13 x 10 mm, inside a prostate with a volume of 22 ml. CT urography was performed to identify the origin of the cystic lesion and to rule out ectopic ureter or ureterocele .
The patient then underwent cystourethroscopy examination under general anesthesia. This showed that the posterior wall of the prostatic urethra was normal and that there was cystic hemispherical bulging based on the anterior portion of the prostate. The bulge was located on the bladder neck at precisely twelve o’clock and was entirely compressing the bladder outlet. It was acting like a ball-valve, without lateral lobe hyperplasia . Moderate trabeculation due to gross back pressure change was also noted in the bladder. Transurethral marsupialization of the prostatic cyst to release the anatomical obstruction was performed, and milky fluid was expelled during the unroofing procedure.
A urethral catheter was left in place for two days, and the patient was then discharged. Histopathological examination revealed that the cyst wall was lined with benign flattened prostatic glandular epithelium without any preneoplastic change, which was consistent with the diagnosis of a prostatic retention cyst. At a return visit in the third postoperative month, a subjective dramatic improvement in symptoms was noted. IPSS was 5 and QoL was 2 at three months after the operation. Uroflowmetry showed an increased Qmax (18 ml/sec with a voided volume of 300 ml) and no residual urine. Furthermore, the patient had no symptoms suggestive of erectile dysfunction or ejaculation disorders.