The patient was 46 years old and gravida 2, para 2 (2g2p). The patient had been treated for multiple submucosal uterine myomas, hypermenorrhoea, and anaemia by a previous physician starting two years prior to the current presentation.
The previous physician was aware that the patient had undergone prior LNG-IUS insertions and that these devices had been spontaneously expulsed three times over a two-year period. At the time of referral, a third LNG-IUS was inserted; however, the patient was immediately referred to our institution for surgery after both she and the medical professional became aware that spontaneous expulsion along with massive haemorrhage had occurred. Since the previous physician was aware that the LNG-IUS had been inserted and that there had been three prior expulsions of the device, the patient was referred to us based on the assumption that no devices were present in the uterus.
The patient had a medical history of breast cancer at the age of 45, which had been treated by total mastectomy. Postoperative adjuvant therapy was not administered, and the patient is currently receiving follow-up and has not developed recurrence.
There is no family history.
The findings at the time of scheduled hospitalization were as follows: height 168 cm, weight 61 kg, body mass index 21, blood pressure 139/89 mmHg, pulse rate 82 beats/min, respiration rate 20 times/min, and body temperature 36.0 °C. The patient had no abdominal pain and no abnormal bleeding.
Blood test findings were as follows: WBC, 4600/uL; Hb, 11.6 g/dL; Plt, 335000/uL, T-bil, 0.39 mg/dL; AST, 16 U/L; ALT, 13 U/L; LDH, 169 U/L; BUN, 10.2 mg/dL; Cr, 0.65 mg/dL; Na, 141 mEq/L; K, 4.1 mEq/L; Cl, 104 mEq/L; and CRP, 0.01 mg/dL.
During examination at our institution for initial diagnosis, the uterine cavity length was 10 cm, and on transvaginal ultrasound images, multiple uterine myomas were identified, including submucosal uterine myomas up to 4 cm in size . Ultrasound images of the uterine cavity were unclear due to the presence of multiple myomas, and the LNG-IUS could not be visualized inside the uterus. During the speculum examination, the thread for pulling out the LNG-IUS was not found. During pelvic examination and ultrasound, no device was visualized in the uterus+ADs- however, two LNG-IUSs were observed in the pelvis on abdominal plain X-rays prior to surgery , such that both intrauterine LNG-IUSs were suspected to be located in the uterus.