A 34-year-old woman, G5P2A2, referred to our hospital (Women’s Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China) because of irregular vaginal bleeding and elevated serum hCG level. She had undergone suction curettage one month ago due to initial diagnosis of inevitable abortion at approximately 8 weeks of gestation in a local hospital. Thenceforth, she suffered persistent vaginal bleeding with rebound serum hCG levels for 3 weeks. Weekly serum hCG levels were 5310 IU/L, 7600 IU/L, and 9121 IU/L after the second curettage, while the levels of other tumor markers were within the normal ranges. An ultrasound examination revealed normal ultrasonic echo in both uterine myometrium and parenchyma except for irregular echo of uterine endometrium and a little enlarged uterus . After admission to our hospital, a pathological diagnosis of CHM was confirmed according to the HE slices from first curettage. All the imaging data which were performed in local hospital were reanalyzed and reconfirmed. Additional abdomen and pelvis CT scan were done in our hospital. All the imaging scans were normal. Combining the symptoms, previous history of CHM, and elevated hCG level, the initial diagnosis was considered as gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). The patient suddenly presented severe abdominal pain in the second early morning after hospitalization and the ultrasound examination showed intra-abdominal hemorrhage.
Combined emergency hysteroscopy and laparoscopy were performed. Hysteroscopy revealed an empty uterine cavity without gestational tissue except for an old iatrogenic uterine perforation at right fundus of uterine. Under laparoscopy, an iatrogenic uterine perforation was confirmed. Totally 300 ml uncoagulated blood were collected in pelvic cavity and three mole lesions with dark-brownish, coin-sized bleeding spot were noted, one was at the pelvic peritoneum near the right uterosacral ligament (about 2 × 2 cm), another was at posterior uterine serosa (0.3 × 0.3 cm), and the third was on the omentum (3 × 2 cm) . Both sides of adnexae appeared normal. The iatrogenic uterine perforation was mended. All lesions of mole were removed. The abdomen and pelvis CT and MRI images were postoperatively re-reviewed, and a mass (3.03 × 1.56CM) on omentum was found in CT scan, as shown in Fig. . The final pathological diagnosis of the three mole lesions was invasive mole. As showed in Fig. , edematous villus with trophoblastic cells significantly invaded into the pelvic peritoneum and omentum metastatic sites. Thus, the patient was diagnosed as FIGO stage IV with score of 3 (1 for hCG level > 1000 U/L, 1 for >3 cm metastasis on omentum, and 1 for three identified metastases lesions). According to 2000 FIGO staging, a risk score of 6 and below is classified as low risk. Thus, the patient underwent chemotherapy with single methotrexate regimen (4 mg/kg at day 1–5, 2-week interval). The serum hCG level was rapidly decreased. At the end of the second course of methotrexate chemotherapy, the hCG level dropped to negative, and additional 2 courses of chemotherapy was given. The woman was followed up to one year and her hCG level was normal.