The now 31-year-old Caucasian woman, a heavy smoker (17 pack-years), had her first attack of anti-GBM disease in 2009 with life-threatening pulmonary haemorrhage and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Plasma anti-GBM antibodies were detected (titre 137 U/ml), and a renal biopsy showed linear IgG deposits along the glomerular basement membrane. She was treated with 1 g iv prednisolone for 3 days followed by 80 mg orally, plasma exchange, and six cycles of iv cyclophosphamide 750 mg. After an allergic reaction to fresh frozen plasma, therapy was switched from plasma exchange to immunoadsorption using Ig-Therasorb® columns with Sepharose-coupled polyclonal sheep antibodies against human immunoglobulins. She responded clinically well to treatment and anti-GBM antibodies became negative. Her serum creatinine in remission was 168 μmol/L. Eight months later she acquired an influenza H1N1 virus infection with pneumonia and adult respiratory distress syndrome requiring mechanical ventilation. In 2012, parvovirus B19-associated perimyocarditis resulting in dilated cardiomyopathy was diagnosed. She was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin. A second episode of parvovirus B19-positive perimyocarditis occurred in 2015. Two months after the infection, the patient was re-admitted with haemoptysis, deteriorating renal function and a nephritic urinary sediment. A test for anti-GBM antibodies was borderline (titre 20 U/mL). She was treated with 500 mg iv prednisolone for 3 days followed by 80 mg orally, plasma exchange and two 1-g doses of rituximab. Serum creatinine stabilized in the range of 180 μmol/L.
In September 2020, the patient presented critically ill with severe dyspnoea, haemoptysis and anaemia. Heart rate was 120/min, blood pressure 170/100 mmHg and oxygen saturation 93% when breathing ambient air. Within 1 week haemoglobin had fallen from 9.6 to 7.1 g/dL. Serum creatinine increased from around 270 μmol/L to 420 μmol/L. Urinalysis revealed 3+ proteinuria, 4+ haematuria and a highly nephritic sediment. Table shows the most relevant results of laboratory investigations at first presentation of the patient.
A SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR was positive with a cycle threshold (Ct) > 30. SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were undetectable by ELISA. A diagnosis of COVID-19 was made, and the patient was treated with conventional oxygen supplementation and dexamethasone 6 mg daily. Because of the medical history, haemoptysis and renal disease a recurrence of anti-GBM disease was suspected. Tests for anti-GBM antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. A renal biopsy was performed. Of seven glomeruli three were completely sclerosed and three revealed fibrocellular crescents with florid segmental fibroid necrosis . Focal tubular atrophy with low-grade lymphomononuclear infiltration and moderate interstitial fibrosis were found. Immunohistochemistry revealed linear deposits of IgG, IgM and C3 along the glomerular basement membrane . No staining on tubular basement membranes was observed.
The diagnosis of recurrent anti-GBM disease was made. The patient was switched from dexamethasone to 60 mg prednisolone, which was reduced to 40 mg after 2 weeks and tapered to 10 mg over the next 2 months. Furthermore, she received one dose of 1 g iv cyclophosphamide and two 1-g doses of rituximab. Cotrimoxazole was given for pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis. A series of seven plasma exchanges of four litres each led to remission of haemoptysis, and her clinical condition improved. After a symptom-free interval of 1 week, haemoptysis re-occurred. Another series of seven plasma exchanges was performed followed by rapid remission of pulmonary symptoms. The patient, however, remained dialysis-dependent. A time line of diagnoses and treatment modalities is provided in Table .