The patient was a 27-year-old Iranian man surviving from severe TBI following a motor vehicle accident, with left hemiplegia and spasticity of the upper and lower limbs (lower limb spasticity less severe than upper limb), especially in the wrist flexors, pronator, and thumb adductor and flexor muscles. The patient had no history of any comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, or high blood pressure. He had started to walk independently and without support 8 months after injury. He had received several other treatments, including physiotherapy, exercise therapy, medication, and botulinum toxin injections to relieve spasticity of the upper limb, but still complained of spasticity and dysfunction in the left upper limb. We aimed to evaluate the immediate effect of a single session of DN on this patient with left hemiplegia after TBI, who suffered from spasticity of the upper limb. The study was approved by the research ethics committee of Shiraz School of Rehabilitation Sciences.
Outcome measures were evaluated before and 1 hour after the DN intervention.The upper limb recovery stage and hand function
The upper limb recovery stage and hand function were determined using a criterion defined by Brunnstrom , which has been introduced as a valid test for the assessment of patients with post-stroke hemiplegia .Spasticity Spasticity was assessed by the Persian Modified Modified Ashworth Scale (MMAS) in the elbow, wrist, and finger flexors, forearm pronator, and thenar muscles. The MMAS grades the intensity of muscle spasticity on a 0–4 scale [, ] . The patient was supine and the head was midline to prevent an asymmetric tonic reflex that may increase spasticity. Passive resistance force Passive resistance force (PRF) was determined biomechanically by a handheld dynamometer (HHD) using the clinical method to assess spasticity with MMAS. The amount of Newtonian force (N) applied to the dynamometer sensitive pad by the evaluator against spasticity of the elbow, wrist, and finger flexors, forearm pronator, and thenar muscles to move them from flexion to extension and from pronation to supination at the end of the existing range of motion (ROM) and by gravity was measured. HHD is a reliable and valid tool for muscle evaluation in clinical settings . Range of motion
A standard goniometer was used to measure the active ROM (AROM) and passive ROM (PROM).Elbow extension The patient was supine with the hand supinated. The axis of the goniometer was placed at the lateral epicondyle of the elbow, the stationary arm was parallel with the humerus, and the movement arm was parallel with the radius. Then, the assessor extended the patient’s elbow passively and recorded the end position of elbow extension as PROM. The same procedure was followed for the measurement of elbow extension AROM unless the patient was asked to extend voluntarily the elbow. Wrist extension The patient was in a sitting position next to the table, elbow flexed to 90°, and forearm in mid-position rested on the supporting surface. The axis of the goniometer was placed at the snuff box, the stationary arm was along the lateral radius, and the movement arm was aligned with the second metacarpal. Then, the assessor extended the patient’s wrist passively and recorded the end position of wrist extension as PROM. The same procedure was followed for the measurement of wrist extension AROM unless the patients were asked to extend voluntarily the wrist. Forearm supination The patient was seated with the shoulder adducted by their side, elbow flexed to 90°, and forearm in the neutral position to start. The axis of the goniometer was placed over the tip of the third digit. The stationary arm was parallel with the humerus, and the movement arm was aligned with the volar forearm surface. The assessor supinated the patient’s forearm passively and recorded the end position forearm supination as PROM. The same procedure was followed for the measurement of forearm supination AROM unless the patients were asked to supinate voluntarily the forearm. Carpometacarpal (thumb) extension The patient was in a sitting position next to the table, elbow flexed to 90°, and forearm in mid-position rested on the supporting surface. The axis of the goniometer was placed at the palmar aspect of the first carpometacarpal (CMC) joint, the stationary arm was along the ventral midline of the radius using the ventral surface of radial head and styloid for reference, and the movement arm was along the ventral midline of the first metacarpal. The assessor extended the patient’s thumb passively and recorded the end position of the thumb extension as PROM. The same procedure was followed for the measurement of thumb extension AROM unless the patients were asked to extend voluntarily the thumb. Carpometacarpal (thumb) abduction The patient was in sitting position next to the table, elbow flexed to 90°, and forearm in mid-position rested on the supporting surface. The axis of the goniometer was placed at the lateral aspect of the radial styloid process. The stationary arm was along the lateral midline of the second metacarpal. Reference center of the second MCP joint, and the movement arm was lateral midline of the first metacarpal. Reference center of first MCP joint. The assessor abducted the patient’s thumb passively and recorded the end position of thumb abduction as PROM. The same procedure was followed for the measurement of thumb abduction AROM unless the patients were asked to abduct voluntarily the thumb. Box and Block Test Reliable and valid Box and Block Test (BBT) was used to measure hand dexterity . A test box, divided by a partition into two compartments of equal size consisting of 150 blocks, was placed in front of the patient on a standard-height table. The patient, sitting in a chair with a standard height, was instructed to remove the blocks one by one with the healthy hand and then with the injured hand, moving them from one compartment to another. The patient was encouraged to perform the test as quickly as possible. The number of blocks transferred to another test box chamber within 1 minute was recorded as BBT score.
The patient received a DN session using disposable stainless steel needles (0.25 mm × 50 mm), which were inserted into the muscle through the skin. Treatment steps included hand washing, wearing disposable examination gloves, and cleansing the skin. The patient’s skin was prepared with an alcohol swab before intervention. Muscle positioning for DN was performed according to Dommerholt Second Edition . The patient was lying down, arm away from the trunk, and forearm in the middle position. The target muscles received a DN using the fast-in and fast-out technique described by Hong . Visual or tactile identification of the local twitch response (LTR) was considered a clinical sign of DN function because the patient’s main complaint was spasticity. Muscles treated were the elbow flexors (biceps brachii and brachialis), the wrist flexors (flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, flexors digitorum superficialis, and profundus), and the thenar muscles (opponens pollicis, adductor pollicis).Biceps brachii The patient lay down supine with the arm slightly flexed. The muscle was grasped between the thumb and index and long fingers. Taut bands were identified. The muscle was needled from a lateral approach . Brachialis The patient lay down supine with the elbow relaxed and slightly flexed. The muscle was needled via flat palpation in the lateral aspect of the arm, distal two-thirds of the humerus. The needle was directed medially between the biceps and triceps brachii . Flexors digitorum superficialis and profundus The patient lay down in supine position with the forearm almost supinated. The muscles were needled with flat palpation; the needle was inserted perpendicular to the skin and directed toward the interosseous membrane . Flexor carpi radialis (FCR) The patient lay down in supine position with the forearm almost supinated. A point at the medial forearm, 4 cm below the point 1 cm medial to the midpoint of elbow crease, was needled for FCR. Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) The patient lay down in supine position with the forearm almost supinated. A point at the midpoint of the proximal third segment of a line from the medial epicondyle to the ulnar styloid process was needled for FCU. Pronator teres (PT) Pronator teres was needled at the proximal and medial forearm, 1 cm below the midpoint of elbow crease between the medial epicondyle and biceps brachii tendon. Thenar muscles (opponens pollicis) The needle was inserted at a point on the dorsum of the hand at the site of the proximal angle formed between the first and second metacarpal bones. Thenar muscles (adductor pollicis) The needle was inserted via the radial aspect of the first metacarpal (to avoid palmar fascia) toward the thenar eminence.