In August 2020, a 51-year-old right-handed male non-smoking marathon runner, with no past medical or relevant family history, presented to a community hospital emergency room with a fall following a four-month history of progressive asymmetric numbness and weakness in the legs. This was associated with unexplained 10-pound weight loss. His exam revealed Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4 strength throughout the right lower limb with normal motor strength in the left lower limb and associated areflexia. Examination of the upper extremities was unremarkable. Investigations were initiated by the family doctor, which consisted of hemoglobin A1c, TSH, and vitamin B12 levels, which were unremarkable. An inpatient work-up including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed elevated white blood cell (WBC) count and protein of 14 × 106/L and 1.1 g/L respectively. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the spine was also performed and was unremarkable. The working diagnosis was Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS), and he was treated with a 5-day course of Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg). After discharge, his electromyography (EMG)/nerve conduction study revealed a primarily lower extremity sensorimotor axonal neuropathy with complete sparing of the upper extremities. Right peroneal motor response was absent with reduced right peroneal sensory amplitude and velocity. Needle EMG showed increased insertional activity with fibrillations and positive sharp waves in the right rectus femoris, right adductor longus, and right tibialis anterior, as well as active denervation in the L5 paraspinous muscles.
In October 2020, he was seen by a community neurologist who identified significant worsening in neurological status. Therefore, he was referred to a neuromuscular specialist in a tertiary centre. Clinical exam at this time identified MRC grade 0 hip flexion, grade 0 knee extension, grade 2 knee flexion, and grade 0 ankle dorsiflexion on the right side. Examination of the left side revealed grade 2 hip flexion, grade 2 knee extension, grade 4 knee flexion, and grade 4 ankle dorsiflexion. Repeat electrophysiologic studies again demonstrated a primarily axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. Due to the patient’s significant clinical and electrophysiologic deterioration, he was referred for admission to the neurology service of a tertiary centre for further work-up.
A complete spinal MRI with gadolinium showed smooth enhancement of the ventral nerve roots of the cauda equina extending from the conus medullaris ventrally at T11-T12 to the lumbosacral thecal sac , which can be seen in immune-mediated syndromes such as Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy (CIDP). Denervation atrophy was noted over the right psoas and dorsal paraspinal muscles. Follow-up MRI of the pelvis and lumbosacral plexus again demonstrated a similar enhancement pattern and evidence of mild Short-T1 Inversion Recovery (STIR) high signal and enlargement in extrathecal lumbosacral plexus. Repeat CSF from November 10th and 20th revealed persistently elevated protein (0.58 g/L and 1.67 g/L respectively) and pleocytosis (cell count of 13 × 106/L and 8 × 106/L respectively) with no oligoclonal bands. Flow cytometry was negative twice for neurolymphomatosis. Given the high concern for malignancy, the patient was further investigated for lymphoma with random skin and bone marrow biopsies, which were negative. Left sural nerve biopsy showed mild, nonspecific changes, with patchy loss of larger myelinated fibers, otherwise normal fascicle architecture, occasional scattered endoneurial lymphocytes, and no evidence of vasculitis, amyloid deposition, or neoplastic infiltrates. Gastrocnemius biopsy also showed mild, nonspecific changes, with rare scattered atrophic and regenerating fibers and no inflammatory infiltrates. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed mild polyclonal increase in gamma globulins, likely related to prior treatment with IVIg, without a monoclonal peak. Low-dose full-body Computed Tomography (CT) was also negative. Porphyria screen was negative.
However, full-dose CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast revealed vascular scarring of the left lower lobe of the lung and 7 × 6 mm soft tissue nodule in the right upper lobe apex. Subsequent positron emission tomography (PET) identified fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid right pretracheal, precarinal, subcarinal, and hilar lymphadenopathy with no hypermetabolism in the nerve roots. Urgent bronchoscopy and lymph node biopsy was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of SCLC. Serum and CSF paraneoplastic and peripheral neurologic diseases antibody panels run at Mitogen Advanced Diagnostics Laboratory (Calgary, AB, Canada) returned negative (including onconeural antibodies anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-amphiphysin, anti-Yo, anti-Ma, anti-CV2.1, anti-recoverin, anti-SOX1, anti-titin, as well as anti-GM1–3, anti-GD1a-b, anti-GQ1b, anti-GT1b).
In terms of treatment, the patient completed the initial course of IVIg as previously described, as well as a repeat course following his admission to the tertiary center. He was then treated with IV methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 5 days, followed by a slow oral prednisone taper. He was started on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylactically prior to the bronchoscopy results. After his diagnosis was confirmed as SCLC, he was transferred to a medical oncology ward at his secondary care centre to receive radical chemoradiotherapy. He went on to have four cycles of carboplatin, etoposide, and radiation therapy (40 Gy in 15 fraction). Two months later, the patient regained ten pounds of weight and is able to independently transfer from his bed to his chair and walk with a walker and ankle-foot orthotic for persistent left foot drop.