A 77-year-old Spanish man was admitted to our hospital in September 2012 after 10 days of marked general syndrome (asthenia, hyporexia, and 2-kg weight loss) accompanied by cough and mucopurulent sputum, dyspnea, and low-grade fever. He had a 20 pack-year history of smoking. He had no surgical background or other medical background of interest.
The clinical findings were as follows: body temperature 38.9 °C, blood pressure 170/80 mmHg, heart rate 110 beats/min, respiratory rate 30 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 72 % on room air. The patient’s physical examination was normal except for pulmonary auscultation. Diminished respiratory sounds and crackles were found bilaterally at the bases of both lungs. Laboratory tests revealed a 20,300 × 109/L white blood cell count with 90 % neutrophils, 13.1 g/dl hemoglobin, C-reactive protein 21.7 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 2.84 ng/ml, and glucose 246 mg/dl. The patient’s platelet count, arterial blood clotting, and the rest of the biochemical tests were within normal ranges. Arterial blood gas analysis showed partial pressure of arterial oxygen 32 mmHg, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide 76 mmHg, pH 7.37, and standard HCO3 35 mEq/L (room air).
A chest x-ray revealed a right lung basal alveolar infiltrate and a reticular interstitial pattern at the lung bases . The results of urinary antigen for Pneumococcus and Legionella, sputum cytology, mycobacterial culture, and serologic HIV tests were negative. Three blood cultures were obtained upon admission from the same site through a single venipuncture, and antibiotic treatment with levofloxacin was initiated. Chest computed tomography (CT) was performed 2 days after admission because of persistence of fever and radiological worsening. Levofloxacin was replaced by a broad-spectrum antibiotic (imipenem) on the third day of hospitalization. The CT scan showed a right lower lobe alveolar consolidation with minimal pleural effusion, severe bilateral diffuse emphysema, and signs of chronic bronchitis . A bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed. The quantitative cultures of BAL specimens yielded a Gram-positive aerobic branched, nonfragmented bacillus at a concentration of 4 × 106 colony-forming units per milliliter identified as S. atratus. No other pathogen was isolated. The microbiology department confirmed S. atratus growth in two blood cultures on the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The isolate was sensitive to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, erythromycin, cefotaxime, imipenem, gentamicin, tobramycin, ciprofloxacin, co-trimoxazole, clarithromycin, and linezolid.
A control chest x-ray obtained 3 weeks later showed radiological improvement . The patient was treated with intravenous imipenem (2 g/day for 14 days) and changed to oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (1000/62.5 mg twice daily for 21 days). After 2 weeks of treatment, the patient’s blood cultures were negative and his PCT level was 0.10 ng/ml. On the basis of his clinical and radiological improvement, the patient was discharged. A control CT scan of the chest obtained at the 3-month follow-up visit showed almost complete resolution of the right lower lobe consolidation . The patient remained well at the 4-month and 6-month follow-up visits.