We report the case of a 7-year-old boy, who was healthy until the age of 6 years when he presented to a local hospital with progressive intermittent back pain (grade 4 on the Numeric Rating Scale), leg weakness, and poor appetite. Within a month, he was admitted to our pediatric emergency department because he could no longer stand without assistance. At that time, he had no bladder and bowel dysfunction and no history of trauma. On neurological examination, he had significant lower extremity weakness, with a grade 3 in both legs on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale and with preservation of sensory function. Moreover, he had positive Babinski reflexes in his lower extremities and the presence of ankle clonus. We planned an emergency imaging examination, suspecting spinal cord compression syndrome.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine and computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a large mass sized 6.1 × 7.4 × 9.5 cm in the right posterior mediastinum from T5 to T11, involving T8 and the T9 vertebral body with extension into the spinal canal and compressing the spinal cord . Moreover, the tumor showed septal contrast enhancement on coronal T2 view of the thoracic spine MRI and internal dystrophic calcification on the chest CT . No metastasis was observed on examination with bone scintigraphy, positron emission tomography–CT, and testicular sonography.
Emergency total laminectomy for T6-T10 was performed and histopathological examination of the specimen confirmed a seminoma in the posterior mediastinum. Immunohistochemical staining result was negative for β-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), but positive for placental alkaline phosphatase (PALP) and c-KIT (CD117) in the tumor cells .
Complete blood cell count and an admission panel test revealed no abnormal findings, including levels of lactate dehydrogenase 547 U/L, α-fetoprotein (AFP) < 1.3 ng/mL, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 172 U/L (PALP portion was not found). However, β-HCG level was high (30.84 mIU/mL, reference range 0–10 mIU/mL). The patient was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy (30 mg/kg/day) postoperatively for 30 h, subsequently followed by maintenance therapy with oral prednisolone for 2 weeks, as well as rehabilitation. Nine cycles of chemotherapy were administered postoperatively, followed by 5 cycles of ICE (Ifosfamide 1500 mg/m2/day IV on days 1-5, Carboplatin 150 mg/m2/day IV on days 1-2, Etoposide 100 mg/m2/day IV on days 1-5) and 4 cycles of BEP (Bleomycin 15 mg/m2/day IV on day 1, Etoposide 100 mg/m2/day IV on days 1-5, Cisplatin 20 mg/m2/day IV on days 1-5) alternatively .
On day 28 (+ 28) after starting chemotherapy, before the 2nd cycle of chemotherapy, β-HCG was undetectable in the blood. Moreover, a thoracic spine MRI showed a much decreased soft tissue tumor in the right posterior mediastinum at T5-T11 level with a residual lesion after removal in the spinal canal from lower T5-T9 level, with the total laminectomy from the T6-T10 vertebra .
He underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic exploration and biopsy on day + 91 (after the 3rd cycle of chemotherapy). A grossly visible tumor was not detected and the tissue specimen was free of tumor microscopically.
After the last (ninth) cycle of chemotherapy (on day + 286), a spine MRI revealed an improved state of compressive myelopathy at the T7-T9 region and that the soft tissue tumor had almost disappeared from the posterior mediastinal and intercostal space compared with the initial MRI .
The patient has been undergoing regular physical therapy and regular follow ups for 3 years since the chemotherapy ended. On day + 1129, there was no abnormality except for a mild kyphotic curvature on the spine MRI. Moreover, the patient slowly recovered from the neurologic symptoms, improving to grade 4 in lower extremity strength on the MRC scale, and could walk without assistance. He has been wearing a thoracolumbosacral orthosis brace for kyphotic curvature prevention and is undergoing multidisciplinary rehabilitation.