A 20-year-old right-handed female presented with a 5-month history of progressively worsening, lancinating right-sided facial pain that was unresponsive to medical management. The pain occurred episodically and lasted for few minutes after which it would resolve. The pain was exacerbated by talking, chewing, brushing her teeth, blowing winds, and cold breezes. She reported no history of headache, watery eyes or redness of eyes, rhinorrhea, or tooth ache. The rest of the systemic history was unremarkable, and the patient otherwise had no significant medical or surgical history.
On the initial examination, the patient sat comfortably with no signs of distress. She was vitally stable, and the general examination was unremarkable. The neurological examination of the cranial nerves was significant for decreased sensation on the right in the ophthalmic (V1) and maxillary (V2) division of the trigeminal nerve. She also had House Brackmann Grade 1 facial weakness on the right side. The rest of the neurological and systemic examination was unremarkable.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain revealed a well-circumscribed 12 × 9 mm cystic lesion in the right CPA at the site of the trigeminal nerve. The cyst returned low signals on T1WI and high signals on T2WI with no contrast enhancement and caused minimal displacement of the trigeminal nerve. Subtle relative atrophy of the visualized right trigeminal nerve was also noted. Due to the cyst, the trigeminal nerve was not completely visualized on the MRI scan. - represent the MR images signifying an abnormal signal intensity lesion at the pre-Meckel cave segment of the right trigeminal nerve, which is iso- to hypointense on T1-WI and hyperintense on T2-WI with no post contrast enhancement or diffusion restriction.
The patient underwent right retrosigmoid craniotomy and exploration of the CPA. Once the thin-walled cyst was punctured (revealing clear fluid), the trigeminal nerve became more prominent, and a localized small, grayish, and soft-tissue lesion became visible on the superior surface of the nerve before it entered Meckel’s cave. The mass extended over the length of the nerve and measured roughly 0.6 cm × 0.3 cm. The lesion was dissected off the nerve, and the case was completed uneventfully. The patient reported immediate improvement in the symptoms of TN and was discharged the next day. Facial nerve function also showed improvement at follow-up 2 weeks later.
Histopathology sections of the lesion revealed tumor cells arranged predominantly around central blood vessels forming perivascular pseudorosettes . The neoplastic cells were rounded showing moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm with round to oval nuclei showing fine granular chromatin with inconspicuous nucleoli. Few of the nuclei exhibited intranuclear inclusions. Scattered calcifications were also present . There was no significant mitotic activity, microvascular proliferation, or necrosis. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein, whereas Olig2 immunostain was negative [ and ]. Hence, morphological and immunohistochemical features favored the diagnosis of Grade II ependymoma according to the WHO classification.
The patient underwent a postoperative neuroaxis MRI scan that revealed no residual lesion and no lesion anywhere else in the neuroaxis. She is currently asymptomatic and on close radiological surveillance.