A 43-year-old woman was referred to our department complaining of dyspnea and orthopnea deteriorating over the course of about 2 weeks. She had a history of colon cancer 8 years earlier and had been found to have a lung tumor in the lower lobe of the right lung on chest computed tomography (CT) 7 years earlier. She had declined further examination and treatment for the lung nodule despite growth of the nodule. Body temperature was 36.6 °C, blood pressure was 114/85 mmHg, heart rate was 84 beats/min, and SpO2 was 96%. Stridor was heard and respiratory sounds were decreased in the right lung. Chest CT revealed right massive pleural effusion and pericardial effusion . Echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricular systolic function but collapse of both the right atrium and right ventricle . She is difficult to take not only supine position but also Trendelenburg position due to massive pleural effusion and pericardial effusion; therefore, pericardiocentesis was impossible without sedative agents. Furthermore, she had declined further treatment as well as invasive examinations on the admission. Because hemodynamics was not broken yet and development of re-expansion pulmonary edema and circulatory failure due to positive pressure ventilation and sedative agents were concerned, we decided to perform elective thoracoscopy under local anesthesia and removal of pleural effusion and subsequently pericardial effusion, after her consent for treatments and the symptoms were relieved by thoracentesis.
The pleural effusion (about 500 ml) was removed by thoracentesis, and a few atypical cells were detected. Because surgical procedures under general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation might have proven intolerable, thoracoscopic examination and pleural biopsy were performed under local anesthesia and light sedation by midazolam. The patient was positioned in a left decubitus position, and a 7-mm trocar was inserted into the right thoracic cavity. A single-channel thoracoscope (Olympus LTF-260™; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted through the trocar. Examination revealed 800 ml of serous pleural effusion, many pleural nodules, and severely distended pericardium with pericardial effusion . The distended pericardium was broken by biopsy forceps at the ventral part of the phrenic nerve , followed by the evacuation of the pleural effusion and biopsies of the parietal pleura. About 435 ml of bloody pericardial effusion spurted through the pericardial fenestration . Finally, a 20-Fr double-lumen chest tube was inserted. The entire procedure took 35 min. Atypical cells were also detected in the pericardial effusion, and the histopathological diagnosis was primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma with neither EGFR nor ALK mutations. On postoperative day 10, talc pleurodesis was performed, and the chest tube was removed on day 14. Although 2 cycles of systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab were performed and achieved stable disease, she refused to continue chemotherapy. No recurrence of pleural or pericardial effusion was observed for 3 months, at which time she transferred from the hospital into palliative care.