A previously healthy 15-years-old Caucasian boy developed progressive dyspnoea and asthenia. At onset, laboratory features showed leukopenia (2.38 × 103/uL), lymphopenia (0.89 × 103/uL), hypergammaglobulinemia (22.31 g/l) and normal C-reactive protein (CRP) (< 0.5 mg/dl); antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-dsDNA were negative. Lung computed tomography (CT) demonstrates the presence of left pleural and pericardial effusion, without lung involvement and elevated hemidiaphragm . He was treated with multiple antibiotics, with no response, and underwent four thoracenteses, with no microbial isolate. After two months, he was admitted to our division for the persistence of pleural effusion. He presented in poor general condition with tachypnoea, respiratory distress, requiring O2 supplementation, dullness over the left lung and mild malar rash. CRP, blood cell count, liver and kidney functional tests and urine analysis were normal. C3 and C4 levels were low. ANA, anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm and anti-U1RNP antibodies were present . Type I interferon (IFN) signature was markedly elevated (score 76.4 median fold change). A massive left pleural effusion was was drained (2800 ml) and chest tube placed with marked improvement. Renal, cardiovascular and central nervous system involvement was excluded. A diagnosis of SLE was made according to the 2012 SLICC and 2019 EULAR/ACR criteria. Methylprednisolone (mPDN) pulses (1 gr/day, equal to 15 mg/kg/day, for 3 consecutive days) followed by mPDN 60 mg/day (equal to 0.8 mg/kg/day) were administered. Simultaneously mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (1000 mg, equal to 600 mg/m2, twice a day) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) (200 mg/day, equal to 3 mg/kg) were also added. The daily volume of drained fluid mildly decreased , and 10 days after one additional mPDN pulse was administered with no substantial effect. After 2 weeks, intravenous TCZ (800 mg, equal to 12 mg/kg, every two weeks) was started. Driven by the need for a rapid response before moving to other untargeted immunochemotherapies or invasive approaches (pleurodesis), we chose to use a high dose of TCZ to avoid the risk of under dosing. Immediately after the first dose, the daily volume of drained fluid decreased progressively allowing to remove the chest tube drainage on day + 4 after the first TCZ dose . Nine days after the first TCZ dose, a chest CT documented no pleural effusion . Prednisone (PDN) was progressively tapered without flares to 7,5 mg/day (0.09 mg/kg/day) at 9 months. After 6 months of treatment, blood tests improved and the infusion-interval of TCZ was extended to every 3 weeks without flares. After one year, the patient was in good clinical condition, still on TCZ (12 mg/kg every 3 weeks), oral PDN (5 mg/day, equal to 0.06 mg/kg/day), MMF (1 gr twice/day) and HCQ (200 mg/day). Pleural and pericardial effusions were not detected. Clinical inactive disease was maintained (SLEDAI 2), C3 and C4 improved but C3 of 0.75 g/l remained below the normal range .