A 61-year-old woman presented with a history of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. She presented with gradually worsening headache, visual disturbance, and disorientation for approximately 3 weeks. Neurological examination revealed confused consciousness and headache worsening in the recumbent position. Diffusion-weighted images demonstrated multiple infarctions in the right temporal and cerebellar hemispheres. T2*-weighted images revealed an extensive thrombus affecting the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) to the right sigmoid sinus (SS) [ and ]. Coagulopathy was ruled out by hematological examination without any recognized thrombocytopenia. Intravenous anticoagulation therapy with heparin was administered for the CVT. Two days after the introduction of anticoagulation therapy, decreased consciousness and left hemiplegia developed. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images revealed a new venous infarction in the right frontal lobe [ and ]. Angiography showed venous congestion with an extensive contrast defect from the SSS to the right SS with venous congestion in the venous phase. No dAVF was detected [-]. Mechanical thrombectomy was performed for venous sinus thrombus. Under local anesthesia, a long guiding sheath of 6 French was inserted into the right jugular vein through the femoral vein. An aspiration catheter with a large bore was advanced into the right SS to the SSS. A large dark-red thrombus was aspirated and spontaneous blood flow was confirmed. Final angiography showed partial recanalization of the SSS and transverse sinus (TS) with a residual thrombus . Her level of consciousness and left hemiplegia markedly improved and she was discharged without any neurological deficits. Oral anticoagulation therapy was then continued. She was readmitted with secondary generalized seizures at our hospital 1 month after discharge. Computed tomography revealed a hematoma with edema in the left frontal cortex. T2*-weighted images revealed a thrombus in the focal cortical vein near the hematoma . The patient was diagnosed with hemorrhagic infarction due to venous thrombus recurrence. Intravenous anticoagulation therapy with heparin was reintroduced and the thrombus subsequently dissolved on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. The patient was discharged uneventfully using warfarin. During the follow-up period, the residual thrombus in the SSS and TS gradually dissolved on MRI examination. However, a high-signal spot arose in the left frontal cortex on arterial spin labeling images, and angiography was performed 2 years after the initial treatment, even though it was asymptomatic. Angiography revealed de novo dAVF that was fed from the anterior falcine and middle meningeal artery and directly drained into the left cortical vein, classified as high-grade dAVF of Borden Type III and Cognard Type III [ and ]. Transarterial embolization with Onyx was performed with complete obliteration without a shunt [ and ].