A 64-year-old male presented to the emergency department from his care home with 12 days of dysarthria and right hemiparesis and three days of progressively worsening altered mental status. His medical history was significant for homelessness, chronic hepatitis C, liver cirrhosis, polysubstance use disorder, and schizoaffective disorder. Of note, an incidental abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan for a urinary tract infection obtained one year before admission was negative for any liver masses.
The patient’s initial examination was notable for the left gaze preference, global aphasia, and right hemiparesis, with head CT showing a large hypervascular 5.7 cm tumor with surrounding edema . He was subsequently intubated for hypoxemic respiratory failure and admitted to the neuroscience intensive care unit. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 5.8 cm enhancing left dural parafalcine hemorrhagic mass extending across the midline with significant vasogenic edema [-]. The radiographic differential diagnosis included a hemorrhagic meningioma versus meningeal hemangiopericytoma. A diagnostic cerebral angiogram demonstrated a distal left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) pseudoaneurysm within the hemorrhagic mass, with additional inputs from the left ophthalmic artery and right middle meningeal artery [-]. The patient underwent successful endovascular embolization of the pseudoaneurysm, which was deemed the source of hemorrhage . Given evidence of pronounced mass effect seen on initial imaging, neurosurgical evaluation recommended resection of the tumor to optimize his recovery potential. Following a discussion with the family, who agreed with said recommendations, the patient underwent an uncomplicated bicoronal frontal craniotomy for falcine tumor resection [ and ]. The intraoperative frozen section of the tumor sample was sent to pathology and was initially interpreted as meningioma. On subsequent examination, however, the tumor sample was negative for numerous other meningioma markers, challenging the preliminary diagnosis. The samples were, thus, sent to another institution for a second consultation.
The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by persistent neurologic disability, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia, and prolonged ventilator dependence. Given his advanced disease, the patient was transitioned to comfort measures following a discussion with the family and expired on day 18 of hospitalization. Histopathological findings of the dural-based tumor returned following the patient’s passing, revealing a poorly differentiated carcinoma with positive epithelial markers and in situ hybridization staining for albumin [-]. These findings, in the context of the patient’s underlying liver cirrhosis, were consistent with metastatic HCC.