A 66-year-old man with a past medical history of sleep apnoea syndrome and junctional tachycardia ablation presented with an acute AR following a coronary angiography. His current treatment included aspirin 75 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, bisoprolol 5 mg, atorvastatin 80 mg, and ramipril 1.25 mg. A few days prior, he experienced an inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction, leading to an urgent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Upon admission, physical examination was normal, and no valvular abnormality was reported on the initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). A complete occlusion of the distal right coronary artery (RCA) was identified, and a stent was implanted (Guide catheter JR40, Stent Resolute Onyx 4.5 mm × 12 mm, duration of the procedure 38 min). The proximal RCA had a shepherd’s crook configuration but no difficulty was encountered during catheter engagement. Shortly after the procedure, the patient complained of shortness of breath and a short decrescendo early diastolic aortic murmur was detected. The NT-pro-brain natriuretic peptide level rose to 1784 pg/mL, chest X-ray was normal and a computed tomography scan revealed no aortic dissection or pulmonary embolism. A second TTE revealed an unexpected moderate-to-severe AR (vena contracta width 0.6 cm, Jet width > 50% of outflow tract, Pressure Half-Time 340 ms) associated with an abnormal mobile structure on the aortic valve (AV). Additionally, the inferior wall was hypokinetic, without left ventricle dilatation and the ejection fraction was 45%. A subsequent transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) in mid-oesophageal view detected a fine and filamentous 17 mm mobile lesion on the non-coronary cusp (NCC), responsible for a coaptation defect with severe eccentric AR. The AV was tricuspid and no aortic root dilatation was observed. The rest of the assessment was unremarkable, with no clinical or laboratory evidence in favour of IE. A multidisciplinary discussion was conducted to determine the cause (infective or tumoral) of this AR and the patient was finally transferred to our cardiac surgery ward for further exploration and management.
On the day of surgery, intraoperative TOE (X8-2t Probe of Ultrasound Epiq 7, Philips, Hamburg, Germany) in mid-oesophageal long and short axis views confirmed the presence of the previously observed mobile structure on the AV, which had not evolved in size or appearance . Following median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass, cross-clamping, and cardioplegic arrest were instituted. Aortotomy was performed and gross inspection of the AV confirmed the prolapse with the presence of an AVF rupture of the NCC . The other two cusps presented small AVFs and no evidence of endocarditis was observed. Because of the severity of the rupture, the presence of fenestrations on other cusps and the patient’s age, a valve-sparing strategy was preferred, and the injured valve was replaced with a n° 25 bioprothesis (Carpentier-Edwards Perimount ThermaFix, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Anatomopathological analysis did not reveal any infectious or tumoral origin. Regarding antithrombotic therapy, the clopidogrel was discontinued 5 days before surgery, and was not resumed after. Postoperatively, heparin was administered and warfarin was promptly initiated, for 3 months. The postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged from the hospital after 12 days.