In 2015, a 47-year old man presented with pain in the TMJ (temporomandibular joint) and whose aesthetic concern was having a chipped maxillary central incisor veneer, as seen in Fig. , and . After a clinical and radiographic analysis, as seen in Fig. , a loss of the vertical dimension and tooth ware, caused by bruxism, was diagnosed.
Digital intraoral photographs were taken from a retracted frontal view, occlusal view and lateral view and extra oral photos (frontal, lateral and 45º) with a digital single lens reflex (DSLR) camera. A diagnostic impression of both arches was made with an intraoral scanner (Carestream 3500) as seen in Fig. . A maximum intercuspation position (MIP) was registered intra orally with the intraoral scanner (Carestream 3500), and the new vertical dimension of occlusion (VDO) was obtained by opening the appropriate amount on the virtual articulator in the CAD/CAM (computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing) software. The digital smile design (DSD) dynamic documentation protocol was applied: four videos were taken with a smart phone (iphone 6) from various calculated angles to achieve an ideal development of the facially smile frame. A facial frontal video with and without retractor smiling, a profile video, a 12 o’clock video and an anterior occlusal video perpendicular to the occlusal plan without mirror were recorded. Four more complementary videos, a facial interview, a 180º phonetics video, an intraoral functional and structural videos using a retractor, as seen in Fig. , were taken for functional, facial and structural analysis. The information was sent to the DSD Lab. The main goal of the DSD technique is to reconcile the photos of the three views (occlusal, frontal and 12 o’clock) with a digital ruler to create a smile frame supported by video analysis. Then a facially guided smile frame was created following these steps: digital facebow, smile curveshape and position, width determination using the recurring aesthetic dental (RED) proportion, length proportion, gingival curve, papillae curve, vermilion curve and arch curve. The 2D smile frame was turned into a 3D digital wax-up on CAD software. The final 3D file STL format was exported to a printer which generated the model with the new design. It was then used to fabricate a matrix for the motivational mock-up, made with bisacryl (Structur; VOCO), as seen in Fig. and Fig. . In the new model, vertical dimension was augmented, so the patient spent two weeks with the provisional mock up to test the adaptation to the new vertical dimension (VD). After this bite was test driven, and since the patient was comfortable and stable, there was no need for further deprogramming the bite and defining a new centric relation (CR). With this new VD, the patient felt more comfortable and had no pain on the TMJ. The treatment plan was presented but, due to economic reasons, the patient did not want to continue the treatment.
In 2017 the patient returned to restart the treatment, as seen in Fig. , and a new intra oral scan (Carestream 3600) was made, as seen in Fig. . A new mock up for tooth preparation was made with bisacryl (Structur; VOCO) using a vaccum formed matrix (V-print Ortho clear; VOCO) printed by a 3D printer (Soflex; VOCO). Guided by the mock up, the abutment teeth were minimally prepared, as seen in Fig. . The old preparations from the second sextant teeth were maintained, no preparation in the posterior upper (14–17, 24–27) and lower teeth (34, 35, 36, 37, 44, 45, 46, 47), and a minimal preparation on the anterior lower teeth (31–33, 41–43) was made. A new intra oral scan (Carestream 3600) was made, as seen in Fig. . The information was sent to the DSD lab, as seen in Fig. , which then produced a STL file with virtual models that were sent and fabricated in the lab (Anatomic Lab). These 3D models (V-Print model; VOCO) were printed in a 3D printing machine (Solflex 650; VOCO). The definitive veneers and crowns were prepared digitally, using prosthetic software (Ceramill mind, Amann Girrbach), and fabricated in a milling machine (Ceramill Motion 2, Amann Girrbach) with machinable lithium disilicate ceramic blocks (VITABLOCS TriLuxe forte for Ceramill Motion 2, Amann Girrbach), as seen in Fig. .
After confirming marginal fit and optical properties in a trial insertion, isolation with a lip retractor (OptraGate, Ivoclar Vivadent) was applied. Following the manufacturer’s recommendations, the abutment teeth and ceramic crowns and veneers were prepared: the ceramic surface was prepared with aluminium oxide 50 μm, hydrofluoric acid 5% 20 s and rinsed 20 s, phosphoric acid 37% (Total etch, Ivoclar Vivadent) and alcohol 96% for cleaning, and silane 20 s (Monobond plus, Ivoclar Vivadent). The crowns (11–13, 21–23) and veneers (14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47) were adhesively luted to the abutments using a light polymerizing resin luting agent (Futurbond U and Bifix QM; VOCO) polimerized by a high-power LED curing light device (Celalux 3; VOCO), as seen in Fig. and Fig. . All the excess of the luting agent was removed and occlusal adjustments were done and confirmed using T-scan technology (T-scan; TeK-scan) as seen in Fig. , , , and , Fig. and Fig. . A removable appliance in acrylic was made for protection of the final restorations.
After 6 months, final restorations were evaluated and they remained stable, without any fracture trait. Patient also referred that with the new vertical dimension he had no headaches.