The patient was a 38-year-old Korean man with severe Crohn's disease that had been diagnosed by clinical features and colonoscopy findings 9 years previously. The patient had been hospitalized with a 2 week history of fever and diffuse abdominal pain. He had been started on infliximab (Remicade®, Centocor) which had been given at baseline and at 2 and 6 weeks. Infliximab infusion therapy was performed three times because of an aggravated Crohn's disease activity index and unresponsiveness to high-dose steroids (methylprednisolone 60mg). The tuberculin skin test was negative, and chest X-rays were normal before the infliximab administration. Three weeks later, the patient started to complain of fever, diffuse abdominal discomfort and fatigue. On admission, his temperature was 39 degrees Celsius, pulse rate 100/min, respiratory rate 24/min and blood pressure 100/80mmHg. Routine physical examination did not show any physical abnormalities except for diffuse abdominal tenderness without rebound tenderness. Laboratory investigations revealed anemia (Hct 31.1%, Hb 9.89g/dL), an elevated C-reactive protein level (9.1mg/L), an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (90mm/h) and no other abnormal findings. Chest X-ray and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan , performed shortly after admission, revealed numerous miliary nodules in both lung fields and multiple tiny low density nodular lesions in the spleen that were consistent with microabscesses . The tuberculin skin test on admission was positive (16mm). Induced sputum was obtained and acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining and cultures for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were positive.
Histologic examination of a lung-tissue sample obtained by percutaneous needle biopsy showed a chronic caseating granulomatous inflammation. In addition, AFB staining of lung tissue revealed acid-fast bacilli. Polymerase chain reaction confirmed an infection with M. tuberculosis. The tuberculosis culture confirmed M. tuberculosis which was susceptible to all anti-tuberculous drugs. Infliximab therapy was discontinued, and antituberculosis therapy (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) was promptly started after confirmation of the diagnosis. After 2 days of therapy, the fever resolved and then the other symptoms progressively improved.
Over the next 3 months, the patient was compliant with the antituberculous medication. However, he presented with a painful swelling of a right supraclavicular lymph node with redness and warmth at the site of the lesion. We performed a CT scan of the cervical region and thorax that showed poorly enhanced lesions in the right upper mediastinum, upper and lower paratracheal, retrosternal region and left supraclavicular fossa consistent with tuberculosis lymphadenitis . Surgical excision of the supraclavicular lymph node was performed due to complaints of pain and purulent discharge from a fistula. Histologic examination of the lymph node samples revealed chronic caseating granulomatous inflammation, but the AFB staining and culture were negative. The diagnosis of a paradoxical response was made; isoniazid, rifampin and ethambutol were continued without change of the treatment regimen. The patient completed a 12-month course because miliary nodules and splenic microabscess were still noted on a follow-up CT scan. His Crohn's disease was controlled with mesalazine, after remission had been achieved with the three cycles of inflixmab.