The patient is a 29-year-old G2P1001 Hispanic woman with uncertain last menstrual period and no previous prenatal care who presented to Labor and Delivery for evaluation of preterm labor. She complained of nausea, vomiting, and acid reflux, which she had experienced throughout this pregnancy. Obstetric history included a prior full term Cesarean delivery without complications. Medical history revealed a history of kidney stones and pancreatitis. Surgical history was remarkable for cholecystectomy, appendectomy, and ureteral stone removal. All previous medical and surgical care took place in Honduras and no records were available.
Ultrasound established an estimated gestational age of 34 weeks with bilateral echogenic fetal kidneys. Amniotic fluid was normal with an amniotic fluid index (AFI) of 15.4. She was found to have contractions and her cervical exam changed from closed to 1 cm dilated. Given concern for preterm delivery, she was given a dose of betamethasone in accordance with recently published Antenatal Late Preterm Steroids trial demonstrating benefit between 34 and 36 weeks and 6 days' gestation . Her contractions subsequently decreased and a repeat cervical exam was unchanged. She was discharged home with instructions to return in 24 hours for her second dose of betamethasone, but she did not return the following day.
Seven days later, the patient returned to Labor and Delivery with contractions and diffuse abdominal pain. She reported vague and worsening discomfort across the entirety of her abdomen. She also complained of nausea, vomiting, and worsening acid reflux. She denied sharp or radiating epigastric pain, flank pain, or dysuria but noted polyuria, fatigue, and weakness. Her vital signs were within normal limits. Tocodynamometry demonstrated uterine irritability and contractions; however, her cervical exam remained unchanged from her evaluation one week before. Fetal heart tracing had moderate variability without acceleration. Ultrasound showed new polyhydramnios with an AFI of 41.3 with a biophysical profile of 8/10.
Despite thorough and repeat history and physical exams, no focal signs or symptoms concerning for a specific etiology of her discomfort were elucidated. Her diffuse discomfort was attributed to significant uterine distension from polyhydramnios and GERD.
However, labs demonstrated severe hypercalcemia, pancreatitis, and acute kidney injury: a corrected serum calcium of 16.9 mg/dL (ionized calcium 2.05), hyponatremia, hypochloremia, creatinine 1.4 mg/dL, BUN 41 mg/dL, amylase 334 U/L, lipase > 3000 U/L, WBC 15.8 K/mm3, and Hgb 9.7 g/dL. AST and ALT were within normal limits. An EKG was performed that showed ST elevations consistent with hypercalcemia. Troponins were negative. Focused physical exam was remarkable for a palpable thyroid gland (bilateral lobes) without rubor, calor, dolor, or bruits. Neurologic exam showed no focal deficits and full strength in bilateral upper and lower extremities. The patient remained alert and oriented × 3. Additional labs were drawn and were significant for low TSH (0.02 ng/dL), elevated free T4 (1.9 ng/dL), and significantly elevated PTH (937 pg/mL).
Thyroid ultrasound showed bilateral subcentimeter nodules and a 2.7 cm hypoechoic noncalcified solid lobulated nodule in the right thyroid lobe. A smaller, 0.7 cm nodule was also seen in the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe. A 0.6 cm predominantly cystic nodule was seen in the junction of the isthmus and right thyroid lobe. Abdominal ultrasound showed no dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree with a normal common bile duct. Florid bilateral nephrocalcinosis was present, consistent with longstanding hypercalcemia. Biliary etiology of her pancreatitis was deemed unlikely.
Fetal status remained reassuring with continuous monitoring. Aggressive IV fluid hydration was initiated with immediate improvement in pancreatitis but with minimal improvement in calcium levels. Given the patient's young age, severe hypercalcemia, very high PTH levels, and neck mass, there was concern for parathyroid cancer, not just parathyroid adenoma, for which the surgical treatment would be en bloc resection of the parathyroid gland as well as the thyroid gland, adjoining fatty tissue, lymph nodes, and surrounding muscles in order to achieve the best chance for surgical cure. A tissue biopsy of the thyroid nodule was obtained. Rushed pathology of a fine needle aspiration of the 2.7 cm thyroid nodule was concerning for parathyroid carcinoma.
Calcitonin, cinacalcet, and zoledronic acid were added in succession, each with minimal improvement in hypercalcemia. For concurrent hyperthyroidism, she was also started on methimazole and propranolol in order to help prevent thyroid storm during possible surgical resection. Given incomplete administration of betamethasone one week before, the decision was made to administer a complete 2-dose course of betamethasone due to risk of premature delivery. Throughout the hospital course, continuous fetal monitoring showed reassuring fetal status. However, on the third day of medical management, the patient continued to have severe hypercalcemia refractory to medical management and fetal status began to deteriorate.
Failing medical management, and in the setting of worsening fetal status, the endocrine surgery team provided emergent surgical management. Unexpectedly, intraoperative frozen section of one of two pretracheal lymph nodes was consistent with metastatic papillary thyroid cancer. She underwent bilateral exploration of parathyroid glands, total thyroidectomy, right central neck dissection, and right cervical thymectomy. After completion of the procedure, intraoperative PTH level decreased to 53, consistent with complete removal of the parathyroid lesion. Final pathology showed a parathyroid adenoma with atypia as well as occult papillary thyroid carcinoma with metastasis to a single lymph node.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was transported to an ICU bed for close monitoring. She was closely monitored and started on calcium carbonate, calcitriol, and levothyroxine. Her calcium normalized within 12 hours and her pancreatitis resolved. Fetal status was reassuring following the procedure.
On postoperative day 2, at 36 weeks and 2 days' gestation, the patient began to contract painfully. She declined trial of labor and underwent an uncomplicated repeat C-section. She delivered a female infant weighing 3400 g with APGARS 7 and 8. The infant's calcium levels were elevated immediately following delivery with an ionized calcium of 1.66, but 24 hours later she was hypocalcemic and required calcium supplementation. The infant's hypocalcemia improved and stabilized with improved feeding and she was discharged home at 5 weeks of age with vitamin D3 supplementation. The infant also received an ultrasound that was consistent with neonatal nephrocalcinosis likely secondary to longstanding intrauterine hypercalcemia that may take months or years to resolve. A follow-up renal ultrasound is planned at 6 months of age.
The patient, now status postsurgical removal of thyroid and parathyroid glands, was discharged home on lifelong calcitriol, calcium supplementation, and levothyroxine with close outpatient follow-up with endocrinology. She will also follow up with endocrinology for further monitoring and evaluation of her thyroid function and for discussion of radioiodine therapy versus surveillance for thyroid cancer surveillance.