1A 58-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology clinic with 1 and a half years of right eye redness and ocular hypertension. Tracing her history, she had recurrent headaches for several years without a history of head trauma. She was diagnosed with right eye dry eye and glaucoma and received treatment including an NSAID, immunosuppressive therapy, a prostaglandin analogue and β-blocker combination medication for eye pressure reduction, and even embolization of the lacrimal punctum. However, all the treatments only slightly decreased the intraocular pressure with no improvement in eye redness and headache. On examination, the visual acuity and intraocular pressure in the right eye of the patient were 20/40 and 20 mmHg after the aforementioned treatment, while these variables in the other eye were 20/25 and 14 mmHg, respectively. Physical examination revealed exophthalmos and severe corkscrew hyperaemia with dilated vessels in the right eye. The results of fundoscopic examination of both eyes were normal. No obvious lesions were found in the optic disc and fundus vessels of either eye .
After we considered that the symptoms may be related to abnormal intracranial vessels, computed tomography angiography and venography (CTA + CTV) were performed, and the results showed an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) in the right parietal-occipital area in the brain. The AVM was definitively located by further examination with digital subtraction angiography (DSA). DSA revealed that the AVM is fed by the posterior cerebral artery and pericallosal artery and is drained by the medial atrial vein. Then, this malformed venous structure could lead the arterial blood flowing into the superior ophthalmic vein .
With these results, the patient was ultimately diagnosed with an “occipital lobe cerebral arteriovenous malformation”, and surgical treatment was given.
After the general cerebral angiography probe reached the right occipital lobe AVM embolism, the arteriovenous malformation mass was blocked. This block led to restoration of normal blood flow of the superior ophthalmic vein, in which the conjunctival congestion of the right eye was significantly relieved and the intraocular pressure decreased to normal (14–15 mmHg).