A 59-year old man presented with dysphagia was admitted in our department. By endoscopy, an irregular ulcerated lesion extending 31 to 35 cm from the incisal dentition was noted. Then esophageal squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed by endoscopic biopsy and the clinical staging was identified as T3N0M0 (IIA staging) by the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM staging system . After a multidisciplinary consultation including oncology, the patient underwent esophagectomy via left open thoracotomy, as there was no suspected upper mediastinal lymph node metastasis evaluated by preoperative CT scan. The surgery was taken smoothly.
On the first day after surgery, the left pleural effusion drainage was about 400 ml, with bloody appearance. After a liquid diet was given to the patient through a duodenal feeding tube, the pleural effusion drainage increased sharply to 2900 ml and the appearance changed to serosanguinous, and then milky. Laboratory tests confirmed the chylous pleural effusion .
Chylothorax was diagnosed and then total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and octreotide (300 ug/day) were employed. The drain output maintained about 1500 ml per day, with a serous gross appearance. Considering the high output of chylous leakage, reoperation was proposed, but relatives of the patient refused. Then we tried lymphangiography via a pedal approach but failed due to the puncture failure. On the 33rd day after esophagectomy, the drainage decreased sharply to 300 ml per day and the patient took a complaint of chest congestion and hiccup. A lower breath sound was revealed by chest auscultation. The Chest CT scan showed a huge cyst full of fluid in the left thoracic cavity, indicating the formation of compartments in left thorax and difficulties of adequate drainage .
Reoperation was imperative. The patient received mass ligation of thoracic duct above the diaphragm. On the first day after reoperation, the chest tube drainage was about 1300 ml, with serosanguinous appearance. Then, the drainage was above 1500 mL on average in the following days . The chylous test of discharge was positive. Unfortunately, the surgical procedure did not work.
After adequate preoperative preparation, a third operation was scheduled. Six hours before surgery, olive oil was given through the duodenal feeding tube. After separating the adhesions, we found that the trunk of thoracic duct was definitely ligated. But there was still clear liquid accumulation at the lowest of the posterior mediastinum. Finally, the leakage was found in the anterior wall of the thoracic duct on the level of the carina. Then, we dissected the thoracic duct near the leakage, and found that a tributary was placed into the thoracic duct in the opposition of the leakage . Lymphatic fluid drained by the tributary entered the thoracic cavity by the injury of the thoracic duct which located opposite the tributary. Finally, the chylothorax was cured after the tributary had been duly ligated.