We report a case of a 1 month 15 days old baby boy, he was admitted to a nearby hospital with the provisional diagnosis of Pneumonia and his sample was sent to our hospital for laboratory testing. The blood sample on gross examination appeared milky, and we therefore took a detailed history from the parents with their consent. He was the product of 2nd-degree consanguinity, first child with no sibling’s, born full term via spontaneous vaginal delivery (SVD) with a normal antenatal history. His developmental history was normal and was up to date on all the immunizations. The past medical and the family history were not significant for Hyperlipidemia.
He was admitted to the emergency ward of a nearby hospital with a history of refusal to feed, cough and excessive cry. On examination his heart rate was 102 beats/min, respiratory rate was 55 breaths/min, temperature was 37 °C and oxygen saturation was 98%.
The laboratory testing revealed the following: Complete blood count (CBC) done on XN-1000 Sysmex hematology analyzer by flow cytometry technique showed hemoglobin of 6.8, White blood cell count of 15.8 and platelets of 161. The sample that was obtained.
appeared milky and lipemic and therefore, he was also screened for Hyperlipidemia. Lipid profile was done by enzymatic method on Cobasc-311 analyzer; its analytical measuring range (AMR) for triglycerides is 8.85 mg/dl to 885 mg/dl. Analyzer gave the result of > 885 mg/dl, since the patients’ physician requested for the exact levels, the sample was rerun, and the results were reported after manual serial dilutions of 1: 50 and multiplication with factor. HDL and LDL levels were performed by the Homogeneous enzymatic colorimetric method on Cobas c-311 analyzer with Analytical Measurement Range (AMR) of 3.09–150 mg/dl and 2–548 mg/dl respectively. Serum amylase and lipase was done on Erba XL-200 by enzymatic method, while liver function tests were done by IFCC kinetic method on the Cobas c-311 analyzer as shown in Table .
Electrocardiography showed severely hypertrophied normal sized left ventricle with a normal systolic function likely due to non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Age wise lipid profile is shown in Table . A” refrigerator test” was performed after overnight storage of blood sample in the refrigerator at a temperature of 4 °C, which revealed the appearance of creamy supernatant due to the caking of Chylomicrons (shown in Fig. ). Other tests like Apolipoproteins B (Apo B), ApoA-V, lipoprotein (a) Lp(a), ApoC-11 and Glycosylphosphatidyl inositol anchored high density lipoprotein binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1) could not be done because of unavailability of these tests in our laboratory and the country at large, and patient’s parents were reluctant to send the samples abroad because of financial limitations. Lipid lowering agents were not started as we could not find any recommendations for its use below 3 months of age. Initially he was diagnosed as type 1 HLP, but later at the age of 2 months and 16 days his lipoprotein electrophoresis was done which showed elevated levels of VLDL or Pre-beta lipoproteins 51.5% (RR 5–22%) and Chylomicrons 4.7% (RR 0–2%) shown in Table . Cholestyramine (Questran sachet) powder was started at dose of 100 mg/kg on t.i.d basis with NAN 1 formula milk at the age of 1 month and 15 days and on follow up visit detailed weaning food advices were given to the mother (use of olive oil during cooking of weaning food, giving protein and avoiding a diet consisting of fatty meals was advised). His lipid profile was checked at age of 3 months showed TGs 1986 mg/dl (RR < 150 mg/dl) TC was 105 mg/dl (RR < 200 mg/dl), HDL was 5 mg/dl (RR > 40 mg/dl) and LDL was 2 mg/dl (RR < 100 mg/dl) as shown in Table .