A 37-year-old male presented with complains of pain around the left knee joint. The patient had similar complains 2 years ago and was diagnosed with a GCT of the left distal femur for which he was treated with an intralesional curettage and Poly methylmetacrylate implantation.
On examination, there was a swelling over the left knee, which was bony in consistency and was associated with painful and restricted movements of the knee joint. Radiographs of the left knee were obtained which indicated a recurrence of the GCT with the hallmark honeycomb appearance, ballooning and breach of the cortex posteriorly as well as a soft tissue mass, suggestive of an aggressive giant cell tumor. Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed an area of hypointensity corresponding with the Cement and multiple loculated hyperintense lesions in the metaphysis of distal femur. Also noted was the breach of the cortex with extension of the mass into the adjacent soft tissue (Campanacci Grade 3 lesion).
A resection arthrodesis was planned owing to the aggressive nature of the tumor. A curvi-linear skin incision was taken anteriorly in line with the previous surgical scar and a medial para-patellar approach to access the distal femur. The Distal end of the femur up to the distal third of the diaphysis was excised. The Patella and the extensor mechanism were spared. The post excision bone gap was measured to 10 cms (a). The desired length of the fibular graft (x) was estimated using the calculation :
x = a + b + c; where a was the estimated bone gap; b was the length of the fibula to sink intramedullary into the femur. c was the lntramedullary sink of the fibula in the proximal tibia.
Length of the fibular graft was calculated to 11.5 cms (x= 10 + 0.5 + 1). “b” was estimated to be 0.5 cms since the fibular graft was to be inserted into the narrow medullary canal of the femoral diaphysis. “c” was estimated to be 1cm since the fibula was to be inserted into the broad metaphyseal region of the proximal tibia. The desired length of the limb was calculated to allow for post arthrodesis limb clearance and final graft length was estimated by subtracting the desired limb shortening from the graft length. Final length of the graft (y) in situ was calculated to 9.5cms, (y=x-2 ie 11.5-2 = 9.5 cms)
A fibula graft of approximately 12 cms was harvested from both the legs using the postero-lateral approach, was fashioned to the calculated length and tied to a custom-made intramedullary interlock nail using a no.1 Polyglactin 910 suture and was inserted from the piriformis fossa extending up to the distal metaphysis of the tibia. Thereby, an intramedullary bone grafting was done with the dual fibular graft spanning over the defects with the grafts wedged proximally and distally in the medullary canal of the femur and tibia to achieve the desired limb length. Interlocking was performed under fluoroscopic guidance. Suture removal was done at 2 weeks post surgery and there were no post operative wound complications. The limb shortening was 2 cms post-operatively.