A 73-year-old female patient, who was hospitalized since 3 months, presented with complaints of paroxysmal dry cough since 2 weeks. The patient was admitted initially due to progressive dyspnea. Respiratory distress occurred 2 days later and she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after intubation for mechanical ventilation. Her past medical history included hypertension and diabetes mellitus for approximately 20 years; both of which were in a stable condition with regular medication. Six months before admission, she underwent a median sternotomy and thymectomy for thymoma. She denied having a recent travel history aboard but reported contact with a large pigeon population as there was a large dovecot near her residence. A series of examinations were performed for the unexplained respiratory failure, and myasthenic crisis was diagnosed based on high levels of acetylcholine receptor antibodies (> 4 nmol/L) and neurophysiological study findings. Consequently, she received several courses of plasma exchange followed by a high dose of prednisolone (30 mg daily) and azathioprine (25 mg daily) to treat the myasthenic crisis. Her respiratory condition improved after the therapy. She was transferred to the general ward after successfully weaning off mechanical ventilation. Oral prednisolone and azathioprine therapy was continued. After receiving prednisolone and azathioprine therapy for nearly 3 months, she developed dry cough. Physical examination revealed that respiratory rate was 15 breaths/min, blood pressure was 140/88 mmHg, heart rate was 80 beats/min, and body temperature was in the normal range. The remainder of the examination including cardiovascular, respiratory, and other organ systems was unremarkable. Laboratory evaluation included a peripheral white blood cell count of 8870/µL; hemoglobin, 10.8 g/dL; and platelet count of 299,000/µL. Her serum alanine aminotransferase level was 9 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase level was 19 U/L; blood urea nitrogen level was 13 mg/dL; creatinine level was 0.3 mg/dL; level of procalcitonin was 0.1 ng/Ml, and level of C-reactive protein was 1.78 mg/dL. Arterial blood gas analysis (with the patient breathing ambient air) revealed pH 7.47, PaCO2 56.9 mmHg, PaO2 66.7 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 99%.
A thoracic CT scan was performed. On comparing it with the previous thoracic CT scan performed on admission , a newly developed 2-cm consolidative nodule was observed on the upper lobe of the left lung . Serum aspergillus galactomannan antigen testing, fungus stain and fungus culture of sputum, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of sputum for mycobacterium tuberculosis were all negative. The CT-guided biopsy was performed, and its pathology revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation with multinucleated giant cells engulfing thick-wall micro-organisms . These organisms were 4–6 microns in diameter, stains bright red with Periodic Acid Schiff and black in Gomori Methenamine-Silver , consistent with those of cryptococcus. A subsequent serum titer of cryptococcal antigen was 1:8 using Remel Cryptococcus Antigen Test Kit (Remel, Lenexa, KS, USA). Because there were no neurologic symptoms and signs indicated cryptococcus meningoencephalitis, lumbar puncture was not performed. Immune status of the patient was then assessed. Except for recent immunosuppressive therapy for the myasthenic crisis, the patient revealed no evidence of malignancy or vasculitis, and human immunodeficiency virus testing was negative. To determine the possibility of cross transmission from infected patients, we reviewed the incidence of cryptococcal infection cases in the ICU and the general ward for up to 1 month before the patient was diagnosed, but no new cryptococcal infection cases were reported. Intravenous fluconazole, 400 mg daily, was administered for pulmonary cryptococcal infection for 14 days. Respiratory symptoms nearly resolved after treatment and the patient was discharged for outpatient follow-up with continuation of oral fluconazole 400 mg daily. The chest CT scan, 3 months after discharge, revealed complete clearance of the lesion and the relevant inflammatory biomarkers were in the normal range. No recurrence of the Cryptococcal infection has occurred to date.