A 58-year-old Japanese man visited an ophthalmology clinic in May 2020 complaining of visual loss in his right eye, which he had noticed 3 weeks before.
The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 in the right eye, 20/40 in the left eye, with a refraction of − 0.75 diopter sphere (DS) with − 1.00 diopter cylinder (DC) at 60° in the right eye, − 1.75 DS with − 0.75 DC at 100° in the left eye. The intraocular pressure for the right eye and the left eye was 15 mmHg and 16 mmHg, respectively. Ophthalmologic examination revealed macular edema and subretinal fluid in his right eye , as well as disruption of the ellipsoid zone in both eyes .
In February 2018, the patient was seen at the same clinic for a diabetic retinopathy checkup with HbA1c 10.9%. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes with a refraction of − 0.5 DS with − 1.25 DC at 105° in the right eye, − 1.5 DS with − 0.5 DC at 100° in the left eye. Fundus examination revealed simple diabetic retinopathy in both eyes, with some dot hemorrhage. Macular edema or subretinal fluid was not found; however, optic coherence tomography (OCT) showed disruption in the ellipsoid zone in both eyes; therefore, the patient was followed up for age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
The exudative change in his right eye was estimated to result from deteriorated AMD, and an intravitreal injection of aflibercept was administered for the first time. On the day following the injection, macular edema worsened, and choroidal detachment was found in all four quadrants of the right eye . The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
On the first visit to our hospital in June 2020, the BCVA was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye. Inflammation was observed in the anterior chamber in both eyes, with a few mutton fat keratic precipitates in the right eye. The fundus examination revealed macular edema and subretinal fluid involvement of the fovea in the right eye , with 360° choroidal detachment. Yellowish spots were seen at the fovea in the left eye . OCT revealed a damaged outer photoreceptor layer in both eyes.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed multiple leakages of dye in the posterior pole from the early to middle phase and mild dye pooling in the subretinal space in the macular area of the right eye . Mild leakage from the optic disc and peripheral retinal vessels over the detached choroid was also noted in the right eye . On indocyanine green angiography (IA), patchy hypofluorescence was observed during the early angiographic phase in the right eye, suggesting poor choroidal circulation . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed hypofluorescent areas in the macula, which implicated damaged retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) corresponding to hyperfluorescent areas with leakage in FA .
In the left eye, FA showed a window defect in the macula , which was shown as a hypofluorescent area on IA and FAF, indicating damaged RPE , respectively.
B-mode ultrasonography confirmed choroidal detachment in the right eye without abnormal scleral thickness .
Laboratory data of the patient were within normal range except for HbA1c 7.8% due to diabetes mellitus, which he had been treated with an oral hypoglycemic agent for 10 years.
Through an interview at our hospital, it was revealed that he had a history of stage IV right paranasal cavity tumor, which was diagnosed in 2010. He did not initially request any treatment; however, as the tumor gradually enlarged, the patient underwent radiotherapy and chemotherapy with cisplatin in 2017. As these treatments were ineffective, the patient underwent nivolumab therapy from August 2019 to March 2020, which was discontinued due to ineffectiveness. Computed tomography (CT) and B-mode ultrasonography showed no signs of tumor invasion in the ocular cavity or globe.
Choroidal neovascularization was not found in FA or IA, which suggests that AMD was not the cause of the initial macular edema and subretinal fluid. Instead, angiography findings taken after intravitreal injection, such as multiple leakages in FA and delay in choroidal circulation in IA, resembled the characteristics of VKH. Considering some reports that nivolumab causes VKH-like uveitis, the initial exudative change in the right eye and anterior inflammation in both eyes were due to uveitis after nivolumab treatment. The fact that anterior inflammation existed also in the left eye suggests that inflammation after nivolumab use continued until aflibercept injection, and the patient a was vulnerable to intravitreal injection.
Since choroidal detachment occurred a day after intravitreal injection and there was no sign of uveal effusion or hypotony, we suspected that choroidal detachment developed due to enhanced inflammation by intravitreal injection. In addition, annular choroidal detachment can be observed in VKH cases with enhanced inflammation, which supports the possibility that the present case had VKH-like uveitis as a background.
In previously reported cases, corticosteroid treatment was effective for VKH-like uveitis after nivolumab use . We started topical corticosteroid treatment in both eyes, which was effective for anterior inflammation in both eyes but not for posterior changes in the right eye. We then administered a sub-tenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide (STTA, 10 mg). Three weeks after STTA, the choroidal detachment disappeared in all quadrants as well as in the subretinal fluid, macular edema, and anterior inflammation . There was no change in the macula in the left eye . Visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/22 in the left eye. Although the inflammation was resolved, visual acuity in the right eye did not improve due to progressive posterior subcapsular cataracts after inflammation.
In December 2020, the patient was monitored for 6 months after STTA without additional treatment, and the inflammation had not recurred.