A 32-year-old gravid-II, Para-I woman who did not recall her last normal menstrual period (LNMP), but reported amenorrhea for the past 9 months, was referred to our hospital from a nearby health center with the diagnosis of latent first stage of labor (LFSOL) + preeclampsia with severity features. Her antenatal care follow up was uneventful. She complained of epigastric and right upper quadrant (RUQ) pain of 4 hours duration and pushing down pain of 2 hours. She had no abdominal trauma. Upon physical examination; her blood pressure was 170/100 mmHg, term-sized gravid uterus and FHB was positive, cervix 3 cm dilated and fully effaced. With the above finding she was given a loading dose of magnesium sulfate and admitted to the labor and delivery unit. After 30 minutes she gave birth by outlet vacuum for an indication of non-reassuring fetal heart rate pattern (fetal bradycardia), the outcome was 3.7 kg alive male neonate with APGAR score of 4, 4, 4, and 0 in the 1st, 5th, 10th, and 15th minute respectively. 60% retro-placental clot was found upon post-delivery placental examination.
Immediately following delivery the woman deteriorated with the vital signs of blood pressure = 60/40 mmHg, pulse rate = 118 bpm, and abdominal distension. She was put on Pitocin drip and the uterus was well contracted with no active vaginal bleeding. Urgent trans-abdominal ultrasound examination showed significant fluid collection within the peritoneal cavity which was tapped under ultrasound guidance and showed frank blood. An urgent decision of surgical exploration was made and she was taken to the operating theater. The abdomen was entered through a midline incision and intra-operatively; there was significant hemoperitoneum, the uterus was intact and a large blood clot adherent to the liver surface was seen. There was also evidence of active blood oozing from the capsular breach on the right lobe of the liver surface of 8–10 cm, suggestive of subcapsular hematoma with spontaneous rupture ( and ).
Since we do not have a surgeon experienced in liver surgery, we consulted the general surgeon and around 2000 mL of hemoperitoneum was sucked out. A pack was applied over the surface to control the bleeding and a drainage tube was kept in the pelvic space. Transfusion with whole blood, platelets and fresh frozen plasma was started and the patient transferred to the recovery room. Since there was no bed in the intensive care unit, she was followed in the labor ward recovery unit. The postoperative plan was to continue transfusion, limit her ambulation, to continue magnesium sulphate, to closely follow her vital signs, and the drainage tube output.
Her laboratory studies gave the following results: serum aspartate aminotransaminase (AST), 386 IU/L; serum alanine aminotransaminase (ALT), 465.7 IU/L; total bilirubin 2.3 mg/dl, indirect bilirubine 1.46 mg/dl; serum creatinine, 0.87 mg/dl; white blood cell, 15,100 /mm3; hematocrit, 22.7%; hemoglobin, 7.6 mg/dl; platelet count, 409×103 µ/mL. A catheterized urine specimen demonstrated proteinuria (+++). From the above tests the women had partial HELLP syndrome since she had elevated liver enzymes and indirect bilirubin. On her second postoperative day, she developed abdominal distension and the drainage tube drained 700 mL of hemolyzed blood. She was investigated with hematocrit, 17.8%; hemoglobin, 6.1 mg/dl; platelet count, 209×103 µ/mL. Serum electrolyte was also determined and all are within normal range.
On her 4th postoperative day the pack was removed and the patient transferred to the maternity ward. She had a smooth course in the maternity ward. On her 11th postoperative day transabdominal ultrasound examination showed a right lobe loculated collection measuring 11.2 x 11 cm in size extending to the subcapsular space . On her 12th post-operative day she was discharged home with appointment after 2 weeks. In total she was transfused with 13 units of whole blood, 10 units of platelet, and 11 units of fresh frozen plasma.