A 72 year old retired woman presented to her General Practitioner with breathlessness, upper abdominal discomfort and nausea. She was treated initially for a lower respiratory tract infection with a five day course of amoxicillin and prednisone. Blood analysis at this time revealed abnormal liver function tests (LFTs) [see additional file ]. Her breathlessness continued to worsen after this initial course of therapy and she was admitted for further investigation and treatment.
A review of her history in the months prior to this acute deterioration revealed increasing breathlessness, not relieved by her usual medication, forcing her to give up her favourite walking routes. Past medical history included stable asthma managed by her general practitioner, recurrent urinary tract infection and osteoporosis. She had no drug allergies and her prescribed medications were: zopiclone 7.5 mg od; medroxyprogesterone acetate 5 mg od; conjugated oestrogens 0.3 mg od; amitriptyline 10 mg od; nitrofurantoin 100 mg tds; fluticasone 250 μg inhaled od; naproxen 550 mg bd; hyoscine butylbromide 10 mg as required; paracetamol 1 gm as required up; and salbutamol 200 μg inhaled as required. The dose of nitrofurantoin had been increased 5 months prior to admission from 100 mg od, she had been taking it for 6 months prior to this dose increase. She had no risk factors for development of liver pathology, did not smoke and rarely drank alcohol.
On examination there were no signs of liver disease. Her abdomen was soft with mild right upper quadrant tenderness. Respiratory examination was unremarkable with no audible wheeze or crepitations, oxygen saturations were 97% at rest. The remaining examination did not reveal any further signs and of note there was nothing to suggest an underlying autoimmune disease.
A full blood count revealed a haemoglobin of 159 g/L (normal 115–155) with no other abnormalities. Repeat LFTs had deteriorated [see additional file ] the remaining biochemistry was normal. Chest radiograph demonstrated bilateral interstitial and alveolar shadowing in the middle and lower zones. Upper abdominal ultrasound scan demonstrated an enlarged hypoechoic liver.
A high index of suspicion of an adverse drug reaction at this point lead to cessation of nitrofurantoin. In addition she was commenced on a course of oral corticosteroids; Prednisone 40 mg od as an adjunct to cessation of the nitrofurantoin.
A full screen for liver disease delivered the following abnormal results; IgG was elevated at 15.0 g/L (normal 7.0–14.0). Anti-nuclear antibody was positive (diffuse, chromosome positive pattern) at a titre of 1/80. Anti-smooth muscle antibody was positive at a titre of 1/40. Epstein Barr virus and Cytomegalovirus serology were both consistent with past infection.
Pulmonary function tests demonstrated impaired diffusion capacity of 0.70 mmol/min/kPa/L (49% predicted) FEV1 2.64, FVC 3.30, FEV1/FVC 79.92%. High resolution computer tomogram of the chest revealed peripheral alveolar shadowing and fibrotic changes [see Fig. ]. A liver biopsy was performed which showed moderate lobular hepatitis characterised by zone 3 necrosis, which was considered to be consistent with a drug induced hepatitis.
After withdrawal of nitrofurantoin and commencement of oral corticosteroids this woman made a good symptomatic recovery. At follow up LFTs had normalized [see additional file ] and diffusion capacity had increased to 0.83 mmol/min/kPa/L (58% predicted) her FEV1 was 2.97 and FVC 3.71 (FEV1/FVC 80.13%). Her chest radiograph was reported as normal at follow up. Her prednisone was stopped after an 8 week course
Two years following her initial presentation and cessation of nitrofurantoin she has had no recurrence of her symptoms.