The patient was a 70-year-old male with a past medical history of oxygen-dependent chronic pulmonary obstructive disease, squamous cell carcinoma of the right vocal cord (treated with definitive radiation therapy in November 1998), and stage 3b chronic kidney disease who was diagnosed with metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma in January 2013. Other pertinent past medical history included left renal vein thrombosis for which he was taking enoxaparin. The patient had a history of smoking (120 packs/year) but had quit smoking (120 packs/year) but had quit smoking in January 2013.
For the metastatic renal cell cancer, the patient was started on pazopanib 600 mg daily in February 2013, with a good initial response. However, medication was discontinued in December 2013 because of disease progression in the lungs and rib cage. He then began treatment with nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks in December 2013. His disease initially responded well to the treatment. During the 10-month period while the patient was on nivolumab, left and right kidney tumors decreased by 19 and 13%, respectively, and adrenal masses decreased by 23% on both sides. He continued treatment until October 27, 2014 when he was found to have acute kidney injury (AKI), with a creatinine level of 10.08 mg/dL. His serum creatinine level the month prior was 1.67 mg/dL. He was admitted for evaluation and treatment for AKI. At the time of presentation, the patient had symptoms of generalized weakness, fatigue, and loss of appetite. His temperature was 35.7 °C (tympanic), and his blood pressure and heart rate were 135/70 mmHg and 79 beats/min, respectively. He showed a 1.7 kg weight gain over 1 month and there was the suggestion of 1+ bilateral ankle edema on physical examination. There was no flank pain or costovertebral angle tenderness.
Upon admission, a metabolic panel revealed sodium 135 mmol/L, potassium 3.8 mmol/L, chloride 95 mmol/L, CO2 28 mmol/L, total protein 6.1 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 58 mg/dL, and creatinine 10.08 mg/dL. Urinalysis was positive at >300 mg/dL for protein and 3+ for hemoglobin. On microscopic examination of urine, there were too-numerous-to-count red blood cells, 3–5 white blood cells, and 1–3 granular casts observed under high-power magnification. Fraction excretion of sodium was 2.2%. Serum C3 and C4 levels were within normal ranges. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-double strand DNA antibody, glomerular basement membrane antibody, cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were all negative. Ultrasound revealed solid masses in the interpolar region of the right kidney and upper pole of the left kidney, representative of his known renal cell carcinoma. Otherwise, kidney sizes were within the normal range and there was no evidence of hydronephrosis.
Biopsy of the right lower pole of the kidney was performed on October 29, 2014. Light microscopic examination demonstrated diffuse tubular injury with vacuoles and immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis with cellular crescents and necrosis. There was moderate interstitial inflammation with lymphocytes observed. With immunofluorescence, there was diffuse granular mesangial staining for IgA, C3, and kappa and lambda light chains. The specimen was also sent for electron microscopic examination. One glomerulus with severe cellular crescents was selected for examination and demonstrated several hump-like subepithelial deposits and no subendothelial deposits. There was partial podocyte foot process effacement. Proximal tubules were flattened with simplified tubular epithelium and shorter microvilli. Pathologic examinations confirmed the final diagnosis of acute toxic-type tubular injury and IgA-dominant acute post-infectious glomerulonephritis. Pictures of microscopic examinations are shown in Fig. .
Although there was the possibility of post-infectious glomerulonephritis based on findings of glomerular deposits in the kidney biopsy, the patient did not show symptoms of streptococcal infection such as pharyngitis or a rash prior to admission. The patient’s C3 level was normal and he was not hypertensive. Based on patient’s previous exposure to nivolumab and lymphocyte infiltration observed in the biopsy, immunotherapy-induced kidney injury was taken into consideration. Nivolumab was discontinued and methylprednisolone administration 40 mg intravenously twice a day was started. The following day, serum potassium increased to 5.6 mmol/L, and creatinine and BUN were elevated at 11.01 and 63 mg/dL, respectively. Nephrology was consulted and hemodialysis was initiated. Methylprednisolone was increased to 40 mg three times a day (1 mg/kg/day). After the biopsy report, the patient was started on pulse dose steroids, methylprednisolone 1 g intravenously daily for 3 days, followed by methylprednisolone 40 mg intravenously three times a day. The creatinine level decreased after steroid treatment and hemodialysis. Four days later, steroids were changed to oral prednisone 40 mg twice a day and the patient was discharged on steroid treatment and outpatient hemodialysis. On the day of discharge, his creatinine level was 8.80 mg/dL.
One month after discharge, the patient was admitted with a fever, rash, tachycardia, and leukocytosis, consistent with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). The source of infection was unclear as blood and urine cultures were negative. The patient had generalized patchy skin lesions with desquamation, most prominent at the bilateral proximal arms and upper torso. Biopsy of skin lesions was deferred, as they were thought to be an irAE and already clinically improving with steroid treatment. The patient was discharged after a short course of intravenous antibiotics. The dose of prednisone was increased at this time. Another month after the second hospitalization, the patient was re-admitted with fever, tachycardia, and hypotension. Again, there was no compelling source of infection identified after an extensive diagnostic work up. During the third hospitalization of 9 days, he received a stress dose of hydrocortisone 100 mg three times a day. Upon discharge, he resumed a tapering course of steroids, starting with prednisone 60 mg daily. The patient tolerated the prolonged course of oral steroids well with no apparent adverse effects. Oral prednisone was stopped at the end of February 2015. In April 2015, his serum creatinine level was 1.81 mg/dL and BUN was 13 mg/dL. Hemodialysis was discontinued on April 27, 2015. The last contact with the patient was on March 30, 2016 and his kidney function remained stable at the time. Change in serum creatinine over the 6-month treatment period is shown in Fig. .
While recovering from nivolumab toxicity, the patient did not receive any treatment for renal cell carcinoma. In spite of the prolonged systemic corticosteroid treatment, anti-tumor activity seemed to continue as the tumors in bilateral kidneys and adrenal glands decreased in sizes for 18 months (left adrenal gland: 3.7 to 2.4 cm, right adrenal gland: 7.0 to 5.8 cm, left kidney mass: 6.0 to 3.4 cm, right kidney mass: 7.0 to 5.8 cm; all measurements in longest diameter). In March 2016, he was started on axitinib 3 mg twice a day for symptomatic disease progression (worsening of rib lesion).