Multinodular masses were detected within the anterior mediastinum of a previously healthy 74-year-old woman by plain chest computed tomography (CT) screening during a comprehensive medical check-up despite a normal chest X-ray. Despite having no symptoms, she was referred to our hospital because of the gradual development of multiple nodules over a 4-year period. She had no coronary risk factors and no history of Kawasaki’s disease or vasculitis. Her vital signs were normal. Blood tests showed slightly elevated brain natriuretic peptide [38.9 pg/mL (≤18.4 pg/mL)] and D-dimer [1.8 μg/mL (≤1.0 μg/mL)] levels. Twelve-lead electrocardiography (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm and incomplete right bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal ventricular systolic function with no wall motion abnormalities or valvular heart disease. Contrast-enhanced cardiac CT showed multiple contrast-enhanced nodules adjacent to the ascending aorta (, Video 1). Three-dimensional reconstruction of the coronary arteries using CT angiography revealed multiple giant CA and abnormally enlarged and twisted arteries in the superior anterior part of the heart . The largest aneurysm originating from the proximal left circumflex artery had become spontaneously occluded. Although the anterior mediastinal multinodular masses suggested mediastinal tumours, such as lymphoma, thymoma, thymic cyst, germ cell, and mediastinal thyroid mass, contrast-enhanced cardiac CT excluded these diseases. Iatrogenic causes and coronary injury were also excluded, as the patient had never underwent surgery or coronary intervention. Genetic testing excluded an underlying connective tissue disorder. A whole-body CT scan detected no aneurysms in any other part of the body. On admission, CAG revealed two CPAFs originating from the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) . Although the CPAFs originating from the left anterior descending artery (LAD) were accompanied by giant CA, the orifices of the fistulas from the LAD could not be identified by CAG (, Video 2). Selective contrast injection using a guide-extension catheter (GuidelinerV3; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) revealed a CPAF originating from the proximal LAD and a saccular aneurysm in the middle LAD. The orifice of the CA was small due to the presence of an aneurysm-coronary septum (Video 3, ). Right heart catheterization (RHC) showed a significant increase in oxygen saturation between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery (71% and 78%, respectively), while the mean pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure were normal (19 and 9 mmHg, respectively). The ratio of pulmonary blood flow to systemic blood flow (Qp/Qs) was 1.3. There was no evidence of myocardial ischaemia with adenosine Tallium-201 myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, which might detect myocardial ischaemia caused by CPAF.
While there were no subjective symptoms and complications related to CPAF and CA, the CA diameter had grown from 23 to 30 mm over 4 years, indicating a risk of aneurysmal rupture ( and B). Therefore, we decided to treat the CPAFs with CA after the heart team held discussions with cardiac surgeons and paediatric cardiologists. Other than discussions in the heart team in our hospital, we discussed with adult congenital heart disease specialists and paediatric cardiologists in other hospitals before treatment, regarding the therapeutic indication and therapeutic strategy for this patient. Surgical correction was not feasible, since it will be difficult to identify the orifice of the fistula originating from the LAD, which requires a dissection of the cluster of CPAFs. Furthermore, the patient preferred minimally invasive treatment by a transcatheter approach. We, therefore, decided to perform transcatheter closure of these fistulas using detachable coils and a coronary stent.
Initial intervention was performed for the CPAFs of the RCA. A guidewire (SION blue; ASAHI INTEC, Aichi, Japan) and a steerable microcatheter (LEONIS Mova; Sumitomo Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan) were inserted into the fistula using a 7-Fr guiding catheter (JR-4, Heartrail II; Terumo Corp., Tokyo, Japan) from the right radial artery. The two fistulas of the RCA were embolized with five coils in total (Target XL360 soft; Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan) up to 6 mm in diameter and 20 cm in length. Post-embolization CAG confirmed the occlusion of all CPAFs from the RCA . Embolization of the fistula at the proximal LAD was performed at a later date. The fistula was embolized with 6 coils up to 8 mm in diameter and 30 cm in length in a manner similar to the CPAFs of the RCA. The saccular aneurysm of the mid-LAD was subsequently treated. Based on the previous IVUS findings, we planned to treat the aneurysm with stent-assisted coil embolization. Initially, a coil (3 mm in diameter and 90 mm in length) was deployed at the orifice of the aneurysm to disturb the blood flow into the aneurysm. A drug-eluting stent (DES) (CoCr-ZES 4.0/12 mm; Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) was then delivered to cover the aneurysm orifice along with the deployed coil. Unfortunately, the coil migrated distally due to interference between the coil and stent. Since the first stent could not fully cover the coil, we decided to implant a second stent (PtCr-EES 3.0/16 mm; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). Although final angiography showed a mild residual flow into the aneurysm, IVUS findings showed the aneurysm orifice was mostly covered by the stents (, , , ). The periprocedural myocardial infarction (defined by elevation of cTn values > 5 × 99th percentile URL) was not documented with all procedures in this case.
Follow-up CAG showed that the blood inflow into the saccular aneurysm was minimal after 6 months . This patient presented with nasal bleeding 1 month after stent implantation. Therefore, she needed the de-escalation from DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel to a single antiplatelet therapy (SAPT) with clopidogrel. Since then, her post-procedure course has been uneventful. A 3-month follow-up cardiac CT showed aneurysm shrinkage associated with partial thrombus formation , and 1-year follow-up cardiac CT revealed that the aneurysm had become completely occluded, suggesting that aneurysm rupture had been successfully prevented by a transcatheter approach .