A 77-year-old woman with a history of medically treated diabetes and hypertension who had worsening dyspnoea on effort for a month and progressive chest discomfort with a nocturnal cough for a week presented to our hospital. At presentation, her body mass index (24.5 kg/m2), heart rate (70 b.p.m.), blood pressure (112/78 mmHg), respiratory rate (14 per minute), and oxygen saturation level (96% in room air) were all within-normal ranges, no abnormal heart murmur was heard, and no specific pathological finding, such as right ventricular overload, was found on an electrocardiogram or trans-thoracic echocardiography (maximal flow velocity of tricuspid regurgitation: 2.3 m/s). Nevertheless, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a massive filling defect in the left PA which was located from the left PA trunk to the left lower lobe branches [)]. Two major differential diagnoses were considered; pulmonary thromboembolism, although contrast-enhanced CT showed no evidence of peripheral venous thrombosis, and serum D-dimer was undetectable, and tumour-like lesions, even though there was no contrast-enhancement in the CT and all serum tumour markers measured to detect occult cancer were negative, including CEA, CA19-9, CA125, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor.
In order to diagnose potential thromboembolism, we initiated the intravenous administration of unfractionated heparin while maintaining the activated partial thromboplastin time at >60 s. In parallel, further evaluations by multiple imaging modalities including contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and total-body 67GA scintigraphy were performed to detect signs of malignant neoplasm and possible metastasis of remote cancers. However, no contrast enhancement in MRI or pathological radiotracer accumulation by scintigraphy was demonstrated. Moreover, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed that there was no abnormal accumulation of 18F-FDG in the mass with maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) 0.90 [)]. Despite no positive findings with respect to either thromboembolism or the tumour by these imaging modalities, anticoagulation was extended by replacing unfractionated heparin (approximately 800 unit/day) with apixaban 20 mg/day, as we believed that the mass in the PA was more likely to be a thromboembolism, rather than a malignant neoplasm at that time point. However, even after effective anti-thrombotic treatment for 3 weeks, a follow-up CT showed completely no reduction in the size of the lesion in the pulmonary artery. Therefore, integrally assessing the clinical course, such as deteriorating dyspnoea on effort without any efficacy of anticoagulants, and the findings of the imaging modalities, the lesion in the PA was finally diagnosed to be an intravascular tumour rather than thromboembolism.
After careful and intensive discussion among cardiologists, radiologists, and cardiovascular and thoracic surgeons, surgery to remove the tumour-like lesion in the PA was performed. Although the surgery was initially planned to be a left-upper lobectomy, it was expanded to a left pneumonectomy, as the tumour had occupied and almost totally occluded the left main, A1+2, A3 (arteries of apical-posterior and anterior segments), and A6 (superior segmental artery of the lower lobe) of the PA and rapid intraoperative histological diagnosis showed that it was a sarcoma. The tumour was generally jelly-like, partly solid, soft, and appeared to be yellow (arrows, ). Histological analyses demonstrated that the tumour was an intimal angiosarcoma that had originated from the PA. Histologically, atypical cells with spindle- or circular-shaped nuclei proliferated against the background of a myxoma-like matrix, which arose from the intima of the PA . Nucleated cells were positively stained for P53 and smooth muscle cell (SMC) markers, including smooth muscle alpha actin (SMa-actin), vimentin, and desmin, indicating that sarcoma cells differentiated into vascular SMC lineage. As the edges of the resected tumour tissues were positive for atypical sarcoma cells, adjuvant therapy by radiation (60 grey) was added. Serum levels of B natriuretic protein (BNP) before surgery and at hospital discharge were continuously low (38.5 and 36.0 pg/mL, respectively). The patient has been followed without critical event for 3 years since surgery.