A 55-year-old Tunisian woman presented with syncope. An electrocardiogram (ECG) upon admission showed complete heart block with a narrow QRS complex (<120 ms) and an escape ventricular rate of 45 bpm. Our patient's medical history included arterial hypertension. She did not have diabetes mellitus, and had no family history of coronary artery disease. A two-dimensional echocardiography showed normal LV function with a 60% EF, the absence of significant valvulopathy and no regional wall motion abnormalities or pulmonary artery hypertension. A conventional dual chamber pacemaker (Medtronic; Sensia SEDR01, US) was implanted with the right ventricular (RV) lead positioned to her RV septum. The septal position was confirmed by fluoroscopic images; defined as a leftward orientation of the lead confirmed by 40° left anterior oblique projection . The electrocardiographic criteria were defined as a negative deflection of lead I and positive initial R-waves of the paced ventricular complex in lead ventricular fibrillation (VF) . The pacemaker was programmed in a DDD mode with lower rate of 50 bpm and upper tracking rate of 120 bpm. An ECG before discharge showed atrial synchronized ventricular pacing with a rate of 80 bpm and QRS duration of 160 ms . Echocardiographic examination two days after pacemaker implantation demonstrated a normal LV function (55%), a LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) of 84 mL, the absence of significant valvulopathy and an aortic pre-ejection period (PEP) of 160 ms. A ventricular dyssynchrony (80 ms between septal and lateral electromechanical delays) was also measured with tissue Doppler imaging (TDI). The ratio of E (peak transmitral flow velocity in early diastole) to Ea (peak early diastolic myocardial velocity) velocity (E/Ea) was estimated at 5.25. Our patient was readmitted seven months later with six days of progressive dyspnea (New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV). Echocardiography showed severe LV akinesis, a depressed LVEF (28%), a LVEDV of 153 mL, the presence of significant mitral and tricuspid regurgitations (grade II-III), an aortic PEP of 170 ms, pulmonary artery hypertension (50 mmHg) and an E/Ea ratio of 6. Her troponin level was not raised. Coronary angiography revealed the absence of significant obstructive epicardial coronary artery disease and left ventriculography demonstrated depressed LVEF (25%).
Despite instauration of optimal medical therapy, our patient remained at NYHA functional class III. She was upgraded to a cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)-device with implantation of a lateral left ventricular lead . After one month of CRT, symptoms and exercise tolerance improved markedly from NYHA class III to class II. A twelve-lead ECG showed QRS shortening after CRT .
After one month, an echocardiography showed a decrease in the aortic PEP (130 ms), LV reverse remodeling, with a reduction of the LVEDV from 153 mL to 135 mL, and significant improvement in LVEF to 40%. She had no symptoms of heart failure or syncope afterwards and device interrogation showed that her cumulative biventricular pacing was 100%.