An 83-Year-old postmenopausal woman was admitted to the emergency department because of fever and diffuse abdominal pain. The patient had a history of hypertension. Her gynecological history was unremarkable, and there was no history of postmenopausal bleeding or vaginal discharge. She appeared acutely ill, and her body temperature was 38.9°C. Her pulse rate and blood pressure were 146 b.p.m. and 88/35 mmHg, respectively. Oxygen saturation was 100% without administering supplemental oxygen, and the respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed rebound tenderness, muscular rigidity in the lower abdomen, and distention. Vaginal examination showed no cervical or vaginal anomalies, vaginal discharge, or detectable pelvic mass. Laboratory studies on admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 6,930/μL; hemoglobin, 8.3 g/dL; C-reactive protein, 9.61 mg/dL; and procalcitonin, 41.00 ng/mL. The serum lactate level increased to 82.0 mg/dL in arterial blood gas analysis. In this patient, a vasopressor was administered for septic shock in the emergency room following fluid resuscitation. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large amount of ascites in the abdominal cavity, and free air was mainly detected in the upper abdomen. In addition, CT imaging showed a fluid-filled uterus with small air bubbles in the uterus cavity and perforation at the fundus on the right side .
Emergency laparotomy was performed for generalized peritonitis with septic shock. Approximately 1,000 mL purulent fluid was detected in the peritoneal cavity. A 2 × 1-cm-sized perforation was observed in the uterine fundus . The mean arterial pressure was approximately 65 mmHg even when 0.4 μg/kg/min intraoperative norepinephrine was given together with red blood cell bolus, we undertook DCS. In the initial surgery, a direct suture of the uterine perforation, decontamination in the abdominal cavity, and temporary abdominal closure using ABThera (Kinetic Concepts, San Antonio, TX, USA) were rapidly carried out. The operation time of the initial surgery was 43 min, and there was minimal intraoperative bleeding. At the end of the initial surgery, 0.5 μg/kg/min norepinephrine and 0.03 U/min vasopressin were given to maintain blood pressure. Planned reoperation was carried out 2 days after the initial surgery because the vasopressor was no longer needed, and the hemodynamics were stable following the open abdomen management, prompt resuscitation, and administration of i.v. antibiotics in the intensive care unit. Consequently, total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and definitive abdominal closure were carried out, and decontamination of the abdominal cavity was achieved. Proteus mirabilis was cultured from the pus in the abdominal cavity, and Prevotella
intermedia was cultured from the blood. Histopathological examination revealed pyometra with no evidence of malignancy. The postoperative course is shown in Fig. . The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 32nd postoperative day in stable condition.