We report a case of 12 years old boy, black, student who was admitted to our department for a 1 year progressive slowly growing of not painful abdominal mass occupying the right flank and right-lower quadrant. The patient had history of chronic constipation of 2 years referring 1 bowel movements every third-fourth day with hard stools. He denies symptoms of vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, fever, hematocquezia, hematuria, anorexia, lost weight. Not learning or mental disabilities were reported from his parents.
The patient was hospitalized previously four times during his life by history of constipation treated with laxatives and enemas and discharged with food recommendations. Only family history of diabetes in his grandmother.
On initial evaluation, the patient had a temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 100/70 mm Hg, a heart rate of 85 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, with weight 30 kg and height 133 cms (BMI = 16.5, 18th centile).
Physical examination revealed a good general condition, cardiac and lungs examination were unremarkable. Abdomen without scars, soft, not distended, tympanic in 4 quadrants, normoactive bowel sound, palpation revealing an abdominal mass smooth, mobile, nontender in the lower right flank and quadrant of ± 13 cm of diameter. Rectal examination revealed no palpable stool in the rectal vault and was hemoccult negative. No malformations were finding during the examination.
The laboratory test parameter during admission were: hemoglobin 13.2 g/dl, hematocrit of 39.5%, WBC 5.500, platelets 374.000 mm3; creatinine 0.8/BUN 70, Na:142, K:4.3, urinalysis and liver function tests were normal. Stool samples for parasites were negative.
Intravenous pyelogram revealed a large rounded mass of approximately 12 cm. in diameter at the colon which seemed to have an irregular mottled texture. The right ureter seemed to be somewhat displaced by the mass that produce a slightly enlargement of the renal pelvis . Roentgenologic examination of the colon after barium enema showed an intraluminal mass having a smooth contour and without any mucosal attachment .
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a mass arising probably from the intestine with no evidence of hydronephrosis.
The flexible rectosigmoidoscopy was done and only passed through 25 cm of rectum which presented a normal rectum with a roomy sigmoid colon and a large, firm fecal ball. Sigmoidoscopic rectal biopsies were not performed and fragmentation was attempted but abandoned because of pain during the procedure. Repeated enemas and laxatives were unsuccessful in evacuating the fecal mass.
The patient underwent elective laparotomy. Preoperative bowel cleaning was performed with phosphosoda solution and lavage with warm saline until evacuations were liquid without fecal residue. A 20-cm midline incision (infraumbilical with supraumbilical extension) was made. During the procedure we founded an enlarged sigmoid colon lateralized to the right showing a large, rock-hard mass, smooth and ovoid in shape, measuring about 14 cm, which appeared to be a hardened mass of feces. The rest of the colon appeared normal and empty.
The sigmoid colon with the mass was resected and an end-to-end anastomosis was done. The patient recovered for the surgical procedure and had an uneventful convalescence. After six months our patient refers 1 bowel movement per day performing soft stools with no recurrence of his symptoms leading a completely normal healthy life.
Examination of the gross specimen after incision of the intestinal wall showed a firm fecal mass covered with a white material (barium) which filled the lumen but was unattached to the wall of the colon . No lesions were observed at the sigmoid wall. Microscopic examination of the colon demonstrates normal intestinal mucosa without ulcers. Myenteric plexus shows nerve fibers with lack of ganglion cells .