A 46 years old Chinese woman, gravida 4 para 1 abortion 2, was admitted to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the Beijing Friendship Hospital (Beijing, China) on July 14, 2020, with complaints of “amenorrhea for 6 weeks, ectopic pregnancy was diagnosed by ultrasound”. The patient was presented elevated beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level (4137.60 mIU/L), and ultrasound findings of a mixed echogenic mass of 0.6 × 0.5 × 0.6 cm in the left cornual uterus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed cystic signal of 0.5 cm × 0.6 cm under the left cornua of the uterus. She was diagnosed with ectopic pregnancy (interstitial tubal pregnancy or cornual pregnancy). 2 days later the patient had a laparoscopic surgery with cornual uteri resection and left salpingectomy. According to Chinese consensus recommendations, If incomplete excision of the ectopic pregnancy is a concern, prophylactic intramuscular treatment with a single dose of MTX may be considered and may significantly reduce the rate of persistent ectopic pregnancy (recommendation grade C), as the villi was incomplete and then it was followed with an intramuscular injection adjacent the uterine horn of MTX at a total dose of 50 mg (< 1 mg/kg). There was no immediate incident.
On day 1 after MTX administration (“day 1” was abbreviated as “D1”), She began to nausea, vomit, and diarrhea for 3 times. The serum creatine (Cr) increased to 178.6 × μmol/L . Considering of the increasing Cr, we analysised the most likely causes: one is the adverse reaction of laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum; The other maybe drug factor. The MRI was enhanced and the contrast medium Omniscan was used before the operation which has side effects of renal function injury. MTX may also induce gastrointestinal reaction, but the renal function injury by MTX cannot be entirely excluded. So we gave her intravenous fluids 2000 ml, and Cr was measured again the next day. On D1 β-hCG level fell by half to 1778 mIU/L, so the treatment for EP is succeed.
On D2, She developed oliguria and lower limbs edma. The Cr increased to 329.1 × μmol/L. She also diarrheaed 9 times a day. An immediate urological ultrasound showed enlargement of the right kidney and enhanced echo of both kidneys. The diagnosis of renal failure caused by MTX is clear. MTX retention was treated by initiating calcium leucovorin (CF) rescue, which was started since D2 (150 mg, q3h, IV), and the dose was decreased on D5 (30 mg, q8h, IV) due to the abnormal MTX concentration. Sodium bicarbonate was administered intravenously to alkalize urine. Furosemide was used because of oliguria.
On day 4(D4), continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was performed from D4 to D14. Although CRRT was given, therapeutic drug monitoring showed that the serum MTX concentrations were 0.262 µmol/L (D7) and 0.116 µmol/L (D11) (in Table ), which were significantly higher than the normal level. The personalized genetic testing showed that MTHFR TT (677C > T) and ABCB1 (3435T > C) were detected, indicating a 66% decrease in the MTHFR activity. For the patient with genetic abnormality the generation of folic acid was seriously prohibited, which resulted in the decrease of MTX clearance. After the CRRT and CF rescue, the serum MTX concentrations is decreasing.
On D5 , the WBC and ANC began to increase and On D 22 descended to the normal level. On D22, the Cr began to return to normal gradually. On D15, the β-HCG level descended to the normal level. It was monitored until negative reports twice; The Urea began to increase on D1 and began to decrease on D4 after the CRRT. When the CRRT stopped, it had a slight increase and On D20 it began to return to normal again. The kidney ultrasound was carried out again and showed no obvious abnormalities. To date, we have followed up her for 24 months, and her general condition is satisfactory.