A 68-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for postoperative care after a stage III-A thymoma resection. His history consisted of Ménière’s disease, and a recent onset hypothyroidism which was diagnosed eight months prior by the general practitioner. He received 100mcg levothyroxine once a day, and 8mg betahistine three times a day. The diagnosis of type B1 thymoma was made after an incidental finding of an upper respiratory tract infect on a chest X-ray, of which he recovered fully. Myasthenia gravis was excluded prior to the surgery by negative antibodies against the acetylcholine-receptor, skeletal muscle and muscle specific receptor tyrosine kinase (MuSK). In the months prior to the surgery, he unintentionally lost 15kg and complained of tiredness and muscle weakness. His laboratory studies showed no abnormalities.
The surgery consisted of resection of the thymoma, and the left phrenic nerve and a small section of the left upper lobe were resected due to adhesions. During surgery, he received phenylephrine up to 1.00mcg/kg per minute, after which it changed to norepinephrine up to 0.40mcg/kg per minute. Blood pressure was maintained with a mean arterial pressure (MAP) between 50 and 70mmHg. There was 1240cc of blood loss and 1500cc of Ringer’s lactate, 500cc of Voluven™ (6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 in 0.9% sodium chloride) and 550 of packed erythrocytes were infused. No corticosteroids were administered.
In the ICU, he suffered from tachycardia and hypotension despite there being little blood loss. His physical examination showed cachexia with decreased muscular strength, and bilateral rigid auricles as the only remarkable sign. The auricles felt calcified and no movement in the auricle was possible. He later told us that this had existed for many years and he could not remember how or when it evolved. There was no history of localized trauma, fight sports, radiation or frostbite. Also, there was no hyperpigmentation. Norepinephrine continued to be administered at 0.4mcg/kg per minute, and additional fluids and 100mg of hydrocortisone were administered to stimulate adrenergic-receptor potency. Serum lactate levels were not elevated, nor was the central venous saturation ever below 70%. During the next day, the norepinephrine was tapered, after which he was discharged to the ward.
On the ward, his MAP persisted between 50 and 60mmHg despite fluid administration. Because the continuous hypotension suggested adrenal insufficiency, hydrocortisone was started at 50mg three times a day and was stopped on the fifth postoperative day (POD). On the seventh POD he was readmitted to the ICU due to respiratory insufficiency based on sputum stasis due to the pre-existing lack of strength. This led to a probable pulmonary infection, although without fever or other signs of infection. His chest X-ray showed left-sided pleural fluid and an atelectasis of the right middle lobe. He was reintubated, inotropics and antibiotics were started and hydrocortisone was restarted at 300mg/day continuously. Later, Streptococcus agalactiae was cultured from the sputum. He was extubated three days later and discharged on the eleventh POD to the ward once again.
On the 14th POD he was re-admitted to the ICU for the second time due to respiratory insufficiency based on diminished airway secretion clearance, while receiving 50mg hydrocortisone once a day. He was re-intubated and a tracheostomy was performed. Hydrocortisone was continued at 75mg/day and he was quickly weaned off the ventilator. He was discharged to the ward on the 18th POD.He was in a stable phase on the 21th POD, so the pituitary axes were evaluated. His laboratory tests showed: cortisol 51nmol/L (normal 200 to 700nmol/L), TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone 11.9mU/L (n=0.4 to 4.3mU/L), free T4 11.2pmol/L (n= 11 to 25pmol/L), lutein hormone (LH) 6.5U/L (n=1.5 to 8.5U/L), FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) 10.9U/L (n=2 to 7U/L), testosterone radioimmunoassay 3.4nmol/L (n=10 to 30nmol/L), prolactin 0.49U/L (n=0-0.36U/L), and IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor 1) 7.8nmol/L (n=6 to 25.9nmol/L). A magnetic resonance imaging scan of his cerebrum showed pituitary hypoplasia. A re-evaluation of his preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral totally calcified auricles (Figures and
), however no other signs of calcifications were found. The adrenal glands appeared normal. A metyrapone test was performed in an out-patient setting and displayed secondary adrenal insufficiency.