A 10 year-old girl presented with the complaint of palpitation to a cardiologist. She had normal physical examination and laboratory tests, except tachycardia (heart rate = 130 per minute) and low TSH levels (0.005) with normal T3 (9.46) and T4 (145). She was referred to endocrinologist for possible hyperthyroidism evaluation. The thyroid gland was normal size, with no nodularity. She was diagnosed with possible thyrotoxicosis, but due to the normal physical examination, she underwent thyroid scan to rule out possible thyroiditis, which did not show any uptake in the thyroid gland, while there was an increased uptake in the right ovary . Pelvic trans-abdominal sonography showed a heterogeneous complex solid mass of 113 × 112 × 100 mm with volume of 670 cc in the right ovary with no ascites. The patient had no complaint of abdominal pain or pelvic pain or abnormal uterine bleeding.
She was treated with methimazole 10 mg daily and propranolol 40 mg daily and were candidate for surgery after being euthyroid. The patient was referred to a gynecologist with the possible diagnosis of struma ovarii for further evaluation. She underwent right oophorectomy with the presumption of teratoma combined with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-suppressive therapy following treatment with I131. Total thyroidectomy was performed to permit evaluation for metastatic disease and monitoring for recurrence by thyroglobulin levels. The pathology report of the ovary mass indicated teratocarcinoma with 60% well-differentiated follicular thyroid carcinoma and 40% well differentiated follicular-variant with tumor necrosis, microscopic capsular invasion and peritumoral lymphovascular invasion, considering stage IC of PTC and the thyroid gland did not show pathologic features of PTC.
Further evaluation with whole body scan with Iodine 123 (I123) showed metastasis to lymph nodes. She had high levels of thyroglobulin and received iodine therapy (150 mCi) twice. In the follow-up whole body scan, there was no trace of iodine uptake and the patient was symptom free.
The patient is now under treatment with levothyroxine 0.1 mg daily. Following 8 months after surgery and iodine therapy, she is totally symptom free.