An 80-year-old male patient presented with anemia during follow-up for cerebral lacunar infarction at another hospital. He was diagnosed with gastric antrum cancer on esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Then, he was referred to the gastroenterology department of our hospital due to his contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan findings. In particular, he had aortic valve stenosis and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, similar to other medical histories, and he took anticoagulant drugs. His American Society of Anesthesiology Physical Status score worsened from 0 to 3 within a few months as the cancer progressed. In addition, as his general condition declined, his food intake also became poor.
Laboratory data showed slight anemia (hemoglobin level at 11.7 g/dL) and moderate elevation of inflammatory markers (white blood cell count at 9500/µL and C-reactive protein level at 0.36 mg/dL). There were no evident abnormalities in liver or renal function. The patient’s serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was high at 8.6 ng/mL. Meanwhile, his carbohydrate antigen 19–9 level was normal (6 U/mL). EGD showed type 2 advanced-stage gastric cancer at the greater curvature of the antrum and extramural invasion of the descending part of the duodenum . Biopsy was performed, and results showed tubular adenocarcinoma, and HER2 status was negative. The CECT of the thorax and abdomen presented with a huge mass clumped with swollen infrapyloric lymph node with a size of approximately 9 cm and thick gastric wall with contrast effect . The tumor invaded the pancreatic head , the descending part of the duodenum, and the transverse colon . Moreover, it had a continuous shadow defect from the tumor located in the superior mesenteric vein . Based on this finding, the patient was diagnosed with superior mesenteric vein tumor thrombus. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed evidently elevated 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the lesion site, including the tumor thrombus. However, there was no evidence of distant metastasis other than that in the infrapyloric lymph node . The clinical diagnosis was gastric cancer L Gre-Post tub cType2 cT4b (pancreas, duodenum, and transverse colon) N + M0, cStageIVA according to the Union for International Cancer Control Tumor, Node Metastasis Classification of Malignant Tumors, Eighth Edition. The lymph node station was defined using the Japanese Classification of Gastric Cancer, Fifteenth Edition. Although pancreatoduodenectomy with portal vein resection is important at this point, pancreatoduodenectomy could not be performed as the patient’s general condition was poor (performance status [PS] score of 3). If the patient’s general condition was attributed to tumor progression, chemotherapy could be considered, and he could be treated with chemotherapy with S-1 and oxaliplatin (SOX) based on curability and his general condition. The patient was HER2 negative, and SOX was selected as the regimen in the hope that oral intake would improve his general condition by using the intestinal tract.
S-1 was administered orally twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by a 1-week rest. The S-1 dose was determined based on the body surface area as follows: < 1.25 m2, 80 mg/day; 1.25 to < 1.50 m2, 100 mg/day; and > 1.50 m2, 120 mg/day. In this case, S-1 was initiated with a dose of 100 mg/day based on the patient’s BSA that was between 1.25 and 1.50 m2. However, the patient had loss of appetite on day 4. Thus, the S-1 dose was reduced by one step to 80 mg/day. Oxaliplatin was administered intravenously at 130 mg/m2 on day 1. During this regimen, no severe adverse events, except for loss of appetite, according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0. were detected. All three cycles of preoperative chemotherapy along with rehabilitation and nutritional management with oral nutritional supplements were performed at the hospital. It improved the patient’s performance status score from 3 to 1. After three cycles of SOX, the patient’s CEA showed improvement over time. The tumor observed at the greater curvature of the antrum on EGD had shrunk . In CECT, the tumor shrunk by approximately 90% after one cycle and by approximately 50% after three cycles . The clinical therapeutic effect was classified as partial response on radiological examination according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors criteria version 1.1. Moreover, the border between the tumor and pancreas was partially obscured, however, much clearer than before chemotherapy. PET/CT scan showed that the FDG uptake in the tumor decreased, and the FDG uptake in the tumor thrombus was not prominent . After chemotherapy, the condition was diagnosed as ycT4b (transverse colon) N + M0 and cStage IVA. As the patient’s ASA-PS score improved and the FDG uptake on the tumor thrombus was not prominent, we planned to perform laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection and partial transverse colectomy.