A 32-year old manual laborer, right-hand-dominant man presented in the Orthopaedic Outpatient Clinic of the local hospital with a two-year history of numbness and tingling sensation in the palmar surface of left hand and fingers. During the last six months the patient reported also burning pain in the same area – causing him to wake up frequently during the nightime hours – and progressive inability to perform his regular occupation. No episode of trauma or other medical problems were mentioned. All the symptoms were attributed to carpal tunnel syndrome and the diagnosis was confirmed with median nerve conduction study (NCS). Through a classical open palmar approach subsequent release of the transverse carpal ligament was performed. According to surgeon's operative report, there wasn't any reference for any pathology in the dissected area except from the severely compressed median nerve. However, postoperatively, the patient experienced only partial and temporary relief of his symptoms without improvement of hand function.
Three months after the surgical procedure, the patient was referred to our department for further investigation. On physical examination, the palmar aspect of the left hand and the area of the previous incision were tender to palpation and swollen while a slight atrophy of the thenar muscles was apparent. There was a sensory loss in the area innervated from the median nerve as compared with the controlateral hand and Tinel's sign was evoked over the median nerve at the wrist. The patient had decreased grip strength while passive flexion and extension of fingers were painful. As a result, additional investigation was deemed necessary and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was selected for delineating any potential pathology in the carpal tunnel or the surrounding tissues. MRI showed a misdiagnosed, volarly placed soft tissue mass with well-defined margins and an ovoid shape which was in direct contact with the flexor tendons .
Because of the persistent symptoms and the radiographic abnormalities, surgical exploration and tumor resection were scheduled. Under axillary block a well-circumscribed, encapsulated mass in the deep palmar tissues was identified causing significant compression of the median nerve. The tumor was adhered to the third flexor digitorum tendon superficialis and it was moving within the tendon during flexion or extension of the middle finger (See additional file ). No vascularity or connection with the deep volar arch was evident. The mass was completely removed from the adjacent tissue and the histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed spindleshaped cells arranged in fascicles with cigar-shaped nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. The smooth muscle nature of the tumor was confirmed immunohistologically by a strong reactivity against smooth muscle actin (SMA) and a negative reaction against S-100 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). No significant cellular pleomorphism or mitotic activity was noted. The above findings were compatible with leiomyoma .
At the two-year follow-up evaluation, the patient showed no evidence of recurrence of the mass and no pain or sensory dysfunction. He had a significant improvement in hand grip strength and he returned to his previous occupation.