A 42-year-old woman was referred to our hospital due to detection of supraventricular arrhythmia during a dental procedure under general anesthesia. She was asymptomatic besides sporadic memory loss. Medical history was insignificant. Physical examination showed a body mass index (BMI) of 24 kg/cm2, normal pulse of 80 bpm, blood pressure 130/90 mmHg. She had no pathological murmurs nor any other abnormal findings. 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) and exercise test were normal. Further evaluation by transesophageal ultrasound (US) and CT showed a globular mass attached to the apex of the left ventricle measuring 4.6 × 3.6 cm . No other abnormalities were found and echinococcus-serology was negative. Decision for minimally invasive resection was made.
After general anesthesia and standard draping, connection to the extracorporeal circulation (ECC) was made by femoral cannulation combined with jugular venous return. 3 trocars were placed in second to fourth intercostal space in the right axillary line. 1.5 cm utility port was placed in the third intercostal space. 5 mm thoracoscope was used for vision. Pericardium was opened followed by aortic cross clamping and anterograde cardioplegia was given. Left atrium was accessed via Waterston’s groove. Clearly visible behind the mitral valve is a lobulated, fatty mass with a broad base pedunculated to the apex of the left ventricle . The mass has partial ingrowth in the left ventricular wall, but can be resected at a macroscopic safe margin using endoscopic scissors and forceps . Attention was given to leaving enough ventricular wall intact for safe ventricular function. Inspection showed no residual lipoma tissue . Left atrium was closed by continuous suture. Pericardium was closed and one thorax drain was left in the right pleural cavity. Patient was disconnected from the ECC and incisions were closed in layers.
Postoperative stay was uneventful and after 7 days patient was discharged. Histological examination was consistent with lipoma. Final measurements were 5.5 × 3.5 × 3.5 cm. Further staining for liposarcoma was negative. Mouse double minute 2 homolog (MDM2) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was negative for malignant lipomatous tumor. Echocardiogram showed no signs of recurrence during a 2-month follow up period.