A 40-year-old Ethiopian male presented to our hospital complaining of painless swellings under the chin and back of the neck for 6 months. The swellings, after they appeared, were 3 months later, followed by itchy heaped-up swellings over the forearms, thighs, legs, and finally the face. These swellings increased in itchiness and size during the daytime and sunlight exposure. Two months before the presentation, he developed new swellings that he noticed over his axillary and inguinal areas. He was treated with oral loratadine and topical steroids as a case of nodular urticaria with no significant improvement. Two weeks before his presentation, he developed worsened fatigue, loss of appetite, and epigastric pain. Three days before his presentation, he developed a high-grade fever, headache, chills, rigors, and worsened epigastric pain.
On examination, his pulse rate was 95 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and he had a temperature of 360C and a saturation of 94% on room air. He had injected conjunctiva with a puffy face. He had multiple nontender firm lymph nodes of different sizes ranging from 2 to 4 cm over the submandibular, anterior and posterior cervical, axillary, posterior auricular, and inguinal areas bilaterally. He had no organomegaly. Skin evaluation that was done by a dermatologist showed generalized urticarial papules involving the face, neck, and upper extremities, with macular erythematous rash involving the trunk, and eczematous plaques and excoriation marks over the extremities. .
His investigations showed normal liver function, renal function, coagulation, and lipid panel. His viral hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) tests were negative. His VDRL was positive, but his TPHA was negative. He had a white cell count of 4500 cells/mm3 with 65% neutrophils, 19% lymphocytes, and 9% eosinophils. He had a hemoglobin of 13.7 g/dl and a platelet count of 284,000 cells/mm3. His fasting blood sugar on two occasions was 86 and 98 mg/dl.
His lymph node biopsy showed florid hyperplasia and vascularization of the germinal centers and parafollicular areas with proliferation and infiltration by eosinophils with fibrotic changes. His serum platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) assay was negative.
With a diagnosis of PDGFRA-negative Kimura’s disease, he was started on a tapering dose of prednisolone 30 mg/d. After 2 weeks of therapy, all symptoms including lymph node swelling and skin nodules resolved. Four months later, he was taken off prednisolone and had a similar recurrence 6 months after drug discontinuation that required reinitiation of prednisolone. After reinitiation of the same dose, a similar fast taper was attempted, which caused a recurrence of symptoms; so, a slow taper with 5 mg every month was attempted with a good response, with the patient being symptom-free while on 5 mg of prednisolone a year later.