A 36-year-old woman was referred to Osaka City University Hospital with episodes of NSCLC since 2011. In 2011, she was diagnosed with stage-IIIb (T1aN3M0) lung adenocarcinoma in her right lower lobe. An ALK gene rearrangement was detected by an immunohistochemical examination and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Crizotinib was administered orally as a second-line treatment. During the crizotinib treatment, no skin events were noted. She was referred to our hospital in November 2014, at the age of 39 years, for the evaluation of a skin event, which was caused by alectinib treatment as the fifth-line treatment for NSCLC with the fusion gene EML4-ALK. She was a passive smoker and had routinely used medications including ambroxol hydrochloride, rabeprazole sodium, and sodium picosulfate hydrate for over 1 year. The skin reaction was observed on the anterior chest, back, upper arms, and ear auricles on day 11 of treatment with alectinib. The skin lesions were flat, atypical lesions, described as irregular purpuric macules . A histamine-1 receptor antagonist, an external preparation of nadifloxacin, and a medium-class steroid were prescribed. On day 12, the skin reaction had rapidly spread to the abdomen and lower limbs. The patient had a mild fever (body temperature, 37.2°C). An external preparation of a very strong steroid was prescribed. On day 13, the skin event presented as widely distributed erythematous macules that were confluent, indicating a severe and life-threatening form. Extensive mucosal involvement was also observed in the mouth and vulvar areas. The intensity of the itching of the skin lesions increased. Alectinib treatment was discontinued, and treatment with the oral histamine 2 receptor antagonist and oral prednisolone (20 mg) were initiated. On day 15, the patient was hospitalized because the skin condition did not improve. After admission, treatment with 40 mg oral prednisolone was initiated. The skin lesions started to resolve after 4 days of admission; thereafter, the prednisolone dose was gradually tapered, and treatment with prednisolone was discontinued on day 48.
Pathological findings of a skin examination on day 13 showed vacuolar degeneration of the basal cell layer with necrotic keratinocytes. The immunohistochemistry showed infiltration with CD4 and 8 T lymphocytes which led to the diagnosis of EM . Laboratory evaluation on day 14 showed elevated levels of aspartate transaminase (76 IU/L), alanine transaminase (55 IU/L), lactate dehydrogenase (300 IU/L), and C-reactive protein (0.86 mg/dL). Complete blood cell counts on day 14 showed no increase in the number of white blood cells, including eosinophils. Paired serum examinations on days 17 and 29 showed no elevation of the levels of the anti-human herpesvirus 6 IgG, anti-Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus IgG antibodies, or Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody. The drug lymphocyte stimulation test was performed twice, on days 28 and 50. On day 28, steroid therapy was administered, and the drug lymphocyte stimulation index was 179%, which was slightly elevated, although it was within normal limits (<180%). The drug lymphocyte stimulation index on day 50 was 142%. A chest radiograph showed a remarkable decrease in the size of the tumor. Using the Naranjo criteria to assess if the EM was caused by alectinib, “probable” adverse drug reaction (ADR) was found.
In January 2015, she showed brain and lymph node metastases on the contralateral side of the mediastinum. She underwent gamma-knife radiosurgery for the brain metastasis, followed by sixth-line chemotherapy with 4 courses of docetaxel, although she developed a progressive disease. In March 2015, she required emergency hospitalization due to increasing dyspnea. The cause of dyspnea was severe stenosis of the right and left main bronchus. At that time, she orally received 10 mg steroid (prednisolone) daily, because steroid reduced cerebral edema due to brain metastasis and gamma-knife radiosurgery. She received our rechallenge program for alectinib for 2 weeks, with 10 mg prednisolone. In brief, she received alectinib 20 mg once a day on days 1 and 2, 20 mg twice a day on days 3 and 4, 40 mg twice a day on days 5–7, 80 mg twice a day on days 8 and 9, 120 mg twice a day on days 10 and 11, and 160 mg twice a day on days 12–14. After each phase, the patient was observed for evidence of a hypersensitivity reaction. The patient tolerated this rechallenge program well with no symptoms of skin reaction or organ damage. Since completion of the rechallenge program, she continued treatment with alectinib (200 mg) twice daily. The result was a further decrease in tumor size and no signs of dyspnea.