A 73-year-old man with a history of cancer treatment was referred to our department for further evaluation and treatment of an esophageal tumor, found on regular endoscopy. The patient underwent a distal gastrectomy (Billroth I reconstruction) for gastric cancer 29 years ago, transverse colectomy for colon cancer 12 years ago, endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for remnant gastric cancer 11 years ago, ESD for upper thoracic esophageal cancer 10 years ago, endoscopic laryngopharyngeal surgery for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer 7 years ago, chemoradiotherapy for recurrence of laryngeal cancer 4 years ago, ESD for upper thoracic esophageal cancer 2 years ago, and transoral laryngoscopic surgery for hypopharyngeal cancer 1 year ago. Some medications were prescribed to manage comorbidities including type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, and prostatic hypertrophy. The patient was an ex-smoker (daily 30 cigarettes until 60 years) and ex-drinker (daily 6 bottles of beer until 66 years).
The patient had no symptoms on admission, and physical examination showed no abnormality except for the operation scar on the abdomen. The results of laboratory tests were normal, and no tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, SCC, and CYFRA) were elevated. Esophagogram showed a dome-shaped tumor, 3 cm in size, in the lower thoracic esophagus . Endoscopy showed a round lesion with a smooth surface and central redness, similar to a submucosal tumor (SMT), located 40 cm from the dental arch . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a hypoechoic region in the second layer . Contrast computed tomography (CT) showed thickness of the esophageal wall but no findings of metastasis. Positron emission tomography (PET) also showed fluorodeoxyglucose concentration in the esophageal tumor but there was no sign of metastasis in the whole body. Magnetic resonance imaging did not show any specific finding. On boring biopsy, pleomorphic atypical spindle cells with increased mitotic activity under the squamous epithelium were observed on histopathological examination . Immunohistochemical staining was negative for AE1/AE3, CD117, CD34, S100, desmin, and caldesmon; focally positive for αSMA, cdk4, and Ki-67; and positive for CD68 and p53. Histological examination suggested features of sarcoma; however, a definitive diagnosis was not made.
Because the efficacy of chemotherapy or radiotherapy for esophageal sarcoma is unclear and a treatment strategy has not been established, we planned to treat the tumor surgically without neoadjuvant therapy. The patient underwent lower esophagectomy and remnant gastrectomy with jejunal reconstruction. First, laparotomy was done in the supine position, because adhesions from previous surgeries were expected. In fact, there were severe adhesions around the anastomosis sites of the transverse colon, remnant stomach, pancreas, and liver. After dissection of the adhesions, remnant gastrectomy was performed, and the jejunum flap was elevated into the right thoracic cavity through the esophageal hiatus. The abdomen was temporarily closed. The patient was then placed in the prone position and lower esophagectomy and esophagojejunostomy with Roux-en Y reconstruction using the overlap technique was performed under the thoracoscopic approach . Next, the abdomen was reopened in the supine position and the elevated jejunum was fixed to the esophageal hiatus. Finally, Braun anastomosis was performed and the surgery was completed. Lymph node dissection was not done.
The surgical specimen contained the tumor SMT, 3.0 × 1.8 cm in size . Histopathological examination of the resected tissue revealed pleomorphic spindle cell proliferation with a storiform pattern in the submucosal layer . Immunohistochemical staining was negative for AE1/AE3, CD34, S100, desmin, ALK, and ERG; focal positive for caldesmon, SMA, and Ki-67; and positive for CD68, p53, and H3K27me3. Pathological morphology and immunostaining examination resulted in the diagnosis of UPS, excluding other diseases.
The patient did not have any severe postoperative adverse events except abdominal drain infection and was discharged in stable condition approximately 1 month after the surgery. Adjuvant therapy was not administered, and the patient survived without local recurrence or distant metastasis 1 year after surgery.