A 42-year-old Caucasian man presented in December 2016 with productive cough, facial pain, and rhinorrhea. He is an engineer, who does not smoke tobacco, and he had no significant premorbid conditions. There was no history of prescription drug use, and no significant family history. Neurological, cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were normal, except for tenderness of the face elicited by palpation. He was first diagnosed as having acute rhinosinusitis and treated with antibiotics (details were not available), without improvement. Due to symptoms persistence, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his face was ordered. This study revealed an expansive irregular heterogeneous lesion (4.5 × 3.5 × 4.0 cm), with its central portion located on the interface between the left maxillary sinus and the pterygopalatine fossa. This lesion invaded medially the nasal cavity and posterosuperiorly the left orbit apex with an intracranial extension through the inferior orbital fissure . There was no lymphadenopathy and no perineural invasion. A biopsy demonstrated poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with negative in situ hybridization for Epstein–Barr encoding region (EBER). Human papillomavirus (HPV) genotyping test was negative as well. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was negative for nodal and systemic metastases. His total leukocyte and platelet counts, as well as hemoglobin levels, were all within normal limits. His biochemical parameters, including serum electrolytes, renal function test, and liver function test, were also normal.
He received, from January 2017 to April 2017, induction therapy with docetaxel 75 mg/m2 at day 1, cisplatin 100 mg/m2 at day 1, and fluorouracil (5-FU) 1000 mg/m2 per day at day 1 to day 4 (DCF) for six cycles every 3 weeks, with clinical benefit and stable disease by MRI and PET-CT . Chemoradiotherapy (radiotherapy 35 fractions – 70 Gy) with weekly systemic chemotherapy based on carboplatin 1.5 area under the curve (AUC), paclitaxel 45 mg/m2, and cetuximab 400 mg/m2 was administered for 7 weeks from May 2017 to July 2017. Concurrently, weekly intra-arterial chemotherapy with cisplatin 150 mg/m2 was performed for 5 weeks with grade 2 myelotoxicity and nausea.
New imaging evaluation, 1 month after the end of the last treatment, revealed a good partial response in the primary lesion . However, PET-CT showed multiple suspicious lesions in his bones and lungs , which were histologically confirmed . Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) was negative (SP263 Ventana). In order to look for other therapeutic possibilities, a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor biopsy was sent to the Foundation Medicine with patient consent. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted from FFPE and hybrid capture-based NGS was applied to perform the FoundationOne™ test, which comprises a panel of 315 genes known to carry somatic mutations in human solid tumors, as well as introns of 28 genes involved in rearrangements. The test showed a rearrangement of BRD4-NUT characterizing NMC. No other mutations were found; microsatellite stability and low mutational burden were reported. The IHC for NUT protein was performed and stained positively in neoplastic nuclei .
Due to the lack of available clinical trials in the country for this highly aggressive tumor, our patient received two more cycles of chemotherapy, but, unfortunately, without any response. He died exactly 2 months after metastatic disease was diagnosed.