A 79-year-old woman presented to our hospital. An abnormal shadow using stomach fluoroscopy was detected during mass screening for gastric cancer. The examination showed an irregular-shaped defect with a central ulceration at the fornix of the stomach . CEA, CA19-9, and IL-2R were 1.7 ng/ml (normal range 0 to 6), 21.5 ng/ml (normal range 0 to 37), and 472 U/ml (normal range 127 to 582). Endoscopy revealed a polypoid lesion comprising irregular ridges with ulceration at the fornix of the stomach. The lesion was suggested to be a gastric malignancy such as gastric cancer, lymphoma, or gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) . A computed tomography scan revealed a nodule (approximately 16 × 13 mm) protruding from the upper edge of the fornix without lymphoid swelling and distant metastasis . Family history of IFP was not found in this case. Pathological diagnosis of biopsy specimens revealed an ulceration with inflammatory cells in the necrotic tissue and granulation tissue. As we could not exclude a gastric malignancy, especially gastric cancer, we performed a partial resection of the stomach using the laparoscopic-assisted method. That surgery was performed with five ports (12 mm ports at the umbilicus and right-side abdomen, 5 mm ports at the bilateral upper abdomen and left-side abdomen). We cut off the greater omentum, left gastroepiploic artery/vein and posterior gastric artery/vein by the energy device. We transferred from the laparoscopic operation to open surgery. We confirmed the main lesion at the fornix of the stomach and performed a partial resection of the stomach with a 2-cm margin. The resected specimens revealed a polypoid lesion with indistinct margins and central ulceration (30 × 30 mm) . Pathological examination revealed that the lesion existed in the submucosal layer without atypia of mucosa and consisted of collagen fibers containing inflammatory cells, plasma cells, and eosinophilic cell infiltration . Immunohistochemical staining was mildly positive for CD34 and α-SMA and negative for c-kit, DOG-1, s-100, desmin, ALK, and IgG4; the lesion was thus diagnosed as an IFP . No malignant lesion was not found in the surgical specimens. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient is currently asymptomatic and has shown no recurrence.