A 74-year-old Caucasian American woman presented to the emergency room of the Cleveland Clinic with a one-month history of progressive exertional chest pain. The pain was dull and diffuse. It lasted for a few minutes after exertion and was associated with shortness of breath. Physical activity made it worse and improvement was noted with sublingual nitroglycerin. She denied any nausea, vomiting, sweating, light headedness or dizziness associated with these episodes.
Her medical history was significant for long-standing asthma and hypertension. She had a stroke nine months prior to this admission in the setting of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with near complete resolution of her neurologic deficit. Her medical history was also significant for coronary artery disease (non-ST elevation myocardial infarction) after angioplasty and stenting to the right coronary artery with a bare-metal stent; the procedure was performed four months before she presented to the emergency room. She never smoked or drank, but she did have a history of allergy to iodine.
On arrival to our emergency department her blood pressure was 105/62 mmHg, pulse was 98 beats per minute, and she was in no acute distress at rest. Her estimated central venous pressure was about 10 cm H2O. Her lungs revealed no wheeze or rales but had decreased breath sounds in the bilateral bases. Cardiac examination revealed a regular heart with no murmur, rubs or gallop. She had 2+ bilateral edema of the lower extremities with normal peripheral pulses.
A diagnosis of non-ST elevated myocardial infarction was initially considered based on her electrocardiography, which showed sinus rhythm with low voltage, left axis deviation with ST, lateral T wave abnormalities and elevated cardiac enzymes . Her total creatine kinase levels peaked at 184U/L (upper limit of normal = 220U/L). Her myocardial band fraction was 54.0ng/ml or 29% (upper limit of normal = 8.8ng/ml). Her Troponin T levels peaked at 5.00ng/ml (upper limit of normal = 0.10ng/ml). Her leukocyte count was 29.59k/ul, with an eosinophil count of 18.94K/ul (64%) (upper limit of normal = 0.4k/ul).
Chest X-ray showed the presence of cardiomegaly, bilateral pleural effusions and pulmonary venous congestion . Emergency echocardiography showed severe regional systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 25%. The patient's left ventricular end diastolic diameter was 52 mm . Her right ventricle was normal in size and systolic function. The aortic valve was sclerotic without aortic regurgitation and the mitral valve had 1+ regurgitation. A small pericardial effusion adjacent to the right ventricle and the right atrium was noted without signs of cardiac tamponade.
Our patient was then started on aspirin, clopidogrel, statin and beta-blockers. She was also scheduled for left heart catheterization. Due to her iodine allergy, she received 1mg/kg of prednisone prior to her left heart catheterization. Her peripheral blood eosinophilia resolved after the first prophylactic treatment with prednisone. Angiography showed that our patient had a mild non-obstructive disease. She then underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, which showed a severely dilated left ventricle with severe dysfunction and multiple regional wall motion abnormalities without any evidence of infarction. On the sixth day of her hospitalization, a right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy was done, which showed endomyocardial thrombosis with eosinophilia consistent with EM. Eosinophilic infiltrate was present in the thrombosed area of the small vessels of the endocardium. The myocardium showed a repair process with lingering mononuclear cells, fibroblasts and interstitial collagen. There was no evidence of Aschoff nodules, giant cells or granulomata. A Movat stain showed no evidence of fibroelastosis. There was also no evidence of amyloid (Thioflavin-S) deposition in the interstitium .
Due to these findings our patient was started on a daily treatment of 70 mg of prednisone at a tapering dose. She responded well to the treatment and her chest pain resolved. The pain was presumably due to the associated pericarditis and steady decrease in her cardiac enzyme markers. An extensive workup for the cause of her eosinophilia showed negative results. This workup included negative antinuclear antibodies, negative antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, negative marrow exam for malignancy, negative CHIC2 studies, negative JAK2 mutation analysis, normal serum IL-5, and negative flow cytometry for immunophenotypically abnormal T-cells associated with lymphocytic hypereosinophilic syndrome. Her stool studies and parasite serologies for strongyloides and toxocara were also negative. No vasculitis was described in any tissue specimen. The patient was therefore discharged home.
Two months later she presented to an outside facility with monomorphic ventricular tachycardia and heart failure exacerbation. She was treated, and upon discharge from this hospital she received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. A follow-up examination with our cardiology department five months later showed that her symptoms had improved but her ejection fraction had remained at 25%.