Here, we describe the case of a 32-year-old woman with no previous medical history who presented with recurrent retroperitoneal IMT in May 2022. Prior exposure to radiation or toxins was not reported. The patient was originally diagnosed and treated in Ukraine. Retroperitoneal IMT was diagnosed in 2017 at the age of 27 years at the University Hospital in Kyiv. Treatment consisted of repeated resections in June and December 2017 as well as in August 2018. In 2018, metronomic chemotherapy was started with the NSAID celecoxib followed by vinblastine, cyclophosphamide and methotrexate. Best response was stable disease (SD). The therapy was continued until the patient fled from Ukraine in January 2022.
The patient presented to a cooperating oncology practice of the University Hospital Augsburg (UKA) with pain and functional impairment in the left gluteal region and edematous swelling of the left leg. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen showed an extensive tumorous mass infiltrating the psoas and iliopsoas muscles and subsequently infiltrating the posterior abdominal wall, lateral paravertebral muscles, and kidney .
Because no tissue samples were available for additional molecular testing, a CT-guided biopsy was performed, and the case was referred to the Molecular Tumor Board (MTB) at UKA. Histologic examination confirmed the presence of IMT . Using the AmpliSeq for Illumina Focus Panel, RNA Sequencing of the FFPE-Material identified a TFG::ROS1 translocation .
As next-line treatment, the kinase inhibitor crizotinib was recommended, consistent with an evidence level of m1C according to National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) guidelines. The patient began treatment with crizotinib but rapidly developed relevant side effects. Due to edema, nausea, dizziness, and muscle cramps, the maximum tolerated dose was reduced to 250 mg daily, as opposed to the recommended dose of 250 mg twice daily. Concomitant medication consisted of dexamethasone, ondansetron, metoclopramide and metamizole.
Follow-up with CT 5 months after therapy onset showed an excellent response with significant regression of soft tissue formations in all affected muscles . The abdominal wall metastasis also markedly regressed in terms of soft tissue involvement. Flake-like calcifications and visible volume decrease remained, but no pathological contrast uptake was detected. The imaging-based response was associated with a significant reduction in pain, decrease in swelling of the left leg, and functional improvement of the patient. The patient is still undergoing treatment 9 months after initiation.
ROS1 encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase whose physiological role in homo sapiens ultimately remains unelucidated. The neural epidermal growth factor-like like 2 (NELL2) protein, has recently been shown to bind to the extracellular domain of mouse ROS1. NELL2 is a lumicrine factor that is secreted by testicular germ cells and mediates lumicrine signaling, an essential pathway for male fertility. Activated ROS1 signaling autophosphorylates tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain. Phosphorylated sites are consecutively accessed by SH2 domain-containing or further canonical adaptors. These adaptor proteins then stimulate signaling via RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK, PI3K-AKT-mTOR and JAK-STAT3 pathways, which are mainly involved in the regulation of cell survival, growth and proliferation.
Up to 55 different 5′-gene partners have been described as fused to the 3′ region of ROS1. This marked heterogeneity of ROS1 partner genes has been observed between patients and especially between different cancer types. In IMTs, YWHAE::ROS1 and TFG::ROS1 are the predominant translocations and make up 10% of all IMTs., ,
Both translocations result in a loss of the large extracellular domain as well as a fusion (in-frame) of the N-terminal portion of the fusion partner with the intracellular kinase domain. Tropomyosin-receptor kinase fused gene (TFG) is a common fusion partner of ROS1, MET, ALK, NRTK1, and NTRK3.
ROS1-fusions lead to constitutive activation of the kinase domain, which drives oncogenesis via the described signal transduction pathways.
The kinase domain of ROS1 shares 70% homology with the ALK kinase domain. The ROS1 kinase exhibits two main conformations: type I is the active form, while type II is the inactive form. Most TKIs (e.g., crizotinib, entrectinib, ceritinib, ensartinib, brigatinib, lorlatinib, repotrectinib, and taletrectinib) bind to the active type I kinase form, which contains the ATP-binding pocket of the ROS1 kinase, and thus inhibit its kinase activity. The type I conformation provides access to the catalytic site of the kinase domain by geometrically enabling contact through folding/orientation of an aspartic acid-phenylalanine-glycine motif (DFG-motif or DFG-in). In type I configuration, phosphatases of ATP are optimally positioned to facilitate phosphate transfer and therefore exerting catalytic activity. Type I inhibitors compete with ATP binding. In contrast, the inactive, type II, “DFG-out” kinase domain conformation is characterized by blocked access to the catalytic site. Type II ROS1 inhibitors such as cabozantinib and foretinib preferentially bind to the type II conformation. Figure gives an overview of the mechanism of action of crizotinib and summarizes the pathways activated by ROS1 (adapted from).