A 31-year-old Caucasian female, with no previous neurological history , was admitted to the hospital due to slow progression of right-sided weakness and numbness during the past three weeks. At symptom onset, the patient suffered from headache, nausea, mild neck pain, and balance impairment, but no dizziness. Additionally, the patient and some of her family members had noticed mild behavioral changes and cognitive impairments including memory and concentration issues. These symptoms remitted spontaneously after 5–7 days. The patient reported no diarrhea, respiratory infections, fever or chills.
Four weeks prior to symptom onset, the patient received the single-dose SARS-CoV-2 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson, Ad26.COV2.S, a recombinant, replication-incompetent Ad26 vector, encoding a stabilized variant of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
Neurological examination revealed moderate right-sided hemiparesis and hypoesthesia. No impaired consciousness was found. Blood tests including complete blood count; glucose; electrolytes; vitamins; thyroid-, kidney and liver function were all within normal reference ranges. Anti-aquaporin-4, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and antinuclear antibodies were negative. Screening for HIV and HCV was negative. HBV antigen was negative and HBV antibody was positive (HBs IgM + IgG), due to previous HBV vaccination.
Pharyngeal swab was negative for SARS-CoV-2 on reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white blood cell count was 1 × 106/L (reference range 0–5 × 106/L); protein levels were 0.31 g/L (reference range 0.15–0.5 g/L); IgG index was 0.47 (reference range 0.38–0.67); and oligoclonal bands in CSF and blood were negative.
Brain and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed five large juxtacortical T2 FLAIR hyperintense lesions with incomplete contrast enhancement on post-contrast T1 images located supratentorial: one in the right cerebral hemisphere and four in left cerebral hemisphere. The largest lesion was in the right frontal lope with a diameter of approximately 4.4 cm . No infratentorial or spinal cord lesions were found. The clinical and radiological findings raised the suspicion of ADEM.
On the day at admission, the patient was treated with high-dose IV methylprednisolone, 1000 mg for three consecutive days followed by oral administration of 500 mg prednisolone for four days with significant clinical improvements. She was discharged from the hospital six days after admission where physical examination only revealed mild right-sided hemiparesis.
A five-week follow-up MRI showed volume reduction in all the lesions, and no new lesions were found. Two lesions showed incomplete ring enhancement. The last MRI follow-up at four months showed regression in all five lesions with extensive lesion volume reduction and almost complete resolution . Additionally, the patient presented with complete clinical recovery at the four-month follow-up.