A 68-year-old man presented with a sudden deterioration manifesting as a headache, vomiting and gait disturbance. Two months earlier, he had begun to notice intermittent headaches. Neurological testing revealed ataxic gait features and bilateral papilledema without other neurological deficits. The computed tomography (CT) scan revealed obstructive hydrocephalus caused by a round hypodense ill-defined lesion in the pineal region . A magnetic resonance (MR) imaging study demonstrated a 4 × 3 × 4 cm mass at the pineal gland. Through the administration of gadolinium, the lesion showed a heterogeneous hypointensity on the T1-weighted image and hyperintensity on the T2 image as well as ring-enhancement with an extension into the midbrain and thalamus . No hematological or biochemical abnormalities were evident, and the other tumor markers, such as α-fetoprotein, β-human chorionic gonadotrophin and placental alkaline phosphatase were within normal limits. Surgery was performed using the occipital transtentorial approach because a non-germinomatous malignant tumor was considered a possibility. During the operation, a very soft, gray-colored mass was located in the pineal region, which was barely demarcated from the peritumoral brain. Some hard portions were found in the tumor. An examination of frozen biopsy samples showed anaplastic astrocytic tumor cells. The mass was subtotally removed due to adhesion with the hypothalamus and midbrain, and its severe bleeding nature. The pathologic findings revealed a typical glioblastoma consisting of frequent mitotic figures, a high proliferation index, microvascular proliferation with endothelial cell hyperplasia, and extensive necrosis with focal pseudopalisading . Immunohistochemistry revealed a positive reaction to the glial fibrillary acidic protein in both cell bodies and processes . A further review of the pre-operative MR imaging study showed an enhanced mass in the fourth ventricle that was consistent with ependymal dissemination . Two weeks after surgery, the patient underwent a ventriculoperitoneal shunt due to the rapid exacerbation of signs and symptoms of the hydrocephalus. Considering the pathological and radiological findings, whole neuraxis irradiation therapy was recommended. However, his family insisted on conservative medical support. The patient died 2 months after the diagnosis.