We describe the case of a 27-year-old white woman who had experienced an emergency caesarean delivery at 39 weeks for fetal distress with no postpartum complications. As part of our ongoing study “Vaginal delivery after caesarean section”, she underwent saline contrast sonohysterography 6 months after the caesarean section. The caesarean scar had a small indentation and the remaining myometrium over the defect was 7.5 mm .
In the current pregnancy, she had a dating scan at around 11 weeks with no remarks. She came for a transvaginal ultrasound examination at around 13 weeks as part of our study. This scan revealed a duplex pregnancy with one viable intrauterine fetus with normal anatomy and placenta located high on the anterior wall and a small gestational sac (8 mm) with a yolk sac without embryo was located in the caesarean scar . There was no extensive vascularity surrounding the sac. One corpus luteum was found in each of the two ovaries. She was asymptomatic.
She was informed that not enough evidence existed to advise a specific management of this condition. After discussion with her and her husband, expectant management was chosen with a new ultrasound examination after 5 weeks.
She came to our ultrasound department at 18 weeks, 22 weeks, and 30 weeks of gestation. She remained asymptomatic. The ectopic gestational sac was not visualized with transvaginal or transabdominal scans at the 18 weeks examination . The niche in the scar and the thickness of the thinnest part of the remaining myometrium appeared unchanged at all visits. The intrauterine pregnancy developed normally with no signs of abnormal placentation. At 30 weeks of gestation the ultrasound appearance of the scar area did not indicate any contraindications for vaginal delivery. The thickness of the lower uterine segment (LUS) was 4.9 mm . In agreement with our patient, vaginal delivery was planned. The staff of the labor ward was fully informed.
She was admitted to the labor ward with irregular contractions in week 37 + 0. Her cervix dilated to 3 cm with no further progress. Due to that oxytocin augmentation was administered for 3 hours. The duration of active labor was 6.5 hours. A healthy male neonate weighing 2985 g was delivered, with Apgar scores 9–10 at 1 and 5 minutes and umbilical cord pH 7.27. The placenta delivered spontaneously and total blood loss was 250 ml. The postpartum period was without any complications, and she was discharged home the next day.
At a follow-up visit 6 months postpartum, saline contrast sonohysterography showed no signs of the previous CSP, and the remaining myometrium over the hysterotomy scar defect was 5.7 mm .
Ethical approval for the ongoing study was obtained by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of Lund University, Sweden, reference number 2013/176. Our patient has given permission for publication of this case report in a scientific journal.