A 48-year old female sought medical consultation due to decreased vision of the left eye. Her past medical history included no necessity for spectacle correction at a younger age and phacoemulsification surgery of the left eye 4 years ago. Following cataract surgery, no improvement of her visual acuity was noticed due to pseudophakic bullous keratopathy. Therefore, the patient underwent DSAEK procedure in the left eye six months post cataract extraction. Restoration of good visual acuity following DSAEK that lasted for the next year was noticed; upon the aforementioned period the patient reported gradual deterioration of vision. Gradual visual impairment was attributed to graft failure.
The ophthalmic examination of the left eye revealed uncorrected distance visual acuity HM (hand movement) that could not be improved with spectacles. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the left eye showed corneal oedema accompanied by anterior corneal fibrosis.
We proceeded with a second Descemet stripping endothelial keratoplasty (almost two years following failure of the primary graft) in order to replace the non-functional graft with a healthy one. The procedure resulted in complete resolution of corneal oedema within the first postoperative month . Nevertheless, 6 months postoperatively, patient’s corrected distance visual acuity could not exceed 20/400 due to the ongoing presence of the corneal scar. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) was performed in order to establish the extension of fibrosis in the anterior stroma; in fact, the depth of the scar was estimated at 112 μm from the corneal surface centrally and at 120 μm in the mid-periphery . A variety of other parameters were also calculated with the use of AS-OCT; central corneal thickness (involving both the scar and the graft) was measured 665 μm and graft thickness was measured 117 μm at its thinnest point , Thus, the residual corneal tissue of the recipient was estimated at 548 μm. Our decision was to proceed with transepithelial phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) in a 7.0 mm-diameter treatment zone for a treatment depth of 120 μm. Treatment was initiated using the Wavelight EX500 femtosecond laser platform. Adjunctive mitomycin-C (MMC) 0.02% for 60 s was applied on the corneal surface. Prolonged antimetabolite application was performed in an effort to spare the patient from the increased risk of postoperative corneal haze that accompanies deep tissue ablations . Postoperative AS-OCT was performed depicting the resolution of the scar . Mixed eye drops containing antibiotic agent (chloramphenicol 0.5%) and cortisone (dexamethasone 0.1%) were administered 5 times daily for the first post-operative month, with gradual dose tapering over the following 6 months.
In the first postoperative month, anterior corneal fibrosis resolved and the patient’s corrected distance visual acuity reached 20/32, with a manifest refraction of −1.50 sph −2.00 cyl × 120°. The final myopic refractive outcome, as opposed to the expected hyperopia induced by DSAEK, was attributed to the myopic shift of the laser treatment. The aforementioned laser platform is scheduled by the manufacturer to induce myopia following PTK treatment (to compensate for the post-PTK hyperopic shift that was observed with previous treatment profiles). Central corneal thickness in the first postoperative month measured by ultrasound pachymetry was 517 μm.