A 15 year-old Caucasian male was referenced to our institution in November 2005 for investigation of severe episodes of flushing, hypotension and vascular collapse since his late-early childhood; at that time, he referred a past history of several admissions at the emergency room for similar episodes. He had no history of urticaria, angioedema, and allergy or identified MCA triggers. In particular, the life-threatening episodes were not caused by food, medications, insect bites, temperature changes, exercise, or other recognized factors. Of note, the patient had been diagnosed with cutaneous mastocytosis at the age of 3-year, based on histopathological analysis of maculopapular skin lesions which disappeared soon thereafter. At the time of referral, he didn’t have skin lesions, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy, and he was under H1 anti-histamines therapy, without the relief of the crises. Laboratory investigation showed markedly increased baseline serum tryptase levels (175 μg/l; normal range: 2–13 µg/l). Transient increase in serum tryptase above the baseline values during the MC-mediators related events were not documented, because blood samples for determination of serum tryptase levels were not taken at the episodes flushing, hypotension and vascular collapse. The BM aspirate was normocellular with increased numbers of MC (1.7%), most of which had an atypical (type I) morphology (spindle-shaped MC with irregular distribution and focal accumulation of the cytoplasmic granules, and elongated cytoplasmic extensions); the myeloid/erythroid ratio was normal and there was no myelodysplasia . The BM trephine (stained with hematoxylin-eosin and Giemsa), showed a normocellular BM without dysplastic features or increased blast cells, but a few scattered morphologically abnormal MCs, difficult to recognize . Dense BM mast cell aggregates (>15 cells/aggregate) were not observed. Flow cytometry confirmed the presence of BM mast cells with abnormally high light scatter values (SSC and FSC), and a mature (CD117+high, FcεRI+high), but aberrant (CD2+, CD25+) and activated (CD63+high, CD69+high) phenotype . Molecular analysis showed the absence of the KIT Asp-816(r)Val mutation; in contrast, the KIT Val-560(r)Gly activating mutation was detected in FACS-purified BM mast cells , but not in other BM myeloid and lymphoid cells, including BM precursors. Serum IgE levels were within normal values (7 KU/l; normal levels <100 KU/l), and the screening for IgE antibodies specific for common food and inhalant allergens and Hymenoptera venom was negative. The remaining work-up, which included a full blood cell count, biochemical tests, bone densitometry and abdominal ultrasound, was unremarkable. Thus, although the patient had no skin lesions since his late childhood, the case fulfilled the WHO criteria for the diagnosis of ISM. Based on these findings and on the clinical manifestations, the patient was diagnosed with the ISMs(−) variant [, ]. H1 anti-histamines were maintained and oral DSCG (200 mg capsules, administered 5-times/day) was added. Since the start of DSCG therapy, systemic MC-associated symptoms have remained under control and serum tryptase levels progressively decreased over time, from 175 µg/l in November 2005 (first observation) to 61 µg/l in 2008, 49 µg/l in 2011, 45 µg/l in 2013, 31 µg/l in August 2015 and 35 µg/l in September 2016 (last observation). The patient is currently 26 years-old and he remains completely asymptomatic under DSCG therapy.