In February 2014, a 50-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to our department due to suspected chorioretinitis in the left eye. The patient reported metamorphopsia in the left eye lasting about 6 months. Both personal and ocular histories were free of any noteworthy facts. VA was 4/4 (ETDRS) natural in both eyes; intraocular pressure was 26 mmHg in the right eye and 23 mmHg in the left eye. The finding in the anterior segment of both the right and left eyes was quite physiological when examined using the slit lamp. Biomicroscopic examination of the fundus of the left eye revealed a clear, prominent whitish tumour with calcification at the centre sized 1 disc diameter, up in the temporal region at the edge of the macular area, 1.5 disc diameter from the foveola. No supply vasculature or vascular drainage were visible. Furthermore, parafoveal greying of the retina was visible in the parafoveolar temporal regions in both eyes, with small crystalline deposits and impaired capillary network structure with small telangiectasias , better visible in red-free photographic documentation . Autofluorescence of the fundus in the left eye showed a mild decrease in autofluorescence in the area of the tumour with hyperautofluorescence at the calcification site . The macular regions of both eyes showed a mild increase in autofluorescence. Fluorescein angiography showed mild fluorescein leakage at the tumour site in the left eye in late phases, with accentuation of the mulberry-like structure of the tumour. In the macular regions of both eyes, the telangiectasias were coloured in early phases with fluorescein leakage in the foveola in late phases . SD-OCT of the tumour showed proliferation in the retinal nerve fibre layer with a normal structure of deeper retinal and choroid layers with centrally located calcification associated with an acoustic shadow. In the area of the foveola with normal contours, small cystoid areas were visible in both eyes, as well as small areas of impaired retinal architecture at the junction of external and internal photoreceptor segments . Ultrasound assessment of the left eye showed a solid, highly echogenic lesion in the temporal region above the central area, prominent by 0.65 mm, with high reflectivity 85-90 % with central calcification and an indicated acoustic shadow . The finding was concluded as macular telangiectasia type 2 associated with a solitary retinal astrocytic hamartoma. No skin alterations were shown in the patient, in the sense of neuroectodermal phacomatoses, and her general condition was not associated with neurological symptomatology either. The additionally collected history confirmed no family burden with the above mentioned diseases. The 85-year-old mother of the patient has been followed at our department due to bilateral active neovascular membrane; however, the advanced stage of the finding at the time of diagnosis prevented us from determining whether it had developed in connection with macular telangiectasia of the mother. To confirm our diagnosis and to rule out familial form of macular telangiectasia type 2 we also examined the 47-year-old brother and, with consent of his parents, 7-year-old son of the patient but found no signs of macular telangiectasia or astrocytic hamartoma.
Considering that currently no efficient therapy of macular telangiectasia type 2 is known, and given the stability of the astrocytic hamartoma without any signs of growth after 18 months of follow-up, the patient is only actively followed without any therapy for now.