A 52-year-old man was referred to the otorhinolaryngology department of the Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II for insidious and painless right neck swelling persisting for the previous six months. Physical examination revealed a non-tender right neck swelling measuring 8 cm x 5 cm and with a hard inconsistency at the lateral neck levels II and III. Intraoral examination showed bilateral tonsil grade III with a normal mucosa appearance. However, on palpation, the consistency of the right tonsil was found to be hard relative to normal tonsillar consistency. Nasoendoscopy revealed no abnormalities.
A computer tomography (CT) scan of the neck found a lobulated, heterogeneously enhancing lesion with evidence of necrosis in the right cervical region measuring 3 cm x 6 cm x 7 cm and with an enlarged bilateral palatine tonsil on the right side. The plane of demarcation between the right lateral oropharyngeal wall and the parapharyngeal fat was obliterated . There was extensive bone metastasis with epidural involvement but no evidence of lung mass. Intraoral biopsy of the right tonsil and fine-needle aspiration of the right neck mass were performed in a clinical outpatient setting. Both investigations identified features of small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, with the cells showing positive staining towards cytokeratin AE1/ AE3, CK7 and CD56. Full blood count indicated bicytopenia, and full blood pictures determined that it was due to metastatic bone marrow infiltration. Because of findings of distant bone metastasis in the CT scan, thoracolumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. The MRI showed a pathological fracture at the levels of T12 and L3. Due to the advanced stage of the disease, no active surgical intervention was performed. The patient was referred to the oncology team for chemotherapy. The oncology team prescribed cisplatin-based chemotherapy (CCDP) for a total of 5 cycles and 35 fractions of radiotherapy to the neck area with a cumulative dose of 70 Grey. Upon completing the third cycle of chemotherapy and 15 fractions of radiotherapy, the patient showed significant improvement in his condition. However, the patient developed neutropenic sepsis with lung infection during subsequent treatments and succumbed to the disease.