A 47-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 1-month history of dysarthria and dysphagia. He did not show swallowing difficulty, but had subtle difficulty in moving his tongue so that he frequently unintendedly bit his tongue. He had a past history of multiple cerebral aneurysms and had a checkup by angiography 6-months prior to the onset. He consumed alcohol occasionally, and had never smoked cigarettes. Neurological examination revealed isolated left HNP .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (CISS, constructive interference in steady state) revealed left hypoglossal nerve compression by the V4 segment of the left atherosclerotic VA . Further investigation revealed that his intracranial arteries were partially dilated and tortuous as a result of atherosclerotic changes. Multiple aneurysms were revealed including a partially thrombosed large left MCA saccular aneurysm and a fusiform aneurysm at the left PICA. The left VA was also dilated and tortuous. The hypoglossal nerve was composed of two bundles, and both of them were running along the left VA in a tortuous pathway to the hypoglossal canal. In contrast, the contralateral hypoglossal nerve was seen linearly and very clearly on the same images. This finding strongly suggested that the hypoglossal nerve was compressed by the left VA .
On the basis of the above diagnosis, he underwent MVD of the left hypoglossal nerve. In a park-bench position, retrosigmoid lateral suboccipital craniotomy enabled us to visualize the glossopharyngeal, vagal, accessory, and hypoglossal nerve together with the VA. Intraoperatively, the VA was compressing the hypoglossal nerve. The hypoglossal nerve was stretched and was extremely thin. The left VA was moved toward the deep side of the surgical field and attached to the dura matter with a polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon®) sheet and fibrin glue. The left hypoglossal nerve became free from compression after the procedure [Figure and ].
He was discharged 7 days after the operation without any obvious complication. At a 3-month postoperative follow-up, he exhibited improvement of hypoglossal nerve palsy without lower cranial nerve dysfunction .