An 82-year-old man was referred to our department with an anterior mediastinal mass. Eleven years earlier, the patient had been diagnosed with IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) from autoimmune pancreatitis and had been taking oral steroid treatment. At the initial diagnosis of IgG4-RD, a well-defined homogeneous anterior mediastinal mass was detected on chest computed tomography (CT); however, it temporarily decreased in size after starting oral steroid therapy . Serum level of IgE was normal (267.5 IU/mL), and he was negative for antinuclear antibody.
His medical history was notable for a history of asthma, multiple pulmonary nodules, and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The latter was suspected to be Castleman’s disease 22 years ago. His serum interleukin-6 level was within the normal limits at the time (details unknown).
On this occasion, 5 months before surgery, peripancreatic lymphadenopathy without enlargement of pancreas was detected by CT, and subsequent positron emission tomography revealed abnormal uptake (maximal value 3.6) by the thymic mass as well as peripancreatic lymph nodes . Exacerbation of his IgG4-RD was suspected and a dose escalation of oral steroids from 2.5 to 10 mg/day was prescribed.
The anterior mediastinal mass was suspected to be an encapsulated thymoma because of its lobulated shape, degree of fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation, response to steroids, moderate enhancement on contrast CT, and the gradual enlargement of the tumor. The patient was therefore referred to our department.
He had no systemic symptoms, and his physical examination was normal. He had an elevated level of IgG4 at 715 mg/dL and soluble interleukin-2 receptor at 604 U/mL. The rest of his laboratory data were normal, including serum C-reactive protein and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody. We performed tumor resection by video-assisted thoracic surgery. The tumor had not invaded the surrounding tissues. The operative findings were compatible with encapsulated thymoma, and the tumor was completely excised. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 7. The levels of IgG4 and soluble interleukin-2 receptor after operation were 307 mg/dL and 403 U/mL, respectively.
Macroscopically, the specimen was a lobulated, well-defined, white, solid mass . The final histopathological analysis revealed dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with sclerotic stroma within the tumor. Immunohistochemical examination revealed abundant IgG4-positive plasma cell infiltrates and more than 50% IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cells . No deviation in the kappa chain- and lambda chain-positive plasma cells was noted . Furthermore, neither keratin-positive thymocyte nor terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-positive lymphocytes were observed . Accordingly, IgG4-related sclerosing disease was diagnosed. Same dose of oral steroids was prescribed after surgery without tapering, and the condition of the IgG4-RD remains stable without exacerbation at 1 year follow-up.