A Japanese four-year-old girl with a rhinorrhea and four days of fever was referred to our hospital. Her past history was as follows: she was delivered at 35 weeks of gestation by caesarian section because of nonimmune hydrops fetalis secondary to congenital chylothorax. She was diagnosed with Sturge-Weber syndrome at 2 years old due to hemangiomas in the trigeminal nerve distribution area, glaucoma, occipital lobe hemangioma and parenchymal atrophy in the same area, and developmental disabilities. Pleural effusion was present at three years of age because of Budd-Chiari syndrome due to occlusion of the hepatic portion of the inferior vena cava. After the placement of a pleuroperitoneal shunt, pleural effusions were improved. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) incidentally revealed a simple renal cyst in her right kidney, and the asymptomatic simple renal cyst was managed conservatively . Her immunizations were up-to-date, and she received a 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine four times.
On exam, she was initially febrile: her axillary temperature was 38.1 °C; respiratory rate was 28/min, with an O2 saturation of 97 % on room air; heart rate was 144/min; and blood pressure was 144/108 mmHg. She had tenderness on her back, and her breath sounds were decreased. Her white blood cell (WBC) count was 15,000/µl, with differential counts of neutrophils (72.6 %) and lymphocytes (20.2 %); her C-reactive protein level was markedly elevated (28.48 mg/dl, normal range 0-0.3 mg/dl); her serum total protein level was 6.8 g/dl and her serum albumin level was slightly decreased (3.0 g/dl, normal range 3.9–5.2 mg/dl). She did not show symptoms of nephrotic syndrome, such as edema and heavy proteinuria, or symptoms of protein losing enteropathy, such as diarrhea. Pyuria and bacteriuria were not present in her urinalysis. A chest X-ray showed massive pleural effusions on the right side . Analysis of the pleural fluid obtained by thoracentesis revealed the following: pH, 7.011; protein, 900 mg/dl; and WBC, 2,940 cells/µl (66 % neutrophils). We suspected pneumococcal infection or catheter-related blood stream infection due to the presence of a pleuroperitoneal shunt catheter and initiated 200 mg/kg cefotaxime (CTX) per day and 60 mg/kg vancomycin (VCM) per day. VCM was discontinued after two days. S. pneumoniae was detected from two sets of blood cultures on admission, chest CT showed infiltration in the left lower lobe and right upper lobe, and otitis media was noted by otological evaluation on the subsequent day. We diagnosed her with invasive pneumococcal disease, including pneumonitis and otitis media. Based on susceptibility test results, CTX was changed to 200 mg/kg ampicillin per day on day 5. Although transient improvement of her symptoms and a decrease in the WBC count (9,800/µl) and CRP level (11.9 mg/dl) were observed on hospital day 9, she complained of respiratory discomfort again on hospital day 12. Her WBC count (13,200/µl) and serum CRP level (16.41 mg/dl) were elevated. Ampicillin (ABPC) treatment was escalated to 300 mg/kg tazobactam-piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC) treatment per day empirically. However, her symptoms did not improve sufficiently. Ultrasonography on hospital day 20 revealed a fluid-fluid level, suggesting an abscess in the right renal cyst. Enhanced CT on hospital day 21 revealed enlargement of the right renal cyst and enhancement and thickening of the wall around the cyst, which was considered to be an infected simple renal cyst . A drainage procedure under general anesthesia was performed on hospital day 23. Twelve milliliters was removed of greenish white pus was removed, and Gram staining of the pus showed neutrophils with no organisms. The melting temperature (Tm) mapping method was performed using 50 µl of the pus. After bacterial DNA was isolated from the pellets using a DNA extraction kit (DNA Extraction Kit, Mitsui Chemicals, Japan) in accordance with the supplier’s instructions, we conducted nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the DNA using seven universal bacterial primer sets and EvaGreen dye, which was performed on an analytical instrument with a high degree of thermal accuracy among PCR tubes. The data profile was analyzed using a Rotor-Gene Q® (QIAGEN, Germany), which can achieve temperature uniformity among samples (± 0.02 °C), and the Tm values were identified. The seven Tm values were determined and mapped on two dimensions, and by comparing the pattern to those in the database, S. pneumoniae was identified 4.5 hours after cyst drainage . We diagnosed her with a simple renal cyst infected with S. pneumoniae. The culture of the pus was negative, but we de-escalated TAZ/PIPC treatment to 200 mg/kg ABPC treatment per day on the basis of positive detection by the Tm mapping method on hospital day 27. Her convalescence was uneventful after the drainage, the drainage tube was removed on hospital day 29, and the antibiotic treatment was changed to oral amoxicillin (40 mg/kg per day) on hospital day 30. An asymptomatic scar approximately 1 cm in size was observed in her right kidney on ultrasonography, but she was discharged from our hospital with 5 days of oral amoxicillin on hospital day 32. Samples of fluid aspirated from the renal cyst did not grow any organisms in culture, but 16 S rRNA sequencing of the pus revealed a 100 % nucleotide identity to the respective sequence of a S. pneumoniae strain (ABI 3500 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in subsequent days. She was followed up for two years after discharge, and no recurrence of renal cyst infection was observed.