A 48-year-old man (weight 74 kg) who was diagnosed with necrotizing pancreatitis was scheduled for local pancreatic resection under general anesthesia. One year earlier, the patient developed acute pancreatitis and underwent mechanical ventilation by endotracheal intubation. After his discharge from the hospital for one month, a severe dyspnea happened, caused by subglottic stenosis. His tracheal stenosis was mostly attributed to the previous instance of prolonged intubation, mechanical ventilation, and cuff injury. Unfortunately, repeated balloon dilatation under bronchofibroscopy failed to cure his tracheal stenosis. Finally, a 12-mm sized MTT (Boston Medical Products, USA) was used to support his trachea. The West China Hospital Review Board approved the study (no. 2020-75) and informed consent was obtained.
Preoperatively, we intended to replace the MTT with a cuffed tracheostomy tube before anesthesia induction. However, the otorhinolaryngologist and respiratory physician who performed the tracheostomy and MTT insertion, respectively, forewarned of a high risk of tracheal hemorrhage or collapse after MTT removal, and that re-insertion of the MTT would be extremely difficult. Therefore, we decided to retain the MTT in situ in the trachea and prevent its displacement.
Based on the information provided by the manufacturer, the OD of the intratracheal and extratracheal limbs were 12 mm and 11 mm, respectively, and the lengths of the intratracheal and extratracheal limbs were 65 mm and 50 mm, respectively. Preoperative chest computed tomography (CT) scan and bronchofibroscopy examination showed that the lumens of the MTT were unobstructed. According to preoperative CT images, the internal diameters (ID) of the intratracheal and extratracheal limbs were estimated to be 10 mm and 8 mm, respectively . We evaluated that either a size 6.5 (ID: 6.5 mm, OD: 8.9 mm) or size 6.0 (ID: 6.0 mm, OD: 8.2 mm) cuffed endotracheal tube (Covidien LLC, USA) could pass through the intratracheal limb, while simultaneously ensuring sufficient tidal volume. Finally, we planned for transoral insertion of an endotracheal tube through the MTT’s intratracheal limb to administer CPPV .
The patient’s blood pressure, heart rate, pulse oxygen saturation, and bispectral index were monitored routinely. A well-lubricated video laryngoscope (E.An-II Plus, Tianjin Medan Medical Corp., China), cuffed endotracheal tubes (size 6.5 and 6.0), and a fiberoptic scope were prepared. First, the respiratory tract was cleaned by suction through the extratracheal limb of the MTT before anesthesia induction. Then, the patient inhaled 100% oxygen through a facemask that covered both his nose and mouth. Simultaneously, the extratracheal lumen was occluded. After 6 minutes of preoxygenation, 1% sevoflurane was inhaled through the facemask, and the sevoflurane concentration was gradually increased to 4%. When the patient was unconscious, but still breathing spontaneously, positive-pressure facemask ventilation was initiated, with no obvious gas leakage observed at the tracheostomy stoma. Thereafter, succinylcholine (100 mg) and propofol (100 mg) were intravenously administrated, and a video laryngoscope was immediately inserted into the mouth after the fasciculation disappeared. The glottis and the upper end of the intratracheal limb in the subglottis, without granulation tissue, were clearly visualized by the video laryngoscope. A size 6.5 cuffed endotracheal tube was inserted into the intratracheal lumen smoothly. To prevent MTT displacement, an assistant held the extratracheal limb lightly during intubation. Then, bronchofibroscopy was used to guide the distal end, and the cuff of the endotracheal tube passed entirely through the intratracheal limb and located above carina. The depth of the endotracheal tube was 23 cm. While the cuff was inflated, the endotracheal tube was connected to the anesthetic circuit for CPPV. An inspiratory pressure of 15 cmH2O achieved a 6–8 ml/kg of tidal volume. Clear and symmetrical breath sounds were confirmed without MTT displacement or tracheal hemorrhage. Then, sufentanil (20 μg) and cisatracurium (10 mg) were infused. Anesthesia was maintained using sevoflurane inhalation (1–2%), with continuous remifentanil infusion and intermittent administration of cisatracurium.
The operation lasted approximately 4 hours, and the respiratory tract was regularly cleaned through the endotracheal tube till the end of the surgery. After the patient fully recovered from anesthesia, extubation was performed under bronchofibroscopy, while holding the extratracheal limb. No tracheal injury or hemorrhage was detected, and the location of MTT remained unchanged.