A 69-year old male with epigastric pain visited the digestive department of Tianjin Medical University General Hospital for evaluation of his symptoms. On admission, he appeared anaemic, but no change in weight loss was observed; moreover, an abdominal examination revealed mild-abdominal tenderness. All other physical examinations were essentially normal. His medical history included diabetes (15 -years) and controlled hypertension (4 -years) but did not include drug treatments, medication, alcohol, or family risk factors for any illness. The patient denied other symptoms such as regurgitation, heartburn, nausea and vomiting, anorexia, bloating, diarrhoea, constipation, and fever. Initial laboratory investigations were insignificant except a haemoglobin level of 11 g/dL and a high C-reactive protein level of 7.44 mg/dL.
An upper GI endoscopy was performed, which showed a superficially elevated granular-nodular mixed and circumferential-type flat elevation in the distal stomach. The endoscopy also showed primary involvement of the antrum and pyloric region as well as a type 0-IIa + 0-IIc and a 0-I tumour (according to Paris classification) 6 –cm in diameter that extended into the duodenal bulb . Inspection with narrow band imaging revealed microvascular and microsurface changes and an irregular pit pattern of IIIL to IV; a white opaque substance was prominent in the antrum region of the stomach and duodenal bulb . Endoscopic ultrasound showed thickened hypoechoic mucosal, muscular mucosal and submucosal layer. The muscularis propria was intact . Enhanced abdominal CT revealed thickened gastric antral wall with prominent small lymph-nodes, a hepatic cyst, and a stone and cyst in the right kidney. Neither distant metastasis nor lymph -node invasion was observed. Abdominal ultrasound showed fatty liver and the wall of the gall bladder was not smooth.
Multiple targeted biopsies of the lesion revealed chronic mucosal inflammation, erosion, high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia of the gastric antrum near the greater curvature, tubulovillous adenoma of low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the pyloric region and tubulovillous adenoma with glandular hyperplasia in the duodenal bulb . The patient was negative for H. pylori. Based on the endoscopic examination, pathological results, and CT findings, an EGC was suspected.
This case was debated at a multi-disciplinary meeting. Due to the suspicion of an early gastric adenocarcinoma and the large tumour size, the team agreed that surgical resection was the best treatment. The patient was advised to undergo a surgical procedure, but he refused; then, despite the potential risk and prolonged operation time, he agreed to undergo endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD).
The patient underwent an uncomplicated, prolonged (15 h) ESD of the distal stomach and duodenal bulb, which was performed by an expert endoscopist. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit. Grossly, the resected tissue measured 6.0 × 5.0 cm. The pathologic examination of the resected tissue of the gastric antrum near the pylorus revealed extensive high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia, multifocal cancer that presented as intramucosal carcinoma, and a highly to -moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The lateral margins of the antrum and the pyloric region were positive for low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia . The remaining gastric mucosa showed severe atrophic gastritis and intense intestinal metaplasia accompanied by mild atypical hyperplasia. Based on these findings, the patient was scheduled for an additional gastrectomy.
Two weeks later, the patient underwent radical distal gastrectomy (Billroth II anastomosis) for gastric cancer and subsequent abdominal drainage. Excisions were made to the most distal part of the stomach and part of the duodenum. The pathologic assessment of the excised tissue revealed a highly to -moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gastric antrum, which involved the muscular mucosa, and tubulovillous adenoma of the pylorus and duodenal bulb . The duodenal bulb was non-neoplastic. An immunohistochemical study revealed that the adenoma was CEA positive and, CDX-2 positive . No cancer cell invasion was observed at the proximal end or at the end of the duodenal bulb. The tumour depth was limited to the muscular mucosal layer, and lymphatic-vascular involvement was absent according to haematoxylin and eosin stain.
Postoperatively, the patient had an uneventful recovery, and he was discharged on the 15th postoperative day in a stable condition. Follow-up after discharge was uneventful, and he remained asymptomatic 1 year after the surgery.