A 74-year-old Japanese woman, suffering from nonproductive cough for one month, referred to our hospital (a 500-bed city teaching hospital, serving about 560,000 people in southwest Tokyo, Japan) on April 14, 2010, due to having fever for one week. The patient had been medically treated with a calcium blocker and alendronate sodium hydrate because of hypertension and osteoporosis for three years. At the time of the visit for cough, although the patient had neither sputum nor wheezing, there was evidence of only slight infiltration at the lower right lung on the chest X-ray. The patient was almost in the normal range for the ratio of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1: 1.42 L) to forced vital capacity (FVC: 1.88 L): the lung function test result was 75.5%, and only normal flora were detected in a provocation sputum culture. She was prescribed a cough medicine and an antibacterial agent (garenoxacin [GRNX], 400 mg/day for five days) with diagnosis of bronchitis; although her cough and other clinical symptoms had reduced for several days, they subsequently returned to their original levels. She referred to our hospital again on May 18 (one month after the first consultation). On the reconsultation day, the patient’s body temperature was 37°C and her unproductive cough was worsened. There was no evidence of swollen lymph nodes, eczema or other abnormalities. The patient’s white blood cell (WBC) count was 11000/µL, the percentages of neutrophils and eosinophils were 69.3% and 2.7%, respectively, and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was 1.25 mg/dL . No other abnormalities were observed in the blood examination. However, a chest CT showed evidence of thickened bronchial walls and mucus plugging, causing a “tree-in-bud” pattern on the right lower lobe . At that time, we considered the patient temporarily diagnosed with a bronchial hypersensitivity, such as ABPA, that the imaging findings suggested. However, her unproductive cough remained dry, and no significant bacteria or fungus was detected in cultures of provocation sputum and gastric juice. In addition, both Aspergillus antigen and IgE antibody were negative, and a T-SPOT.TB test was also negative. The patient was treated with cough medicine, an inhaler (budesonid/formoterol), and a leukotriene antagonist after a short-term GRNX prescription (400 mg/day for five days). Although there was no episode of fever, the patient’s unproductive cough was maintained, and the CT findings continued to change from thickened bronchial walls to increased clubbing bronchiectasis and mucoid impaction . Treatment with a macrolide (clarithromycin [CAM], 400 mg/day) was then added, after the patient’s unproductive cough became productive in September 30. Meanwhile, there were no eosinophils in the provocation sputum, and no significant bacteria or fungi were detected in the accompanying cultures. These findings suggested that the patient was suffering from neither bronchial asthma nor ABPA. Her clinical symptoms maintained with scant improvement, and a high fever of 39°C and right chest pain appeared under productive cough and sputum on November 18. The patient was admitted to our hospital for pneumonopleuritis at that time with a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, blood pressure of 142/88 mmHg, regular pulse of 96 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. The patient’s WBC count was 22500/µL, the neutrophils and eosinophils percentages were 82.0% and 0.0%, respectively, and CRP was at 26.29 mg/dL. Since a strong inflammatory response was observed, we considered that the patient had bacteremia. The results of other blood examinations were also in the normal ranges, including the transaminases, except for lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), which was slightly elevated (243 U/L) . Both pneumococcal and legionella urine antigen rapid tests were also negative, and no pathogenic organism was detected, although hemoculture, sputum culture, and urinary culture were performed along with antibacterial agent (cefpirome sulfate [CPR], 4 g/day, drip infusion) preinitiation treatment. Four days later, after treatment with CPR, the patient’s fever abated, although a part of her productive cough continued, and WBC and CRP results improved to 12700/µL and 8.78 mg/dL, respectively. On November 25, we considered that FBSC should be performed, as the clubbing bronchiectasis and pulmonary atelectasis at the right lower lung had not improvements . FBSC findings of rubor and swelling of the bronchial mucosa at the distal intermediate bronchus were observed. When the purulent sputum was absorbed carefully, a granuloma-like structure was observed, surrounding a white foreign body at the right B9 bronchus , and a roughly 8 × 5 × 2 mm3 white foreign body was then extracted from that location . As a result of a pathology search, this white foreign body was identified as a vegetable core , along with a bronchus necrotic tissue. In the culture of the bronchial lavage, no significant bacteria were detected, except for scant alpha streptococcus. After extraction of the foreign body, the productive cough and sputum, as well as the clinical symptoms and blood examination results improved dramatically, and the pulmonary atelectasis also improved . The patient left our hospital on November 30. The cough had disappeared completely during the 18-month period following discharge. As for the chest CT findings at May 8, 2012 (almost 18 months after the TFB extraction), the peripheral portion of the clubbing bronchiectasis observed in the right lower lung had improved, although the central portion remained .