A 32-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of nausea, vomiting, and diffuse abdominal pain in all quadrants, especially in the epigastrium. On physical examination, diffuse abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness were detected, particularly in the epigastrium and right upper quadrant. Laboratory assessment revealed a leukocyte count of 20,500/mm3 with 85% polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PNLs)/neutrophils, hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL, hematocrit of 37.2%, AST of 26 U/L, and ALT of 29 U/L. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed free fluid approximately 1 cm thick around the liver and heterogeneous areas of abscess formation in the right lateral gallbladder, which measured approximately 5 × 5 cm in size and was partly encapsulated, containing free air. The CT also demonstrated diffuse free fluid between the bowel loops and pelvis, as well as a hydropic gallbladder with pericholecystic fluid, wall thickening, and free air trapped in the lumen ( - ).
Due to these findings on examination in the emergency department, the patient was scheduled for surgery with an initial diagnosis of intra-abdominal abscess and/or gallbladder perforation. Diffuse adhesions between the bowels and seropurulent free liquid in the abdomen were detected on exploration, and a sample was taken for cultures. A partly encapsulated abscess pouch was also identified near the gallbladder, and samples were collected for cultures. On continued exploration, no perforation was detected in the gallbladder, while hyperemia was noted on all peritoneal surfaces. Fluids within the abdomen were aspirated, adhesions between the bowels were opened, and approximately 100 cc of pus was drained from the abscess. An aspiration drainage tube was inserted in the abscess pouch.
Until the culture report was received, the patient was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone at a daily dose of 2 g per day and metronidazole 500 mg twice per day. S. anginosus was reproduced in the culture sample taken from the intra-abdominal abscess. Since the results of antibiotic susceptibility testing revealed that the reproducing microorganism was sensitive to ceftriaxone, the treatment was continued in the same manner. On clinical follow-up, the patient’s leukocyte count was found to have fallen to 8,200/mm3 (with 55% PNLs). The patient was discharged without complications on the sixth postoperative day, and his antibiotic treatment was completed with 4 weeks of oral medication.