A 50-year-old male patient with no somatic or psychiatric history was diagnosed with left basal pneumonia at a hospital consultation and was started on amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (1 g t.i.d.), a beta-lactamase inhibitor antibiotic. Then, he was discharged. Due to persistent respiratory symptoms, the patient returned to the hospital the day after, and the treatment was switched to a macrolide antibiotic, clarithromycin (500 mg b.i.d.).
Two days after the second antibiotic prescription, his family members noted a progressive change in his behavior, with unusual logorrhea, irritability, increased physical activity, elevated mood, and ideas of being in contact with God. Due to these sudden changes, the family brought him back to the hospital. He was transferred to the emergency department (ED) of the University Hospital of Geneva (HUG), 2 days after modifying the antibiotic therapy. There were no known allergies, no tobacco, alcohol, illicit substance or daily medication intake (including steroids), and the patient had never taken antibiotics before.
At our first psychiatric evaluation, the patient reported that during the night after the introduction of the first antibiotic (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid), he had the feeling of dying and developed auditory hallucinations, as he was hearing God who was talking to him and saying he was chosen for a special mission. The psychiatric examination revealed a familiar attitude, a lightly increased psychomotor activity, irritability, logorrhea, elevated mood, difficulty falling asleep, as well as auditory hallucinations and mystic mood-congruent delusions that were, however, partially criticized. The antibiotic was immediately stopped and the patient received lorazepam (2.5 mg p.o.) as a treatment for psychomotor agitation. We chose to begin the psychopharmacotherapy very gradually, without immediate recourse to antipsychotic treatment, because the patient was partially nosognosic and the increased psychomotor agitation as well the irritability was foregrounded. Moreover, 12 h after clarithromycin cessation, amelioration was rapidly observed with the progressively gained insight of delusions and cessation of auditory hallucinations. The patient agreed that if his clinical conditions symptomatology did not improve, antipsychotic treatment would be necessary. These symptoms lasted in total about 36 h. The Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) score at the moment of the evaluation was 28, the equivalent of a manic episode .
The patient spent one night at the psychiatric ED observation unit of the HUG. After the above initial described amelioration during the first 12 h after the clarithromycin cessation, diminution of other manic symptoms was observed. Only logorrhea was still present. The YMRS score was 13, the equivalent of hypomanic symptomatology . We discharged the patient with two tablets of lorazepam (1 mg p.o.). Considering the rapid amelioration of his symptoms by the antibiotics cessation and the only utilization of benzodiazepines, we chose not to initiate antipsychotics. We advised the patient to consult his family doctor in a few days and come back for a psychiatric evaluation 1 week later. Given the course of the clinical presentation the diagnosis of clarithromycin-induced manic episode was retained, and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (625 mg b.i.d.) (Augmentin®) was then reintroduced for the pneumonia.
Investigations were completed with blood tests, which were in normal range except for high C-reactive protein at 200 mg/L without leukocytosis, rapid nasopharyngeal test for influenza A, B, and RSV, as well as cerebral scan, lumbar puncture and EEG. None of the results were contributive.
Since the patient was 50 years old, without psychiatric history, considering the close temporal relationship between the clarithromycin intake and the manic episode in addition to the rapid amelioration after clarithromycin cessation, the diagnostic of clarithromycin-induced manic episode was retained at this point as an exclusion diagnostic. We considered this event to be a probable adverse drug reaction based on the WHO-UMC system for standardized case causality assessment , and the Naranjo algorithm, which showed a score of 5, indicative of a probable causal reaction .
One week later, at the psychiatric follow-up evaluation, the patient presented the subjective impression of a mildly elevated mood and talkativeness and an YMRS score of 3, the equivalent of a euthymic state.
In fact, the patient reported a worsening of the psychiatric symptomatology the evening after the reintroduction of amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. As he left the hospital, he took two doses of 625 mg as prescribed. At midnight, he started hearing voices again, he felt persecuted and anxious. He was again partially nosognosic. The next day, he presented symptoms similar to the first manic episode, with logorrhea, difficulties sleeping, familiar attitude, and dysphoria. The patient took the two tablets of lorazepam (1 mg) he received (one during the night after leaving ED and one the next day). He called his family doctor, who recommended the cessation of the antibiotic and concluded an adverse reaction to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. This evolution then oriented towards a pharmacodynamic drug-drug interaction between clarithromycin and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, leading to antibiomania.
This case was reported to the national pharmacovigilance center, and the need for local ethics committee approval was waived.