A 64-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for surgery for ascending colon cancer detected by colonoscopy to address the symptom of frequent diarrhea. The patient had no history of malignancy, and laboratory findings, including tumor marker levels, were within normal ranges. Colonoscopy identified a type-2 tumor in the ascending colon, which was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma by biopsy . Additionally, barium enema examination showed an irregular stenosis in the ascending colon. Subsequent abdominal computed tomography revealed focal thickening of the ascending colon and middle of the appendix and swelling of the lymph nodes around the ileocolic artery . Under a preoperative diagnosis of ascending colon cancer and tumor of the appendix, laparoscopic right hemi-colectomy with D3 lymph node dissection was performed. The macroscopic examination of the resected specimens revealed a circumferential type-2 lesion in the middle of the ascending colon and thickening of the middle of the appendix . The mucosa between the ascending colon cancer and appendix was normal. Histopathological findings revealed that the ascending colon cancer was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with lymphatic and vascular invasion (stage IIIB; pT3N2M0, ly1, v1) . Extramural tumor deposits without lymph node structure were seen in the extramural adipose tissue . Tumor budding grade 2 was also seen in the leading edge of the cancer cells . In addition, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma cells were observed in the submucosa and muscularis propria of the appendix , which was approximately 10 cm proximal to the ascending colon cancer. The tissue between the ascending colon cancer and the middle of the appendix was free of malignant cells. These findings indicated intramural metastasis to the appendix from the ascending colon cancer. The patient experienced the postoperative complication of chyle leak, which was treated by drainage, and he was discharged on postoperative day 23. The patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy for 6 months after surgery; however, he developed lung metastasis 2.5 years after the first surgery and underwent segmentectomy of the upper lobe of the left lung.