A 34-year-old male presented to our institution for evaluation of a left popliteal mass that was present and growing over 1 year with increasing pain. There was no neurologic or vascular compromise distal to the lesion. The patient developed inguinal pain 1 month prior to presentation. Otherwise the review of systems was negative.
Left knee MRI demonstrated a large, lobulated nonspecific T2-weighted hyperintense soft tissue mass in the popliteal fossa with local mass effect and surrounding soft tissue edema suspicious for soft tissue sarcoma . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis performed for tumor staging demonstrated evidence of necrotic left external iliac lymphadenopathy , along with a right lung mass and a pulmonary nodule most consistent with distant metastatic disease.
Tumor cells obtained from CT-guided core biopsy of the popliteal mass and then subsequently of the inguinal lymph nodes showed a proliferation of rounded epithelioid to spindle shaped cells with hyperchromatic nuclei arranged in trabecular-like architecture within hyalinized stroma. Ultimately, complete surgical resection of the primary, popliteal site was performed. Immunohistochemical evaluation revealed reactivity for vimentin, CAM5.2 as well as focal reactivity for CKAE1/3, EMA and synaptophysin. The tumor was negative for S-100, desmin, chromogranin and CD45. Further immunohistochemical analysis following external consultation revealed pankeratin and focal EMA positivity while staining for GFAP, calponin, p63, CD99, FLI-1, CD34, MUC-4, ERG and TLE-1 was negative. Given the limited sample, the lesion was tentatively termed “atypical spindle and round cell neoplasm, possibly myoepithelial in type” . The patient underwent radical resection of the popliteal mass with a positive margin allowing sufficient tissue to confirm the diagnosis. Grossly, the tumor measured 9.0 × 7.8 × 5.0 cm and cut sections showed an encapsulated, pale white, rubbery, lobulated mass. Histopathologic examination revealed a lobulated, multinodular, infiltrative malignant neoplasm composed of cellular nodules of epithelioid tumor cells with hyperchromatic nuclei showing frequent mitoses arranged in a trabecular fashion. Small proportions of the nodules were hypocellular with tumor cells exhibiting less nuclear atypia and more prominent myxoid stroma. Tumor necrosis was present. The specimen was again sent for consultation and the staining profile mirrored that of the biopsy specimens, aside from focal desmin positivity. Molecular analysis was notably negative for rearrangement of EWSR1 (22q12) locus and rearrangement of SS18 (SYT; 18q11.2) locus. Additional molecular testing (FISH analysis) performed revealed no rearrangement of NR4A3. In view of the histomorphologic features and reactivity for epithelial markers, a final diagnosis of high-grade myoepithelial carcinoma was rendered both locally and by outside consultation, although the immunophenotype was not definitive in that regard.
Because of the systemic disease burden and limited reported activity of traditional sarcoma chemotherapeutic regimens, the case was discussed amongst medical and pediatric oncologists within and outside our institution without a clear consensus. We elected to treat with 3 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel initially with an almost immediate clinical response. Surveillance CT imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated decreased size of iliac lymph nodes and pulmonary metastases consistent with tumor response to neoadjuvant therapy while MRI demonstrated surgical changes without clear, active disease .
The patient underwent a completion lymphadenectomy of the left superficial femoral and deep pelvic nodes without evidence of residual tumor in 25 examined lymph nodes. The patient received an additional 2 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel. Due to incomplete radiographic response the patient underwent a wedge resection, which also confirmed pathologic complete remission without malignancy identified. Hemorrhage and areas containing epithelioid macrophages with foamy and/or hemosiderin laden cytoplasm along focal adjacent hyaline fibrosis were seen. This was interpreted to be compatible with chemotherapy effect. The patient received adjuvant radiation therapy with 2 Gy fractions ×33 doses to the popliteal fossa. The patient remains in radiographic remission 36 months from completion of chemotherapy. Molecular studies were undertaken to elucidate the mechanism responsible for the durable response to systemic therapy.