We report a case of 35-year-old female presented to an emergency room with a 3-day history of hoarseness, laryngeal stridor and dyspnea without fever, after execution of FNA.
Recently, thyroid ultrasound showed a right-side, solid, hypoechoic nodular formation with areas of intraparenchymal liquefaction (30 × 20 mm): overall size 51 mm (maximum diameter). Under prescription from her regular doctor, thyroid function and calcitonin were evaluated (all within the normal range). The patient was in her usual health until the first diagnostic cytology examination with FNA, which occurred 3 days before admission. After the procedure, the patient felt her voice became hoarse and 1 day before presentation began to have dyspnea, without fever. It had become difficult for her to swallow solids and she felt as if food was sticking in her throat. The patient's history included non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus diagnosed 3 years ago and first degree obesity (BMI 31 kg/m2). Medication was only metformin (1.5 g every day). She had no known allergies, did not smoke, drink alcohol or use illicit drugs and there was no history of unusual ingestions.
On examination, the patient appeared obese. Her temperature was 37.3°C, the blood pressure 120/70 mm Hg, the pulse 78 beats per minute, and the respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute.
Oxygen saturation was reduced (88% while she was breathing ambient air); therefore, she required oxygen therapy without intubation. The abdomen was without tenderness or distention, with normal bowel sounds. The patient had strong pain on superficial palpation on the anterior neck region.
The emergency department carried out blood tests, which highlighted leukocytosis with neutrophilia and elevation of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (92 mm/hr). Computed tomography (CT) of the neck and mediastinum, without the administration of intravenous or oral contrast material, revealed a severe cellulitis framework with involvement of the laterocervical neck area and, in particular, the invasion of retropharynx and upper mediastinum ( and ). In the right side of the thyroid, it confirmed the existence of right nodular formation recently examined by FNA . Probably due to compressive phenomena, a mild reduction of oxygen saturation was recorded, though it did not require intubation and/or oxygen therapy. After the infectious disease specialist’s consultation, the patient was admitted to the hospital. Antibiotic therapy with meropenem plus teicoplanin and anti-inflammatory therapy with methylprednisolone were started. Furthermore, blood cultures were negative.
After 2 days of therapy, a progressive improvement of the clinical picture was noted and by the fourth day, ultrasound reassessment of the neck area did not reveal any more marks of cellulitis. The patient was discharged home on the fifth day on metformin, steroid and antibiotic therapy.
The result of cytological examination detected a suspicious framework for malignant follicular proliferation (TIR 3b), therefore a subtotal thyroidectomy was performed after 20 days.
The intervention did not involve any complications and a histopathological examination showed a benign follicular lesion framework. The patient thus began a substitution therapy with levothyroxine (1.6 g/kg/day).