The index patient was a 5-year-old boy from a non-consanguineous family, without a history of neurologic diseases. He was born at term without any neonatal problems. His elder sister was healthy. He was able to walk at the age of sixteen months. Since he began to walk, he has displayed a waddling gait and a propensity to fall. He began to speak at the age of one, but in a slurred way. At the age of 4.5, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and nerve conduction tests, but all the results were normal. However a neurological examination revealed hypotonia, the absence of tendon reflexes, and a positive finger-nose test. At the age of 5, he suffered from strabismus and visual impairment. He was admitted to our hospital at the age of 5. He still had a slurred speech and abnormal gait, but his cognition was normal. A neurological examination performed on him, revealed hypotonia, Romberg sign, and the absence of deep tendon reflexes. A finger-nose test performed on him showed a positive result. No foot and joint deformities were observed. Sensory examination showed a normal result. The results of complete blood counting, homocysteine, lactate, ammonia, pyruvic acid, urine organic acids, and plasma amino acids were in the normal range. The liver and renal function tests and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis performed on him all showed an unremarkable result. An MRI of his brain and spine showed a normal result. However, the examination of nerve conduction performed on him again revealed severe axonal sensory neuropathy. Although the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude and motor conduction velocity (MCV) of the bilateral tibial nerve and common peroneal nerve were normal, the sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitude of the bilateral sural nerve and superficial peroneal nerve could not be elicited. His right eye’s visual acuity was 0.4 and his left eye’s 0.6, while the fundus oculi examination and the orbital MRI test showed a normal result.
The compound heterozygous mutations (c.41 A > G and c.259G > T) were identified in the COX20 gene by whole-exome sequencing (WES), while his unaffected mother carried c.41 A > C and his unaffected father carried c.259G > T in the heterozygous form. Located within the donor splice of exon 1, the missense c.41 A > G (p.Lys14Arg) mutation may result in a 20 bp deletion. As has been proven, this variant results in aberrant splicing and the premature termination codon p.Gly8Valfs*2, which further leads to nonsense-mediated mRNA degradation by producing a shorter and more unstable transcript [, ]. Located within the exon 4, the nonsense c.259 C > T (p.Gln87Ter) mutation results in premature termination of the coding protein in exon4, and the length of the missing coding protein exceeds 10% of the normal coding protein, which impairs the function of the coding protein product. The c.259 C > T (p.Gln87Ter) mutation has been reported by Dong and Ban et al. [, ].
L-carnitine and coenzyme Q10 were administered to the patient, but the medication had no effect. Now he is 6 years old, he falls more frequently than before.