A 45-year-old Greek female patient with a palpable neck nodule was referred to the Nuclear Medicine Department to undergo evaluation for a possible parathyroid adenoma. During the physical examination, the neck nodule was palpable and painless and measured approximately 1 cm. Her medical and family histories were not significant.
A neck ultrasound had been performed two weeks earlier and had revealed a 1.203 x 0.442 cm hypoechoic mass suspected of being a parathyroid adenoma. This mass was located near the lower pole of the thyroid gland .
Blood examination showed an excessively high parathormone (PTH) level (167.2 pg/ml) (normal range: 15–65 pg/ml). However, other parameters were within their normal ranges (phosphorus: 2.8 mg/dl, calcium: 9.9 g/dl, thyroid-stimulating hormone :4,52 mU/l, free triiodothyronine (FT3):3.81 pg/ml, free thyroxine (FT4):8.27 pg/ml, 1,25(OH)2vitamin D:6 ng/ml, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 47U/L).
Dual-phase parathyroid scintigraphy technique was then performed, in which 20 mCi of 99mTc-tetrofosmin was administered intravenously, followed by early images (20 minutes pi) and delayed images (2.5 hours pi) of the neck and the anterior mediastinum. Planar images of 100,000 counts were obtained on a large field of view camera at a 140 KeV photopeak with a 15% window and a low-energy high resolution collimator. Scintigraphy revealed a focus of intense radiopharmaceutical retention in the thyroid bed during the early acquisition phase (at 20 minutes), just below the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe. This sign corresponded to the sonographic finding. The late acquisition phase (at 2.5 hours) showed normal radiopharmaceutical wash-out from the whole thyroid gland, while the initial hot spot disappeared. Mediastinal imaging findings were normal with no detection of ectopic parathyroid glands. The above finding (intense focus on early acquisition and disappearance on late imaging) raised a strong suspicion of a left lower parathyroid adenoma, probably rich in high p-glycoprotein (p-gp) .
To exclude thyroid pathology, thyroid scintigraphy with 5 mCi TcO4− was carried out one day later. This study revealed normal uptake of the tracer in the thyroid gland. The intense focus seen on previous parathyroid imaging (as shown in the early phase at 20 minutes) was not depicted, supporting the diagnosis of a parathyroid adenoma on the above mentioned position .
Two months later, surgical resection of the parathyroid adenoma was successfully performed. Parathyroidectomy was performed under general anesthesia, followed by creation of a left transverse incision 3 cm from the mass; the procedure concluded with identification and removal of the left inferior parathyroid gland using ligatures.
Macroscopically, the gland appeared as a solid, gray-brown, enlarged nodule with a maximum diameter of about 1 cm . The specimen was sent for pathology examination.
The pathology report confirmed the initial suspicion of a parathyroid adenoma and revealed a mixture of oxyphil, chief and clear cells (the latter as the dominant type) with the absence of intermediate fatty tissue .
The specimen was also sent for immunohistochemical examination for p-gp because the “reverse” scintigraphic tetrofosmin finding (positive early phase to negative delayed phase) combined with the size of the removed nodule (1 cm) was consistent with a parathyroid adenoma rich in p-gp. Unfortunately, immunohistochemical staining for p-gp cell expression was unable to be performed for technical reasons. However, shortly after the operation, the patient’s PTH levels began to gradually decrease and, two months later, her PTH level had returned to normal (13.8 pg/ml). This confirmed our initial hypothesis of a parathyroid adenoma.