A 35-year-old man was admitted to the hospital complaining of bilateral lower extremity edema. He reported a six-month history of painless mass in the left scrotum. Physical examination disclosed a 10 × 6cm firm non-tender left scrotal mass. A thorax computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple metastases in both lungs. Abdomen enhanced CT revealed retroperitoneal multiple lymph node metastases, inferior vena cava thrombus extended from the left spermatic vein and bilateral external iliac veins to the hepatic vein and a decrease in the function of the left kidney due to a thrombus of the left renal vein . Color Doppler ultrasound confirmed complete occlusion of the inferior vena cava, the left renal and bilateral common iliac veins. Serum tumor markers were high except beta human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-HCG): lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 441U/L (120-246); alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), >1000ng/mL (<8); ß-HCG, 0.2mIU/mL (<1.0).
A left high inguinal orchiectomy was performed and pathological diagnosis was pure yolk sac carcinoma with lymphovascular invasion and direct tumor extension into the left spermatic cord. Three cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) were given. A nearly complete response in the retroperitoneal and lung metastases was observed by thorax and abdominal CT , tumor markers were normalized at 3 months after this chemotherapy. Although the patient did not have any several respiratory complaints, thorax CT showed partial embolism in the right pulmonary artery and bronchial mass. Anticoagulant treatment was begun and then bronchoscopy with biopsy was performed. Pathological and microbiological examination revealed mycobacterium tuberculosis. Anti-tuberculosis therapy was started and an inferior vena cava filter was implanted through the right internal jugular vein. The inferior vena cava remained occluded, with evidence of collateralization such as the improvement of the left renal function. CT and positron emission tomography (PET-CT) showed no findings of metastasis or local recurrence at 6 months after the surgery.