The male patient aged 60 years was hospitalized due to sudden dizziness for 3 h combined with slurred speech on May, 16, 2017. The patient had nausea, but he did not have vomiting, incontinence and unconsciousness. The patient was immediately referred to China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University. Head CT performed within 3 h of onset of symptoms showed hemorrhage in the left temporal lobe, and the patient was admitted in our department with a clinically confirmed diagnosis of “hemorrhage in the left temporal lobe”. The patient had a previous history of hypertension for more than 10 years, and was under medication to control and maintain the blood pressure to be around 130/80 mmHg. The patient denied the history of diabetes and had no bad habits, such as smoking and drinking alcohol. Physical examination at admission revealed that his body temperature was 36.2 °C and blood pressure was 196/119 mmHg. The patient was conscious and suffered from incomplete aphemia. Bilateral pupils were of the size and round, the diameter of pupils was 3 mm, and pupils were sensitive to light reflexes. Muscular strength of the limbs was about grade 4. Bilateral pathological signs were negative, and there was no significant abnormality noticed during nervous system examination. Head MRI conducted the next day after admission indicated no significant vascular malformations . General consultation evaluated that bleeding sites of the patient were slightly different from hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage. The hematoma sites were close to the middle cerebral artery and the walking areas of its branches, mainly in the temporal lobes. Therefore, cerebral vascular hemorrhage and other causes could not be excluded, and head CTA was further suggested. Head CTA performed on 17th May 2017 showed that the patient suffered from intracerebral hematoma caused by aneurysm rupture at the M1 bifurcation of the left middle cerebral artery, without any significant subarachnoid hemorrhage . Craniotomy and clipping of intracranial aneurysm were performed the next day after admission. During the operation, the aneurysm was found to be located in M1 bifurcation of the left middle cerebral artery, which was in cystic bulging. An asci formation with the size of 3 × 4 × 5 mm was located on the upper side of the aneurysm, and the aneurysm neck measured 4.2 mm, which was clipped successfully. There was no significant hematoma in the subarachnoid space, and the arachnoid around the aneurysm showed no obvious adhesion during the surgery. The patient successfully recovered from anesthesia after the surgery, without any significant neurological deficits. The patient was discharged after 2 weeks and Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) scored 5 points. Follow-up was performed for 4 months at the Outpatient Department. Head CTA demonstrated that aneurysm did not relapse and GOS score was 5 points.