A 73-year-old male with a history of atrial fibrillation on warfarin (INR 1.9) presented with an acute onset bilateral lower extremity weakness, pain, and sensory changes, with a loss of bowel and bladder function and saddle anesthesia. The symptoms began spontaneously while resting in a seated position. The patient’s physical examination was remarkable for significant weakness in the right distal lower extremity, and left proximal lower extremity, with bilateral lower extremity loss of fine touch and pinprick sensation from the knee down. The patient was incontinent with poor perineal sensation and absence of any rectal tone. Emergent MRI of his neuroaxis was performed given the concern for CES or spinal cord injury. MRI was unremarkable for any acute neurologic process, cord edema, or disk herniation. Simultaneously, the patient was treated with intravenous dexamethasone and titration of his mean arterial pressure above 90 mmHg. His examination improved significantly in a matter of hours with some residual pain, weakness, and sensory changes in his lower extremities. Interestingly, the patient also tested positive for COVID-19 on arrival.
Given the patient’s clinical picture and the lack of MRI findings of cord compression, the differential diagnosis widened to include a diagnosis of a potential spinal cord stroke. Arterial duplex examination of both LEs demonstrated minimal flow bilaterally. Diminished pulses were noted in the common femoral, profunda, and popliteal arteries bilaterally. The blunted bilateral signal indicated more proximal obstruction. On second review, his lumbar spine MRI depicted signal change in the aorta concerning for a thrombus . The vascular surgery team was immediately consulted, and computed tomography (CT) angiography scan of the chest and abdomen was ordered. CT angiography findings showed an occlusion of the infrarenal abdominal aorta and bilateral common iliac arteries . The patient was taken for emergent aortoiliac thrombectomy by vascular surgery. They also performed emergent bilateral 4-compartment fasciotomies at the bedside. After revascularization, his strength improved, and his distal pulses were palpable. The patient was started on a heparin drip and was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for close monitoring. Due to the improvement in his neurological examination and need for anticoagulation, a lumbar drain was not placed.
One week following presentation, angiography was performed and demonstrated resolution of the aortic thrombus, as shown in . At his 2-month follow-up, he was ambulatory with a walker and only complained of mild dysesthesias in the left foot.