We report a case of a 40-year-old man who presented with 7 days history of visual disturbance, leg weakness, pain, and unsteadiness. He reported seeing “spots” in his visual fields, double vision, and some retro-ocular pain. He described burning pain in his right thigh and proximal weakness of his right leg which restricted his daily activities. However, he was fully independent on presentation.
He had a medical history of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis for the last 15 years for which he was currently on monthly natalizumab for the last 9 years and received a total of 107 infusions over this period. Past disease-modifying therapies for multiple sclerosis (MS) included beta interferon and glatiramer acetate which were switched due to recurrent relapses. His serology for John Cunningham virus (JCV) was positive since 2012 as shown in Fig. .
He also had epilepsy for last 10 years, with a seizure semiology of partial with secondary generalized tonic-clonic seizures. He was on 4 anti-epileptics: levetiracetam 4gm/day, lamotrigine 600 mg/day, carbamazepine 700 mg/day, phenobarbitone 105 mg/day. The other regular medications included fesoterodine 8 mg, pyridoxine 100 mg, and vitamin D 2400 units daily.
His pertinent examination findings were horizontal nystagmus with diplopia in central and right gaze without any restriction in the eye movements. The right leg had reduced power grade in hip adduction, abduction, and flexion 4/5. His reflexes in bilateral lower limbs were 3+ with bilateral extensor plantar responses. There was past pointing on the right finger to nose test.
It was suspected that his current symptoms may be due to MS relapse. He was started on intravenous methyl prednisolone 1 g/day, and MRI brain was done as shown in Fig. (day 1). The MRI brain prompted further investigation due to the atypical location and radiological features of the lesion including a lumbar puncture and CSF analysis for JCV-DNA PCR. Results received 3 days later showed a JCV viral load of 6620 copies/ml. Another lumbar puncture was done to further confirm the results 5 days that showed a viral load of 48,300 copies/ml.
He was started on mirtazapine at 60 mg daily doses. Cidofovir 5 mg/kg per dose, two doses 1 week apart followed by fortnightly doses a total of 6 doses over 12 weeks were administered. Mefloquine was considered but due to the potential of causing seizures in our patient was not commenced.
The clinical course is summarized in Table over a 6 months period from PML onset to his transfer to a rehabilitation facility. Over this course, he deteriorated from being functionally independent to being wheel chair bound. There was a major deterioration in weeks 7–15 before his clinical condition stabilized and later improved with a major morbidity.