A 70-year-old woman presented with persistent weakness of the right leg after a fall and fracture of the right ankle 10 months before. She had no pain but complained of dry eyes and a dry mouth. Personal history was remarkable for a colon carcinoma operated 30 years ago, a metabolic syndrome and endoprosthesis of both knees. Only in the later follow-up, the patient reported that her mother had died from bulbar ALS. There was no known history of autoimmune disease in the family. The time course of both, clinical evolution and results of ancillary examinations are depicted in .
At first outpatient consultation, we saw an overweight woman (BMI 43 kg/m2) in otherwise good health. The cranial nerve examination was unremarkable. Upper limbs and the left leg were normal including preserved deep tendon reflexes and reported normal sensory function. The right leg showed a distally pronounced weakness (right/left, Medical Research Council (MRC) grades): hip flexion 2/5, hip extension 4/5, hip adduction 5/5, hip abduction 2/5, knee flexion 2/5, knee extension 4/5, foot dorsal extension 0/5, foot plantar flexion 3/5. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the right leg and plantar responses were flexor bilaterally. We observed no fasciculations. The right lateral lower leg and dorsal foot showed a marked sensory deficit while vibration sense was only minimally impaired (7/8 at both halluces).
Neurographies in the right leg were abnormal: The peroneal compound muscle action potential (CMAP) was absent, the tibial CMAP and the sural sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) showed markedly reduced amplitudes without conduction block (CB). The left leg showed a slightly decreased peroneal CMAP and otherwise normal neurographies. Myography showed severe signs of acute denervation in the right anterior tibial, gastrocnemius, and rectus femoris muscle with fasciculations, positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials. Plain MRI of the lumbar spine showed no abnormalities. An asymmetric sensorimotor axonal neuropathy was diagnosed.
Further work-up included laboratory screening for treatable causes of neuropathy, a spinal tap and measurement of sNfL levels. Anti-SSA/ro antibodies (55 U/ml; cut-off <10 U/ml), anti-GM1 (116%; cut-off 50%), anti-GD1a (130%; cut-off 50%) and anti-GD1b (98%; cut-off 50%) were elevated. Anti-SSB/la antibodies, cryoglobulines, blood sedimentation rate and the remainder of the laboratory screening including serum creatine kinase (CK) levels were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a normal cell count, negative CSF-specific oligoclonal bands (OKBs) and only slightly elevated total protein (515 g/L, reference: 150–500 mg/L; quotient albumin CSF/serum: normal). Serum NfL levels were markedly elevated [141.5 pg/ml; >99.9th percentile ] indicating severe ongoing neuro-axonal injury. Nerve ultrasound had limited validity due to the patient's obesity but showed no detectable abnormalities.
The clinical suspicion of Sjögren's disease was supported by a positive Schirmer test and sialometry showing pathologic reductions of tear and saliva production. On lip biopsy, interstitial fibrosis and lymphatic invasion of small saliva glands was demonstrated and a diagnosis of Sjögren's disease was made according to the ACR criteria .
At this stage, the neuropathy was considered to be attributable to Sjögren's disease. Prednisone (80 mg/day, with tapering) as well as Rituximab treatment was established. Treatment was expected to improve or at a least stabilize motor (and sensory) function.
Contrarily, the weakness progressed further over the course of the next months, spreading to the left leg, rendering the patient wheelchair bound. Moreover, she began to complain of shortness of breath. Upon re-admission, the clinical examination was normal for cognition and cranial nerve function. In the upper limbs, we found focal atrophies of the right first dorsal interosseous (FDI), abductor pollicis brevis (APB) and intrinsic hand muscles with a relatively preserved abductor digiti mini muscle (ADM), a pattern classically known as a “split hand”, as well as slight weakness of the right arm (MRC, right/left): Deltoid 4/5, biceps 4/5, brachioradial 4/5, triceps 5-/5, wrist extension 5/5, finger extension 5/5, wrist flexion 5-/5, hand grip 5/5, APB 4/5. Deep tendon reflexes were now brisk in the upper limbs, and there were no signs of sensory impairment. Lower limbs were nearly completely paralyzed with an MRC grade of 0 in most proximal and distal muscles apart from left foot plantar and toe flexion (MRC grade 3). All deep tendon reflexes were absent; plantar response was flexor on both sides. Vibration sense was reduced (right/left 4/8 and 5/8), while the sensory deficit in the right lower extremity remained largely unchanged. Pulmonary work-up revealed a right diaphragmatic paresis. Sensory and motor neurographies were normal in the right ulnar nerve but unobtainable in the lower limbs. Motor evoked potentials to the upper extremities showed no abnormalities. Electromyography showed progressive signs of severe acute denervation in the upper limbs and the sternocleidomastoid muscle, with sparing of the tongue. A biopsy of the left superficial peroneal nerve revealed a reduction of myelinated fibers without signs of vasculitis. Serum NfL levels remained highly elevated and only slightly decreased at last follow-up [107.9 pg/ml; >99.9th percentile (see )].
At this point, the clinical course was clearly deviating from expectance with deterioration under immunotherapy, brisk reflexes in wasted muscles, split hand, and split leg characteristics , bulbar involvement on myography and a nerve biopsy negative for vasculitis. This presentation allowed a diagnosis of laboratory supported probable ALS according to the El Escorial/Awaji criteria (, ) and a diagnosis of ALS according to the Gold Coast criteria (see ). The sensory involvement was most likely explained by coincidental, probably Sjögren's associated, sensory neuropathy.
Because of the patient's family history, genetic panel testing for motor neuron diseases was performed. It revealed a pathological repeat expansion in the C9orf 72 gene confirming a familial ALS. During the following months, the patient experienced a further decline in motor function and died from respiratory failure 26 months after symptom onset.