A 39-year-old man was admitted to the department of otorhinolaryngology with a mass, which had developed within last 15 days, in the left anterior sternocleidomastoid muscle region. He complained of episodes of fever reaching 38 oC. The patient noted that the mass was progressively growing and painful. He lived and had been working as stockbreeder in Thessaly while his rest medical history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a fluctuating, 2.5x4.5-cm tender mass in his neck. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck with intravenous contrast showed an approximately 3x1.8x5 cm, well defined mass located anterior to the left sternocleidomastoid muscle and two other smaller lesions approximately 1 cm deeper. These findings were suggestive of an abscess formation .
Blood count results revealed hemoglobin of 15.9 g/dL, a white blood cell count of: 9x103/per microliter (neutrophils: 70%, lymphocytes 22%, monocytes 8%) and a platelet count of 325x103 per microliter. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 15 mm/h and C-reactive protein: 0.4 mg/dL (normal value <0.5 mg/dL). The results of biochemical analysis were within normal limits.
Sampling from the abscess was performed by ultrasound (US)-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA). The aspirate was immediately sent to pathological and microbiological laboratories for analysis. In addition, blood aerobic and anaerobic cultures (BD, BACTEK) were also taken on his admission.
According to the FNA results, the lesion was found to involve the lymph node. The microscopic diagnosis revealed granulomatous lymphadenitis with necrosis. The microbiological analysis included firstly cell counting that showed inflamed material of the abscess with 17x103 cells/per microliter of which 70% were neutrophils. In addition, Gram and Ziehl-Neelsen (Z-N) stains, cultures for common bacteria and mycobacteria and a broad-range 16S rRNA PCR able to detect and to identify bacterial DNA directly in the clinical sample, were also performed . Both Gram and Z-N stains were negative for detection of any bacteria and mycobacteria, while 16S rRNA PCR revealed the presence of Brucella spp. within 24 hours from the time of aspiration of the sample. After 4-days incubation, a Gram negative coccobacillus, positive for catalase, oxidase and urease, was isolated in cultures of the aspirate, confirming the result of molecular methods. Identification of Brucella melitensis was established by PCR using specific primers after DNA extraction from the colonies . We note that blood cultures obtained from the patient remained sterile even after prolonged incubation (20 days).
Soon after the results of 16S rRNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were obtained, serum was taken from the patient for Rose-Bengal (Omega Diagnostics) and Brucellacapt (Vircell SL; Granada, Spain) testing. The Rose-Bengal test was negative, while the Brucellacapt test revealed a titer of 1/320. Notably, in Thessaly, this titer is interpreted as an uncertain result due to the high exposure of the population to Brucella .
The patient could not be submitted to an magnetic resonance imaging scan because he was claustrophobic and refused to undergo sedation. The results of the CT scan suggested that the patient did not have cervical spondylodiscitis. We therefore decided to treat the patient with a combination of streptomycin 1 g for 3 weeks and oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 6 weeks. If the patient had been diagnosed with spondylodiscitis, the dosage would have been tripled (streptomycin, doxycycline and rifampicin) for at least 12 weeks. Three days after his admission in our hospital the abscess was drained automatically and fully resolved until the conclusion of the antibiotic treatment. After a further 8 month of follow up, including clinical examination and serological tests, he had no evidence of recurrence.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.