72-year-old female patient, right-handed, with past history of ischemic heart disease and myocardial infarction, old cerebrovascular stroke dating 2006 with no disability on modified Rankin scale (mRS) presented to Emergency room (ER) by recurrent more than 4 episodes of bilateral hearing loss that resolves spontaneously without any deficit within 60 min.
On history taking, there was history suggestive of psychological stress 2 days prior to the patient symptoms onset. Meanwhile, patient denied any previous central or peripheral hearing impairment, traumas, or surgical operations to her head or ears.
NIHSS was performed, while the hearing loss was present, and since the patient could not hear; some remarks were placed beside some domains, and other domains were performed by imitation. The NIHSS score was zero indicating normality for consciousness, commands, gaze, visual field, facial symmetry, motor, coordination, sensory, language, speech, and attention. The only missed to score question was commands about age and month but this was remarked and on writing down these questions; the patient answered loudly.
Baseline computed tomography (CT) was ordered and it showed dilated right insular ribbon and encephalomalacia along right parietal lobe and dilation of ipsilateral ventricle reflecting the old stroke . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) diffusion was ordered that did not add further findings to those of the CT. Patient was reassured that nothing to worry upon and her relatives were informed that her symptoms mostly have a psychogenic background and the patient was asked to follow-up in outpatient clinic.
One hour later; bilateral deafness reoccurred and lasted more than 60 min and patient rushed to ER again.
Based on the facts that psychogenic diagnosis ought to be considered after exclusion of organic causes, patient presentation is sudden and episodic with full resolution in 60 min or less which fulfills the diagnosis of transient ischemic attack (TIA), but now symptoms exceeded the time of just being TIA, the on-call consultant was notified.
The patient has no contraindications to rtPA and even if her deafness was psychogenic in nature; there is no contraindication to administering rtPA in mimics. Thrombolysis decision was taken considering that old infarction in CT could have damaged the ascending ipsilateral auditory pathway and the crossed contralateral ones. The patient condition could be attributed to ischemia involving the auditory cortex on the left hemisphere that if present will affect the still functioning ipsilateral and the crossed contralateral auditory pathways causing the patient complete deafness.
Based on the patient weight; 0.9 mg/kg rtPA was administered, patient received a total of 70 mg. The patient deafness improved on injection and she was transferred to the inpatient to fulfill the stroke protocol including full MRI study.
Follow-up MRI after 24 h from injection revealed a lacunar infarction inferior to the left insula corresponding to the auditory cortex .
Transthoracic ECHO cardiography (Vivid E9 machine, General Electric, Vingmed Ultrasound, Horten, Norway) showed ejection fraction (EF) 61% with normal cardiac chambers dimensions and grade 1 diastolic dysfunction. Transcranial duplex (Siemens, Korea) revealed diffuse atherosclerosis. Patient’s laboratory results were within normal limits. Patient was discharged with mRS zero after 48 h.