A 71-year-old woman underwent SSPPD for an adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater, classified as stage IIB (pT1bN1M0) according to the 8th edition of the Union For International Cancer Control Tumor–Node–Metastasis classification. She experienced postoperative pancreatic fistula (PF) (Clavien–Dindo grade IIIa) , treated with drainage and antibiotics, and was discharged on day 21, postoperatively. At that time, laboratory data demonstrated that albumin and lymphocyte were 4.0 g/dL and 2050/µL, respectively, not suggesting malnutrition. After that, she had less oral intake than preoperative intake in addition to fasting for a month in total due to recurrent cholangitis. An adjuvant chemotherapy including gemcitabine and cisplatin were administered for 6 months. Post-chemotherapy, she was on regular follow-up every 6 months, without evidence of recurrence. She was treated twice with antibiotics for cholangitis at 12 and 31 months, respectively, post-surgery. She had lost 8 kg compared to preoperative body weight at the first cholangitis, whereas hypoalbuminemia (3.0 g/dL) and lymphopenia (820/µL) were present at the second cholangitis. She presented with vomiting 33 months after surgery. Additionally, her family complained of her disorientation. She was non-alcoholic, and had been able to eat until just before the onset of the symptom, except for the period of PF and cholangitis. On neurological examination, no specific findings were noted, including mental status despite her family complaint. She had not gained weight, since the onset of cholangitis. Laboratory data revealed hyponatremia (133 mEq/L), hypoalbuminemia (3.2 g/dL), and lymphopenia (810/µL), suggesting mild malnutrition. However, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head confirmed no specific findings. Although a neurologist and a psychiatrist examined closely, the exact cause of these syndromes remained unknown. The psychiatrist measured thiamine concentration to examine the cause of disorientation, whereas the laboratory measurement required 6–8 days. Thus, she underwent the treatment for hyponatremia until the results of thiamine value came. After 6 days, her level of consciousness worsened (Glasgow Coma Scale score, 3/15) . Her comatose state made it difficult to evaluate other neurological findings. MRI of the head showed symmetrically abnormal hyperintense signal on fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion weighted image (DWI) in the frontal horn of lateral ventricle, the medial thalami bordering the third ventricle, the mammillary bodies, the periaqueductal region of the midbrain, and the bottom of the 4th ventricle . As the MRI findings suggested WE, administration of thiamine (150 mg daily, intravenously) was immediately initiated. After 2 days, her serum thiamine level was 6 µg/mL (reference range, 24–66 µg/mL). Accordingly, she was diagnosed with WE. Shortly after initiation of the treatment, blood thiamine value reached 246 µg/mL, with significant improvement of her confusional state. After a week of intravenous therapy, oral administration of thiamine 100 mg daily was started. However, as short-term memory loss and ataxia remained, 3 weeks after starting the therapy, she was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital with continuation of thiamine administration. After 3 months, the memory impairment continued although walking with support was restored.