The patient was a 66-year-old Caucasian overweight (body mass index [BMI] 26.7 kg/m2) woman, with medical history relevant for multiple myeloma, with complete therapeutic response since 2011; left hemicolectomy for sigmoid cancer in 2013; radical mastectomy for breast cancer in 2015; and abnormal liver function tests in the context of metastatic disease of unknown origin, detected in April 2016.
She was admitted with the diagnosis of the right TF (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosyn these fragen 31-A2) after a low-energy fall from a standing height. Laboratory studies showed abnormal coagulation (prothrombin time [PT] 20.5s, activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] 25.6s, and international normalized ratio [INR] 1.9) and normal platelet count (193 ×109/L). The patient was not under anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy. From day 1, she received thromboprophylaxis with enoxaparin (40mg subcutaneously once daily) and compression stockings.
Eleven days post-injury and after clinical stabilization, the patient underwent a closed reduction and long intramedullary nail fixation (coagulation tests were PT 13.8s, aPTT31.9s, and INR 1.3). For the closed reduction, we made moderate traction to the injured limb until length was restored, with approximately 15° of internal rotation and 20° of adduction. After confirming the appropriate reduction of the fracture, the torso was abducted 15° to the unaffected side. Afterward, we proceeded with disinfection and applied the following surgical protocol. First, 5cm longitudinal skin incision was made approximately 3cm proximal to the greater trochanter, and the fascia lata and abductor muscles were subsequently split in line with their fibers, from caudaltocranial with scalpel, through 8cm incision, centered on the skin cut. After insertion of the guide wire and reaming of the medullary canal upto 11.5mm under imaging control and with the aid of a soft tissue protector, an anterograde long femoral nail (proximal femoral nail anti-rotation; Synthes®Oberdorf, Switzerland), with a caput-collum-diaphyseal angle of 125°, 380mm in length, and 10mm in diameter, was implanted. A 95mm blade and two distal locking screws (40mm and 42mm) were used. Acceptable reduction and fixation were attained . No significant bleeding was documented. Intraoperative bone biopsy was obtained during the proximal reaming and sent to pathology. Total operative time was 66 min and the estimated blood loss was 200cc.
On the 1stpost-operative day, the patient developed an extensive ecchymosis of the thigh, attributed to the normal evolution of the fracture hematoma. She was transfused with two units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs), with an appropriate rise of hemoglobin level from 5.6g/dL to 9.2g/dL. She remained hemodynamically stable and began rehabilitation 2 days after surgery. Surgical dressings remained clean and dry. Two supplementary units of PRBCs were administered for persistent anemia on post-operative day 3, without evidence of increased swelling or ecchymosis. The patient general condition was stable. However, pain and diffuse swelling of the thigh were not alleviated and, on post-operative day 5, there was an abrupt drop in hemoglobin level to 5g/dL, without evidence of gastrointestinal or urinary tract bleeding, neurological signs, or abdominal pain. She was transfused with two additional units of PRBCs and transferred to the intermediate care unit for monitoring. The thigh was recognized to be swollen but not tense. The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of the right hip, which demonstrated an extensive hematoma in the region of the gluteus medius, measuring 25 ×7cm . On the following day, a CT scan with contrast showed no significant change in the dimensions of the hematoma but revealed findings suggestive of an active contrast extravasation in the gluteal region . Angiography was subsequently performed, on post-operative day 7, and confirmed an active extravasation of contrast from the right superior gluteal artery that was coiled and embolized (, , ).
During the remnant of her hospital stay, the patient did not require further transfusions and remained hemodynamically stable. She resumed her physiotherapy rehabilitation 2 days post-angiography. Pathology confirmed the diagnosis of bone metastases from breast carcinoma. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 25, after the treatment of urinary tract infection caused by Klebsiella extended-spectrum beta-lactamases. After discharged clinical deterioration occurred and the patient died of metastatic cancer 3 months after surgery.