A healthy, primigravida, asymptomatic 31-year-old woman was referred to our Obstetric Unit at 26 weeks of gestation, because of the finding of foetal bradycardia during routine obstetric ultrasonography examination. The foetal echocardiography, performed in our clinic, revealed dissociation between atrial rhythm (154/bpm) and ventricular rhythm (54 bpm) . Neither structural heart defects nor hydrops fetalis were found.
Despite the mother was asymptomatic for any autoimmune diseases, anti-Ro/La autoantibodies were searched for, because of the possibility of autoantibodies-related CHB. High title of maternal anti-Ro/SSA was found (359,5 U/ml) and diagnosis of an autoantibody-related CHB was made. After prenatal counselling between neonatologists, cardiologists, rheumatologists and obstetricians, mother started a combination therapy protocol of plasmapheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin and betamethasone . Foetal heart rate remained stable until the 32 + 3 weeks of gestation, when a non-reassuring cardiotocography pattern occurred and a 1515 g male was delivered by an emergency C- section. A male newborn (1515 g, NGA, Apgar 8–10) was treated since birth with high-flow O2 for mild RDS. Electrocardiography confirmed complete AV block, with an atrial rate of 136 bpm and a ventricular rate of 44 bpm , and no significant heart rate increase after isoproterenol (up to 0,1 μg/kg/min) administration. Newborn serum was positive for ENA (SSA/Ro = 257U/ml) and IVIG administration was started at one week and every two weeks, until complete disappearance of maternal antibodies from blood. Because of persistent low ventricular rate (<60/min), seven days following birth, pacemaker implantation was performed . Because of gestational age (33w + 3) and low weight (1380 g), the pacemaker (MICRONY TM II SR+; St.Jude Medical) was placed in an abdominal pocket, through a left xipho-umbilican paramedian incision, between the rectus muscle sheet and the posterior surface of the abdominal muscle, as already reported [,]. A 35 cm bipolar steroid-eluting epicardial pacing lead was positioned on the right ventricular free wall through a left antero-lateral thoracothomy at the 5th intercostal space. The exuberant length of the cable was rolled into the left pleural space, tunneled till the abdominal pocket and connected to the generator. The pacemaker was programmed with a heart rate of 120 bpm. The baby is now 40th week with no signs of cardiac failure and free of any medications.