A 2-month-20-day-old white girl, who was born at 38 weeks of gestational age with birth weight of 3 kg by cesarean section without complications, had been exclusively breastfeeding and was vaccinated on time. She had presented to the emergency department for the first time when she was 40 days old with complaints of episodes of choking, shortness of breath, and cyanosis after coughing. She experienced an apnea episode that lasted 35 seconds associated with cyanosis and an oxygen saturation level of 45%. Her muscle tone was normal, and there were no abnormal movements in her eyes or limbs. After the episode resolved, it was observed that the patient’s color returned to pink, the oxygen saturation level was 100%, and the physical examination findings were unremarkable. She was hospitalized with a prediagnosis of pertussis-like syndrome, and antibiotherapy was started as clarithromycin. Upon the increase in choking and apnea attacks with the negative result of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Bordetella pertussis, clarithromycin was discontinued in 3 days. Epilepsy was another possible diagnosis because the patient had life-threatening repetitive hypoxemia, and symptoms resolved between the episodes. Therefore, phenobarbital was started at a dose of 5 mg/kg. However, due to lack of clinical improvement and absence of epileptic focus on electroencephalogram (EEG), antiepileptic therapy was discontinued. The patient was referred to our clinic for further medical investigation. She was hospitalized for evaluation of differential diagnoses such as gastroesophageal reflux, pertussis, aortic arch anomaly, infantile epileptic encephalopathy, and BRUE.
Physical examination revealed an afebrile, mildly dehydrated female infant in good general condition and interested in her environment. She had normal findings on auscultation with a respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. Cardiovascular examination revealed a systolic 1/6 murmur over the mesocardiac area and capillary refill time shorter than 2 s. Her body weight was 4.4 kg (3–10th percentile) at hospitalization, and she had poor weight gain, while her birth weight was 3 kg (25–50th percentile). The abdomen was mildly distended with normal active bowel sounds on auscultation without evidence of hepatosplenomegaly. The neurologic examination, including anterior fontanel and head circumference, was unremarkable. In the clinical follow-up, it was observed that she had episodes of apnea, cyanosis, and choking that began after successive coughing, lasted for 20–25 s, and up to 20 times a day. Episodes appeared approximately 15 min after feeding, sometimes accompanied by vomiting, showing cyanosis with oxygen saturation as low as 40%. Epilepsy was considered as another possible diagnosis because of repetitive periods and being asymptomatic between the episodes. However, the patient experienced apneic episodes with normal muscle tone, no loss of consciousness, and no abnormal movements in the eyes or extremities. Therefore, this was excluded because the patient was well during sleep despite having many attacks during the day, the symptoms were related to feeding, and her video electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal. Since detailed cardiac evaluation is required for an infant hospitalized with cyanosis and apnea, echocardiography was performed due to a murmur heard and revealed a 2–3 mm patent foramen ovale. There was no structural anomaly suggestive of aortic arch anomaly or cyanotic heart disease. After exclusion of cardiac anomaly and epilepsy possibilities, empirical antireflux treatment was initiated with a diagnosis of GER disease.
Oral intake was discontinued by inserting a nasogastric tube for tube feeding. On the abdominal radiograph, excessive intestinal gas shadows with an abnormal image of the fundus gas were visualized . Double-contrast barium radiography was performed to determine anatomic abnormalities such as hiatal hernia, malrotation, or strictures and to evaluate for other conditions that might mimic or predispose to GERD due to the patient having alarm signs. The orally administered contrast freely passed through the esophagus into the stomach, and the oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing were natural. Esophageal contours, peristaltic activity, and passage were normal without tracheoesophageal fistula. During the esophagram, severe reflux was observed that repeated at least three times up to the proximal part of the esophagus . Also, there was an upward rotation of the stomach along its long axis, which resulted in displacement of the greater curvature adjacent to the abdominal face of the diaphragm and inversion of the greater curvature above the lesser curvature .
The patient benefited from tube feeding when expressed breast milk was given through the nasogastric catheter at 40 ml per hour. It was observed that her cough regressed, and the apnea episodes disappeared. Since the patient had no reflux symptoms for a week and gained weight after 20 days of follow-up, she was discharged home with nasogastric tube feeding during home follow-up. She will undergo an elective surgical procedure when her weight and age are appropriate with the aim of preventing gastric malrotation from progressing to volvulus or intestinal ischemia.