A 52-year-old man was referred over concerns of elevated IOP and progression of glaucoma in the left eye, with normal pressure and no glaucoma in the right eye. He noted a recent onset of blurry vision in the left eye. The patient had a self-described history of poor compliance with the use of his prescribed latanoprost. On examination, best corrected visual acuity showed 20/15 on right and 20/20-2 on left. The patient's manifest refraction was +2.75–0.50 × 153 OS and + 5.25–1.00 × 075 OD. Ultrasound pachymetry measured central cornea thickness of 521 μm in the right eye and 530 μm in the left eye. External examination showed a left-sided unilateral FCM along the V1 and V2 dermatomes with minimal V3 involvement . Slit lamp examination of the right eye showed a mild nuclear sclerotic cataract but was otherwise unremarkable. Slit lamp examination of the left eye showed prominent episcleral vessels and a mild nuclear sclerotic cataract . Posterior segment examination showed asymmetric optic nerve cupping with a cup-to-disk ratio of 0.3 on right and 0.7 on the left. Intraocular pressure was 12 mm Hg in the right and 30 mm Hg in the left via Goldmann applanation.
Further testing revealed thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in the left eye superiorly more than inferiorly with borderline thinning temporally . Using a Humphrey visual field 24-2 platform, the patient's visual field testing revealed marked inferior deficits with scattered superior deficits . These visual field changes are consistent with quantitative changes noted on the RNFL.
After discussing the diagnosis of moderate primary open angle glaucoma in the left eye, the options for reducing IOP were explored. The patient elected to proceed with cataract surgery plus the CyPass stent. The cataract surgery was uneventful, and the CyPass device was placed into the supraciliary space without complication. During stent placement, a reflux of blood was noted which was likely from choroidal vascular malformations that can also be present in patients with FCM.
An immediate reduction in IOP was observed. This reduction sustained through 12 months postoperatively without a requirement for topical medications . During routine follow-up visits, prominent episcleral venous prominence has continued in the left eye, but repeated RNFL measurements have shown no progression of his glaucoma . His best corrected visual acuity at 12 months was noted to be 20/20 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye.