The patient is a 25-year-old female with no comorbidities who presented to the emergency department on day 16 following her first dose of the ChAdOx1 nCOV-19 vaccine complaining of inability to walk and urinary retention. She developed fever during the first 48 h following the vaccination, which subsequently resolved. From day five onwards, she complained of myalgia of her lower limbs, especially upon walking up stairs. There was a further onset of fever with progressive bilateral lower limb weakness on day 12. By day 16, she was unable to stand and developed urinary retention. There were no visual, respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms. On examination, she was afebrile with normal vital signs and had numbness and allodynia below the T8 spinal level. In the lower limbs, there was bilateral hypertonia with reduced power (3/5 proximally and distally) along with exaggerated deep tendon reflexes at the knees and ankles with upgoing plantar. Upper limb and cranial nerve examinations were normal, along with no evidence of optic neuritis or cerebellar signs. Blood investigations revealed haemoglobin of 15.0 g/dL with total white cells of 8.12 x 103μL (81% neutrophils and 15% lymphocytes) and platelets of 285 x 103μL. Renal and liver functions test were normal. Erythrocytes sedimentation rate (ESR) was 21 mm/hr. (upper limit normal). Urine microscopy revealed the presence of leucocytes and bacteria, which culture eventually showed no growth.
Urgent gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the whole spine revealed multi-segment T2-hyperintensities (T3-T5, T7-T8 and T11-L1), which showed variable cord enhancement post-contrast at T7-T8 lesions . Visualised MRI brain was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed clear-appearing CSF with an elevated protein count of 546 mg/L (normal range: 150 -400) and CSF glucose of 3.1 mmol/L (serum glucose of 5.6 mmol/L). No acid-fast bacilli were seen, and no growth was obtained from CSF and blood culture. CSF anti-aquaporin 4 (AQ-4) and anti-myelin-oligodendrocyte were negative. No oligoclonal bands were detected in CSF. Connective tissue screening, including antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor, were negative. Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) and nerve conduction study were normal. She was diagnosed with LETM following COVID-19 vaccination and started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 5 days. The patient was also started on intravenous ceftriaxone covering for urinary tract infection for 5 days and subcutaneous enoxaparin for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis. The patient responded to the treatment and was discharged after 1 week. Upon discharge, the patient was able to walk about ten steps but was still limited given ongoing pain and numbness, mainly at the distal lower limb up to the knee. Her urinary incontinence resolved. Two weeks later, the patient was able to walk without assistance; however, she still had persistent neuropathic pain up to the knees bilaterally. She was understandably distraught, but at the same time, encouraged by her gradually improving condition. She will continue to be on a regular follow-up to observe the recurrence of symptoms and monitor recovery. Despite the adverse event, the patient is keen on the COVID-19 vaccine, where we suggested an mRNA based vaccine in 1 month following the index event.