A 64-year-old female (weight: 60 kg, height: 165 cm) who presented in April, 2020 was assessed for a recent isolated episode of hematuria that was accompanied by abdominal pain.
During the past five months, the patient reported a decrease in body weight of about 5 kg.
The patient had a medical history of bilateral renal stones. Additionally, she received pharmaceutical management for hypertension for many years, and intermittently utilized nifedipine.
The patient had no specific personal or family history of illnesses.
Upon admission, the patient's body temperature was 36.5°C, heart rate was 75 beats per min, respiratory rate was 19 breaths per min, blood pressure was 145/90 mmHg, and oxygen saturation (while breathing ambient air) was 99%. She also had mild tenderness in the right lumbar and abdominal regions.
A urinalysis indicated the red blood cell count was 581.5/μL and the round epithelial cell count was 2.4/μL. An exfoliative cytology test indicated no atypical epithelial cells.
A conventional abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated irregular enlargement of the right kidney, indicative of a space-occupying lesion. The subsequent enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results, which used a gadolinium-based contrast agent , revealed a distinctive clumpy and abnormal signal in the right renal pelvis that had dimensions of 7.9 cm × 6.4 cm × 7.4 cm . The tumor had uniformly low signal intensity in the T1-weighted phase, and slightly elevated mixed signal intensity in the T2-weighted phase. We also identified multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneal region, raising a concern of metastasis. After nephrectomy, immunohistochemical analysis of tumor samples indicated positive staining for Ki-67 (70%), CKpan, 34β12, p63, GATA3, and vimentin, but negative staining for CK7 and PAX8 . There was also evidence from the MRI of cancerous infiltration in the renal sinus, renal parenchyma, and vasculature, and a cancerous thrombus in the right renal vein.
A genetic analysis of the tumor tissue showed mutations in the ELF, LTK, NOTCH2, REL, and ZFHX3 genes . However, there were no mutations in genes that have known relationships with hereditary tumors. Furthermore, the gene analysis yielded no specific drug targets that could be used for pharmacological intervention.