An 80-year-old woman developed unsteadiness of gait and required assistance to walk one week after she noted lower back pain. One week later, the patient presented with headache, nausea, and low-grade fever and was admitted to a local hospital. Acute multiple cerebral infarctions were diagnosed via brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and anti-coagulant therapy was initiated. However, despite continuing medical treatment for 7 days, consciousness disturbance developed and she was transferred to our hospital. At the time of admission, the patient was 155 cm tall and weighed 61 kg. Her body temperature was 37.4°C, her blood pressure was 145/85 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 66/min. There was no blood pressure differential between the right and left arms. The physical examination, including palpations of the lymph nodes, chest and abdomen, was unremarkable. There was mild edema in the lower legs. Neurological examination revealed mild consciousness disturbance with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 12 (E3V4M5), mild left facial paralysis, and bilateral positive Babinski’s sign. The patient displayed no motor weakness or sensory disturbances. Marked nuchal stiffness and a positive Kernig’s sign were observed.
The patient’s laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 12,100/μL with 87.3% neutrophils, C-reactive protein levels of 11.69 mg/dL, and D-dimer levels of 18.1 μg/mL. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis disclosed 5 mononuclear cells/μL, a glucose level of 42 mg/dL (CSF-blood glucose ratio: 0.35), and a protein value of 46 mg/dL . An electroencephalogram revealed frequent bilaterally asynchronous sharp wave activities. Brain MRI revealed hydrocephalus, and high signal intensities in the right cerebellar hemisphere, corona radiata, caudate nucleus, and the left parietal lobe on diffusion-weighted imaging , with corresponding reduced apparent diffusion coefficient maps. No enhancement was observed in these lesions or the meninges on post-contrast T1-weighted images . MR angiography showed intracranial vessel irregularities and stenoses of the right middle cerebral artery and vertebral artery. Electrocardiography displayed a sinus rhythm. Neither a potential cardiac source of embolism nor a source of the right-to-left shunt, including patent foramen ovale, was demonstrated via transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography. A computed tomography scan of the chest detected calcification of the aortic arch. The patient was treated with intravenous heparin.
The subacute clinical course, marked nuchal stiffness, and mild mononuclear pleocytosis with a decreased CSF-blood glucose ratio led us to consider meningoencephalitis due to tuberculosis or fungi; subsequently, antitubercular and antifungal drugs were administered. However, the CSF exams resulted in a negative cryptococcus antigen test and a low adenosine deaminase level (<2.0 IU/L). Additionally, CSF culture for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli and fungi was negative. The CSF cytology on admission revealed adenocarcinoma . Tumor markers were within normal ranges. The chest, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography and gallium scintigraphy findings showed no evidence of malignancy. However, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy disclosed scirrhous gastric cancer, which was pathologically diagnosed as adenocarcinoma (signet-ring cell). The final diagnosis was meningeal carcinomatosis and excessive coagulation related to occult gastric cancer. Following discussion with the patient’s family, and based on the patient’s age, worsening consciousness levels (GCS of 6 on week 3), and poor performance status, she was transferred to the other hospital 22 days after admission, and supportive care rather than active management was administered.