A 26-year-old primigravid woman, at 35 weeks gestation attended our obstetric department complaining of abdominal pain along with nausea and vomiting for 3 h. The woman’s antenatal care was uneventful. She had no significant medical, surgical or family history and no history suggestive of thromboembolism. She had never used oral contraceptives or any other hormonal therapy.
Upon arrival, she had a temperature of 36.8 °C, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute and blood pressure of 119/71 mmHg. A physical examination on admission showed a gravid uterus just below the xiphoid process. No abdominal tenderness or rebound tenderness were appreciated. The bowel sounds were normal and there were no signs suggestive of peritonitis. A hematologic examination revealed a leukocyte count of 13.1 × 109/L (normal range 4.0 × 109/L - 10.0 × 109/L) with neutrophils accounting for 73.9% (normal range 50–70%), hemoglobin level of 98.6 g/L (normal range 100 g/L - 150 g/L), hematocrit of 0.317 (normal range 0.37–0.43), and platelet count of 187 × 109/L (normal range 100 × 109/L - 300 × 109/L). Coagulation profile and biological tests were within normal limits. Obstetric ultrasound revealed a normal fetus compatible with expected gestational age. The fetal monitor showed that fetal heart rate fluctuated between 150 and 160 beats per min and the uterus contracted occasionally. Threatened preterm labor was initially suspected and magnesium sulfate was given to inhibit uterine contractions. Acute gastritis was also considered.
The second day after admission, the patient complained of more intense abdominal pain that was centered in the right lower quadrant, and she experienced increased vomiting and abdominal distention. Physical examination demonstrated right lower quadrant tenderness without rebound tenderness and a distended abdomen and weak bowel sounds. Hematologic testing revealed leukocytosis with a left shift (leucocyte count of 26.9 × 109/L and neutrophils accounting for 91%) and hemoconcentration (hematocrit of 0.439). Serum amylase was normal. An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed dilation and effusion of the right intestinal canals, thickening of the intestinal wall and a small amount of ascites. Abdominal plain radiography was performed and showed no dilated bowel loops and no features of obstruction or pneumoperitoneum. Obstetric ultrasound revealed demise of the fetus.
Acute appendicitis with perforation was suspected and an emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed immediately. On exploration, approximately 1500 mL of serosanguineous peritoneal fluid was found in the abdomen. The entire ileum, part of the jejunum and part of the ascending colon were gangrenous, and thromboembolism in the corresponding mesenteric veins was noted. The necrotic intestine, measuring approximately 180 cm, was resected and an end-to-end jejunum-colon anastomosis was performed. Since there was no evidence of pending spontaneous labor and delivery and to avoid the release of fetally-derived necrotic materials that could complicate the clinical scenario via pro-coagulant and pro-inflammatory effects, a cesarean section was performed and the fetus and placenta were removed. The patient’s hematological values during the operation showed a white cell count of 14.58 × 109/L, neutrophils accounting for 91%, hemoglobin of 73 g/L, a hematocrit of 0.236 and a platelet count of 135 × 109/L. The pathologic examination revealed extensive mucosal denudation, edema, hemorrhage and neutrophil infiltration in the submucosa and muscularis propria of the bowel , and widespread thrombosis in mesenteric venous lumens .
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit after surgery. Total parenteral nutrition, intravenous antibiotics and full anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin were initiated postoperatively and continued until discharge. Thrombolytic therapy was withheld due to bleeding risk. The patient had a reasonably uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 36. Four years later, the patient was again pregnant and underwent thrombophilia testing (antithrombin, protein C, protein S, and coagulation parameters) at 30 weeks of gestation. At that time, antithrombin III activity was 64% (normal range 80–120%). Her antithrombin III activity returned to normal (96%) 4 weeks later. She delivered a healthy baby through a cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation without thromboembolic event and without thromboprophylaxis. She has been recurrence-free for 10 years without anticoagulant therapy.