This 25-year-old man (early follow-up published elsewhere) suffered from generalized acquired dystonia with choreoathetotic movements due to perinatal asphyxia. Upon clinical examination, he also had an action-induced tremor with myoclonic jerks, mild spastic tetraparesis and ataxic gait. He was wheelchair-bound for longer distances and was not able to drink or eat by himself independently. Furthermore, he had severe dysarthria. The Burke-Fahn-Marsden (BFM) motor score was 80.5 (assessing axial and more peripheral dystonic symptoms), disability score 19 (describing dystonia-related problems in daily life). The patient was under no specific medication.
He underwent implantation of quadripolar DBS electrodes (Model 3387; Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis) bilaterally in the ventral intermediate nucleus (Vim) of the thalamus and bilaterally in the posteroventral lateral globus pallidus internus (GPi) guided by CT-stereotactic surgery and microelectrode recording. Postoperative stereotactic CT demonstrated appropriate placement of all four electrodes. After test stimulation an implantable pulse generator (IPG) (Kinetra; Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis) was implanted and connected to the thalamic DBS electrodes. Postoperatively, he had improvement of tremor and dystonia, he was able to grip objects and was more independent (BFM motor score 67.5; disability score 15 at 17 months postoperatively). Stimulation settings and the further course are shown in .
After 38 months of Vim stimulation the IPG was replaced upon battery depletion, and the previously and simultaneously implanted pallidal electrodes were then connected to possibly obtain further benefit. The rationale were the phasic and dystonic symptoms of the extremities, especially with severe difficulties to put the feet with the sole on the ground, and cervical dystonia further affecting the ability to eat. While there was subjective improvement in fine motor skills (e.g. handling of his smartphone became somewhat easier), the BFM motor and disability scores remained unchanged (BFM motor score 67, disability score 15) compared to bilateral Vim stimulation (electrodes were disconnected but not removed).
When he was seen for a routine follow-up 76 months after implantation, there was stable improvement of dystonia. However, IPG check revealed battery depletion since 5 weeks ago. Since clinical symptoms were stable with still an improvement of about 15% in the BFM motor score compared to the preoperative situation, IPG replacement was postponed and he continued to do well. Two and a half years after battery depletion, both the BFM motor score (58,5) and the disability score (13) were even further improved. No confounding factors such as medication, life circumstances or additional treatments had been modified. In the further course, however, one and a half year later, he noted a mild deterioration of dystonia and the IPG was replaced, leading to a rapid improvement to the former level, which is now stable for more than a year.