At 22 weeks of gestation a 34-year-old pregnant female was referred to our lab for prenatal genetic testing after amniocentesis due to the presence of micrognathia detected at the routine 2nd trimester ultrasound examination. The prospective parents were healthy and of Greek origin. This was their first pregnancy and they had no previous medical history. The molecular cytogenetic analysis (see below) revealed a deletion in 1p. Genetic counseling was offered to the couple. At the parents’ request the pregnancy was terminated at 22 weeks of gestation. Subsequently, the female fetus was sent for an autopsy.
The fetus was of normal growth according to the weeks of gestation (~21/40) weighing 438 g without essential autolytic changes of intrauterine death. The autopsy’s observations are shown in Table .
The mitral decidual arteriopathy observed in the placenta indicated pathological implantation, which possibly caused uteroplacental insufficiency and relevant gestational complications uteroplacental ischemia. In the present case, however it is possible that the decidual arteriopathy and the underweight placenta just reflect the pathological implantation and the abnormal placentation of a genetically pathological fetus.
Molecular karyotype analysis by array CGH using “Illumina Cytochip Focus Constitutional array with BAC technology” was performed on DNA isolated from uncultured amniocytes according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The Illumina Cytochip Focus Constitutional array is a commercially available whole-genome BAC array with a median resolution of 0.5−1 Mb. (Cytochip Focus Constitutional, Illumina).
The parent’s blood derived DNA samples were prepared from peripheral blood leukocytes (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Array data was analyzed using Bluefuse software analysis (BlueGnome Ltd., UK) using GRCh37/hg19 UCSC assembly and compared to known duplication listed in public available databases [Database of Genomic Variants (DGV, ), ENSEMBL , and DECIPHER Accessed at 25/01/2015].
A female profile was revealed with a 2,7 Mb deletion at chromosome 1p34.3 extending from position 36,901,642 to 39,606,756 (GRCh37/hg19 Feb.2009) . No other copy number variant was detected at the referred sample. Using the UCSC Genome Browser and the OMIM database we observed that the deleted region contains 27 OMIM genes, listed in Table . Parental blood testing with a-CGH method revealed that the deletion occured de novo.