A 52-year-old woman presented because an anterior mediastinal mass had been discovered by computed tomography (CT) during a health checkup. She was healthy and had never experienced chest pain, dyspnea, or palpitations. Physical examination revealed no evidence of neuromuscular disorders or heart failure. Routine blood biochemistry was normal. Chest CT revealed an anterior mediastinal mass with central intermediate attenuation and irregular marginal calcification . Coronary CT did not demonstrate a coronary aneurysm or a feeding artery from the coronary artery . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that this tumor was located within the pericardial sac adjacent to the right atrium with hypodensities on both T1- and T2-weighted sequences indicating soft inclusions. There was no finding of the tumor to invade or adhere to the heart in preoperative chest MRI. . We did not perform a transthoracic needle biopsy because of the risks of dissemination or hemorrhagic complications.
With a provisional preoperative diagnosis of intrapericardial teratoma, surgery was performed via a median sternotomy without cardiopulmonary bypass because there was no evidence of tumor invasion of the heart . Pericardiotomy exposed the tumor within the pericardial sac and revealed that the lesion was attached to the aortic adventitia at the root of the ascending aorta . The tumor had no feeding artery and was completely resected. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to consist of an encapsulated, cystic, intrapericardial, soft-tissue mass measuring 5.2 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm and weighing 45 g . Macroscopically, the lesion mainly comprised a large cyst containing yellow and white cheese-like and tan-brown muddy material surrounded by calcification . Pathological finding showed that this tumor was made of mature cartilage, bone, bronchial epithelium and nerves. A histological diagnosis of a mature cystic teratoma was made without immature components and there was no morphological evidence of malignancy in the tumor. The postoperative course was uneventful; the patient recovered fully and was discharged on postoperative day 5. There is no evidence of recurrence 5 years after surgery.
This case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Nihonkai General Hospital (005-6-15) and the patient gave written, informed consent to publication of this report.