An 82-year-old female presented with right hip/groin pain and an inability to ambulate after a ground-level fall from standing at home. Persistent pain on clinical examination prompted advanced imaging for suspicion of occult femoral neck fracture despite a negative radiographic workup utilizing plain radiographs and a CT scan . An MRI was unable to be obtained secondary to the patient’s history of retained metal shrapnel. Therefore, a three-phase bone scan was obtained which demonstrated increased uptake in the subcapital femoral neck region . The patient underwent fracture fixation using the FNS 130-degree one-hole plate with an 85 mm barrel and a locking antirotation screw . She tolerated surgery successfully without immediate post-operative complications. She was allowed to fully weight bear immediately after surgery. Her perioperative stay was otherwise uneventful, and she was discharged on post-operative day six to an inpatient rehabilitation center. Secondary to the fragility fracture, the patient was referred to her primary care physician for evaluation and management of osteoporosis. The patient was seen in the orthopedic trauma clinic at 2 weeks postoperatively for suture removal.
At 8 weeks post-operative, the patient presented back to the emergency department following a second ground-level fall from standing at home. Radiographs and advanced imaging in the emergency department demonstrated a new four-part, peri-implant intertrochanteric fracture about the pre-existing FNS . All instrumentation appeared intact without evidence of screw penetration, varus collapse, or other mode of construct failure outside of the PIF. Recommendations were made to the patient and her family regarding the removal of the instrumentation with cephalomedullary nail fixation versus possible hip hemiarthroplasty. The patient elected to proceed with revision surgical fixation versus possible hemiarthroplasty and was medically optimized before returning to the operating room.
Intraoperatively, the patient was positioned in the lateral decubitus position utilizing a peg board in anticipation of the possible need for hemiarthroplasty. The original incision was utilized and extended and routine dissection was performed splitting the vastus lateralis down to the level of the pre-existing FNS implant. The previous instrumentation showed no macroscopic evidence of fatigue or failure. The proximal antirotation screw and inner barrel were then easily backed out of position within the femoral neck without complication. The distal transverse screw through the one-hole plate was noted to be cold-welded to the implant, preventing simple removal with a hand screwdriver or a torque-limiting power driver. Multiple techniques for implant removal were attempted, including the use of a diamond-tipped burr and conical extraction screws. Both methods were unsuccessful at the time. Unable to free the distal screw, the side plate was then cut proximally in situ utilizing a metal-cutting diamond disc (Stryker, 2019). Then using a needle driver, the cold-welded screw and one-hole plate were successfully removed as a unit from the lateral cortex in a counterclockwise fashion .
At this point the fracture was adequately reduced with gentle traction and, secondary to adequate remaining bone stock, a decision was made to proceed with cephalomedullary nail fixation using the TFN-Advanced (TFNA) proximal femoral nailing system (DePuy Synthes, 2020). The previous FNS neck angle matched the 130° TFNA implant, so the same neck path was used with a fenestrated 85 mm lag screw through the nail. Injectable radiopaque cement was then directed through the lag screw, filling defects left from the previously placed antirotation screw . Postoperatively, the patient was restricted to toe-touch weight bearing and was mobilized daily with physical therapy. She was discharged on post-operative day 5 in stable condition to a sub-acute rehabilitation center. Her post-operative period was mostly uneventful minus a brief episode of acute kidney injury which was managed and resolved by nephrology.
The patient was seen and evaluated in the orthopedic trauma clinic 3 weeks postoperatively. X-rays were obtained demonstrating stable positioning of the orthopedic implant . She was allowed to fully weight bear after this visit. The patient had returned to her baseline as a household ambulator with an assistive device.