A 73-year-old Japanese male was transferred to our hospital with high levels of serum AST, ALT, and γ-GTP. He did not complain of any symptoms. His surgical history revealed that subtotal gastrectomy with Billroth II reconstruction was performed due to a gastric ulcer 33 years prior (the operation record was unavailable). His medical history also included multiple cerebral infarctions and a chronic subdural hematoma. There were no other significant findings in his family medical history, social history, or lifestyle history.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 16-mm tumor in the ampulla of Vater with low contrast . Despite no clinical signs of jaundice, both the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct were dilated. Due to obstruction of the bile duct and past Billroth II reconstruction, a double-balloon endoscopy-assisted endoscopic retrograde cholangiography was performed and revealed an exposed protruding tumor at the ampulla of Vater. Subsequent endoscopic biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. Preoperative imaging showed no obvious evidence of vascular invasion or distant metastasis. Taken together, the ampullary carcinoma was diagnosed as stage IB, T2N0M0 (American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), 8th edition .
In addition, contrast-enhanced CT revealed abnormal branches of the PV . Both the “abnormally dilated PV” and the postpancreatic superior mesenteric vein (SMV) were divaricated from the SMV at the caudal side of the pancreas. A splenic vein (SPV) and inferior mesenteric vein flowed into the “normal” PV. The “normal” PV encircled the common bile duct and flowed into the S4 segment of the liver, forming a cavernous transformation at the hilar plate. The abnormal PV crossed in front of the pancreas and common bile duct and then entered the cavernous transformation behind the common hepatic duct. The bulbus was already resected when gastrectomy was performed; therefore, the relationship between the abnormal PV and duodenum was not obvious. Additionally, due to the cavernous transformation at the hilar plate, the branch to the right/left portal branches could not be detected. The dilated PV was diagnosed as a PPPV based on the characteristic L-shaped PV in three-dimensional angiography .
During the operation , we attempted to isolate the PPPV from the bile duct and pancreas. However, the boundary between the PPPV and adjacent organs could not be clearly established. We tried to isolate the PPPV from the adjacent organs, but it was easily injured and bled if any load was applied because of its fragile wall. Even though we stopped the bleeding by suturing the hemorrhagic spot, each time isolation was attempted, rebleeding occurred. The attempt resulted in uncontrollable blood loss and necessitated PPPV resection to remove the ampulla of Vater and control the hemorrhage. An Anthron bypass catheter (Toray Medical Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan) was placed between the SMV and umbilical portion to avoid congestion of small intestine. Resection and reconstruction of PPPV was conducted using the postpancreatic “normal” PV as an autogenous graft. The PV clumping time was 116 min. After reconstruction, the intrahepatic PV flow was confirmed by ultrasound. The operating time was 16 h and 43 min, and operative blood loss was 13,994 ml.
Even though there is a lack of scientific evidence, unfractionated heparin (10,000 units/day) was administered on postoperative days 3–7 to prevent PV thrombosis. However, enhanced CT on postoperative day 8 showed thrombosis in the reconstructed PV. Fortunately, intrahepatic PV flow was favorable due to cavernous transformation. Then, edoxaban (30 mg/day) was administered starting on postoperative day 8. Several complications occurred but were treatable, such as hyperammonemia (treated by Lactulose and L-arginine/L-citrulline), pancreatic fistula (treated by abdominal drainage for 20 days) and delayed gastric emptying (treated by dietary manipulation and prokinetic medications such as metoclopromide and mosapride Citrate; 15 days after operation, his symptoms due to delayed gastric emptying were improved). The patient was discharged after 45 days of care.
In terms of pathological findings, the ampullary carcinoma was diagnosed as stage IIB (T2N1M0, AJCC, 8th edition ). The resected PPPV had a heterogeneous thickness and had much thinner walls (0.1–0.2 mm) than normal portal veins (1.6 ± 0.3 mm ) . Additionally, the elastic fiber that formed the PV wall was partially sparse. There was no obvious finding for PV invasion. Twelve months after the operation, the patient is still alive without any recurrence.