A 33-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our surgical ward for fever with chills and a mass in the upper quadrant of her left breast. She had suffered from a left-sided mastitis that had been incised and drained at another institution 20 days prior to her presentation at our hospital. Poor wound healing with pus discharge was noted. She did not have any personal medical history of TB or diabetes mellitus. She also had no family history of breast cancer. She was married and had a three-year-old child.
Upon admission she had a body temperature of 38°C, blood pressure of 126/68 mmHg, a pulse rate of 89/minute, and a respiratory rate of 19/minute. On physical examination, we noted a firm mass of 5 × 6 cm with an erythematous open non-healing wound and a brownish discharge measuring 1.5 × 1.5 cm over the upper outer quadrant of her left breast. Dark reddish plaque skin lesions were found over both lower legs and the dorsal aspect of her feet. Her blood test results showed the following: white blood cells at 11.80 × 103/μL, neutrophils at 77.3%, lymphocytes at 12.7%, platelets at 418 × 103/μL, C-reactive protein at 4.9 mg/dL (normal range ≤ 0.8), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) during the first hour of 56 mm/hour (normal ≤ 12). Her blood culture revealed no growth, while her chest radiography was unremarkable.
An ultrasonograph of our patient's left breast showed a lump measuring about 5 × 5 cm, which was conglomerated, with an irregular margin with hypoechoic heterogeneous echogenicity, and with a left axillary lymph node. An echo-guided core needle aspiration biopsy of her left breast was also performed which revealed a mastitis with granulation tissue. Under the microscope, this section of her left breast showed chronic mastitis mixed with granulation tissue and numerous foreign body giant cells but with no evidence of malignancy . A culture of the wound tissues failed to grow any organisms. Stains for AFB and TB culture were not undertaken. A dermatologist was consulted regarding the dark reddish plaque skin lesions, and a skin biopsy was later performed.
Her right lower leg skin biopsy showed granulomatous septal panniculitis that was consistent with erythema nodosum. Microscopically, there was fibrosis and granulomatous inflammatory cell infiltrate, primarily involving the thickened fibrous septa, but there was no evidence of vasculitis. A core needle biopsy tissue of her left breast was sent for a PCR test for M. tuberculosis. The result of the PCR test showed the presence of M. tuberculosis complex DNA. A right lower leg skin biopsy tissue was also tested for TB PCR and came back positive for M. tuberculosis complex DNA.
Our final diagnosis relied on histopathological tissue findings and on the molecular detection of M. tuberculosis. Our patient was then treated with anti-tuberculous medication after her PCR results were made available. After undergoing four months of anti-tuberculous treatment, her left breast mass was gradually reduced, but a new small mass appeared from the medial side of the initial mass. Excisional biopsy was done which revealed the presence of chronic granulomatous inflammation composed of epitheloid cells with Langhans giant cells, as well as small foci of necrosis. Although acid-fast stain and culture showed no tubercle bacilli, her anti-tuberculous therapy was continued. Her left breast mass gradually became smaller and then regressed. She was treated for 18 months without any further complication. After a further six months, she underwent lumpectomy. Her biopsy results revealed a fibroadenoma with a few foci of calcification of her breast tissue. She was regularly followed up for another 12 months and no evidence of the recurrence of her disease was noted.