A previously healthy 20-year-old southeast Asian–American male presented with 6 weeks of intermittent fevers, nonproductive cough, dry eyes, oral ulcers, rashes, arthritis, and myalgias. The patient’s vitals were temperature of 102°F, heart rate 99 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure 112/63 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 96% on room air. On physical examination, the patient was not in acute distress, no scleral icterus was noted, extraocular movements were intact, with oral ulcers on the hard palate. The patient did not have evidence of jugular vein distention (JVD), carotid bruits, and no palpable cervical or axillary lymphadenopathy. Cardiac examination found normal rate and rhythm with audible S1 and S2. Lung examination was clear to auscultation bilaterally without rales, rhonchi, or wheezes. The patient’s abdomen was soft, nontender, and nondistended with normoactive bowel sounds. The patient noted papules along lateral digits and tender palmar maculopapular lesions, synovitis of the hands and feet, but no noticeable edema of all extremities. Neurological examination was without focal deficits, and he was alert, awake, and oriented, answering questions appropriately, with strength of 5/5 on upper and lower extremities. The patient did not have significant past medical history, did not take any medications, and his only surgery was a circumcision. The patient’s family history was negative for rheumatological disease, his mother is a thalassemia carrier. The patient denies any tobacco, alcohol, or drug use. The patient is a university student.
Three days prior to admission, the patient sought his primary care physician who prescribed 5 days of azithromycin 500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg on days 1–5, and a methylprednisolone dose pack. An outpatient chest computed tomography (CT) without contrast showed an ill-defined density in the right lower lobe and scattered micronodules. The patient did not improve and presented to the hospital .
On hospital day 1, X-rays of hands and wrists were normal. Repeat CT imaging revealed additional ground glass opacities in the periphery of the right lung and a 6.5 mm right middle lobe nodule . MRI of the lower extremities showed nonspecific edema of the left distal sartorius muscle, but this finding was deemed to be nonspecific and not relevant to the patient’s condition when reviewed by the musculoskeletal radiologists and the treating physicians. There was an absence of other evidence to suggest the presence of muscle inflammation. Echocardiogram and CT and MRI imaging of brain, sinuses, and spine were normal. A skin biopsy of the left palm revealed superficial mounds of parakeratosis and sparse lymphocytic inflammation, suggestive of a resolving spongiotic or psoriasiform dermatitis. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies were normal. Laboratory tests were as follows: hemoglobin 11.4 g/dL (13.7–17.5 g/dL), absolute lymphocytes 1000/µL (1.3–3.6 1000/µL), creatinine 0.7 mg/dL, alanine transaminase (ALT) 91 IU/L (0–50 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 58 IU/L (5–34 IU/L), ferritin 920 ng/mL (12–300 ng/mL), and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 91 IU/L (55–170 IU/L). Urinalysis was positive for trace ketones, otherwise negative for leukocyte esterase/nitrites/blood/protein. Infectious workup revealed positive M. pneumoniae IgM and negative IgG, Epstein–Barr viral capsid antigen (VCA) IgM, and parvovirus B19 IgM. Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and parvovirus B19 PCR were negative. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 by nucleic acid amplification test (SARS-CoV-2 by NAAT) was negative. Two sets of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures drawn from two separate venipuncture sites transported at room temperature had no plated growth after 5 days. No cultures for fungi were collected. Urine culture grew < 1000 colony forming units per milliliter. The patient completed 10 days of oral doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours for M. pneumoniae infection without improvement. Notably, M. pneumoniae IgG subsequently turned positive.
The patient continued to have fevers, oral ulcers, arthritis, and myalgias. An antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer 1:160 with homogeneous immunofluorescence pattern and weakly positive Sjogren’s syndrome-related antigen A (SSA)/anti-Ro antibody were noted. A highly positive anti-MDA5 was measured by qualitative immunoprecipitation assay on hospital day 15 and confirmed on repeat testing.
Intravenous methylprednisolone 60 mg daily was initiated for 2 days, with resolution of fevers and improvement of arthritis and myalgias. The patient was tapered to oral prednisone 30 mg twice daily, with improvement of cutaneous lesions on the digits and palms. He was referred to pulmonology for close monitoring with pulmonary function tests and serial CT chest imaging. Chest CT at 3 and 12 months after diagnosis showed no evidence of interstitial lung disease. The patient started treatment with azathioprine 50 mg daily as an outpatient; however, due to persistent transaminitis, was switched to mycophenolate mofetil initially on 500 mg twice daily and titrated up to 1000 mg twice daily. Owing to the side effect of diarrhea, he was then changed to mycophenolic acid 720 mg twice daily, which was well tolerated.