A 44-year-old Caucasian woman presented with sudden onset central crushing chest pain, shortness of breath, and collapse. An ECG showed anterior ST elevation across leads V2–V5 prompting management via the primary percutaneous angioplasty pathway. Past medical history was unremarkable except for recently diagnosed asthma, treated with inhaled corticosteroid and β-agonist. The patient did not have any risk factors for ischaemic heart disease. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable and respiratory examination revealed bi-basal crepitations, more prominent on the left. Urgent coronary angiography showed unobstructed coronary arteries, with initial coronary artery spasm that resolved with intracoronary nitrate . Troponin-T was 772 ng/L (normal range <14 ng/L) and a chest radiograph showed extensive left-sided consolidation . A working diagnosis of myopericarditis secondary to pneumonia was made and the patient received intravenous co-amoxiclav with supportive treatment and monitoring.
Viral swabs and urinary antigens for atypical pneumonia were negative. Serological viral and autoimmune screens for myocarditis were negative and the patient did not improve despite antibiotic treatment. Peripheral blood counts revealed a white cell count of 17.34 × 109/L (normal range 3–10.5 × 109/L) consisting of an eosinophilia of 7.23 × 109 (normal range <0.5 × 109/L). The patient denied any recent travel history, had a stable weight and no bowel symptoms. A computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram was undertaken which confirmed the consolidation seen on the chest x-ray, and showed multiple small filling defects suggestive of pulmonary emboli. A bronchoalveolar lavage showed abundant polymorphonuclear leucocytes, lymphocytes, macrophages, and bronchial epithelial and squamous cells, in keeping with acute inflammation, though no evidence of organisms or eosinophilic damage. Serum troponin-T remained elevated at 1131 ng/L.
A CMR was undertaken showing extensive myocardial oedema on multi-parametric native myocardial mapping, patchy subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) particularly in the apical segments and right ventricle, and a circumferential pericardial effusion . These features were in keeping with a myopericarditis, but not indicating a specific underlying aetiology.
Taken together with the eosinophilia and late onset asthma, which was poorly responsive to standard inhaled treatment, but responsive to oral steroids, and CT sinus imaging revealing sinusitis and polyposis, the patient met the American College of Rheumatology diagnostic criteria for EGPA [asthma, eosinophilia (>10% of peripheral white cell count), pulmonary infiltrates, and paranasal sinus abnormalities].
The patient was treated with pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg) once daily for 5 days and cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg) and rapidly showed improvement clinically. She received a further five cycles of cyclophosphamide with tapering oral prednisolone and was initiated on azathioprine as a maintenance agent. The patient had a good response symptomatically, biochemically (normalized troponin-T), electrocardiographically, and radiologically.
Interval CMR imaging showed complete resolution of myocardial oedema indicating a dramatic response to therapy. Some LGE remained in the apical segments which is likely representative of focal areas of fibrosis, but may also represent a limited area of infarct due to initial coronary vasospasm. Coronary vasculitis also remains a differential, but the response to intracoronary nitrate on angiogram would not be expected with vasculitis . These findings suggest that fast administration of cyclophosphamide with high-dose steroids may reduce the burden of post-myocarditis fibrosis in EGPA. The patient was maintained on oral azathioprine and oral steroids were weaned off. She remains in clinical and radiological remission.