A 72-year-old male patient, a retired factory worker, who had no cardiovascular risk factor beside sex and age, had a history of undocumented dysthyroidia. He was diagnosed with type 1 Gaucher disease 1 year prior to current hospital admission. A bone marrow biopsy found Gaucher cells, and a reduced glucocerebrosidase activity was detected. The patient suffered from a syncope that occurred during mild physical effort 4 days before admission. He described also a progressive onset of exercise intolerance and bilateral lower limb oedema over the last three months. He denied any other cardiac symptoms. On admission, his blood pressure was 126/86 mmHg, with a heart rate of 124 bpm. Cardiac auscultation found irregular rhythm, without murmurs or gallops. A Jugular venous distension, a hepatojugular reflux and a bilateral lower limb oedema limited to ankles were observed. Abdominal examination revealed hepatosplenomegaly. A mobile soft thyroid nodule was found with no signs of thyrotoxicosis or cervical adenopathy.
The electrocardiogram showed focal atrial tachycardia, left axis, left ventricular hypertrophy, a poor R antero-septal progression and repolarization abnormalities in inferior leads . The pattern of atrioventricular conduction with “ the grouped beating” was in favour of focal atrial tachycardia. The laboratory workup showed a bi-cytopenia (haemoglobin level at 13 g/dl, white cell counts at 3130/mm3, platelets at 54,000/mm3), mild hepatic cytolysis, BNP level at 590 pg/ml and a very low TSH at 0,07 UI/L with a high free T4 level at 1.94 ng/dL. Chest X-ray showed signs of pulmonary interstitial oedema of cardiac origin.
Echocardiography demonstrated a concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) with global hypokinesis and marked wall motion disturbances in the basal and median segments of the infero-septal and inferior walls. The systolic function was mildly impaired ejection fraction at 43%. The global longitudinal strain was reduced (− 9.6%) with regional wall motion abnormalities . Mitral and aortic valves had normal structure with minimal mitral regurgitation . No ejection tract obstruction was found. Bi-atrial enlargement (Left atrium volume at 52 ml/m2; Right atrium area at 22 cm2). Pulmonary artery pressure was mildly elevated at 40 mmHg with pulmonary acceleration time at 98 ms. Mitral flow was in favour of grade II diastolic dysfunction with elevated filling pressure. Pulsed Doppler at mitral valve showed an exclusive E wave of increased velocity (0.73 m/s), a deceleration time of 92 ms, and E/e’ ratio of 12.3, with an E’ velocity at 5.9 cm/s.
To further investigate the syncope aetiology, we performed a cerebral CT scan and supra-aortic trunks echo-Doppler that turned out to be normal. A Holter-ECG found a focal atrial tachycardia with an average heart rate of 103 bpm, frequent premature ventricular complexes (PVC) with bigeminism. Coronary arteries angiography was normal.
To rule out a myocardial infiltration, a CMR was performed. It revealed a non-dilated left ventricle (EDV 58 ml/m2) with hypertrophy limited to the basal segment of the infero-septal wall with a thickening of 12mm (ventricular mass at 74g/m2), a mildly reduced ejection fraction (40%) and global hypokinesis. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) showed the presence of a focal interstitial fibrosis in the basal LV infero-septal segment . Marked bi-atrial enlargement was noted. The right ventricle was non-dilated with normal systolic function.
We hypothesized that the primary mechanism of the syncope was purely arrhythmic. A sudden heart rate acceleration at the initiation of the tachyarrhythmia remains a plausible cause. While a continuous in-hospital heart rate monitoring and a Holter-ECG found a persistent tachycardia with no conduction disturbance. Thus, a cardiac pause at the termination of the tachycardia is of lesser probability.
Given the bi-atrial enlargement and the tachyarrhythmia, an anticoagulation regimen based on apixaban was initiated. The haemorrhagic risk assessment based on HASBLED score (2/9) was moderate, despite the thrombocytopenia which remains above 50.000/mm3. Rate control was successfully obtained with beta-blockers. Nonetheless, because of hyperthyroidism, amiodarone could not be initiated. The patient was discharged after an effective diuretic decongestion and normalization of BNP level. He was then referred to a metabolic disease centre to start enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The patient will benefit from radioiodine therapy for a toxic thyroid nodule revealed by scintigraphy.