In December 2019, a right-handed 38-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with increasing right shoulder pain and raised inflammatory parameters. Her past medical history was remarkable for paraplegia due to poliomyelitis in childhood and a residual epilepsy due to the sequelae of a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Apart from these conditions, for which she was wheelchair-bound, this patient was in good general health with a previous non-pathologic and well-functioning right shoulder.
One month prior to her admission with shoulder pain, she was involved in a car accident as a result of a tonic-clonic seizure. Upon admission, she developed hypertension with associated proteinuria and was diagnosed with a 26-week gestation previously unknown pregnancy and pre-eclampsia. She was previously nulliparous. At day six of hospitalization, the patient presented a spontaneous placental abruption and underwent an emergency caesarean section with a simple post-operative evolution.
Physical exam of her right upper extremity revealed a swollen, warm and painful right shoulder on palpation and mobilization without neurovascular disorder. On general examination, she had moderate asthenia without disorientation. The vital signs were: Temperature of 37.2 °C, heart rate at 104 beats per minute, blood pressure of 148/95 mmHg, respiratory rate at 23 per minute and an oxygen saturation within the norm (SpO2 95% breathing ambient air).
Hemoglobin was 101 G/L, leukocytes 9.8 G/L, thrombocytes 305 G/L and C-reactive protein was increased to 271 mg/L. Blood cultures were sent for culture.
Suspecting right shoulder septic arthritis without any degenerative sign on X-ray , she underwent open surgical debridement, synovectomy and 9 L saline solution lavage of the right shoulder by a delto-pectoral approach with subscapularis tenotomy. Abundant pus at arthrotomy was observed with the observation of a stage 3 equivalent according to Gächter’s classification .
Awaiting culture results, empirical antibiotic treatment with intravenous 2,2 g 3td amoxicilline and clavulanic acid was initiated.
Whilst the blood cultures and intra-operative cultures remained sterile without any crystals positivity on microscopic analysis, the clinical evolution was unfavorable with persistent pain, inflammation and purulent drainage. The patient required two additional surgical debridements and lavages on days 4 and day 7 after the first surgery. Both surgical interventions revealed persistent amounts of purulent and fibrous material despite the previous procedures and the empirical antibiotic treatment.
The 16S ribosomal RNA PCR performed on the purulent intra-operative liquid revealed U. urealyticum at 2.95 × 106 copies/ml , positive specific cultures inoculated a posteriori confirmed this finding .
Cervical smear showed no simultaneous U. urealyticum genital infection. Fresh placental tissue was not available for further testing, but there was no evident macroscopic chorio-amnionitis.
Upon receiving the microbiological documentation, a bi-therapy of levofloxacin and azithromycine was initiated. Susceptibility testing showed an intermediate sensibility to ciprofloxacin and clarithromycin. The strain was susceptible to doxycycline. Following cessation of breastfeeding, we started treatment with doxycycline for 4 weeks according to the guidelines of our institution and on the basis of the low initial therapeutic response . Early mobilization was started with our physiotherapist . She showed a favorable course with an excellent biological and functional outcome with a post-surgical DASH score of 5,8 at 3 months follow-up . As a reminder, a DASH score of 0 represents no disability and a score of 100 represents severe disability after surgery. Concerning the father of the infant, no other specific considerations were taken related to this infection. The infant presented good clinical evolution.