An 80-year-old obese man with a past history of smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, colon, and prostate carcinoma (which were curatively treated with surgery and radiation therapy in 2004 and 2017 successively) was presented in our emergency department (ED) with complaints of progressive dyspnoea and bilateral lower extremity oedema, as well as a weight gain of 10 kg in a few weeks. Medication used by the patient upon admission is listed in , the dosage of the medication had not been changed recently. Vital signs were normal. Cardiac examination was normal, no additional heart sounds were heard and the jugular veins could not be visualized due to severe obesity. With pulmonary auscultation mildly decreased breath sounds in the lower region bilaterally were heard. Abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen with tympanitic percussion on the left and right side suspect for ascites. In the lower extremities, extensive bilateral oedema was found.
An electrocardiogram showed new-onset atrial fibrillation with normal ventricular response, there were no signs of ischaemia. Laboratory tests revealed normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin level 7.6 mmol/L, normal 8.5–11.0 mmol/L), elevated D-dimer levels (3.17 mg/L, normal −0.50 mg/L), elevated gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT 89 IU/L, normal −55 IU/L), and decreased renal function (creatinine 233 μmol/L, normal 59–104 μmol/L). For additional laboratory values at the time of presentation, see . A transthoracic echocardiogram performed at the ED showed a left ventricle with normal dimensions and a preserved left heart function (ejection fraction 60%), a D-shaped left ventricle in both systole and diastole suggesting increased right-sided pressure, mitral annular calcification without valve dysfunction and left atrial dilatation. In the IVC, a ‘snake thrombus’ was seen, visible up to the right atrium . Patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen to screen for possible causes of IVCT which revealed a large mass (9 cm × 10 cm × 8 cm) in the right kidney with growth into the IVC, highly suspect for an RCC . A CT-thorax showed no metastases. The patient was diagnosed with a right-sided T3bN0Mx RCC.
According to current guidelines anticoagulant therapy was initiated with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Due to the reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) a reduced dose of tinzaparin was administered. After 3 days factor Xa levels were checked and revealed a level of 0.33 U/mL (normal 0.5–1.2 IU/mL), which was considered inadequate and the patient was switched to heparin intravenous. The possibility of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy and surgical therapy were considered in a multidisciplinary team. However, the clinical condition of the patient deteriorated significantly over the next few days with progressive dyspnoea, oedema, and kidney failure. The patient deceased on day 12 of admission, after initiating palliative care.