The patient is a 39-year-old male with medical history of obstructive sleep apnea who presented in February of 2021 with progressive left anterior chest wall pain and a fluctuant mass in that region. The patient, who had a pet turtle at home, developed crampy abdominal pain and diarrhea about 12 h after eating a fast-food chicken meal in September 2020. Within a week of that episode, he was admitted at a local hospital with fever and chills and admitted to be treated for Salmonella Oranienburg sepsis. Sensitivities were found to be to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. He was treated with a 5-day course of IV levofloxacin and metronidazole, then a 10-day course of twice-daily ciprofloxacin. He recovered, but in November of 2020, he noticed progressive discomfort in the left anterior chest wall with point tenderness in the region of the fourth sternocostal joint. Anti-inflammatory medications reportedly kept the pain manageable, but he noted a gradually increasing firm but fluctuant lump in that area.
A CT scan of the chest was performed and the patient was referred to the cardiothoracic surgery service for evaluation. Needle aspirate of the area failed to reveal a bacterial source or other histological abnormality, and the patient was taken to the operating room for exploration. At operation, a small discrete purulent collection was noted deep to the fourth sternocostal joint and wide debridement was undertaken with wound vac placement. Operative cultures revealed S. Oranienburg. Sensitivities for this isolate included ampicillin, ceftriaxone and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. These isolates were not genetically compared to the blood sample taken from the bacteremia episode. The patient received IV ceftriaxone through a peripheral line for 6 weeks following his surgery. The wound closed within a month, and the patient made a full recovery several months after his surgery. Of note, the patient did not have positive stool cultures at any point during his illness.