A 62-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with decompensated liver cirrhosis secondary to hepatitis C virus infection in 2002. He was hospitalized because of HE several times during 2004.
In November 2004, the patient was admitted to the emergency department because of personality changes that developed four hours after a lot of vomiting. After admission, loss of consciousness and respiratory distress occurred. He had a history of surgical operation to the right kidney due to nephrolithiasis approximately 29 years previously. Medications before admission included propranolol, aldactone, lactulose and ursodeoxycholic acid. Physical examination on admission indicated a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, heart rate 68 beats/minute and respiratory rate 24/min. There was mild jaundice, fetor hepaticus, splenomegaly (3 cm below costal margin) and a hernial sac about 20 cm in diameter at the right lumbar incision, reducible with difficulty . After administering first aid, the patient was transferred to the internal medicine ward.
Admission laboratory tests were as follows: hemoglobin 11.6 g/dl, leukocytes 4,000/mm3, platelets 49,000/mm3, sodium 133 mEq/l, potassium 2.5 mEq/l, glucose 115 mg/dl, creatinine 0.7 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase 220 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 18 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 30 U/l, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 20 U/l, total bilirubin 4 mg/dl, direct bilirubin 2.1 mg/dl, total protein 5.7 g/dl, albumin 2.2 mg/dl, activated partial thromboplastin time 25 sec, prothrombin time: 15 sec, and international normalized ratio (INR) 1.2. The plasma ammonia level on admission was 422 μg/dl (normal range 25 to 94 μg/dl). His Child-Pugh score was 10 (Child’s class C). The model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score was 14.
Nasogastric suction was performed and approximately 2,000 ml dark green bile aspirated. The patient received intravenous 40 mEq of potassium chloride (at a rate of 20 mEq/hour) over a period of 2 hours in the emergency department. Thereafter, intravenous potassium supplements in saline and in dextrose solution were given and an enema containing lactulose and ampicillin was given twice a day for 10 days. The patient recovered consciousness after the correction of the hypokalemia. Subsequently, the previous drug therapy was re-established.
Plain abdominal radiography taken in the upright position demonstrated no air-fluid levels, suggesting small bowel obstruction. Abdominal ultrasonography showed parenchymal inhomogeneity of the liver with irregular margins, splenomegaly (with a craniocaudal diameter of 157 mm), a large splenic vein, and a hernial sac sized 21 × 13 × 9.5 cm located in the right lumbar region. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 6.5 cm fascial defect and mesenteric fatty tissue and bowel as the content of the hernial sac but with no sign of incarceration . A barium-contrast study of the small intestine showed that the hernial sac contained gastric antrum, duodenum and proximal jejunum . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed straight, small-sized (F1) varices over the lower third of the esophagus and food retention, despite the patient fasting for at least 12 hours. Furthermore, a decentralization and deviation of the pylorus and antrum were observed.
The condition of the patient was discussed with the general surgeons. Repair of the hernia was not recommended because of the high risk of general anesthesia and operation and the high rate of postoperative mortality in patients with cirrhosis.
After two weeks, we observed a second episode of HE precipitated by a large volume of vomiting (approximately 2000 ml). Hypokalemia was again evident, and the patient lost consciousness, necessitating intravenous potassium administration. Three similar episodes were observed during the hospitalization period. During all of these episodes, his serum potassium concentration fell rapidly following a large volume of vomiting and the hernia sac collapsed. When the hernia sac was reduced, copious amount of bilious fluid flowed from the nasogastric tube.
shows the neurological and laboratory findings of all hepatic encephalopathy episodes observed during the hospital stay.
The patient was discharged 10 weeks after admission and he died 15 months later.