Our patient is an 8-year-old boy. At his first admission, his complaint was being hit to the stomach by the handlebar while riding bicycle 24 h before admission. He was admitted to the Department of Pediatric Surgery after 1 day of abdominal pain with vomiting. He did not receive any special treatment before admission. Physical examination showed abdominal tenderness under the xiphoid process, mild local muscle tension, no rebound pain, a soft rest of the abdomen, and normal bowel sounds. Abdominal CT showed that the tail of the pancreas was thickened, lumpy high-density shadows could be seen near the tail of the pancreas, and patchy isodensity shadows could be seen around it, which suggested the possibility of hematocele and exudation. Blood amylase was high at a value of 206.0 U/L, and urine amylase was 1,193.0 U/L. Therefore, closed abdominal injury and pancreatic injury were diagnosed preliminarily. After admission, the patient was given conservative treatment, namely, eating prohibition gastrointestinal decompression, flucloxacillin to prevent infection, aminocaproic acid to control bleeding, famotidine and somatostatin to inhibit acid and enzyme, and intravenous nutritional support. The boy had good health, with regular vaccinations and no history of exposure to infectious diseases. There is no genetic disease in his family.
On the third day after admission, abdominal CT showed that there was an injury in the body and tail of the pancreas, accompanied by hematoma formation and multiple exudative changes around the pancreas, and the hematoma had grown. Then, conservative treatment was continued for 3 weeks. Finally, abdominal CT was reviewed and suggested PPC formation with a maximum cross size of ~6.5 cm × 6.8 cm, accompanied by a small amount of peripheral exudation and effusion . The patient developed significant abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting because of the compression of the cyst on the stomach wall. We considered that the PPC was too large to absorb and shrink by itself, so endoscopic ultrasonography-guided cyst puncture and drainage of the pseudocyst through the gastric wall was performed. The boy and his parents agreed and supported our treatment plan. During the operation, endoscopic ultrasound entered the stomach and found that the gastric wall was edematous, and the mucosa at the posterior wall of the gastric body was compressed. Ultrasound showed that there was a cystic area in the body and tail of the pancreas, with a size of 5.8 cm × 6.2 cm. The echo-free zone existed in the area, with a slightly high echo in the shape of a mass, a weak echo in the shape of a floating dot, and no blood flow signal in the area . Under the guidance of ultrasound Doppler, the blood vessels were avoided, a 19 G puncture needle was punched on the cystic area, and the brown liquid was pumped back. The guide wire was indwelled inside the needle into the cyst cavity, and the needle was withdrawn. A three-cavity sphincter incision was performed along the guide wire, and a 10 Fr dilated probe was used to expand the puncture site. A large amount of brown liquid was seen flowing out, and a second guide wire was inserted along the dilated probe. The probe rod was withdrawn, and the puncture channel between the stomach and the cyst was expanded to 15 mm by using a progressively dilated water sac along the guide wire. The dilated water sac was withdrawn, and two double pigtail stents with a diameter of 7 Fr and a length of 5 cm were placed in the cyst cavity along the guide wire. The other end was placed in the stomach cavity. A nasal cyst tube with a diameter of 7 F was placed in the cyst along the other guide wire, and the catheter was extracted from the nasal cavity . Postoperative recovery was smooth, and no special discomfort was reported.
However, on the 8th day after surgery, the child vomited blood, and the blood clot was bright red with a volume of ~220 ml. Then, he vomited blood twice again, ~220 ml and 180 ml, respectively. Therefore, severe acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage was considered, and an emergency gastroscopy was performed. Gastroscopy showed a large amount of bloody gastric juice and old blood clots in the gastric cavity. No obvious active bleeding was found at the puncture and anastomosis, and the stent and drainage tubes were in a good position. After the blood clot was cleaned up by foreign body forceps, a 1.5-cm long malformed blood vessel was observed in the submucosa of the greater gastric curvature, with a blue surface and much blood oozing. The blood vessel was clamped by a titanium clip. Then, endoscopy detection was continued to the duodenum, and no obvious bleeding or oozing was found. As a result, the intraoperative supplementary diagnosis was gastric Dieulafoy's disease . Postoperative abdominal CT showed that cystic lesions in the tail of the pancreas were significantly reduced, with tubular shadows and little air accumulation in the corresponding area, and a small amount of exudate could be seen. Abdominal CT was re-examined 10 days later . There were multiple strip-shaped extremely high-density shadows in the tail of the pancreas and a few surrounding strips with slightly lower density, and the surrounding exudate was less than before.
The patient was discharged half a month after surgery. In total, 3 months later, the patient returned to the hospital for transendoscopic stent removal . Under endoscopy, the gastric mucosa was smooth, and peristalsis was good. The titanium clip was well fixed in the greater gastric curvature without bleeding or other lesions. Two pairs of pigtail stents were extracted from the posterior wall of the stomach. The stent was removed with a snare device, and the operation was successful without bleeding or oozing at the puncture site. After half a year of follow-up, the child recovered smoothly.