A 65-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 2-day history of sudden-onset headache, weakness, visual disturbance, and a background of unintentional weight loss. He experienced gait-disturbance, difficulty with word-finding, and left-sided visual impairment. He had associated nausea and vomiting. His wife describes confusion, muddled speech, and weakness. He had no history of head trauma preceding the neurological disturbance.
A systemic review revealed a 3-month history of an unintentional 15 kg weight loss.
Past medical history included: migraines in his 20s, with his last episode 40 years ago; type 2 diabetes mellitus diagnosed in his 20s (T2DM), treated with Vildagliptin and metformin since 2012, previously diet controlled; hypertension treated with Cilazapril; a left-sided cataract and progressive right wet macular degeneration.
On physical examination, significant findings were a heart rate of 69 beats per minute, blood pressure of 177/95 mmHg, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, oxygen saturations of 97%, while breathing room air, and a temperature of 36.7°C. He had no significant peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis and was clinically euvolaemic. On cardiovascular examination, he had a new ejection systolic murmur heard loudest over the aortic region, radiating to the carotids, a clear chest on auscultation and no pitting oedema. On neurological examination, he had a left-sided hemianopia with left visual inattention. No focal deficit in tone, power, or sensation was identified. Left plantar reflex was up-going and he had impaired left-sided coordination characterized by past pointing and dysdiadochokinesia.
Initial investigations showed blood results with no remarkable features other than a creatinine of 120 µmol/L and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 54 mL/min/1.73 m2, with a normal white cell count of 8.8 × 109/L and a C-reactive protein of <5 mg/L. His blood sugar was 9.7 mmol/L with serum ketones of 0.8 mmol/L, procalcitonin was negative.
Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia at rate of 105 beats per minute, otherwise normal. His chest X-ray was normal.
Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head was performed which showed no acute intracranial findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without IV contrast and magnetic resonance angiography of the head and neck with contrast showed a small foci of right occipital lobe restricted diffusion in keeping with embolic infarction . Time-of-flight sequencing demonstrated unremarkable cerebral vasculature.
On Day 4 of admission, the patient had a reduction in level of consciousness with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3 requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. There was significant discordance between the relatively minor neuroimaging findings and the patient’s neurological status. Infectious/autoimmune encephalitis was considered in the differential diagnosis.
A cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) sample: including CSF protein study, Cryptococcus neoformans, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody, and a central nervous system polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screen were sent to query a cause for reduced consciousness. The CSF sample showed a raised protein level of 1.35 g/L (0.15–0.40) and glucose of 6.9 mmol/L (2.8–4.4). NMDA receptor antibodies were negative.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal left ventricular systolic function with a subjective ejection fraction of >55%, and suspicious lesions on the aortic and mitral valves. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed which identified an 8 × 5 mm echogenic vegetation on the pulmonary valve and vegetations on the mitral and aortic valve . These findings were in keeping with the clinical finding of a new ejection systolic murmur heard loudest in the aortic region.
Intravenous amoxicillin 2 g Q4H and acyclovir were started after the TTE. After discussion with the infectious disease unit, ceftriaxone 2 g Q12h and was added while awaiting blood cultures. These returned negative.
A panel of bloods involving; antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-rheumatoid factor, HIV screen, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and CA19-9 were sent; all returned negative. Anti-neuronal antibodies were sent including anti-hu, Ri, Yo, Ma1, Ma2, anti-cv2/CRMP, amphiphysin, sox-1, zic-4, Tr, Tritin, and recoverin paraneoplastic antibody; all were negative.
Computed tomography chest/abdomen/pelvis was performed looking for neoplastic disease. A 61 × 63 × 70 mm right renal heterogeneous soft-tissue mass with a large necrotic centre was identified that was consistent with a right renal cell cancer without evidence of metastasis . Antibiotics were stopped on Day 10 of admission after CT result showing renal mass, multiple negative blood cultures, and TOE confirming valvular lesions, supporting a differential diagnosis of marantic endocarditis.
On Day 11, the patient underwent nephrectomy, which was uncomplicated. An unfractionated heparin infusion was started on Day 2 post-operation, switching to therapeutic dose of low-molecular weight heparin after 24 h. The patient rapidly regained consciousness and returned to baseline neurological function post-nephrectomy. On Day 13 of admission, he was alert, orientated, and GCS 15 with no residual neurology.
On discharge, he was bridged onto warfarin for on-going anticoagulation. On a follow-up TOE, 2 and 4 months later the lesions steadily resolved . Anticoagulation was stopped at 4 months.