A 72-year-old man presented with sudden onset of loss of consciousness after chest discomfort and numbness in his left upper limb. His medical history included hypertension and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and he had taken rivaroxaban. His blood pressure was 150/101 mmHg without any significant difference between right and left limbs. The Japan coma scale was III-100, and the Glasgow Coma Scale was 8 (E1V2M5) on the admission. His National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 29. Twelve-lead electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 78 beats/min and ST elevation at II, III, and aVF and ST depression at V2– V6 . The head computed tomography (CT) image showed no intracranial hemorrhages , but the hyperdense arterial sign was observed at the basilar artery , which suggested the basilar artery occlusion. The contrast-enhanced chest CT did not indicate aortic dissection nor cardiac tamponade . The platelet count was 13.2 × 104/μL, and D-dimer was 7.5 mg/dL, and the other laboratory data were almost within normal limits.
The patient was diagnosed with CCI, and a multidisciplinary discussion was done. Due to the current use of rivaroxaban and high NIH score, he was not considered as a candidate for intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (IV-tPA) treatment. We immediately performed coronary angiography for salvage of the myocardial ischemic area, and it revealed distal occlusion in the posterior descending branch of the right coronary artery . Mild stenotic lesions suggestive of atherosclerotic pathology were observed in some parts [ and ]. We considered that overall myocardial perfusion was sufficient and that immediate further investigation on stroke was needed, so percutaneous coronary intervention was not performed. Magnetic resonance imaging was subsequently performed, and the diffusion-weighted image showed hyperintense lesions in the region of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery [ and ]. Magnetic resonance angiography did not reveal the flow of the basilar artery, and severe stenotic lesions of the major arteries were scarcely observed . Therefore, we diagnosed him with cardioembolic stroke. We considered percutaneous endovascular recanalization of the basilar artery, but the fatal hemorrhagic risk of the ischemic cerebellum was deeply concerned. At that time, the patient’s Japan coma scale was improved as I-1 and his NIH score as four. Due to the rapid improvement of stroke symptoms, we started medical treatment with 10,000 unfractionated heparin administration per day. He started rehabilitation, and his blood pressure was around 140/90 mmHg without any vasopressors.
After 38 h from the onset, his consciousness level was depressed as Japan coma scale I-3. The head CT showed hydrocephalus due to cerebellar edema and hemorrhagic infarction of the ischemic cerebellum, which compressed the aqueduct . We stopped the heparin administration and performed cerebral ventricular drainage under local anesthesia to control hydrocephalus. External decompression for cerebellar edema and hemorrhagic infarction was subsequently planned, but he suddenly presented shock after intubation by an anesthesiologist. After stabilizing circulatory dynamics with adrenaline and noradrenaline, the head CT showed improvement in hydrocephalus . The chest CT showed cardiac tamponade , considered as the cause of shock. Emergency pericardiotomy was immediately performed to allow the pericardial fluid to drain . The pericardial fluid was bloody and over 500 mL. A left mural and atrial appendage thrombi were observed. There were no apparent bleeding sources, aortic dissections, nor myocardial ruptures intraoperatively, suggesting that his cardiac tamponade seemed idiopathic or to be resulted from oozing type cardiac rupture due to AMI. The blood pressure gradually increased, and the patient no longer needed any vasopressors. Seven days after pericardiotomy, his Japan coma scale was III-100. He has been undertaking rehabilitation.