A 75-year-old woman was scheduled for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to a chronic total occlusion (CTO) on the right coronary artery (RCA). The patient was known with hypertension and dyslipidemia. She had impaired renal function with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 35 ml/min/1.73 m2. The patient had a transient ischemic attack in 2018 and was diagnosed with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in 2020 after which she was started on direct oral anticoagulation. In 2020 she was diagnosed with sarcoidosis with involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes. There were no signs of pulmonary involvement.
In 2021 she was diagnosed with ischemic heart disease. A coronary angiogram showed 3-vessel disease including a CTO on the RCA. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 40%. Coronary artery bypass graft surgery was planned. However, besides the left internal mammary artery she had no vessels suitable for bypass grafts. Thus, only the left anterior descending artery was grafted. In March 2023, she was treated with PCI of the left main and circumflex artery because of symptoms in spite of optimal medical treatment.
A O-15-H2O positron emission tomography scan showed severe hypo-perfusion in the RCA territory. With a Seattle Angina Questionnaire Quality of Life score of 50 out of 100, she fulfilled the criteria for inclusion in the Ischemia CTO trial and she was randomized to PCI of the RCA CTO . Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a long QT interval (QTc corrected by Bazett's and Fridericia's formula of 521 ms and 495 ms, respectively) which was known for several years . The patient was not on any medications known to cause QT interval prolongation.
A coronary angiography showed a severe mid-LAD stenosis, a good stent result in the left main and circumflex artery and a good left internal mammary artery to the LAD . A dual coronary angiogram showed a short heavily calcified mid-RCA CTO and long segments proximal and distal to the CTO with significant disease. The occlusion was passed with retrograde wiring. The RCA was predilated with a 2.0 × 20 mm compliant balloon followed by a 2.5 × 15 mm non-compliant balloon before imaging with intravascular ultrasound. Intravascular ultrasound showed areas with circular calcification throughout the diseased segment of the RCA. Thus, S-IVL with a 3.5 × 12 mm Shockwave balloon was planned. The first 70 impulses were delivered between the distal landing zone and just proximal to the CTO. After additional 5 impulses, the patient suddenly had VF and cardiac arrest. She was immediately defibrillated to sinus rhythm and recovered completely in less than two minutes. It was thought to be unlikely that VF was caused by the S-IVL. Thus, additional S-IVL was performed. However, after the very first of the subsequent impulses was given she had VF and cardiac arrest. Again, the patient was defibrillated and recovered. No further S-IVL impulses were given and the rest of the procedure was uneventful. The vessel was further predilated with NC-balloons and stented from the ostium to the posterior descending artery with a good final result . After the procedure, the ECGs recorded during the procedure were reviewed. There were several episodes with ventricular capture beats . It is also clear that both episodes of VF were initiated by the R-on-T phenomenon caused by the superimposition of a ventricular capture beat on the T wave of the preceding beat . During and after the procedure, the patient´s heart rate was around 60 beats per minute (bpm) which was lower than her normal heart rate of 80–90 bpm. Post procedure ECG showed sinus rhythm, 60 bpm and a very long QT interval, QTc corrected by Bazett's and Fridericia's formula of 534 ms and 537 ms, respectively . Blood test showed normal electrolytes including normal plasma potassium, magnesium and calcium.
Because of the post procedure ECG with very long QT interval, she stayed in hospital overnight for heart rhythm monitoring. There were no further arrhythmias. She was discharged the next day. The ECG at discharge was identical to the pre procedure ECG .