A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of an unruptured right ICA aneurysm that was detected incidentally on time-of-flight MR angiography . Cerebral digital substruction angiography revealed an unruptured aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 4.3 mm at the supraclinoid portion of the right ICA , and three-dimensional rotational angiography demonstrated that a DMCA and the AChA originated from the dome . Additionally, fusion three-dimensional computer graphics integrating MR imaging and digital substruction angiography revealed that the DMCA passed through the sylvian fissure along the M1 segment of the MCA and perfused the anterior temporal lobe . The fusion three-dimensional computer graphics was reconstructed using GRID 1.1 (Kompath Inc., Tokyo, Japan), utilizing the multi-threshold technique, as described previously (–). In summary, preoperative images were the output from the DICOM (digital imaging communication in medicine) format; they were imported into the image processing software GRID, which implements automatic registration of multiple imaging modalities. The multi-threshold is a method for extracting both thick and thin blood vessels with different threshold values. Microvessels can be visualized with less noise using this method . The patient had a family history of subarachnoid hemorrhage. The aneurysm increased to 4.3 mm after 10 years of follow up; it was 3 mm at the time of detection. Therefore, we determined that an intervention was required. The risk of occlusion of the arteries branching from the dome was estimated to be high if endovascular treatment was performed. In order to preserve the incorporated branch arteries, we decided to perform clipping. A right frontotemporal craniotomy was performed using a transsylvian approach to the aneurysm. Intraoperative findings showed that the DMCA and the AChA branched from the dome of the ICA aneurysm . Two titanium clips were combined and applied to occlude most part of the aneurysm, while confirming the patency of the DMCA and the AChA . Aneurysm obliteration and the patency of the parent and branch vessels were confirmed using intraoperative microvascular Doppler ultrasonography and indocyanine green video angiography . Postoperatively, there were no neurological deficits or ischemic lesions on MR imaging.