A 42-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) post-scuba diving in a quarry. He has a past medical history of depression, an ex-smoker, drinks 32 units of alcohol per week, in a same-sex marriage, and a body mass index of 39.
He had 2 weeks ago been abroad scuba diving multiple times out at sea at depths of 40 m, after which he flew back to the United Kingdom (UK). A day prior to attending the ED, he had dived three times to depths of 40 m for 30 min each time in a quarry in the UK. Shortly after diving, within 30 min, he experienced symptoms of left arm weakness, confusion, pain in the left ear, and bilateral paraesthesia of the hands. He was taken to a hyperbaric oxygen recompression chamber (HBOC) in Rugby, after which he showed signs of improvement.
He was discharged home by the diving doctor requiring only some assistance with walking. The next morning, he became confused, agitated, feverish, and clammy. He was brought to the ED where his Glasgow Coma Score was 13 and he had a left upper limb weakness. A computed tomography (CT) was conducted of the head. His haemoglobin was 222 g/L, haematocrit was 63%, white cells 28 × 109/L, neutrophils 23 × 109/L, C-reactive protein 81 mg/L, and a mild acute kidney injury. He was haemodynamically stable and was commenced on 1000 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride over 1 h, followed by a maintenance of 3 L over 24 h. After discussion with the diving medicine doctor, he was taken to a HBOC for the second time, but to no avail.
He was admitted and treated for an ischaemic stroke and meningitis with empirical antibiotics. A magnetic resonance scan (MRI) was conducted followed by vasculitis screen. During his stay, his oxygen saturations dropped to 91% on room air and a sinus tachycardia of 120 beats per minute with a blood gas analysis showing a type 1 respiratory failure. A CT-pulmonary angiography was performed, after which his saturations had self-resolved. A bubble echocardiogram was conducted after identifying a heart murmur. Lumbar punctures were later taken as symptoms persisted. Blood cultures were also taken.
On day 2 of admission, his confusion had resolved; he was left with a residual left side arm weakness 4/5 power and dysmetria on the same side. He was advised to never scuba dive again.