A 71-year-old woman presented to The First People’s Hospital of Changzhou with a >1-month history of bloody stool. She demonstrated normal consciousness and arrived at the hospital on foot. Her vital signs were stable (blood pressure, 120/80 mmHg; heart rate, 80 bpm; and SpO2, 98%). Electronic colonoscopy suggested a rectal mass in the anal canal line within 2 cm of the anus, occupying about one-quarter of the circumference. Pathological biopsy suggested adenocarcinoma. Laparoscopic radical resection of rectal cancer was planned. The patient stated that she had no other medical conditions except for a history of cholecystectomy 10 years previously. Laboratory test results showed positive fecal occult blood, tumor marker CA72-4 level of 7.79 U/mL (reference, <7 U/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen level of 6.51 ng/mL (reference, <5 ng/mL). The patient’s hemoglobin level was 110.0 g/L (reference, 115.0–150.0 g/L) and red blood cell count was 3.79 × 1012/L (reference, 3.80–5.10 × 1012/L). The results of both chest X-ray and electrocardiogram examinations were normal.
On the second day after surgery, the patient experienced chest tightness, shortness of breath, and slight pain in the left side of her chest. Her blood pressure decreased from 125/89 to 103/75 mmHg, SpO2 decreased to 90%, and heart rate was 90 bpm. The patient was agitated. Chest auscultation revealed weakened breath sounds on the left and normal breath sounds on the right. Arterial blood gas analysis was performed immediately. The results showed a PCO2 of 75 mmHg and PO2 of 65 mmHg. The patient’s hemoglobin level was 97.0 g/L and red blood cell count was 3.12 × 1012/L. Oxygen was provided to the patient through a facemask; although she was able to breathe spontaneously without pain, she experienced some pain in the left side of her chest. Her SpO2 gradually increased to 95% to 96%.
Emergency chest X-ray and computed tomography demonstrated left pleural effusion and left pneumothorax. A chest tube was immediately placed in the left hemithorax. A total of 550 mL of blood and air were discharged from the chest tube. Because the patient’s chest tightness, shortness of breath, and other symptoms were improved and vital signs were relatively stable, conservative treatment was continued with fluid infusion and chest drainage.
The chest tube discharged 850 mL of blood and air 3 hours after the initiation of conservative treatment. However, the patient developed shortness of breath and signs of shock (blood pressure, 89/60 mmHg; heart rate, 110 bpm). In addition, a chest radiograph suggested an increase in the amount of left pleural effusion. Her red blood cell count decreased to 2.95 × 1012/L and hemoglobin level decreased to 87 g/L.
The patient’s vital signs were stable after blood transfusion and fluid resuscitation. She then underwent emergency video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) to control the progression of her condition. We found that the chest tube was blocked by blood clots. A large number of blood clots and a large amount of blood were found and removed after the chest tube was pulled out . After evacuation of the blood clots and blood, we discovered left lung tip rupture with bleeding and adhesive band fracture at the top of the left thoracic cavity. The ruptured lung tissue was removed and electrocoagulation was performed at the adhesion band to stop the bleeding. Hemostasis was easily achieved by clipping . After the operation, the patient received fluid resuscitation and anti-infection treatments. The chest drainage tube was removed on the third postoperative day. Repeated chest X-ray examination revealed good lung recruitment . The patient’s blood hemoglobin level increased to 99 g/L, and her red blood cell count increased to 3.55 × 1012/L. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day. Follow-up was carried out by telephone calls. At the time of this writing, the patient had developed no recurrence of SHP or any other complications. Histopathology of the excised specimens was consistent with bullae with emphysematous changes and hemorrhage. No malignancy was present.
The Ethics Committee of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University approved this study. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.