A 57-year-old male touched a mass in his testis incidentally by himself a month ago, without pain, redness and swelling or urinary irritation symptoms. There was no evidence of family history, tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) or tumor elsewhere on comprehensive and systematic work-up. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic cavity revealed a 10 mm diameter mass in the right testis . No distant organ or lymph node metastases were detected. Radical orchiectomy was performed. Grossly, the mass was well demarcated from the surrounding testicular tissue and had a solid, yellow-tan and fleshy cut surface. Microscopically, the tumor showed limited infiltration into the surrounding testicular tissue. The tumor mainly displayed nested or sheet-like architecture separated by delicate fibrovascular septa . Many of the tumor cells exhibited marked nuclear atypia and pleomorphism , significant variation in cell size and multinucleation. Multinucleate giant cells and spider-like cells were readily seen, with abundant granular epsinophilic cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. A few giant cells had coarse cytoplasmic stippling (basophilic to purple cytoplasmic granules). The tumor cells in the local region of the tumor had clear-to-granular cytoplasm, distinct cell borders and round or oval nuclei with small visible nucleoli . Thick stromal collagen bands could be seen between some neoplastic cell nests. Melanin pigment was focally identified. The mitotic count was up to 2 per 10 high-power fields, and necrosis was not found.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for cathepsin-K , HMB45 and TFE3 and completely negative for PAX8, AE1/AE3, EMA, CD10, CK7, CK20, calretinin, inhibin, Melan A, S100, WT1, SMA, desmin, MyoD1, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56, CD68, D2-40, hepatocyte, GS and SALL4. The Ki-67 index was approximately 5%. The histomorphological findings and immunohistochemical profile were found to be consistent with Xp11 translocation PEComa.
To confirm the presence of a TFE3 gene rearrangement, the break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The case exhibited TFE3 rearrangement with Xp11.2 translocation. The fusion probe assay using probes centromeric to SFPQ and telomeric to TFE3 revealed fusion signals , thus confirming the diagnosis of Xp11 translocation PEComa.
Since the tumor was so small and the cut margin of the resected sample was tumor-free, adjuvant chemotherapy was not planned. Although the follow-up time was relatively limited, the patient was alive and well without local recurrence and distant metastasis 18 months after the surgery.