A 52-year-old man with no particular medical history developed sudden-onset left occipital headache, dizziness, dysphagia, and right-sided hemiparesthesia and was transported to another hospital. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a left lateral medullary infarction due to the left VAD, and he was admitted to that hospital. Conservative treatment was performed, and the patient had an uneventful course, but at his and his family’s request, he was transferred to our hospital 4 days after onset.
On admission to our hospital, head MRI was performed again. The MRI findings were the same as those observed at the other hospital; that is, a left lateral medullary infarction due to the left VAD was observed, and there were no abnormal findings in the right vertebral artery [ and ]. Antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents were not administered, and conservative treatment with administration of a free radical scavenger and mild volume expansion was performed. Because his blood pressure remained at approximately 130/80 mmHg, antihypertensive agents were not administered. He had an uneventful course with no exacerbation of symptoms.
On day 9 after onset, the patient developed sudden disturbance of consciousness and was found lying on the side of his bed by a nurse. Head computed tomography (CT) showed SAH, mainly in the posterior cranial fossa . Three-dimensional CT angiography revealed a dissecting aneurysm with active extravasation of contrast agent in the right vertebral artery distal to the posterior inferior cerebellar artery . Under general anesthesia, emergency internal coil trapping was performed for the dissecting aneurysm of the right vertebral artery [ and ]. The left vertebral artery angiography after internal trapping showed moderate stenosis of the left vertebral artery corresponding to the dissection site, but the basilar artery was visualized in antegrade with no delay of blood flow, endovascular treatment for this stenotic portion was not performed . After the procedure, there were no ischemic symptoms due to vasospasm after SAH. The patient’s condition improved gradually, and he was discharged with a modified Rankin Scale score of 1. The stenosis of the left vertebral artery due to dissection had resolved on head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) performed approximately 1 month after onset . Up to the present, approximately 2 years after onset, no new dissections have occurred in the vertebral artery on either side.