A 48-year-old male patient presented with dyslexia, agraphia, and homonymous hemianopia. Post-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneously enhanced lesion in the left temporo-occipital lobe . The tumor was subtotally resected and carmustine wafers were implanted into the surgical cavity. The pathological diagnosis was GBM, IDH-wildtype . Radiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions) with concomitant temozolomide therapy (75 mg/m2) was performed after surgery . One month after completion of chemoradiotherapy, wound infection was observed. The wound was debrided and treated with meropenem antibiotic therapy .
Three months after completion of chemoradiotherapy, MRI revealed an increase in the size of the contrast-enhanced tumor. A second craniotomy was therefore performed and the lesions were completely resected . Thereafter, the patient was treated with adjuvant temozolomide (150 mg/m2) and bevacizumab (10 mg/kg) every 4 weeks. Follow-up included laboratory assessments every 4 weeks and MRI every 2 months. The patient had a febrile episode 2 months after the second surgery. Blood tests revealed mildly elevated CRP (1.17 mg/dL) and white blood cell (WBC) count (8760/µL). Sputum, urine, and blood cultures performed to identify the source of fever were negative, and full-body computed tomography (CT) revealed no source of the fever. There were no signs of wound infection, but there was a subcutaneous effusion, which was punctured, and culture tests detected Serratia marcescens. Since this bacterium was previously found in the postoperative wound infections, the patient was treated with meropenem for 2 weeks, followed by cefepime for another 2 weeks, after which the fever resolved. The patient received prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and temozolomide maintenance therapy.
The patient’s chronological clinical course is shown in Fig. . An increase in CRP level was identified 20 months after the second surgery and continued to increase slowly without a concurrent increase in WBC count. Twenty-nine months after surgery, CRP was 5.29 mg/dL and body temperature was 38℃. Simultaneously, CRP-albumin ratio increased and lymphocyte–CRP ratio decreased. However, there were no signs of infection of the surgical wound or elsewhere. Chest CT performed to investigate the source of the fever revealed swelling of the supraclavicular, mediastinal, and hilar lymph nodes and lymph node biopsy was performed. We suspected secondary lymphoma associated with temozolomide because the patient had received temozolomide treatment for more than 2 years (28 therapy cycles) and serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor was elevated to 1031 U/mL. Despite the prolonged temozolomide therapy and the associated risk, maintenance temozolomide therapy was continued based on the patient’s request. However, the pathological findings were negative for lymphoma, and the patient was diagnosed with lymph node metastasis of glioblastoma . Lymph node metastasis progressed to the lungs, and the patient received palliative irradiation (20 Gy in 4 fractions) to the mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient died 4 months after diagnosis of metastasis (38 months after surgery) due to respiratory failure and pneumonia. The intracranial tumor had not recurred by the final follow-up MRI performed 37 months after the initial surgery .