A 29-year-old woman was transferred to our university dental hospital complaining of swelling of the right mandible. She had a history of enucleation of cementoblastoma associated with the third molar at the same site 5 years previously . A panoramic radiograph showed a radiopaque mass fused to the tooth root and surrounded by a clear radiolucent rim . Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) demonstrated expansion and perforation of the cortical bone . Macroscopically, the adhesion of the mass to the tooth root was confirmed . Histologically, although the staining property was not good due to over-decalcification, cementoblast-like plump cells around the rim of radiated hard tissue were observed .
In the current lesion, a panoramic radiograph showed a large mass with heterogeneous radiopacity in the edentulous postoperative region . CBCT images demonstrated multicentric masses, measuring 12 × 11 × 10 mm (buccal side) and 29 × 35 × 21 mm (lingual side), surrounded by thin radiolucent rims . Expansion, thinning, and perforation of the cortical bone were observed. These clinical and radiographic findings suggested a possibility of recurrent cementoblastoma. However, a suspicion for other possibilities, including malignancy, remained histologically due to the insufficient sampling of the incisional biopsy, which contained only a few atypical plump cells.
Under general anesthesia, mandibular segmentectomy and reconstruction using a scapular flap were performed, and the specimen was subjected to histopathological examination. After formalin fixation, the lesion macroscopically appeared as a well-demarcated, brown, and bony hard mass . Histological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed that the lesion mainly consisted of osteocementum-like hard tissue with basophilic, irregular reversal lines. The outer border of the masses was well-defined; thin fibrous tissue was observed between the lesion and the surrounding tissue despite the presence of cortical bone perforation. . The hard tissue was rimmed with osteoblast- or cementoblast-like polygonal or plump tumor cells . The tumor-cell size ranges from 10 to 30 μm in width. Some of the plump cells were binucleated. The cellular atypia of tumoral cells, showing anisokaryosis, hyperchromasia, and bizarre nuclei, was often outstanding, but mitosis was not observed. . The osteoclast-like multinucleated cells were scattered. There were several clusters consisting of aggregated atypical cells and multinucleated cells . Tumor infiltration into the surrounding tissue was not observed. The fibrous tissue between trabeculae included rich blood vessels.
Immunostaining for RUNX2, a marker of the cells in both osteogenesis and cementogenesis, was positive in some spindle and small tumor cells. Tumor cells were positive for c-FOS, a marker of osteoblastoma and cementoblastoma . Ki-67 immunostaining revealed its low proliferative activity (< 1%) . Immunostaining results for MDM2 and CDK4 were negative. These results were consistent with those for benign tumors. The multinucleated cells were positive for CD68 and TRAP . Atypical cells in the clusters were partially weakly positive for c-FOS but negative for RUNX2, CD68, and TRAP.
A final diagnosis of recurrent cementoblastoma was made based on radiological and histological findings.
A follow-up CT scan performed 7 months postoperatively showed no evidence of recurrence, and the patient is making satisfactory progress. A half-yearly follow-up has been scheduled.