A 74-year-old female with no significant past medical history presented with complaints of headache in conjunction with speech and memory problems for approximately one month. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an enhancing cystic lesion in the left temporal lobe. A partial resection of the left temporal mass, revealed a malignant neoplasm on frozen section and on final pathological evaluation, a diagnosis of GBM was made. Immunohistochemical results showed positive staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and no evidence of positive staining for cytokeratin. The patient received adjuvant external beam radiation therapy.
Approximately nine months later the patient returned with both speech and short-term memory problems. MRI revealed tumor recurrence in the left temporal area. Stereotactic biopsy demonstrated a necrotic tumor consistent with GBM on frozen section, a diagnosis confirmed on permanent sections. The stereotactic biopsy was followed by intraoperative injection of the chemotherapeutic agent DTI-015 . Three months later, the patient returned with a 2.0 cm subcutaneous mass in the left parietal scalp, approximately six centimeters from the closest postoperative scar. Fine needle aspiration biopsy of the left parietal scalp mass revealed a GBM. The lesion was excised a month later with histological confirmation of the diagnosis. Following excision of the scalp mass, a repeat MRI documented progression of the primary tumor. The patient died of pulmonary embolism one month after excision of the scalp mass.
FNA biopsy of the palpable left parietal subcutaneous scalp mass was performed by a pathologist, using a 23 gauge needle. Four smears and one cell block were prepared. The air dried smears were stained with a modified Wright stain (Diff-Quik®); the 95% ethanol fixed smears were stained with the Papanicolaou stain.
The smears were abundantly cellular with atypical cells arranged in loosely cohesive clusters, ranging from 5 to 40 cells per cluster, with overlapping nuclei . Scattered atypical mitoses were also present . Morphologically, the cells were polygonal to spindle-shaped with increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios, moderate nuclear pleomorphism, coarsely clumped hyperchromatic chromatin, irregular nuclear membranes, and distinct nucleoli. Binucleated and multinucleated cells were also noted. A few scattered intranuclear inclusions were present . Fibrillary processes extending from the atypical cells were apparent. A tumor diathesis consisting of neutrophils, degenerated cells, necrotic debris, a few lymphocytes, and bare nuclei made up the background. The cell block showed similar findings as well as characteristic necrotic foci surrounded by palisading spindle-shaped atypical cells (geographic necrosis) . Immunohistochemically, the atypical cells displayed strong reactivity for GFAP and vimentin with no reactivity for CD45, cytokeratin, and HMB-45, supporting the diagnosis of GBM. The histological sections from the tumor excised a month later verified the FNA findings of GBM .