A 20-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with nodular sclerosing HD stage III-SA with an International Prognostic Score (IPS) of 2 with cervical, supraclavicular, axillary retroperitoneal lymph node localizations, with a bulky mediastinal mass and a splenic nodule on PET/CT with F18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). A response evaluation 8 months later after six cycles of Adriamycin® (doxorubicin), bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine with F18-FDG-PET/CT showed a major, both morphologic and metabolic, partial response with minimal focal metabolic activity in his left hilar region for which additional infranodal radiotherapy (in total 15×2Gy) on the mediastinal mass was given. Four months later, after radiotherapy the response evaluation by PET/CT revealed three metabolic active extranodal lesions in his left lung. Relapse of HD was histologically proven using CT-guided biopsy .
Salvage chemotherapy consisted of two cycles of cisplatinum, cytarabine, and dexamethasone (DHAP) and one cycle of etoposide, ifosfamide, and methotrexate (VIM), followed by ASCT with BEAM conditioning was proposed.
Response evaluation using interim F18-FDG-PET/CT, after one cycle of DHAP and VIM chemotherapy showed a partial metabolic response in his lung nodes, his maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) decreased from 12 and 15 in left upper and lower lobe respectively, to SUVmax 6 and 8.
New symmetrical intense FDG uptake in his adenoids (SUVmax 24), and in multiple bilateral cervical (SUVmax 10), axillary lymph nodes and in a lymph node within the high-right para-aorta (SUVmax 6.5) and a lower-right mesenteric lymph node, with furthermore diffuse increased splenic F18-FDG uptake (SUVmax 6) suggested rapidly progressive disease . However, the coincidence of both an extensive nodular relapse with a partial response of the extranodal lung lesions was regarded unlikely. Additional information obtained from the patient revealed he had recently met his first girlfriend. Additional virus serology tests showed EBV-specific immunoglobulin M antibodies and EBV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) copies in peripheral blood.
We hypothesized that the asymptomatic primary EBV infection was responsible for the extensive PET-positive lymphadenopathy with a concurrent partial response of HD after DHAP-VIM chemotherapy. After disappearance of EBV DNA copies the second DHAP chemotherapy cycle was given without flare-up of the infection.An interim PET/CT, 2 months after completion of the last DHAP chemotherapy and with absence of EBV DNA in peripheral blood showed metabolic activity in only one of the three lung lesions and only marginal increased activity in a (probably reactive) small mediastinal pre-aortal lymph node . After extensive discussion, he progressed to ASCT and subsequent BEAM conditioning chemotherapy. In the event of extrapulmonary disease progression, he will be considered for treatment with brentuximab vedotin (an antibody-drug conjugate directed to the protein CD30).