A 73-year-old man presented with a sore throat, hoarseness, and weight loss. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a 30-mm type 0-IIc lesion on the posterior wall of the cardia of the stomach with an estimated depth of the muscularis propria (T2). . An upper gastrointestinal series showed deformation of the posterior wall of the cardia, suggesting infiltration of the lesion into the muscularis propria (T2).
Biopsy showed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet-ring cells. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed an enlarged lymph node in the left subclavian region, and a positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) scan showed mild FDG accumulation in the same lymph node (SUV-max3.7), which was suspected as a Virchow metastasis. .
There were no other obvious lymph node or distant metastasis findings. The cervical lymph nodes were not palpable, and blood tests detected normal levels of tumor markers and other variables .
We suspected Virchow metastasis of gastric cancer and therefore performed a left subclavian lymph node biopsy to determine the treatment strategy. Because of the close location of the cervical blood vessels and the risk of recurrent nerve injury, it was judged that a biopsy under local anesthesia would be difficult and was performed under general anesthesia. The tumor was an elastic, firm, well-defined limbed mass, approximately 20 mm major axis, located on the left side of the esophagus, dorsal to the left carotid artery and jugular vein. The tumor was completely removed. Pathological findings showed eosinophilic spindle-shaped cells that exhibited bundled and intricate arrangements. Immunostaining revealed diffuse expression of S100, which is diagnostic of a schwannoma .
We, therefore, planned curative gastrectomy appropriate for the diagnosis of gastric cancer clinical stage I. One month after the biopsy, we performed laparoscopic proximal gastrectomy with D1 + dissection and double-tract reconstruction. Histopathological findings of the stomach were Type 2, por2 > tub2, pT3(SS), V1b, without detectable lymph node metastasis (pStage IIA) .
The patient's postoperative course was good, and he began oral nutritional intake on the fourth postoperative day and was discharged on the tenth postoperative day. As of the completion of this case report (9 months after surgery), there has been no obvious recurrence, and the patient is being followed as an outpatient.