A 57-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency room with severe precordial chest pressure radiating to the left jaw and arm and associated with dyspnea and nausea. The past medical history included gout and hypercholesterolemia for which he was treated with atorvastatin and allopurinol. He also was a chronic heavy smoker but denied history of alcohol or drug abuse.
The patient was in mild distress. Initial physical examination revealed blood pressure of 180/115 mmHg and heart rate of 96 beats/min with regular rhythm. Cardiac examination showed normal first and second heart sounds with no audible murmurs, rubs or gallops. He was given sublingual nitroglycerine with some relief of chest pain. A stat electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in leads V3-V6. He was given aspirin 325 mg orally, metoprolol 50 mg orally, clopidogrel 300 mg orally, atorvastatin 80 mg orally, a bolus of heparin 5000 units intravenously as well as nitroglycerine infusion at 25 mcg/min.
Emergent selective coronary angiography showed a 100% occlusion with a filling defect suggestive of thrombosis at the ostium of the first diagonal branch (D1) and a 70% stenosis of the mid-segment of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) at the D1 branching point (1,1,1 Medina classification). Balloon angioplasty was performed on the D1 lesion using Maverick 2 RX 2.0 × 12 balloon with maximum inflation pressure of 16 atm leading to reestablishment of blood flow through D1. Chest pain improved significantly and ST-segment elevations started to regress. Further dilation of the same lesion was done using Maverick 2 RX 2.5 × 15 balloon with maximum inflation pressure of 6 atm. A Mini Vision 2.5 × 18 bare metal stent (BMS) was deployed in the D1 ostium with maximum inflation pressure of 16 atm.
Using the Cullote technique, balloon angioplasty using Maverick 2 RX 2.5 × 15 balloon with maximum inflation pressure of 10 atm was performed on the 70% stenosis of the mid LAD. Then a Paclitaxel eluding stent (Taxus) RX 3.0 × 20 was deployed in the LAD lesion with maximum inflation pressure of 16 atm. Simultaneous kissing balloons were inflated in the D1 and the mid LAD using Maverick 2 RX 2.5 × 15 with maximum inflation pressure of 6 atms in the LAD and Maverick 2 RX 2.5 × 15 with maximum inflation pressure of 10 atms in D1. Following intervention, there was excellent angiographic appearance with 0% residual stenosis of both vessels. The patient was transferred to the coronary care unit for overnight observation and was discharged home the following day without complications.
Three months later, staged percutaneous coronary intervention of an 80% stenosis of the mid right coronary artery was performed. Angiography revealed a 40% restenosis of the BMS in the D1 and no restenosis in drug eluting stent (DES) in the LAD. The patient continues to be asymptomatic.