A 63-year-old woman employed as a sign language interpreter presented to an outside hospital in 2006 with a 3- to 4-year history of gait disequilibrium and occasional bladder incontinence. Other medical history was only significant for essential tremor for which she was taking propranolol. She was initially diagnosed with “normal pressure hydrocephalus” for which she was treated with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. However, immediately following the procedure, she awakened with symptoms of whole-body numbness, particularly in the extremities. For the next 3 years, her condition waxed and waned with a trend toward deterioration. According to the patient, her arms and legs were numb as if she had been “sleeping on them all of the time.” She occasionally noticed painless burns and cuts on her hands and fingers. She was intermittently treated with steroids and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for a possible inflammatory radiculoneuropathy but without lasting benefit. An MR scan of the head obtained at that time reported small bilateral subdural hematomas without mass effect. No other abnormalities were reported. She did not notice weakness, but she was increasingly clumsy. Her gait became progressively more unsteady, particularly in the dark, and she had fallen at least twice. More troubling, she was losing her ability to gesture language with her hands – a skill critical for her employment. She was referred to our institution with a working diagnosis of “atypical chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy” (CIDP).
On examination, she had a dolichocephalic head. Alertness and orientation were normal. Cranial nerves were intact. Strength was normal in all extremities, but her alternating motion rates were reduced. She had a marked impairment in vibration and joint position sense in both upper extremities, slightly worse on the right than the left. Lower extremity sensation was also impaired, but less so. She had minimal ataxia but tandem gait was impaired and her Romberg test was moderately positive. Knee and ankle reflexes were mildly increased; plantar responses were flexor and there was no clonus.
A thermoregulatory sweat test was obtained and revealed mild hypohydrosis of the lower extremities, which was of uncertain significance. Quantitative sensory testing of the left upper extremity demonstrated hyposensitivity to vibration distally which normalized proximally. The heat/pain thresholds were reduced. Somatosensory potentials of the right median and tibial nerves were also obtained. For the tibial nerve, spinal and cortical potentials were normal both in amplitudes and latencies. The right median potential, however, demonstrated prolongation of both the N13-N20 and N9-N20 interpeak latencies.
Imaging included an MR scan of the head which demonstrated dolichocephaly as noted on the clinical examination as well as the presence of the known ventriculoperitoneal shunt . The previously noted small subdural hematomas were no longer present, but there was diffuse enhancement of the dura overlying the convexities consistent with intracranial hypotension. On an MR scan of the cervical spine, the vertebral arteries were identified as entering the spinal canal at C1-2 where they passed posterior to the cord until they nearly touched at the midline before turning cranially and back laterally. The anomalous vertebral arteries severely compressed the posterior aspect of the cord with a resultant intramedullary T2 signal change. Ectopic cerebellar tonsils caused further crowding at the foramen magnum. There was no syrinx in the spinal cord .
The patient was diagnosed with a sensory myelopathy related to a Chiari malformation and posterior cervical cord compression at the C1-2 levels secondary to anomalous vertebral arteries.
The patient was taken to surgery for a suboccipital craniectomy, C1-2 laminectomy, and duraplasty. After exposure of the suboccipital skull and upper cervical spine, the vertebral arteries were identified lateral to the facets at the C2-3 interspace by manual palpation and Doppler ultrasonography and then carefully protected during subsequent dissection. After completion of the suboccipital craniectomy and C1-2 laminectomies, a Y-shaped incision in the dura was made over the inferior cerebellum and upper cervical spinal cord. The cerebellar tonsils were observed to extend down to the level of C1 consistent with a mild Chiari malformation. The most striking finding, however, was the course of the vertebral arteries which entered the cervical canal at the C1-2 level laterally and immediately compressed the dorsal and lateral aspects of the spinal cord on both sides as they converged toward the midline. They then turned superiorly and back laterally passing anterior to the cord at C1. The vertebral arteries were gently dissected from the dorsal surface of the cord but their turgor and short length precluded a complete decompression. Their impression into the cord substance could be clearly observed. The cerebellar tonsils were partially resected to assure satisfactory cervicomedullary decompression. The dura was closed with a bovine pericardial patch graft. The ventriculoperitoneal shunt was ligated through a small infraclavicular incision.
There were no perioperative complications. The patient was kept under observation in the hospital for 3 days. Physical medicine and rehabilitation services assisted with mobilization and in activities of daily living. Shortly following operation, she began to experience improvement in her symptoms and her ability to gesture sign language was improving by the time of discharge. At her 3-month follow-up visit, her position sense in the left hand was normal and in the right hand nearly normal. Vibration sense, which had been essentially absent in the right hand, was near normal. Her gait was stable.