A 35 year-old left-handed man, a motor mechanic by profession, presented to the emergency room at 10:00 a.m. with excruciating pain at the ulnar side of the left dorsal forearm. The previous day he had repetitively used a sliding hammer with his left arm. Since then he had experienced severe pain despite the use of over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Upon admission, the patient denied any history of recent trauma, fever or chills, and the medical history was inconspicuous. He denied the use of intravenous drugs, anabolic steroids, anticoagulants or other medications, and stated to consume 4 cups of coffee with caffeine per day, as well as nicotine and alcohol occasionally. The initial evaluation (approx. 18 hours after the onset of pain) showed an afebrile patient with stable vital signs and an unremarkable routine whole body exam without any tattoos or changes of the integument. There was marked swelling with extreme tightness to palpation at the left dorsal forearm, but full range of motion of the left shoulder and elbow with only limited pain at supination/pronation. Severe pain was elicited by passive flexion/extension or ulnar/radial deviation of the wrist. The radial pulse was palpable and the capillary refill in all fingertips was physiological. The left dorsal forearm showed diminished sensation in form of a hypesthesia, paresthesia and altered ability to discriminate between two points while testing with pinprick, light touch and two-point discrimination. The hand was neurologically intact to motor and sensory testing. Radiographs in two planes of the left elbow, forearm, and wrist did not show any bony abnormalities. Complete blood cell count and electrolytes were normal including a C-reactive protein of 1.9 mg/l (normal 0 – 5.0mg/l), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 1 mm/h (normal 1 – 15 mm/h). The serum creatinine kinase was considerably elevated at 9.01 μmol/l (normal 0 – 3.15 μmol/l). Duplex-ultrasound examination of the arteries and veins of the left arm also remained inconspicuous. Despite immediate treatment with diazepam and opioid-derivates the patient continued to have severe pain. Therefore, an emergency decompressive fasciotomy centered over the extensor carpi ulnaris, was performed in the operating room. Upon release, the muscle bulged, displayed demarcation by grey-brown color (however, less intense than on the intraoperative macroscopic figure) without gross signs of necrosis, and appeared less contractile than the surrounding musculature, which in turn displayed a normal color, texture, and ability to contract. Histological examination of 2 specimens of the grey-brown tissue (together measuring 12 x 9 x 4 mm) showed skeletal muscle fibers with focal areas of necrosis and partially intense edema. Malignancy was excluded .
After irrigation, the skin was loosely approximated and the wound temporarily closed by stapling the edges of the skin with Epigard TM (synthetic skin substitute consisting of polyurethane-foam). A sterile dressing was placed over the open aspect of the wound and a well-padded volar forearm orthosis was applied. Three days later, the patient was returned to the operating room for wound closure. At this time, the entire extensor carpi ulnaris appeared grey-white to dark brown , with a firm texture and diminished contraction. Histological examination of multiple tissue fragments (together measuring 14 x 10 x 5 mm) revealed skeletal muscle fibers with larger focal areas of necrosis and reactive inflammatory changes. Again, malignancy was excluded .
Following irrigation, the skin incision was sutured and covered by a sterile dressing and a well-padded volar forearm orthosis. An orthotic immobilization followed for one week, and his activities were increased progressively. The patient showed an uneventful recovery with complete relief of pain. Two months after the second intervention, left arm and hand were neurologically intact to motor and sensory testing and functionally comparable to the contralateral side.