A 23-year-old Asian male student presented as an emergency with an acute abdomen a week after minor trauma to his upper abdomen. The injury occurred during a night out when he was innocently punched in the abdomen by a friend. He experienced only moderate discomfort lasting a short time following the incident. His past medical history included coeliac disease and an admission four months previously with severe acute pancreatitis, believed to be due to alcohol binge drinking at the weekends. Ultrasound scanning at that time had shown no evidence of gallstone disease. Five days after the minor trauma, he became anorexic, lethargic and feverish and started vomiting bilious content. Seven days post-trauma, he presented to our emergency department with severe upper abdominal pain. On examination, our patient was found to be tachycardic, drowsy and in severe pain. Abdominal examination revealed a large firm epigastric mass. There was right upper quadrant tenderness with guarding. He was resuscitated and blood investigations revealed a high white blood cell count of 18.64 × 109/L, a C-reactive protein level of 108 mg/L and an amylase level of 17 U/L. A chest radiograph demonstrated free air under his right hemidiaphragm. Our patient was initially managed with intravenous fluids, intravenous antibiotics, regular analgesia and antiemetics. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his thorax, abdomen and pelvis was obtained. This demonstrated a right pleural effusion, a large pancreatic pseudocyst measuring 17 × 11 cm and thick free fluid within his abdomen with large pockets of air under his right hemidiaphragm. The site of perforation could not be determined from the CT images. A decision was made to proceed to an emergency laparotomy.
At laparotomy, free intraperitoneal air with loculated collections of bile and purulent fluids in the supra- and infracolic compartments were found. A large pancreatic pseudocyst was found, pushing the stomach and duodenum anteriorly with a 5 cm transverse laceration at the junction of the first and second part of duodenum . An anterior gastrostomy was made to drain the large pancreatic pseudocyst by a wide cystogastrostomy. The edges of the duodenal laceration were excised for histology and then closed transversely with interrupted absorbable sutures. An omental patch was sutured over the duodenal repair. The proximal jejunum was used to fashion an antecolic gastrojejunostomy to the anterior gastrostomy to ensure drainage from his stomach. His abdominal cavity was lavaged with copious warm saline, a drain placed adjacent to the gastrojejunostomy and a drain by the duodenal repair and his abdomen closed. The drains were necessary due to the widespread peritoneal contaminations found during the laparotomy. He made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on a proton pump inhibitor nine days later. Histology of the duodenal tissue showed no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy.