A 62 year-old woman was incidentally discovered with thyroid nodules by ultrasound. Neck examination revealed a hard painless nodule in the left lobe of thyroid with no palpable lymphadenopathy. No symptoms such as hoarseness, tachycardia, dyspnea, dysphagia, and weight loss. Family medical history was unsuspicious and no medical history of any malignancy. Ultrasonography revealed the thyroid nodule located in the deep outer layer of the left lobe, about 1.0*0.8*0.9cm in size, solid, hypoechoic nodule with irregular margins and calcified lesions inside, the aspect ratio of the nodule with visible blood flow signal was less than 1, and no lymphadenopathy, TI-RADS 4a; another cystic nodule of about 0.81*0.42 cm with regular margins and medium echo were seen in the deep lower layer of the right lobe, TI-RADS 3. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) on thyroid prevailing nodule demonstrated indeterminate cytology. The pre-operative basal serum Ctn level was 41.10 pg/ml (normal values <5 pg/ml) and CEA level was 12.45 ng/ml (normal values <5 ng/ml) (06/10/2016). The patient did not perform a calcium stimulation test to determine calcitonin before surgery. Results of thyroid function tests, anti-thyroid antibodies, plasma catecholamine, and fractionated metanephrine were negative. Preoperative computed tomography of the chest and abdomen revealed no other extrathyroid lesions. The patient and her family refused the RET proto-oncogene genomic examination for economic reasons. Coincident phaeochromocytoma and primary hyperparathyroidism were excluded and the diagnosis of MTC was made. Total thyroidectomy and central compartment nodal dissection were performed.
Intraoperatively, a 1.2*1.0cm hard mass was identified in the lower part of the left thyroid lobe, left hemithyroidectomy and isthmus resection was performed first and MTC was considered by fast-frozen section. Then completed thyroidectomy with lymphadenectomy of the central compartment as performing. Postoperative pathological findings revealed medullary carcinoma with no capsule invasion in the left lobe, and without any histological features of other malignant thyroid tumors including papillary thyroid carcinoma, follicular thyroid carcinoma, etc. Tumor cells were widely positive for CgA, Syn, CEA, Galectin-3, CK19, Ctn in immunohistochemistry. Partially positive for Tg, the Ki-67 index was about 1%. There was 1 out of 5 lymph node metastasis which originated from the primary lesions and had the same histomorphological pattern of the lesions in the central compartment with a cancer nodule detected . Serum calcium and parathyroid hormone values were normal after surgery and no surgery-related complications happened. Levothyroxine was administrated 100 ug daily after the operation to keep normal thyroid function. Three months after surgery (05/01/2017), the serum Ctn level was 4.25 pg/ml and the serum CEA level was 9.96 ng/ml, both of them were lower than that of preoperation. However, six months after the first operation, serum CEA levels increased consistently whereas Ctn levels remained normal as showed above .
The patient was asymptomatic during the follow-up. Due to the increased CEA levels, the patient underwent repeated neck ultrasonography, computed tomography of the neck, chest, and abdomen, pelvic MRI, gastrointestinal endoscopy, and total body 18F-FDG PET-CT. However, no positive results were found in all tests. Until one and a half years after the operation, ultrasonography revealed atypical lymph node with a size of 0.8*0.4cm in the left cervical region. FNA was performed and aspiration fluids were tested for CEA and Ctn. Laboratory results indicated CEA was 315.70 ng/ml and Ctn was over 2,000 pg/ml. Blood tests (24/06/2019) showed serum CEA was 57.15ng/ml and Ctn was 4.98 pg/ml. Cervical lymph node metastasis was considered and the patient was admitted for the re-operation. Cervical lymph node dissection was performed and a hard lymph node in the left neck-level IV was seen during operation. Postoperative pathology results showed lymph node metastatic neuroendocrine tumor (1/18) in level IV, which was consistent with the histopatological pattern of the primary lesions. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive for Syn, CgA, CK19, Galectin-3, and negative for Ctn and TPO. Lymph nodes in left neck level II, III, and IV showed no metastatic carcinoma (0/17, 0/5, and 0/7 respectively) . The patient recovered evenly without complications, the CEA values on days 1, 4, and 6 after the surgery was 36.24, 34.92, and 25.55 ng/ml, respectively. One month after the second surgery CEA levels raised to 57.64 ng/ml. Four months later, local bone destruction in the left scapula was found by total body 18F-FDG PET-CT, considering the possibility of distant metastasis, local bone destruction with a SUVmax of 3.6 in the left scapula was found by whole body 18F-FDG PET-CT, considering the possibility of distant metastasis. The latest CEA values of the patient without any symptoms were 78.95 ng/ml. It is recommended that patients continue to follow up, and no systematic treatment measures such as targeted therapy are currently available.