A 68 year old man started complaining of stiffness of his lower limbs, nightmares, and recurrent falls from bed during his sleep since 2002. He was taken to an outpatient department of neurology on the following year. Brain MRI showed intracranial multiple lacunar infarction, leukoencephalopathy, old cerebral hemorrhage in medulla oblongata pons and slightly cerebral atrophy. In consideration of the combination of limbs stiffness and possible rapid-eye-movement(REM) behavioural disorders such as nightmares and falls from bed, Parkinson’s disease (PD) was diagnosed and levodopa/benserazide was prescribed with slight improvement of rigidity.
In 2004, he developed memory loss, irritability, right hand tremor, discontinuous urinary and fecal incontinence. From then on, he took donepezil hydrochloride (10 mg per day) and sedative drugs (Benzodiazepines). Possible visual hallucination, illusion, yelling, progressive amnesia and gait instability were seen in 2005. In 2006, he developed a significant decline in daily living capability and became wheelchair bound because of frequent falls. In May 2007 the patient was admitted to the Psychological department of Beijing Geriatric Hospital. Neurological examination showed rigidity and weakness of the four limbs, mild aphasia, subtle hand tremor.The deep tendon reflex and muscle tonus were abnormal, and bilateral palmomental reflex and Babinski’s sign were not recognized.No other abnormal neurologic signs were evident.
He had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia for 20 years and coronary atherosclerotic heart disease for 14 years. There was no history of autoimmune disease, such as thromboembolic vasculitis.. He had 18 years of education and no family history of dementia or other neurologic diseases.
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype was ε3/ε4. Levels for folic acid, vitamin B12 and thyroxine function were normal. Evaluation of neuropsychological rating scales performed in 2004 and 2007 are reported in Table .
3T brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI, 2007) showed severe atrophy in the bilateral temporal and frontal lobes, mild atrophy in parietal lobes, as well as lacunar infarction in bilateral radiation coronal, basal ganglia, left thalamus and brainstem. Mild white matter hyperintensities (WMHs) can be found on both sides lateral ventricleas..
After hospitalization,levodopa/benserazide,Memantine Hydrochloride and rehabilitation treatments were implemented for the patient. He suffered several cerebral vascular diseases on the following years. He developed progressive dysphagia requiring nasogastric tube placement. On March 3, 2018, the patient suddenly developed coma with left limb movement deprived and unequal pupils. A cerebral hemorrhage was suspected and he died 12 hours later.
Postmortem examinations were performed within 24 hours. The brain weighted 1426 g, and brain tissue was fixed in 10% formalin for two weeks. 8-µm thick series sections were mounted, deparaffinized, dehydrated, and stained. Pathologic examination was performed on 13 sections using routine hematoxylin & eosin(HE) , Luxol fast blue (LFB), modified Gallyas-Braak (GB) silver staining, and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for Aβ (mouse monoclonal antibody; diluted 1:100; Dako, Glostrup,Denmark), phosphorylated tau (mouse monoclonal clone AT8; diluted 1:500; Thermo Fisher, Rocford,IL,USA), α-synuclein (rabbit polyclonal antibody;diluted 1:1000; Sigma-Aldrich, St.Louis, MO,USA;), TAR DNA binding Protein-43 (TDP-43) (rat monoclonal antibody; pSer409/410; diluted 1:500;Merck Millipore,Temecula,CA, Germany), and P62 (mouse monoclonal clone ;diluted 1:1000; Abnova, Taipei China), according to the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) guidelines for AD neuropathologic changes (ADNC) .
Severe whole brain edema was observed. There were many cerebral infarctions in the middle cerebral artery. The locus coeruleus was relatively preserved. There was mild midbrain, pons, basal ganglia, thalamus, hemi-ovary center . Widespread arteriosclerosis was seen in large, middle and small cerebral vessels, and thrombosis was found in the lumen of the right internal carotid artery and bilateral depigmentation in the substantia nigra .
Volume shrinkage of neurons were observed in cerebrum, brainstem and cerebellum due to brain edema. Marked Purkinje’s cell loss were found in the cerebellem. We have not found Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra, locus ceruleus and cerebrum by HE staining . AT8 and P62 immunoreactive neurofibrillary tangles and threads were seen in the hippocampus, which were also revealed by Gallyas-Braak staining . No accumulation of Aβ, α-synuclein or TDP-43 were noted in the brain . The Alzheimer’s disease neuropathologic change was A0, B1, C0 (Braak stage I) according to diagnostic criteria made by the National Institute for Aging-Alzheimer Association . There were no astrocytic plaques or tufted astrocytes in the brain or brainstem(data not shown).Based on above fingdings Vascular parkinsonism(VaP) pathologic diagnosis was made.