This 51-year-old business woman, married and mother of two children, presented in our memory clinic complaining of predominant and progressive memory disturbances. She initially came to our memory clinic two years ago with a cognitive impairment she believed had been getting even worse within the last years. She also reported a known but slightly worse gait disturbance. The gait disturbance originated from a head trauma followed by a coma lasting 10 days (caused by a car accident nearly 28 years earlier). Her coma involving consecutively diagnosed disorders affecting her memory, concentration, word-finding, and reading capabilities was the consequence of head trauma. Her cMRI shows a posttraumatic right temporoparietal, right frontolateral brain lesion in the thalamus and on the left posterior border of the capsula interna, as well as in left white matter in the frontal region. She developed structural epilepsy entailing secondary generalized seizures. Under treatment with lamotrigine (200 mg/d), she is currently seizure-free. Other comorbidities in her history are ferritin anemia, restless legs syndrome, and alcohol abuse previously (currently she is abstinent). She also suffers from neurodermitis and bronchial asthma. Her family anamnesis is inconspicuous concerning psychiatric or neurologic diseases. Psychopathological assessments revealed fluctuating mood and drive. Her depressive symptoms have been treated with citalopram (20 mg/d) and psychotherapeutical interventions. Neurological examination confirmed the known spastic paresis of the upper left-sided and lower right-sided extremities and a gait disturbance with upright stand and gait ataxia since her brain trauma. Furthermore, she exhibited bradydysdiadochokinesis and ataxic upper extremities, as well as bilateral square werve jerks.
Cognitive screening with the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) and Clock Drawing Test (CDT) revealed normal results, but extensive neuropsychological testing was indicative of a mild cognitive impairment (amnestic MCI, multiple domains) with deficits in verbal fluency, processing speed, flexibility, verbal und figural memory .
In comparison to neuropsychological testing in 2018, deficient memory performance remained stable over time without further deterioration, but impairments in verbal fluency and processing speed declined slightly. Concurrently, her depressive symptoms increased and might have caused or contributed to the mild worsening of attentional and executive dysfunctions. A lumbar puncture to enable a differential diagnosis had been declined two years ago but was consented to at her last visit in 2020. This lumbar puncture aimed to determine specific autoantibodies, as she had begun to reveal progressive memory impairment a few years ago and a “red flag”, i.e., the gait disturbance and slight cerebellar ataxia. The autoantibodies we analyzed were: via antibody blots [antibodies against intracellular antigens: Amphiphysin, CV2, HuD, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), SOX1, Ma1/2, Ri, Ro, TR, Yov and Zic4] and immunofluorescence tests [antibodies against cell-surface antigens: α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor 1/2 (AMPAR1/2), Aquaporin 4, contactin associated protein 2 (CASPR2), dipeptidyl-peptidase–like protein-6 (DPPX), gamma-aminobutyric acid B1/ 2 (GABAB1/2), leucin rich glioma inactivated protein 1 (LGI1), NR1 subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) ]. Using fluroescence brain-tissue slides, we set a 1:10 intensity as the cut-off for positivity compared to the control slides. CSF testing revealed no destruction markers and no pleocytosis. Serum cell-based antibody analysis showed anti-AP3B2 antibodies with an intensity of 1:100 . 1:100 was set as the cut-off for anti-AP3B2 antibodies positivity. No molecular neurodegeneration was diagnosed, as her molecular markers in CSF were within the normal range . We assumed an autoimmune origin of MCI and started immunosuppressive therapy with high-dose intravenously applied corticosteroids. Consecutive neuropsychological testing after the first cycle of corticosteroids revealed improved semantic word fluency, cognitive flexibility, and consolidation of verbal, non-associated information. Fluor-18 FDG PET revealed no hint of cancer throughout her body. Brain Fluor-18 FDG PET revealed photopenia on the right parietal side, concurring with her condition after the brain trauma.