A 9-year-old boy was referred our hospital with slowly growing mass that localized in his left thigh above the knee. Patient have moderate pain without any daily distraction. His history was not relevant with trauma or septic disease. He did not have pain that localized on the abdomen and chest. The patient lives in a rural area and he is in close contact with animals due to his family's farmery.
Physical examination revealed a 6 × 5 × 4 cm fixed, firm and tender mass in anterolateral and distal parts of the left thigh. There was no ecchymosis, erythema, increased warmth or lymphadenopathy .
Laboratory tests were normal and showed a total leukocyte count (WBC) of 5700/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 25 mm/h (Westergen) and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 0.
Firstly, ultrasound examination was performed and it showed multiple cystic lesion in the muscle localized on vastus lateralis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for further imaging. MRI showed oval cystic mass approximately 77 × 20 × 18 mm in the left vastus lateralis muscle, containing round-shaped daughter cysts . The cysts seen hypointense in T1 A weighted images and hyperintense in T2 A weighted images .
Since the MR images were suggestive of hydatid cyst, further laboratory and imaging studies were employed to support the diagnosis and to detect the other sites of possible involvement. There was no other involvement by hydatid cyst. There was a positive response to indirect hemagglutination test for hydatid disease.
The mass was operated under general anesthesia. Cyst localized in vastus lateralis muscle was removed with muscle for preventing cyst wall intact . Cyst area was irrigated with hypertonic 3% saline after removal of mass to reduce risk of recurrence. Incision was closed primarily after inserting suction drain and patient was discharged after removal of drain on day two. Histological examination of the specimen revealed daughter cysts and fragments of lamellar membrane of the hydatid cyst. No bacterial pathogen was cultivated in cyst fluid.
Albendazole therapy, 200 mg twice daily, was given for six weeks after operation. Clinical, radiological and serologic tests showed no recurrence after treatment.