A 75-year-old diabetic woman presented to us with complaints of pain and redness in the left eye for 2 weeks. Past ocular history in the left eye included a bare sclera pterygium excision with adjunctive MMC application 4 years previously and a cataract extraction 4 months before presentation. At the time of presentation, the uncorrected visual acuity of the left eye was counting fingers at 50 cm. Examination revealed a 3 × 3 mm white patch of scleral necrosis and melting . A mild corneal edema and a moderately severe cellular reaction in the anterior chamber were also noted.
With a presumptive diagnosis of infectious necrotizing scleritis, smear and culture samples were taken for microbiological studies. The patient was then treated with topical amikacin (25 mg/mL), ceftazidime (50 mg/mL), and ciprofloxacin (0.3%) eye drops every hour as well as intravenous ceftazidime (2 g every 8 h). The bacterial culture subsequently showed a significant growth of P. aeruginosa, which was sensitive to amikacin, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, and gentamicin, and resistant to cefazolin, trimethoprim, and vancomycin.
Despite intensive antibiotic treatment for 12 days, vision decreased to light perception, and progression of the scleral melting was observed ; therefore, the patient underwent surgery. Intraoperatively, surgical debridement of the necrotic scleral tissue revealed extensive areas of ischemia . To manage this ischemia, the Tenon's capsule was extensively dissected from the surrounding conjunctiva and advanced anteriorly . After scleral graft for tectonic support of the thinned sclera , tenonplasty was performed by suturing the pedunculated flaps of the Tenon's capsule over the scleral graft, using 6-0 vicryl sutures . Finally, amniotic membrane transplantation was performed to cover the scleral graft and the overlying Tenon tissue .
The postoperative course was uneventful, with a gradual decrease in ocular inflammation as well as conjunctival re-epithelialization over the graft. Evaluations during 6 months of follow-up revealed an intact scleral graft, complete maintenance of the structural integrity of the globe and ocular surface, and no recurrence of infection [Figure and ]. No complication was noted except for the formation of posterior iris synechia onto the posterior chamber intraocular lens.