A 30-year-old right-handed gentleman with unremarkable past medical and family history presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with nine days history of fever associated with headache, neck stiffness, and blurring of vision. Headache described as holocephalic, non-radiating pressure like with photophobia and phonophobia alongside paroxysmal sharp abdominal pain, stabbing in nature, that lasts for few seconds to one minute with nausea and vomiting. Upon admission, he developed two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS) lasting one minute each aborted with 2 mg (mg) of intravenous (IV) lorazepam and IV 2-g loading dose of levetiracetam, following by 1000 mg twice daily.
His vital signs upon arrival to Hamad General Hospital ED revealed a temperature of 38 °C, respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 129/62 mmHg (with no postural variation), and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. He appeared agitated with persecutory delusions, preservation, and echolalia. Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score was 15/30 with impaired orientation, registration, attention and recall. Neurological examination was none focal with negative Kernig's sign and normal optic disc exam. No observed extrapyramidal signs or focal neurological deficits aside from biceps and patellar hyperreflexia with clonus (4/4) with bilateral extensor plantar responses.
Initial work up revealed unremarkable computed tomography (CT) head. Lumbar puncture (LP) showed grossly clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with lymphocytic pleocytosis of 97% (Normal range: 40–80%) glucose 3.55 mmol/L (Normal range: 2.22–3.89), protein 0.32 g/L (Normal range: 0.15–0.45). Acyclovir and ceftriaxone are initiated empirically for a preliminary diagnosis of meningio-encephalitis. SARS-CoV-2 (COIVD-19) nasopharyngeal swab PCR was negative. Day two of admission, he developed a flurry of GTCS that progressed into status epilepticus, warranting midazolam infusion and admission to the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU). Anti-seizure medication were optimized and seizure control attained with levetiracetam 1 g BID, Lacosamide 200 mg BID, and Clobazam 10 mg BID and midazolam infusion was stopped after 24-h with regain of consciousness.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain, demonstrated bilateral symmetric external and extreme capsules, left thalamus high T2 signal / fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) with sparing of bilateral claustrum ( A-C). There was no significant abnormal post-contrast enhancement or other noted anomality. Possible differential diagnosis proposed was autoimmune limbic encephalitis, acute intermittent porphyria owing to the recurrent paroxysmal abdominal pain with co-current neuropsychiatric manifestations.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed continuous left-sided epileptiform discharges in the form of periodic to predominantly left middle temporal Area and lesser extend anterior temporal area T reminiscent of Left Temporal epileptiform focus, suggestive of left limbic encephalitis . Autoimmune encephalitis serum and CSF panel were sent to Mayo clinic laboratory which was negative and malignancy screening showed unremarkable CT chest, abdomen and pelvis (PAN-CT) reaching to a working diagnosis of seronegative limbic encephalitis (SNLE).
Management encompassed a multidisciplinary approach with pulsed IV methylprednisolone (1 g/day for five days) followed by IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) 2 g/kg over five days. Upon completing his immunotherapy, personality changes, abdominal pain, and seizures have almost resolved with residual impaired short-term memory with MMSE 27/30 (impaired recall). Follow up EEG obtained on day fourteen of admission showed left posterior temporal epileptiform discharges on top of mild encephalopathy. A 3-week Follow-up MR displayed significant regression (almost total resolution) of previously noted symmetric signal abnormality at bilateral external and extreme capsules as well as at the left thalamus, as shown in D-E. Subsequent follow ups in neurology clinics showed well controlled seizures with resolution of neuropsychiatric manifestations and planned to gradually taper off his anti-seizure medications (Levetiracetam 1 g BID, Lacosamide 200 mg BID, and Clobazam 10 mg BID).