A 47-year-old mentally impaired Chinese man presented with 4 days’ history of lower abdominal pain and pus discharge from his right inguinoscrotal area. He had had continuous fever with chills and rigors for the past 2 days. He denied any history of diarrhea, vomiting, or abdomen distension. His past medical history included hyperthyroidism and hypertension and he has been on antithyroid medications and beta blockers for more than 20 years.
On examination he was lethargic, toxic, and clinically dehydrated. Initial vital signs showed that he was hypothermic (30.4 °C), hypotensive (74/50 mmHg), with bradycardia (48/minute) and tachypnea (30/minute). Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were insignificant. His abdomen was soft with tenderness over his lower abdomen; however, his bowel sounds were active. An examination of his groin and external genitalia showed gross necrotizing fasciitis with the epicenter of an abscess at his right groin extending up to the root of his right scrotum . His right testis was not palpable separately. His left groin, scrotum, and left testis were normal.
Blood investigation revealed hemoglobin (12.5 gm/dL), leucocytosis (33,000 cells/mm3), neutrophils 24×109/L, lymphocytes 7.2×109/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 320 mg/dL. A renal panel showed signs of acute kidney injury: creatinine 353 μmol/L and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 29 mL/min/1.73m2. His total bilirubin was 0.6 mg/dl and his albumin was low (22 mg/dl). No significant pathology was found on an X-ray of his chest and abdomen. Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with lactate 7.7 mmol/l. A thyroid function test revealed undetectable thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) <0.01 with grossly elevated free thyroxine (T4; 59.1 pmol/L). His thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb) and TSH antibodies were elevated. He was intubated and transferred to our High Dependency (HD) unit for resuscitation and active monitoring.
In view of suspected thyroid crisis (Burch and Wartofsky score of 50) we started him on propylthiouracil and Lugol’s iodine, hydrocortisone was administered intravenously, and he continued to be treated with beta blockers. Broad spectrum antibiotics (penicillin, ceftriaxone, and metronidazole) were started. His blood gases were normalized and his serum lactate dropped to 2.2 mmol/l after a few hours of treatment. In view of the gross sepsis which had triggered the thyroid storm, emergency wound debridement was planned.
On exploration, the entire skin and subcutaneous part covering his right inguinal region, groin, and scrotum were gangrenous (15×12 cm) and these areas were excised. The depth of the necrotic patch extended approximately 5 cm from his skin surface. His right spermatic cord and atrophic testis were gangrenous with slough; hence, a right orchiectomy with excision of the cord structures was done. Debridement of tissues in his right inguinal area showed a thickened indirect hernia sac with gangrenous appendix with pus and a 1 cm fecolith close to the base as the content. His deep inguinal ring was narrowed (0.5 cm). The sac was opened at the fundus. His appendix base was found to be healthy and an appendicectomy was done . Definitive hernia repair was not attempted in view of extensive infected tissues and his poor physiological status.
He was extubated and transferred back to our High dependency unit for further monitoring. Post-procedure his inflammatory markers normalized: white blood cells were 9700 cells/mm3 and CRP was 54 mg/dL. He made an uneventful postoperative recovery; he received a definitive inguinal hernia repair and diagnostic laparoscopy 48 hours after the debridement to check for the viability of his intestines and to rule out another abdominal source of sepsis. The laparoscopic examination showed a healthy terminal ileum, ascending colon, and congested caecum. Subsequently, the hernial sac with his appendix stump was reduced into his peritoneal cavity. The neck of the sac was transfixed followed by right inguinal modified Bassini’s herniorrhaphy . A corrugated rubber drain was kept in his inguinal region and the wound was closed partially. He recovered well and the drain was removed on the second day. Secondary skin suturing was done after 3 weeks. He was discharged home with negative pressure wound dressing. An ultrasound of his neck was done, which showed diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with increased vascularity but no nodules; this finding supports a diagnosis of Grave’s disease. Currently he is in good health with no evidence of hernia recurrence. His TSH and free T4 levels are within normal limits; he is continuing with antithyroid medications with plans for radioactive iodine ablation at a later date.