A 39-year-old primigravid woman was referred to our tertiary care centre for management of her MHV in pregnancy. She had a history of rheumatic heart disease with symptomatic severe mitral stenosis, severe tricuspid regurgitation, severe left atrial enlargement (LA indexed volume of 92 mL/m2), Type II pulmonary hypertension, and chronic atrial fibrillation. One year prior to pregnancy, she underwent a 33 mm St-Jude bi-leaflet metallic mitral valve replacement, tricuspid valve annuloplasty, and an amputation of the left atrial appendage containing a large thrombus discovered intraoperatively. A mechanical valve was chosen because of its longer durability in light of the patient’s young age, and the presence of another indication for anticoagulation (i.e. atrial fibrillation). At the time, the patient had no future pregnancy plans. Her surgery was well tolerated and without complications. She was adherent to her antithrombotic regimen, which consisted of daily oral warfarin 5 mg (targeting an International Normalized Ratio [INR] of 2.5–3.5) since her surgery.
At four weeks of gestation, her warfarin was discontinued due to teratogenicity concerns, and she was switched to low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Aspirin 81 mg orally daily was added at 10 weeks as an adjunct antithrombotic therapy to LMWH in pregnancy, and for preeclampsia prophylaxis given the presence of some risk factors (i.e. nulliparity and maternal age ≥35 years). She was referred for multidisciplinary high-risk pregnancy care at our tertiary healthcare centre at 12 weeks of gestation. The potential anticoagulation strategies for the remainder of the pregnancy were reviewed, along with an in-depth discussion regarding their associated risks and benefits. After shared decision-making, and despite detailed explanations on the risks and benefits of each anticoagulation modality on multiple occasions, it was decided that LMWH was to be continued (i.e. enoxaparin 1 mg/kg SC BID) due to its better fetal safety profile. The importance of strong adherence to therapy was reinforced, as well as the need for meticulous monitoring of anti-Xa levels throughout pregnancy. Her anti-Xa levels were measured every 1–2 weeks, targeting peak levels of 1.0–1.2 IU/mL and trough levels >0.6 IU/mL. Anticoagulation modalities were revisited at each follow-up appointment. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) at 17 weeks of gestation demonstrated the mechanical mitral valve in situ with a mean transvalvular gradient of 4 mmHg, mild–moderate mitral regurgitation, severe left atrial dilatation, and normal biventricular systolic function and pulmonary artery pressure.
At 30 weeks of gestation, she presented to the emergency room with an acute onset of dyspnoea, orthopnoea, bilateral lower extremity oedema, and a new cough with scant haemoptysis. Blood pressure was 110/71 mmHg, and the heart rate was 100–115 beats per minute (sinus rhythm), and her oxygen saturation ranged between 88 and 91% on room air. She was afebrile. Her chest X-ray showed pulmonary oedema. A TTE was performed emergently and demonstrated a mass of 2.5 cm in diameter on the ventricular lateral aspect of the mitral valve prosthesis with some multi-lobulated mobile projections, and a diastolic mean gradient of 28 mmHg (; see , ).
The mass was concerning for MHV thrombosis. The differential diagnosis included infective endocarditis and myxoma, albeit these diagnoses were felt to be less likely in the given clinical context. Nevertheless, empiric antibiotics were started with gentamycin and vancomycin pending blood culture results. The position of the mass and the rapidity with which it developed (i.e. within 1 year of cardiac surgery) made a myxoma highly improbable.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for monitoring, diuresis, and anticoagulation with intravenous (IV) unfractionated heparin. She received betamethasone for fetal lung maturation and magnesium sulfate for foetal neuroprotection in anticipation of an intervention leading to preterm delivery. After 48 h, a repeat TTE and transesophageal echocardiography were performed and redemonstrated the large mass. The mitral valve mean gradient had decreased from 28 mmHg to 20 mmHg (heart rate of 72 bpm), however the mass size remained unchanged.
An urgent multidisciplinary meeting was held. Present at this meeting were specialists in cardiology, cardiac surgery, obstetric medicine, haematology, maternal–fetal medicine, neonatal intensive care, adult intensive care, cardiac anaesthesia, and obstetric anaesthesia. It was decided that the patient would undergo a caesarean section followed immediately by cardiac surgery to replace her mitral valve.
The patient’s IV heparin was held for 4 h in preparation for surgery. However, a repeat TTE revealed an increase in the size and mobility of the mass, and an acute worsening of the diastolic mean gradient to 34 mmHg at 84 bpm. Therefore, anticoagulation was immediately restarted, and the caesarean section was performed while on therapeutic IV heparin. The high-risk nature of the surgical plan necessitated careful logistical organization before proceeding to the operating room. Specifically, the medical and surgical teams that were required to be present or on standby throughout the perioperative course was communicated and confirmed with all team members (see ).
Peripheral cannulation for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was installed while awake under local anaesthesia in her right femoral vein and artery to be prepared in case of severe haemodynamic instability on induction of general anaesthesia or during surgery. The risk of neonatal respiratory depression using high-dose opioid induction precluded its use for cardiac stability, so induction was achieved with propofol and succinylcholine. The caesarean section was performed by two maternal-fetal medicine specialists. Bleeding was surgically cauterized to optimize haemostasis. A live baby boy weighing 1560 g was delivered. The placenta was delivered manually, and the uterus was closed in one layer. Filshie clips were used bilaterally for tubal ligation, as consented by the patient prior to surgery. An attempt to insert an intrauterine Bakri balloon was unsuccessful, and a Foley catheter was placed into the uterine cavity as an alternative. She lost an estimated 500–600 mL of blood during the caesarean section and an additional 800 mL was measured by the intrauterine Foley catheter during the cardiac surgery. She received 3 units of packed red blood cells before proceeding to cardiac surgery.
The patient then underwent a redo sternotomy to replace her MHV prosthesis. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established using femoral artery cannulation and bicaval venous cannulae. A 31 mm St. Jude Epic bioprosthetic valve replaced the previous mechanical mitral valve. The rationale for choosing a bioprosthetic valve instead of a mechanical valve despite her age was in the event of post-operative bleeding requiring interruption of anticoagulation (as occurred in this case), which would pose a particularly high risk of thrombosis in the early post-operative and postpartum periods. She remained stable coming off cardiopulmonary bypass. Intravenous protamine was given to reverse the effect of heparin. A thrombus was confirmed upon pathological examination . Cerebral embolic events were excluded through serial neurologic exams performed pre- and post-operatively.
In the ICU, vasopressor requirements increased post-operatively with a drop in haemoglobin from 94 g/L to 57 g/L. Chest imaging revealed a large loculated right haemothorax causing leftward mass effect, active arterial extravasation in the superior anterior mediastinum, and a displaced chest tube. Thus, the patient was taken back to the operating room on post-operative day one for surgical exploration. No bleeding source was identified, but a large amount of blood and clots were evacuated from the right pleural space. While her haemodynamic status rapidly normalized following surgery, she developed an expanding rectus sheath haematoma measuring up to 11 × 9 × 11 cm on post-operative Day 4. It improved with expectant management while receiving prophylactic dose dalteparin. Anticoagulation with warfarin targeting an INR of 2–2.5 was initiated on post-operative Day 12 for valvular atrial fibrillation. She otherwise recovered well and was discharged home after a 28-day hospital stay. Her baby was hospitalized in the NICU for 9 weeks due to prematurity.