A 62-year-old male with past medical history of prior cerebral vascular accident and coronary artery disease presented to the ED by emergency medical services with three days of extremity weakness, fatigue, and imbalance. The patient’s spouse reported that he experienced lethargy, myalgias, decreased appetite, subjective fevers, and poor sleep over this time. One day prior to presentation, the patient fell secondary to generalized weakness without a loss of consciousness, which ultimately prompted presentation for medical evaluation, after lying on the floor for approximately four hours.
On presentation to the ED, vital signs included heart rate of 121 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 130/103 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute with a saturation of 95% on room air, and oral temperature of 101.5 degrees Fahrenheit. Physical examination was notable for tachycardia, diffuse abdominal pain without evidence of peritonitis, a resting tremor, and mild confusion.
Electrocardiogram was notable for sinus tachycardia to 121 bpm without evidence of ischemia or right heart strain. Serum studies demonstrated a thyroid stimulating hormone level of 0.007 microinternational units (uIU) per microliter (uL) (normal 0.27–5.00 uIU/uL), free T4 (FT4) of 2.94 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) (normal 0.6–1.8 ng/dL), elevation of aminotransferases with an aspartate aminotransferase of 232 units (U) per liter (L) (normal 5–40 U/L) and an alanine aminotransferase of 78 U/L (normal 4–41 U/L), creatinine of 1.23 milligrams (mg)/dL (normal 0.67–1.17 mg/dL), troponin of 0.081 ng/mL (normal <0.03 ng/mL), and B type natriuretic peptide was elevated to 2852 picograms (pg)/mL (normal <900 pg/mL). Creatinine kinase (CK) was also elevated to 32,290 IU/L (normal 24–170 IU/L), and urinalysis demonstrated large amounts of blood with only two red blood cells/high powered field (normal 0–3). A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed no abnormalities, although a PE was noted in the right lower lobe of the lung , which was confirmed with a subsequent CT pulmonary angiogram along with an additional right upper lobe PE.
Based on the patient’s presentation with abnormal thyroid function, BWPS score was calculated as 50, which is highly suggestive of thyroid storm. He was started on propranolol, propylthiouracil, Lugol’s iodine solution, and hydrocortisone with improvement of his vital signs and symptoms over the following several days. Therapeutic heparin was initiated for multiple submassive pulmonary emboli, with resolution of elevated troponin. Anticoagulation was transitioned to apixaban for continued outpatient treatment.
Additionally, the patient was diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis in the setting of myalgias, elevated CK well above five times the upper limit of normal, acute kidney injury, and myoglobinuria. He received intravenous fluids with a urine output goal of 200–300 mL/hour as well as allopurinol due to hyperuricemia. CK and uric acid levels were trended throughout hospitalization, which progressively improved prior to discharge. He was ultimately discharged after an otherwise uneventful hospitalization.