A 42-years-old male patient was admitted to the Sino-Japanese Friendship Hospital affiliated to Jilin University on June 2, 2021, for diarrhea and intermittent hematochezia since April 2021. Colonoscopy showed large and deep ulcers distributed from the cecum to the colon, about 30-cm away from the anal verge. Some ulcers had paving stone-like changes around the ulcer, the blood vessels were blurred, the ileocecal valve was damaged, and the terminal ileum showed hyperemia and edema . Two ulcer biopsies showed acute and chronic mucosa inflammation with necrosis and inflammatory granulation, local crypt abscesses, abundant lymphocytes, and lobulated nuclear cells in the interstitium. The patient was diagnosed with “inflammatory intestinal disease” and treated with mesalazine for 2 months, without relief.
On August 3, 2021, a reexamination of colonoscopy showed multiple lamellar ulcers at the end of the ileum with a diameter of 0.2–0.6 cm, and many flaky hyperemia spots were covered with white fur. The ileocecal valve structure was damaged and deformed, the appendix opening was normal, and flaky hyperemia spots could be seen in the cecum. The segmental distribution of deep ulcers could be seen in the ileocecal valve, from the ascending colon to about 40-cm away from the anal verge. Some ulcers showed paving stone-like changes .
Two ulcer biopsies near the ileocecal and ascending colon showed acute and chronic mucosal inflammation with necrosis and inflammatory exudation. The symptoms and intestinal lesions did not relieve after treatment. The patient was admitted to the outpatient department on August 10, 2021, for suspected “intestinal tuberculosis.” Abdominal CT showed a blurred intestinal wall around the ileocecal region and the surrounding fat space. Protein chip tuberculosis antibodies of 38 kD, 16 kD, and LAM were negative. Tuberculin skin test (PPD) was 0*0, and the T-cell spot test (T-SPOT.TB) was negative. A colonoscopy was performed 3 d later, and the results were roughly the same as before. Nucleotide-based MALDI-TOF MS on biopsies (5 pieces of ulcers in the terminal ileum, ileocecal, cecum, and ascending colon) found Mycobacterium intracellular and Mycobacterium nonchromogenicum. The diagnosis was intestinal nontuberculous mycobacteriosis (Mycobacterium intracellulare). Then the patient was admitted to the hospital for treatment.
Antimycobacterial therapy was used with clarithromycin, rifabutin, amikacin, linezolid, and clofazimine. The drug dose was adjusted according to the patient’s weight. After 2 weeks of antimycobacterial therapy, the patient’s diarrhea was relieved, and hematochezia no longer appeared. After 2 months of treatment (the treatment was interrupted for 1 month due to the patient’s adverse drug reactions), colonoscopy in November 2021 showed scattered punctate erosions in the terminal ileum without abnormality in the opening of the appendix, scattered erosions and ulcers in the ileocecal valve and ascending colon, scattered congestion, and digital polyps in the transverse colon and descending colon . A total of 8 biopsies were collected, both nucleotide-based MALDI-TOF MS and next-generation sequencing could still detect Mycobacterium intracellulare. The patient continued with antimycobacterial treatment for now.