A 13-year-old white boy born with a complete unilateral cleft lip and alveolus was receiving orthodontic treatment. He was referred for surgical treatment. A clinical examination showed his left middle incisor in an ectopic position in his frontal vestibule. The root was twisted to the midline and the crown was heavily displaced to the lateral side . The occlusion was not acceptable. An orthodontic tooth movement would be too difficult and cause side effects, such as periodontal problems, or reabsorption of the root or adjacent permanent teeth. An immediate removal of the tooth and insertion of a dental implant was not the treatment of choice due to his young age and incomplete jaw growth. Our main long-term aim was to preserve as much bone as possible in his compromised cleft area.
The psychological aspect of this condition should not be underestimated because he was ashamed of his front teeth and was not able to smile. He describes the appearance of his maxillary anterior teeth as unaesthetic. In cooperation with the Department of orthodontics, a decision for surgical intervention was made.
The transplantation of the incisor was performed using the standard treatment protocol according to Kirschner and the updated protocol by Pohl [, ]. The operation procedure included a careful preparation of the tooth so that the periodontal ligament could be preserved vital . A dental splint fixed the tooth for 3 weeks. His postoperative course was uneventful and without complications. The orthodontic treatment to align the remaining teeth followed after 7 months. The transplanted central incisor was included in the fixed multibracket appliance and our patient did not show any atypical symptoms or reactions. In the follow-up 24 months later, the tooth was still functional without any clinical signs of pain or infection . Radiography illustrated a reintegration of the root in the surrounding bone and the periodontal gap could be seen . No bone loss or reabsorption of the root in terms of replacement or infection reabsorption could be diagnosed. The soft tissue around his frontal teeth at the cleft site was stable; even his vestibule developed positively and was deeper than before.
The guidelines of the International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) for the success or failure of replantation describe the success criteria as clinically asymptomatic, normal mobility, no apical lesion in a radiograph, and no reabsorption or ankylosis of the root . The presented case fits all the criteria; however, the mobility could not be tested due to orthodontic treatment.