A 49-year-old male with a sudden-onset loss of consciousness, presented to our emergency department (ED), with 1-year history of headache, nausea, vomiting, weakness in the limbs, thirst with desire of drink, hoarseness, and dysphagia.
The patient had similar symptoms 1 year ago, including nausea and vomiting. Head CT were performed in a local hospital . Cisterna circinata cerebri with high density image was revealed, and Pandy test in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was positive. Then, he was diagnosed as subarachnoid hemorrhage and received relevant symptomatic treatment. But further examination showed that there were no red blood cells in his cerebrospinal fluid, and CTA indicated his intracranial arterial system was normal. Because of indifference and there was no obvious improvement, the patient discharged 3 days later.
After the patient was referred to our hospital, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15 with retrograde amnesia, there was no fever, pupils were isochoric and normally reactive to light. No obvious abnormality was observed in respiratory, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems. Limb muscle strength was level 4, muscle tension was normal, limbs sophisticated activities were weaken. Physiological reflex was normal, and pathological reflex including meningeal signs was negative .
The patient had a history of cysticercosis 30 years ago, and the CT value of the high-density shadow near the thalamus and cisternae measured 92 Hu without perihematomal edema, so we considered the high-density shadow as calcification. During the subsequent treatment, there was no significant change in the density , which also proved our opinion. According to these findings, we thought that the diagnosis was cerebral cysticercosis. Therefore, we performed antibody detection of cysticercosis and found IgG was positive.
At admission, this patient treated with albendazole (15 mg/kg/day); meanwhile, short course of dexamethasone (20 mg/day) along with fatty meals promotes drug absorption . In first 3 days, the patient had a worse headache and dizziness, according to known side effects of albendazole, we reviewed the patient’s head CT, and monitored blood counts and liver enzymes but there is nothing unusual.
After regular treatment, the patient had less headache and nausea and no other discomfort; we performed the CT again a month later. CT scan images indicated that the left basal ganglia cystic lesion was significantly smaller and hydrocephalus was slightly smaller than before, there were calcifications in the cystic lesions indicating that the treatment was effective . Because of financial reasons, at day 30 post-treatment in the hospital, the patient required to be conservative treated at home. Upon evaluation of the patient, we found he was asymptomatic. CSF analysis revealed 10 cells/mm3 (monocyte 15%, neutrophils 6%), 158 mg/dL protein, and 2.8 mg/dL glucose. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test on CSF for cerebral cysticercosis was negative.
One month later after discharge, the patient became sluggish, no dizziness, headache, nausea, and vomiting. The patient was referred to hospital again, CT scan images showed obvious dilation of bilateral ventricle and third ventricle , high density shadow was seen in left cerebral cistern and thalamus area . At admission, we performed antibody detection of cysticercosis and found IgG was negative. After a consult, the patient had a ventriculoperitoneal shunt placed because of the obstructive hydrocephalus. Postoperatively, cefodizime sodium (1 g) was administrated intravenously twice a day for 3 days from postoperative day 1 followed by mannitol (50 g) intravenously once a day for 3 days. On the third day after the operation, the signs of hydrocephalus were better than before, and the clinical symptoms were less. No obvious discomfort was observed after drug withdrawal. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7, the patient came to the hospital for re-examination 2 week after hospital discharge, and CT showed that supratentorial hydrocephalus was significantly better than before ; meanwhile, the patient showed no symptoms of sluggish with a normal gait.