A 60-year-old female presented in 2018 with dyspnoea and haemoptysis.
In 1999, a dual-chamber pacemaker (PPM) was inserted overseas for sick sinus and intermittent atrial fibrillation (AF) and was complicated by lead infection, treated with antibiotics without lead extraction. She remained well until 2012 where she was treated in a heart failure clinic for recurrent exacerbations. She presented with dyspnoea, in florid right heart failure and clinically severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR). A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed normal left ventricular function, torrential TR, moderate mitral regurgitation (MR), and raised pulmonary pressures. Cardiac catheterization showed normal coronary arteries, pulmonary pressure, and pulmonary vascular resistance. Her heart failure was considered secondary to severe TR and moderate MR. She proceeded to tricuspid valve (TV) replacement with a bioprosthetic valve, mitral valve (MV) repair, and epicardial lead insertion. The original generator and lead were left in situ. Intraoperatively the PPM lead was tangled at the base of the anterior leaflet papillary muscle with severe distortion, fibrosis, and retraction of the TV.
Three weeks postoperatively she presented with sepsis and blood cultures positive for Staphylococcus aureus. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed vegetations on the prosthetic TV (Videos 1 and 2). Following treatment with intravenous (IV) antibiotics, blood cultures were initially negative but there was a subsequent relapse of bacteraemia and worsening heart failure. A redo TV replacement, MV replacement, PPM system extraction, and connection to the tunnelled epicardial lead were performed.
In 2015, she was admitted with worsening heart failure, fevers, and Streptococcus salivarius bacteraemia. A TOE revealed MV vegetations; successfully treated with 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics. In December 2016, she was admitted with a dental abscess and fevers which was drained with benzylpenicillin coverage. One week later she presented with fevers. Blood cultures were negative, but a TOE revealed new MV vegetations. She was treated as culture-negative endocarditis. Computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest revealed two new pulmonary artery aneurysms (PAAs) in the left upper lobe, presumably mycotic aneurysms, stable on serial imaging . These were not present on prior CT scans in 2012.
In December 2018, she presented with haemoptysis in the context of warfarin for AF, severe dyspnoea, and fevers. Examination revealed tachypnoea with a respiratory rate of 25 breaths/min with an oxygen saturation of 88% on room air. Blood pressure was 114/61 mmHg, and heart rate was 75 b.p.m. She was cyanosed with new clubbing , jugular venous pressure was elevated to 7 cm. Heart sounds were normal with previously noted soft systolic and diastolic murmurs across the tricuspid region. Chest auscultation showed right crepitations worse than the left with reduced air entry bilaterally at the lung bases.
Differential diagnoses included recurrence of infective endocarditis with septic emboli to the lungs causing infarction, pneumonia, pulmonary haemorrhage with her known history of aneurysms and pulmonary embolus.
Arterial blood gases revealed Type 1 respiratory failure and respiratory alkalosis with pO2 56 mmHg, pCO2 28 mmHg, and pH 7.48. Haemoglobin (Hb) was 132 g/L, INR 2.7, and creatinine 57 mL/min/1.73 m2. Chest X-ray revealed right lower zone consolidation .
A TTE did not reveal vegetations. Haemoptysis continued and the patient’s Hb dropped to 98 g/L. High-resolution CT chest identified two large clusters of PAVM associated with extensive ground glass changes in the right middle and lower lobes consistent with pulmonary haemorrhage .
She was referred for urgent percutaneous pulmonary angiography with coil embolization . The two largest clusters were coiled successfully; however, the procedure was terminated due to radiation exposure time and contrast use. Following her coil embolization, her arterial oxygen saturation had improved to 97%, pO2 91 mmHg, and pH 7.38. She declined further treatment of the remaining PAVM and discharged well.