A 71-year-old man (55 kg, 149 cm) was admitted to the hospital for total laparoscopic distal gastrectomy under general anesthesia. During surgery, insufficient muscle relaxation was reported repeatedly by surgical team.
General anesthesia was induced and maintained with 2% propofol and remifentanil using target-controlled infusion. When the patient became unconscious, TOF stimulation of the right ulnar nerve was initiated using a peripheral nerve stimulator (NMT module of the Carescape monitor B850; GE Healthcare, Madison, WI, United States). The initial TOF ratio was 0.98, and the patient then received a bolus injection of rocuronium 50 mg (0.9 mg/kg). According to routine practice, we waited to perform intubation until a TOF count of 0 was observed. The TOF ratio decreased at an unusually slow rate, and a TOF count of 0 was detected approximately 7 min after the administration of rocuronium . After successful endotracheal intubation, however, a TOF count of 1 was detected within 1 min, and a TOF ratio of 12% was detected within 2 min. Rocuronium 5 mg was then injected followed by a continuous infusion at a rate of 9 µg/kg/min for deep neuromuscular blockade (post-tetanic count of 1-2). However, a TOF count of 4 (TOF ratio < 10%) was continuously recorded and visually detected. The surgical team noted insufficient muscle relaxation 20 min after the start of the laparoscopic procedure.
The patient had previously been diagnosed with dementia and mild parkinsonism with tremor and had been taking donepezil 5 mg, quetiapine 25 mg, and pregabalin 75 mg twice a day for 16 mo. He had been taking anti-hypertensive medication for 11 years and had undergone diaphragm surgery in our hospital 7 and 10 years prior. During these two surgeries, he required rocuronium 50 mg during 195 min of balanced anesthesia with sevoflurane-remifentanil and rocuronium 60 mg during 225 min of TIVA with propofol-remifentanil. No specific events or comments regarding insufficient muscle relaxation were identified from a review of his anesthesia records of previous surgeries.
The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol abuse. He had no family history of cancer or any other hereditary diseases.
During general anesthesia, vascular access for intravenous anesthetics and NMBAs was well secured, and the patient’s vital signs and state entropy (Entropy module of the Carescape monitor B850; GE Healthcare, Madison, WI, United States) were within the normal ranges, which indicated adequate depth of anesthesia. Using forced-air warming blankets, the central core temperature and skin temperature over the adductor pollicis muscle were maintained above 35.5 °C and 32 °C, respectively. The preoperative physical examination was unremarkable.
The results of preoperative laboratory tests and electrocardiography were normal.
The preoperative chest X-ray showed elevation of the left diaphragm, which was considered evidence of previous diaphragm surgeries.