A 28 year old woman, 37 weeks of pregnancy presented with fever of four days duration to the casualty medical ward. The following day she appeared to be irritable, somnolent, aggressive and thereafter followed by unresponsiveness to commands. On examination she was febrile, anicteric and not pale. She was confused, poorly responsive and her GCS was 9 (eyeopening = 2, verbal response = 2, motor response = 5). Respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. There was no neck stiffness, Kernigs and Brudzinki signs were negative. Cranial nerves were intact. Pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs were absent. Dilated fundoscopy did not reveal any papilledema. Her full blood count revealed an isolated thrombocytopenia. White cell count 9000 cells/cumm, Hemoglobin 10 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 85 ft, Platelets 60,000 cells/mm, counts progressively dropping up until 8000 cells/cumm. Hematocrit was stable at 33%. ESR was 20 mm/h and was CRP 4 mg/dL. LDH was <200 u/L. Blood picture revealed a thrombocytopenia in keeping with a possible viral infection, there were no features of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Urine analysis excluded proteinuria and hematuria. Hepatic profile which was initially normal started to escalate. Aspartate aminotransferase 25 U/L up till 250 U/L (<40 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 20 U/L up till 250 U/L (<40 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 300 U/L (30–300 U/L) and serum bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL respectively, revealing an anicteric hepatitis which is a common finding in dengue infection. Renal functions and serum electrolytes were normal. Clotting profile was PT 10S, APTT 38S, INR 1.2 and FDP < 0.2 u/L, excluding the possibility of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Ultrasound scan did not reveal any pleural effusions or ascites excluding the early signs of capillary vascular leakage. Dengue non structural protein-1(NS) antigen was positive at day 4 of the illness. Dengue IgM antibodies were high in titre by day 6. Due to deterioration of clinical status she was transferred to intensive care unit for closer observation. An electroencephalography revealed bilateral rhythmic delta wave activity consistent with a diffuse cerebral dysfunction. CSF analysis was not performed due to profound thrombocytopenia, thus making it difficult for us to exclude other encephalitic pathogens as a cause for the encephalopathy. Nevertheless since serology was strongly positive for dengue infection and with the present dengue epidemic in our country we strongly suspected dengue encephalopathy as our first differential diagnosis. A CT scan of head was not performed due to possible risk of radiation to the fetus and the patients relatives refused consent for any imaging modalities. She was monitored closely, careful fluid management according to guidelines were carried out with regular fetal monitoring and bleeding precautions were undertaken. With the gradual rise in platelets, the patients neurological status improved spontaneously by day 10 of the illness. The encephalopathy had lasted approximately for 6 days. Fortunately, she did not have any clinical evidence of increased vascular permeability suggestive of dengue hemorrhagic fever or go into dengue shock syndrome. Once the platelet reached 70,000/mm3, she was induced for labour and delivered vaginally the baby without any peripartum or postpartum complications.