A 69-year-old Japanese woman was found to have a right breast mass with calcifications and pleural nodules on computed tomography for post-treatment surveillance of ovarian cancer . This patient had undergone debulking surgery and chemotherapy (carboplatin plus paclitaxel) for stage IIIc ovarian cancer 9 years before, and she had received additional chemotherapy (carboplatin plus paclitaxel) for bilateral axillary lymph node metastasis 4 years before. Then, she had been followed up every 3 months.
On physical examination, a 33 × 30-mm induration was palpable in the upper-outer quadrant of the patient’s right breast. Mammography showed segmental distribution of the amorphous microcalcifications associated with a focal asymmetric density in the upper-outer area of the breast . Ultrasonography showed a 33 × 33 × 16-mm irregular hypoechoic area with high echo spots and indistinct margins . From these images, ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive ductal carcinoma with a predominant intraductal component was primarily suspected, but metastatic ovarian cancer could not be excluded considering her clinical history. The patient underwent vacuum-assisted needle biopsy for the breast lesion. After the biopsy, she was treated with chemotherapy (carboplatin plus gemcitabine followed by carboplatin plus doxorubicin) for 2 years. At the time of this report (2 and half years after the biopsy), she receives best supportive care for metastatic ovarian cancer and myelodysplastic syndrome.
Macroscopic examination of the surgical specimens revealed a 65 × 55 × 45-mm, lobulated, whitish-yellow, solid mass in the right ovary; an 8-mm mass on the surface of the left ovary; and multiple disseminated tumors, up to 16 mm in size, in the greater omentum.
Microscopically, the right ovarian tumor displayed a complex branching papillary architecture . The epithelium lining the papillae was stratified and was composed of endocervical-type mucinous epithelium and serous epithelium . There were multiple invasive cancer foci in the stroma composed of endocervical-type mucinous epithelium displaying tubular architecture and serous epithelium displaying micropapillary architecture with psammoma bodies . Thus, the tumor was diagnosed to be seromucinous carcinoma (mixed endocervical-type mucinous and low-grade serous carcinoma) associated with seromucinous borderline tumor. The immunohistochemical analysis supported the diagnosis .
The left ovary was also diagnosed with seromucinous carcinoma with seromucinous borderline tumor. In the omentum, there were multiple disseminations of serous carcinoma accompanied with psammoma bodies and desmoplastic stroma .
Microscopic examination of the needle biopsy specimen revealed invasive adenocarcinoma displaying micropapillary and papillary architectures in the breast stroma . The cancer cells displayed intermediate nuclear atypia and low mitotic activity. Psammoma bodies were frequently observed. In addition, a small number of cancer nests showed a tubular architecture surrounded by myoepithelium, which appeared to be an in situ carcinoma . On the hematoxylin-and-eosin-stained slides, metastatic serous carcinoma was primarily suspected due to the morphological similarities to the previous ovarian carcinoma, but invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the breast origin could not be ruled out considering the in situ-like foci.
In immunohistochemistry, the cancer cells were immunoreactive for WT1 , PAX8, and CA125, and negative for GATA3, mammaglobin, and gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP15) . Therefore, the breast tumor was diagnosed to be metastatic ovarian serous carcinoma.
Regarding the in situ-like tubular foci, the cancer cells lining the tubule and papillae showed the aforementioned immunophenotype (e.g. positive WT1, Fig. f), but the tubular foci were surrounded by myoepithelium which was immunoreactive for myoepithelial markers [p63 , cytokeratin 14 , CD10 and calponin], and negative for endothelial markers (podoplanin and CD31). Thus, the histogenesis of the in situ-like tubular foci may be explained by the spread of metastatic ovarian cancer cells into existing mammary ducts.