A 22 year-old Cameroonian primigravida at 36 weeks of gestation was received in our district hospital for labour type pain for about 17 h. This was associated with continuous and abundant flow of clear fluid per vagina. She had started antenatal care visits at 19 weeks of gestation at a health center and she started receiving folic acid supplementation from then. Her immunization status was up-to-date. Her past history was negative for alcohol or tobacco consumption and she had no known family history of foetal anomalies. According to her past records, only one obstetric ultrasound scan was done at 19 weeks of gestation at a secondary hospital and had revealed a monoamniotic twin gestation with no apparent structural or growth abnormalities. Other routine antenatal laboratory investigations were unrevealing.
Obstetric examination revealed that she had presented at the expulsive phase of labour with the first twin’s presentation being cephalic. Clinical pelvimetry was suggestive of cephalo-pelvic disproportion. A caesarean section was performed and life male monoamniotic-monochorionic twins were extracted. The first twin had APGAR scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min and weighed 2800 g. The second twin had APGAR scores of 7 and 8 at 1 and 5 min and weighed 2724 g. The physical examination of the first twin was normal. The second twin had symmetrically deformed feet: the hindfeet were in equinus and varus, there was cavus of the midfeet and the forefeet were adducted and inverted . In addition, the muscle tone in the neonate’s lower extremities was low. A defect in the lumbar spine through which there was considerable protrusion and exposure of the spinal cord and its coverings was also observed . The Pirani score was used to grade the severity of the limb deformity in the second twin: the midfoot score was 2.5/3 (curved lateral border: 1, medial crease: 1, and talar head coverage: 0.5), and the hindfoot score was 2/3 (posterior crease: 1, rigid equinus: 0.5, and empty heel: 0.5) giving a total of 4.5/6. These findings were indicative of severe bilateral TEV in the second twin. No other abnormalities were noted on examination of the second twin.
It was concluded that the twins were discordant for spina bifida and bilateral CTEV. Routine postnatal care was ensured and at day two of life the affected neonate was referred to a tertiary hospital for proper management. At the referral site, surgical repair of the spina bifida defect was planned. However, before the surgical procedure could be carried out, it was reported that the neonate had developed hydrocephalus and had died from its complications.