We report the case of a 36-year-old Hispanic woman whose medical history features Down Syndrome, grade 1 obesity, and hypothyroidism in hormonal supplementation without a history of epilepsy or seizure. She was admitted to the emergency department with 7 days of diarrhea without mucus or blood, dry cough, progressive altered mental status, and an episode of focal tonic–clonic seizure in the left half of the body, which later became generalized. Upon arrival, the patient’s vital signs showed a blood pressure of 110/60 mmHg, heart rate of 115 beats/minute, respiratory rate 30 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation of 88% with supplementary oxygenation with a high mask flow of 15 L. On physical examination, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 11/15, and she showed drowsiness and poor interaction with the examiner. She presented reactive isochoria, pulmonary auscultation with rales in both lung fields with signs of respiratory distress given by polypnea, and use of accessory muscles. During the evaluation, she had a grand mal seizure that progressed to status epilepticus, requiring management with diazepam and valproic acid, airway protection, and invasive ventilatory support. Laboratory findings reported leukocytosis with neutrophilia and lymphopenia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase and D-dimer (18,320 ng/mL). Arterial gases showed respiratory alkalosis with severe hypoxemia and hyperlactatemia, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was confirmed with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and chest X-ray showed peripheral interstitial opacities in both lung fields.
She was transferred to the intensive care unit, where treatment for refractory hypoxemia was initiated with protective mechanical ventilation and prone therapy. A simple brain computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, reporting left parietal intraparenchymal hemorrhage with associated vasogenic edema, without any evidence of drainage in the ventricles or signs of intracranial hypertension; thus, neuroprotection was initiated, and management with valproic acid and levetiracetam was continued. Due to the findings described, the initiation of anticoagulation was postponed. On the second day in the intensive care unit (ICU), due to persistent bradycardia and progressive elevation of D-dimer to 25,000 ng/mL, a simple CT brain scan was performed reporting indirect signs of thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus with venous infarcts . Afterwards, cerebral CT angiography with venous phase confirmed extensive venous thrombosis of superior sagittal sinus, herophilic torcula, and terminal portion of the rectus sinus, as well as subtotal occlusion of transverse sinuses . Hence, full anticoagulation was started with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) at 1 mg/kg every 12 hours. Further analyses on prothrombotic disease were performed such as tests for lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM), beta 2 glycoprotein IgM and IgG, and chorionic gonadotropin, which were negative and ruled out pregnancy or antiphospholipid syndrome considering that the thrombotic event was secondary to COVID-19 infection.
During her stay in the ICU, she was under mechanical ventilation for 16 days and completed two cycles of prone therapy with improvement in oxygenation without signs of neurological deficit, so the sedation was suspended and she was successfully extubated. Afterward, she was transferred to a general ward for comprehensive rehabilitation, where no neurological sequelae were identified. At discharge, the anticoagulation was switched from LMWH to warfarin at a dosage of 5 mg per day 6 months after her the initial event a brain CT scan was performed as well as a neurological assessment that reported no neurological deficit. Since discharge, no seizures have been reported .