The patient, a 65-year-old, white, Caucasian man with a height of 172cm, weight of 75kg and body mass index (BMI) of 25.35kg/m2, was admitted to our clinic for the first time in June 1999 when a biopsy of the left hip was done. It was diagnosed as a myxoid fibrosarcoma (low grade G2). Following the biopsy, our patient underwent a resection of a tumor and the femur 12cm in length, and a reconstruction with MP™ Reconstruction Hip Stem (Waldemar Link GmbH & Co KG, Hamburg, Germany) and HI™ Acetabulum (Intraplant, Cham, Switzerland). The femoral component was a cementless stem made of titanium alloy with distal anchoring and had longitudinal fluting to provide rotational stability. It was modular with a porous-coated surface to promote bone ingrowth. The postoperative course was without complications. Our patient underwent regular ambulatory controls with clinical and radiology examinations annually. He exerted high levels of physical activity. In October 2012, our patient felt a sharp pain in his left hip while walking in the street, which prevented him from continuing to walk. After a clinical examination and a review of his radiographs, a diagnosis of fracture of the femoral stem was made. Our patient’s left leg was immobilized and put into traction. After standard preoperative preparations, our patient had his first operation in the lateral decubitus position using spinal anesthesia. The fracture was reached with the direct lateral approach extended distally. Below the fascia, proximally around his hip, hard white-yellow tumor tissue was found that extended in the inguinum and dorsal, close to the nervus ischiadicus. It was suspected to be a recurrence of a primary tumor. The tumor tissue, 11.5cm in length and 7cm in width, was excised and sent for pathohistological analysis. Microbiological samples were taken as well. The definitive reconstruction was postponed. Our patient underwent a multislice spiral computed tomography (MSCT) scan of his pelvis and lower left extremity, and a bone scan with Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m-MDP). Both demonstrated a local recurrence of the primary tumor without propagation in his pelvis. Microbiological samples were sterile and C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were within the range of normal values. A biopsy suggested a definitive diagnosis of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma and our patient was prepared for a definitive operative procedure.
Our patient was given spinal anesthesia, in the lateral decubitus position. We used the direct lateral approach that was extended distally. The fracture was 7cm distally from the tip of the greater trochanter, just at the junction of the proximal and distal modular parts and at the level of the remaining bone after the primary resection . The proximal part of the femoral stem was extracted easily and without complications. We continued with the disengagement of the proximal portion of the distal part of the femoral stem from the surrounding bone. We needed at least 2cm to have enough space for two locking pliers. This was achieved with a longitudinal osteotomy through the anterior cortex extending distally for 10cm . The transversal osteotomy was 2cm below the tip of the femoral stump to allow enough space for two locking pliers. The transversal osteotomy was about 60 to 70 percent of the total bone circumference as shown . A lamina spreader was then inserted in the osteotomy line proximally and two bone flakes were opened like a book in order to provide space for the tip of the locking pliers . The proximal tip of the broken stem was compressed as much as possible with two locking pliers. A lamina spreader was then inserted in the remaining distal longitudinal osteotomy and carefully opened for 1 to 2mm to allow the bone to separate from the stem, avoiding fracture of the femur . Simultaneously, a hammer was used on the locking pliers and with several strong strokes the broken stem was removed from the bone easily . Next, a cerclage wire was inserted below the horizontal cut to prevent a possible uncontrolled fracture of the femoral bone during broaching. A second cerclage wire was inserted on the proximal 2cm of the femoral bone, which adapted perfectly. The femoral canal was reconstructed perfectly with minimal damage to the periosteum. The new revision prosthesis was then inserted in the standard manner .