A 70-year old man presented at his hematologist’s outpatient clinic on July 12th 2016 with 3 weeks of intermittent fever, myalgia, headaches, tinnitus and an exanthema, which had started under his left eye. His history revealed a mantle cell lymphoma (a B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) in 2010, which was initially treated with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclofosfamide, doxorubicine, vincristine and prednisolone), high dose cytarabine, and autologous stem cell transplantation. After achieving a complete response, he developed progressive disease in 2015, which was treated with R-CHOP. A second complete response was achieved, and he continued to receive rituximab maintenance every other month until July 2016. For his current symptoms, he was treated with azitromycin. A consulting dermatologist observed generalized nummular to palm-sized non-pruritic erythematous macules, sparing the foot soles, which was considered either a drug eruption or a para-infectious skin reaction. An abdominal skin biopsy revealed a non-specific chronic perivascular dermatitis, deemed consistent with a hypersensitivity response. A PCR on blood was negative for EBV and CMV, and a nasopharyngeal swab was negative for respiratory viruses. His next dose of rituximab was delayed until July 18th, at which point his erythema had resolved with only minor myalgias remaining. From July 22nd the patient started to experience a right-sided headache with right-sided rhinorrhea and a tearing eye, tinnitus of both ears and a different sensation for taste, as well as relapsing (sub)febrile episodes. From August 1st, he noted a left facial palsy, and on August 23rd the patient was admitted to the neurology ward with progressive symptoms. By this time, he had developed an unsteady broad-based gait, a mild action tremor, mild apathy, dysphagia and hearing loss. He had an erythema on his wrists and left elbow and had lost 6 kg. An MRI of his brain revealed periventricular white matter lesions, and pathological enhancement of multiple cranial nerves (bilateral trigeminal and vestibulocochlear nerves and right hypoglossal nerve, Fig. ). These findings raised suspicion of a relapse of mantle cell lymphoma in the central nervous system, for which a diagnostic lumbar puncture was performed, and intrathecal prednisone combined with methotrexate was administered. A peripheral leukocyte differentiation was normal besides a lymphopenia (0,30 × 109/ml), while total IgA (0.44 g/l), IgM (< 0.181 g/l) and IgG (2.92 g/l) were reduced . The CSF showed 279 leukocytes/μl containing 60% non-clonal T-cells and only 0.001% non-clonal B-cells, and elevated protein (2.55 g/L) (Additional file : Table S1). Five days after the lumbar puncture and intrathecal chemotherapy the patient deteriorated with nausea, a nystagmus and progression of the unstable gait. An MRI was repeated and showed a small increase of basal and cerebellar leptomeningeal enhancement, as well as recent focal ischemia in the right medulla oblongata. Additional body CT and a PET-CT did not reveal lymphoma or pathological FDG absorption. Repeated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis including immunophenotyping did not reveal malignant cells, prompting a search for an alternative diagnosis.
A skin biopsy excluded sarcoidosis. Furthermore, the CSF was negative for all performed microbiological assays (Additional file : Table S2) and PCRs were negative for Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (s.l.), the tick-borne relapsing fever genus, as well as a species-specific PCR for Borrelia miyamotoi . Serology was negative for HIV and Treponema pallidum (Additional file : Table S2), and Borrelia IgM and IgG in serum were negative (Liaison, Diasorin S.p.A., Saluggia, Italy) . The patient mentioned regular walks with his dog in the woods, but did not remember any tick bites.
During his admission, spontaneous resolution of symptoms made the patient refuse a brain biopsy and he was discharged on September 22nd without definite diagnosis. Due to a relapse of dysarthria, dysphagia, cognitive decline, ataxia and a novel paresis of the right facial nerve he was re-admitted October 5th. While a brain biopsy was already planned, a lumbar puncture was repeated and a PCR on B. burgdorferi s.l. turned out weakly positive (Ct value 37), confirmed by sequencing and PCR in a second laboratory. The patient was diagnosed with neuroborreliosis and was treated with ceftriaxone 2 g/d intravenously for one month. After an initial worsening of symptoms within the first two days, he experienced a recovery and was able to continue the final two weeks of treatment in a home care setting. Finally, minimal dysarthria and dysphagia were the only remaining symptoms after treatment.
After establishing the diagnosis of neuroborreliosis in this patient, we were interested whether other serologic tests would have been able to establish the diagnosis, or that this patient was truly seronegative (which is extremely rare). We also compared serology during (4–11-2016) and after treatment (19–01-2017). Serology was negative in the Enzygnost IgM and IgG ELISA (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH, Marburg, Germany), C6 peptide ELISA (Immunetics Inc., Boston, MA, USA), and Liaison IgM in all sera, while the Liaison IgG became equivocal in intra- and post-treatment sera. Interestingly, both IgM and IgG blots (Mikrogen GmbH, Neuried, Germany) were negative, with only an IgG p41 band positive in all tested serum samples. A retrospective PCR on the skin biopsy failed to detect Borrelia DNA.