We present a three year old boy with valgus deformity of middle finger of right upper limb with an associated ulnar bony swelling at the level of middle phalanx which was noticed two years before and was progressing rapidly since last three months. On physical examination a pedunculated bony swelling was noticed to be arising from dorsoulnar aspect of the base of the middle phalanx measuring 2x1x3 cm . Another sessile bony swelling of size 2x1x1 cm is noticed on the medial aspect of second toe of right foot with an associated valgus deformity . Mild tenderness was present in both the lesions.
Radiographs of the right hand showed a pedunculated mass arising from the proximal metaphysio-diaphyseal junction of middle phalanx . Presence of cartlagenous cap was unlikely as the soft tissue shadow over the bony lesion was minimal. Irregular areas of dense calcification was noticed within the matrix. Continuity of the medullary cavity of the phalanx with the medulla of the bony lesion was noticed. Radiographs of the right foot showed a sessile bony lesion arising from the medial aspect of base of proximal phalanx, with its medulla in continuity with the medullary cavity of the phalanx . There were also multiple, small but similar bony lesions in the hand and feet. Rest of the skeleletal survey was normal. Indications for surgery were progressive angular deformity, increasing size and pain. As the lesion in the hand was pedunculated, marginal excision biopsy could be performed. The lesion in the foot was sessile and hence wide excision was done (excision of the proximal half of the affected phalanx.)
Resected specimen consisted of thin cartilage cap and bone tissue. Histologically the lesion had three components: fibroblastic spindle cells, cartilage with mild cellular atypia and irregular bony trabeculae, all present in intermixed islands without any specific pattern . This classic finding was conclusive of Bizzare parosteal osteochondromatous proliferation [,].
Latest follow up at one year since index surgery showed no recurrence. There was partial correction of the deformities of the operated phalanges. Also, some of the lesions which were initially found on skeletal survey to be small, have grown in size causing similar deformity of the affected phalanges, which might need future surgical intervention.