A 54-year-old man was admitted to Shanghai Chest Hospital due to pulmonary shadow incidentally detected on routine chest roentgenograms. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large mass with partial pleural adhesion which seemed to originate from the mediastinal pleura rather than the right middle lobe . The tumor was well-circumscribed measuring about 4 cm and displayed heterogeneous enhancement (parenchyma of the tumor showed moderate contrast enhancement; 21 HU (Hounsfield Unit) on pre-contrast image and 63 HU on post-contrast image) . On the lung window image, one discrete 11 mm nodule was also noted in the left lower lobe, raising the possibility of lung-to-lung metastases . Right pleural localized enclosing effusion and mild enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes were additional radiological findings.
Surgical procedures were tentatively scheduled for tumor dissection of the middle lobe and wedge-resection of the left lower lobe. Intraoperative frozen section of the larger mass was interpreted as indeterminate for malignancy in view of the atypical tumor cells growing in the interstitial surrounding blood vessels while the small solid nodule was diagnosed as a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Based on the above analysis and the patient approval, supplementary lobectomy of the right middle lobe and lymph node dissection were performed subsequently.
Gross specimen of the larger tumor showed a well-demarcated and non-encapsulated mass, with a grayish brown cut-surface and significant cystic lacunar structure . Microscopically, the tumor parenchyma was composed of epithelioid cells ranged in perivascular haemangiopericytoma-like patterns with clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm, with rich sinusoidal blood vessels . Trabecular-like and pellet-like growth pattern can be seen in some areas. Abundant clear intracellular glycogen displays positive Periodic Acid-Schiff staining with and without diastase digestion . Mass emergence of intra-nuclear pseudo-inclusions is an important morphological feature of this case. Neoplastic cells with obvious enlarged nucleoli and pathological mitosis were found. In addition, some dispersed bizarre hyperchromatic tumor giant cell (5/50 high-power fields) throughout the tumor is highly distinctive. The small solid nodular of the left lower lobe was confirmed as classic primary lung adenocarcinoma .
Immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity within tumor cells for Vimentin and Melan-A , weak but diffusely positive for TFE3 protein , while HMB45 was negative. The Ki-67 score was about 10%. The neoplastic cells failed to stain with epithelial marker pan-cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), myogenic marker caldesmon, myogenin and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and additional antibodies including neuroendocrine markers.
TFE3 gene rearrangement was not identified by fluorescence in-situ hybridization and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The results of targeted molecular gene alteration including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS proto-oncogene 1(ROS1), kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (K-ras) of these two tumors were all negative.
The patient underwent three courses of chemotherapy of combined paclitaxel (300 mg) and carboplatin (600 mg) after surgery. A follow up fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) obtained 12 months after chemotherapy showed no metastatic lesions elsewhere. At present, the disease is stable and the patient is followed-up regularly.