We present the case of a 23-year-old female office clerk suffering from fluctuating paranoid-hallucinatory symptoms since the age of 14 years (2007). Therefore, the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia was made by different psychiatrists. Although taking neuroleptics, in the course of the disease, the patient developed five episodes (for several weeks) with paranoid-hallucinatory exacerbation. In these episodes, the patient suffered from formal thought disorder, fear, delusions of persecution, auditory hallucinations with commenting, discussing, and commanding voices, visual hallucinations with seeing maggots in her room, and tactile hallucinations with the feeling of being touched from behind. In parallel to these exacerbations, the patient developed severe negative and cognitive symptoms including attention and memory deficits, fatigue, depressive mood, and sleep disturbances thus completing the psychopathological features of comprehensive schizophrenia. Neurological and medical examinations were normal.
There was a positive family history for unipolar depression, which was diagnosed earlier in two sisters, both parents, and both grandmothers. There was no history for schizophrenia-like psychopathology, bipolar disorder, or epilepsy.
Symptoms started 6 weeks after pain of the large joints. Therefore, a rheumatological disease was discussed. During an external work-up of repeated diarrhea, a chronic inflammation gut disease (ulcerative colitis) was diagnosed in 2014 and treated with mesalazine. No birth complications or in utero abnormalities were remembered; the birth was performed by cesarean section. The early childhood development was normal. No febrile convulsions or inflammatory brain diseases were remembered. The patient suffered mild cerebral contusions at the age of 4 and 12 years.
The diagnostic findings are summarized in Table . Taken together, the immunological alterations were compatible with the previously known ulcerative colitis . The electrophysiological findings would be compatible with primary (idiopathic) generalized epilepsy; however, the history for epileptic seizures including absences and myoclonic jerks was negative.
The schizophreniform symptoms fulfilled the criteria of paranoid-hallucinatory schizophrenia (see footnote 1). Therefore, the most important differential diagnoses would be schizophrenia plus coincidental epileptiform discharges. Although the findings of the investigation led us to our consideration of neuropsychiatric SLE, the American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for SLE were not fulfilled.
External neuroleptic treatment with risperidone (4 mg), amisulpride (600 mg), perazine (100 mg), aripiprazole (15 mg), and clozapine (275 mg) did not lead to long-term stabilization. Additional treatment with fluoxetine (20 mg) and citalopram (20 mg) for affective, negative, and cognitive symptoms did not successfully improve these symptoms. During the first visit in our clinic, in 2013, we detected the abovementioned epileptiform discharges. Assuming a (para)epileptic pathomechanism, we added antiepileptic treatment with valproate (1,500 mg) to the neuroleptic medication with clozapine and aripiprazole. At this point, the cognitive deficits improved significantly. Also, the EEG improved except for the (F)IRDAs. Another paranoid-hallucinatory episode in 2014 was treated successfully with a dose increase of clozapine and valproate. Because of a strong weight gain, the therapy with valproate was changed to topiramate (200 mg) in 2014. Assuming a (para)epileptic pathomechanism, clozapine was reduced and stopped in 2014. Aripiprazole was reduced in January 2014 and stopped in 2015. Normal results were found in both the routine EEG and in the EEG after sleep deprivation (2014). In the further course, topiramate led to a severe loss of appetite and was therefore changed to levetiracetam (1,500 mg) in 2014. The mental condition stabilized with the short-term antiepileptic treatment with topiramate and the subsequent antiepileptic treatment with levetiracetam (since 2014, and since 2015 as monotherapy). There were no more paranoid-hallucinatory episodes, the negative symptoms declined, the patient became a mother (in the spring of 2016); she lived alone, took care of her daughter, and simultaneously finished her vocational training (in the summer of 2016). She was able to suspend the mesalazine therapy and therefore only took levetiracetam (1,500 mg) at the time of stabilization.