A 76-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with anemia. Her previous medical history included endoscopic submucosal dissection 1 year prior for early gastric cancer, appendectomy, and hypertension. The patient was postmenopausal, with no family history of cancer.
Laboratory examinations revealed pancytopenia (white blood cell count, 2200/μL; hemoglobin count, 9.2 g/dL; and platelet count, 75,000/μL), suggesting myelodysplastic syndrome. The patient was not treated for pancytopenia, and the treatment plan was observation. The carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels were 9.3 ng/mL (normal: < 5.0 ng/mL) and 6.2 U/mL (normal: < 37 U/mL), respectively. Colonoscopy revealed a type II tumor, which measured 30 mm in diameter and was located in the middle transverse colon . Additionally, biopsy demonstrated a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma . However, computed tomography detected no remarkable abnormality and no evidence of lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis . Moreover, barium enema examination revealed an arc-shaped deformation in the transverse colon, further indicating that the lesion was a type II tumor . According to the TNM classification, the clinical diagnosis was cT2N0M0 (Stage I) . Two months after the initial colonoscopy, the patient underwent colonoscopy again for preoperative localization, revealing tumor shrinkage to a diameter of 15 mm and a shift to type 0–IIc morphology . After confirming that the tumor was in the correct location, we performed endoscopic tattooing, followed by a laparoscopic partial resection of the transverse colon with D3 lymph node dissection. The resected specimen left only a discolored scar, and the tumor had disappeared . Histopathological examination revealed mucosal regeneration and a mucus nodule in between the submucosal and muscular layers, with no any residual cancer cells noted. All of the resected specimens also demonstrated no malignant lesions . Similarly, the dissected lymph nodes showed no cancer cells. Considering that the relationship between SR and dMMR has been pointed out, we further performed immunohistochemical analysis using the biopsy specimens. Results showed that MutL homolog 1 (MLH1) and postmeiotic segregation increased 2 (PMS2) were not expressed, suggesting dMMR . Germline mutation testing was not performed because the patient did not request it. I have not measured methylation either.
Subsequently, the patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged 7 days postoperatively. Colonoscopy was then performed 2 months postoperatively, and it showed no tumors in the colon and rectum. The patient continues to be followed up until 6 years postoperatively without any adjuvant therapy. No recurrence has been observed. Accordingly, the final diagnosis was SR of advanced transverse colon cancer.