A 19-month-old female presented with diarrhea for more than 10 months, 4 to 5 times a day, and no vomiting. The blood routine examination at the external hospital showed a decrease in hemoglobin, and a negative Coombs test. No abnormalities were detected in the bone marrow biopsy. An abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged spleen measuring 10 cm × 9 cm × 2 cm. No abnormalities were detected in the other organs. The patient was diagnosed with infectious diarrhea and treated with cefotaxime, imipenem, and vancomycin. Following the treatment, the diarrhea improved slightly. However, after some time the patient started to experience diarrhea with mucus and bloody stools, 4 to 5 times a day. A colonoscopy was performed which revealed proctitis. Pathological examination showed active inflammation of the rectal mucosa, accompanied by small vessel congestion and bleeding. The fecal test showed a positive result for Clostridioides difficile toxin. Based on these findings we thought that the patients might be suffering from infectious diarrhea, and did not consider the possibility that the patient may have an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Therefore the patient was treated with anti-inflammatories. Although, initially the patient experienced some improvements, the patient relapsed after some time. Two months later a second colonoscopy was performed which revealed similar changes. Nevertheless, the tissue samples obtained during the colonoscopy revealed chronic active inflammation in the colon, accompanied by focal granuloma formation. The two pathological biopsies confirmed the presence of inflammatory changes and no tumor cells were found. Therefore we suspected that the patient was suffering very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEO-IBD). Despite being treated with vancomycin, metronidazole, thalidomide, and prednisone, the therapeutic response remained unsatisfactory. The patient was admitted to our hospital on 21 August 2023. A clinical examination revealed normal hemoglobin levels, no skin abnormalities, and no lymph node swelling. However, the patient had an enlarged spleen and was underweight. The immediate family members of the child had no history of genetic diseases. A third colonoscopy was performed and showed diffuse congestion and edema of the total colon mucosa, erythema, and superficial ulcers. Therefore, multiple biopsies of the ileocecal region, transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum were obtained. The pathological results showed normal intestinal mucosa crypt structure with no significant reduction in the glandular structure of the mucosal lamina propria. These cells were evenly dispersed within the stroma and had an irregular nucleus and a pale, granular cytoplasm. Additionally, minor eosinophilic infiltration (approximately 10/high-power field) was observed in localized areas of the stroma. The immunohistochemical (IHC) results were positive for CD1a, S-100, CD68 and CD163. The Ki-67 marker showed a highly proliferative index. However, the IHC results for the CD30, ALK, CD117, CKpan, and CD138 tumor markers were negative . The BRAF p.V600E gene mutation was detected by fluorescence Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) using the Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) method . The immunohistochemical and BRAF p.V600E mutation results support the diagnosis of intestinal LCH. The computed tomography (CT) of the lungs and brain showed no abnormalities, except for LCH involvement of the intestine and spleen. Therefore, the girl was diagnosed with intestinal LCH with spleen involvement. After the diagnosis of this disease, the patient was treated with vincristine and prednisone chemotherapy drugs, as well as BRAF inhibitor dalafinil, for 2 months. The treatment significantly reduced the patient’s intestinal bleeding and diarrhea. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a reduction in the size of the spleen, indicating a gradual improvement in the patient’s condition.