At term of gestation, a 36-year-old woman presented at the Labour Unit of our hospital. Twenty days before, she had fever and cough and was identified as SARS-CoV-2 positive. Since then, the patient was asymptomatic. In the family history, her parents also tested positive for COVID-19. On the admission to the hospital, the patient was put a surgical mask and nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were performed. The samples were tested for SARS-CoV-2 by using Allplex™ 2019-nCoV Assay, which is multiplex Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) assay for simultaneous detection of 3 target genes of SARS-CoV-2 (RdRP, N and E gene) in a single tube. The result of RT-PCR-RNA test confirmed woman’s infection with two genes being detected (RdRP and N). The day after, a 3290 g male infant was born by vaginal delivery at 40 weeks of gestation, with Apgar scores of 9 and 10. Skin to skin contact was performed in labour room.Amniotic fluid samples,vaginal and placenta swab specimens obtained were tested negative for SARS CoV-2 by RT-PCR-RNA test. After delivery, the infant was moved to room-in with the mother. The baby's cradle was placed at a distance of 2 m from the mother's head. Breastfeeding was immediately commenced to benefit of the antiviral potential of colostrum and subsequently of breast milk. During breastfeeding, the mother was indicated to wear the surgical face mask and to follow hygienic rules (hand washing) in order to avoid viral transmission by droplet, according to the Neonatal Italian Society guidelines . Breast milk samples, collected via pumps into sterile containers 10 min after baby feeding and following meticulous nipple hygiene with chlorhexidine 2%, tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 by using Allplex™ 2019-nCoV Assay. Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs obtained to detect SARS-COV2 on the infant at 6, 24 and 48 h of age were all negative whereas on the same timings the mother still resulted positive for COVID-19. Blood tests of the baby were unremarkable. On day 2 the baby was discharged home with his mother. At 28-day follow-up the baby was in a good condition. Breastfeeding, integrated with strict hygiene measures, was not discontinued at home although mother was still SARS-CoV 2 positive. Repeated nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs on the infant at 4, 14, 18 and 28 days of age were all negative, whereas on the same days the mother still tested positive for COVID-19. In all the nasopharyngeal swabs obtained from the mother, the cycle threshold (Ct) value of RT PCR targeting N gene and RdRPgene, was between 33 and 38.7.