A 3-year-old female was accidentally found with a large left upper abdominal mass for a day. By physical examination, a smooth, hard, painless, and firm mass of about 14 cm in the left upper abdomen was found. Laboratory test showed increased fibrinogen of 4.08 g/L (reference range 2–4 g/L), neuron-specific enolase (NSE) of 79.90 ng/mL (reference range 15.6–17 ng/mL), and tumor abnormal protein (TAP) of 135.60 (reference range 1–121). An ultrasound showed a solid mass of about 13.8 × 10.4 cm in the left upper abdomen, with an unclear boundary with the left kidney. Blood flow signal could be observed using the color doppler flow imaging (CDFI) technique .
Contrast-enhanced CT examination indicated a huge soft tissue mass, measuring 12.3 × 7.4 cm at the larger section, in the left retroperitoneum extending superiorly to the level of the left hilus renalis and inferiorly to the left acetabulum in the pelvic cavity, with intrusion into the lumbar foramens, compression and squeezing of the left kidney and left abdominal bowel, local compression and stenosis of the inferior vena cava, and the abdominal aorta was displaced to the right side by compression . The tissue mass showed mottling calcification, cystic degeneration, and necrosis. The patient was injected with 0.1 mCi/kg of 18F-FDG after 6 h of fasting, and PET/CT images were acquired 60 min later. The tissue mass with a high FDG uptake was found using 18F-FDG PET/CT in the left retroperitoneum from the level of T12 to the left acetabulum, with the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of about 7.0 and a CT value of about 39 HU. The tumor invaded the left L3-5 intervertebral foramina and protruded into the spinal canal, with an unclear boundary with the spinal cord . The abdominal cavity and retroperitoneum showed enlarged lymph nodes, with a SUVmax of about 6.4 and the largest size of about 2.0 × 3.0 cm. No obvious abnormal FDG uptake was observed in the lung and bone.
Retroperitoneal tumor resection and vascular repairing operation were performed 10 days after admission. The tumor was found to extend superiorly to the left hilus renalis, rightwards to cross the spine, and inferiorly to the level of the internal inguinal ring. It surrounded the abdominal aorta, the left iliac vessel, and the inferior vena cava, while locally infiltrating and growing in the inferior vena cava. After vessel clamping, the inferior vena cava segment invaded by the tumor was resected. Since the patient's family refused artificial vascular replacement, the inferior vena cava, at the level of the left and right iliac artery branches, and the left and right iliac veins were ligated. Histological results showed small round malignant cell with characteristic alveolar structures (,). Immunohistochemical staining revealed myogenin (+), LCA (–), EMA (–), AE1/AE3 (–), Syn + (partly), NSE (–), CD99 (–), Fli-1 (–), Ki-67 (+60%), PAX-8 (+), CD56 (+), CgA (foci+), Desmin (+), Myo D1 (+), WT-1 (+), PD-1, S-100 (–), and PAX-5 (+). Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed fork head in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) rupture . The final diagnosis was confirmed as ARMS with TNM stage 3 and IRS stage III, and the level of risk was high. Then, the patient received chemotherapy comprising vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide (VAC therapy) with supportive treatments to alleviate adverse reactions to chemotherapy. A combination of vincristine and irinotecan (VI) was administered 1 month later, and VAC was repeated 2 months later. The patient has survived for 9 months since the initial diagnosis with no recurrence and obvious complications.