Our patient was a 35-year old Caucasian woman with CP of unknown etiology. Her main complaint at the time of the consultation was severe chronic abdominal pain refractory to narcotic pain medication. Additionally, she was experiencing nausea and vomiting. Her pancreatic function was normal, with a hemoglobin A1C level of 5.4% and basal C-peptide level of 1.3 ng/mL. The history of her present illness was significant for several episodes of recurrent pancreatitis over the past six years after undergoing an open cholecystectomy with subsequent removal of a retained common bile duct stone by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Her past medical history was also significant for psoriasis and heavy alcohol consumption, which likely contributed to the subsequent development of CP, although she reported abstinence for the past year.
At the time of her admission, an ERCP was performed and demonstrated the presence of a previous sphincterotomy and a dilated common bile duct of approximately 11 mm without filling defects. A stricture of her main pancreatic duct was observed at the level of the ampulla of Vater; dilatation of the remaining portion of the pancreatic duct was present. An endoscopic ultrasound was performed and revealed sonographic changes consistent with mild CP (2.5 mm pancreatic duct, heterogeneous parenchyma) according to the Cambridge classification . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and computed tomography of her abdomen were also performed and demonstrated findings consistent with those observed in the ERCP. Given the young age of our patient, we gave priority to surgical therapy to avoid additional endoscopic procedures. After discussing the various therapeutic options with our patient, she chose an RA-PPPD, for better drainage of the distal pancreas and pain relief. Additionally, in consideration of her young age and the future unknown fate of the pancreatic remnant, our patient was offered AIT to preserve endocrine function.
After induction of general anesthesia, our patient was placed in the lithotomy position, with slight reverse Trendelenburg, and her abdomen was prepared and draped in the usual sterile fashion. Trocars were placed as indicated in Figure . The Da Vinci robotic surgical system (Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was docked into position, with a viewpoint from our patient's head. We mobilized the right colonic flexure, exposed the second portion of her duodenum and completed mobilization of the pancreatic head. The pancreatic head was enlarged and fibrotic. Next, her hepatic hilum was dissected, her common hepatic artery was exposed and her right gastric artery was ligated. The origin of her gastroduodenal artery was prepared with a vessel loop but not divided to preserve the blood supply to the head of the pancreas. The dissection of her gastrocolic ligament was completed, exposing the inferior border of her pancreas and the pancreatic neck. The neck of her pancreas was prepared and her superior mesenteric vein was widely exposed. Next, the pylorus was prepared; her right gastroepiploic artery and vein were divided. The first portion of her duodenum was divided 2 cm distal to the pylorus using a stapling device. The first loop of her jejunum was transected using a stapler device as well. Her duodenum was retracted, exposing the uncinate process. Subsequently, her common bile duct was transected and the dissection was conducted in the neck of her pancreas, dividing the pancreatic neck with the Harmonic scalpel. Her pancreatic duct was enlarged, measuring approximately 3 mm to 4 mm. The dissection proceeded cautiously until the entire head of her pancreas was connected only to her gastroduodenal artery and superior pancreaticoduodenal vein. Immediately before the transection, a small Pfannenstiel incision was made; a hand access device (Lap Disc, Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH, USA) was inserted with the aim of preserving the pneumoperitoneum. At this point, her gastroduodenal artery and superior pancreaticoduodenal vein were clipped and divided . The specimen was placed in an endobag and extracted immediately through the mini laparotomy previously performed. Her pancreas was flushed with University of Wisconsin solution on the back-bench and brought to the islet isolation facility in a sterile bag on ice for processing.
In the interim, the reconstruction phase of the operation was initiated. A pancreaticogastrostomy was performed. Next, a retrocolic end-to-side hepaticojejunostomy was created with the first loop of her jejunum. The last anastomosis was an end-to-side two layer pylorojejunostomy, 40 cm distal to the hepaticojejunal anastomosis. Once the reconstruction was completed, her inferior mesenteric vein was dissected and canulated with a 16-gauge canula in preparation for the islet cell infusion.
The islet isolation procedure was conducted as previously described . In brief, the pancreatic duct was canulated and injected with a purified collagenase solution (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany). The pancreas was cut into small pieces and placed into a modified Ricordi digestion system. Under microscopic control of repeat samples, the digestion was stopped by dilution and cooling as soon as 50% of the islets were free from the exocrine tissue. The digest was collected and washed under repeat centrifugation. After a quality assessment the islet preparation was placed into several syringes and brought into the operating room. The islets were successfully infused into the portal stream and her inferior mesenteric vein was subsequently ligated . To conclude, two Jackson Pratt #10 drainages were placed - one adjacent to the pancreatic anastomosis and one underneath her liver.
Our patient tolerated the procedure well. The weight of the resected pancreas portion was 47 g, after trimming of non-pancreatic tissue. Fifteen milliliters of tissue containing 134,727 islet equivalent (IEQ; 2867 IEQ per gram of pancreas or 2449 IEQ per kilogram of the recipient body weight) were collected. The viability of the tissue was 97%, as measured by propidium iodide and cytogreen fluorescent staining. The operation lasted six hours and thirty minutes, with an estimated blood loss of 200 mL. Our patient was maintained on an intravenous insulin drip during the first two days after the operation. She was subsequently transitioned to 4U to 6U of long-acting insulin daily. Our patient's recovery was uneventful; her C-peptide level on the eighth postoperative day was 2.2 ng/mL. She was discharged home on the ninth postoperative day with pain improvement and was maintained on low dose insulin. During her last follow-up 45 days after the surgery, she was normoglycemic without any insulin injection and reported complete resolution of her pain.