A 17-year-old female presented to our emergency department (ED) with acute voluminous bilious emesis. Prior to this acute presentation, she had endorsed over 6 months of chronic nausea, especially upon awakening, progressing to protracted non-bilious emesis every 1–2 weeks. Symptoms were frequently relieved by prolonged hot baths. Her recurrent vomiting exacerbations were generally followed by 1 to 2 weeks of symptom reduction and self-imposed limitations in oral intake. Four months prior to her acute presentation, she had norovirus infection with mesenteric adenitis and mid-ileal small bowel-to-small bowel intussusception requiring laparoscopic reduction without resection. Evaluation of her chronic nausea and vomiting 3 months prior to admission revealed normal inflammatory, liver, and kidney markers, negative ß-hCG, and no evidence of sexually transmitted disease. An upper endoscopy performed at that time showed no anatomic abnormalities and was normal apart from a small hyperplastic antral polyp and microscopic non-eosinophilic esophagitis .
Her past medical history otherwise included hepatomegaly [seen on computed tomography (CT) scan several years prior to presentation, normal liver enzymes] and intermittent hyperglycemia, glucosuria, and ketonuria with a normal HgbA1c and no other clear clinical or laboratory evidence of diabetes. Of note, her prior CT scan noted no abnormalities in the proximal small bowel. Her social history was significant for over 5 years of heavy and accelerating cannabis use. At the time of presentation, she endorsed smoking 5–6 marijuana cigarettes daily for over 1 year, a habit she attributed to life stressors both at home and at school.
At presentation, the patient reported a rapid weight loss of more than 9 Kg. She denied constipation, diarrhea, or intentional vomiting or weight loss. She was noted to have a normal body mass index (BMI) of 23.46 Kg/m2, despite her weight loss. Physical examination was remarkable for diffuse abdominal tenderness and fullness to palpation, worst in the epigastrium. ß-hCG was again negative and urine toxicology screen was positive for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Abdominal x-ray was unremarkable. CT scan with contrast of the abdomen and pelvis revealed moderate gastric and proximal duodenal distention, with tapering of the duodenal lumen at the level of the SMA. The aortomesenteric (AOM) angle was 10 degrees and AOM distance was 6 mm. Taken together, these findings were suggestive of SMAS (, ) . There was no evidence of biliary or pancreatic pathology, adenopathy, or malignancy. A nasogastric tube was inserted for gastric and duodenal decompression and a nasojejunal (NJ) tube was placed to bypass the obstruction and provide nutrition and hydration.
While the patient's acute presentation and CT findings were attributable to SMAS, this did not explain her chronic antecedent symptoms of nausea, episodic vomiting, and weight loss. The patient's heavy chronic cannabis use, the longstanding nature of her complaints (>6 months), her otherwise reassuring evaluation, and her stereotypical pattern of episodic vomiting, satisfied the Rome IV criteria for cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS), a well-defined disorder, characterized by prolonged cannabis use, cyclical nausea and vomiting with reduction or even complete cessation of symptoms between events, abdominal pain, and often compulsive hot water bathing for relief of symptoms . It was postulated that the weight loss she sustained as the result of frequent protracted CHS resulted in a diminution of the fat pad between the SMA and the aorta and eventual obstruction of the third portion of the duodenum leading to her acute presentation with voluminous bilious emesis. Acute symptoms improved with gastroduodenal decompression for several days. She was monitored for refeeding syndrome as NJ feedings were advanced to goal. The patient and her guardian demonstrated good understanding of her acute and chronic conditions and the goals for both her acute and long-term management. She did not follow-up with the Gastroenterology service but sought regular care with her primary care provider and was able to tolerate oral meals and have the NJ removed within 8 weeks of hospitalization. During this period, she was reportedly cannabis-free and had no further episodes of vomiting. Three months after admission, the patient presented again to the ED with intractable nausea and vomiting. She endorsed progressively escalating use of cannabis that approached the quantity and frequency at her prior admission. The resolution of symptoms during prolonged cessation of cannabis and the prompt resumption of symptoms with recurrent use further supported the diagnosis of CHS.