A previously healthy 35-year-old man contracted an influenza type A virus infection. He had a high fever with a mild painful throat, myalgia and arthralgia throughout his whole body. He was diagnosed with an influenza type A infection by a positive result from an influenza antigen detection kit with a sample taken from a throat swab. He started taking oseltamivir phosphate (three 75 mg capsules) within 24 hours of the onset of high fever. The next day, he had an acute progressive tetraplegia and transcortical motor aphasia with mildly altered mental status. He was then transferred to our emergency room for further evaluation.
Initial MRI at day 1 showed lesions diffusely throughout the white matter and especially on the central portion of the corpus callosum splenium, with a slight hyperintensity on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and markedly high signal intensity on diffusion-weighted images. These findings resolved completely on follow-up study at day 8 and day 146 .
His cerebrospinal pressure was high (235 mmH2O), but cytological and biochemical analyses of CSF were within normal limits: number of cells was 3/3 mm3 (all monocytes), protein level was 30.6 g/dl and the glucose level was 67 mg/dl. The influenza genome was not detected by polymerase chain reaction in CSF samples from day 1 and day 8. Blood count showed a mild thrombocytopenia (12.0 × 104 cells/ml) and leukopenia (2500 cells/ml). Electroencephalography showed normal basic activity with no paroxysmal discharge. He was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy (1000 mg/day) for 3 days; his condition improved quickly following this treatment. After a 2-week rehabilitation, he made a complete recovery and was discharged from the hospital on day 24.
The levels of cytokines in his blood serum and CSF were assayed at pre- and post-treatment with methylprednisolone, as described previously . In the blood serum, IL-6 and IL-10 levels were elevated at day 1 (pre-treatment) and had decreased to normal at day 8 (post-treatment). In the CSF, IL-6 levels were remarkably high (19.6 pg/ml) at day 1 and had decreased to normal by day 8 . The levels of IL-6 and IL-10 in the serum and CSF were correlated with his clinical course.