A 76-year-old obese Caucasian male with past medical history of hypertension controlled with hydrochlorothiazide, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on ipratropium bromide and albuterol, diabetes mellitus type II on metformin, atrial fibrillation on diltiazem and warfarin, gastroesophageal reflux disorder, and benign prostatic hypertrophy on tamsulosin presented to the ED with acute-onset shortness of breath. On initial examination, the patient was in respiratory distress, unable to speak greater than two-word phrases, with diffuse erythema and associated severe pruritus. He described an acute onset of these symptoms approximately 30 minutes prior to arrival to the ED. On initial evaluation, he gave us a piece of paper on which he had written “polyethylene glycol,” implicating this as the new and only medication or substance he had ingested in the three hours prior to presentation.
At the time of arrival, the patient’s blood pressure (BP) was 177/143 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), heart rate (HR) 163 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate (RR) 23 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 93% on room air, weight 103 kilograms (kg). He was in acute respiratory distress in tripod position, with an urticarial eruption on his trunk. Auscultation was significant for inspiratory and expiratory wheezes in all lung fields. Oropharyngeal exam revealed an edematous soft palate with a brawny texture and elevation of his tongue to the hard palate, with associated difficulty tolerating his oral secretions.
The patient immediately received 0.3 milligrams (mg) of IM epinephrine, 125 mg intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone, 50 mg IV diphenhydramine, 20 mg IV famotidine, and one liter 0.9% normal saline. Despite these interventions, the patient deteriorated rapidly, demonstrating signs of anaphylactic shock. His BP decreased to 63/42 mmHg, with a HR of 173 bpm, RR of 34 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 78% on room air. It was determined that the patient would need intubation and further resuscitation with IV fluids and an epinephrine infusion to maintain his blood pressure in the setting of respiratory failure and anaphylactic shock. His oxygenation improved to 93% with application of supplemental oxygen via a non-rebreather mask at 15 liters per minute, and he maintained his mentation; thus, we elected to use fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy to evaluate the airway for concern of significant oropharyngeal edema and the potential for a complicated endotracheal intubation.
The patient’s oropharynx was prepped with topical benzocaine spray, and a 6.0 endotracheal tube (ETT) was loaded on the fiberoptic scope in preparation for emergent nasotracheal intubation if necessary during the procedure. On visualization of the pharynx, he was noted to have edema extending to the area of the hypopharynx, sparing the epiglottis and vocal cords. We elected to proceed with rapid sequence endotracheal intubation after evaluation of his airway. The intubation was performed with 200 mg IV ketamine and 200 mg IV succinylcholine. Video laryngoscopy using a 7.0 ETT resulted in first-pass success. An in-line albuterol nebulizer was then initiated. To allow for central hemodynamic monitoring and accurate titration of the patient’s epinephrine infusion, right femoral central and arterial lines were placed with goal to maintain a mean arterial pressure of greater than 65 mmHg. The patient was subsequently admitted to the medical intensive care unit in critical condition.