A 51-year-old Japanese male experienced lower back and left thigh pain after falling off a bicycle. The first-contact doctor did not detect any obvious fracture line on a plain radiograph and followed up conservatively. However, the patient’s pain still persisted 1 month after the injury and without relief, so he visited a different nearby orthopedic clinic. Because the left thigh and lower extremity pain closely resembled sciatica originating from a lumbar spinal lesion, the orthopedic doctor performed lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, no significant lumbar spinal stenosis or herniated disc was observed that could account for his leg pain, so additional cervical and thoracic MRI and whole-spine computed tomography (CT) were conducted to screen for covert spinal lesions. The thoracic MRI revealed an ossified lesion of the ligamentum flavum at the T5/6 level, but it was too minute to compress a spinal nerve or induce any neuropathic pain. Furthermore, the whole-spine MRI findings could not account for his radicular pain. His pain persisted and gradually worsened. Because no diagnosis was able to be made, 3 months after his initial injury, he was referred to our hospital for a thorough and detailed examination.
On his initial visit to our hospital, the patient complained of lower back pain and radiating leg pain from the left buttock to the posterior thigh area. His left leg pain was also spreading to the lateral side of the lower leg and the dorsum of the foot. Physical examination indicated a positive straight leg raising test on the left side, with severe pain occurring at 20 degrees, and the Patrick test was also positive on the left side. There was no motor weakness or reflex abnormality. Notably, even with severe pain, he was an independent ambulator despite claudication.
Reassessment of the serial spine and hip images showed degenerative changes in the lumbar spine and confirmed the absence of an identifiable fracture. The minute ossified lesion of the ligamentum flavum at T5/6 was identified on the CT and MRI images, but there were no compressive changes to the spinal canal . We then performed hip radiographs at our hospital, but no significant findings, including fractures, were revealed . Next, on the basis of his history of trauma without any spinal lesion, we performed hip joint MRI screening for hip and pelvic lesions. A fracture line with bone marrow edema at the left proximal femur exhibiting low T1 and high T2 signal intensity on the T2-weighted image was revealed, leading to the diagnosis of OPFF.
Because the patient’s pain had persisted for 3 months and gradually worsened, he underwent surgery under general anesthesia to stabilize the OPFF by osteosynthesis. We inserted a compression hip screw and fixed it in situ . During the operation, the left lower limb was pulled using a traction table, and the left hip joint was passively moved, and no fracture instability was noted. Full weight-bearing walking from the day after the operation was permitted. He started walking with a T-shaped cane 5 days after surgery and was discharged 17 days after surgery. One month after surgery, pain relief was complete, and his gait had returned to normal. A postoperative MRI at 7 months showed the disappearance of the fracture line and of the bone marrow edema in the left proximal femur .