A 66-year-old woman presented with sudden dysarthria and nausea and vomiting for 6 h upon admission. The patient’s past medical history included cholecystectomy, meningioma resection, bilateral knee joint replacement surgery, and hypertension. Her vital signs were stable upon admission. Neurological examination revealed clouded consciousness with symmetric, round pupils, 2.0 mm in diameter, responsive to light. The extremities were mobile but without elicited tendon reflexes or Babinski signs. Due to the patient’s inability to cooperate with further examinations, sensory, coordination, and Romberg’s sign assessments were not possible. Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 12.
Upon admission, the patient’s glycated hemoglobin level, blood gas analysis, and novel coronavirus nucleic acid test results were negative. shows the abnormal findings. The patient had abnormalities in coagulation function, providing a solid theoretical basis for thrombus formation. Electrocardiogram and echocardiography showed no significant abnormalities. The patient had undergone a meningioma resection surgery 7 years ago; however, the emergent head computed tomography (CT) scan ruled out intracranial space-occupying lesions or hemorrhage. Due to the 6-h delay from symptom onset to the arrival at the emergency room, intravenous thrombolysis was not administered owing to the increased risk of cerebral hemorrhage of this therapy when the time window of 4.5 h was exceeded. The patient had a stroke-like onset, occurring 6 h earlier. CT excluded intracranial hemorrhage; the NIHSS score was 12, indicating large blood vessel occlusion. After a discussion with the patient’s family, we performed a DSA examination to determine the presence of extensive vessel pathology and assess collateral blood flow. An endovascular mechanical thrombectomy was performed to salvage the ischemic penumbra when necessary.
A right femoral artery puncture was performed, and a catheter was placed at the bilateral carotid and subclavian arteries. Angiography revealed visible PTA with tortuous vessel course at the C4 segment of the right ICA (a, b), occlusion of the distal basilar artery at the PTA anastomotic site (a, b), and hypoplasia of the right vertebral artery with no visualization beyond V3 and no visualization of the left vertebral artery beyond V4 (c, d). DSA confirmed the diagnosis of acute posterior circulation stroke in the patient. Due to the underdevelopment of vertebral arteries and the proximal basilar artery up to the PTA anastomotic site, posterior circulation thrombectomy was not feasible. Therefore, the right ICA and PTA were selected as the thrombectomy route.
We advanced a React™ 68 distal access catheter (Medtronic, Irvine, CA, USA) into the C1 segment of the right ICA. Subsequently, the Rebar™ 18 microcatheter and Synchro microguidewire were introduced and advanced to the proximal end of the thromboembolic segment in the basilar artery. However, we could not successfully traverse the occlusion, and the distal access catheter was challenging to advance. We suspected that the inability to cross the thrombotic occlusion segment with the Synchro microguidewire might be due to its low stiffness, while the difficulty in advancing the distal access catheter could be attributed to the pronounced tortuosity and small caliber of the PTA and insufficient support of the microguides. Consequently, we switched to a stiffer and more supportive microguidewire, Avigo, which allowed us to traverse the thrombotic occlusion segment successfully (a); however, we still could not advance the distal access catheter. Thus, we advanced the microcatheter to the distal end of the basal artery and deployed a Solitaire™ FR 4–20 stent retriever (Medtronic, Irvine, CA, USA) for thrombectomy. However, the thrombus was not retrieved, and the subsequent angiography revealed that the basal artery remained occluded with a small amount of contrast extravasation (d), suggesting a small amount of bleeding. We hypothesized that the focal bleeding be related to the puncture of small arteries while using Avigo microguidewire, as its strong support force can potentially cause mechanical injury and subsequent bleeding due to its relatively rigid material composition. Considering the patient’s vascular variation, abnormal tortuosity, and stenosis in the mechanical thrombectomy path, the success rate of thrombectomy upon repeat attempts was expected to be extremely low. Therefore, we administered intermittent intra-arterial thrombolysis with urokinase 300,000 IU. Follow-up angiography showed persistent occlusion at the embolism site (b, c). Although complete reperfusion of the basal artery was not achieved, we decided to terminate the procedure to avoid further complications and bleeding.
A follow-up CT performed 24 h postoperatively revealed a new brainstem wedge-shaped hypodensity, indicating cerebral infarction (e) and patchy hyperdensity in the posterior part of the cerebral falx, suggesting hemorrhage. The patient remained sedated postoperatively with a NIHSS score of 28, symmetric, round pupils, 2.0 mm in diameter, sluggish to light, and assisted ventilation via a respirator. After discussing the patient’s condition with the family, they automatically discharged the patient and signed the relevant documents. According to a follow-up phone call 1 month later, the patient had passed away. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report and attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).