A 46-year-old gentleman from Bangladesh with no past medical history presented to the emergency department with a 3-day history of fever, chills and progressively worsening right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort. Upon initial assessment, he was febrile with a temperature of at 38.7 °C, blood pressure was 139/75, he was tachycardic and tachypneic with a heart rate of 155 beats per minute and respiratory rate of 33 breaths per minute, and his peripheral oxygen saturation was 94 % on room air. Physical examination revealed right upper quadrant tenderness without evidence of peritoneal irritation while heart sounds were normal with no audible murmurs and a chest examination was significant for reduced air entry to bases. Laboratory tests showed markedly elevated inflammatory markers with white blood cell count of 20.7 /all, C-reactive protein level of 315.8 mg/L and procalcitonin 95.10 ng/mL while HIV was excluded with a negative serology. Liver function tests were deranged with aspartate transaminase (AST) level of 142 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 210 U/L and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level of 486 U/L. In addition, blood glucose level was high at 410.4 mg/dL, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level was 8.8 % but urine was negative for ketones and arterial blood gases showed no acidosis with a pH of 7.42. Radiological evaluation with a chest x-ray revealed bilateral patchy air space opacities and a well-defined rounded heterogenous hepatic lucency . Hepatic pathology was confirmed with an abdominal ultrasonography (US) and a computed tomography (CT) scan that demonstrated a significant right lobe liver abscess 8 cm in diameter with a gaseous core replacing normal hepatic parenchyma and an air fluid levels as well as focal emphysematous air tracking into adjacent hepatic veins .
Because of his critical condition, the patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) where he was started on empiric antibiotic therapy with high dose meropenem, and an insulin infusion for hyperglycemia followed by an urgent percutaneous catheter drainage of the abscess. A culture from the drained purulent fluid was significant for profuse growth of Klebsiella pneumoniae which was susceptible to standard antimicrobials therapy while cytology did not reveal any malignant pathology. Furthermore, blood and urine cultures collected at the time of presentation, grew the same sensitive strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Based on the antimicrobial susceptibility tests, antibiotics were adjusted to ceftriaxone 2 g/day in addition to adjuvant metronidazole therapy.
During his stay in the MICU, the patient became acutely tachypneic and tachycardic. An urgent CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed bilateral pleural effusions and filling defects in the right lower lobe of the pulmonary artery denoting probable septic emboli . The patient continued to receive appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Subsequently, he remained hemodynamically stable, with improving inflammatory markers while repeated cultures demonstrated no further bacterial growth and he was eventually transferred out of the MICU to the general medical ward (GMW).
A few days later, the patient started to complain of left gluteal pain and developed a fever of 38.0 °C. An US revealed a deep left gluteal abscess measuring 42.6 mm by 4 mm with associate subcutaneous edema which required US guided drainage. Cultures of the purulent aspirated material grew the same sensitive strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae. A whole body fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) CT redemonstrated the liver abscess, pulmonary infarcts and necrotizing myositis in the left gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and minimus, as well as a focal area of fat stranding in the subcutaneous fat of the right gluteal region suggesting superficial cellulitis and early abscess formation. There were no other sites with pathologic FDG uptake ( and ). After drainage, his fever subsided and he remained vitally stable for several days at which time he was discharged from the hospital with outpatient antimicrobial therapy (OPAT) of ceftriaxone 2 g/day and general infectious diseases clinic follow up.
After receiving 4 weeks of parenteral ceftriaxone 2 g/day the abdominal US was repeated only to find that the abscess had barely decreased in size. He was therefore electively admitted to the hospital again where he underwent percutaneous aspiration of the liver abscess for further bacteriologic data. The aspirated material grew the same sensitive strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) did not reveal any vegetations on the valves and a fundoscopic examination ruled out endophthalmitis. Ceftriaxone was changed to parenteral ertapenem 1 g/day for 2 weeks and a subsequent abdominal US revealed complete resolution of the previously seen abscess in the liver. The patient is currently doing well with regular follow ups with general medicine and is schedule to undergo a colonoscopy in a few weeks’ time to rule out the presence of colorectal cancer.