An 81-year-old female with persistent AF since 2011, presented with dyspnoea and an elevated brain natriuretic peptide. Her medical history is significant for type II diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, morbid obesity, and hypertension. On examination, she had an irregularly irregular pulse, no apex pulse deficit, and a paradoxically split second heart sound from a left bundle branch block. There was no murmur, gallop, or tumour plop heard.
The echocardiogram demonstrated a large, mobile, pedunculated thrombus (10 mm × 15 mm) attached to a 30 mm Watchman™ device which was implanted 4 years prior to index hospitalization (, Video 1). The indication for the device was a relative contraindication to long-term anticoagulation given a history of a life-threatening gastrointestinal bleed. After implantation, anticoagulation was discontinued, and the patient was treated with dual antiplatelet therapy for 6 months followed by monotherapy with aspirin. Imaging at 45 days post-implantation showed a 6 mm peri-device leak adjacent to the coumadin ridge which was decided not to be treated by the operators. At presentation, her CHADsVASC2 score was 5 and HAS-BLED score was 4, and she was on daily aspirin for stroke prevention.
The patients’ presentation was not attributable to the thrombus but because of the high perceived risk of systemic embolization given its large size and mobility; intravenous heparin with therapeutic anti-Xa levels for anticoagulation was started. The thrombus was unchanged in appearance at 4 days and the heart team decided to intervene. Given her age and co-morbidities; an open surgical intervention was felt to be inferior to a transcatheter intervention.
Heparin was used for intraprocedural anticoagulation with a targeted activated clotting time of >250 s. The procedure was carried out under embolic protection with a Sentinel™ (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) device. After obtaining transeptal access The Penumbra Lightning 12™ aspiration catheter (Penumbra Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) was advanced into the left atrium to aspirate the thrombus. It is a 12-Fr catheter with a large 0.131-inch lumen designed for thrombus engagement and removal. It is indicated in the treatment of pulmonary embolism. The aspiration component is motorized with a microchip that detects when the device is in contact with thrombus vs. in contact with blood. It provides audio-visual feedback allowing for minimized blood loss and maximum extraction of the thrombus. The combination of this intelligent aspiration system and large lumen was chosen as it struck the right balance between device profile and suction capability.
The Sentinel™ was delivered via the right radial artery and positioned with one filter in the innominate and the second in the left carotid artery . Targeted transeptal access was obtained in the posterior and inferior portion of the interatrial septum similar to an approach for implantation of a Watchman™ device. The septum was punctured using a SL1™ sheath (St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA) and a Brockenbrough™ needle (St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA). The aspiration catheter was delivered to the LA appendage through a 12-Fr Medtronic Flex Cath™ Delivery Sheath (Medtronic Inc., Santa Rosa, CA, USA). The delivery system was coaxially advanced to the LA appendage and suction was applied over 3–5 min, successfully macerating the thrombus (, Video 2). , Video 3 illustrates the Watchman™ within the left atrium without the large thrombotic attachment noted in . is the post-procedure documentation of the thrombotic debris illustrating its large size. The Sentinel™ was removed, and no debris was identified in it.
The patient had no neurological symptoms or major clinical sequelae after the procedure and was started on apixaban. At 1-month follow-up, she continues to tolerate oral anticoagulation without any side effects.