A 31-year-old, non-smoking male presented to the hospital complaining of progressive asthenia and exertional dyspnoea for 4 months before. He had an unremarkable past medical history and physical examination.
Before the patient presented at hospital, the spirometry had provided normal results, a high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) pulmonary scan had shown a non-specific inflammatory parenchymal pattern and an enlarged pulmonary artery trunk. In addition, echocardiography showed a marked increase of trans-pulmonary peak flow velocity and an unspecified mass in the pulmonary arterial trunk. The patient was admitted to the hospital for further investigation. On admission, his vital signs were stable, and peripheral oxygen saturation was normal. Laboratory data showed mildly increased inflammatory markers (D-dimer: 528 μg/L, fibrinogen: 609 mg/dL, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP): 23 mg/L) and low ferritin, while white blood cell count, haemoglobin, renal function, hepatic and cardiac enzymes were normal. The laboratory investigation for genetic thrombophilia was negative.
Echocardiography confirmed a mass with irregular borders within the pulmonary trunk, almost obliterating its lumen and determining a flow acceleration with a peak velocity and a gradient of 3.8 m/s and 60 mmHg, respectively. All other Doppler, morphologic and functional findings of the pulmonary valve and right ventricle were normal.
Initially, these findings were interpreted as possible venous thromboembolism, and we started anticoagulant therapy with low molecular weight heparin. However, compression ultrasonography ruled out a deep vein thrombosis.
Repeated pulmonary HRCT showed dilatation of the pulmonary trunk with an irregular mass within its lumen with extremely limited enhancement by contrast medium, mistakenly reported as a big thrombus , and isolated areas of ground-glass opacity in the lung parenchyma for which we started large spectrum antibiotic therapy.
Colonoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy were performed to exclude a paraneoplastic thrombosis and were both negative for malignancies.
Follow-up echocardiography performed after 10 days demonstrated a dilated right ventricle with increased systolic pressure.
Due to the atypical clinical manifestations and the unresponsiveness to anticoagulant therapy with Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), we performed a cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) that confirmed an intravascular mass with a thrombotic component adherent to the right side of the pulmonary trunk and inhomogeneous impregnation by contrast medium, highly suggestive for an angiosarcoma of the pulmonary artery.
Positron emission tomography scan (PET-SCAN) with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) revealed an intense local glucose metabolism at the pulmonary trunk level, without any extrapulmonary lesion, which excluded a metastatic nature of the mass.
Finally, the lesion was biopsied by bronchoscopy transbronchial, but the resulting material was inadequate for a specific diagnosis. The histologic report highlighted the presence of rare and isolated atypic cells, not further typable, interspersed with cylindric hair cells and globular red cells; it was technically impossible to search for the different types of markers, with the exception of Citokeratyn 5.2 (CAM 5.2), which was positive.
The patient decided to continue the treatment in another hospital, where he was operated 2 weeks after diagnosis. However, he developed a local relapse after 6 months and died within a few weeks.