A 65-year-old woman (height, 161 cm; weight, 46 kg) with severe mitral regurgitation was scheduled for MICS with mitral valve plasty via right-sided mini-thoracotomy, under general anesthesia. Although mitral regurgitation had been diagnosed in childhood, she noticed exertional dyspnea at 64 years of age. She had no other medical history and took no medications preoperatively. We explained the CEINB procedure and imaging evaluation in detail and obtained written informed consent.
On arrival in the operating room, she had stable hemodynamic parameters. We initiated preoperative monitoring including standard monitoring, electroencephalography using the bispectral index monitor and cerebral/somatic oximetry using INVOS™ (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), and CCO/SvO2 monitoring using Vigilance® (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). General anesthesia was induced with 200 μg fentanyl and 4 mg midazolam after pre-oxygenation with 100% oxygen. We administered 50 mg rocuronium after induction, and a 35-Fr left double-lumen endotracheal tube was carefully inserted without complications. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen, air, sevoflurane (1–1.5%), remifentanil (0.1–0.35 μg/kg/min), and intermittent administration of rocuronium and fentanyl. Invasive monitoring included a radial arterial line and Swan-Ganz catheter; a 7.5-Fr vascular access sheath was inserted through the right internal jugular vein. In the supine position with 30° elevation of the right side, she underwent a MICS mitral procedure through a right thoracotomy approach via a 5.5-cm incision at the fourth intercostal space. Anesthesia was maintained with propofol (4–6 mg/kg) during cardiopulmonary bypass. Following administration of intravenous unfractionated heparin (18,000 units), femoral-femoral CPB was established, and mitral valve plasty was performed. In total, 500 μg of fentanyl was administered during the operation: 300 μg before the start of cardiopulmonary bypass and 200 μg after withdrawal of CPB. The surgeon placed the catheter for CEINB in the following steps before closing the chest .
First, a syringe filled with isotonic saline was connected to a long 8-Fr vascular access sheath (8Fr × 25 cm, Radifocus® introducer IIH, Terumo Corporation, Japan), which was inserted from the outer edge of the incision to between the innermost intercostal muscle and parietal pleura. To avoid damaging the parietal pleura and blood vessels, the blunt catheter with a soft tip was used instead of a needle. The placement was confirmed by injecting saline and observing the elevation of the parietal pleura. When the tip of the sheath reached the posterior thorax, 20 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine was administered. The tip of a catheter (19-Ga × 90 cm, Arrow®FlexTip Plus® Epidural Catheter, Teleflex Medical Japan, Japan) was then placed into the posterior thorax via the sheath. The surgery proceeded uneventfully, and the vital signs remained stable.
After surgery, we assessed the general condition by plain chest radiography and simultaneously determined the appropriate positioning of the catheter tip; 20 mL of iohexol (Omnipaque 240®, GE Healthcare, Japan) was then injected through the catheter to confirm the spread of the local anesthetic and the catheter position. The contrast medium was distributed between the parietal pleura and innermost intercostal muscle across the 3rd to the 5th intercostal areas ; 0.17% levobupivacaine was then continuously administered at 4 mL/h using a disposable continuous infuser (Bezelfuser, TORAY Medical, Japan). In addition, a patient-controlled analgesia apparatus was provided at 3 mL for postoperative pain, with a lock-out time of 30 min. The patient was moved to an intensive care unit and extubated 4 h after transfer.
Pain intensity was assessed by ICU nurses using a numeric rating scale ranging from 0 to 10. During extubation, the patient rated 0/10 for postoperative resting pain and 4/10 for movement pain without other analgesics. She was discharged to the general ward on the day after surgery; patient-controlled analgesia was activated only once on the second postoperative day. Both resting pain and movement pain were subsequently rated as 0/10; administration of local anesthetics was continued. She did not receive any other analgesics, and the analgesic catheter was removed 72 h after surgery. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12 without any complications.