A 24-year-old male of Asian origin came to our clinic with complaints of pain, swelling of left distal leg for the 2 weeks following blunt injury to right ankle. The patient had mild fever for 1 month with weight loss of 6 kgs over 3 months. His past medical history was insignificant. He had received Bacillus Calmette-Guérin vaccination and there was no history of recent contact with TB patients tenderness with local rise of temperature which was elicited at distal leg. The patient was afebrile at the time of presentation. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were 12 and 18, respectively, with normal total white blood cell count. A plain X-ray of the left leg showed a well-defined lytic lesion at the distal metaphysis of tibia . Magnetic resonance imaging reported as left tibia showing hypointense signals in T1 involving distal metaphysis extending to the subchondral region. On post-contrast study, there is abnormal enhancement in distal tibia with eccentric hypointensity and linear extension into the metaphysis. There is hyperintensity of adjacent soft tissues with thick-walled collection seen along the medial and posterior aspect of distal tibia with cortical breach on the posterior tibia cortex . Intraoperatively, pus was noted to arise from distal tibia which was sent for microbiological and histopathological study . The patient was taken up for distal tibia bone debridement and curettage. Culture-indicated growth of S. agalactiae and appropriate intravenous antibiotics were started. Bone biopsy result came after 10 days from initial washout and reported as necrotizing granulomatous lesion with Langerhans giant cells and mixed inflammatory cells suggestive of tuberculous osteomyelitis. On further imaging, computed tomography thorax revealed necrotic tuberculous mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy. The patient was treated with antitubercular treatment regime according to Indian tubercular society protocol (2 months-isoniazid 600 mg/week, rifampicin 450 mg/week, pyrazinamide 1500 mg/week, ethambutol 1200 mg/week, 4 months-isoniazid 600 mg/week, and rifampicin 450 mg/week). Antimicrobial therapy (Clindamycin+Cefazolin) was given for a period of 6 weeks for S. agalactiae infection. The patient was given below knee back slab for 4 weeks for soft-tissue healing and protective weight-bearing. Post-operative X-ray taken at follow-up showed no reactivation of infection .