A 24-year-old female patient presented with "4 d of hemoptysis" as the chief complaint.
Bright red blood appeared 4 d prior, the amount was approximately 20 mL/d, accompanied by cough and sputum, and the sputum was a small amount of frothy sputum.
The patient had a good health previously and had no history of specific diseases.
The patient’s personal history and family history were unremarkable.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and she had a clear mind and cooperated with the physical examination. The skin mucosa color was normal, and the superficial lymph nodes of the whole body were not enlarged. Bilateral respiratory movement was normal, palpation of both lungs was normal, percussive sound of both lungs was clear, small wet rales were heard in the left lung, and pleural fricative sounds were not heard on either side. No abnormal positive signs were found in the remaining physical examination.
D-dimer was 1.17 µg/mL, and hypersensitivity C-reactive protein was 32.88 mg/L. There were no obvious abnormalities in lung tumor markers, routine blood tests, coagulation function, liver function, renal function, or Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture.
Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed left lung emphysema, atelectasis of part of the left lung, and part of the bronchus unclear .
After admission, the patient was treated by hemostasis and anti-infection therapy, and no hemoptysis occurred. Contrast-enhanced CT of the chest showed that a left main bronchial nodule was seen . Increased soft tissue density shadows appeared in the left hilar area of the lung, and fiberoptic bronchoscopy was recommended. Left pulmonary obstructive emphysema and obstructive atelectasis and obstructive inflammation of the left lung were noted. Further electronic bronchoscopy showed that the main bronchus had a spherical lesion 1.5 cm from the protuberance, with pulsation and slight bleeding on the surface. The considerations were as follows: (1) The lesion in the left main bronchus was suspected to be a tumor; and (2) malignant stenosis of the left main bronchus was present. The lung tumor markers improved and showed no abnormalities. Cytopathology and DNA ploidy analysis of alveolar lavage fluid (left main bronchoalveolar lavage fluid) showed no definite malignant cells. The results of bronchial tissue biopsy showed that the mucosa presented acute and chronic inflammatory changes, mucinous gland hyperplasia in the lamina mucosa, squamation of the columnar epithelium, and active proliferation of epithelial cells. Some necrotic tissues were also observed, among which small clusters of proliferative glandular epithelial cells were found, the cytoplasm was vacuolar, nucleoli were visible, and no mitotic image was observed. The immunohistochemical results were as follows: Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (+), cytokeratin (CK) (+), CK5/6 (partially +), CK7 (+), P40 (-), TTF1 (-), and NapsinA (-). The automatic immunohistochemical results were as follows: CD117 (-) and Ki67 (5% +). Antacid staining was negative, while periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) was positive .
Based on the immunohistochemistry findings, the patient was transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery for surgical treatment on the 16th day after admission. After the exclusion of surgical contraindications, the patient underwent resection of the tumor in the left main bronchus by single-pore video-assisted thoracic surgery on the 19th day of admission (thoracotomy of the left main bronchus and trachea window for tumor resection and anastomosis). Rapid intraoperative pathological examination revealed neoplastic lesions (in the left main bronchus), which were likely to be malignant tumors from the salivating glands. Postoperative histopathological results showed the following: Lung mucoepidermoid carcinoma (in the left main bronchus), without vascular invasion or nerve invasion; group 4 lymph nodes (0/3), group 5 lymph nodes (0/1), group 10 lymph nodes (0/2), and no tumor metastasis; pTNM stage pT1bNOMX. Immunohistochemical results were: CK (+), CK5/6 (partially +), P40 (partially +), P63 (partially +), CK7 (+), CK-H (+), TTF1 (-), NapsinA (-), and CEA (focally +). The automatic immunohistochemical results included CD117 (partially +) and Ki67 (10% +). PAS staining was positive . Head MRI plain + enhanced scans and upper abdominal CT plain + enhanced scans showed no obvious abnormalities. After the operation, the patient was treated with anti-infection, hemostasis, cough suppressant and expectorant, anti-inflammatory treatment, and lung function recovery exercises. After repeat chest CT , the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 8th day after surgery.