A 24-year-old male presented in August 2017 with transient memory loss and paresthesia of the left lower limb. The patient was right handed with no tobacco intoxication and occasional alcohol intake. The patient’s main medical history was a known right arterial thoracic outlet syndrome diagnosed in Nov 2016 after a 3 days episode of cold and painful right hand during the night, and Raynaud’s syndrome when he was playing table tennis.
He underwent in January 2017 a CT angiography of the supra-aortic arteries that showed an extrinsic compression of the right subclavian artery with mild stenosis of the retro-scalar subclavian artery, associated to a typical post-stenotic dilatation with no thrombus inside. Ultrasound examination of the supra-aortic arteries depicted a focal occlusion of the termination of the right humeral artery. Upper limb electroneuromyography was normal. Cervical spine and chest X ray did not show a cervical rib. Cervical CT scan showed anterior synostosis of the 1st and 2nd rib. Due to the occlusion of the right humeral artery and the post-stenotic dilatation on the right subclavian artery, it was decided to plan a surgery of the first rib associated with an arterial bridging for Sept 2017. On the day before admission in our unit in August 2017, the patient had an episode of transient memory loss and paresthesia of the left lower limb. The episode lasted for 30 min. He decided to present himself to the emergency room. The neurological exam was normal. There was a difference of arterial pressure between the right arm (101/67 mmHg) and the left arm (127/78 mmHg). MRI of the brain revealed acute right PCA territory infarction , with no visible arterial occlusion. CT angiography revealed the presence of a 24.1 mm thrombus in the post-stenotic aneurysm sac .
An ultrasound examination of the supra-aortic arteries confirmed the post-stenotic dilatation and showed the presence of a small mobile thrombus on the distal wall the aneurysm, 5 cm away from the ostium of the right vertebral artery. Doppler shows retrograde reflux lasting about 0.45 s. During this reflux, the average maximum speed is − 12.8 cm / sec. The reflux can be therefore estimated to be 5.76 cm (12.8 × 0.45). The distance separating the edge of the mobile thrombus from the ostium of the right vertebral artery was 5 cm.
Blood cell counts and inflammatory markers were normal. Thrombophilia and vasculitis tests were negative. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with no arrhythmia during 1 week of telemetry. A trans-thoracic and trans-esophageal echocardiography was normal.
An enoxaparin treatment was started at curative dose. The thrombus disappeared after one week follow up. The patient underwent the surgery as planned in Sept 2017 with resection of the first rib, anterior scalenectomy and bridging of the aneurysm via a supra and sub-clavicular approach.
The patient always remained asymptomatic.