A 44 years-old woman presented with right breast pain, swelling and nipple retraction. Breast ultrasonography (US) showed an irregular hypoechoic mass (30 × 10 mm) in the right retro-areolar space; a further lesion (maximum diameter 8 mm) was detected in the right upper inner quadrant. Lymph-nodes with a maximum diameter of 25 mm were also detected in the right axilla by US. A core needle biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated (G3), estrogen receptor (ER) positive (ER+) [65%], progesterone receptor (PgR) positive (PgR+) [50%], cell proliferation antigen (Ki-67) 70%, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2 neu) negative, IDC. A total body Computed Tomography (CT) showed no evidence of metastatic disease. After four cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with epirubicin 100 mg/m2 and taxol 175 mg/m2 every 21 days, a right “skin sparing” mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection was performed. Immunohistochemistry confirmed G3 luminal B/HER-2 neu negative IDC subtype. Eleven out of fifteen axillary lymph nodes showed metastatic deposits (TNM: pT4b N3a M0). After chest wall radiotherapy including supra−/infraclavicular lymphatic drainage area, the patient started further eight cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with taxol 175 mg/m2 every 21 days. Tamoxifen 20 mg daily and triptorelin 3,75 mg once a month for 3 years, and letrozole 2.5 mg daily in the following 3 years were used. Seven years after the diagnosis, while still under letrozole-based hormonal therapy, the patient displayed diplopia, blurred vision, and significantly restricted upward right eye movements . Ocular acuity decreased from 7 to 2/10 in both eyes. A brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed a lump involving the right inferior rectus extraocular muscle . Computed Tomography (CT) confirmed this finding without showing other sites of metastasis. A transpalpebral biopsy revealed breast cancer metastasis (ER 50%, PgR 0%, Ki67 35%, HER-2 neu negative) . The patient underwent orbital Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (40 Gy in 5 days), combined with fulvestrant 500 mg day 1, 15, 29 and, subsequently, every 28 days. A brain CT and MRI, performed 2 months later to evaluate the treatment response, showed a shrinking of the orbital mass. . One month after MRI, following mediastinal lymph nodes enlargement, a third line therapy using palbociclib 125 mg daily for 3 weeks/month was started. Twelve-months later, MRI showed no residual tumor mass and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) confirmed no uptake in the orbit. Despite tumor regression, the right eye sight failed to improve. Currently, the patient is alive and in good general conditions after 20 months under anti-hormonal-based therapy. Patient provided informed consensus to publish her case and release case details and other personal information and images.