A 53-year-old woman from Ghana was referred for severe insulin resistance, treatment-resistant hypertension and dyslipidemia. She was first diagnosed with type 2 diabetes at age 40 and was treated with oral hypoglycemic agents until age 51 when insulin was added. She presented to the emergency room with exertional chest heaviness, dyspnea, and epigastric discomfort, however no definite cardiac event was diagnosed. She had a history of burning pain and numbness in her feet, diffuse muscle pains consistent with a chronic pain syndrome, and bilateral frozen shoulders. The patient has a strong family history for early coronary heart disease: her father had a myocardial infarction (MI) in his early 60s, her mother had three MIs, one sister had coronary artery bypass surgery in her 40s and another sister had an MI in her 30s. The patient's only family history of diabetes was in her maternal grandfather's brother.
Current medications included 120 units of insulin daily, amlodipine, valsartan, hydrochlorothiazide, rosuvastatin, ezetimibe, metformin, enteric coated acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), rabeprazole, amitriptyline, meloxicam, K-lyte, and magnesium.
On physical examination, she had a typical Dunnigan-type lipodystrophic habitus, including lipoatrophy of the lower extremities but sparing of fat deposits in the abdominal region, face and neck. Although the age of onset of her lipodystrophy is not known, she has had the same physiognomy for most of her adult life. Her radial pulse was 70 beats/minute and blood pressure was 150/85 mmHg. Her weight was 61.8 kg, height 162 cm, and body mass index 23.5 kg/m2. On cardiovascular examination, soft bruits were heard over both carotids, a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur was heard over the pericardial region and transient pitting edema of the lower extremities was detected bilaterally. On neurological examination, she had absent ankle jerk reflexes and decreased sensation in the area of the upper shin. She had marked acanthosis nigricans on the back of her neck. No other pertinent findings were observed on physical examination; specifically no ocular, dermatological, or abdominal findings.
Her laboratory results included (reference range) fasting glucose of 8.8 mmol/L (4.0-6.0 mmol/L), glycated hemoglobin 16.9% (4.1-6.5%), total cholesterol 7.2 mmol/L (4.3-6.5 mmol/L), triglycerides 3.35 mmol/L (0.67-3.15 mmol/L), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) 4.8 mmol/L (2.3-4.3 mmol/L), HDL 0.9 mmol/L (1.0-2.4 mmol/L). Cardiac investigations, including electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, exercise and pharmacological stress echocardiogram, gated single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) perfusion study, cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography, were all negative specifically showing no significant ischemia or coronary artery disease.
The patient was found to carry no mutation in any of the known lipodystrophy-causing genes (LMNA, PPARG, BSCL, AGPAT2, LMNB2, CAV1) by exon-by-exon sequence analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and 250 ng was used in each genotyping assay. The high-density oligonucleotide microarrays (chips) used for analysis were the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 500 K array set (Santa Clara, CA, USA). The chips were processed using established protocols in the London Regional Genomics Centre. Copy number determination was performed using 130 normal controls and 40 lipodystrophy cases with Partek Genomics Suite version 6.3 (St Louis, MO, USA). No log transformations or data normalizations were used, but probes were corrected for fragment length, sequence, and guanine-cytosine (GC) content. Two CNVs were identified within the genome of the patient: three copies of the entire X chromosome, and a duplication of 89 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) probes over 415 kb of chromosome 5q33.2, from 154,979 kb to 155,394 kb (physical position, NCBI reference build 36.2). No genes were found in or within 300 kb of the 5q33.2 duplication. Neither the duplication of 5q33.2, nor triple X syndrome, was identified in any of the other lipodystrophy patients or normal controls.