A 22-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with swelling and pain in the right breast for the past 2 weeks without any fever. She had a 19-month-old child and had not breastfed recently. The patient had no history of trauma or surgeries related to the breast, or no family history of breast cancer and was not immunocompromised.
Physical examination revealed a palpable tender mass with swelling in the upper half of the right breast . A routine breast ultrasonography revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic lesion with multiple fluid-filled areas, suspected to be abscesses . Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) revealed a 64 × 58 × 62 mm, ill-defined, high-signal-intensity lesion with multiple ring enhancements in the upper half of the right breast . The enhancement area showed a fast plateau pattern. Diffusion-weighted imaging on MRI showed strong diffusion restriction at the lesion . The first diagnosis based on clinical and imaging findings was inflammatory breast cancer or granulomatous mastitis with abscess. A core needle biopsy led to drainage of pus. Gram staining of the pus did not reveal any bacteria . However, the pus cultured on blood and chocolate agar plates showed the formation of bacterial colonies after 3 days of incubation. M. chelonae, and not Corynebacterium, was detected by mass spectrometry. Ziehl–Neelsen staining of the second biopsy drainage sample revealed acid-fast bacillus consistent with NTM . The susceptibility test indicated resistance to sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (ST) combination product, and sensitivity to amikacin (AMK), tobramycin (TOB), imipenem (IPM), and clarithromycin (CAM) . Histopathological findings revealed mastitis in the mammary gland tissue with infiltration of inflammatory cells (neutrophils, lymphocytes and foam cells). Owing to the absence of malignancy and granulomatous lesion, inflammatory breast cancer and granulomatous mastitis were ruled out . No lesions in organs other than the mammary gland were observed, and screening tests for autoimmune disorders yielded negative results .
Treatment included a drainage tube and oral administration of levofloxacin (LVFX). Since granulomatous mastitis was suspected based on the findings of DCE-MRI performed 3 days later, LVFX was changed to minocycline (MINO) in consideration of Corynebacterium infection. After 7 days, the abscess worsened and was drained additionally. Ten days later, M. chelonae was detected and the antibiotic was changed to CAM according to susceptibility. Multiple antibiotic therapy based on sensitivity was recommended; however, the patient rejected inpatient treatment due to family circumstances. Three weeks later, the pus discharge had reduced, and the drainage tube was removed. Although CAM administration continued, the induration in the breast did not resolve; therefore, multidrug antibiotic treatment was initiated. The patient preferred avoiding a long hospital stay, so she received AMK and IPM infusion therapy for 2 weeks, followed by continuation of CAM. Three weeks later, tenderness with slight pus discharge in the right breast recurred. Gram and Ziehl–Neelsen staining of the pus did not reveal any bacteria. Although multidrug antibiotic treatment was re-proposed, the patient requested oral antibiotics. Hence, MINO, a general antibiotic to treat NTM, was added to the treatment. Resection was proposed for residual induration, but she preferred a follow-up. She stopped taking both CAM and MINO 2 weeks later, after which, the induration gradually disappeared. There was no recurrence 2 years after treatment.