A 27-year-old male with no known medical history had presented to his primary care physician in rural Texas, United States, complaining of a rash that acutely progressed to raised, circular lesions all over his body. These lesions started originally on his right forehead as a small papule two weeks prior but rapidly expanded to involve most of his body but the genitalia. Family history was not contributory. The patient had been using intravenous drugs (i.e., methamphetamines) for the last two years. He was a nonsmoker and did not drink alcohol. The patient had multiple unprotected sexual encounters with men in the past six years. He was born and raised in rural east Texas and had never traveled out of the state or the United States. He worked as a salesman in retail and cleaned the yard associated with house properties in his leisure time. No pets were reported at his house, but neighbors reportedly had chickens, pigs, and horses.
The patient reported that the lesions started on his right forehead after direct trauma from a tree branch while cleaning the yard. The lesions were approximately 7 × 8 cm in diameter, had well-defined edges, were raised, and produced serous discharge . They had a foul-smelling discharge. The lesion over the right eye was nearly obscuring his visual field. The lesion on the left hand had extensive deroofing of the ulcer crater, and bone covered by a thin layer of musculature was visible.
The lesions had worsened despite short courses of oral antibiotics (levofloxacin, doxycycline, and linezolid) and progressively involved his right eyelid. Skin biopsies from multiple sites showed a dense neutrophilic infiltration . The Gram stain, bacterial, fungal, and acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear and cultures, and immunohistochemistry from the biopsies were unremarkable. The initial hematology and chemistry studies were within normal parameters. The patient was screened for sexually transmitted infections, and he tested positive for HIV (viral load of 100,000 copies/ml, CD4 count of 190 cells/mm3) and syphilis [rapid plasma regain (RPR) titer: 1:512]. The chest x-ray was unremarkable. He started antiretroviral therapy (bictegravir, emtricitabine & tenofovir alafenamide) and received three weekly intramuscular penicillin injections. The imaging of the left hand revealed underlying osteomyelitis in the second and third digits. Bacterial cultures of swabs from draining wounds from left hand and right shoulder isolated pan sensitive Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus dysgalactiae, and Staphylococcus aureus. A Beta-D glucan, antigens and serology testing were obtained for Sporothrix, Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coccidiodes, and Paracoccidiodes -all returned negative/non-reactive. Lateral flow antigen testing for Cryptococcus spp. was negative.
There was a high suspicion of systemic endemic mycoses, given the disseminated nature and appearance of the skin lesions and lack of response to courses of antibacterials given outpatient (levofloxacin, doxycycline, linezolid) and during hospitalization (cefepime and vancomycin). The patient was started on intravenous liposomal amphotericin B for two weeks, but no improvement was observed in the lesions . The ophthalmological evaluation showed the presence of cotton wool spots bilaterally. No evidence of keratitis was seen. AFB staining, fungal staining, herpes simplex virus staining, bacterial, mycobacterial and deep fungal cultures of repeat punch biopsies taken from left hand and left ankle were negative. A presumptive diagnosis of endemic cutaneous mycosis was made, and the patient was discharged home on itraconazole 200 mg bid orally with outpatient follow up.
A metagenomic microbial plasma cell-free DNA (mcfDNA) next-generation sequencing assay (Karius) was sent, which revealed high levels of human mpox DNA (15468 DNA molecules per microliter).
We contacted the patient once the Karius testing results were obtained and informed him of the diagnosis. The patient then recalled that his most recent sexual partner tested positive for human mpox four months ago and was treated successfully with tecovirimat. He had not brought this concern to the primary care physician or the infectious diseases team earlier as his lesions were remarkably different from his partner's lesions and other human mpox lesions he had searched online. The patient was also concerned about the partner’s privacy and potential stigma. Guidance from CDC via electronic consult services was obtained given the lesion’s very atypical appearance and extensiveness, including osteomyelitis and ophthalmological involvement. It was decided to start the patient on intravenous cidofovir and oral tecovirimat. He responded well with improvement in the lesions seen on 1 and 2-week follow-ups .