A 53-year-old man presented to a local hospital with the complaint of upper abdominal pain. The patient had no significant medical history. However, he had a family history of cancer, as both his brothers had died of liver cancer. Imaging revealed multiple masses in the liver. The patient visited our institution for confirmation of the diagnosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen confirmed a mass in the right lobe of the liver with multiple intrahepatic nodules and lymph node metastases. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multiple nodules and lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular fossa and mediastinum, suspicious of metastatic disease . Biopsy of lymph nodes was performed. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CK7 (+), CK20 (+), HepPar-1 (−), SATB2 (−), CDX2 (−), TTF-1(8G7G3/1) (−), Pax-8 (−), NKX3.1 (−), MLH1 (+), MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+), PMS2 (+), and HER2 (0). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with advanced iCCA. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) results suggested that the patient harbored MET amplification and that the tumor mutation burden (TMB) was high (TMB-H, 11.52 Muts/Mb) .
As suggested by a multidisciplinary team (MDT), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) was performed on 29 March 2022. Combined therapy with gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8, q3w) and cisplatin (25 mg/m2 on day 1, q3w) was administered in April 2022. After three cycles, the local image monitor suggested stable disease. However, the patient complained of poor treatment tolerance, as grade 2 nausea, vomiting, and grade 3 decreased platelet occurred. When the dosage was reduced by 25%, the situation was not improved. The patient still suffered from grade 3 myelosuppression. Thus, treatment was switched to nab-paclitaxel (125 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15, q4w). Unfortunately, the patient experienced grade ≥3 myelosuppression after one cycle. Treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy was not considered because of intolerable adverse effects. Based on the NGS results, MET inhibitors and immunotherapy were considered as alternative treatments. After a discussion with the patient and his family, they preferred savolitinib. Treatment with savolitinib (600 mg/day) was initiated in June 2022. After 2 months of treatment, PR was achieved (according to RECIST version 1.1) as the liver mass dramatically decreased . Meanwhile, the lymph nodes in the abdomen and lung masses also disappeared . Serum carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels also remarkably decreased . A follow-up CT scan indicated continuous PR. Savolitinib was well-tolerated and no grade ≥3 AEs occurred.
However, in May 2023, new nodules were identified in the liver and lungs, implying the experience of disease progressive disease (PD) (according to RECIST version 1.1) . As suggested by the MDT, localized interventional therapy was recommended because the performance status of the patient was good (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group [ECOG] 0–1). Immunotherapy was considered as a subsequent treatment because the patient harbored high TMB. Additionally, to understand the mechanism of acquired resistance to savolitinib, NGS was performed. The NGS results indicated that the patient still harbored MET amplification. EGFR amplification was also detected . After recovering from the effect of localized therapy, the patient was administered lenvatinib plus toripalimab. However, the liver masses were not under control after one cycle. Based on the latest NGS results, cetuximab was recommended. However, the patient and his family could not afford the treatment and rejected this recommendation. Since savolitinib is widely used in treating lung cancer, we consulted a thoracic oncologist for advise on further treatment. Based on their clinical practice experience, savolitinib could be continued and localized radiotherapy was recommended. The patient and his family were fully informed of the current alternative treatment and prognosis, and agreed to receive savolitinib and radiotherapy. Savolitinib was restarted in June 2023, combined with radiotherapy. The timeline of this clinical case is summarized in .