Our patient was a 41-year-old Caucasian woman who presented to our Rheumatology clinic for evaluation of progressive exercise intolerance, fatigue, diffuse myalgias, arthralgias and difficulty sleeping. The pain primarily involved her entire back and arms, and she reported multiple tender points all over her body. On the basis of her symptoms, our patient had also been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, and was treated with multiple different medications without any relief.
Her other medical history included hypothyroidism, cervical disc disease, hypertension and Raynaud's disease. Notable family history included breast carcinoma and hypertension in her mother, and lymphoma in her father. Her medications at presentation included lisinopril 5 mg daily and levothyroxine 25 μg daily. Other pertinent medications she had previously used included pregabalin, amitriptyline and gabapentin. Her physical examination results were normal except for mild tenderness to palpation along her upper and lower back, and shoulders.
Significant laboratory results included creatine kinase (CK) = 325 U/L (normal range 0 to 150 U/L), normal comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) and complete blood count (CBC), liver function tests and thyroid functions tests. A six-minute walk test revealed a normal resting lactic acid = 1.6 mmol/L, and an elevated post-six-minute-walk lactic acid = 5 mmol/L (normal result < 2 mmol/L). Her ammonia levels were normal at rest and after six-minute walk (14 μmol/L and 38 μmol/L respectively; normal 0 to 40 μmol/L). A muscle biopsy was performed for biochemical evaluation, which revealed several abnormalities including decreased levels of citric acid synthase (49% of normal), cytochrome c oxidase (53% of normal), succinate dehydrogenase (72% of normal), and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) dehydrogenase (73% of normal), thereby demonstrating a defect in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Genome sequencing was performed, which revealed multiple POLG1 polymorphisms (C-T polymorphism at 2254, and G-T polymorphism at 3708) and several mitochondrial genome polymorphisms (1438 A-G, 3992 C-T, 14365 C-T, 14582 A-G, and 4042 A-G).
Our patient was started on a compound of Co-Q10 200 mg, creatine 1000 mg, carnitine 200 mg and folic acid 1 mg to be taken four times a day. She gradually showed significant improvement in her symptoms over a course of several months.