A seven year old male presented with a painless, firm 3 cm mass overlying his sternum. He was clinically well, apyrexial with no history of weight loss. Initial investigations revealed an elevated CRP (27.5), ESR (90), white cell count (22.3) with a neutrophilia (17.0) and a hypochromic microcytic anaemia (Hb: 9.3). Technecium99 bone scan revealed increased uptake in the sternum, L1 vertebra, the left sacro-iliac joint and the right acetabulum.
A CT scan of the chest and sternum confirmed the presence of a sternal mass with no underlying soft tissue involvement. A fine needle biopsy of the sternal mass showed an inflammatory infiltrate. Bone marrow aspirates and trephine from the sternum showed a reactive marrow with no evidence of malignancy. Both ultrasound of the abdomen and echocardiogram were normal. On the basis of these results a provisional diagnosis of multi-focal osteomyelitis was made and the patient was started on antibiotic treatment (Benzylpenicillin, Flucloxacillin and Fusidic Acid). Despite this treatment his white cell count and inflammatory markers continued to rise.
Five weeks after discharge he represented because of an enlarging sternal mass and the development of back pain with no associated neurology . He remained well with no weight loss or signs and symptoms of systemic disease. An open biopsy of the chest wall mass and a CT guided biopsy of the L1 spinal lesion were performed. These revealed macroscopically caseous material. Mantoux and Heaf tests were negative. An MRI scan of the lumbar spine showed loss of height of L1 with disease extending bilaterally to the pedicles of T12 and L2. There was a soft tissue mass anterior and posterior to L1 causing spinal stenosis and impingement on the conus. Radiologically this was thought to resemble Potts disease and the macroscopic appearance of the lumbar specimen suggested a diagnosis of tuberculosis. Triple therapy was commenced (Rifampicin, Isoniazid and Pyrazinamide). The specimens were negative for acid fast bacilli, Ziehl-Neelson stain for TB was negative and no organisms were cultured. Subsequent histology from the sternal mass showed Hodgkin's lymphoma . Cells within the specimen were positive for CD30 and CD20 .
Treatment with chemotherapy was started following the current UKCCSG (United Kingdom Childrens Cancer Survey Guidelines) for Hodgkin's disease, and antituberculous treatment was stopped. Staging showed no lymphadenopathy in the chest or abdomen. Two weeks after commencement of chemotherapy a dramatic decrease in soft tissue involvement around the spinal cord was seen on a repeat MRI. . The time from presentation to diagnosis was two months.