A 67-year-old female presented to the emergency department with complaints of left hip pain. Patient has a pertinent past medical history of atrial fibrillation, carcinoid tumor of the stomach, coronary artery disease, diverticulitis, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, mitral valve prolapse, osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, pancreatitis, restless leg syndrome, and hypothyroidism. Patient has a pertinent past surgical history of appendectomy, carpal tunnel release, left total knee arthroplasty, and hysterectomy. The patient was recently discharged from a different hospital 1-month prior after being treated for sepsis and pneumonia. At that time, she still remained bacteremic. She was unable to ambulate upon discharge, so she was sent to a rehab facility. She had been using a wheelchair for assistance. Patient was admitted for pain control, after her presentation to the emergency department. The orthopedic surgery team was consulted to assess her left hip pain. Her prior imaging from 1-month prior was reviewed before her physical examination, which demonstrated a preserved joint space as seen in (-). On physical examination, patient did have intact motor, gross sensation, and adequate perfusion distal to the left hip in the left lower extremity. Of note, patient did have extreme pain to micromotion of the left hip, a positive log roll test, and she was unable to perform a straight leg test. New imaging was obtained and reviewed, which demonstrated deterioration of the left hip joint as seen in (-). Due to the patient’s presentation, imaging, and elevated inflammatory markers, we had a high suspicion for a septic joint. The plan for the patient at this time was to make the left lower extremity non-weight bearing, continue her intravenous antibiotics, and place consults to infectious disease and interventional radiology to aspirate the hip. The patient’s DVT prophylaxis was held, and the interventional radiology team was able to aspirate the hip joint the following day. The final results of the aspirate resulted and demonstrated a rare Group G beta-hemolytic Streptococcus bacterium within the joint. At this time, the Orthopedic Surgery team had a discussion with the patient and the family about how to proceed. After thorough discussion, we elected to proceed with a 2-stage hip arthroplasty and antibiotic treatment with the infectious disease team. The patient was optimized and taken to surgery two days later for left hip resection with an antibiotic cement spacer placement. Intra-operative cultures were taken, and JP drain was placed. Post-operative imaging was obtained which demonstrated cement spacer placement in ( and ). Post-operatively, the patient was placed on posterior hip precautions, pain control, deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis, and medical management by the internal medicine and infectious disease teams. Results of the cultures taken intra-operatively did not demonstrate any new growth of bacteria. The patient tolerated the procedure and progressed very well. Her JP drain was subsequently pulled after 2 days. On the third day, a PICC line was placed for antibiotics, and the patient was stable from an Orthopaedic Surgery standpoint. The patient was later discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility, with instructions to follow-up as an outpatient with the Orthopedic Surgery team.