A 67-year-old male smoker with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus was admitted to our department due to chest tightness and shortness of breath on exertion. The electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with nonspecific ST-T-wave changes. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed an enlarged left atrium (46 mm) and left ventricle (58 mm), widened sinus of Valsalva (45 mm) and ascending aorta (42 mm), severe regurgitation of mitral (regurgitation arear 10.4cm2 per beat) and aortic (regurgitation arear 11.7cm2 per beat) valves, and left ventricular systolic ejection fraction of 57%.
For the coronary evaluation, CAG was performed under fluoroscopic guidance, using the right radial artery, a 6 French (Fr) sheath, a 0.035 inch ×150 cm, angled, J-type Radifocus hydrophilic guidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), and a 5 Fr radial diagnostic catheter (TIG 110 cm, Angiopointer, Hunan, China). The hydrophilic wire was inadvertently advanced into RIMA, and its tip transiently entered a small branch during the exchange for a Judkins right catheter (3.5 curve, 100 cm, Cordis, USA), because the TIG failed to engage the ostium of the right coronary artery. CAG showed no significant coronary stenosis.
Hours after the procedure, the patient complained of paroxysmal pain in the right side of the chest. The vital signs were stable and no significant differences in the results from chest physical examination as well as immediate electrocardiogram, TTE and cardiac enzyme profile were found compared with those before the procedure. Latently, the hemoglobin level fell from 14.1 to 12.7 g/dL. Emergent chest X-ray results revealed a new mass in the right outer lung area suspected to be an encapsulated pleural effusion . The branch of thoracic artery perforation was highly suspected, and computed tomography angiography of the access vessels was performed. The specific arterial bleeding site was scrutinized and not observed for the poke-shaped encapsulated effusion in the right pleural cavity (13.8 cm × 6.7 cm) .
Precautious volume supplementation was performed and the patient was taken to the catheterization laboratory again for further scrutinization. Right radial access was taken again and the TIG was used for right subclavian and internal mammary arteriograms. The right subclavian arteries were intact, whereas contrast extravasation was noted in the terminal portion of the branch from RIMA . Then a 6 Fr right Judkins guiding catheter was used to engage the RIMA ostium. Endovascular occlusion therapy was performed successfully by delivering a Tornado embolization microcoil (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) via the Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) to the perforated branch. Angiogram confirmed that the extravasation was extinguished .
Later, thoracic drainage was performed to relieve pulmonary compression due to extravasation. In total, 5.4 L of bloody pleural effusion was drained from the hemothorax. The drainage was removed after 12 days, when drainage was minimal. The hemoglobin concentration gradually decreased to a minimum of 7.8 g/dL and two units of packed red blood cells were transfused. The hemoglobin levels finally stabilized at approximately 10.2 g/dL after 15 days.
After 4 weeks of optimized treatment, the dyspnea of the patient was not improved significantly. Furthermore, the pulmonary function test was performed. The forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and the forced vital capacity (FVC) were measured. It was predicated that the patient had coexisting severe obstructive and restrictive lung disease with the FEV1/FVC ratio of 46.22%, FEV1 of 29.6%, and FVC 50.9%. Chest Computed Tomography (CT) showed cavities in the encapsulated pleural effusion .
After full discussion by the expert committee composed of specialists from cardiac surgery, thoracic surgery and cardiology, combined surgeries of valve replacement and hematomaectomy were recommended for the patient. Subsequently, the patient underwent ascending aortic replacement, AVR, MVR, and thoracic hematoma removal using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). The total CPB time was 284 min, and the aortic cross-clamp time was 197 min. He was extubated within 24 h of surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative hemostatic vasoactive agents (dopamine, epinephrine, etc.), and antibiotics were routinely applied. Hematoma was completely removed as presented in postoperative chest CT . Postoperative TTE revealed that the prosthetic valves were well-seated and functioning normally. The patient was discharged on the 20th post-surgery day. During the 14-month follow-up, the patient presented no further chest discomfort or dyspnea, and no recurrence of thoracic hematoma on chest CT.