This chapter describes the case of a three-and-a-half-year-old male child, with persistent cough and severe dyspnea. These respiratory symptoms were present for 12 h (from the previous night). When the child got to the hospital, the main symptoms were: intercostal, subcostal and jugular re-entries (refractory to drug therapy), severe desaturation (88%), perioral cyanosis and no fever. On auscultation of the chest, whistles and hisses were appreciated on the right lung (bronchospasm-like) and hypophonesis on the left one. He performed a molecular swab for SARS-COV-2 which gave negative results. He was given oxygen at 10 L per minute (FiO2 50%) by face mask, and 15 mg of iv methyl prednisone. Its weight was 15 kilos. Epinephrine was administered by aerosol and also salbutamol with beclomethasone-dipropionate, with no benefit.
On the chest X-ray (2p) taken in supine position, given the clinic, it is highlighted: “enlargement of the iloperilar regions with peribronchovasal thickening at the mid-basal fields with prevalence left, in hyper-expanded lungs. Heart shadow within limits " .
There were no radiographic signs compatible with the inhalation of a foreign body, nor cardiomegaly to suggest a myocarditis.
After above-described various therapeutic approaches (beta2-agonist, adrenaline, salbutamol and beclomethasone dipropionate for aerosol, iv methyl prednisone and O2 therapy) the resuscitator was alerted with whom the urgent hospitalization in Intensive Care Unit for respiratory failure refractory to medical therapy was agreed.
Blood chemistry tests at entry: arterial blood gas analysis pH 7.13, paO2 85, paCO2 78, BE -3.3, HCO3- 26, P / F 85, LAC 1.1. Neutrophilic leukocytosis (WBC 16 × 103 cells / uL, N 13.6 × 103 cells / uL), CRP (C-reactive protein) 3.66 mg / dL, PCT 0.97 ug / L, LDH 286 IU / L, Fibrinogen 443 mg / dL .
Absence of impaired coagulation and liver and kidney function markers .
After one hour of hospitalization in Pediatric Intensive Care unit (PICU), given the clinical worsening, the little patient underwent an Oro-tracheal Intubation (IOT) and a Mechanical Assisted Ventilation (VAM), after sedation and curarization. In the following hours there was a worsening of pulmonary exchanges resulting in a severe ARDS picture that required protective ventilation.
Therefore, broad spectrum empirical antibiotic therapy (iv ceftriaxone and teicoplanin), sedation and continuous curarization were started .
Following the critical evolution of the respiratory picture, in the following 6 hours, he had a lung CT examination (HRCT) with 16-layer MDCT (Siemens) which highlighted a clearly worsening evolution of the radiological picture with a mixed pattern (interstitium-alveolar) : “scattered consolidations, the major ones of which in the left upper apical area, in the middle fields in the iloperilar, and right posterior basal (with aerial bronchograms); an interstitial-reticular pattern associated with small areas of ground glass; small amount of right posterobasal pleural effusion and borne by the small fissure " .
On the second day of hospitalization, the little sister (1.5 years old) was also hospitalized in the Infectious Diseases Department of the same hospital, for mild dyspnea and neutrophilic leukocytosis; to follow, the brother (10 years) and the cousin (1.5 years) also for the same symptomatology.
At this point, deepening the anamnesis in search of environmental risk factors, it was clear that the parents had bought some parrots about a week before the first child was admitted and that everyone had played and even slept in the same room with them.
Thus, the research in the first child admitted to PICU, both serological (immunofluorescence tests) and through bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), of the DNA of Chlamydia Psittaci (PCR analysis) started, with a positive result which therefore confirmed the picture of psittacosis.
They were all finally treated with targeted antibiotic therapy: tetracyclines (doxicillin) [, ].
The siblings and cousin are discharged after a few days, thanks to timely targeted antibiotic therapy.
As regards to our first child admitted to PICU, after targeted antibiotic therapy (doxicillin), gas exchanges improved, with a net reduction in dyspnea and oxygen requirements, so extubation was carried out on the fifth day.
During the days of hospitalization, blood gas analyzes were performed every day, with progressive improvement in respiratory exchanges. The child went through respiratory acidosis (pH 7,13, paO2 85 mmHg, paCO2 78 mmHg, HCO3 25,9, BE-3,3) to a normal respiratory condition on the sixth day (pH 7,44, paO2 78 mmHg, paCO2 50, HCO3 32,3, BE 9,8).
Therefore, a detailed anamnestic investigation, together with the clinical-radiological evolutionary picture, directed the diagnosis towards psittacosis pneumonia with evolution into ARDS.
The etiological picture was confirmed with laboratory tests (isolation of the bacterium from clinical samples, search for antibodies) .