In this case, 66 year old woman patient visited the clinic complaining of discomfort of the dentures.
She had undergone a heart valve surgery twice in 1968 and 1998 and was under warfarin medication. Following problem lists were detected. The mandibular anterior teeth showed extremely short clinical crown length. The reverse compensating curve of the old prostheses, overgrowth of mandibular symphysis area, and bone resorption of mandibular posterior region were observed. The possibility of combination syndrome was anticipated due to the recent extraction of maxillary anterior teeth ( and ). As Davarpanah et al. suggested, a thorough examination was performed. In radiographic examination, any periapical radiolucency was not detected even though the dentin was exposed to oral cavity. The periodontal ligament was within normal limit. The crown-to-root ratio was about 1:3. In clinical examination, attached gingival band was 4 to 5 mm width, and periodontal pocket depth was 3 mm or less. Neither periodontal problem nor tooth mobility was detected. On the properly mounted diagnostic cast examination, the imaginary line from retromolar pad 2/3 point to mandibular premolar tip was drawn. The distance between the imaginary line and the mandibular incisor's tip was 4 to 5 mm. The clinical crown was 2 mm height. According to Ash and Nelson, the diagnostic wax up was undertaken to allow the crown to be 9 mm length. Supposing the height of coping, porcelain and the amount of subgingival margin position were 1.5 mm, 2.5 mm and 1 mm respectively, the required additional crown length was calculated as 2 mm ( and ).
Based on the examination as mentioned above, the treatment plan was established. The mandibular anterior teeth were planned to have a surgical crown lengthening procedure of 2 mm extension as determined by diagnostic wax-up. Complete denture for maxilla and removable partial denture with linguoplate for mandible were planned. As mentioned by Langer et al., linguoplate was planned to prohibit the extrusion of mandibular anterior teeth and minimize the force upon the premaxilla. Mandibular anterior teeth were planned to be fabricated as single crowns. Bilateral balanced occlusion scheme was applied to the distal extension of the mandibular removable partial denture. The patient was suggested the implant installation at the second molar area to supplement the support of denture, but she denied the suggestion on account of economic problem.
The patient was referred to the department of periodontology for surgical crown lengthening procedure, and visited our department 2 months after operation. The planned amount of crown length was gained enough . The walls of the anterior teeth were prepared as parallel as possible. The individual trays were fabricated. One sheet of baseplate wax (Dae-dong industry, Daegu, Korea) was covered for relief and tray resin (Quicky, Nissin Dental Products Inc., Kyoto, Japan) was adapted to the cast. By using the individual trays, functional impressions were registered both in maxilla and in mandible. Maxillary wax rim was fabricated as a general method. The vertical dimension of the patient and the amount of anterior exposure were maintained equal to previous old denture. Mandibular recording base and wax rim were fabricated, and then the resin cap made of DuraLay resin (Reliance Dental Mfg. Co., Worth, IL, USA) was attached to the recording base for stabilization during interocclusal registration, as described by Chang et al. . Facebow transfer was followed by mandibular teeth wax up, coping fabrication and porcelain-fused-to-gold crown fabrication. After the mandibular anterior teeth were delivered to the patient, mandibular functional impression was taken. Framework and wax rim were fabricated as a general method. Interocclusal record was taken again, and artificial teeth were arranged to have a scheme of bilateral balanced occlusion. The definitive denture was delivered to the patient without any problem . Implant placement was recommended again, but the patient hesitated over for economic problem. However, she had agreed to recall check for every six months. After 4 months, on the recall check, the gingiva and periodontum were healthy . She had been satisfied with the prostheses for esthetic and functional aspects.