A 42 years old Caucasian female, single, childless, had business school training, worked as a 100% fiduciary accountant until the age of 32, the date she was put on sick leave due to persistent trigeminal neuralgia. We investigated her in our multidisciplinary medical expertise service, in which evaluations from different medical specialties are conducted. In our service, a GP (IK) collects the information of all the specialists who participated in the assessment and discusses the case with the psychiatrist (BPM, KT) to pronounce himself regarding the working capacity review.
We evaluated the patient for a review of a disability income. When she was 32 years old, she had to stop her professional activity due to severe persistent trigeminal neuralgia. She made the first claim for disability benefits, which was agreed to 100%. At 38 years of age, the insured moved to another city, and the insurer requested a review of the income. Psychiatric expertise was conducted, in which a factitious disorder was retained as diagnosis, with a full working capacity. This diagnosis brought severe consequences such as a suspension of income due to disability and a family conflict that implied the patient was “inventing” the symptoms. It also impacted her symptomatology with an increase in stress and pain. She contested this decision, and our expert service received a reevaluation request.
The patient presented an essential left trigeminal neuralgia since 31, treated by glycerolization of the Gasser's ganglion, which temporarily improved her symptoms. Due to the recurrence of pain, and after a surgical intervention (left microvascular decompression), a radiosurgery treatment was performed on the trigeminal nerve, at its root, brainstem, and the left hippocampus levels. Three years later, a subcutaneous electrodes implantation treatment was performed without improving her symptoms. After this treatment, at the age of 36, the patient complained of visual disturbances. Progressive visual loss over 12 months lead to complete blindness by 39. At the age of 42, an extensive neuro-ophthalmological examination was performed (FXB). The patient reported a total absence of light perception in both eyes (subjective). The ocular examination revealed only the presence of severe punctuate superficial keratitis of the left cornea with left corneal anesthesia (normal sensitivity of the right cornea). Fundus examination revealed normal macula, peripheral retina, retinal vessels, and optic nerve in both eyes. Objective assessment of macula and optic nerve was normal by Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) in both eyes.
Electrophysiological testing disclosed normal results for multifocal electroretinogram (ERG), full-field ERG, and pattern visual evoked potentials. The left neurotrophic keratitis resulted from previous therapies delivered to the left trigeminal nerve and is certainly responsible for some degree of visual impairment but could not explain total blindness of the left eye. There was no explanation for the blindness of the right eye. Electrophysiological investigations and OCT failed to reveal either any interocular asymmetry or any disturbances of the afferent visual pathways on both sides. Loss of vision was then attributed to a severe and chronic functional non-organic component superimposed on an organic left keratopathy resulting from the left trigeminal therapies.
During the psychiatric interview, we learned that her childhood was marked by the fear of losing her mother in the context of repeated hospitalizations. At the age of 7, she reported having been the victim of a sexual assault. When she asked for help from her father, he made her feel guilty. Regarding the aggressor’s identity, she described that she “can’t see his face". Later, her classmates mocked her for being the only one wearing glasses. When she turned 14, she was again sexually abused for almost a year by her schoolteacher. The sexual assaults took place in the classroom after school, the teacher pulling down the window blinds to get dark. At the age of 15, she got pregnant with twins. The perpetrator forced her to have an abortion in inhumane conditions while "blindfolded".
The patient started a Business School at the age of 15, describing that she was in "a denial of these traumas". She explains that defensively, to avoid thoughts linked with the traumatic experience, she heavily invested in her studies with good academic results. When she was 17, she came across the teacher who raped her, an encounter that provoked a traumatic experience's reactivation. It was in this context that she started psychotherapy. At the age of 30, she had her first boyfriend. She described that she decided to tell him that she was raped five months after the beginning of the relationship. He left her following this unveiling. After the end of this relationship, she described the onset of diffuse pains. She began to complain of abdominal and left ear pain with no improvement despite the proposed treatment, with an unfavorable evolution.
At 31, due to the painful symptoms on the left trigeminal territory, she benefited from two brain magnetic resonance imaging which were normal. A neurologist suspected left trigeminal neuralgia some months later, and an interventional analgesia treatment was performed. When she was 32 years old, she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital due to visual hallucinations, and a diagnosis of possible dissociative disorder was retained. In the same year, in the context of recurrent left trigeminal neuralgia, she benefited from a radiosurgery treatment with no improvement. Afterward, she underwent subcutaneous stimulation with electrodes at the infra and supraorbital level by the neurosurgeons, primarily without side effects. Due to the lack of improvement, neurosurgeons decided to remove the subcutaneous implants. Neurologists retained a functional nonorganic etiology, and they proposed a hypnosis treatment.
The visual disturbances started at the age of 36, during a psychotherapeutic treatment of exposure to trauma. The treating neurologist did not find any oculomotor alteration, and a thorough ophthalmological examination did not reveal any visual impairment or ocular abnormalities to explain the patient's complaints. They observed an apparent discrepancy between subjectively claimed visual loss and visual performance. A year later, a neuro-ophthalmologist (FXB) assessed her and found only left neurotrophic keratitis (secondary to iatrogenic trigeminal nerve injury), concluding to bilateral blindness of a non-organic functional type. At this time, the patient needed outside help to ensure her safety and independence.
In summary, detailed ophthalmological and neurological examination, electrophysiology testing, brain imaging, and blood tests revealed no significant abnormalities that could have contributed to his visual impairment.
At the age of 39, a psychiatric expert diagnosed a factitious disorder. From that moment on, different diagnoses of functional symptoms, factitious and somatoform disorders were proposed with no consensus. A deficiency of Vitamin B12 (99 pmol / l; norm 145–569 pmol / l) was observed and treated at the age of 41; Vitamin B12 level was normal during our examination (365 pmol / l). Sexually transmitted infections have been excluded during 10 years of follow-up in a primary care and specialized setting and there was no evident risk in order to test again in the context of the current expertise. On the date of our evaluation, she was under treatment of the following psychotropic drugs: clonazepam, alprazolam, vortioxetine and trazodone.