The patient was a 51-year-old man who presented to the Emergency Department with hematemesis. His past medical history was unremarkable and he took no drugs. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs. On abdominal examination, the patient had no masses, muscle guarding, or rebound. Complete blood count revealed anemia with hemoglobin of 9.2. C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal, and the remainder of the serologic and immunologic workup was within normal limits. Gastroscopy revealed a submucosal-like tumor on the posterior wall of gastric angle with superficial ulceration . There were blood clots on top of the tumor, but no active bleeding existed; therefore we did not perform endoscopic hemostasis technique. Computed tomography indicated a tumor measuring 65 × 50 mm in the stomach, which was suspected to have invaded into the pancreas, but no metastatic lesions were detected . Magnetic resonance imaging also revealed a mass, having a high signal in the diffusion-weighted image (DWI) in the stomach, and the mass was also growing into the pancreas. At first, we considered the tumor as a malignant submucosal tumor such as GIST in the stomach or NET in the pancreas. General condition after hospital admission was stable, so we decided to perform an operation on suspicion of submucosal tumor, originating in the stomach or pancreas. During the preoperative period, massive hematemesis occurred with bright red blood with hemostatic shock. Emergency distal gastrectomy, distal pancreatectomy, and splenectomy were performed. The resected specimen consisted mostly of a hematoma and some vessel wall but did not have any malignant cells . We checked preoperative CT angiogram retrospectively and it indicated dissection of common hepatic artery as well as aneurysms of the common hepatic artery (maximum diameter, 8 mm) and bilateral renal artery (maximum diameter, 5 mm) . The tumor was close to splenic artery; therefore he was diagnosed with vessel rupture of splenic artery causing retroperitoneal hemorrhage and a hematoma that penetrated into the stomach.
On postoperative day 21, he exhibited peritoneal irritation in the form of a rigid board-like abdomen with shock vital signs. Emergency CTA showed a dissection and vessel rupture of aneurysm of common hepatic artery, causing intra-abdominal hemorrhage, so he underwent emergency coil embolization .
Follow-up was done every 6 months, and CTA one year after the first operation indicated the aneurysms (maximum diameter, 5 mm) of the bilateral renal arteries remained.