A 21-year-old female came to the emergency room with fever, headache, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and left-side hemiparesis. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score on admission was 15 and she had no signs of meningeal irritation. Three weeks earlier she had undergone endoscopic sinonasal surgery, and the day before hospital admission, her ear-nose- throat surgeon prescribed oral antibiotics for acute sinusitis. No cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula was noticed. On admission, her body temperature was 39°C, and serological examination revealed an increased white blood cell (WBC) count (13.510/mm3) with neutrophilia (12.680/mm3) and elevated C-reactive protein (194.80 mg/L). Non-enhanced cranial computed tomography (CT) scan was considered normal by emergency physicians , so they decided to do a lumbar puncture. CSF count, protein, and sugar levels were 210 WBC/mm3 (polymorphonuclear cells: 75%), 101.2 mg/dl, and 54 mg/dl (53%), respectively. Despite no organisms being identified with CSF Gram stain, meningoencephalitis was suspected, and ceftriaxone and vancomycin were started. The following day, a retrospective assessment of the admission CT scan disclosed a laminar extracerebral collection adjacent to the falx . A definitive diagnosis of interhemispheric SDE was established using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The small subdural collection (4 cm3) along the right side of the falx was found to be hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and with low signal intensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) [Figure 1b3-b4]. Moreover, hydro-aerial levels in the maxillary and fontal sinuses confirmed acute sinusitis. No signs of venous sinus thrombosis were observed.
Suspecting an interhemispheric SDE of nasosinusal origin, the patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics including cefepime, metronidazole, and vancomycin. The last was later substituted for linezolid. She experienced progressive clinical improvement except for two episodes of the left leg focal seizures, which resolved after a second anti-epileptic drug was administered. Two weeks after admission, the patient’s fever, headache, and seizures had completely resolved, and the left hemiparesis had noticeably improved. Nevertheless, control MRI demonstrated a notable enlargement of the subdural collection [22 cm3, ], and thus we were consulted about the possibility of surgical drainage. Given the good clinical situation of the patient, our recommendation was to continue with the pharmacological treatment alone. Cultures of CSF and blood were both negative, as well as serologic markers for hepatitis A, B, and C. Laboratory parameters continued to improve (normal WBC count and notable decrease of C-reactive protein to 15.9 mg/L) as did the clinical situation, except for the left foot paresis. Nevertheless, the MRI performed during the 3rd week showed an additional enlargement of the parafalcine collection [30 cm3, ]. In addition, hyperintensity in the underlying brain on T2/fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequences pointing to a possible cerebritis was also observed [Figure 1d4]. At this point, we took the decision to operate on the patient despite having uncertainties given her good clinical condition.
A large right parasagittal frontoparietal craniotomy was performed . After opening the dura mater, we found brain swelling, so the inter-hemispheric fissure could only be reached between two frontal bridging veins. We found easily-drainable white pus, a finding that contrasts with the general belief that pus tends to organize in the course of empyema, making delayed surgeries more difficult. The parafalcine compartment was repeatedly washed out with antibiotic solution (gentamicin and vancomycin). No drainage tubes were left in situ. Empyema material was processed for routine aerobic/anaerobic detection, revealing no growth. Nevertheless, amplification of bacterial 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demonstrated Prevotella oris, a Gram- negative, anaerobe commonly found in the oropharyngeal mucosa. Immediately following surgery, the patient developed a slight weakness in the left arm, which, as well as her preoperative lower limb paresis, completely resolved with rehabilitation therapy. Intravenous antibiotic therapy was extended for 4 weeks after surgery, but linezolid was suspended when the causative bacteria were identified. Based on her good clinical and radiological evolution, she was then treated with oral antibiotics (levofloxacin and metronidazole), which lasted 3 weeks until the follow-up MRIs demonstrated complete resolution of the subdural collection . The patient was discharged completely asymptomatic from hospital 5 weeks after surgery.