A 61-year-old Japanese man with multiple coronary risk factors, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, a family history of coronary artery disease, and current smoking, presented to our hospital with a history of angina upon exertion. Imeglimin hydrochloride 2000 mg, candesartan cilexetil 8 mg, empagliflozin 25 mg, linagliptin 5 mg, and pitavastatin calcium 2 mg were prescribed to him by his primary care physician. The patient experienced episodes of chest pain (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Angina Grade II) predominantly in the morning, which typically resolved within 3–5 min after cessation of exercise. His blood pressure was 116/70 mmHg and heart rate was 88 b.p.m. No cardiac murmur was audible, and no leg oedema was observed on physical examination. The serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level was 13 pg/mL (normal range, 0–125 pg/mL), the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 151 mg/dL (normal range, 70–139 mg/dL), and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was 6.8% (normal range, <6.0%). The chest X-ray showed neither cardiomegaly nor pulmonary congestion. Both the electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiogram showed no abnormal findings. A computed tomography coronary angiogram revealed a moderate stenosis at the proximal site of the left anterior descending coronary artery and diagonal coronary artery with no stenosis in the right coronary artery . Invasive coronary angiogram was scheduled. Given the clustering of chest pain in the morning, VSA with fixed stenosis was suspected. The baseline coronary angiogram revealed a relatively spastic coronary artery, which describes the condition of coronary artery with relatively even and diffuse reductions in vessel diameter along the coronary artery in angiography . Since the patient complained of angina upon exertion, we initially performed a hand grip test (20 kg × 5 min: 50% of his maximum grip strength). At the end of the 5 min hand grip test, an increase in heart rate and blood pressure was observed, and the patient reported chest pain accompanied by prominent ST elevation in leads II, III, and aVF . Angiogram revealed spasm at the site of the organic stenosis with delayed flow in his diagonal coronary artery . Nitrate (300 ug) was administered to the left coronary artery as the patient’s symptoms were uncontrollable. Subsequent coronary angiography of the right coronary artery, performed immediately after nitrate administration, showed already dilated right coronary artery. Following nitrate administration, the left coronary artery angiogram showed residual organic stenosis in the proximal part of the left anterior descending coronary artery and the diagonal branch . Physiological assessment of the moderate lesion in the proximal part of the left anterior descending coronary artery and the diagonal branch was performed using a PressureWire™ X (Abbott, USA) and intracoronary administration of 2 mg nicorandil. Fractional flow reserve of 0.86 (normal range, >0.80) in the far distal part of the left anterior descending coronary artery and 0.84 in the far distal part of the diagonal branch confirmed the absence of ischaemia caused by the organic stenosis. With reproducible angina during the provocation test, ST segment changes in electrocardiogram, and spasm at the site of organic stenosis, exercise-induced VSA was diagnosed. A calcium channel blocker was administered, and smoking cessation guidance was provided at discharge. Nitrate was used as needed, since the patient was intolerant for the regular use of long-acting nitrate due to headache. Since then, the patient has been free from angina.