A 31-year-old female patient, gravida 4, para 3, presented at her 30th week of gestation for epigastric pain. The pain was gradual in onset, epigastric, progressive, and constant, radiating to the back with no relieving factors, of 2 days’ duration, and associated with nausea and vomiting once of normal gastric content. She denies any fever, previous similar attacks, or any other complaint. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer; any acute, repeat, or discontinued medications; any allergies; or any genetic or psychosocial issues. Past medical and surgical histories were free. On physical examination, the patient was fully conscious, alert, and oriented, with stable vital signs, a gravid abdomen, soft laxity with severe epigastric tenderness, and voluntary guarding. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis with a left shift (12 800/μl with 88% neutrophils), alanine aminotransferase of 13 U/l, aspartate aminotransferase of 27 U/l, alkaline phosphatase of 313 IU/l, direct bilirubin of 0.3 mg/dl, total bilirubin of 0.9 mg/dl, and 10 times elevated amylase of 1383 IU/l. Pancreatitis was diagnosed based on the clinical presentation and laboratory findings. The patient was kept NPO (nil per os, meaning nothing by mouth) with pain control medications and intravenous (i.v.) fluids. While investigating the etiology of pancreatitis, an ultrasound of her abdomen showed an enlarged liver with a 19 cm span at mid-clavicular, regular contour, normal echotexture, and no dilatation of intrahepatic biliary ducts. Gallbladder is normally distended, with no stones or thickening of the walls. Common bile duct is not dilated. The visualized proximal parts of the pancreas appear edematous and echogenic and measure 3.5 cm. However, her calcium level was found to be significantly elevated, with a value of 11.7 mg/dl with low serum phosphorus and magnesium levels of 1.2 and 1.16 mg/dl, respectively, and a serum albumin level of 2.5 g/dl. PTH levels were elevated at 701 pg/ml and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels were 21 ng/ml. Based on the above-mentioned results, PHPT was identified, and the resulting hypercalcemia was thought to be the underlying pathologic agent of her acute pancreatitis. A neck ultrasound revealed a well-defined heterogeneous, mostly hypoechoic, solidly vascularized lesion measuring 1.9×1.7 cm, seen posterior to the left thyroid lobe and mostly representing a parathyroid adenoma. The right thyroid lobe shows a well-defined spongiform nodule measuring 1×0.6 cm and a tiny pure cyst; otherwise, the left thyroid lobe is normal in size and echotexture, with no enlarged cervical lymph nodes . At the same time, the initial target to reduce the patient’s serum calcium level failed despite various attempts using aggressive saline infusion. Moreover, the patient refused all other medical therapies due to their potential adverse effects on pregnancy, despite discussing their risks and benefits with herself and her family. Thus, a multidisciplinary decision involving the gynecology, endocrinology, internal medicine, and surgery teams was made, and the patient was advised to have an emergency parathyroidectomy. So, parathyroidectomy was performed after 7 days of diagnosis, with a subsequent significant intraoperative drop in PTH (from 1331 to 234 to 18 pg/ml) indicating adequate adenoma removal . The procedure was performed by a consultant at the general surgery department of a government hospital. The patient was followed up for 3 weeks without any reported complications, adverse events, or readmissions. The pregnancy was continued without any maternal and/or fetal complications.