A 63-year-old woman without a history of trauma presented with left shoulder pain for six months. The patient was right-hand dominant.The comorbidity was hypertension, whereas the patient had no risk factor of osteonecrosis including a dysbarism history or autoimmune disease of sickle cell anemia or systemic lupus erythematous [, ]. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. The patient had a history of RCR on the right shoulder at a local clinic five years ago. Plain radiography performed at our institution did not reveal osteonecrosis on the right shoulder. Before visiting our institution, the patient had received treatments comprising nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication and physiotherapy, including active assisted stretching exercises in a local clinic. The patient did not receive corticosteroid medication . The patient presented with left shoulder pain accompanied by stiffness in the initial physical examination performed at our institution, and additional conservative treatment, excluding steroids, was given for a 1-month period. Despite continued conservative treatment, the pain did not improve, which led to arthroscopic RCR. The inflammatory markers (white blood cell count, white blood cell differential for segmented neutrophils, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein) before surgery were within normal ranges. The visual analog scale (VAS) score of the left shoulder a day before surgery was 3 for pain at rest and 8 for pain during activity. The range of motion was 120° for active forward flexion, 30° for external rotation at the side, 40° for external rotation at 90° of abduction, 30° for internal rotation at 90° of abduction, and L3 vertebral level for internal rotation to the posterior (hand behind back), accompanied by stiffness. A medium size rotator cuff tear and nearly complete tear of the biceps long head tendon were observed on pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging . Osteonecrosis of the humeral head was not observed on plain radiography .
Arthroscopic RCR was performed under general anesthesia in the beach chair position. As the biceps long head tendon showed a nearly complete tear, tenotomy was performed using radiofrequency in the area attached to the superior labrum. For the subscapularis, which showed a longitudinal tear with a relatively intact footprint of the lesser tuberosity, only debridement was performed. Acromioplasty was performed by the standard procedure, and RCR was performed in a single row using two anchors: a 2.8 mm all-suture anchor (Y-Knot®; ConMed Linvatec, Largo, FL) and a 5.5 mm open-construct PEEK suture anchor (HEALICOIL; Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA). No metal anchor was used. For the PEEK suture anchor, the insertion was in the lateral aspect of the greater tuberosity, and after the single-row repair, an all-suture anchor was inserted into the upper part of the intertubercular groove to repair the anterior of the supraspinatus and the rotator interval. To examine anchor settling, radiofrequency debridement was performed on the surrounding area . The retracted torn rotator cuff showed repair up to the footprint of the greater tuberosity without tension. On the immediate postoperative follow-up MRI, osteonecrosis of the humeral head was not detected. During surgery, epinephrine was not added to the irrigation fluid, which was controlled within 50–70 mmHg using a pressure-controlled pump. After surgery, local anesthetics were not used in the intra-articular or subacromial space. The patient performed assisted motion exercises that started six weeks after surgery, when the abduction brace was weaned.
Four months after surgery, the pain and range of motion showed significant improvements compared to the time before surgery as follows: pain (VAS score pain at rest, 2; pain during activity, 3) and range of motion (140° for active forward flexion, 30° for external rotation at the side, 40° for external rotation at 90° of abduction, 40° for internal rotation at 90° of abduction, and L3 vertebral level for internal rotation to the posterior). Six months after surgery, the left shoulder pain (VAS score pain at rest, 5; pain during activity, 6) increased, except for external rotation at 90° of abduction, all other ranges of motion were at similar level (140° for active forward flexion, 30° for external rotation at the side, 70° for external rotation at 90° of abduction, 40° for internal rotation at 90° of abduction, and L4 vertebral level for internal rotation to the posterior). On follow-up ultrasonography, the integrity of the repaired rotator cuff tendon was intact , but osteonecrosis could not be confirmed due to the lack of plain radiography. The inflammatory markers estimated to detect infection were within normal ranges. Conservative treatment including NSAIDs and stretching exercises was continued, and 1 year after surgery, the left shoulder pain decreased (VAS score pain at rest: 1, pain during activity: 3); however, follow-up plain radiography and MRI showed osteonecrosis of the humeral head . The repaired rotator cuff tendon showed insufficient thickness, but no discontinuity (Sugaya classification type III) . Shoulder range of motion was similar to the time after six months of surgery as follows: 140° for active forward flexion, 30° for external rotation at the side, 70° for external rotation at 90° of abduction, 50° for internal rotation at 90° of abduction, and L2 vertebral level for internal rotation to the posterior. The serial shoulder range of motion from before surgery to final follow-up is summarized in Table . The Shoulder Rating Scale of the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and Constant scores were 23 and 59, respectively, indicating poor clinical outcome. The patient had gradual pain relief and arthroplasty was not performed.