A 70-year-old, previously healthy female developed excruciating pain on the right cheek and chin. After 3 days, she noticed redness and vesicles on the same area with aggravated pain unresponsive to over-the-counter pain killers. She was admitted to the Neurology Department of our hospital the following day. She had no history of medication, diabetes or chronic hypertension, or alcohol and cigarette use. Physical examination at admission showed paresthesia, allodynia and painful vesicles on the right trigeminal distribution (V2 and V3). Her breathing sound was clear, and the heart beat was regular without murmur. Her blood pressure was 113/73 mm Hg, her pulse rate was 73 beats/min, and her temperature was 36.7°C. Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram and laboratory findings including a complete blood count and chemistry (renal/hepatic function test, electrolyte, uric acid and lipid profile) were normal. She was treated with intravenous acyclovir (15 mg/kg/day) for 7 days. Pain was controlled by various analgesics (acetaminophen 975–1,950 mg/day, tramadol 112.5–225 mg/day and pregabalin 75–300 mg/day).
While the painful vesicles were resolving, vertigo and gait disturbance with nausea developed 15 days after hospitalization. The patient was able to walk but tended to be lateropulsive to the right side. On neurologic examination, she was alert and oriented. Fine left-beating nystagmus was observed on the left gaze with no limitation of ocular movement and skew deviation. She exhibited no other focal neurologic signs including the usual signs of LMI (Horner syndrome, swallowing or articulation difficulty and hemibody sensory change). At first, we made a presumptive diagnosis of pregabalin-related dizziness or concomitant vestibular neuritis because she showed no focal signs other than lateropulsive gait and nystagmus. The dose of pregabalin was reduced from 300 to 75 mg/day, and a vestibular suppressant (diazepam 2 mg/day) was prescribed. Dizziness was moderately relieved, but mild dizziness persisted thereafter.
Sixteen days later, painful vesicles developed again on the right chin, with high fever (>38°C) and a headache. Brain computed tomography showed no abnormal findings. Lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 15 cm of water, 24 red blood cells, 13 white blood cells (lymphocytes 57%, neutrophils 23%, eosinophils 2% and other 18%), glucose 79 mg/dl (blood glucose 111 mg/dl) and protein 37.4 mg/dl. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for VZV in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was negative. However, VZV IgG antibody was positive in CSF (3.3; normal value <0.8), and the antibody index of VZV IgG antibody in CSF – the ratio of CSF/serum VZV IgG antibody compared with the CSF/serum total IgG – was 63.6 (normal value <2), which is indicative of intrathecal synthesis. The patient was further treated with a high dose of intravenous acyclovir (30 mg/kg/day) and an oral steroid (prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) for 10 days.
Eight days later, brain MRI was performed, which showed a small infarct in the far posterolateral portion of the right rostral medulla and pontomedullary junction . However, there was no abnormal vessel change on brain MR angiography. One month later, the patient recovered with no disability (modified Rankin Scale = 1) but complained of mild transient dizziness upon positional change.