A 36-year-old man was transferred to our hospital due to recurrent syncope. His symptoms started approximately 1 month prior to presentation. He had no past medical history. The 24-h Holter on admission exhibited sinus rhythm, a Mobitz II atrioventricular block and sinus arrest, with the longest time being 5148 ms . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal ventricular function without any significant abnormalities. Cardiac CTA showed no significant coronary lesions. After completing the relevant inspection, he underwent permanent dual chamber pacemaker (Advisa DR, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) implantation . The postoperative electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, a dual chamber pacemaker, and DDD mode pacing, and pacemaker pacing perception function was normal .
The pacemaker implantation procedure was performed in a cardiac catheterization laboratory. Under local anesthesia, the left subclavian vein was punctured, and a C315 His sheath (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) was advanced into the right atrium (RA) over a guidewire. Thereafter, the 3830 His lead (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) was advanced to the tip of the sheath. The parameters of the electrode were as follows: ventricular threshold: 0.4 V, perception: 12.0 mV, impedance: 650 Ω. The pacing electrode (Medtronic, 6232ADJ) was fixed after the incision. The detachable sheath was sent along the guidewire, and the atrial pacing electrode was sent to the right atrial auricle through the detachable sheath. The electrode position was adjusted, and the following electrode parameters were tested: ventricular threshold: 0.5 V, perception: 3.0 mv, impedance: 500 Ω. The pacing electrodes were fixed. The pacemaker was connected and implanted into the premade pacemaker bag (this was a pacemaker bag made in advance). The postoperative examination showed that the pacing rhythm, pacemaker pacing and perception function were normal. He was discharged without any complications after a successful pacemaker implantation (pacing mode: DDD 55–130 bpm, sense AV delay: 80 ms, pace AV delay: 100 ms, RA sensing 0.3 mV + auto capture managing on, RV sensing 0.9 mV + auto capture managing off, RA output 2.5 V × 0.4 ms, RV output 4.0 V × 1.0 ms).