A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with body weight loss (-10 kg during 6 months) and upper abdominal pain. His blood pressure was 123/71 mmHg, pulse was 92 bpm. Physical examination revealed upper left quadrant pain but soft in his abdomen. The tumor was palpable in the upper left abdomen.
Laboratory examination findings were as follows: Peripheral leukocyte count was 91,500/mm3 (87.5% neutrophils, 0% eosinophils, 1.5% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes), hemoglobin was 10.3 g/dL, and platelet count was 38.3 × 104/mm3. Serum pancreatic enzymes such as amylase, lipase, and elastase-1 were normal. Serum tumor markers such as sIL-2R (soluble interleukin-2 receptor) and TK (thymidine kinase) were elevated to 2870 U/ml and 15 U/L, respectively, but CEA (Carcinoembryonic Antigen), CA 19-9 (Carbohydrate Antigen 19-9) and NSE (Neuron-specific enolase) were normal. The serum G-CSF was elevated to 134 pg/mL (normal, < 18.1 pg/mL, by enzyme immunoassay).
Computed tomography (CT) showed a heterogeneously enhanced mass 10 cm in diameter in the left upper abdomen and multiple low density areas in the liver (see Figure ). The pancreas could not be detected and it is suggested that the large tumor was originally derived from the pancreas. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a mass of heterogeneous intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images. Endoscopic examination revealed an extrinsic compression 10 cm in size, at the lesser curve of the body of the stomach. In 2-deoxy-2-[18F]-fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography (PET), the maximum standardized uptake value was over 11 at his left upper abdominal lesion. No source of infection was detected. We therefore speculated that this case might be a G-CSF-producing pancreatic carcinoma.
Following informed consent, a tumor biopsy of the liver was performed. Histopathologic diagnosis of the tumor was an anaplastic pleomorphic-type carcinoma (see Figure ). Immunohistochemical staining of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded liver biopsy material was performed. The pancreatic cancer cells were positive for G-CSF (see Figure ).
The patient developed interstitial pneumonia, probably caused by G-CSF produced by the carcinoma, and died 11 days after admission.