A 67-year-old woman who had been previously treated for RA at a medical clinic presented with abdominal pain and chronic diarrhea, and was referred to our Internal Department. Her vital signs were normal, but pedal edema was present. The remainder of the physical examination findings were unremarkable.
Laboratory values were as follows: serum creatinine, 0.47 mg/dL; urea nitrogen, 10 mg/dL; serum total protein/albumin, 5.2/2.0 g/dL; immunoglobulin (Ig) G, 1002 mg/dL; IgA/M, 111/69 mg/dL. C-reactive protein (CRP), 4.9 mg/dL; rheumatoid factor, 38 IU/mL (reference range, < 15 IU/mL); anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, 124 U/mL (reference range, < 4 U/mL); matrix metalloproteinase-3, 248.4 ng/mL (reference range, 17.3 ~ 59.7 ng/mL); SAA, 193.2 μg/mL (reference range, < 8 μg/mL). Antinuclear antibody was undetectable, and urinary protein excretion was 0.5 g per gram urinary creatinine.
A computed tomography scan showed a right renal tumor suggestive of renal cell carcinoma. Right nephrectomy (May, 20XX) was performed and confirmed the diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma. The non-cancerous part of the renal tissue contained 365 glomeruli; 57 glomeruli were globally sclerotic. In addition, deposition of amorphous eosinophilic material was observed at vascular poles and mesangial regions . These deposits were Congo red- and AA-positive . Tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were moderate. Immunofluorescence staining showed no deposition of complements or Igs, including light chains. Electron microscopy revealed randomly disposed, rigid, nonbranching fibrils compatible with amyloid deposition and effacement of podocyte foot processes.
Colonoscopy revealed amyloid deposition in addition to inflammation of the colon (February, 20XX, Fig. ). Biopsy of the duodenum also revealed amyloid deposition. The patient was therefore diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma and AA amyloidosis.
We initiated treatment with for RA, but her proteinuria gradually increased to the nephrotic range . was replaced with TCZ, and her proteinuria began to improve considerably and eventually resolved (February, 20XX + 1). Her gastrointestinal symptoms were also alleviated. In addition, the levels of SAA decreased to the reference range. However, repeat colon biopsy (July, 20XX + 1), performed after her gastrointestinal symptoms resolved (November, 20XX), showed persistence of amyloid deposition, although it had decreased compared to that observed on the initial biopsy .