A 16-year-old Mexican girl presented with a 4-day history of epigastric abdominal pain that radiated to the left hypochondrium and was accompanied by abdominal bloating. She reported vomiting approximately 30 times 24 hours after symptom onset. Oral intake of fluids and solid food was impaired, and both flatus and bowel movements were absent. She had no history of prior surgical interventions and did not have a history of fever, hematemesis, jaundice, chyluria, or acholic stools.
She was hemodynamically stable on room air with a mild tachycardia of up to 140 beats per minute (bpm). On physical examination she presented no neurological alterations or alopecia. An abdominal examination revealed distention, borborygmi, painful palpation, and involuntary resistance in upper quadrants with rebound tenderness.
She was hemoconcentrated with a hematocrit of 40 and had leukocytosis of 17,560/mm3. A computed tomography of her abdomen and pelvis with intravenously and orally administered contrast showed dilatation of the gastric chamber with a hyperdense beehive pattern . Dilated small intestine loops with fluid levels and a target image in the jejunum were suggestive of intussusception. Furthermore, findings were compatible with a trichobezoar.
She underwent an exploratory laparotomy. Findings included gastric distention , a palpable mass that extended from the gastric lumen to the first duodenum section, and a jejuno-jejunal intussusception , which was liberated through manual revision. The jejunum showed macroscopic signs of inflammation 110 cm away from the ligament of Treitz. The mass was manually dragged into the duodenum.
A 10 cm gastrotomy was performed on the anterior portion of the gastric body and a 20 cm-long continuous conglomerate of hair was extracted followed by four smaller fragments which extended to the site of the intussusception . After gastric lavage with saline solution, a first intention closure was performed in two layers: first with polyglactin 00 using the Connell technique and then with gastric silk 00 using the Lembert technique. A 19 Fr closed system drainage was placed in her peritoneal cavity.
She had no immediate complications. Enteral nutrition was tolerated during the third postoperative day. Before hospital discharge she was evaluated by an in-house psychiatrist and was discharged during the fifth day of hospital admission.