A 9-year-old boy was transferred to our hospital due to jaundice and coma. He lived in a village in Jilin Province in northeastern China. His mother had collected wild mushrooms in the forest and cooked them for breakfast. The boy ate more mushrooms than the rest of the family. Approximately 12 h later, the boy and his parents presented to a local emergency department with nausea and vomiting. All of them were diagnosed with mushroom poisoning according to the history of mushroom ingestion. His parents’ symptoms gradually disappeared, and they were discharged the next day. However, symptoms in the boy gradually worsened even though gastric lavage had been performed. Twenty-four hours later, he developed abdominal pain, diarrhea and jaundice, so he was transferred to a tertiary hospital. On admission, he had jaundice. The laboratory data were as follows: alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 269 U/L (normal range: 9–50 U/L); total bilirubin (TBIL), 32 µmol/L (normal range: 6.8–30 µmol/L); direct bilirubin (DBIL), 11.6 µmol/L (normal range: 0.0-8.6 µmol/L); prothrombin time (PT), 24.3 s; INR, 2.08; Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound and abdominal computed tomography findings were normal. Virological analysis, autoantibody detection, and metabolic investigations were negative. He was diagnosed with mushroom poisoning based on medical history, clinical manifestations and exclusion of other causes. He also had ALF. He was treated with penicillin G, silybin, N-acetylcysteine and plasma exchange (the amount of plasma exchange was 40–50 ml/kg/d, once a day for 2 h each time). However, the patient was still deteriorating. On the 3rd day of admission, the patient began to suffer delirium and agitation. ALT increased to 4410 U/L, TBIL increased to 340 µmol/L and INR increased to 2.2. Ammonia was 73 µmol/L (normal range: 9–47 µmol/L). On the 5th day of admission, the patient became comatose, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3. Changes in liver function gradually resulted in a decrease in transaminase and an increase in bilirubin. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further management and an evaluation for PLT on the sixth day after mushroom ingestion.
Upon arrival at our institution, he had grade IV hepatic encephalopathy (HE). The laboratory data revealed that the PT was 62 s, and the INR was 5.5. ALT had decreased to 1200 U/L, TBIL had increased to 435 µmol/L. Ammonia was 126 µmol/L. Because of his worsening laboratory parameters and grade IV HE, LT was considered. ALF was one of the indications for LT, but contraindications still needed to be excluded. In particular, this patient had grade IV HE, and neurological sequelae were a worrisome problem. An electroencephalogram ( EEG ) showed that a diffuse δ wave pattern with a 2–3 Hz median amplitude was dominant, and a 4 Hzθ wave appeared after pain stimulation. Brain color Doppler ultrasonography showed no obvious intracranial hypertension. Cranial CT was normal. After consultation with the LT center, the patient was recommended to undergo PLT. With the consent of his parents and the approval of the ethical review board of Jilin Province, the patient underwent PLT on the 7th day after mushroom ingestion. The patient needed an emergency liver transplant, when the only source of liver was a living donor from a parent. The mother’s gastrointestinal symptoms disappeared within one day after eating mushrooms, and there was no other discomfort.Her liver function, renal function and abdomen CT were normal, and the other preoperative examinations were in accordance with the donor standard. The patient’s family agreed that the mother was the donor. The patient’ weight is 45 kg which is close to an adult’s weight. In order to ensure a reasonable graft to recipient weight ratio(GRWR), His mother donated the right lobe of her liver. The graft was implanted into the abdominal cavity using the piggyback technique. The histology of the explanted liver revealed massive hepatic necrosis compatible with severe cholestasis in residual hepatocyte. After operation, the patient returned to the pediatric intensive care unit with tracheal intubation and was placed on mechanical ventilation. Immunosuppression regimen included methylprednisolone combined with tacrolimus was started on the 2nd day after the operation. Prophylactic antibiotics including ganciclovir, meropenem and vancomycin, were administered. On the 2nd day after the operation, the patient’s consciousness gradually improved, and the GCS score increased to 11. On the 3rd day, his consciousness was clear, and the endotracheal tube was removed. Ammonia decreased to normal (34 µmol/L). One week later, liver function and coagulation were normal. Abdominal ultrasound didn’t show complications of hepatic vessels and biliary tract. Since there were no abnormal symptoms and signs of the nervous system, we did not recheck the brain imaging and EEG for him. The patient gradually improved and was discharged on postoperative day 20. So far, he has survived for 6 months without complications.
This report was approved by the ethics committee of The First Hospital of Jilin University, and informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents.