Our patient is a 32 year old Nigerian second gravida who presented to our antenatal clinic for late booking at 32 weeks with a written referral letter from her attending Obstetrician from a neighboring state on account of birth preparedness (husband was out of town and she had need to be near her family). She had 3 antenatal care visits with us and was booked for an elective CS at a gestational age of 38 weeks plus 2 days due to one previous CS with persistent breech presentation.
The index pregnancy was desired and was spontaneously achieved. The pregnancy so far had been uneventful. She booked for antenatal care in secondary health care facility (General hospital) in a neighboring state at a gestational age of 26 weeks. Prior to her booking, she was on routine hematinics. Her booking investigations were as follows: packed cell volume: 34%, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL), and retroviral disease were non-reactive. The genotype was HbAA and blood group was A Rhesus “D” positive. The first and second obstetric scans done made impressions of normal viable intrauterine fetus at 12 weeks + 4 days and 25 weeks + 5 days of gestation, respectively. She received 2 doses each of intramuscular tetanus toxoid and intermittent preventive therapy for malarial prophylaxis. There was no history of labor pains prior to the elective CS.
A general physical examination done revealed a young woman, afebrile, not pale, anicteric, acyanosed, not dehydrated, with no pedal edema. Abdominal examination revealed a uniformly enlarged abdomen which moved with respiration with no scar tenderness noted, symphysiofundal height was 37 cm compatible with her gestation, singleton fetus in longitudinal lie, breech presentation, on dorsoanterior position, presenting part was 5/5th palpable per abdomen, fetal heart rate was 132 beats/minute asynchronous with maternal pulse. There was no palpable uterine contractions. Vaginal examination revealed a closed and uneffaced cervical os. She was counseled on findings and her diagnosis. An informed consent was obtained and she subsequently had an elective CS due to persistent breech presentation at a gestational age of 38 weeks plus 2 days on a background of one previous CS with the following intra-operative findings : moderate peritoneal adhesions, uterine dehiscence along the small area of the line of the previous scar (the thinned-out dehisced myometrium later repaired in 2 layers with Vicryl 2 suture in interlocking and simple continuous fashion, respectively; ), a live female neonate APGAR scores of 8 and 10 in 1 and 5 minutes respectively and birth weight of 3.4 kg was delivered. The placenta was fundal and not low lying. There were normal looking tubes and ovaries bilaterally. Estimated blood loss was 250 ml. The immediate post-operative condition was satisfactory.
Post-operatively, she was managed with intravenous fluids (0.9% Normal Saline alternated with 0.5% dextrose water), intravenous antibiotics (Ceftriazone and Metronidazole), and parenteral analgesics (pentazocine and paracetamol) for 48 hours. Her drugs were converted to orals 48 hours post-surgery.
Contraceptive counseling was offered, and the need for adequate observation of inter-pregnancy interval of up to 3 years was advised. She opted for long-acting reversible contraception in the form of progesterone implant. Patient had nil complaints and was discharged home with oral medications and hematinics on third day post-surgery. Her postnatal visits at 2 and 6 weeks post-surgery were uneventful, mother and baby were fine.
Her previous confinement in 2020 was uneventful. Pregnancy was carried to term, and delivery was via emergency CS due to fetal distress during labor induction. The outcome was a live male neonate with good APGAR score and a birth weight of 3.5 kg. The baby is currently alive and well. She had no post-operative complications. She attained menarche at 13 years and have an average menstrual flow of 5 days in a regular 28-day cycle. An informed consent for publication of this case report was duly received from her.