A 53-year-old woman, born in Guinea-Bissau, was admitted in São Francisco Xavier Hospital with a progressively proximal muscle weakness of the lower extremities that had led to a total inability to walk. The patient had a history of a locally advanced breast cancer diagnosed ten months earlier. The tumour was 4 × 5 cm and located in her right breast with ulceration to the skin and with axillary adenopathies. Biopsies revealed an invasive ductal carcinoma with extensive tumor necrosis. Immunocytochemical staining was negative for hormonal receptors (estrogens and progesterone) and positive for c-erbB2 (Score 3+). The staging of the neoplastic disease, conducted through axillary echography, computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, and bone scintigraphy, revealed a IIIC stage according to the Tumor-Node-Metastases (TNM) classification. Primary chemotherapy was performed with epirubicin and docetaxel, associated with radiotherapy of the primary lesion (3400 rads total). Given the absence of a reduction of the tumoral mass, the chemotherapy scheme was modified to cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil (CMF).
Ten months later, the patient presented with signs of lower back pain with radiation towards both lower extremities accompanied by a decrease in muscle strength. Upon neurological examination, the patient presented muscle weakness and atrophy of both proximal lower extremities without myalgia. Muscle strength was graded according to the Medical Research Council Scale (MRC) as 2 out of 5 in the bilateral iliopsoas muscle, and 4 out of 5 in the bilateral quadriceps femoris. The deep-tendon reflexes were hypoactive. No other findings were encountered in the neurological examination.
There was no history of diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, toxin exposure, blood transfusion, nutritional deficiency, or any medication besides the chemotherapy above mentioned.
The following complementary examinations were performed: lumbar puncture, CT and magnetic resonance scans of the lumbosacral column, and tumor markers. All the results were normal. The laboratorial evaluation at this time indicated only a small elevation of creatinine kinase (CK) values (300 IU/l). In view of these results, the provisional diagnosis of secondary neuropathy due to docetaxel was considered, with the patient maintaining the CMF cycles and starting gabapentin. At this stage, and given the reduction of the tumor mass and partial recovery of the muscular strength (according to the MRC Scale as 4 out of 5 in the bilateral iliopsoas muscle, and 4 out of 5 in the bilateral quadriceps femoris), the patient was submitted to a modified radical mastectomy and was discharged from the hospital.
Three months later, the patient was readmitted due to new neurological deterioration. Muscle strength was graded according to the MRC Scale as 2 out of 5 in the bilateral iliopsoas muscle and 2 out of 5 in both quadriceps femoris, although it was nearly normal in other muscles. The muscles innervated by cranial nerves were spared. The deep-tendon reflexes were hypoactive.
The laboratorial re-evaluation showed a marked increase in serum CK values (2400 IU/l), serum myoglobin (780 IU/l), and moderate elevation of serum aminotransferases (alanine aminotransferase: 300 IU/l). Viral examination (serological markers for hepatitis B, C, HIV and human T-lymphotropic virus) was negative.
An EMG showed an incomplete interference pattern with poor activation during voluntary contraction in the iliopsoas and quadriceps femoris. The motor nerve conduction was 44.1 m/s and 44.3 m/s in the right and left tibial nerves, respectively, and 46.5 m/s and 46.1 m/s in the right and left peroneal nerves, respectively. The sensory motor nerve conductions and the compound motor action potential amplitudes were normal.
One week later, a biopsy specimen of the left quadriceps femoris presented a muscle necrosis pattern, increased centrally placed nuclei consisting of 3% of total fibers, and substantial numbers of scattered necrotic and regenerating fibers without inflammatory cells. A diffuse replacement of the muscle tissue by adipose and conjunctive tissues was also encountered .
The following screening tests for inflammatory myopathies were conducted: antinuclear antibodies; anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ab); anti-ribonucleoprotein ab; anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen ab; anti Mi2 ab; anti Jo1 ab; anti-SS A and anti SS B ab; and anti-scl 70 ab. Complement levels were normal.
A new staging of the neoplastic disease was also conducted, and revealed an absence of metastases.
The diagnosis of necrotizing myopathy was attributed, and corticotherapy was initiated (prednisolone 1.5 mg/kg/day), while still maintaining the chemotherapy already established. A full recovery of muscle strength was observed.
Four months later, a new decrease of muscle strength was observed, and the patient noticed difficulties standing up and raising her arms above shoulder height. Muscle strength was graded according to MRC as 3 out of 5 in the bilateral deltoids, biceps brachii and triceps brachii, and 2 out of 5 in the bilateral iliopsoas muscle and in both quadriceps femoris, but still maintaining distal strength. The muscles innervated by cranial nerves were still spared.
The EMG and muscle biopsy of the left biceps brachii muscle were repeated one week later. The EMG showed the same incomplete interference pattern during voluntary contraction in bilateral deltoids, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, iliopsoas and quadriceps femoris. The motor nerve conduction velocity was: 44.4 and 45 m/s in right and left median nerves, 49.5 and 48.7 m/s in right and left ulnar nerves, and 39.6 and 40.3 m/s in right and left peroneal nerves, respectively. The sensory motor nerve conductions and the compound motor action potential amplitudes were still normal. The biopsy specimen showed the same myopathic changes encountered in the first muscle biopsy.
At the same time, the re-staging of the neoplastic disease showed evidence of bone metastases in the sternum, which were confirmed by bone tomography and scintigraphy. Reinstitution of chemotherapy was established with epirubicin and docetaxel, and corticotherapy was intensified (3 mg/kg/day).
Three weeks later a progressive improvement of the muscle strength was observed with a partial recovery of the ability to walk. Muscle strength was graded according to MRC as 4 out of 5 in bilateral deltoids, biceps brachii, and triceps brachii and 3 out of 5 in the bilateral iliopsoas muscle and in both quadriceps femoris. The serum muscle enzymes returned to normal values.
The patient died one year later with pulmonary and hepatic failure due to metastasization of the underlying cancer.