A 43-year-old woman with recently-diagnosed diabetes presented to the emergency department (ED) with edema, facial and upper chest hyperpigmentation and abdominal pain from four months before. She reported fever and weakness in the past few days and about 5-kilogram weight loss over the past month. In the physical exam, she showed a cushingoid face with pale sclera, facial edema and hyperpigmentation extended to her upper trunk as dark papules, although there was no buffalo hump . In her abdominal exam, she had a fatty abdomen with mild tenderness in the epigastric region and white steria in the lower half of the abdomen with a 1.5-cm diameter and a 4-cm length. On the extremities, she had pedal and foot edema without any size difference. Over the past month, she had had several admissions for hyperpigmentation and abdominal pain.
At her first assessment carried out in the ED, she had hypokalemia (2.3 meq/l), alkalosis, mild hypertension and low-grade fever. Her peripheral blood smear (PBS) revealed 4000-5000/L of white blood cells, mostly neutrophils, and her platelet count was about 50000-60000 cells/µl. She had anisopoikilocytosis with hypochromicity and no schistocytes.
In the abdominopelvic ultrasound, she had a 13-cm spleen and a dilated common bile duct (CBD). Due to the dilated CBD and abdominal pain, we conducted an intravenously and orally-enhanced abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan that showed a poorly-enhancing mass in the periampullary region with a 32*22 mm diameter causing CBD dilation (19 mm) and main pancreatic duct (MPD) dilation (4.5 mm). No invasion was observed to the adjacent organs. Some pathologic lymph nodes with the maximum short axis diameter (SAD) of 25 mm were present in the pancreaticoduodenal region. Bilaterally-increasing adrenal limb thickness (adrenal hyperplasia) was noted (9.5 mm). There were three liver hemangioma ranging from 9-20 mm in the liver .
Because of the mass shown in the CT scan, an upper endoscopy was performed, which reported a grade-A esophagitis. The patient had a grade-A hiatal hernia. In D2, she had a mass that was biopsied and Endo-ultrasonography (EUS) was recommended. The biopsy was not malignant, and due to the high susceptibility of a pancreatic mass, EUS and biopsy were planned.
Later in the admission process, the patient showed a positive blood culture with Acinetobacter and extended antibiotic therapy was then started. The sepsis progressed and she got resistant hypotension and finally passed away