A 46-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for an episode kidney allograft biopsy because his proteinuria and serum creatinine had increased at the level of 0.7 g/day and 1.8 mg/dl, respectively. His first kidney biopsy was performed at 19 years of age for proteinuria and hematuria (this biopsy result could not be obtained). However, he had not received any treatment for his kidney disease. After 16 years, he presented at our hospital with a visual loss caused by hypertensive retinopathy, and blood examination showed end-stage renal disease. After undergoing peritoneal dialysis for 1.5 years, he received a living-related kidney transplantation from his mother when he was 36 years old. ABO blood types were compatible. The immunosuppressive therapy consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, methylprednisolone, and basiliximab. The allograft demonstrated excellent early function, with a serum creatinine (S-Cr) level and proteinuria of 1.5 mg/dl and 0.2–0.3 g/day, respectively. The 1-month and 1-year protocol biopsy showed neither evidence of rejection nor recurrence of primary disease. However, he developed pure red cell aplasia caused by parvovirus; therefore, tacrolimus was converted to cyclosporine and he recovered from this infection immediately. His S-Cr levels increased to 1.8 mg/dl, with the appearance of proteinuria (0.7 g/day) 8 years post transplantation. A first episode biopsy was performed and histopathology showed no evidence of rejection with limited interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (5%). However, global sclerosis was observed in 15 out of 36 glomeruli (42%). The rest of the conserved glomeruli showed focal segmental mesangial proliferation with IgA deposition. Of note, severe arteriolar hyalinosis partly associated with CNI arteriolopathy was evident (Banff 2013 classification: t0, i0, g0, v0, ptc0, ct1, ci0, cg0, cv0, aah3). He was diagnosed with recurrence of IgAN (Oxford classification: M1, S1, E0, T0) and severe arteriolar hyalinosis. We estimated that the patient had no active lesion due to IgAN because there was neither endocapillary nor extracapillary proliferation. On the other hand, 42% of global sclerosis seems to be led by severe arteriolar hyalinosis . Because he had already taken angiotensin II receptor blocker, we did not administer further drugs. Dietary sodium restriction and conversion of cyclosporine to tacrolimus reduced urinary protein to the level of 0.15 g/day.
However, 2 years later (10 years after transplantation), he presented proteinuria again at the level of 1.0 g/day accompanied by microscopic hematuria (urinary red blood cell count was 5–9/high-power field). Therefore, a second episode biopsy was performed. Histopathology showed diffuse global mesangial proliferation and mild interstitial fibrosis (20%); moreover, endocapillary and extracapillary hypercellularity was evident in two out of 19 glomeruli . In the mesangium, immunofluorescence revealed multiple immunoreactivities for IgA, immunoglobulin M (IgM), complement component 3 (C3), and complement component 1, q subcomponent (C1q). We diagnosed recurrence of IgA nephropathy again and the Oxford classification showed a higher score (M1, S1, E1, T1) than in the first episode biopsy. This recurrence had happened despite taking immunosuppressive drugs and histologically worsened than first time recurrence after kidney transplantation. These findings predicted disease progression and poor prognosis. Therefore, we considered steroid pulse therapy plus tonsillectomy was more effective in this case than steroid pulse therapy alone. He received tonsillectomy first due to his work’s schedule (He could hospitalize only at this time). Because steroid pulse therapy immediately after tonsillectomy had been reported to increase the bleeding episodes, he received steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 500 mg/day × 3 days × 3 times) few months later. After the treatment, his proteinuria gradually decreased and was maintained around 0.3 g/day for 3 years after started therapy .