A 74-year-old Chinese man presented with a one-month history of recurrent headaches, vomiting and left limb atony. He had undergone a successful clipping operation through the pterional approach for an anterior communicating artery aneurysm five years previously. One month before presentation, he developed a headache without apparent cause that was especially severe in the right frontal region. He also had a small tumor on the right side of his forehead at the original incision site; the tumor had gradually increased from soybean size to egg size in one month. This was accompanied by nausea, projectile vomiting of gastric contents and left limb atony. Computed tomography demonstrated a subcutaneous tumor on the right side of his forehead, a scalp lesion complicated with right frontal lobe hemorrhage, and a right ventricular hematocele. We gave our patient oxiracetam (5.0g in 250mL of normal saline (0.9% weight to volume of sodium chloride)) for treatment of neurotrophy. On the third day after admission, he suddenly lost consciousness. Urgent head computed tomography showed an intracranial hemorrhage, the volume of which had increased from 40mL to 90mL as well as persistent bleeding and a midline shift of over 1.5cm .
Our patient then underwent surgery to resect the subcutaneous tumor and evacuate the intracranial hematoma under general anesthesia. An incision was made along the one from the original surgery. During the operation, it became apparent that the main part of the tumor was located in the subcutaneous tissue of his right frontal region. The tumor was approximately 7cm×6cm×4cm , fully enveloped, and characterized by abundant revascularization. The cyst of the tumor was intact, and his temporal muscle tissue was thin. His cranial periosteum and cerebral dura mater were invaded by the tumor, resulting in a thin, brittle skull . His dura mater was also thin and light yellow in color. The tumorous hemorrhage extended into his intracranial tissue, but no tumor tissue was seen in his subdural area. The intracranial hematoma was successfully removed during the operation (70mL from the right frontal part, 20mL from the intraventricular hematoma). The subcutaneous tumor was totally resected along with some affected cranial tissues. The epidural bleeding was completely stopped. However, the temporal muscle fascia was incomplete because of the hemostasis. An artificial dura was created by relaxation sutures to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage. His residual temporal muscle was then sutured, and his galea aponeurosis and scalp were perfectly closed. Our patient’s postoperative recovery was good, and he was safely discharged 20 days after the surgery. He was free of recurrence over two years of follow-up.
A pathological microscopic examination of the resected tumor showed a malignant histiocytoma (undifferentiated sarcoma). It was gray-white, had no capsule, was gray on the cut section, had areas of hemorrhage and necrosis, and had a ductile texture. Microscopic examination showed pleomorphic tumor cells, specifically fibroblasts, histiocytes, multinucleated cells and some inflammatory cells infiltration, as shown in Figure . Immunohistochemistry results showed it was negative for keratin, S-100 protein, actin, desmin, homatropine methylbromide 45, cluster of differentiation 34 and b-cell lymphoma 2, and positive for vimentin and cluster of differentiation 99, with Ki-67 content over 60%.