A 32-year-old man was admitted to the abdominal surgery department due to findings on abdominal ultrasound examination. The examination was performed during preventive health check-up due to work policy. During the ultrasound examination asymptomatic suspicious mass was detected in the pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with intravenous contrast was performed . In the pelvis, above the bladder, a mass of a heterogeneous structure with a predominant solid component and several calcinates was visible. The mass had uneven vascularization with diffusion restriction zones, had a polycyclic margin, and was about 80x107x80 mm in size. Multiple small blood vessels were seen in the peripheral part of the mass arising from the basin of the superior mesentery artery. The mass appeared to be in close contact with the upper part of the bladder and middle-distal part of the sigmoid colon with no visible infiltration into the surrounding organs. No pathological changes were found during the colonoscopy. Cystoscopy and urethroscopy showed no changes as well.
A multidisciplinary team discussion took place, and the decision for surgery was taken. A middle-lower laparotomy was performed on a patient. An 11 cm tumor was found, beginning in the greater omentum, and it was fixed by loose vascularized adhesions to the rectum in two places and the posterior-right lateral wall of the bladder. Adhesions were excised radically and the biopsy from the areas of adhesions were taken. As the tumor was in the greater omentum and dilated veins up to 7–8 mm were going to the splenic hilum, the greater omentum was mobilized from the transverse intestine and radical omentectomy was performed .
On pathological examination, macroscopically observed grayish-white, stiff, coarse-grained tumor 10.5 × 9.5 × 5.2 cm with omentum 26 × 14 × 1 cm was identified. Histologically the peritoneal tumor consisted of fibrous and fibromyxoid tissue with vessels of various sizes and uneven cellularity, irregular fibrous squamous cells with monomorphic oval/oblong nuclei, and a small number of typical mitoses (up to 3 mitoses per 10 high-powered fields (HPFs)) . Perivascular and stromal hyalinization were observed as well as focal tumor necrosis. No metastases into omentum lymph nodes were found. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor was positive for STAT6 and CD34 ( and ). The Ki-67 index was up to 5%. Histological findings support the diagnosis of the peritoneal cavity and greater omentum solitary fibrous tumor.
A postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 7 days after his surgery. The patient is well and no signs of recurrence are visible on the chest and abdomen CT and the pelvic MRI 6 months after the surgery.