A 59-year-old man visited our hospital with epigastric discomfort and regurgitation of gastric acid in April 2014. There were no remarkable findings in the past medical history. He denied alcohol and drug abuse history. The abdomen was soft and without palpable mass. Tests for hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus were negative. Other laboratory examinations were regular, including low levels of CEA, CA19-9, and AFP (AFP: 3.1 ng/ml, CEA: 5.3 ng/ml, and CA199: 12.7 U/ml). No significant indication was observed in hepatic function and routine blood examination. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a slight oval mass with irregular enhancement, which measured ~1.8 cm × 1.4 cm in the tail of pancreas. Moreover, impression of pancreatic duct dilation or stenosis was not detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). By careful evaluation with the radiologist, there was no noticeable abnormality in the liver shown on CT. The postoperative contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also confirmed the speculation on the hepatic condition .
Traditional laparotomy was performed, which revealed nothing but a tumor in the pancreatic space that was mentioned in previous CT. The surface of the tumor was yellow and well-demarcated, and had a focal hemorrhagic appearance . The process of separation of the tumor is smooth without adhesion. There was no sign of invasion to the pancreas or other adjacent organs. Hepatic palpation was regular during the surgery, without cirrhosis and other abnormal findings. No lesion was found in the mother liver. Meanwhile, a lump like a GIST was found in the pylorus. Contrary to the hard texture of the pancreatic tumor, the touch of the stomach tumor is between soft and hard. Both tumors were resected with an adequate margin. Microscopy of the pancreatic tumor showed pleomorphic and prominent nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm with a section of pancreatic tissue that separated with capsule . The immunohistochemistry of pancreatic tumor was positive for Hep-Par-1, CK, CK8, and CK19, and negative for AFP, S100, Vim, CgA (chromogranin A), and P53 . The final diagnosis was ectopic HCC arising in the tail of pancreas and GIST in the stomach. Postoperative recovery was well without further chemotherapy therapy. Surveillance of AFP, ultrasound, and CT failed to find a sign of recurrence. Up to now, relapse was not observed 7 years after the operation.
Consent for publication was signed by our patient and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai.