A 73-year-old man who reported chronic gait impairment and progressive hearing loss presented with worsening balance and weakness in his arms and legs over the past 2 years. Neurologic physical examination demonstrated that the range of motion of his neck was severely impaired on extension and lateral rotation. He had hearing loss, motor weakness, abnormal coordination and gait, and poor balance. He had also noted loss of sense of smell and diminished sense of taste. He had difficulty walking on his toes and heels without assistance. Upper extremity weakness was noted especially at the triceps, bilaterally, with distal muscles relatively normal, but poor fine motor movements. Reflexes were diminished at the biceps and brachioradialis muscles and absent at the triceps. He had decreased perception of pin prick and light touch in fingers of both hands. Of note, he denied current neck or back pain.
His initial symptoms of gait ataxia began in 2008, when he was diagnosed with cervical spinal stenosis due to marginal disc osteophytosis and OPLL. He subsequently underwent a combined anterior-posterior surgery at an outside medical center including anterior decompression of the spinal cord with corpectomy, removal of bone spurs, and placement of a vertebral titanium mesh cage. In the same operation, he also had posterior decompression with bilateral laminectomy from C2 to C4. He suffered extensive postoperative complications, including a lower extremity deep vein thrombosis, pneumothorax, and residual weakness in his arms and legs. He was hospitalized for several weeks after his operation, and eventually made a full recovery and went home with improved neurological symptoms compared to before the operation.
MRI demonstrated extensive superficial siderosis over the cerebral hemispheres, cerebellar hemispheres, and the spinal cord extending from the foramen magnum down into the thoracic spinal cord. Prior imaging at an outside medical center did reveal evidence of mild superficial siderosis 5 years postoperatively , with worsening of the superficial siderosis seen approximately 13 years after the initial surgery (present day). The cervical spine imaging shows significant arachnoiditis at the level of the surgery with adherence of the dura to the surgical corpectomy site with marked distortion of the spinal cord . There is focal partial SCH at the site of the dural defect. The same MR shows a fluid collection anterolateral to the right of the surgical site in the soft tissue of the neck, originally diagnosed as a thyroid nodule on an outside hospital report .
During evaluation at our medical center, the patient underwent a total spine CT myelogram due to concern for a CSF leak which may be contributing to the progressive SSCNS findings . Pre-injection CT imaging of the lumbar spine was performed and the L3-L4 interspace was chosen as an appropriate entry point. Under local anesthesia, a 20-gauge standard 6-inch Quincke spinal needle (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) was used to access the subarachnoid space under intermittent CT guidance. Initially, 0.5 mL of Omnipaque 300 (GE Healthcare, Marlborough, MA, USA) was injected with confirmation of intrathecal contrast by intraprocedural CT. After confirmation, an additional 9.5 mL of Omnipaque 300 were injected intrathecally. The patient was then moved to a stretcher and placed in Trendelenburg position with intermittent full-body rotations for intrathecal contrast mixing. Final patient positioning was prone to provoke an anterior leak. After approximately 20 min, the patient was placed back on the scanner table for conventional CT imaging in supine positioning.
At the C3 level, there was a large ventral dural defect with extrathecal contrast completely opacifying the corpectomy surgical site . At the C2-C3 level, the cord was anteriorly displaced and markedly deformed, appearing inseparable from the OPLL as well as tethered to the partially intact ventral dura at the mid C3 level, suspicious for a dural defect with borderline SCH . In the prevertebral soft tissues, at the right anterior C4 level, there was a tract of extrathecal contrast extending into the right neck from C4 through C5-C6 levels, located along the right lateral aspect of the thyroid cartilage .
Shortly after CT myelogram was performed, the patient had a mechanical fall as a result of his progressive impaired balance and weakness, sustaining a hip fracture requiring repair. Given his age, clinical condition, and comorbidities, the likelihood of life-threatening complications was deemed prohibitive to justify a revision and repair operation at the corpectomy site.