During a dengue epidemic in Sri Lanka, an 8-year-old Sinhalese boy presented to our children’s hospital in Colombo on the fourth day of high fever that had responded poorly to paracetamol. Severe myalgia and anorexia were present from the onset of illness. Abdominal pain and vomiting had set in on the second day of symptomatic infection and abdominal pain continued for six days after hospital admission. His examination showed that he had a flushed appearance and was febrile and moderately dehydrated. His Hess test was positive. A tender hepatomegaly of 2cm and tenderness in the lower right abdomen were present. The patient’s spleen was not palpable. Laboratory tests revealed leukopenia (4×109/L white blood cell count), neutrophil leukocytosis (92%), thrombocytopenia (86×109/L), raised hematocrit level (42%), and mildly elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, 101IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 48IU/L). A clinical diagnosis of dengue fever was made. The boy’s dehydration was corrected with intravenous fluid therapy. The presence of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgM dengue antibodies provided serological confirmation of the diagnosis.
The patient was monitored for evidence of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome. Plasma leakage and circulatory instability were absent. Eighteen hours after the boy’s admission, his abdominal tenderness became more marked. We observed localized abdominal guarding and felt a well-defined mass in the right iliac fossa. A tender mass in the right iliac fossa with surrounding intraperitoneal fluid suggestive of an appendicular mass was confirmed by ultrasonography. The patient’s serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 44.0mg/L (normal, <8mg/L). His urine culture was sterile. Concomitant acute appendicitis with dengue fever was diagnosed clinically and on the basis of ultrasonography.
The boy’s illness was managed conservatively with intravenous cefotaxime and metronidazole. The patient’s leukopenia and thrombocytopenia resolved on the sixth day of illness, and we observed the characteristic rash that appears upon recovery from dengue. However, his fever, neutrophil leukocytosis, and raised CRP level persisted. We attributed these symptoms to appendicitis and mass formation. We administered intravenous antibiotics, which led to a positive response, and the patient was free of pain and gastrointestinal symptoms when he was discharged to home. An interval appendectomy was planned. His hospital stay of 13 days exceeded the average length of stay for dengue fever.