A 25-year-old Mexican female with family history of ovarian cancer at her maternal side and personal history of a mass on her right breast clinically and radiologically diagnosed as fibroadenoma 2 years ago. The same mass had a growth of 2 cm so an incisional biopsy was performed at another institution. This was positive for mucinous carcinoma, and the patient was referred to our institution for treatment and follow up.
At our institution in the biopsy slides revision, we found a tumor composed of mucinous lakes with numerous tumor cells of medium to large size with a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm confirming the presence of pure mucinous carcinoma. We could not identify the tumor size and surgical margins by no prior radiological and pathological report. . The tumor was classified as a Low grade tumor (G1) based on the Scarff Bloom Richardson scale. We did not observe perineural or vascular invasion. On immunohistochemistry the results were 100% and 90% positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors respectively with high intensity, and HER2 receptors negative.
On physical examination a surgical injury was seen. Upon palpation, this zone felt indurated, edematous and presented as a rough irregular texture. No other lesions were found. An ultrasound was performed, showing avascular distortion and a heterogeneous mass with microcysts (white arrows) . MRI showed a hypointense irregular mass that indicates a mild enhancement in contrast sequences and a hyperintense sequence in SPAIR. The evaluation of the lymph nodes was not suspicious for metastasis.
With the radiological suspicious of residual tumor and pathological findings accomplished at our institution a partial mastectomy and a sentinel lymph node biopsy was performed. Pathological findings showed a residual mass of 25 mm of pure mucinous carcinoma with negative surgical margins. Sentinel lymph node was negative for metastasis.
Molecular screening with EndoPredict clinic showed a score of 2.7 classifying it as a low risk, reason why this patient was treated with tamoxifen because her positivity to receptors and low risk showed in molecular assay. The clinical and pathological stage IB was confirmed.