A 70-year-old female with a history of osteoarthritis and arthroscopic partial medial meniscectomy presented with pain of the left knee and was on a waiting list for Total Knee Arthroplasty (TKA). The patient had failed to respond to intra-articular cortisol administration at the time of arthroscopy. The MRI scan of the knee, using a 3-Tesla proton density turbo spin echo fat saturated acquisition with TR 3000 ms TE 30 ms, demonstrated subchondral BML associated with focal full thickness chondral defects at the medial aspects of the weight bearing medial femoral condyle and medial tibial plateau . The BML in the medial femoral condyle measured 11 × 7 × 12 mm (CC x transverse x AP) and the medial tibial plateau BML measured 8 × 8 × 8 mm (CC x transverse x AP). In addition, the axial proton density fat saturated imaging at the level of suprapatellar pouch revealed a knee effusion and a recurrent tear of the medial meniscus (body and posterior horn). Following patient consent, the pain assessment score was determined by the Numerical Rating Scale (NRS), an 11-point scale with endpoints of ‘a state of no pain (“0”)’ and ‘the worst pain imaginable (“10”)’ . Functional capacity was assessed using the Lysholm knee score . At pre-treatment, the NRS pain score was severe with a score of 8 out of 10 (Scale range: 0 to 10) and the Lysholm Knee Score was 37 out of 100, reflecting poor knee function indicated by problems in stair climbing and limping.
As PPS is a weak anticoagulant with 1/15 the activity of heparin, the patient was monitored for safety by assessments of complete blood count, Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (APTT), prothrombin time, liver function tests, renal function tests and serum calcium prior to commencement of treatment and periodically during treatment with PPS. The clinical status of the patient was checked regularly throughout the course of the treatment and follow up period.
After evaluation, the patient was considered suitable for PPS treatment. Since the injectable form of PPS is not a registered product in Australia for the treatment of BMLs, approval to use PPS as treatment for the patient was acquired from the Department of Health - Therapeutic Goods Administration, Australian Government under the Special Access Scheme. The patient was administered 2 mg/kg of PPS twice weekly with a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 4 days between dosages. Six intramuscular injections were administered into the gluteus maximus muscle over a 3-week period (2 injections per week). During the course of PPS treatment the patient abstained from NSAIDs and did not receive any additional therapy. Three follow-up appointments were made at 10, 24 and 38 days post-completion of injection regimen. Five weeks after the first PPS injection, MRI scans were performed using a 3-Tesla proton density fat saturated SPACE acquisition with TR 1200 ms TE 28 ms which demonstrated complete resolution of the BMLs at the medial femoral condyle and medial tibial plateau. In addition, the axial imaging at the level of the suprapatellar pouch demonstrated reduction in the size of the knee effusion. The patient displayed a marked functional improvement of 43% in the Lysholm Knee score at 4 weeks after the last injection, reporting a score of 65. Similarly, a robust recovery of pain was demonstrated, with the patient reporting a pain score of 0 on the NRS. During the PPS treatment and follow-up period, the patient did not present with any drug-related or nondrug-related adverse responses.