A 40-year-old male SriLankan presented with a 1 month history of right-sided abdominal pain, loss of appetite, weight loss, and melena, with no family history of gastrointestinal (GI) cancer. On physical examination, there was a palpable mass in the right iliac fossa (RIF) associated with tenderness.
Investigations highlighted hypochromic microcytic anemia [hemoglobin (Hgb) 7.4 mg/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 26%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 67 mg/dL, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 19.5 mg/dL]. Tumor markers were normal. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a mass with irregular eccentric soft tissue density involving the cecum and proximal ascending colon measuring 65 × 35 × 31 mm with multiple enlarged regional lymph nodes . Colonoscopy showed a cecal ulcero-proliferative circumferential lesion with a malignant appearance . No metastases were seen on the staging CT scan. The patient was scheduled for an elective laparoscopic right hemicolectomy; however, before his date of surgery, he presented to the emergency with an acute obstruction and was taken for emergency surgery. He underwent laparoscopic right hemicolectomy with side-to-side ileocolic anastomosis. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.
The histopathology evaluation of the resected specimens showed invasive carcinoma with syncytial growth pattern, foci of lymphoid host response, and dirty necrosis, in keeping with a medullary carcinoma. The tumor was present in subserosal fat (pT4a) and show metastatic carcinoma in 13 (out of 22) lymph nodes (pN2b). There was prominent lympho-vascular invasion. The margins were clear (R0) . Immunohistochemical stains for mismatch repair (MMR) status showed loss of nuclear expression of both MSH2 and MSH6 with intact expression of MLH1 and PMS2 . The most commonly reported loss is that of MLH1. The tumor cells expressed CK20 and SATB2 in keeping with a colorectal primary. Unlike most reported medullary carcinoma cases and like usual large bowel cancers, caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) was positive. Despite areas with morphological resemblance to endocrine tumor, common neuroendocrine markers (synaptophysin, chromogranin, and CD56) were negative.