A 30-year-old South Indian man presented to our facility with a left-sided obstructed inguinal hernia of one-day duration with a history of left inguinal swelling from 12 years and absence of the right testis since birth. Our patient had been married for five years. He had no sexual dysfunction, but had primary sterility.
He had no history of recurrent hematuria or family history of such disorders. A general physical examination revealed a man of muscular build with well developed secondary sexual characteristics. His urethra and penis were fully developed with a poorly developed right hemi-scrotum and no palpable right testis in the scrotum or inguinal canal.
There was a non-reducible, tense, tender swelling measuring approximately 10 × 8 cm in the left inguinal region. A cough impulse was absent. Other examinations and routine investigations were normal. Our patient was prepared and taken for surgery.
Exploration of the inguinal canal revealed an indirect inguinal hernia containing omentum, the left corner of the uterus and a left fallopian tube. Extension of the incision revealed a well formed uterus, cervix and the upper part of the vagina attached to the prostate by a thick fibrosed band with an atrophic right testis embedded in the broad ligament .
Total excision of the uterus with bilateral fallopian tubes and right testis was performed and the operation was completed with left inguinal herniorraphy. Though the left testis was atrophic, a biopsy was taken and it was left in place to sustain hormone secretion. Our patient recovered well post-operatively. To protect against the risk of malignancy in the testis, long-term follow-up was planned.
Grossly, the specimens removed were identified as a uterus with patent endometrial and endocervical linings and two fallopian tubes with no ovaries. The right testis measuring 1 × 1 × 1 cm, was atrophic and embedded in the right broad ligament. The left testicular biopsy specimen measured 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm.
On histopathological examination, uterine muscular tissue with its cavity lined by atrophied endometrial tissue was seen . Sections from both fallopian tubes showed congestion and fibrosis. No ovarian tissue was seen. Sections from both testes showed atrophic semineferous tubules with hyalinization, Sertoli cells and evidence of Leydig cell hyperplasia . No evidence of malignancy was seen in tissue samples from either testicle.
The final histopathological diagnosis of the hernial tissue was consistent with that of a uterus with fallopian tubes and no ovaries. Additionally, the testes were found to be atrophic with complete arrest of spermatogenesis.
Post-operative karyotype analyses were negative for 46,XY and Barr bodies on buccal smear. The post-operative serum laboratory test results are shown in Table . A semen examination revealed azoospermia.