A healthy 40-year-old female Brazilian patient residing in the state of Rio de Janeiro reported a trip to São Gabriel da Cachoeira (Amazon State) between October 18, 2019 and November 26, 2019. On November 30, 2019, she presented to a general hospital in Rio de Janeiro with malaise, myalgia, and arthralgia. On December 2nd, 2019 she presented high fever, accompanied by chills and sweating. The patient sought medical care and was medicated with analgesics and antithermics for treatment support of a possible nonspecific viral infection. The case evolved with periods of recurrent fever.
On December 6, 2019 (6 days after the onset of symptoms), she was admitted to the Emergency Department with a severe headache, anaemia (haemoglobin: 7.8 g/dL), heavy vaginal bleeding, and high fever. Vaginal bleeding continued for 5 days and severe thrombocytopenia was reported observed (33,000/µL). The patient was not pregnant as she had previously undergone a uterus tubal ligation. She had no history of using contraceptives. She left the hospital on December 12, 2019, without bleeding and with improved thrombocytopenia (116,000/µL).
On December 13, 2019 (13 days after the onset of symptoms), the patient was admitted to the Infectious Diseases ward of the Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, with moderate fever, headache and malaise, where the diagnosis of vivax malaria primary infection was made (3720 parasites/mm3). Treatment with chloroquine for 3 days (600 mg—first day/450 mg—second and third days) and primaquine (30 mg/day—7 days) was started for the patient who weighed 79.4 kg. Vaginal bleeding stopped without recurrence and platelets increased to 144,000/µL. On the same day (December 13, 2019), the patient was discharged from the outpatient clinic. On discharge, she still had fever, but did not present any sign of severe illness. It was recommended that she return for a follow-up consultation for clinical and laboratory evaluation.
Three days after beginning treatment, the patient reported myalgia, high fever, severe headache, and progressive tachypnea (54 breaths per minute). A blood smear exam and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), were performed, both of which were found to be negative for the presence of malaria parasites on December 16, 2019.
Physical examination (December 16, 2019) showed moderate hepatosplenomegaly, lungs with bilateral crackling rales, and severe anaemia. Blood gas tests revealed progressive hypoxia (oxygen saturation: 62%). A chest X-ray showed bilateral interstitial infiltrates. A diagnosis of severe ARDS was confirmed (low arterial oxygen pressure, increased arterial carbon dioxide pressure, and low oxygen saturation) the following day, and the patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit. Special care was initiated and intravenous artesunate (2.4 mg/kg) was prescribed because the possibility of recurrence was considered, despite negative parasitaemia. The patient developed progressive worsening of tachypnea and low blood oxygenation, requiring orotracheal intubation. Antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and azithromycin was started to treat possible nosocomial bacterial pneumonia. Whole blood collected prior to antibiotic therapy was culture negative. Intensive care was not enough to reverse the metabolic changes, however, and the patient died on December 17, 2019 following three episodes of cardiac arrest.
Diagnostic tests for HIV infection were negative. Serum samples from the 18th day after the onset of symptoms had negative RT-qPCR results for Dengue virus (DENV), Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), and Zika virus (ZIKV). Serological test performed for CHIKV IgM and IgG antibodies, were positive in the serum from the 18th day after the onset of symptoms. Non-reactive anti-DENV-IgM and IgG serological test were confirmed.
A progressive increase in the patient’s leukocytes and C-Reactive Protein suggested worsening of the inflammatory and infectious injury. Laboratory tests performed during treatment showed severe anaemia, mild thrombocytopenia, and a moderate increase in blood creatinine. Liver function was normal throughout the treatment follow-up . Figure describes the main biological parameters registered during the 18 days of illness preceding the patient’s death.