In August 2013, our 45-year-old female patient underwent a gross total resection of a 2.5 cm non-functioning pituitary adenoma with degenerative changes and recent hemorrhage, at an outside institute. Pathologic examination revealed small sheets of pleomorphic cells with positive staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin, CAM5.2, and AE1/AE3. She was subsequently followed regularly until March 2014, when repeat imaging showed her tumor had recurred in the sella turcica with asymptomatic invasion into the left cavernous sinus. The patient underwent a debulking resection of the sellar component of the tumor. Upon pathologic review, the recurrence specimen was found to now stain positively for ACTH as well as contain some atypical features including nuclear pleomorphism, large nucleoli, mitotic figures, and Ki-67 staining of 8–12%. Although lacking p53 nuclear expression, the tumor's increased mitosis, Ki-67, and invasive phenotype led to the classification of atypical pituitary adenoma . She remained without Cushinoid symptoms at that time. She tolerated the surgical resection well and subsequently underwent postoperative CyberKnife radiation to a dose of 25 Gy given in 5 fractions to the residual mass completed in June 2014. On radiographic follow-up, a small amount of residual disease was observed in the left cavernous sinus. Over the next year and a half, the adenoma demonstrated slow, but persistent progression, and the patient began complaining of issues in her left eye concerning for CN III, IV, and VI palsies including lid ptosis and difficulty with left eye abduction and adduction. The diplopia progressed to persistent double vision, which was compounded by intermittent severe headaches causing nausea and vomiting.
Due to her clinical and symptomatic progression, she established care with our institution in December 2015 to discuss repeat irradiation for her recurrent pituitary macroadenoma and undergo a full endocrine evaluation. At that time, her salivary cortisol levels were found to be approximately four times the upper limit of normal though she remained clinically asymptomatic. She initiated treatment with pasireotide 0.6 mg/mL subcutaneously twice a day and cabergoline 0.5 mg twice a week for this clinically-silent, ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma with the intent to slowly titrate up her cabergoline dose to 2 mg twice a week. Repeat brain MRI two months later showed disease progression with her soft-tissue mass measuring 3.0 × 1.9 × 2.1 cm compared to 1.7 × 2.0 × 2.7 previously. The MRI also revealed persistent left cavernous sinus involvement with vascular encasement of the left internal carotid artery and newly-identified possible mild abutment of the left optic nerve. Of note, the patient's ACTH was stably elevated with cortisol levels maintained within normal range at this time.
With a lack of disease control with medical management, the patient elected for a repeat course of radiation therapy. In February 2016, the patient underwent a stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) delivering a single fraction of 14 Gy using a head frame-based technique. Follow-up MRI one month after repeat SRS demonstrated the tumor had only a minimal increase in size, thought to likely represent pseudoprogression given the previously fast growth rate of the neoplasm that now appeared to be relatively stable post-irradiation. Repeat MRI three months later was unchanged and still demonstrated the pituitary adenoma extending into Meckel's cave, partially compressing the internal carotid, and abutting the left optic nerve. A five-month follow-up MRI showed the bulk of the disease to remain unchanged, however, a small, but obvious, enhancement in the oculomotor nerve concerning for progression was identified. Review of the SRS radiation treatment plan confirmed only low dose exposure to CN-III, not favoring but also not ruling out radiation-induced neuritis due to her previous history of fractionated SRS. Disease progression was high on differential. Due to the slow rate of growth and location in question, observation was deemed most appropriate over further treatment intervention. At the seven-month post-radiation follow-up, ACTH levels were found to have increased from 155 to 269 (norm. 0–46 pg/mL) over the month prior, but the salivary and urine cortisol levels remained within normal ranges. Repeat MRI imaging at seven, ten, and fourteen months after SRS all demonstrated a stable, large pituitary lesion with CN-III enhancement and elevated, but stable ACTH levels at seven and ten months after SRS.
However, starting at twelve months post-radiation, her ACTH levels began to steadily increase each month, reaching 667 in June 2017. Following this rise in ACTH, the patient's cortisol levels began to rise despite taking 2 mg of cabergoline twice weekly. These endocrine abnormalities resulted in noticeable weight changes as well as an episode of psychosis secondary to Cushing's with acute anxiety and paranoia prompting hospital admission. On this admission, her ACTH and urine cortisol levels had spiked to 677 pg/mL (norm. 0–46 pg/mL) and 279 µg/dL (norm. ≤45 µg/dL) respectively, despite continued treatment, although serum cortisol levels remained relatively stable at 23.2 mcg/dL (norm. ≤10 mcg/dL). Repeat MRI revealed only mild primary tumor progression with a tumor size of 2.9 × 1.8 × 2.6 increased from 2.7 × 1.7 × 2.6 in April 2017 and 2.6 × 2 × 1.7 in December 2016. A multi-disciplinary, neuro-oncology tumor board suggested the use of PET-CT to identify a potential extra-pituitary source as an explanation for this atypical disease presentation. The board also recommended temozolomide (150 mg/m2 nightly for five consecutive nights) in an attempt to slow any new growth or invasion and added ketoconazole (500 mg BID) to her on going cabergoline treatment to manage her Cushing's disease. The PET-CT confirmed the presence of an FDG-avid pituitary mass with additional lesions in the liver and left occipital condyle-lateral C1 vertebra with associated bony destruction as well as potential involvement of the left adrenal gland. Biopsy of a liver lesion confirmed metastatic pituitary corticotroph carcinoma. In July 2017, the patient underwent RFA to her liver lesions and SRS (16 Gy in 1 fraction) to her C1 lesion.
One week after receiving RFA and the same day as undergoing SRS, the patient's ACTH levels had dropped dramatically to 188 (down from 677 measured three weeks prior) and displayed a decreasing trend with monthly levels measured at 128, 86, 78, 59, and 53 pg/mL. Serum cortisol levels have returned to normal ranges with a nadir of 2.9 mcg/dL (norm. ≤10 mcg/dL) four months following her RFA and SRS treatments and have remained stable since. It should be noted that ACTH did display suppression after dexamethasone administration, < 12 pg/mL suppression. Monthly repeat imaging (both CT and MRI) for three consecutive months following RFA and SRS showed the three ablated hepatic lesions had decreased in size, while the vertebral and pituitary masses had remained stable. No other areas concerning for disease have been identified, and per these findings, three-month imaging intervals were initiated. Her most recent scan (14 months following RFA/spine SRS) showed decreasing size in the both the primary and metastatic sites.
Since receiving her most recent RFA and SRS treatment, fourteen months have passed, and the patient has finished her eleventh cycle of temozolomide (150 mg/mm2 given over 5 consecutive days every 4 weeks) and pasireotide 0.6 mg/mL subcutaneously twice a day. All diagnostic scans and lab tests suggest her disease is in remission. Moreover, function has begun to be restored in the patient's eye movement, and her diplopia has become less severe.