A 70-year-old man presented to the emergency department after a 30-min episode of anterograde amnesia and disorientation. A similar episode had occurred the previous day. Past medical history included hypertension; paroxysmal atrial fibrillation for which he took apixaban 2 × 5 mg daily; mitral valve insufficiency; and a recent urinary tract infection treated with ciprofloxacin. On examination, he was fully oriented without focal neurological deficits. Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) revealed a persistent anterograde amnesia with no further cognitive impairments (score 26/30). Routine blood tests and computed tomography of the head were unremarkable. Initial electroencephalography after spontaneous resolution of symptoms showed intermittent right frontotemporal spikes followed by slow waves. They were preceded by intermittent beta waves and low-amplitude spikes in the left temporal region ; diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) 48 h after first symptoms revealed a punctate hyperintense area with reduced ADC signal in the lateral part of the tail of the left hippocampus; the lesion was T1-hypointense and rather hyperintense in FLAIR images . After admission, there was complete spontaneous remission of symptoms before another self-limiting episode of amnesia and disorientation was observed. A repeat EEG during the attack showed that the spikes had regressed over time, in line with the interpretation that the symptoms might, in part, have been postictal. After the patient was started on levetiracetam 750 mg twice daily, no further symptoms were experienced and a repeat EEG on day 4 did not show any epileptiform discharges. Further diagnostic workup included a lumbar puncture as well as blood tests, neurosonography and transthoracic echocardiography to screen for common causes of ischemic stroke; beyond dyslipidaemia no relevant new abnormalities were found and the patient was discharged on levetiracetam and a statin. On follow-up after 4 weeks on this medication, no further episodes of amnesia had occurred. A repeat MRI after 9 weeks under continued medication showed complete resolution of the lesion on DWI and no residual FLAIR changes.