A 12-year-old girl (weight 55 kg; height 1.5 m; ASA-PS Class 2) was referred to our institution with a right parietotemporal tumor. The tumor was diagnosed as anaplastic astrocytoma via stereotactic biopsy and was refractory to chemoradiotherapy; thus, partial resection was planned. Intraoperative dc-MEP was essential since the medullary arteries located deep in the sulcus supply the pyramidal tract. Preoperative motor function of the patient's extremities was normal, with a manual muscle testing score of 5. Because the preoperative allergy test showed egg hypersensitivity, remimazolam-based general anesthesia, instead of propofol, was selected. Anti-epileptic therapy with levetiracetam (2000 mg daily) was the sole medication before surgery.
Besides standard ASA monitoring, invasive arterial pressure and processed electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring were adopted. General anesthesia was induced with remimazolam at 6 mg/kg/h and remifentanil at 0.5 μg/kg/min. After the loss of consciousness, remimazolam infusion was reduced to 1.5 mg/kg/h, then 30 mg of rocuronium was given to facilitate endotracheal intubation. Neither additional rocuronium nor sugammadex was administered during MEP monitoring. Remifentanil dose was adjusted between 0.3 and 0.4 μg/kg/min according to surgical stimuli. The infusion rate of remimazolam was titrated to attain a Bispectral Index® (BIS; Medtronic-Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) value of 60 using an electrode placed upon the forehead of the contralateral side of the tumor.
After craniotomy and durotomy, a strip electrode was positioned subdurally onto the cortex. Monitoring of dc-MEP was performed using one of the contacts of the strip electrode as the anode, whereas an electrode positioned above the nasion at Fpz according to the 10–20 International System was used as the cathode. To detect the compound muscle action potentials, seal-type electrodes were placed on the relevant muscles of the contralateral side of the tumor in a standardized way: the upper extremities (abductor pollicis brevis, extensor carpi ulnaris, biceps brachii, and deltoid) and the lower extremities (abductor hallucis, tibialis anterior, and quadriceps). Continuous MEP monitoring by monophasic direct cortical stimulation was performed using a neurophysiological monitoring device (Neuromaster MEE-1216, Nihon Kohden, Tokyo, Japan) with a 5 Hz –1.5 kHz bandpass. Direct cortical stimulation by train-of-five pulses with interstimulus intervals of 2 ms at 15 mA with a pulse duration of 0.5 ms was delivered by subdural electrodes. Because no significant motor responses were observed, electrode locations and stimulation intensity were adjusted. In addition, the initial rate of remimazolam administration of 1.8 mg/kg/h varied incrementally to 0.8 mg/kg/h, with careful observation of BIS values as well as raw EEG waveforms, while remifentanil infusion remained at 0.3 μg/kg/min. Then, the patient’s motor responses gradually appeared with interstimulus intervals of 2 ms at 20 mA. Finally, body movement was elicited by train-of-five pulses with interstimulus intervals of 2 ms at 25 mA. To prevent false-negative signals, MEPs were recorded throughout the tumor removal as the constant-current stimulation with the suprathreshold intensity by train-of-seven pulses with interstimulus intervals of 2 ms at 23 mA from the upper extremities. The bridging veins hindered electrode placement for lower extremities monitoring. A successful dc-MEP recording was defined as detecting a certain compound muscle potential apparent from the background activity. Combination of remimazolam at 0.9 mg/kg/h and remifentanil at 0.35 μg/kg/min provided stable MEP recordings . The blood pressure remained within 20% of the baseline level without any drug administration. Body temperature, ventilation status, and hematocrit level were kept within the physiological ranges. After the surgery, the patient regained consciousness and was extubated 8 min after remimazolam termination. A total of 829 mg of remimazolam and 14.5 mg of remifentanil were administered. The total duration of the surgery and anesthesia was 601 min and 735 min, respectively. No significant dc-MEP changes were observed relative to baseline values during the tumor removal for 215 min . The patient showed moderate sensory disturbance in the left upper limb due to postcentral gyrus removal, but neither motor deficits nor memory of the operation was present.