The patient is a 30-year-old Japanese man who fell down a hill while driving a tractor and was diagnosed with a depressed fracture of the right temporal bone as well as an epidural hematoma in the right temporal lobe using head computed tomography (CT). He underwent an emergency craniotomy on the same day for the evacuation of the hematoma due to decreased levels of consciousness and a tendency toward bilateral hematoma expansion. He was transferred to our hospital for rehabilitation after his general condition stabilized 40 days after admission. Prior to admission, the patient could independently perform ADLs and did not have ophthalmologic diseases such as strabismus or amblyopia. His chief complaint during admission to physical therapy evaluation was, “I want to reduce double vision.” He walked with the help of a walker and closed his right eye when performing movements due to diplopia. No motor paralysis or sensory impairment was observed during examination for physical function. Balance was measured using the Berg balance scale, which yielded a score of 54/56. Higher brain function was assessed using the mini-mental state examination-J, which yielded a score of 30. The results of parts A and B of the Trail Making Test were 42 seconds and 56 seconds, respectively. The patient was informed of the purpose, objectives, contents, and methods of the study both in writing and orally in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and his written informed consent was obtained before the study was conducted.
Diplopia symptoms were observed at 12° from the primary position on the right side with the object in the midline, but losses or other defects of the visual field were not observed in any direction. Eye fatigue was observed after 3 minutes of eye movement training. The open-source image analysis software, ImageJ , was used to evaluate the amount (i.e., distance) of abduction of the right eye. The distance to the center of the pupil at maximum abduction of the right eye was 19.4 mm . Holmes’ diplopia questionnaire was used for self-assessment of diplopia . This questionnaire scores subjective diplopia symptoms in seven gaze positions, with higher scores indicating a greater symptomatic severity of diplopia. The patient’s score was 76/100 before the intervention. A computer display equipped with eye tracking hardware (Tobii TX60; TobiiInc., 1280 × 1024 pixels) was used to evaluate eye movements, which were recorded in response to each object displayed on the personal computer (PC) screen. We evaluated the gaze transition when the patient gazed at five objects (left 2, left 1, center, right 1, and right 2) presented horizontally on the display . Assessments of gaze transition were conducted before the intervention, as well as 2 and 4 weeks after the intervention. For gaze analysis, we used the gaze coordinates at 0.8 seconds, approximately when the gaze reached the target after stimulus presentation. The average of the line-of-sight coordinates at that point, as well as the error between each target coordinate and the line-of-sight coordinate, were calculated and absolutized, followed by calculating the average magnitude of the error.
Two 40-minute sessions of eye movement training were performed daily for 4 weeks. The training interventions included tasks such as following a laser pointer at slow and fast speeds as well as holding the laser pointer at the maximum eye position . Moreover, 15 minutes of each 40-minute session were spent in the face-to-face sitting position using a touchscreen computer equipped with the rehabilitation tool @ATTENTION (manufactured by CREACT) to perform passive and random tasks in which the patient looked at the target. In the passive task, the objects were placed in an ordered fashion, and in the random task, one of the 35 objects placed randomly on the PC display flashed from black to red for about 5 seconds. The patient was instructed to gaze at the blinking object, with his own gazing point also being displayed in real-time and used as feedback. In addition to eye movement training, walking practice, ADL practice, and muscle strengthening training were performed daily for two 20-minute sessions.
Initially, the degree of diplopia was 12° to the right of the midline, which increased to 24° after 2 weeks of intervention, and to 40° after 4 weeks of intervention. The initial distance of abduction of the right eyeball was 19.4 mm, which improved to 23.6 mm after 2 weeks of intervention but remained unaltered after 4 weeks of intervention. The initial Holmes’ diplopia questionnaire score was 76 points, which improved to 26 and 12 points after 2 and 4 weeks of intervention, respectively . Figure depicts the trajectory of gaze transition before the intervention, as well as 2 and 4 weeks after the intervention. Gaze to target stabilization was visually confirmed at 2 and 4 weeks after the intervention compared with that before the intervention . Figure a shows the average gaze coordinates at each evaluation period minus the target coordinates, with positive values indicating excessive gaze transition and negative values indicating insufficient gaze transition. Before the intervention, the patient’s gaze shifted excessively to the left when shifting the gaze to the leftward targets (left 2, left 1), and did not reach the rightward targets (right 1, right 2). After 2 and 4 weeks of intervention, the excessive gaze transition to the target on the left side was reduced, along with improvements in deficient gaze transition to the right side. Figure b shows the magnitude of error between the target and the line of sight at each evaluation period. Before the intervention, the respective errors with the target on the left and right sides were significant. After 2 and 4 weeks of intervention, the errors between the left and right targets became smaller. However, errors with the left targets (left 2, left 1) were larger than those with the right targets (right 1, right 2).