A 59-year-old woman with no medical or family history was brought to the emergency room at 7:50 AM with the right hemiplegia that occurred while she was taking a bath. At the time of initial examination, she had Glasgow Coma Scale 14 (E4V4M6), amenable but slow response, and severe right hemiplegia (Manual Muscle Test 1/5) with marked dysarthria. She was diagnosed with a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score of 10. MRI diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed a vague high-signal area in the left lenticular nucleus and corona radiata, and a small clear lesion in the temporal lobe, with a DWI-Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomography (CT) Score of 9/11 . MRI fluid-attenuated inversion recovery showed a left hyperintense MCA sign, perfusion-weighted image showed diffuse left hypoperfusion , and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed occlusion of the distal M1 segment of the left MCA ; however, neck MRA showed no embolic source in the proximal vessels including the aortic arch. An electrocardiogram showed no evidence of atrial fibrillation. Chest CT showed a PAVM in the S10 inferior lobe of the left lung . Thrombolytic therapy with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) was started (9:50 AM), with concurrent endovascular therapy.
The right femoral artery was punctured under local anesthesia (10:22 AM), and a 9F Optimo (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was inserted into the left internal carotid artery. Heparin-added saline was used for irrigation of each catheter, but heparin bolus administration was avoided because the patient was receiving rtPA. Angiography showed occlusion of the M2 segment of the left MCA [ and ]. React 71 (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and Phenom 21 (Medtronic) were used as coaxial system. Synchro Select Soft (Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) was guided to the distal part of the occlusion and followed by Phenom 21. Thrombectomy was performed using a combined technique with a Solitaire 3 × 20 mm (Medtronic), and a 1-cm red thrombus was retrieved in one pass, resulting in complete recanalization (11:26 AM, Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction 3, and ). Activated clotting time was 162 before treatment and 166 at the end of treatment.
Immediately after treatment, the patient became conscious, and her severe right hemiplegia improved markedly. Head CT showed an intracerebral hematoma in the contralateral right temporal lobe, but no new abnormal findings were found on the treated side . Acute antithrombotic therapy was not given in the acute phase. On the next day of treatment, the left hemispatial neglect and the left homonymous hemianopsia became apparent, but there was no increase in the intracerebral hematoma, and the patient was managed conservatively. Transthoracic echocardiography, Holter electrocardiography, and venous echocardiography of the lower extremities showed no abnormal findings. Blood biochemical tests, coagulation tests, tumor markers, and immunological tests also showed no abnormal findings. Head CT on day 9 showed no worsening of the hematoma, and edoxaban 30 mg was started on day 10. Head MRI and MRA on day 11 showed no evidence of recurrent stroke [ and ]. Chest CT angiography on day 10 confirmed the diagnosis of PAVM in the left lung S10 , and the venous sac was 19 × 12 mm. No embolic source was found in the aortic arch. As it was considered that there was no other lesion except the PAVM that could cause cerebral embolism, endovascular treatment of the PAVM was performed on day 24 to prevent recurrent stroke.
Under local anesthesia and systemic heparinization, an 8F Optimo was inserted from the right femoral vein into a branch of the left pulmonary artery, the feeder of the PAVM. The PAVM was a single lesion, simple type with a single feeder (2.6–2.8 mm in diameter), and a single drainer [ and ]. Coil embolization was performed by double catheter technique: Excelsior 1018 (Stryker) straight and 45° were guided into the sac of the PAVM using a Meister 45° (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan). Through each catheter, Micrus FrameS 18 8 mm × 30 cm (Cerenovus, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) and Target XXL 6 mm × 40 cm (Stryker) were carefully placed in the sac to avoid migration to the venous side. Target XXL was added and packed back into the feeder. Hydrogel-coated coils (AZUR 4 mm × 10 cm, Terumo, Tokyo) were also used in the feeder. A total of 10 coils were used and shunt blood flow disappeared [ and ].
The patient’s post-treatment course was uneventful. Her left homonymous hemianopsia and left hemispatial neglect remained but tended to improve. She was transferred for rehabilitation on day 46 without stroke recurrence (NIHSS 2, modified Rankin Scale 2).