A 74-year-old man was admitted to hospital for septic shock. He had been suffering from fever, weakness, and erysipelas of the right leg for the previous month. He mentioned that his pet dog had licked a skin wound, and had received two courses of antibiotics (amoxicillin + clavulanic acid). The comorbidities including atrial fibrillation, hypertension, venous leg ulcers, obesity, alcoholism and aortic valve stenosis. The patient had undergone total right knee joint replacement 1 year previously.
On admission, the patient presented with fever (38.1°C), hypotension (80/50 mmHg) and a known systolic aortic murmur. He had an elevated leukocyte count (13 × 109 L−1), high C-reactive protein (340 mg L−1, N value <5) and procalcitonin (11 μg L−1, N value <0.5) levels and mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance: 32 ml min−1, serum creatinine: 181 µmol L−1, serum urea: 21 mmol L−1). Urine and blood cultures were sent to the microbiology lab. Fluid resuscitation and empirical antibiotic treatment therapy (with piperacillin + tazobactam) were initiated.
The patient rapidly developed septic shock, acute kidney injury and hyperlactatemia (7.2 mmol L−1, N value <1.6). Two peripheral blood cultures were positive for wild-type P. multocida. Isolates presented a sensibility to beta lactams, fluoroquinolones and cyclines, a resistance to lincosamides and to aminoglycosides and a decreased sensibility to macrolides. The urine sample was negative. Computed tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the right leg revealed cellulitis over the lower half of the tibia, many small fluid collections but no damage around the prosthetic knee joint. These abscesses were evacuated surgically on the day of admission, and were also positive for P. multocida. The piperacillin + tazobactam treatment was then replaced by ampicillin (8 g/day) and doxycycline (200 mg/day).
On day 3, the patient’s renal function had improved and norepinephrine was withdrawn.
Septic shock recurred on day four. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed intense mitral regurgitation and a left ventricular fraction ejection of 55%. Subsequent transesophageal echocardiography evidenced mobility of the small cusp of the mitral valve , severe mitral regurgitation, and holosystolic flow reversal in the left ventricle. Together with the patient’s blood culture results, these findings along were consistent with mitral valve endocarditis (as defined by Duke’s criteria) .
The patient became confused and disoriented. The results of a lumbar puncture (Cerebrospinal fluid analysis) and a brain CT scan were normal. A whole-body CT scan revealed multiple abscesses on both legs, with knee joint effusions . With a view to treating the infection around the prosthetic knee joint, we performed right arthrotomy and synovectomy, together with irrigation and debridement of the rest of the legs. Treatment with piperacillin + tazobactam was reintroduced and supplemented with a course of vancomycin-ciprofloxacin-amikacin.
On day 6, the patient developed treatment-refractory shock with multiple organ failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Despite vacuum-assisted closure, the right leg became increasing necrotic—prompting removal of the prosthetic knee joint on day 7. During surgery, the patient suffered a cardiac arrest and died despite our attempts at resuscitation.