A transsexual 35-year-old Caucasian male without known relevant medical history of cardiac disease presented to the emergency room with a sudden onset of typical anginal chest pain. Physical examination revealed a hemodynamically stable patient with resting pulse of 70/min and blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, with no signs of acute cardiopulmonary decompensation. Cardiac examination was uneventful with normal heart sounds without pathological murmurs. Respiratory, abdomen, and neurological examinations remained normal. Active smoking accumulating to 20 pack years and a history of daily alcohol consumption were significant risk factors. Drug history revealed a hormonal therapy with intramuscular testosterone undecanoate for gender conversion over the past 6 years, with an initial dosage of 1000 mg per month over a period of 1 year from 2011 to 2012 and later at a dose of 1000 mg every 3 months to date. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with ST-Segment elevation in the inferior leads .
An emergency coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries with an occlusion of the distal right coronary artery . The appearance of the remaining coronary arteries was smooth, not indicative of an advanced atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. We suspected a thromboembolic origin as the primary cause of the myocardial infarction by the appearance of the coronaries. Recanalization of the vessel was achieved by catheter-driven direct thrombectomy using an aspiration catheter. This was followed by intracardiac lysis with 20 mg tissue plasminogen activator, Alteplase, and subsequently the intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor Tirofiban. A short episode of reperfusion-related ventricular fibrillation and subsequent third-degree atrioventricular block (av-block) were overcome by defibrillation and intravenous administration of 2 mg Atropine, respectively. Finally, a successful recanalization was achieved with TIMI-3 flow with immediate resolution of the patient's symptoms. A stent implantation was not necessary. Cardiac biomarkers were subsequently elevated with Troponin I up to a maximum of 46.63 ng/ml (Reference range: 0.00–0.06 ng/ml). Echocardiography revealed a good systolic left ventricular function with postinfarct inferior wall hypokinesia. The patient remained haemodynamically stable without complications during the hospital stay.
Subsequently, investigations were conducted with the aim to identify an underlying cause for the suspected embolic myocardial infarction. The transthoracic echocardiography did not reveal intracardiac thrombus or valve vegetations as evidence for infective endocarditis. A deep venous thrombosis could also not be detected by ultrasonography, and the D-Dimer levels were negative.
The initially performed transoesophageal echocardiography under sedation (Midazolam) raised the suspicion of a possible small persisting foramen ovale (PFO). We performed a second contrast-enhanced TOE without sedation. No crossover of microbubbles over to the arterial circulation were observed even under Valsalva manoeuvre. Thus, a haemodynamically relevant right to left shunt could be ruled out.
No evidence of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was reported in a 72 h Holter-ECG Monitoring. Cardiac embolic sources were thus deemed unlikely.
Other manifestations of atherosclerotic vessel diseases could not be seen in the colour-coded Doppler Ultrasound scans of the extracranial arteries or pelvic/lower limb arteries.
Laboratory tests for Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS), Factor-V Leiden, Protein C and Protein S deficiency, Antithrombin III deficiency, and Hyperhomocysteinemia as possible causes for a hypercoagulable state were also negative.
In conclusion, the work-up for the definitive cause of the infarction remained inconclusive. The drug history of the patient with the use of high-dose hormonal therapy with testosterone for gender conversion was one of the significant factors in the patient's history.
This background of high-dose testosterone therapy for the purpose of gender conversion and its procoagulant associations led us believe this to be the factor leading to the coronary embolism.
A follow-up of the patient was performed at 3 months and 1 year. The echocardiography and ECG showed no signs of long-term detrimental effects following the myocardial infarction with resolution of the initial wall motion disturbances.