A 14-year-old male had an extensive flame burn in the right side of neck, face, and scalp, anterior chest, and right upper limb at the age of 2 years.
No past medical or surgical history. No known drug history, no family history of any genetic disorder, patient and both parents are non-smokers.
He received multiple skin grafting procedures and an amputation of the right hand. The burn to his scalp was treated with a burr hole to the outer cortex to allow granulation tissue to cover the scalp, and then the wound was skin grafted.
The patient chronically continued to have unstable skin over the scalp and kept developing recurrent ulceration. On 29 March 2012, the patient was admitted throw the clinic due to his chronic condition of recurrent open wounds for many years.
A plan was set for the removal of the unstable ulcer and scarred skin of the scalp and coverage with an omental free flap and split thickness skin graft .
Under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation, the patient was in supine position, with draping of the head circumflex, face, abdomen, and left thigh down to the knee.
The General Surgery team was consulted for laparoscopically harvesting the omental flap and was performed by Dr I.Anwar based on the left gastroepiploic artery. The right superficial temporal artery was identified to be the recipient vessel .
The ENT team did a right neck exploration to explore the neck vessels as a backup in case the right superficial temporal artery was not suitable.
The free omental flap based on the left gastroepiploic artery was anastomosed to the right superficial temporal artery. The micro procedure of omental free flap was performed by DR F.Hashem, Plastic surgeon.
The patient was given heparin 2000 U intraoperatively. The flap was viable with bleeding with a positive Doppler signal.
After establishing flap revascularization, all the excising unstable scarred and ulcerated skin covering the scalp was resected, and the underlying irregular skull was smoothed down using a flat burr. The omental flap then covered the scalp, and a split-thickness skin graft from the thigh was placed over the omental flap .
The patient was monitored postoperatively in intensive care unit. Post-operative care for microsurgery and wound care for skin graft over omental flap.
The hospital course was uneventful. The patient was kept on IV anticoagulants (dextran and heparin) for 5 days.
The patient tolerated the procedure well. No wound complications were reported during his two years follow-up . Re-Exploration nor revision of the surgery were needed