A female patient, 23 years old, located in the same city as the medical center (São Paulo, SP, Brazil), requested TM evaluation on February 07, 2021, at night. A senior general practitioner from this TM center answered the call promptly. The patient requested a connection from their LG K10 cell phone (Android, 5.3-in. screen) using specific software developed by TM Center called Einstein Conecta, version 1.0. The remote doctor was working from home using a personal computer, accessing the same software.
The symptom complaint and its duration were vague: malaise today. Spontaneously, the patient reported feeling unwell, weakness, and mild headache. When actively asked, no localizing symptoms or acute disease hypotheses were presented. These symptoms have been recurring spatially since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. There was no fever, chills, myalgia, arthralgia, upper airway symptoms, cough, dyspnea, chest pain, abdominal pain, nausea, or urinary abnormalities. The patient’s face was in an altered mood and apparent recent crying. The remaining remote physical examination showed the good subjective general condition, regular breathing pattern at rest, normal speech, and behavior, with no signs of mental confusion, no skin or mucous discoloration, no jaundice, no cyanosis, no signs of dehydration or tissue hypoperfusion, and no signs of intense pain. When asked for personal history, initially, no antecedent was highlighted, but the question about current medicine was positive: she was on sertraline 50 mg once a day since a few months ago. She was not pregnant and had no allergies. She does not have a regular medical follow-up.
After a complete remote questionnaire, the doctor checked previous TM encounters and, surprisingly, found seven recent evaluations. The first of these assessments occurred 5 months ago, followed by three reviews approximately 1 month apart and the last three visits in the previous month. The final ICD-10 diagnosis was utterly different among them, and, except for headache, they were not noticed in the present evaluation: muscle pain, anxiety, asthma, limb pain, and articular pain. Moreover, all encounters were at night.
Based on this compilation of information, the doctor suspected an unadjusted psychiatric condition. A deep depression anamnesis was started, and a lot of typical symptoms were manifested in the last few weeks: anhedonia, sadness, feeling of worthlessness, feeling of ruin, lack of energy, and reported somatic symptoms. The next step was a direct question, but it was welcomed if the patient thought about SI. She immediately replied, “yes!”. After this point, she felt free to talk about her condition, and despite much crying, she felt welcomed and understood. She confirmed recurrent suicidal thinking, a sense of self-harm but never attempted it objectively. On this day, the symptom was the most intense she ever had. The doctor slowly explained the importance of asking for expert help and the possibility of an excellent prognosis after the correct treatment. This information encouraged the patient, who positively altered her facial expression and was motivated to follow the recommendation.
A safety point was the interrogation about family members or other companies at that moment at home. She was alone, unemployed, and 2 km far from the next relative, a cousin. It was another red flag in this remote evaluation. The only strategy to provide this patient immediate and correct assessment would be to refer for face-to-face assessment at the emergency department. There could be a clinical and toxic-metabolic and a psychiatric inter-consultation evaluation.
Faced with the difficulties found, the doctor insisted that the patient access the closest family member and made the company available via TM throughout the journey to the emergency department and even with a duty physician’s report. The objective was successful, and the patient was admitted for a complete evaluation. Unfortunately, there is no more data from this evaluation point.