A 25-year-old man with normal cognition presented with a complaint of shortness of breath for 1 year. He had been having positive urinary occult blood tests since the age of two and was diagnosed with IgA nephropathy by renal biopsy at the age of 19. His parents are non-consanguineous and healthy. No family history has been revealed.
On arrival, he presented with a cyanosis of lips and clubbing fingers and toes. The arterial blood gas on room air showed a PaO2 level of 51 mmHg. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) showed diffuse centrilobular ground-glass shadows and nodular shadows , dilated pulmonary artery, and enlarged right ventricle (RV, ). In addition, the pulmonary function test revealed a severe decrease of diffusion function. As echocardiography indicated intermediate probability of suspected PH, right heart catheterization (RHC) and pulmonary angiography were performed, which showed an mean PAP (mPAP) level of 34 mmHg, a pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 10 mmHg, and a pulmonary vascular resistance of 5.8 WU. Furthermore, the screening test for autoimmune disease was negative. Therefore, PVOD/PCH was highly suspected, and oxygen therapy was initiated. To confirm the diagnosis, a genetic test for EIF2AK4 mutations was performed, and the result was negative.
Five months later (November 2016), the patient suddenly developed nausea and vomiting, with an elevation of the N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP, 3000 pg/mL) and an increased echocardiography-estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP) (74 mmHg). The full blood count revealed macrocytic anaemia, with haemoglobin shown as 84 g/L. The total and direct bilirubin were elevated to 42 and 17 µmol/L, respectively .
The anaemia workup showed positive direct Coombs test and normal levels of vitamin B12 and folic acid, and bone marrow aspiration revealed a megaloblastic change. Therefore, a diagnosis of haemolytic anaemia-associated PH was considered. Steroids were administrated, ambrisentan (5 mg qd) and sildenafil (20 mg tid) were also administrated as off-label prescriptions. His shortness of breath was alleviated, and NT-proBNP and PASP were decreased within 6 months. However, his hypoxaemia was not improved. In 2018, the patient was admitted again, presenting with severe anaemia and worsening of PH. Previous investigations were thoroughly reviewed, and his clinical presentation was assessed. Metabolic workup revealed elevated serum homocysteine and methylmalonic acid {101.5 μmol/L [normal value (NV): 0.2–5.6 μmol/L]}. The mass spectrometric analysis of his urine sample demonstrated a significant increase of methylmalonic acid-2 [50.97 μmol/L (NV: 0.2–3.6 μmol/L)] and 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid-1–2 [50.97 μmol/L (NV: 0–0.3 μmol/L)]. The genetic analysis revealed heterozygous mutations of the MMACHC gene located on chromosome1 (GRCh37) c.80A>G, p.Gln27Arg and c.394C>T, p.Arg 132 X, which were inherited from his mother and father, respectively. The patient was, therefore, diagnosed with adult late-onset cbl-C defect.
Upon diagnosis, administration of vitamin B12, betaine, L-carnitine, and folate were initiated, and the patient’s dyspnoea was relieved in 6 months. CTPA scans at 1-year post-initiation of the treatment showed a significant decrease of diffuse lung lesions . A repeated echocardiography and RHC revealed mild PH with normal RV function . Overall, the patient demonstrated an excellent response to treatment, with a significant improvement in exercise capacity and other clinical parameters.