The patient was a 69-year-old female who was diagnosed with pituitary macro-adenoma in 2010. At the time of diagnosis, the patient complained of a visual disturbance. The investigation revealed bi-temporal hemianopsia, nervus opticus right side atrophy and left side sub-atrophy.
A hormonal investigation showed an NFPA. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an endo-, supra- and parasellar macroadenoma with extension into the left cavernous sinus (Knosp grade 2) with a total CC dimension of 3,86 cm and a large suprasellar component . In August 2010, the patient underwent surgery via craniotomy, and partial resection of the suprasellar part of the pituitary adenoma was performed. Before the surgery, the patient was enrolled in national government-funded biobank - the Genome Database of the Latvian population (LGDB) . During recruitment patient has signed two written informed consents (1) broad consent for LGDB for the use of the samples and data for health-related studies, and (2) project-specific consent for pituitary tumour studies. Both written informed consents obtained from the patient and biobank and pituitary tumour studies have been approved by the Central Medical Ethics Committee of Latvia (protocol No. 22.03.07/A7 and 01.29.1/28, respectively). Written informed consent for publication of the clinical details and/or clinical images was obtained from the patient. A copy of the consent form is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumour tissue showed negative immunostaining for p53 protein expression, PRL, growth hormone (GH), ACTH, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone beta-subunit (FSH), somatostatin receptor 5 (SSTR5) and T-box transcription factor TBX19 (T-Pit); mild immunostaining for POU domain class 1 transcription factor 1 (PIT1); moderate immunostaining for steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1); and strong positive immunostaining for luteinizing hormone beta subunit (LH), glycoprotein hormones alpha subunit (CGA), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP). The distribution of cytokeratin-8 (CK8) was diffuse throughout the tumour, the KI-67 level was 1.5%. Haematoxylin and eosin staining of the tumour is presented in Fig. . The patient developed secondary hypothyroidism and secondary adrenal insufficiency after surgery what was substituted according to thyrotropic and corticotropic axis. She was started on thyroxin and hydrocortisone supplementation. The first postoperative MRI was performed 3 months after surgery. A clinical record indicates that MRI showed a large residual tumour at the left side of the cavernous sinus and a cystic structure that was also suprasellar. No images were available in the electronic medical records of the patient for this procedure. Subsequent radiotherapy was declined.
Two years later, an MRI of the pituitary gland revealed prolonged tumour growth with an essential suprasellar extension (Knosp grade 2). The patient was on thyroxin and hydrocortisone, and clinical evaluation revealed NFPA with partial hypopituitarism after the first surgery. The patient underwent a second craniotomy with partial tumour resection in September 2012. The immunohistochemistry analysis showed negative immunostaining for ACTH, TSH and T-Pit; mild immunostaining for PRL, GH, FSH, SSTR5 and PIT1; moderate immunostaining for LH, CGA and SF1; and strong positive immunostaining for SSTR2 and AIP. The distribution of CK8 was diffuse throughout the tumour, and the KI-67 level was 1%. After the second operation, the patient continued medication as before. The visual fields were unchanged when compared with 2010.
The patient was lost to follow-up, as she rarely attends her family doctor and does not want further special examination. A detailed description of additional clinical data, materials, methods and timeline following the CARE guidelines are presented in Additional file .
Final average exome (defined by UCSC Genome Browser (GRCh37/hg19) interval file in Additional file ) coverage was 60.5 ± 42.7X for white blood cells (WBC) derived DNA, 70.9 ± 210.7X for the exome of the first tumour and 84.8 ± 273.9X for the exome of the second tumour (for additional coverage, alignment and quality metrics see Additional file ).
The results of the exome-wide search for missense and nonsense variants are shown in Table . In total, 26 missense and zero non-sense variants were found in the exomes from the PA tumours of this patient. Ten variants were present in the first and second tumour but not in the germline DNA derived from patients WBC. Two of those variants showed evidence for statistically significant clonal expansion after the first surgery (C11orf57 from 5.3% (4 reads at 76X depth) to 24.3% (17 reads at 70X) and MED24 from 3.2% (2 reads at 62X) to 22.2% (14 reads at 63X). An additional 16 variants were found in the second tumour but not in the exome of the WBC or in the exome of the first tumour. However, it should be mentioned that six (KIAA1841, DMXL1, AK9, PTPRK, PLEKHA7 and ITGAX) of these 16 positions had lower than 10X coverage in the first tumour sequencing. Additionally, two genetic variants were represented in the germline DNA derived from WBC by one sequencing read of 53 (1,9%) and 70 (1,4%), respectively, and have an expanded fraction of mutant alleles in the exomes from the PA samples.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that three of the genes are associated with the RNA binding process and two of them, ALKBH8 and AHNAK, contain a variant in the first tumour. RGS14 and C5 are involved in the G protein alpha signalling pathway, and APC and PCDHGA1 are involved in the Wnt signalling pathway, but the products of ENPP1 and PTPRK possess phosphatase activity. Three variants have been previously reported in COSMIC database PCDHGA1 (COSV65295567) in three cases - one prostate, one endometrium and one large intestine tumours. CLMN (COSV54187254) has been reported in one cervical cancer sample and ZNF320 (COSV67089305) in one thyroid carcinoma sample.
We also performed a targeted analysis of SNPs located in a gene set compiled from the literature on PA genetics, tumour suppression and genome and exome sequencing. By searching the literature with the keywords “pituitary adenoma genetics”, “pituitary adenoma exome sequencing”, “pituitary adenoma gwas” and “tumour suppressor genes” on 15th of May 2018, a list of 403 genes was compiled (Additional file ). Targeted SNP analysis was performed in this region which encompasses 47,370,914 base pairs (including introns, which are sparsely represented in exome data) . Two hundred fifty-two missense SNPs were found in 133 genes. SIFT and Polyphen prediction algorithms rated 23 missense SNPs both “deleterious” and “probably damaging” or “possibly damaging”. CDH23 was the only gene that has two SNPs (rs45583140, rs1227049) recognized by both algorithms as severely affecting protein function.
A frequency filter with minor allele frequency threshold 1% (gnomAD database, non-Finnish European population) left five SNPs as the top candidates possibly contributing towards characteristics and development of PA . Four SNPs had “start-loss”, “stop-gain” and “stop-loss” consequences, but all have high population frequencies. CNVs detection using CoNIFER v0.2.2 yielded negative results.