A 36-year-old Chinese man without any systemic medical illnesses presented to our emergency department with a 5-h history of acute general weakness that occurred upon waking up. On the day prior to symptom onset, he suffered from the feeling of low-grade fever and ate heavily before sleeping. There was no history of recent strenuous exercise or diuretic use. He denied any history of palpitations, hand tremors, abdominal pain, diarrhea, body weight loss, and numbness of limbs. Neither he nor his family members had previously experienced any such attack.
On physical examination, his blood pressure was 121/63 mmHg, body temperature was 36.6 °C, pulse rate was 102 beats per minute, and respiration rate was 18 breaths per minute. The patient had decreased muscle power especially in the lower extremities (lower limbs: proximal muscles 2/5 and distal muscles 4/5; upper limbs: proximal muscles 4/5 and distal muscles 5/5), but there was no flaccid paralysis of the lower extremities or areflexia. Other physical examination findings were unremarkable. The results of biochemical studies conducted on admission are shown in Table . Marked hypokalemia (2.2 mmol/L) and mild hypomagnesemia (1.8 mg/dL) were prominent findings. Urine potassium excretion indicated renal potassium wasting [transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG): 7.02; and fractional excretion of potassium (FeK): 7.12]. Potassium supplementation was initiated with potassium chloride (KCl) infusion (20 mEq of KCl in 500 mL of normal saline infused at a rate of 120 mL/h). The serum potassium level was corrected (from 2.2 to 3.8 mmol/L) within 4 h via KCl replacement (total: 19.2 mEq). The hormonal profile, including low thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (< 0.0025 uIU/mL), elevated free tetraiodothyronine (T4) (1.8 ng/dL), and normal triiodothyronine (T3) (1.4 ng/mL), indicated hyperthyroidism. Because TPP was highly suspected due to the rapid resolution of hypokalemia despite high renal potassium excretion, an oral beta-blocker and anti-thyroid medication (propranolol, 10 mg BID, and methimazole, 5 mg BID) were prescribed for controlling the hyperthyroidism. Normal anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (< 1.0 IU/mL) and high titers of thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody (18.4%) indicated Graves’ disease. Thyroid sonogram revealed bilateral multinodular goiter . Finally, he was discharged on day 3 of admission in a stable condition with normal serum potassium levels.
No hypokalemia was noted during the outpatient follow-up (at 9 days after discharge). Methimazole was continued to control his hyperthyroidism, and the dose was adjusted according to the thyroid function test findings. Moreover, no more muscle weakness episode occurred during the one-year follow-up in the outpatient department of endocrinology.