A 75-year-old Japanese woman presented to another hospital with a fever in August 2018. Chest x-ray and computed tomography (CT) showed a mass in her lower right lobe. She was suspected to have a lung abscess and was treated with antibiotics, but her fever was sustained. Thus, she presented to our hospital for further investigation. Her past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypertension. She had smoked approximately two packs of cigarettes a day for 53 years and had quit smoking 2 years ago. She was taking theophylline, vonoprazan, amlodipine, and tiotropium bromide hydrate/olodaterol hydrochloride. We conducted bronchoscopy and diagnosed her with SCLC (cT3N2M1b, cStage IVA according to the 8th edition of the International Union Against Cancer TNM Staging System for Lung Cancer). She was administered carboplatin and etoposide and was discharged.
Four days after the discharge, she had fever and malaise; her serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated at 11.4 mg/dl. She was re-admitted and treated with antibiotics. The main laboratory results from the second admission are shown in Table . Chest x-ray showed a regression of the mass in her right lower lobe, and there were no shadows suggesting pneumonia. After the admission, her fever still persisted, and her serum creatinine level rose rapidly from 1.06 mg/dl (day 1) to 3.51 mg/dl (day 10). Her urine test showed 1+ protein, 1+ occult blood, and urinary sediments of red blood cells. Ten days after admission, the myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA titer was 82.4 U/ml (normal range, < 3.5 U/ml) and the anti-GBM antibody titer was 4.6 U/ml (normal range, < 3.0 U/ml). On day 12, her serum creatinine level increased to 4.26 mg/dl; thus, we initiated corticosteroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg/day for 2 days). On day 14, a renal biopsy was performed and revealed glomerular endocapillary proliferation, although there was no crescent formation . Diffuse tubular degeneration and atrophy were observed, and cellular debris was present in the tubules. Necrotizing vasculitis and diffuse interstitial cellular infiltration were also observed. Upon immunofluorescence, no immune deposits were visible in the glomerular basement membrane and tubular basement membranes (pauci-immune). Based on these results, we diagnosed her with acute kidney injury (AKI) due to microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). After corticosteroid pulse therapy, she was administered 30 mg/day (0.5 mg/kg/day) oral prednisolone. Her fever disappeared, serum CRP and creatinine levels improved, and the MPO-ANCA titer decreased. She was then discharged again.
Only 7 days after the second discharge, the patient complained of dyspnea and returned to our emergency department. On physical examination, her blood pressure was 146/84 mmHg; she had a pulse rate of 108 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 85% on 10 l/min of oxygen via non-rebreather mask. On chest auscultation, coarse crackles were bilaterally detected in the lower back. Chest x-ray and CT showed ground-glass opacities in the bilateral lower lung fields . After admission, the patient frequently produced bloody sputum. Although we could not perform bronchoscopy because of her deteriorated respiratory state, we made a clinical diagnosis of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) and started corticosteroid pulse therapy again. After corticosteroid pulse therapy, her oxygen demand decreased from 10 l/min to 5 l/min. Dyspnea and bloody sputum also partially improved. Four days after the third admission, laboratory investigations revealed that the MPO-ANCA titer decreased to 13.2 U/ml, but the anti-GBM antibody titer increased to 43.3 U/ml. Since the serum creatinine level remained at 2.12 mg/dl after the second discharge, there was no need to perform renal biopsy again. Given that the MPO-ANCA titer was lower and the anti-GBM titer was higher than those previously determined at the time of her second admission, we speculated that the DAH was probably a concurrence with the anti-GBM disease rather than an aggravation of MPA. Therefore, we performed plasma exchanges (PEs) following corticosteroid pulse therapy. After five cycles of PE, her oxygen saturation increased to 95% in room air, with improved chest radiographic findings.
During treatment for AKI and DAH, we could not administer chemotherapy for SCLC; this resulted in a gradual growth of her tumor. Since her activities of daily living and performance status had deteriorated because of frequent hospitalizations, we could not restart chemotherapy. The treatment course of this patient is shown in Fig. .