A 65-year-old female reported to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery with the chief complaint of pain due to decayed tooth in right lower back region since 2 months. The intraoral examination revealed partial edentulous lower jaw with 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 43, 44, and 45 teeth present. Careful examination revealed swelling in the anterior mandible, which was not obvious for the patient to take treatment. The swelling was present from past 9 years and was asymptomatic with slow growth. There was no associated history of trauma. The anterior teeth 31, 32, 41, and 42 were extracted 4 years back by the dental surgeon due to loosening [Figure and ]. Patient was not advised for the intraoral radiographs before extraction. Patient was wearing removable partial denture in the lower anterior mandible, which impinged the underlying alveolar mucosa and appeared erythematous.
The medical history of the patient revealed her to be hypertensive and diabetic from past 2 years and is under medication for the same. The swelling appeared hard without any change in the color of overlying mucosa except in denture region. The extraoral examination showed mild swelling of the lower anterior mandible. The submandibular glands were palpable, nontender but hard, and appeared fixed to the underlying structures.
Introral periapical radiograph and panoramic radiographs were advised, which revealed well-defined lytic multilocular radiolucency involving the whole of the anterior mandible with its extension in the anteroposterior direction involving right and left body of the mandible [Figures and ]. Based on the clinical and radiographic finding, a differential diagnosis of odontogenic keratocyst and ameloblastoma were made. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was advised, which revealed only blood cells. Incisional biopsy was carried out, which on gross examination appeared as blood clots; but on histopathology, it showed ciliated cells with intraepithelial microcyst formation and mucous cells with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive material. The connective tissue was filled with blood cells and few inflammatory cells . The diagnosis of GOC was made.
The patient was explained about the lesion, the surgical treatment plan, and informed consent was taken. Segmental resection of the mandible was advised, which was carried out under general anesthesia. A bilateral extended submandibular incision was made and the mandible was exposed . The osteotomy cuts were performed from right antegonial to left antegonial region including the surgical margin of 1cm. The submandibular lymph nodes were also removed. The angle of the mandible was spared along with the ramus andcondyle. Reconstruction plate was adapted along with the curvature of mandible across the midline and fixed to the remaining mandible . Closure of the surgical site was done in layers. Postoperative healing was good with no complications except for the paresthesia. The patient is kept under long-term follow-up and no recurrence was observed in 2 years of duration.
The excisional biopsy of the mandible was sent for the confirmatory histopathological diagnosis and margin clearance. The final diagnosis was in correlation with the incisional diagnosis and the margins were also free of the lesion.