A 52-year-old male patient was admitted within 4 h of the onset of chest pain. Initial admission occurred at a local hospital, where the diagnosis of CS due to AMI was made. He denied any serious medical condition and is currently still smoking 20 pack-years. The patient received treatment, including aspirin 324 mg, clopidogrel 300 mg, enoxaparin 30 mg IV (initial dose) followed by 60 mg SC (total daily dose), and noradrenaline at 0.49 μg/kg/min, before being transferred to our centre. Upon admission, his presentation included pallor, cold extremities, a heart rate of 110 b.p.m., a blood pressure reading of 90/60 mmHg with the administration of noradrenaline, an elevated respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation level of 94% while receiving oxygen through a 10 L per minute mask. The patient’s condition further deteriorated, presenting severe hypotension requiring an escalation of vasopressor therapy. The emergency electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST-segment elevation in leads V1–V4 and aVR . The echocardiography revealed global hypokinesis of the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at 14% . Laboratory findings indicated a significantly elevated hs troponin I level of 1286.1 ng/L (reference range: <34). Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a mixed acid–base disorder with a pH of 7.093, PaCO2 of 43.8 mmHg, HCO3− of 13.4 mmol/L, and PaO2 of 95 mmHg. Other test results were presented in .
The confirmed diagnosis by the 6th hour was ST-elevation myocardial infarction progressing to Killip IV, accompanied by Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) D–CS, indicative of acute decompensated heart failure. Following the consensus of the heart team, the patient underwent peripheral VA ECMO through femoral veno-arterial cannulation in the catheterization lab within 30 min before emergent PCI. The vasoactive-inotropic score (VIS) of the patient at the time of initiating VA ECMO was calculated to be 164 points. Coronary angiography revealed total occlusion of the left main coronary artery (LMCA), 70–80% stenosis of the mid-right coronary artery, and 80% stenosis of the posterior descending artery (; , ). The LMCA–LAD I was intervened with a 3.0 × 4 mm stent, achieving TIMI III flow (see , ).
After a successful PCI, the patient was transferred to the coronary care unit for ongoing recovery. Subsequently, the patient’s haemodynamic status significantly improved, maintaining an average blood pressure of 78 mmHg and a noradrenaline infusion rate of 0.2 μg/kg/min. Vasopressor doses were gradually tapered and ceased after 6 h with VA ECMO. Continuous monitoring and maintenance on VA ECMO, coupled with advanced resuscitative measures, ensued. After 7 days, a notable improvement in cardiac function was observed, reflected in an LVEF of 36% (Simpson) and a global longitudinal strain (GLS) of 6.8% on speckle tracking echocardiography (; , ). After a 25-day hospitalization, the patient was discharged in a haemodynamically stable condition with the following discharge medications: ticagrelor 90 mg BID, aspirin 81 mg OD, rosuvastatin 20 mg OD, ivabradine 5 mg BID, verospiron 25 mg OD, and sacubitril/valsartan 50 mg BID. After over 30 days post-discharge, two successful outpatient follow-up visits indicate the patient’s prognosis remains positive.