A 66-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 5-month history of cough and sore throat. Clinical examination revealed a palpable elastic hard mass on the right side of the neck; ultrasonography and computed tomography revealed the mass to be in the lower pole of the right thyroidal lobe without extrathyroidal extension and the Delphian and paratracheal lymph nodes to be slightly enlarged. No other enlarged lymph nodes and metastatic lesions were detected in the body. Serum thyroid stimulating hormone (29.32 μIU/mL, reference range: 0.35–4.94 μIU/mL) and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (576 IU/mL, reference range: 0–16 IU/mL) levels were elevated. Serum free T3 (1.42 pg/mL, reference range: 1.71–3.71 pg/mL) and serum free T4 (0.46 ng/dL, reference range: 0.70–1.48 ng/dL) levels were slightly decreased; however, other laboratory data were normal, including thyroglobulin (1.73 ng/mL, reference range: 0–33.7 ng/mL) and IgG4 (60.3 mg/dL, reference range: 4.8–105 mg/dL) levels. Fine needle aspiration of the thyroidal mass obtained follicular cell clusters containing less amounts of colloid, which were categorized as “atypia of undetermined significance or follicular lesion of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS),” in a background slightly rich in lymphocytes and plasma cells . The patient and her family had no relevant previous history of disease. The clinical and radiological findings indicated thyroidal cancer rather than thyroidal inflammatory disorders such as subacute and Hashimoto thyroiditis; therefore, partial thyroidectomy (right lobectomy) with Delphian and paratracheal lymph node dissection was carried out after careful informed consent. The postoperative course was uneventful.
Gross examination revealed that whitish, firm, somewhat nodular lesions were distributed into the upper and lower poles . Particularly in the lower pole, lesions were fused, forming a somewhat circumscribed mass measuring approximately 2.5 cm in diameter, which was clinically and radiologically misinterpreted as thyroidal cancer.
As shown in Fig. , the histology seems to differ between mass lesion and background thyroidal tissue. In the lower pole’s mass, interstitial storiform fibrosis extended abundantly; however, it did not extend beyond the thyroid capsule. Most of the follicular epithelium was effaced, and a few cells underwent squamous metaplasia and formed morulae sporadically. There was extensive infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells with the occasional formation of well-developed germinal centers. Meanwhile, in the background tissue, lymphocytes and plasma cells intensely infiltrated the parenchyma, as seen in lymphocytic thyroiditis; however, storiform fibrosis did not occur. The thyroid follicles were not effaced but atrophic and regenerative with less colloid. Obstructive and non-obstructive phlebitis was not observed.
As shown in Fig. and , immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the infiltrating lymphocytes included numerous IgG4-secreting plasma cells (45–55 cells/high power field), and the IgG4/IgG-secreting plasma cell ratio was increased (approximately 49.4%) in both the whitish sclerotic nodular lesions and the background thyroidal tissue. In-situ hybridization assay demonstrated that the κ and λ light-chain-producing plasma cell populations did not differ significantly.
The Delphian and paratracheal lymph nodes were grossly swollen, measuring 7 mm and 11 mm, respectively (major axis). Histologically, lymph node architecture was reactively hyperplastic, and plasma cells, including IgG4-secreting cells, were infiltrated in great number, particularly in the interfollicular area of the inner cortex .