A 54-year-old gravida 2 para 2 Japanese woman visited her local hospital, complaining of fever and left vulvar pain over a 2-month period. She had a past medical history of appendicitis at 13 years of age, erythema nodosum at 20 years of age, and hypertension diagnosed at 50 years of age. Her menopause occurred at 53 years of age. The initial examination revealed a 10 × 6 mm, firm, ulcerative mass on the inner side of the left labium minorum . A vulvar abscess was suspected at the initial visit, but treatment with antibiotics was not effective. SCC was strongly suspected by a subsequent needle biopsy, and she was referred to our hospital for further treatment. Upon admission, her physical examination revealed an ulcerative mass on the left side of the vulva that had increased in size to 31 × 24 mm. Our patient underwent a diagnostic workup that included magnetic resonance imaging, revealing that the primary lesion did not involve the urethra or anus . Neither inguinal lymphadenopathy nor distant metastases were seen on computed tomography (CT). With a preoperative diagnosis of vulvar SCC, our patient underwent radical local excision and bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy. Histopathological examination found eccrine porocarcinoma with a depth of invasion of more than 20 mm; marked vascular invasion was present. The inguinal lymph nodes were negative for metastatic disease, and the surgical margins of the resected lesion were also negative. Our patient was diagnosed with stage IB disease (T1bN0M0; International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2008). To prevent local recurrence, she underwent adjuvant radiation therapy for the pelvis, bilateral inguinal area, and vulva (50.4 Gy/28 Fr) with concurrent administration of weekly cisplatin (40 mg/m2) for five cycles. One month after her treatment was completed, positron emission tomography CT revealed metastases to the sacrum and multiple small nodes in both lungs. She received three further courses of chemotherapy (paclitaxel and carboplatin) and underwent palliative radiation therapy to the sacrum. At 12 months after surgery, our patient died of her disease.
Histological examination revealed polygonal tumor cells with variable nuclear atypia and increased mitotic activity. The tumor lesions were broadly connected to the epidermis, but the presence of a direct connection to the squamous epithelium was unclear . The tumor cells appeared as solid nests resembling large alveolar glands, without apparent keratinization . In addition to the intracytoplasmic luminal and cribriform pattern, necrosis was seen in the center of the nodules, giving the appearance of comedo-necrosis . Based on these findings on hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections, the differential diagnosis included SCC, adenosquamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, sweat gland carcinoma, and mammary-type ductal adenocarcinoma. Additional immunohistochemical examinations were performed . The tumor was strongly positive for CAM5.2, partially positive for 34βE12, focally positive for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) , and negative for cancer antigen 125 expression. The tumor was strongly positive for p16 expression, and almost negative for the squamous cell markers p63 and p40. The neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A and synaptophysin were partially positive. The tumor was negative for the apocrine marker BRST-2 (also known as gross cystic disease fluid protein-15); estrogen, progesterone, and androgen receptors; human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2); p53; and mucin 1, cell surface associated (MUC-1) expression. Epithelial-membrane antigen (EMA) expression was positive at the luminal rims . The tumor was focally positive for S-100 and positive for Ber-EP4 expression. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of vulvar porocarcinoma.