In March 2019, a 50-year-old asymptomatic never-smoker woman was admitted to our hospital due to bilateral mGGNs detected on her routine health checkup. She had no significant medical history for herself or family medical history. The chest's computed tomography revealed a 1.5 cm diameter of irregularly shaped lesion in the left upper lung, and 28 ground-glass nodules in all lobes of the right lung . Systemic examination including the abdominal CT scan, brain MRI, bone scintigraphy, and else, were individually performed for the exclusion of distant metastases Then, we suggested a lung biopsy, but the patient refused. She was then diagnosed with mGGNs, as SMPLC being the most likely, but intrapulmonary metastasis could not be ruled out, either. We selected an isolated nodular lesion in the left lung that could be resected surgically. In March 2019, this patient underwent segmentectomy of left S(1+2+3) and systematic lymph node dissection. Postoperative specimen pathological examination verified the disease as lung adenocarcinoma, with immunohistochemical results (CK5/6(−), P40(−), TIF-1( +), Napsin-A( +), P53( +), Ki-67(+ , 3%), EGFR( +)), all resected lymph nodes were negative. Subsequently, the EGFR gene test was performed, and the result manifested the pathology as a primary T790M (Ex20 T790M: p.T790M (c.2369C > T)) mutation. Aggressive surgical treatment or stereotactic body radiation therapy was considered not feasible for this case, and the patient refused to undergo chemotherapy. After multidisciplinary discussions and communications with the patient, the target therapy was adopted as the follow-up treatment. In March 2019, the patient was treated with 80 mg osimertinib on a daily basis (According to the drug instructions, osimertinib is suitable for patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer with primary EGFR-T790M mutation). After 3 months of therapy, the chest CT showed that most GGNs in the right lung were partially absorbed. Therefore, the osimertinib treatment was continued. Until the last follow-up in July 2021, the reviewed chest CT exhibited that most GGNs in the right lung were completely absorbed, only one GGN left was radiologically the same as before . We suggested the patient to excise this single lesion, but she refused. So far, she remains receiving the osimertinib treatment. We will closely follow up checking the residual GGN. If the nodule progresses, it will be strongly recommended to perform thoracoscopic surgical resection to obtain the information about relevant gene mutation. If the patient still refuses surgery, SBRT can be taken.