A 59-year-old male with decompensated hepatitis C virus cirrhosis (Child–Pugh score of 10 [C], and a Model for End-stage Liver Disease score of 31) underwent living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) using a left liver plus caudate lobe graft from his spouse. The patient developed partial liver infarction because of a portal vein thrombus extending from the main to the left portal branches, leading to liver graft failure. After that, the patient underwent deceased donor liver transplantation (DDLT) using a whole-liver graft on postoperative day 43 (Additional file : Fig. S1). A portal vein was reconstructed between the recipient’s superior mesenteric vein and the graft portal vein with the donor’s left common iliac vein graft interposition using end-to-end anastomosis. The biliary duct was constructed using duct-to-duct anastomosis.
After DDLT, aspartate aminotransferase levels decreased immediately , but the patient developed a postoperative pancreatic fistula (grade B, according to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula). Candida species were cultured in the fluid drainage, and the fistula was relieved by conservative treatment. Seven months after the surgery, the patient was transferred to a nursing hospital.
One month after the transfer (postoperative day 261), the patient experienced acute abdominal discomfort around the epigastrium. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a 4-cm cystic lesion in the pancreatic head . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a to-and-fro wave pattern in the cyst . Angiography of the celiac artery confirmed HAP in the CHA . Because the HAP had a narrow neck shape, thrombin (800 U) was injected under balloon protection of the proper hepatic artery (PHA) . After this procedure, the HAP disappeared, and the hepatic artery was patent . Daily doppler abdominal ultrasonography was performed. On the third day, doppler abdominal ultrasonography showed that the blood flow resumed in the mass. Embolization was performed with thrombin under IVR (Interventional Radiology). However, during the third relapse, the HAP was recanalized repeatedly and occluded by embolization with NBCA (1:2 NBCA: Lipiodol). No collateral formation was observed at this point.
The HAP resolved for a while. However, abdominal pain and fever were later observed, thus confirming the fifth HAP recurrence 8 months after the first thrombin infusion (postoperative day 517). Angiography showed that the neck of the HAP had widened to 1 cm, and the PHA diameter had narrowed . Another NBCA injection into the HAP or stent graft was unsuitable because of the widened neck and the small diameter of the PHA. Fortunately, the liver graft was enhanced by a collateral bypass around the bile duct from the SMA and under from left gastric vein with balloon occlusion of CHA (Additional file : Fig. S2). Given the collateral vasculature; we believe CHA embolization is safe. Coil embolization (Target and Penumbra) of the HAP and CHA under balloon protection was performed . After embolization, angiography confirmed complete HAP occlusion and blood flow to the liver graft through the SMA . Additionally, abdominal ultrasonography showed that the intrahepatic arterial waveforms were visible after coil embolization . After that, the patient’s clinical course was uneventful. Liver function test results remained within normal limits. The patient was discharged on day 20 after coil embolization and has remained stable without abscess or HAP recurrence for over 2 years.