A 47-year-old male patient was referred to our department from the general practitioner with recurrent left sided flank pain for 3 months. He had no urological history and his serum creatinine level was normal. A previous abdominal ultrasound revealed left sided secondary hydronephrosis, kinking of the iliac artery and probably a neoplasm of the ureter. Hence, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan was performed, which showed an extrinsic compression of the left ureter at the level of the bifurcation of the common iliac artery . No intra-abdominal aneurysms were detected.
Afterwards the patient underwent retrograde pyelography and primary ureterorenoscopy with double-J stenting, which revealed the ureteric stricture at the level of the bifurcation of the common iliac artery . During the ureterorenoscopy the pulsation of the vessel was seen in the stenotic area and histological samples were taken from the region of interest. Histopathology of the resected ureteric segment showed slight chronic inflammation of the ureter.
Afterwards, the patient was presented to the colleagues from the vascular surgery in our hospital. The patient had no symptoms concerning angiopathy especially no signs of intermittent claudication. He has been a cyclist for over 20 years with about 10,000 driven kilometers per year.
In the clinical examination all pulses (femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial) were well palpated. After re-evaluation of the computed tomography scan, hypertrophy of the psoas muscle as well as extension of the internal iliac artery (diameter 1.0 × 1.1 cm) could be shown. In men, the average diameter of the iliac artery is 1.2 ± 0.2 cm.
In our view, the muscular hypertrophy could be explained by the strong hip flexion due to extensive cycling for several years and the hypertrophy caused the concomitant enlargement and kinking of the iliacal vessels. Especially the artery was made responsible for the lower ureteral obstruction. After interdisciplinary discussion with the vascular surgeons, no vessel reconstruction was recommended. The patient was admitted to robotic-assisted laparoscopic ureterocystoneostomy. The stenotic area, which could be seen directly next to the artery, was resected and the patient underwent ureterocystoneostomy with psoas hitch technique. The histopathological samples showed no malignancy . The patient recovered well.