Our patient was a 38-year-old pauciparous Arabic woman with a pregnancy of 7 weeks, 1 day gestation. She had consulted for acute pelvic pain of increasing intensity with fever without metrorrhagia and any other digestive or urinary signs. She had no specific medical or family history except a notion of unexplored secondary dysmenorrhea.
On examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable and conscious, feverish at 38.6 °C, with tenderness of the left iliac fossa without defense or abdominal contracture. Her uterus was enlarged with tenderness and filling of the left lateral cul de sac.
Her biological assessment objectified hyperleukocytosis at 15,200 elements/mm3, hemoglobin at 11.5 g/dl, platelet count at 241,000/mm3, a very high C-reactive protein (CRP) at 254 mg/l, and positive leukocyturia with a negative urine culture result.
Pelvic ultrasound described an enlarged uterus that was the seat of a toned gestational sac containing an embryo of 7 weeks, 1 day with cardiac activity and yolk sac. The patient’s right ovary was without visible abnormality, and her left ovary contained two contiguous cystic images of 68 and 35 mm with thickened wall in places not vascularized on the basis of Doppler imaging, with finely echogenic content without vegetation or endocystic septum with posterior strengthening of the echoes, without effusion. We mentioned the diagnosis of hemorrhagic corpus luteum or decidualized endometrioma, given the notion of dysmenorrhea.
The patient received pain relievers for her pelvic pain and antibiotics. Due to the persistence of the symptomatology (pelvic pain and fever) and the increase of CRP (294 mg/l vs 254 mg/l) after 1 week of treatment, an ultrasound control was performed, which objectified a progressive intrauterine pregnancy with persistence on the left side, of the two cysts that appeared as heterogeneous echogenic images with a thickened wall in places, pseudovegetations not taking the Doppler, and the presence of a liquid and thin effusion in the cul de sac of the pouch of Douglas . The right ovary was normal.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to complete the exploration (axial and sagittal T2 sequence, axial T1 spin echo sequence, and liver acquisition with volume acquisition before and after gadolinium injection), with the following findings: two cystic hemorrhagic formations of the left ovary in T1 and T2 hyperintensity of 87 mm × 78 mm and 25 mm × 25 mm with fluid levels without endocystic vegetation and increasing at the periphery after injection of gadolinium. The largest cyst was in intimate contact with the sigmoid with a possible rupture of its wall at this level . Presence of an effusion in the cul de sac of the pouch of Douglas was detected, along with absence of infiltration of the peritoneal fat. No pelvic or lumboaortic lymphadenopathy was visible. Thus, an exploratory laparotomy was decided on the basis of radiological suspicion of sigmoid fistulization and the worsening of the patient’s clinical symptomatology.
On exploration, discovery was of a minimal serohematic effusion, a uterus at 8 weeks of gestation, and the right appendix without particularity. A mass was present at the expense of the left ovary, smooth-walled, about 10 cm and adherent to the left fallopian tube, the posterior surface of the uterus, and the sigmoid. This mass was very adherent and fistulized to the sigmoid, and there had been an accidental rupture during adhesiolysis and outpouring of a chocolate liquid. We performed a left adnexectomy and resection of the sigmoid by removing the fistula and then placing a Hartmann-type ostomy. The cytologic specimen returned in favor of an inflammatory hemorrhagic fluid without any tumor cell. Histology revealed that the cystic wall was fibrous with large foci of suppuration on the periphery. The colic wall had an ulcerated epithelium in places with broad suppurative areas at the level of the chorion. Immunohistochemistry highlighted glandular structures at the level of the intestinal wall that were well underlined by the anticytokeratin antibody and expressed estrogen and progesterone receptors with an expression of CD10 around the glands. Moreover, tumor cells were absent. Thus, the final histological study concluded the diagnosis of a decidualized and reshaped endometriotic cyst.
The postoperative follow-up and monitoring of the pregnancy were simple with full-term vaginal delivery without incident. The restoration of intestinal continuity was performed by laparotomy 6 weeks after the delivery.