A 69-year-old male patient, who was previously healthy without a history of other chronic, infectious or genetic diseases, was admitted to the hospital in June 2022 because of swelling and pain in the left thigh for twenty days, accompanied by recurrent fever. There was no cough, expectoration, wheezing or other abnormal pulmonary symptoms on admission.
Liver function, renal function and infectious disease screenings revealed no significant abnormalities. The white blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), procalcitonin (PCT), C-reactive protein (CRP) and other inflammatory makers were abnormally elevated. To further identify the foci of infection, we performed metagenomic detection of pathogenic microorganisms including bacteria, funguses, viruses, parasites, mycoplasmas, chlamydia and mycobacterium tuberculosis. Unfortunately, no significant abnormal pathogen nucleic acid sequences were detected. To provide further treatment to this patient, genetic sequencing testing for 551 target genes was performed. The results revealed that foci showed TERT c.-124C mutation (abundance 8.81%), TP53 p.R342 mutation (abundance 11.35%), TMB 7.09 muts/Mb, MSS, and PD-L1 (SP263) TPS 5% were detected.
The patient had a smoking history of 20 cigarettes/day for more than 30 years. No information for family history.
On June 27, 2022, the patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of pelvis and abdomen which revealed a bone destruction in thoracic six vertebra and left proximal femur (, ). Further evaluation of the lung using enhanced CT scan showed a pulmonary cavity (20 mm × 30 mm) in the superior lobe of left lung and scattered lung nodules, which was considered a possible malignancy with vascular invasion multiple metastatic sites . Femoral bone metastases were also found using emission computed tomography (ECT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The multisystem neoplastic lesion was considered as multiple metastatic foci. No obvious abnormalities were observed in head MRI. Positron emission tomography (PET)- CT showed multiple pulmonary nodules in both lungs with increased fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism. The left proximal femur and thoracic six vertebra were hypermetabolic and metastasis to these sites was considered. The CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of the femur was performed on July 8, 2022. Microscopically, it showed the tumors were composed of spindle cells and epithelioid cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed TTF1(focal +), CK (+), CK8/18(+), Vimentin (+), CK7(+), EMA (+), TLE1(+), CD56(-), CD34(-), NapsinA (-), Desmin (-), P63(-), P40(-), S100(-), Ki67(+, about 50%) . The features were consistent with PSC.
The patient was diagnosed with PSC (T4N3M1c, stage IVB) with metastasis to left proximal femur and thoracic six vertebra.
Due to the unresectable locally femoral neoplasm, we then decided to begin preoperative NACT. On July 30, the patient began taking anlotinib (Focus V®, Jiangsu Chia-Tai Tianqing Pharmaceutical and Advenchen Laboratories) 8 mg peros (po) once daily continuously for 2 weeks of each 3-week cycle (q3w) combined with immunotherapy consisting of sintilimab (Tyvyt®, Innovent Biologics and EliLilly and Company) 200 mg once every 21 days.
Surprisingly, after one course treatment with sintilimab combined with anlotinib, pathologic fracture of the left proximal femur occurred at the site of tumor invasion , and the symptom of fever of undetermined origin was relieved. There were signs of osteosclerosis at the margins of the vertebral destruction. In order to relieve the pain of the fracture and restore mobility, an urgent resection of the femoral tumor and prosthesis replacement for proximal femoral were performed. Postoperative pathology sections and immunohistochemistry confirmed that the tumor in the proximal femur was metastatic sarcomatoid carcinoma .
Since then, the regimen of anlotinib 12 mg orally quaque die(qd) from day 1 to 14 combined with sintilimab 200 mg on day 1 every 3 weeks has been maintained. The latest postoperative follow up to our hospital was on December 27, 2023(15 months after treatments), during which the chest-abdomen-pelvis CT showed that the left lung cavity was further reduced in size of approximately 16*0.9mm with scattered foci of fibrosis and focal inflammation in both lungs. The scattered lung nodules were also significantly smaller than before . The range of vertebral body destruction which showed a circular hyperdense shadow on the right side of thoracic six vertebra was not significantly changed . No signs of new metastasis and significant abnormalities were found in the original proximal femoral tumor site and other vertebral bodies.
Currently, the cancer has been stable for over 15 months and no notable discomfort occurred while receiving sintilimab combined with anlotinib.