An 80-year-old woman presented complaining of back pain and shortness of breath for 4 days. She had a past medical history of minor penicillin allergy, hypertension, hypothyroidism, gout, diastolic dysfunction, hyperlipidemia, transient ischemic attack, and non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction “NSTEMI.” Initial workup revealed elevated troponin and leukocytes/bacteria on urinalysis. Computed tomography angiogram “CTA” chest revealed bibasilar atelectasis/consolidation suspicious for pneumonia. The patient was diagnosed with severe sepsis secondary to bacterial pneumonia and urinary tract infection. She was started at an outside hospital on piperacillin–tazobactam, vancomycin, and azithromycin. The patient then developed acute anemia, and gastrointestinal bleeding was suspected. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy “EGD” was done and revealed a gastric ulcer with visible vessels that were treated. Hemoglobin had stabilized for days post-therapy. Then the patient was transferred to our tertiary center.
The first set of blood cultures came back positive for MSSA; antibiotics were downgraded to cefazolin. Magnetic resonance imaging “MRI” of the back was done given the patient’s bacteremia and back pain. Results demonstrated discitis and osteomyelitis at the level of T1–T2 vertebrae. Repeat blood cultures were positive again for MSSA. At this point, a transesophageal echocardiogram revealed mitral valve endocarditis. However, after visiting with the cardiothoracic surgeon, she decided to continue on medical treatment without surgical intervention.
Seven days after switching to cefazolin, the patient’s hemoglobin started to downtrend again and required multiple blood transfusions. Suspicion of recurrent gastric ulcer bleeding was high, but a repeated EGD revealed a healing gastric ulcer with no evidence of active bleeding. The patient’s workup for hemolytic anemia showed elevated lactate dehydrogenase “LDH,” indirect bilirubin levels, and low haptoglobin. DAT and complement testing yielded negative results. Peripheral blood smear showed schistocytes. Differential included side effects of one of the medications, shearing force from the endocarditis, or autoimmune hemolytic anemia “AIHA.” However, other bloodwork showed an up-trending of eosinophil count from the 5th-day post-switching to cefazolin. Presumptively, the patient was diagnosed with a possible allergic reaction to cefazolin resulting in CIHA. The diagnosis was in light of her prior known allergy to penicillin, declining hemoglobin, workup picture consistent with hemolytic anemia, the elevation of eosinophils after starting cefazolin, and the exclusion of other plausible causes of acute anemia. After switching to vancomycin, hemoglobin level gradually up-trended, and eosinophil count down-trended. The patient was discharged on a regimen of vancomycin for 6 weeks.