The patient was a 23 days-old female referred from the neonatal ICU with a spinal muscular atrophy type 2 diagnosis received in-utero associated with patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular, and atrial septal defects. She had an older sibling diagnosed with SMA and an amniocentesis was requested by the family. At admission, she suffered from dyspnea and poor feeding. Survival motor neuron-1 (SMN-1) gene exon 7 and 8 homozygous deletion and two copies of SMN-2 gene were detected in genetic testing. Regarding the surgical correction plan, given the post-operative morbidity potential in this patient as well as the uncertainty of the future access to disease-modifying treatments, a palliative procedure was decided upon. At the age of 23-days and a weight of 3.7 kg, we performed pulmonary banding and patent ductus arteriosus ligation under anesthesia with 4 mg Thiopental, 4mcg Fentanyl, and muscle blockage with 1.5 mg Rocuronium. The patient was extubated 16 h after the operation with a stable hemodynamic status. The postoperative echocardiographic evaluation revealed a 55 mmHg gradient on the pulmonary band and no residual flow from the patent ductus arteriosus (Additional file : Fig. S1). The patient was discharged on postoperative 10th day. During this course, the patient was neurologically asymptomatic other than absent deep tendon reflexes and had not yet received the first dose of her treatment with Nusinersen: an antisense oligonucleotide that increases the synthesis of full-length survival motor neuron protein that is lacking in spinal muscular atrophy patients . At 12 months of age, before her first dose, the patient received a score of 3 on the Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale Expanded (HFMSE) . She received her first dose of treatment at the age of 14 months.
The second admission of the patient was at age 17 months. The pulmonary band gradient was 78 mmHg, and pulse oxygen saturation was 93. No neurologic deterioration was noted, patient was able to hold her head, sit unsupported and the weighed 8.2 kg. We performed atrial and ventricular septal defect closure and pulmonary artery reconstruction. Neuromuscular blockade was established with Rocuronium 4 mg; sedation was applied with Pentothal 25 mg, Dormicum 0.5 mg, Fentanyl 16 mg, and maintained with Precedex 0.1 mg/kg/h and Sevoflurane 0.6–0.7 MAC. The patient was weaned and extubated in the operating room. Postoperative echocardiographic evaluation showed a trivial residue on ventricular septal defect and a 14 mmHg gradient on the pulmonary artery (Additional file : Fig. S2). The patient was transferred to the ward on the post-operative 2nd day and discharged on the 9th day. Thirteen months and eighteen months after the second operation, before and after her fifth dose, the patient’s Hammersmith score was 25 and 41, accordingly. In the patient’s recent follow-up at age of four, cardiac assessments were normal. In her physical and neurological examination, patient had a positive Gower’s sign with evident hypotonia but could walk unsupported, reported improvement in motor skills with continuing treatment and received a Hammersmith score of 64 (Additional file : Fig. S3).