A four-year-old Romanian boy was admitted to Spitalul Clinic Judetean de Urgenta Constanta, Romania for 'febrile seizures'. An initial evaluation revealed hypertension, severe anemia and end-stage renal disease.
Our patient is the second offspring of consanguineous parents. His family history was notable for obesity, learning difficulties, six digits on two limbs and visual impairment in his 14-year-old sister. He had also six digits on two limbs, diagnosed at birth . No ultrasonography was performed during the pregnancy or during the neonatal period. Initial motor and mental development milestones were abnormal, a delay noted by the family doctor, but the diagnosis was not established in the context of family history and consanguinity of the parents.
Nystagmus and pigmentary retinopathy, mild central obesity, male hypogonadism (microtestis and microphallus on genital examination), mental retardation, behavioral abnormalities, hypothyroidism, and abnormal dentition were observed. Digital abnormalities included partial syndactyly (between the second and the third fingers), fifth finger clinodactyly of both hands, brachydactyly of both hands and feet, and minor scars after surgical removal of the sixth digit of the left hand and left foot. Renal involvement was very mild. Bilateral renal enlargement and increased renal parenchymal echogenicity were the early findings of imaging studies performed at two years old, whereas urea and creatinine values were slightly elevated (45 mg/dL and 1.4 mg/dL). Hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, congenital heart disease, hearing impairment or cardiomyopathy were not identified at the first consultation.
According to the clinical and paraclinical evidence, he met all of the six cardinal or primary criteria and six minor or secondary criteria necessary for a diagnosis of BBS . His older sister was also diagnosed with BBS at the same time, based on clinical assessment. No genetic testing for BBS was available at our hospital.
The mother and the family doctor were advised to check his renal status routinely; the boy was not seen for routine medical controls for two years, until he suddenly developed an episode of a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. He was admitted to the local health facility and was found to have hypertension, severe anemia (hemoglobin 6 g/dL) and renal impairment (serum creatinine 8.5 mg/dL).
A diagnosis of BBS with ESRD was made. Due to the elevated urea and serum creatinine levels accompanied by uremic symptoms (loss of consciousness and generalized seizures), a Tenckhoff catheter was inserted and he was initiated on daytime ambulatory peritoneal dialysis .
After a 15-month follow-up, his evolution was satisfactory without any complications with the catheter. His glomerular filtration rate was stabilized.
Our patient's 14-year-old sister was not obese, and had polydactyly in one hand and one foot. Rod-cone dystrophy with myopia and strabismus was diagnosed at eight years of age. Neurodevelopmental delay had been noted since infancy, and evolved with hypotonia, dyspraxia, poor balance, and ataxic gait. Speech and behavior problems were noted, as well as learning difficulties. No renal tract abnormalities were diagnosed. Dental anomalies, such as crowding of the teeth, hypodontia, and high arched palate were noticed. She has a typical facies with enophthalmos and downward slanting palpebral fissures.
Another boy, a third degree cousin in the same family, was diagnosed with mild obesity, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, then diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, renal dysfunction, and cardiac involvement (dilated cardiomyopathy). This patient died due to a myocardial infarction at 28 years of age.
He also had a brother who died at nine months of age, presenting with signs and symptoms suggestive for cardiac failure. Both of these patients presented with nystagmus starting from four months of age .
Our patient's cousin's symptoms are more compatible with a diagnosis of Alström syndrome, while the siblings are closer to a diagnosis BBS. Our patient, his sister and their cousin were included in a mutation analysis (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine) and were screened using a microarray (Asper Ophthalmics, Tartu, Estonia) containing 155 published disease-causing variants and polymorphisms in 11 BBS genes and 98 in ALMS1. Our patient and his cousin shared a heterozygous single nucleotide polymorphism in BBS5 (BBS5_N184S het) that is not disease causing. Haplotype analysis showed that our patient and his sister shared only one allele in the ALMS1 region, meaning that the disorder shared by them is most likely not Alström syndrome . Efforts are still being made to identify possible novel mutations that may explain the phenotypic diagnosis.