A 78-year-old man was referred to our department for close examination of a liver tumor. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a 2-cm-sized hyperechoic mass with indistinct borders at the origin of the right hepatic duct. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus, vasospastic angina pectoris, and transurethral resection for bladder carcinoma. Physical examination results were unremarkable. Laboratory data showed slightly elevated hemoglobin A1c levels. Anti-Hepatitis B surface- and core antibodies were positive. However, the result of serum hepatitis B virus-polymerase chain reaction test was negative. All tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKAII), were within the normal ranges. The retention rate of indocyanine green at 15 min was 10%. The Child–Pugh score was 5 points .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed a tumor, 2 cm in size, in the hilar region, slightly cephalad, and dorsal to the right hepatic duct . The tumor showed a heterogeneous contrast effect in the arterial phase, with prolonged enhancement, accompanied partly by a low-attenuation component mimicking cystic structures. In addition, localized dilatation of the caudate lobe bile duct was observed near the tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed high intensity on T2 weighted images dorsal to the origin of the right hepatic duct with a heterogeneous low-intensity area in the lumen . The tumor showed mild diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging. The tumor showed a low signal intensity on the hepatocyte phase of the contrast-enhanced MRI. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrated the existence of a cystic lesion located adjacent to the right hepatic hilum. In addition, the bile duct of the right caudate lobe was found to be significantly dilated, suggesting that the tumor originates from the origin of the bile duct of the right caudate lobe . Moreover, the tumor appeared to fill the bile duct without evidence of invasion into the liver parenchyma. The tumor was also suspected to be a papillary or multicystic growth pattern. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography revealed no abnormal findings and failed to detect any tumor. Biopsies of the hilar hepatic duct and the common bile duct showed no malignant tissue.
Based on these findings, right hemi-hepatectomy was performed, suspecting intrahepatic intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct. As the estimated future remnant liver volume after right hemihepatectomy was 34% of the total liver volume, portal vein embolization of the right branch was performed prior to the liver resection to prevent postoperative liver failure.
The extrahepatic bile duct was preserved, because no tumor was found at the margin of the right hepatic duct during intraoperative frozen diagnosis. Lymphadenectomy was not performed in this case, because it is not routinely performed for IPNB.
Macroscopically, the lesion was an 18 × 15 mm tumor occupying a dilated intrahepatic bile duct near the right hepatic duct, with a soft, fine papillary tumor . Histologically, the tumor grew in a nearly cord-like tubular structure and showed carcinoma-equivalent atypia with fine granular, highly acidophilic, abundant cytoplasm, and irregular round nuclei with agglutinated chromatin, consistent with moderately differentiated HCC . Immunostaining showed that the tumor cells were hepatocyte-positive, Glypican3-negative, HSP70-positive, and CK19-positive suggesting hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition, a 2 mm-sized hepatocellular carcinoma was observed in the liver parenchyma near the bile duct, where the main tumor was located . Based on these findings, we have diagnosed the tumor as HCC with BDTT, rather than as cholangiocarcinoma (T2N0M0 Stage II; TNM classification of malignant tumors; eighth edition ). The cystic lesion seen on the preoperative images was considered as a dilated bile duct filled by BDTT, and low attenuation component in the lesion was thought to be a gap between the bile duct and the tumor thrombus. Although mild fatty changes were observed in the non-cancerous liver parenchyma, no fibrotic changes were observed. Based on these pathological and preoperative imaging findings, a schema of the relationship between the biliary tree, HCC and BDTT was illustrated in Fig. . The patient recovered well with no signs of recurrence 20 months after surgery.