An 86-year-old woman presented with a few months of exertional shortness of breath, malaise, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea.
The patient has a history of hypertension treated with ACE inhibitors [ramipril, 1.25 mg once a day (o.d.)] and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) treated with rivaroxaban (15 mg o.d.) and beta-blockers (bisoprolol, 2.5 mg o.d.). She had a COVID-19 infection 7 months before the procedure.
The patient was first diagnosed with moderate MR in 2013, with moderate left atrial enlargement, mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with an estimated right ventricular (RV) systolic pressure (RVSP) of 35 mmHg, and normal left ventricular (LV) function. Mitral regurgitation severity did not progress over the subsequent 2 years.
With the appearance of symptoms, the patient underwent another echocardiogram in 2021 that showed severe MR with apical tethering of the leaflets (significantly worse than in previous echo studies) with moderate TR (RVSP, −38 mmHg). There was no evidence of ischemia on SPECT thallium dipyridamole scintigraphy.
Physical examination was unremarkable, besides mitral systolic murmur.
Because of high operative risk, a heart team discussion recommended TEER.
A TOE at the beginning of the procedure showed severe MR with a regurgitant jet originating mainly from the medial commissure ( and , ), and a 3D planimetred valve area of 4.12 cm2. The baseline MR parameters were as follows:
regurgitant volume = 71 mL; effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) = 0.37 cm2; vena contracta diameter; 0.65 cm, pulmonary vein (PV) flow; systolic = 22.7 cm/s; and diastolic = 45.2 cm/s [blood pressure (BP) was 117/78 mmHg; heart rate (HR) −86].
Transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (MitraClip, Abbott) was performed through right femoral vein access and transeptal puncture with a BRK needle. A single XTW clip was inserted with good grasping (see , and ) and reduction of MR severity to mild (see , and ). The patient was in AF from the beginning of the procedure, with a ventricular response of 86 b.p.m. During clip implantation, the patient converted into a regular wide complex tachycardia with an LBBB pattern , and a HR of 130 b.p.m. During the tachycardia, diastolic mean pressure gradient on the mitral valve was 10 mmHg. The patient was then treated with 12 mg of adenosine, which revealed atrial flutter with a ventricular response of 70 b.p.m. Mean diastolic pressure gradient was then 5 mmHg. Final MR severity was mild [BP was 115/72 mmHg; HR −121] with systolic dominance of the PV flow velocities, Thus, the clip was successfully released, and grasping was assessed as stable ( and , ).
The patient was then treated with a loading dose of 150 mg intravenous amiodarone and underwent a successful 150 J biphasic synchronized cardioversion, returning to normal sinus rhythm. Immediately after the cardioversion, the operators noticed recurrent severe MR [BP was 105/83 mmHg; HR −119].
The differential diagnosis of recurrent MR post-TEER includes single leaflet device detachment, loss of leaflet insertion, leaflet tear, leaflet prolapse, and leaflet distortion.
In our case, TOE demonstrated that the clip was detached from the posterior leaflet causing recurrence of the severe MR.
Transseptal access was re-obtained with successful deployment of a new NTW clip adjacent to the detached one. Diastolic mean pressure gradient was 3 mmHg with marked improvement of the MR that was now mild . During the insertion of the second clip, the patient remained in sinus rhythm and haemodynamically stable. The patient stayed in the ICU for another 48 h on sinus rhythm with sporadic atrial premature beats (APBs) and was treated with an oral loading dose of amiodarone (400 mg BID). A follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram showed mild-to-moderate MR without stenosis. On the 2-month follow-up visit, the patient was in good condition with no shortness of breath. The patient was treated with amiodarone (100 mg). An echocardiogram showed mild-to-moderate MR with the second clip well docked.