A 6-year-old male neonate was referred to our hospital due to cyanosis, dyspnea, and melena. The patient was born at the gestational age of 39 weeks, weighing 2,690 g. Echocardiography after birth showed complete atrioventricular defect (Rastelli A), common atrium, pulmonary atresia, patent DA, bilateral superior vena cava, and cardiac-type total anomalous pulmonary venous return. His systemic oxygen saturation was around 90% after mechanical ventilation and intravenous administration of PGE1 (5.3 ng/kg/min). He presented worsening dyspnea because of excess pulmonary blood flow via a large DA. Next, we performed hypoxic therapy using nitrogen inhalation. At six days of age, progressing metabolic acidosis, systemic oxygen saturation over 93%, cyanosis, dyspnea, and melena were noted. Despite the intensive treatment, the patient presented circulatory incompetence, resulting in NEC. Based on computed tomography, NEC was confirmed by intestinal dilatation and portal vein gas accumulation . Echocardiography following the visit showed moderate atrioventricular valve regurgitation but no pulmonary vein stenosis. Therefore, we attempted emergent surgery to regulate the systemic and pulmonary circulation by placing a Blalock-Taussig shunt.
We continued PGE1 due to the risk of DA closure during the operation. Following median sternotomy, his heart appeared in poor condition; atrial and ventricular tachycardia very easily developed whenever the heart was touched. We noted the pulmonary artery located deeply behind the common atrium . This made placing a Blalock-Taussig shunt without cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) hazardous and bilateral pulmonary artery banding difficult. Therefore, we undertook DA banding with a part of a 3-mm expanded polytetrafluoroethylene artificial graft. The banding circumference was 16 mm, which was determined to ensure a systemic oxygen saturation of around 80% and a partial arterial oxygen pressure above 40 mmHg at an inhaled oxygen fraction of 0.3–0.4. The chest remained open. Subsequently, colectomy and resection of a part of the small intestine were performed for NEC.
Intravenous administrations of adrenaline, antimicrobial agents, and PGE1 (2.5 ng/kg/min) were continued after admission to the intensive care unit. Serum lactate was 52 mg/dL (maximum, 400 mg/dL). In addition to systemic oxygen saturation and partial arterial oxygen pressure, we assessed the patient by daily echocardiography to evaluate the pulmonary artery, DA, and atrioventricular valve regurgitation to determine whether the band was adequate. His condition improved by the day. Delayed closure of the chest was performed on postoperative day 21. Enteral nutrition was started on postoperative day 27, and mechanical ventilation was discontinued on postoperative day 32.
PGE1 was continued to maintain pulmonary blood flow from the DA. Nutrition management was cautious due to the patient’s post-intestinal resection; therefore, he continued to receive inpatient care. At five months, he weighed 4.6 kg and had a systemic oxygen saturation of around 80%.
He underwent a bidirectional Glenn procedure, including the repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous return at five months and closure of colectomy at six months.