A 39-year-old female with a history notable for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), severe pulmonary arterial hypertension (now mixed pre and post), and infective endocarditis complicated by severe mitral stenosis status post-bioprosthetic mitral valve replacement in 2013 presented to our medical centre for symptoms of acute decompensated heart failure in the setting of severe bioprosthetic mitral valve stenosis. Prior to admission, she was admitted to an outside hospital for similar symptoms. There, she had a cardiac workup that was notable for an echocardiogram that demonstrated right ventricular systolic pressure of 139 mmHg, right ventricular volume overload, a normal ejection fraction of 65%, and a thickened mitral valve prosthesis. She was diuresed; however, she did not feel better so she left against medical advice and came to our institution.
The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) and had a difficult ICU course including a pulseless elective activity (PEA) arrest thought to be secondary to hypoxia, acute renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), and diffuse cerebral oedema. However, on hospital Day 5, the patient had improved neurologic status and reactive pupils but remained haemodynamically unstable. Given improvement in neurologic and clinical status, the patient was considered for a TMViV procedure using haemodynamic support. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was chosen as the mode of circulatory support given her history of right ventricular failure with elevated pulmonary artery pressures and likely needed for bi-ventricular support. On hospital Day 5, the patient was placed on VA-ECMO in anticipation of a TMViV procedure for circulatory support. The patient underwent a successful TMViV replacement using a trans-septal approach with a 26 mm SAPIEN 3 valve and atrial septal defect closure with a 14 mm Amplatzer device on hospital Day 12 ( and and , ). The patient was successfully de-cannulated from VA-ECMO on hospital Day 13. The patient successfully had her tracheostomy de-cannulated on hospital Day 31 and had continued improvement in renal and neurologic function. A trans-thoracic echocardiogram prior to discharge was notable for a mitral valve inflow gradient of 3 mmHg, left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient of 23 mmHg, mild paravalvular leak, and a normal ejection fraction of VA-ECMO. The patient was discharged to a nursing home for further rehabilitation.