A 56-year-old male presented with unexplained abdominal distension 2 years ago, accompanied by easy satiety, a loss of appetite, and back pain. Physical examination showed no abnormalities. Laboratory tests for liver and kidney function as well as tumor markers were normal. Gastroscopy revealed the presence of duodenal polyps, while colonoscopy showed multiple polyps in the colon and rectum. After the polypectomy, pathology showed duodenal bulb and sigmoid colon polyps and a rectal tubular adenoma. The patient had a previous history of tonsillitis resection.
The patient underwent a CT examination of the abdomen, revealing a 2.5 × 1.9 cm low-density lesion with unclear boundaries in the right lobe of the liver. Contrast-enhanced CT was recommended. During contrast-enhanced CT scanning of the abdomen, the lesion in the right lobe of the liver showed no obvious enhancement, which suggested a complicated cyst. Additionally, a soft tissue density nodule measuring 1.6 × 1.4 cm with a CT value of 33HU was found in the renal sinus in the lower pole of the left kidney. This nodule showed significant enhancement during the arterial phase (CT value: about 202HU) and conspicuously decreased during the venous phase (CT value: about 160HU), raising the possibility of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC; ). MRI scan showed a 1.6 cm diameter nodule in the left renal sinus, which was isointensity on T1 weighted image and hypointensity on T2 weighted image and significantly enhanced in the arterial phase.
Subsequently, an 18F-FDG PET/CT was done to help determine the exact nature of the lesion in the left kidney. The lesion demonstrated mild FDG uptake with a maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.5 . According to the low to moderate uptake of 18F-FDG, the following day, 18F-PSMA-1007 was carried out to evaluate tumor neovascularization. 18F-PSMA-1007 PET/CT scan showed no uptake in the left renal lesion . The absence of 18F-PSMA-1007 uptake in a renal mass made ccRCC less likely.
After that, a multidisciplinary discussion between the department of radiology, nuclear medicine, and urology was carried out. Through analysis, it was found that the left renal lesion was significantly enhanced in the arterial phase and decreased significantly in the venous phase, and the degree of enhancement was always consistent with the abdominal aorta, considering the possibility of vascular malformation. By contrast enhanced CT reconstruction, maximum intensity projection (MIP), and volume rendering (VR) showed feeding arteries and thickened draining veins . Combined with PET/CT, there was no PSMA uptake and near mild FDG uptake, ccRCC can be excluded. Therefore, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was recommended for further examination. Left renal angiography demonstrated a renal aneurysmal sac, and early drainage of contrast from the left renal vein was also remarkable. After coil post-embolization, the aneurysmal sac vanished without the renal vein filling up . The patient was cured and discharged after treatment.