A 24-year-old primigravid woman of Indian origin and married for one year was seen in our emergency department with a history of a brief episode of loss of consciousness and acute pain in her abdomen of four hours duration. She was 8 weeks pregnant. It was a spontaneous conception and there was no past history of abortion, infertility, pelvic inflammatory disease or any history of abdominal surgery. On examination, she was pale with a pulse rate of 120 per minute and blood pressure of 80/60 mmHg. Abdominal examination revealed diffuse, lower abdominal tenderness with significant guarding and rigidity. Pelvic examination revealed an anteverted, enlarged, soft and tender uterus corresponding to 8 weeks of pregnancy. In addition, a tender mass was also palpable in her right adnexa. Cervical movements were painful but there was no bleeding. After initial resuscitation with intravenous fluids, she was further investigated. Her hemoglobin was 4.2 gm/dl with a normal white blood count (WBC) and platelet count. Urine for HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) was positive. Transvaginal sonography revealed an 8-week intrauterine viable pregnancy and a 3.3 × 2.2 cm echogenic mass near her right ovary with a 1.6 × 1.0 cm central anechoic area. A moderate amount of fluid was present in the cul-de-sac and in Morrison's space and a diagnosis of heterotopic pregnancy with tubal rupture was made. An emergency laparotomy on the patient revealed an 8-week gravid uterus and rupture of the right tube near the fimbrial end and the presence of approximately 1.5 liters of hemoperitoneum. Right salpingectomy with removal of the hemoperitoneum and peritoneal lavage was performed. She was transfused with four units of blood during and after the surgery and her postoperative period was uneventful. Histopathology of the resected specimen showed the presence of chorionic villi confirming a viable pregnancy. The patient was discharged and followed-up regularly in the antenatal clinic. At 38 weeks gestation she went into spontaneous labor and delivered a healthy male baby weighing 2.6 kg with no congenital malformation. Postnatal recovery was uneventful and both mother and baby were discharged on the third postpartum day.