A 33-year-old Caucasian female presented to our head and neck oncology clinic. She was 24 weeks pregnant at the time of presentation. She complained of a four-month history of dysphonia and odynophagia. Additionally, she noted shortness of breath on exertion as well as left-sided otalgia. She was otherwise healthy with a history of a tonsillectomy at age five, and a previous knee arthroscopy. She was taking prenatal vitamins, Tylenol and ranitidine. She had 10 pack year history and quit one week prior to initial consultation. She drank 5–7 alcoholic drinks per week prior to pregnancy and worked as a bartender.
Flexible fiberoptic nasolaryngoscopy revealed a lesion involving both vocal cords, fixing the left vocal cord with impaired mobility of the right vocal cord. The lesion extended from the cords to the ventricle and onto the false cords with partial involvement of the base of the epiglottis. Laryngeal biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma involve both the left and right supraglottis. In addition to the supraglottic lesion, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) noted a 12.0 mm lymph node in the right neck level IIa. Hence, per the patient was diagnosed with T3N1M0, stage three p16+ squamous cell carcinoma of the supraglottis.
Extensive inter-disciplinary discussion was completed regarding this patient’s treatment plan. Experts from medical oncology, radiation oncology, obstetrics and gynecology, speech and language pathology and otolaryngology - head and neck surgery were included. Importantly, the patient’s perspectives and preferences were also included in the decision-making process. After much deliberation, it was decided to proceed with an awake tracheostomy, percutaneous endoscopy gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement and then elective C-section at 28 weeks’ gestation, followed by chemoradiotherapy (Cisplatinum 100 mg per m2 on days 1,22, and 43). The radiation dosage used was 7000 centigray in 35 fractions over 7 weeks. Treatment was successful and the patient has remained recurrence free with a healthy child at four years post-treatment. From a functional outcome perspective, the patient has stable dysphonia that has not improved over time. Additionally, she has a small glottic web superior to the vocal cords. Finally, the patient has no dysphagia or any other airway/breathing difficulties.