A 30-year-old male patient presented with a 5-mo history of right neck masses, complaining of dysphagia and labored breathing.
Five months ago, two thumb-sized masses grew in the upper and middle parts of the anterior right neck, then gradually enlarged, especially the tumor in the middle part, which enlarged rapidly. The patient disregarded the masses and did not seek evaluation and treatment. The patient subsequently developed dysphagia, labored breathing, dizziness, and occasional earaches. He was diagnosed with right neck masses in another hospital and underwent neck exploratory surgery, but the masses could not be removed due to severe bleeding. The two tumors continued to grow after surgery. The upper tumor increased in size over the short term and eventually developed into two adult fist-sized masses with associated symptoms.
The patient was diagnosed with a right parietal lobe neoplasm and hemorrhage at a local hospital due to the sudden onset of headaches and left limb weakness 8 mo ago. The patient underwent a craniotomy with hematoma removal and tumor resection, and the post-operative pathology was a metaplastic atypical meningioma (WHO grade II) with local de-differentiation (WHO grade III). Post-operatively, the patient had left limb weakness and hoarseness, but did not receive radiotherapy as recommended by the physician.
No family history of meningiomas or neck tumors.
Two masses were identified in the upper and middle parts of the right neck, about 10 cm × 8 cm in the upper part and 8 cm × 5 cm in the middle part, and an 18.0-cm lateral surgical scar was present between the two masses . The trachea was deviated to the left and the right vocal cords were paralyzed. Grade 3 muscle strength was demonstrated in the left upper and lower limbs.
There were no obvious abnormalities in routine blood tests, coagulation function, liver and kidney function, blood electrolytes and other blood biochemical tests.
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right side calcified mass and an unclear boundary at the root of the neck measuring 7.1 cm × 5.8 cm × 6.0 cm. Another large cystic mass was present in the right parapharyngeal space and measured 5.9 cm × 9.2 cm × 8.1 cm. The two masses reached the right sublingual space and extended downward to the thorax. The adjacent blood vessels were displaced and the trachea, oropharynx, and hypopharynx were deviated to the left . Head and neck angiography showed that the right common carotid artery was compressed and completely occluded and the diameter of the internal carotid artery was reduced. The jugular vein was enveloped by the tumor and occluded. A balloon occlusion test (BOT) showed no perfusion in the right common carotid artery. The anterior communicating artery was opened so that the left carotid artery could compensate for the contralateral cerebral circulation.