A 59-year-old Chinese man presented to the outpatient department of our hospital with retrosternal chest pain.
Over the prior 12 years, the patient had experienced intermittent retrosternal pain on effort with palpitations, shortness of breath, and fatigue lasting from 5 to 10 min. Because of the manifestation of typical angina pectoris, he was admitted to our institution for coronary angiography (CAG) 10 years ago. CAG showed severe stenosis in the mid-segment of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD), and 3 stents were implanted. Since that time, he had been treated with aspirin, clopidogrel, statins, and nitrate. However, his chest pain had recently returned and occurred more frequently at 1 to 2 times a day.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 30 years and poor blood pressure control (blood pressure ranging from 150/100 mmHg to 205/120 mmHg), even after treatment with felodipine and enalapril. Secondary hypertension was excluded after an outpatient evaluation. He suffered a cerebral hemorrhage one year ago. Due to the small size of the cerebral hemorrhage, no sequelae were noted.
He had been smoking approximately 60 cigarettes a day for 30 years. No significant family history was noted.
Physical examination demonstrated poorly controlled hypertension with a blood pressure of 180/105 mmHg. His body weight was 65 kg, and his height was 166 cm (body mass index 23.9 kg/m2). Jugular venous distention was not detected, and the thyroid gland was not enlarged. The breath sounds of the two lungs were normal, and no dry or moist rales were detected. Heart auscultation revealed a regular rhythm, normal heart sounds without murmur, and a heart rate of 63 bpm. The liver and spleen were normal, and no swelling was observed in the lower extremities.
Electrocardiography indicated sinus rhythm and a high-voltage left ventricle but no significant change in the ST segment or T wave . Echocardiography demonstrated symmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy (wall thickness 13-14 mm, normal reference ≤ 11 mm), left atrial enlargement (42 mm, normal reference ≤ 35 mm), mild mitral regurgitation, and some reduction in left ventricular diastolic function. Ultrasound of lower limb arteries revealed a rough intima and spotty calcified plaques without significant stenosis. All these observations suggested hypertensive heart disease and peripheral vascular atherosclerosis. No other abnormalities were present in other examinations, including routine blood tests (platelet count 211 × 109/L, normal reference 125-350 × 109/L), coagulogram, liver and kidney function, blood electrolyte levels, blood glucose, blood lipids, thyroid gland function, myocardial damage markers, and brain natriuretic peptide, a biomarker of heart failure.
The patient was preliminarily diagnosed with CAD, unstable angina, grade 3 hypertension, and hypertensive heart disease[-]. He was treated with aspirin (100 mg daily), clopidogrel (75 mg daily), atorvastatin (20 mg daily), isosorbide mononitrate (20 mg twice daily), amlodipine (5 mg twice daily), and enalapril (5 mg twice daily). For the coronary anatomy evaluation, CAG was performed by puncturing the right brachial artery because the right radial pulse was absent due to the PCI 10 years prior. A 6 French (F) sheath, a 0.035 cm × 260 cm J-Tip guidewire (Cordis, Ireland), and a 5 F 100-cm Tig coronary catheter (Terumo, Japan) were used during CAG under fluoroscopic guidance. CAG showed total occlusion of the proximal left circumflex artery (LCX), subtotal occlusion at the opening of the first obtuse marginal branch (OM) and 60%-70% in-stent restenosis at the middle LAD. In addition, 60%-70% stenosis of the distal right coronary artery was observed . For PCI of the left coronary artery, the 5 F angiography catheter was replaced with a 6 F EBU 3.5 A LAUNCHER coronary catheter (Medtronic, United States) and a 0.014-cm × 180-cm ASAHI SION coronary guidewire (ASAHI INTECC, Japan), which were passed through the distal OM. Then, repeated attempts were made to pass through the proximal LCX using a 0.014-cm × 180-cm ASAHI SION blue coronary guidewire (ASAHI INTECC), a 0.014-cm × 190-cm Fielder XT-R coronary guidewire (ASAHI INTECC), and a 1.8 F 0.018-cm × 130-cm FINECROSS coronary microcatheter (Terumo, Japan), but these attempts failed. We then decided to address the stenosis of the OM. During balloon angioplasty with a 2.5-mm × 12-mm TREK balloon (Abbott, United States), the patient began to feel pharyngeal pain and tightness, which we mistook for myocardial ischemia. Stenosis was eliminated by implanting a 2.75-mm × 16-mm PROMUS Element Plus stent (Boston Scientific, United States) in the proximal segment of the OM . PCI was terminated after high-pressure balloon angioplasty using a 2.75-mm × 12-mm NC Demax noncompliant balloon (Demax Medical Technology, Beijing, China). The procedure lasted 52 min, and 6000 units of heparin was administered through the artery. The activated clotting time measured immediately after the operation was 305 s (normal reference 80-120 s).
After the patient was returned to the critical care unit, swelling in the right neck and right supraclavicular area was observed and gradually increased, with bleeding spots under the skin. The patient felt dyspneic, and physical examination showed that the trachea was compressed to the left. Bedside ultrasound demonstrated a poorly defined hematoma behind the right internal jugular vein measuring 26.0 mm × 30.1 mm × 12.3 mm. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan performed immediately thereafter also showed contrast extravasation surrounding the proximal subclavian artery and a cervical hematoma compressing the trachea , but no hemothorax, subclavian artery rupture or bleeding was diagnosed.