A 66-year-old male, farmer, chronic smoker, presented with multiple erythematous evanescent tender nodules over body associated with fever and joint pain for 25 years. He also had multiple skin colored shiny infiltrated umbilicated nodules over earlobe, trunk and extremities with glove and stocking anesthesia (up to wrist and ankle), bilateral partial ulnar claw hand and trophic ulcers on foot.
He was a defaulter with irregular treatment with anti-leprosy drugs for past 20 years and had been self-medicating with varying doses of oral steroids for the reactional episodes.
The hematological, biochemical and serological profile of this patient was within normal range. However, the patient exhibited hyperglycemia with a fasting glucose level of 120.36 mg/dL.
On examination two well defined mobile, fluctuant cystic swellings were present on left thumb and left leg above the medial malleolus measuring 1 × 1 cm and 9 × 7 cm respectively for 6 months . They were mildly tender on palpation, followed the course of nerves. The routine blood investigations were within normal range except leukocytosis and finding of chronic obstructive lung disease on chest X-ray. Slit skin smear from ear nodules was positive for Wade fite stain for lepra bacilli (+6). Biopsy from the skin papules was consistent with lepromatous leprosy. With differentials of nerve abscess and cutaneous cysticercosis, FNAC of the nodules was done. FNAC smears showed scattered population of few viable and many degenerated mixed inflammatory cells, necrotic material and many fungal hyphae. These were broad bulbous hyaline to melanized having constrictions at septal region (A). These fungal hyphae stained positively with PAS and Masson Fontana (B, C). Fungal hyphae were also highlighted on 10 % potassium hydroxide mount (KOH) preparation which, however the fungal culture came out be negative in this case.
Surgical excision of the cysts was done under antifungal cover which showed fibrous walled off cyst with necrotic center containing multiple broad septate toruloid hyphae with multiple foreign body giant cells and mixed inflammatory infiltrate, fungal hyphae stained with PAS stain . With a final diagnosis of phaeohyphomycosis, patient was started on oral itraconazole 200 mg leading to regression in lesion size. Excision site healed well however patient was lost to follow over next few months.