Our patient is a 66-year-old female, who underwent mechanical aortic and mitral valve replacement (Bjork-Shiley Monostrut 21 mm and 25 mm, respectively) for rheumatic heart disease in 1992. In addition, the patient had a history of permanent AF and was on anticoagulant therapy with acenocoumarol. The patient was first admitted to our hospital in 2015 complaining of dizziness and gait instability. She presented with a blood pressure (BP) of 150/80 mmHg, a pulse rate of 81 b.p.m., and a blood oxygen saturation of 99% (ambient air). On physical examination, the patient showed a severe ataxia. Blood analysis showed an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.4. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain revealed an acute ischaemic area in the superior left cerebellar hemisphere, suggesting embolic stroke in the left superior cerebellar artery territory . The patient was discharged after 2 weeks in a good general condition and recovered completely. Anticoagulant therapy was maintained with acenocoumarol, maintaining a target INR of 3.0.
The patient was later admitted to our emergency department in February 2017, complaining of sudden onset of chest pain. Her BP was 160/94, the pulse rate was 65 b.p.m., and blood oxygen saturation was 96% (ambient air). The electrocardiogram showed AF with new ST-segment depression in V4–V6 and a negative T-wave in inferior and lateral leads. Biochemical blood analysis revealed a high-sensitivity Troponin T of 14 ng/L, elevating to 68 ng/L after 2 h (99th percentile upper reference limit of 14 ng/L). The INR at admission was 3.4. Bedside echocardiography showed regional akinesia of the inferior wall, as well as elevated peak and mean pressure gradients of the aortic valve (89 mmHg and 53 mmHg, respectively). Emergency cardiac catheterization was performed, revealing a distal occlusion of the obtuse marginal artery, with angiographic features typical of an embolic aetiology (Video 1, ).
In addition, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed to assess the elevated pressure gradients of the aortic valve (Video 2). The TOE assessment revealed an echodense thickening of the aortic annulus, not restricting the leaflet opening, thus suggesting pannus formation. Of note, discs mobility was also preserved in cineangiography. The patient was discharged with low molecular weight heparin and acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was added to her treatment. She was referred to cardiac surgery for elective aortic valve replacement (implanting a St. Jude Medical Trifecta, 21 mm), which was performed in March 2017 without complications. Pannus formation was confirmed during surgery. Anticoagulant therapy was continued with Acenocumarol, increasing the target INR values to 3.5, while ASA was withdrawn on 30 March 2017.
In February 2019, the patient was admitted to Neurology in an outpatient setting due to transient left hemiparesis and dysarthria. A CT of the brain revealed a hypodense area in the right corona radiata, therefore confirming ischaemic stroke . The INR at admission was 3.4. Given the recurrent embolic ischaemic events despite adequate VKA therapy, the patient was presented for percutaneous left atrial appendage closure (LAAC) as adjunctive therapy to anticoagulation.
Preprocedural TOE showed a left atrial appendage (LAA) thrombus not identified in previous studies , thus the procedure was scheduled under embolic protection (, Video 3). LAAC (Watchman FLX™, Boston Scientific, MA, USA) was performed in August 2020, supported by a double filter cerebral protection system (CPS, SENTINEL™, Boston Scientific, MA, USA). The procedure was carried out without complications and the patient was discharged the next day. Anticoagulant therapy was continued with acenocumarol and a target INR of 3.5. Until the present date, the patient has not presented new thromboembolic events.