A 29-year-old female patient presented to our outpatient department with a 15 years history of painful swelling over the sole both foots(R>L). The patient gives an alleged history that she was apparently normal 15 years ago when she developed a small nodular swelling over the sole of her foot. The swelling was gradually progressive and was multiple in number over her right foot. The swelling was painful and prevented the patient from weight-bearing and even walking for small distances was affected. There was no associated trauma. The patient gives no history of diabetic mellitus and epilepsy. There was no significant familial history of the disease. On examination of the patient, the feet were in plantigrade and no deformities were noted. The right foot revealed multiple nodular swellings which was tender to touch and firm in consistency with no local warmth. The skin over the swelling appeared normal. The biggest nodule measured about 2 cm in diameter. No neurovascular deficits were noted. Range of motion at the ankle and foot was within normal range. Examination of the left foot revealed a smaller nodule measuring 1 cm in diameter with local tenderness. The patient has no similar swelling elsewhere in her body. X-rays revealed no significant pathology. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done to evaluate further. MRI revealed a nodule in both the plantar aponeuroses. A diagnosis of bilateral foot plantar fasciitis was made and the patient was started on conservative management in the form of analgesic and anti-inflammatory drugs, physiotherapy (stretching exercise), cryotherapy, and footwear with soft insole were advised. The patient showed better results regarding pain on the left foot. However, there was no difference in pain or function of the right foot even after 6 months. Persistence of symptoms indicated surgical excision of the nodule. After obtaining necessary fitness for surgery, the nodule over the skin was palpated and marked. A small surgical incision was planned and marked onto the skin with relevance to the clinical anatomy of the nodule. The skin and soft tissue dissection were made just adjacent to the weight-bearing surface of the foot and the nodule as identified . We had raised skin flaps to aid in exposure. After careful dissection of the fascia, the nodule was exposed and excision of the nodule was done in toto andtissue sample is sent to the pathologist for evaluation. The skin flaps were sutured and there was no post-operative complication with wound healing. Sutures were removed after 2weeks. The patient was mobilized non-weight-bearing with walker support for 3weeks following which she was started on full weight-bearing with a soft insole footwear. The healed skin did not show any discharge, inflammation . The histopathology of the excised nodule was discussed with the pathologist and revealed bland spindle-shaped cells with abundant collagen in a fibrous stroma background . This was consistent with our diagnosis of plantar fibromatosis. On follow-up, the patient reported no pain and improvement in function of the foot.