71-year old male was admitted to emergency department due to a chest pain that was aggravated by moving or breathing. Patient also had unexplained weight loss of 22 kg in the last 3 months. Medical history included arterial hypertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease. Laboratory data showed normocytic anemia, elevated inflammatory parameters, elevated alkaline phosphatase and creatinine. Chest X-ray did not show any abnormalities. Initially, pulmonary embolisms were suspected, but chest computer tomography angiography (CTA) did not show any abnormalities in the lungs. Abdominal ultrasound examination found already known adrenal adenoma with no other abnormalities. As attending physician was suspicious of malignant disease patient was hospitalized. During hospitalization 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT imaging was done which revealed disseminated predominantly osteoblastic metastatic lesions in thoracic and lumbar spine , iliac bones , ribs, humerus and clavicles. However, primary tumor was not identified initially. For further characterization magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was planned, but unfortunately it was contraindicated due to more than 20 years old osteosynthetic material present in the lumbar vertebra. A CT guided biopsy of small osteoblastic lesion in the iliac crest was ordered. Unfortunately, biopsy was inconclusive, since it showed only a fatty bone marrow without any malignant cells. Finally, patient underwent an open bone biopsy of large osteoblastic lesion in the eleventh thoracic vertebra. Microscopic evaluation of the open biopsy showed clear cell RCC with sarcomatoid differentiation .
Afterwards patient was presented to medical oncologist. Control CT scan confirmed a small carcinoma in the right kidney with diffuse bone metastases, which were predominantly osteoblastic. Additionally, numerous new tiny lung metastases were found leaving no suspicion that primary tumor was not in the lungs. His prostate specific antigen was 0.3 ng/ml and therefore it was very unlikely that osteoblastic metastases were from prostate cancer. At presentation patient had several poor-prognosis risk factors (WHO performance status 2–3, anemia and time from initial diagnosis to the start of treatment less than 1 year), which indicated short life expectancy. He was offered treatment with mammalian target of rapamycic (mTOR) inhibitor temsirolimus. Unfortunately, despite treatment with temsirolimus patient gradually deteriorated and after two months of treatment CT scan showed progression of disease in his lungs. Few weeks later patient died.