A 39-year-old Caucasian male presented with the sudden onset of severe and progressive neck and left shoulder pain, radiating down the left arm with decreased range of movement at the shoulder. He denied any preceding trauma. His past medical history was significant for a two-year history of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis treated with azathoprine and etanercept, the last dose of which had been administered three weeks prior.
On examination, he was guarding his left neck and shoulder. He was haemodynamically stable and febrile at 38.3°C. His left shoulder area was oedematous with an erythematous rash, and was diffusely tender both anteriorly and posteriorly. Passive range of movement was painful and active range of movement was very limited. Neurological and vascular examinations were normal. He had no clinical evidence of toxic shock syndrome.
Initial investigations revealed neutrophilia with an elevated CRP and blood cultures were subsequently negative. Chest radiograph and plain films of the left shoulder and cervical spine were normal. Differential diagnosis included septic arthritis, osteomyelitis and localized skin abscess. As a result, his physician commenced intravenous cefotaxime and immunosuppressant medications were immediately discontinued. Over the following 24 hours he remained febrile and developed a diffuse macular blanching rash over the left shoulder with a non-fluctuant boggy swelling in the left supraclavicular area. Antimicrobial therapy was changed to intravenous cefotaxime, metronidazole, vancomycin and ciprofloxacin. Serial examination of the shoulder showed persistent tenderness and progression of the erythematous macular rash with defined areas across the left shoulder area, but with no evidence of blistering, skin eruption or discharge.
As a result of ongoing symptoms, an MRI with intravenous gadolinium contrast of the shoulder was performed and showed extensive oedema of the subcutaneous and intramuscular fat of the left lower neck, supraclavicular region, pectoralis major and teres minor muscles. There was no evidence of a discreet fluid collection or abnormality within the muscles or osseus structures. The appearances were felt to be consistent with extensive fasciitis . He was clinically improving, as a result medical and surgical reviewers agreed with antimicrobial consolidation to intravenous clindamycin, ciprofloxacin, flucloxacillin and benzylpenicillin with the caveat of close monitoring and surgical intervention at any sign of deterioration or progression. He clinically improved and inflammatory indices slowly normalised. He received a total of 14 days of intravenous antimicrobials followed by oral equivalents for a further 14 days. Follow up CT of his shoulder showed resolution of the inflammatory changes . He was closely followed up as an outpatient for a number of months after dismissal from the hospital with no evidence of recurrence.