A 19-year-old woman with no significant history or symptoms of CA tumor (gravida 1, para 0) underwent her first pregnancy examination at 8 weeks of gestation. She was found to have a giant pelvic tumor at a hospital where she initially consulted. She was referred to our institution for tumor management. In our institution, initial examination revealed a pelvic tumor measuring 130 mm. The fetus was not easily detected using transvaginal ultrasonography; hence, it was detected using transabdominal ultrasonography . Notably, the levels of tumor makers, including CA125, CA19-9, CEA, SCC, NSE, and LDH, were all within the normal range. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed at 12 weeks of gestation to evaluate the tumor, which measured 115 mm × 150 mm × 160 mm. Moreover, MRI revealed a bulky, well-circumscribed mass in the retroperitoneal space, with low- and high-signal-intensity bands on T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively. There were significant high-signal-intensity bands on diffusion-weighted MRI, and the tumor was assumed to have a strong swelling lesion. There were whorl-like formations within the tumor, which included a fat component. These imaging findings led to a suspicion of AA, with differential diagnoses of CA and AMFB.
The potential complications and management options were explained to the patient, and she initially chose to continue the pregnancy, since AA is a benign tumor.
At 16 weeks of gestation, the patient developed nausea and fever. The examination doctor suspected ileus because of the tumor and, after a comprehensive examination, diagnosed the patient with gastroenteritis. Nevertheless, the following day, she experienced persistent lower abdominal pain; thus, she was re-examined and found to have abdominal and costovertebral angle tenderness, without signs of peritoneal irritation. Laboratory analysis revealed increased white blood cell count (18,800/μL), elevated C-reactive protein level (8.36 mg/dL), and pyuria. There were no signs of hydronephrosis, and the patient was diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis based on the above-mentioned findings. Consequently, she was administered antibiotics (ceftriaxone [CTRX] [1 g/day]). Three days after admission, the amniotic membranes prematurely ruptured, leading to a miscarriage. The pathological diagnosis of the placenta was stage II of chorioamnionitis . Six weeks after the miscarriage, the patient underwent surgical tumor resection.
MRI was performed 4 weeks after miscarriage to re-evaluate the tumor size and location as well as to screen for malignant transformation. Although the pelvic tumor with hypervascularity had not grown, tumor infiltration into the levator ani muscle was suspected.
Tumor resection was performed following bilateral ureteral stent placement to prevent ureteral injury. Caudally, the tumor was found in the retroperitoneal space and occupied part of the posterior uterine and rectovaginal regions . Part of the tumor surface adhered to adjacent structures, and no invasion was observed. A small part of the vagina was ruptured during resection due to the closeness of the surface of the tumor to the vagina, and a transvaginal approach was required. Spindle cells proliferated from blood vessels to interstitial tissues, and the vessel walls were hyalinized. No atypical cells or necrosis was observed . Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells was diffusely positive for vimentin. Most of the tumor tissues, except for blood vessels, was α smooth muscle actin (αSMA)- and h-caldesmon-positive, and spindle cells were slightly CD34-positive. Furthermore, most tumor cells were estrogen receptor (ER)- and progesterone receptor (PgR)-positive. Based on these results, CA, AA, and AMFB as differential diagnoses were distinguished .
The tumor samples were sent to another institution for pathological diagnosis, and the histopathologic findings were consistent with those obtained at our institution. Meanwhile, immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells was positive for αSMA, ER, and PgR, and slightly positive for h-caldesmon, CD43, and CD99. However, the staining was negative for S-100. Neither HMGA2 nor RB1 expression was detected. The patient was diagnosed with CA based on the above-mentioned findings, although the clinical findings were not typical.
Postoperatively, on day 3, the patient developed a hematoma (3 cm) in the rectovaginal space, which grew to a maximum size of approximately 10 cm by the 13th day. A drain was inserted transvaginally into the rectovaginal space for hematoma drainage. On postoperative day 29, the hematoma volume reduced significantly (3.5 cm), and the patient was discharged. MRI was performed 3 months postoperatively, no residual tumor was found, and the uterine position was normal. Postoperative follow-up was conducted for up to 5 months, although the patient was lost to follow-up after this period.