A 19-year-old Caucasian female presented to us with bilateral lower limb ulcers. She reported a scratch on her left ankle 3 months earlier that worsened over time into an ulcer, in spite of antibiotic treatment. A week later, new lesions appeared on the left leg and similar ones were seen on her right leg. The patient denied fever, weight loss, or other signs or symptoms of systemic illness. Four years earlier she had been admitted at another hospital with transaminasemia and jaundice and was diagnosed with autoimmune hepatitis based on serological (ANA and ASMA) positivity and compatible histopathological features, in the absence of viral markers. Treatment with prednisolone and azathioprine brought the disease into remission. The patient was on 5 mg prednisolone upon presentation.
On admission, the patient was afebrile, bearing purulent, painful ulcers in both legs . Lab results showed the inflammation markers just exceeding the upper normal limits . Transaminases were within a normal range, while anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were positive at a titer of 1/320 and anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA) were positive at a low titer (1/80). Cryoglobulin test was negative. The lesions were cultured for bacteria and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and empiric therapy was started with clindamycin and moxifloxacin. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the region of ulcers in both legs revealed diffuse subcutaneous oedema and subcutaneous nodular lesions on the dorsal surface of the feet. With a working diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum, a skin biopsy was acquired, her previous medication of azathioprine was reintroduced at 150 mg, while the steroids were increased from 5 to 20 mg prednisolone, daily. The patient was discharged pending the pathology and bacteriology results.
She returned a week later with arthritis of both ankles and worsening of the ulcers . Further cultures were again negative. The biopsy was interpreted as being compatible with pyoderma gangrenosum , hence prednisolone 1 mg/kg was started, azathioprine was switched to cyclosporine at 150 mg that was further increased to 250 mg daily, and methotrexate 10 mg/week was added to the regimen. Given the rare combination of pyoderma gangrenosum with autoimmune hepatitis, upper and lower endoscopies, as well as upper abdominal MRI and Magnetic Resonance Cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) were done to exclude more common associated diseases. All of the investigations were negative. A review of the initial liver biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, showing dense portal and periportal lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltrates, as well as mild periportal fibrosis. The patient was again discharged, with slow tapering of the steroids.
On follow up a month later she was feeling well, with no ankle swelling, and with all ulcers healing satisfactorily . Six months hence she was on 4 mg methylprednisolone, 100 mg cyclosporine, and 7.5 mg methotrexate, with normal liver enzymes, and with the ulcers nearly healed . Cyclosporine was discontinued at 8 months, and a year later the patients was on 4 mg methylprednisolone and 7.5 mg methotrexate, with further improvement and complete healing of the ulcers .
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic self-perpetuating inflammatory disease occurring in all ages and races . Besides its diverse presentation and heterogeneity of the clinical features, AIH is characterized biochemically by elevated transaminases, histologically by interface hepatitis, and serologically by increased levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and autoantibodies, in the absence of viral markers . Based on the autoantibody profile, two types of AIH are recognized: type 1 (AIH-1), positive for ANA and/or anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), and occurring at any age, and type 2 (AIH-2), positive for anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibody (anti-LKM) or for anti-liver cytosol type-1 antibody (anti-LC-1), with a peak incidence in children and adolescents [–]. AIH generally responds to immunosuppressive treatment, but if left untreated usually progresses to liver failure requiring transplantation .
Extra-hepatic disorders, mainly autoimmune conditions, are common in autoimmune hepatitis and occur in all stages of liver disease, including ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, vasculitis, arthritis, thyroiditis, diabetes mellitus, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, glomerulonephritis, fibrosing alveolitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, coeliac disease, sicca syndrome, vitiligo, or lymphoproliferative syndromes [, ].
On the other hand, PG is associated with a variety of mainly autoimmune diseases in 50–70 % of cases, with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) topping the list at 10–15 % . However, there is a dearth of data on the association of PG with AIH, as a search of the English-language literature unearthed only fifteen other cases .
Our patient had AIH-1, as the majority of reported cases when the type of AIH was identified, although AIH-2 may be underestimated . Our patient’s gender, the age at diagnosis of AIH, and the interval to the subsequent onset of PG concur with those of the other reported cases, as does the development of PG during a quiescent stage of the AIH. Our patient remained in remission subsequently, even with the use of potentially hepatotoxic agents. Although a fulminant presentation of AIH has been proposed as a possible risk factor for the subsequent development of PG , our patient’s hepatitis course was not severe, emphasizing our poor understanding of the pathogenesis of PG in relation to AIH. Finally, pathergy, although rare , is a hallmark of PG, and our patient’s first appearance of an ulcer was at a previously “scratched” area, raising the distinct possibility of such event.