A 74-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension, treated with losartan 50 mg orally daily, presented to our hospital experiencing retrosternal chest pain at rest, persisting for 6 h. She has no history of diabetes or smoking and is not on any other medication. Further, she has no non-cardiac comorbidities and maintains a good functional status. Upon arrival, her vital signs were stable. A cardiovascular physical examination revealed regular heart rate and rhythm, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops, and peripheral pulses were palpable bilaterally without any oedema. The electrocardiogram confirmed a diagnosis of posteroinferior STEMI. Her laboratory results showed a haemoglobin of 13.2 g/dL (12.0–16.0 g/dL), white blood cell count of 6.2 × 109/L (4.5–11.0 × 109/L), and platelets of 240 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L). The blood urea nitrogen was 15 mg/dL (7–20 mg/dL), creatinine was 0.9 mg/dL (0.6–1.2 mg/dL), and fasting glucose was 98 mg/dL (70–100 mg/dL), and high sensitivity troponin I level was 850 pg/mL (0–50 pg/mL).
The patient underwent coronary angiography, which revealed a thrombotic sub-occlusive distal right coronary artery (RCA) stenosis ( and ). The RCA was accessed with a Judkins Right 4 (JR4), and the lesion was crossed using a standard guidewire. Thrombus aspiration using an Export catheter (Medtronic AVE, Danvers) was performed, and significant red thrombotic material was obtained. Control injection showed a significant reduction in thrombus size, TIMI 3 flow , and patient’s pain resolved with normalization of the ST elevation. In the context of a lesion with a high thrombotic burden, stemming from the thrombotic complication of an atheromatous plaque that extended distally and involved the bifurcation, and given that reperfusion was successful with no significant residual stenosis, we deferred stenting. The patient was transferred to the coronary care unit. During her treatment, the patient was administered intracoronary tirofiban with a continuous infusion over a 24 h period, accompanied by clopidogrel, acetylsalicylic acid, and enoxaparin.
On the 5th day, a diagnostic 13 N-ammonia myocardial perfusion imaging using a positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET CT) scanner was performed to assess the CFR and CFC as described by Cho et al. The CFR was found to be abnormally reduced in the basal, mid, and apical inferior segments, as well as in the apex . Accordingly, we identified a culprit vessel region based on the affected segments, which was then compared to the non-culprit vessel myocardial region.
A subsequent coronary angiogram was performed with the aid of optical coherence tomography (OCT) and at the 5th day post-MI. No significant angiographic residual stenosis was observed . The OCT imaging demonstrated a complicated fibrolipidic atheroma plaque located at the distal RCA. The remaining thrombus and atheroma plaque resulted in a coronary stenosis with a minimum luminal area of 3.15 mm² . To further assess the haemodynamics of the coronary arteries, a pressure wire was utilized to obtain the fractional flow reserve (FFR = 0.98) .
Using haemodynamic data from catheterization and PET, we calculated coronary resistance. To estimate the distal pressure value, we applied the FFR value to non-invasive pressure quantification obtained during maximal hyperaemia under dipyridamole administration (78 ∗ 0.98 = 76 mmHg). The flow used was the average of affected segments (CFR < 2) during maximal hyperaemia (1.575 mL/min/g). Therefore, the resistance offered by the coronary circulation per gram of tissue during maximal hyperaemia was 48.25 mmHg/(mL/min/g). For the calculation of coronary resistance in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCx), we did not use FFR to correct the mean pressure value during maximal hyperaemia. We obtained a coronary resistance value of 35.94 mmHg/(mL/min/g) and 30.83 mmHg/(mL/min/g), respectively.
One year later, a repeat 13 N-ammonia PET CT study was performed to re-evaluate myocardial perfusion. We obtained a mean pressure value of 60 mmHg during maximal hyperaemia. The resistance in the infarcted sector was 51.23 mmHg/(mL/min/g) compared to 32.79 mmHg/(mL/min/g) and 37.29 mmHg/(mL/min/g) in the LAD and LCx, respectively .
Comparing the magnitude of coronary resistance in the affected segments as a percentage of the average resistance in unaffected vessels (i.e. LAD and LCx), we obtained a value that was 44.5% higher in the affected segments 5 days after the infarct and 46.2% higher after one year.
Based on CFR and maximum stress flow data, we constructed a CFC diagram. This diagram displays both the affected and not affected myocardial segments by the infarct. represents the CFC in the affected (culprit) and non-affected (non-culprit) territories at 5 days and 1 year after STEMI.
The patient had an excellent clinical evolution, remaining symptom-free at 1 year follow-up.
The data supporting this case report are available as supplementary material accompanying this manuscript.