A 52-year-old man, a prisoner in a jail, was brought to our ED in winter due to deep coma and profound hypothermia. He appeared restless and drowsy in the morning of the day of presentation. At night, he went to bed after urinating and became unresponsive, so emergency services were called. The patient's medical history included hepatitis C, angina pectoris, and methamphetamine-associated psychosis. Upon arrival at the ED, his vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, 3 (E1V1M1); respiratory rate, 10 breaths/min; heart rate, 33 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 40/30 mmHg; core temperature, 27.5°C; and unmeasurable oxygen saturation. On physical examination, he was 182 cm in height and 128.2 kg in weight. Generalized, nonpitting edema was evident as well as thick lips, tongue hypertrophy, and dry skin. No goiter was palpated, and no surgical scar was seen on the neck. Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe respiratory acidosis and the laboratory data showed hyponatremia and elevated creatinine kinase levels .
Immediately after arrival, the patient developed pulseless electrical activity arrest; however, return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after one cycle of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, during which intubation was performed and 1 mg adrenaline was administered intravenously. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function with neither regional wall motion abnormality nor pericardial effusion. A J-wave was observed on electrocardiogram. Head computed tomography was unremarkable. Based on the clinical features and data including deep coma, hypocapnia, circulatory collapse, nonpitting edema, hyponatremia, and elevated creatine kinase, myxedema coma was highly suspected. On the same day, the diagnosis of myxedema was confirmed by a thyroid profile consistent with hypothyroidism (i.e., markedly elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone, low free triiodothyronine, and low free thyroxine levels; Table ). A significant increase in antithyroglobulin antibodies was identified thereafter.
After admission to the intensive care unit, the patient was referred to an endocrinologist. He then received both 300 mg hydrocortisone and 400 μg LT4 IV for 16 h following hospital arrival. With active external rewarming, his core temperature returned to 35°C at 12 h. Although the patient required mechanical ventilation and a high dose of vasopressors, ongoing intensive care as well as thyroid and steroid hormone replacement therapy gradually improved the patient's condition. His blood, sputum, and urine cultures obtained at presentation showed no growth. On day 7, LT4 treatment was converted from IV to an enteral route at an equivalent dose. The patient was successfully extubated on day 12 and discharged on day 15 without any complications .