On 20 November 2016, a febrile, 25-year-old, 35-week pregnant woman was admitted for the fourth time during the pregnancy at Vanga Hospital, Vanga, DR Congo. She had sickle-cell disease, with a history of several crises over the years and two previous spontaneous abortions (in 2012 and 2014). She obtained a bednet at her first antenatal visit, and was followed thereafter. She took 5 mg folic acid daily, and received prophylactic doses of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in weeks 16 and 26. Overall, she was hospitalised thrice for malaria during the 1st, 2nd and 3rd trimester, and once during the 2nd trimester for a sickle-cell crisis (without malaria) and was treated with blood transfusion. The first malaria hospitalisation was at 12 weeks, followed by a sickle-cell crisis at 19 weeks, then malaria again at weeks 21 and 35. She was treated with 500 mg quinine twice daily for 7 days during the first two malaria episodes. Her thick and thin blood smears were malaria-negative after each course of treatment. She reported to use her bednet regularly, and our nurse verified the presence of the net at her home during the second hospitalisation. The physical exam upon her final admission revealed fever (38.9°C), an elevated respiratory rate (27 cycles/minute), and marginal hypotension (100/60 mmHg). Her palpebral and bulbar conjunctivae were pale and anicteric, respectively. The fundal height was 36 cm, foetal echocardiograms were normal, and no uterine contractions were detected. Her blood smears were positive for P. falciparum. The patient was stable overall. We administered 80/480 mg artemether-lumefantrine (Coartem®) for 3 days with 1000 mg paracetamol start and as needed for the fever. On the 5th day of admission, she went into active labour. During labour, both twins developed acute foetal distress, indicated by tachycardia. A C-section was promptly performed to save the babies. Their new-born exam results are in .
The mother was malaria-negative 7 days after treatment, but her twins had malaria at birth. They received 20 mg quinine intravenously twice daily, and 2 mg vitamin K intramuscularly for 2 days. However, on their third day of life, both developed fever but their blood smears were malaria-negative. A bacterial infection was suspected, as prematurity and LBW are commonly associated with neonatal infection [,]. Both twins were prescribed a daily, 7-day long intravenous course of 200 mg ceftriaxone, besides quinine.
Fever in both twins quickly resolved, and twin-A totally recovered within 2 days of antibiotic treatment. Twin-B, however, who also had lymphocytosis, developed acute respiratory distress and hypoxia. Her oxygen saturation rapidly dropped from >90% to 60% in 2 hrs. Oxygen was given at 1 l/pm by nasal cannula to keep the saturation above 90%. The next day, she died of respiratory distress.