A 49-year-old man was admitted to LongHu Hospital, the First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University Medical College with a history of abdominal pain and diarrhea for 7 days. The pain mainly occurred around the umbilicus, presenting in the manner of colic pain. The patient also complained about generalized fatigue and low-grade fever.
At admission, the body temperature was 38.2 °C, with the pulse 116 beats/min and blood pressure 105/64 mmHg. Physical examination revealed that breath sounds of both lungs were thick and the abdomen was flat with tenderness around the umbilicus, without rebound tenderness or other positive sign.
In history taking, a colonoscopy which revealed ulcer in ascending colon and rectum polyp was performed in the Shantou Central Hospital before admission. Pathological examination revealed chronic inflammation of ascending colonic mucosa accompanied by erosion, and rectal tubular adenoma.
After admission, the patient experienced the pain worsening than before. The pain gradually disseminated to the whole abdomen, presenting persistent colic. Physical examination found tabular abdomen, obvious tenderness and rebound tenderness in the whole abdomen, with reduced bowel sounds. The computed tomography (CT) indicated perforation of digestive tract (most likely in the splenic curvature of the colon) and massive effusion in the abdominal cavity. Therefore, urgent laparoscopy surgery was performed. Intraoperative exploration found no obvious perforation, which could not explain the patient’s peritonitis. After cautious consideration, terminal loop ileostomy was performed in view of potential obscure colonic perforation. With thorough intraoperative exploration, it was found that the serosa of the appendix was crackable and the canal wall was stiff. An appendectomy was performed accordingly and four drainage tubes were placed after thorough abdominal irrigation. The stable postoperative vital signs and gradually reduced drainage fluid indicated smooth recovery.
At histological examination, the diffusely infiltrating lymphocytes at the appendix wall was uniform, with various sizes, coarse-grained chromatin and unclear nucleoli. Epidermophilic phenomena could be seen and lymphoma could not be ruled out . The microscopic examination found atrophy in some of the glandular duct epithelium with epithelial infiltration of neoplastic lymphocytes in the glandular duct. Tumor cells diffusely distributed throughout the whole wall of the intestine, with single morphology, granular chromatin and obvious nucleoli .
Immunohistochemistry reveals cell positivity for the following markers: CD3, CD7, CD8, CD56, TIA-1, Ki-67, CD4, while CD5, CD20, CD30, TDT, ALK and EBER are negative .
Combined with HE morphological examination and immunohistochemical results, the diagnosis was consistent with MEITL. Moreover, the tumor cells invaded the whole wall of the appendix and the surrounding mesangial adipose tissue.
Postoperative reexamination of PET-CT indicated thickening in the ileocecal region, colon and stomach, and soft tissue shadow in the lower edge of liver and the outer edge of spleen. In addition, glucose metabolism in the above lesions increased to varying degrees, which was consistent with lymphoma.
Two months after the operation, the patient was admitted to the hospital again due to “abdominal pain and anuria” with primary diagnosis of peritonitis and septic shock. Computed tomography (CT) showed intestinal obstruction with multiple free gases in the abdominal cavity. Abdominal paracentesis and catheterization were performed for drainage and irrigation. The drainage fluid was cloudy dark green with more gas visible in the drainage bags. After treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, intravenous fluid resuscitation, analgesics, antiemetics, and antithrombotic drugs, the patient showed no sign of recovery. Subsequently, due to worsening infection, the patient gradually developed thrombocytopenia, coagulation dysfunction, electrolytes imbalance and finally died from multiple organic dysfunction half a month later.