A 73-year-old male patient had a history of left upper lobectomy for carcinoma of the lung 7 years earlier. He complained of a 1-year history of intermittent atypical chest and epigastric pain for which cardiac investigations were normal and barium meal revealed only gastro-oesophageal reflux. During the current admission, he presented with a 1-day history of epigastric discomfort, nausea and vomiting. Physical examination revealed mild epigastric tenderness. Serum haemoglobin was 14.8 g/dL and total white cell count was 13.6 × 109/litre. Liver function and amylase were normal. Chest radiograph revealed an elevated left hemidiaphragm. Abdominal radiographs revealed an abnormally low position of the presumed site of the cardio-oesophageal junction with an ovoid gastric bubble located in an abnormally low position . After admission, he developed haematemesis, worsening abdominal pain and increasing tachycardia. Creatine kinase (CK) initially normal, climbed to 2049 U/litre (40–120), despite normal electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac troponins. Serum aldolase was elevated at 14.2 U/litre (2–12). Gastroscopy detected acute ischaemic ulceration of the stomach body with non-visualization of the pylorus. He was started on proton-pump inhibitors. Follow-up oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy (OGD) was performed twice over 2 weeks, only to reveal similar findings. He reported interval improvement in symptoms, although intermittent low-grade epigastric discomfort persisted. Abdominal CT scan performed 19 days after admission finally revealed mesenteroaxial volvulus of the stomach.
At laparotomy the next day, rotation of the proximal two-thirds of the stomach around an adhesion band between the diaphragm and stomach was noted . This resulted in the pylorus and gastric antrum being pulled up towards the diaphragmatic hiatus . Otherwise, the stomach was healthy. There was no hiatus hernia or diaphragmatic herniation. The adhesion band was divided and anterior gastropexy was performed . He was discharged well on the 10th postoperative day. Subsequent follow-up over a 1-year period revealed no recurrence of symptoms.