A 63-year-old female patient presented with acute bilateral upper extremity cold, pulselessness, and altered temperature sensation. The patient described that she had performed a lot of pull-up and lat pull-down exercises in the 2 months prior to the onset of the above symptoms. The physical examination showed that typically marked bilateral upper extremity ischemia manifesting with radial and ulnar artery blood flow were out of palpable and cold sensation in upper limbs. The patient was diagnosed with arterial thoracic outlet syndrome after clinical provocation tests (Wright test, Roos test, Adson test) and computed tomography (CT) results showing artery compression at the thoracic outlet. Doppler ultrasonography showed thrombosis in the right axillary artery and left axillary and subclavian artery. The patient did not have a history of atrial fibrillation, and echocardiography did not suggest intra-atrial thrombus. In addition, further laboratory test results , especially immunological tests and thrombophilia-related tests, basically excluded the possibility of upper extremity ischemia due to atherosclerotic occlusion or vasculitic disorders.
The patient received anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy after hospitalization. An 8F Rotarex (Straub, Switzerland) mechanical thrombectomy system was used to reduce the thrombus burden in the axillary artery and the subclavian artery. To decrease the risk of ectopic embolization, we adopted a strategy of slowly pushing the Rotarex catheter from proximal to distal end of the artery. Before the aspiration of thrombus in the distal artery, we performed repeated aspiration in the proximal artery aiming to reduce the amount of thrombus fully. Then, 3-, 5-, and 8-mm Mustang balloon catheters (Bosten Scientific, United States) were used to dilate the target vessels. An 8-mm Acotec drug-coated balloon catheter (Xianruida, China) was implanted subsequently to prevent neointimal hyperplasia and recurrence of thrombosis. Angiography shows that residual stenosis is less than 30% when the upper extremity is in the excessive abduction and hyperextension position . The patient received strict anticoagulation (rivaroxaban, 20 mg/day) and antiplatelet (aspirin, 100 mg/day) therapy postoperation for 6 months and achieved full recovery. During the 6-month follow-up, bilateral upper extremity arteries were patent, with no recurrence of symptoms.