A 38-year-old male with no known past medical history presented to the hospital as a transfer from an outside facility status post cardiac arrest. The patient had been experiencing chest pain for two weeks prior to the arrest. On the day of the arrest, the patient had ingested a pre-workout nutritional supplement before working out at the gym. He then developed chest pain, and emergency medical services were called. Initially he had a normal electrocardiogram (ECG) and stable vital signs. Paramedics administered one dose of nitroglycerin en route to the emergency department (ED) at the first hospital. On arrival, he went into ventricular tachycardia (VT) and became unresponsive.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was initiated, and he received one synchronized cardioversion of 150 joules (J) and a second shock of 200 J. He was intubated while CPR was in progress and had an emergent central line placed. During the initial arrest, the patient received in total 10 doses of one milligram (mg) epinephrine (1:10,000 dilution) intravenously (IV), three doses of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate 50 milliequivalent (mEq) IV, 300 mg amiodarone IV, two grams (g) of calcium gluconate IV, and 50 mg esmolol IV. During resuscitation the patient was defibrillated a total of six times, including the two initial defibrillations at 150 J and then 200 J, followed by four dual sequence defibrillations at 400 J, total for each attempt.
After 44 minutes of CPR, return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved with a sinus bradycardia rhythm. However, the patient went into a second cardiac arrest, secondary to ventricular fibrillation (VF), with an additional three rounds of CPR before ROSC was achieved. The ECG after the second ROSC showed ST-segment elevations in V4, V5, V6, I and aVL with reciprocal changes in II, III and aVF. (ECG image unavailable) The patient then had a third cardiac arrest—a VT arrest—for which he was cardioverted and received one dose of epinephrine 1 mg IV and magnesium sulfate 2 g IV before ROSC was achieved.
We were unable to learn the exact times at which the arrests occurred or the length of the time between the arrests,as these had not been documented in the chart. We know the first arrest occurred at 2 pm; however, the details of the timing of each subsequent arrest were unclear. Other medications given at the first hospital included lidocaine 100 mg IV, propranolol 5 mg IV, aspirin 300 mg per rectum, 0.9% normal saline two liters (L) IV, post-intubation sedation with fentanyl and midazolam drips (guttae [gtt]). The patient was started on amiodarone gtt, lidocaine gtt, norepinephrine gtt, and sodium bicarbonate gtt. Laboratory values obtained from the ED visit are noted in . Of note, the patient had a normal sensitive troponin of greater than 800 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (reference range: 0.0–0.08 ng/mL) consistent with myocardial infarction secondary to SCAD.
The patient was transferred to the regional trauma center for interventional cardiology for the diagnosis of acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), ES, status post cardiac arrest. Upon arrival to the higher level of care facility, a repeat ECG showed ST-segment elevation in I and aVL with depressions in III and aVF . The patient was taken to the catheterization lab for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and was diagnosed with SCAD resulting in acute total occlusion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery at its proximal segment with an extension of intramural hematoma into the long segment of the mid LAD, as well as into the proximal major diagonal branch . The patient had three overlapping drug-eluting stents placed in the proximal to mid LAD and one stent placed in the proximal major diagonal branch off the LAD.
The patient was diagnosed with severe dilated cardiomyopathy with an ejection fraction of 15% and severe hypokinesis in all mid and apical left ventricular segments and stress-induced cardiomyopathy. One week later the patient had an internal cardiac defibrillator placed and was discharged to acute rehabilitation after a 13-day hospital stay. He survived neurologically intact. After acute rehabilitation and discharge, the patient subsequently presented to the ED frequently and required hospital admissions for complications related to his SCAD. Specifically, he suffered from consequences related to heart failure exacerbations, requires supplemental oxygen at home, and takes apixaban for atrial fibrillation.