A 23-year-old Pakistani female presented with fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and dyspnoea for 5 days after her recent travel to Pakistan. The patient’s past medical history included tricuspid atresia with a normal great arterial position, possible patent ductus arteriosus, a restrictive ventricular septal defect (VSD), and a large bidirectional atrial septal defect (ASD). She reportedly underwent serial staged surgeries at ages 3 months and 3 years old. Past surgical records were unavailable. She was lost to follow-up for the past 6 years due to lack of insurance.
Upon presentation, she was febrile (102.9°F) and tachycardic (96 b.p.m.) with borderline oxygen saturation, requiring 2 L of nasal cannula therapy to maintain an oxygenation level of 94%. Physical examination revealed a 2/6 harsh systolic ejection murmur at the left second intercostal space with normal distal extremity pulses, and the patient was euvolaemic on examination. Lab tests were obtained and revealed a normal complete blood count and basic metabolic panel with the exception of mildly low sodium levels of 133 mEq/L (normal range, 135–145 mEq/L). Aspartate transaminase (AST) was 53 U/L (normal range, 8–33 U/L), and alanine transaminase (ALT) was 59 U/L (normal range, 4–36 U/L). The international normalized ratio was 1.3 (normal range, 1.1 or below), and albumin was 2.3 g/dL (normal range, 3.4–5.4 g/dL). Her blood culture grew salmonella species. The chest X-ray was unremarkable.
The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed preserved left ventricular and valvular function with no apparent vegetation. A subsequent transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was done due to bacteraemia and revealed a hypoplastic right ventricle, atretic tricuspid valve, fenestration between the right atrium (RA) and the extracardiac Fontan baffle with no clear flow or gradient , large ASD with a bidirectional shunt, and restrictive peri-membranous VSD with inlet extension. A CT chest with contrast was done for PE rule-out and showed filling defects involving the right pulmonary artery (RPA), right lateral segmental pulmonary artery, and lower lobe pulmonary arteries suggestive of thrombus , in addition to congestive hepatopathy. The anatomy of the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC) (which was connected with a Gore-Tex conduit) anastomosis to the RPA was confirmed . The patient was subsequently started on rivaroxaban and ceftriaxone. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) tests including D-dimer and ultrasound in addition to coagulopathy labs were negative.
While post-Fontan patients are at increased risk for thrombosis and PE, the transthoracic echo showed phasic, laminar flow in the SVC and Fontan baffle. Thorough review of her CT scan images with the cardiac congenital heart disease specialist suggested that filling defects were related to the contrast-blood mixing artefact that is related to the flow of contrasted and non-contrasted blood. A repeat CT angiogram with a delayed-phase contrast sequence with simultaneous upper and lower extremity contrast injections was performed and showed no evidence of PE . Anticoagulation was discontinued. Her bacteraemia was thought to be secondary to gut translocation and thus was discharged on oral levofloxacin in addition to aspirin 81 mg daily for thromboprophylaxis.
The patient followed up in the clinic and finished 4 weeks of oral antibiotics. She reported doing well and is asymptomatic.