A 94-year-old woman was receiving home visits and treatment for comorbidities including hypertension, chronic heart failure, dementia, chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, and constipation. She sustained a left femoral transverse fracture 4 years and 2 months before her presentation and has been bedridden since then. She was attended to at home by a house call physician because of dyspnea on the day of admission and was then rushed to our hospital because of fever (40 °C) with chills. According to her medical history, she had suffered a spinal compression fracture at the age of 84 years and a left femoral transverse fracture at the age of 90 years, for which she underwent artificial head replacement surgery. She was bedridden and used diapers for excretion.
The vital signs at the time of our visit were as follows: level of consciousness, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, 11 points (E3V2M6); body temperature, 40 °C; blood pressure, 97/56 mmHg; heart rate, 110 beats/min; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; and SpO2, 96% (O2 mask 6 L/min). Pupils were of the same size, normal contralateral light reflex was noted, and there was no pharyngeal redness; no tonsillar redness, swelling, or moss white color. The heart and respiratory sounds were normal. There was no skin rash or abnormal findings, such as tenderness, heat, or swelling of the joints. She tended to be somnolent and had no clear costovertebral angle tenderness.
Laboratory data at the time of her visit are presented in Table . The white blood cell (WBC) count was 17,400/μL and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 12.31 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed a leukocyte count of > 100/high power field, gram-positive cocci (3+), gram-positive rods (1+), and gram-negative rods (3+) on urine Gram staining. The Quick Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA) score was 3 points [, ] and the SOFA score was 3 points [–]. Abdominal computed tomography showed stones in both kidneys, right ureteral dilation, and a thickened bladder wall .
She was diagnosed as having sepsis associated with acute pyelonephritis. Gram-positive cocci were detected in the urine, and penicillin antimicrobials were selected to cover enterococci. Intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam administration of 3 g every 12 h was initiated on the day of admission. The fever was controlled, and inhaled oxygen 1 L/min using a nasal cannula was administered for dyspnea until hospitalization day 2. The temperature temporarily dropped to the 37 °C range but rose again to 40 °C, followed by remittent fever. The temperature resolved to 36 °C on hospitalization day 2. The level of consciousness also improved to a GCS score of 15 points (E4V5M6). The number of viable bacteria in a urine culture was 106 CFU/mL, and Pseudomonas sp. (3+), Streptococcus sp. (3+) and Corynebacterium sp. (1+) were detected. Since ampicillin/sulbactam was effective, Pseudomonas sp. was considered not to be the initiating bacterium. On hospitalization day 9, based on the antimicrobial susceptibility of other bacteria, the patient was started receiving cefazolin 1 g intravenous infusion every 12 h. On hospitalization day 10, gram-positive coccobacilli, identified as Arcanobacterium sp, were detected in two sets of blood cultures. The samples were analyzed using a Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer (MALDI-TOF MS) and were identified as T. bernardiae (identification score > 2.0). Similarly, T. bernardiae was detected in a urine culture by MALDI-TOS MS analysis. 16SrRNA gene sequencing was not performed.
As no T. bernardiae breakpoints are specified by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) or The European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST), susceptibility testing was performed based on the CLSI criteria for Corynebacterium sp., and the susceptibility was determined based on the size of the inhibition circle . Susceptible and resistant bacteria were determined based on whether the inhibition circle was > 30 mm using the disk method. Antimicrobial agents were also selected based on this method. The results are presented in Table . The bacteria were susceptible to penicillin G, amoxicillin, piperacillin, cefazolin, cefotiam, ceftriaxone, cefozopran, meropenem, imipenem/cilastatin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, piperacillin/tazobactam, amikacin, erythromycin, clarithromycin, clindamycin, minomycin, fosfomycin, and vancomycin, but were resistant to levofloxacin and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. Bacteria from urine and blood cultures were similarly susceptible. T. bernardiae was susceptible to cephazolin and, therefore, the antimicrobial therapy was continued.
Two sets of blood samples cultured on hospitalization day 11 were negative. Since oral intake was improved, she was switched to oral cephalexin 1 g/day on hospitalization day 16. On hospitalization day 22, antimicrobial therapy was terminated .
Thereafter, rehabilitation is provided for declining ADLs and she was discharged on hospitalization day 60.