A 29-year-old man underwent aortic valve replacement (ATS 29 mm, ATS Medical Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) and composite graft implantation for moderate-to-severe aortic valve regurgitation and ectasia of the ascending aorta complicating a congenital bicuspid aortic valve. Eight months later, he presented with a three month history of fatigue, chills, night sweats and myalgias. On admission, he was afebrile with no systemic manifestations of infection. No cutaneous lesions or heart murmur was noted on physical examination. Laboratory analyses revealed mild anaemia with a haemoglobin of 130 g/L (range 140–160 g/l). Platelet and peripheral leukocyte counts were normal as were liver and renal function tests. C-reactive protein level was slightly elevated at 32.4 mg/L. A new first-degree AV block was detected on ECG. Transeosophageal echocardiography demonstrated a thickened wall of the aortic root (11 mm) and a pseudoaneurysm (13 × 18 mm) of the left ventricular outflow tract, interpreted as abscess formation (Figure ) supporting a diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis with abscess formation and composite graft infection.
After collection of blood cultures, empiric intravenous therapy with vancomycin 1 g bid, amikacin 1 g qd and rifampin 600 mg bid for prosthetic valve endocarditis was started. Two days later, moxifloxacin 400 mg qd was added to cover culture-negative pathogens. One week after hospital admission serologies for Brucella spp., Chlamydia spp., Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Coxiella burnetti, Treponema pallidum and Borrelia spp. were negative as were stool- and serum-PCR for Tropheryma whipplei.
After twelve days of incubation, Propionibacterium acnes grew in all (4/4) anaerobic blood culture bottles. Despite the recommendation for abscess evacuation and debridement of the composite graft, the patient decided against a surgical procedure.
In addition to MICs (minimum inhibitory concentration), MBCs (minimal bactericidal concentration) were determined in stationary phase (Table ). Antibiotic therapy was revised with discontinuation of prior therapy and initiation of ceftriaxone 2 g qd and rifampin 600 mg bid. The patient remained afebrile, the CRP concentration returned to normal range and the first-degree AV block resolved. After 7 weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy, oral therapy was initiated with levofloxacin and rifampin and given for an additional 6 months. The patient remained asymptomatic after cessation of treatment, works full time and vigorously exercises three hours/week. Two sets of blood cultures collected six weeks after completion of treatment remained negative. Serial echocardiography has shown no disease progression (Additional file
: Figure S1), the peripheral leukocyte count and the CRP-level remained in normal range > 2 years after completion of antibiotic therapy. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) with abscess formation due to P. acnes that was successfully managed without surgical therapy.