A 69-year-old female (weight 41 kg, height 142 cm) with degenerative spinal stenosis was scheduled for transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion surgery under general anesthesia in prone position. She was not taking any medication and had no known previous cardiovascular disease, as well as no family history of sudden cardiac death. In addition, the patient had no cardiovascular symptoms, including syncope, tachycardia, or chest pain, under at least 4 METs of daily activity. However, routine preoperative resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a second-degree 2:1 AV block with a narrow QRS complex (0.102 s), heart rate (HR) of 46 bpm, normal axis, and with no ischemic change . The patient was sent to the cardiology department in our hospital for detailed cardiac examinations. Holter’s ECG recording for 24 h indicated the constant fixed 2:1 AV block. Echocardiography demonstrated a normal left ventricular systolic function with ejection of 80.2% with no segmental anomaly. At that time, exercise stress testing and cardiac artery computed tomography were not conducted due to the symptom of lumbar spinal canal stenosis and patient’s denial, respectively. After discussion with the consulting cardiologists, we concluded that she was at a low risk of progression to high grade AV block as she was asymptomatic, had a stable heart rhythm, had no established underlying cardiac disease, and a narrow QRS interval. Therefore, we decided that a temporary (or permanent) pacemaker would not be implanted before surgery in this case. In addition to the general preoperative explanation, the attending anesthesiologist informed the patient about the potential risks associated with her AV block, as well as our recommendations including relevant alternatives, obtaining the consent for the management of anesthesia.
On the day of surgery, no premedication was administered before surgery. Standard monitoring systems, including ECG, pulse-oximetry, and non-invasive blood pressure, as well as a radial arterial line, were placed in the operating room. An external transcutaneous pacemaker was ready to use in case it was needed. Just before induction of anesthesia, the patient’s ECG pattern remained similar to preoperative examinations, i.e., second-degree 2:1 AV block, at a rate of 46 bpm, and blood pressure was 121/74 mmHg, SpO2 was 97% at room air. After administration of 100% oxygen, general anesthesia was induced with 150 mg of intravenous thiamylal and 25 μg of fentanyl followed by intravenous administration of 50 mg of rocuronium to facilitate endotracheal intubation. Sevoflurane (1.0–2.0%) was used to maintain anesthesia. A few minutes after induction, the HR gradually decreased to <40 bpm. Atropine was then given intravenously as a bolus of 0.5 mg, but showed ineffective. Conversely, the 2:1 AV block progressively converted to complete AV block . During the third-degree AV block, the hemodynamic collapse did not occur, i.e., the patient’s hemodynamic status was relatively stable with a HR of 38–46 bpm and BP of up to 80/50 mmHg. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed no pathological data. Therefore, the pacing or pharmacological interventions were not considered at that time. After discussion with the surgeons and cardiologists, surgery was postponed in order to implant prophylactic transvenous pacemaker leads and to obtain an additional patient’s informed consent. Subsequently, sevoflurane inhalation was interrupted and 200 mg of sugammadex was given for reversal of neuromuscular block. During emergence from anesthesia, the third-degree AV block recovered to 2:1 AV block, similar to the preoperative pattern. The patient emerged smoothly and was extubated in the operating room. The vital signs remained stable with HR in the range of 48–61 bpm and BP in the range of systolic 100 to 138 and diastolic 68 to 80 mmHg. She was monitored in the intensive care unit for 2 days and then transferred to the normal orthopedic ward uneventfully.
The patient’s surgery was rescheduled for 1 month later. This time, implantation of a preoperative transvenous temporary pacemaker was performed for the emergent treatment of bradyarrhythmias, with the patient agreement. On arrival to the operating room, the patient’s ECG showed 2:1 AV block, same as the previous time, at a rate of 52 bpm, and blood pressure was 119/67 mmHg. A slow mask induction using sevoflurane with oxygen was started. Upon loss of consciousness during the inhalation of the initial 2% sevoflurane, HR decreased to <40 bpm just as it did during the first anesthesia. Temporary pacing was immediately initiated with 60 bpm in VVI mode (output 5 mA, sensitivity 1 mV), after that it worked well. Subsequent anesthesia and surgery were uneventful. The emergence from anesthesia was smooth, and she was extubated without difficulty in the operating room. The patient made an uncomplicated recovery from surgery with stable hemodynamics. Since the temporary pacemaker was no longer required, the catheter was removed 1 day after surgery. The patient was discharged 14 days postoperatively and has been in periodical follow-up at the department of cardiology. Approximately 6 months after surgery, the patient experienced bradycardia-related symptoms such as dizziness and weakness and underwent permanent pacemaker implantation. Her symptoms completely disappeared after the implantation.