A 51-year-old morbidly obese female presented to the emergency department of our facility after sustaining a fall from standing height while at home. She described a rotatory mechanism and an inability to bear weight on her right lower limb due to pain and instability at the knee. On examination, the invagination of the skin was noted at the medial joint line of the knee in a characteristic dimple sign. Posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses were palpable bilaterally at 2+ and 1+, respectively, with no signs of hypoperfusion to the right foot. All compartments were soft, and no pain with passive range of motion was noted at the ankle and foot. Sensory and motor innervation was intact. Ankle-brachial indices (ABIs) of bilateral lower extremities were documented at 1.10. Neurovascular status was closely monitored throughout the patient’s stay. Further, vascular studies, such as angiography, were deferred. Radiographs revealed lateral subluxation of the tibiofemoral joint with a wide medial compartment and lateral dislocation of the patella (, , ).
The emergency room physician urgently sedated the patient and the orthopedic trauma team, which was inclusive of a junior and senior resident as well as the attending surgeon, performed several attempts at reduction. The reduction technique employed consisted of traction and counter-traction with a force directed to correct the deformity. A lateral-to-medial force failed to reduce the patella. After unsuccessful closed reduction, the patient was transported to the OR for closed versus open reduction under general anesthesia. She was placed supine on the table with a bump under the right hip and with her right leg slightly flexed on a foam pad. The leg was prepped in the usual sterile fashion and before the incision was made, the hip was flexed, and the knee was flexed to 120 with internal rotation of the limb. A large valgus force was applied at the distal thigh, as described by Tateda et al. . The dislocation was reduced, and the dimple sign disappeared. The limb was brought out to extension and reduction was confirmed with fluoroscopy in the anterior-posterior and lateral views. Some lateral subluxation of the patella remained (, ). It was felt that this maneuver allowed the medial femoral condyle to be pulled back through the buttonhole in the medial retinaculum.
The right lower extremity was subsequently placed in knee spanning external fixation due to gross instability. Post-operative pulses remained at baseline 2+ DP and 1+ PT bilaterally, and the patient was admitted for regular neurovascular checks. Repeat ABIs were 0.99 right leg and 1.10 left leg. MRI of the right knee showed a fracture of the fibula with ruptures of the ACL, PCL, MCL, and partial LCL, therefore classifying this as a KD-V injury by the Schenck classification (, , , ). A medial meniscal root tear was also present. It was planned that the patient would remain non-weight-bearing and in external fixation for 6 weeks to undergo staged ligament reconstruction.