In December 2020, a 31-year-old woman was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University. She had a change in stool pattern and habit for 8 months and anal pain with bloody stools for 6 months . Anal finger examination suggested a neoplasm in the anterior rectal wall about 5 cm from the anal verge. The size of the neoplasm was about 3 × 4 cm, invading half a circle of the intestinal wall, with unclear border, hard texture, poor mobility, no pressure pain, and no fluctuating feeling. No blood stain was found in the receding finger sleeve after examination. At this moment, computed tomography (CT) scan suggested extensive inhomogeneous thickening of the rectal wall with enhancement, considering malignant neoplastic lesions, and possible rectal cancer. The lesion broke through the serosa, with the surrounding fat gap blurred and the peritoneum, omentum, multiple irregular soft tissue nodules around the superior rectal artery, and presacral fascia multiple nodular enhanced; thus, the possibility of metastasis was considered . The colonoscopy suggested a new invasion of the intestine 5–13 cm from the anal verge, with localized erosion and necrosis . Biopsy suggested rectal adenocarcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested that the lower margin of the tumor was about 7.5 cm from the anal verge, which was consistent with the manifestation of rectal cancer. According to the 2020 version of Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO) guidelines for colorectal cancer, the MR stage was T4aN2, CRM (+), and EMVI (+). Positron emission computed tomography (PET-CT) suggested extensive heterogeneous thickening of the rectal wall, with unclear demarcation from the adjacent uterine wall and increased metabolic activity, which was consistent with the manifestation of rectal cancer. Multiple lymph node shadowing on the left side of the abdominal aorta, left parietal iliac vessels, right iliac fossa, and pelvic mesentery with partially increased metabolic activity was considered as metastasis . The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 23 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was 337.1 . According to the 2020 version of CSCO guidelines for colorectal cancer, she was diagnosed with rectal adenocarcinoma T4aN2M1. There was no past medical history except that she had undergone cesarean section 10 years ago.
With no surgical opportunity, she received two cycles of chemotherapy with the XELOX regimen from December 2020 to January 2021. Then, on account of genetic testing that revealed KRAS WT, NRAS WT, BRAF V600E mutation, MSS, and high tumor mutation burden (TMB) (9.75 mutations/Mb) , the chemotherapy regimen was changed to XELOX + Bevacizumab for four cycles, and radiotherapy (CTV 50Gy/25F, PTV 50Gy/25F) was administered simultaneously from February 2021 to May 2021. In 26/04/2021, the CEA decreased to 8 and CA19-9 decreased to 125.5, suggesting that the therapy was effective. However, when reviewing the CT scan on 19/5/2021, multiple nodules occurred in rectal lesions, superior rectal artery, presacral fascia, peritoneum, and omentum, which were similar to the previous case. CEA was elevated to 10 and CA 19-9 was elevated to 166.9. This suggested progressive disease, and it was proposed to change the treatment plan.
Due to alopecia and other toxic side effects, the patient refused to use irinotecan second-line therapy. Due to the cost, she refused BRAF V600E mutation drug combined with anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody targeted therapy. A trial of immunotherapy was requested. Two cycles of immunotherapy with Camrelizumab 200 mg + XELOX + Bevacizumab were completed from May 2021 to June 2021. However, she complained of concurrent nausea, vomiting, and myelosuppression. The regimen was changed to Camrelizumab + Regorafenib from July 2021 to August 2021 for two cycles after multi-disciplinary treatment (MDT). After the treatment, the CT review scan revealed that compared to the May CT film, the rectal wall and sigmoid colon are less thickened than before, and the peritoneal nodules disappeared. However, the patient developed oral ulcers and erythema on the hands and feet after taking Regorafenib, which was considered as hand–foot syndrome grade 2. The symptoms continued to worsen after dose reduction. From September 2021 to November 2021, she discontinued Regorafenib and received Camrelizumab + Cetuximab + Vemurafenib regimen. On 29/10/2021, the CT review scan suggested slight reduction in intestinal wall thickening compared with the slight reduction in rectal mesenteric fascia and presacral fascia thickening and little change in scattered multiple nodular shadows in the superior rectal artery travel area, presacral fascia, peritoneum, and omentum compared with the previous film. PET-CT suggested that no significant increase in metabolic activity was seen after rectal cancer treatment, and metabolic activity was suppressed after rectal cancer treatment. Colonoscopy showed that after neoadjuvant treatment for rectal cancer, only a few nodules remained after significant shrinkage of the tumor. On 16/11/2021, Vemurafenib treatment was suspended due to pancreatitis, and Cetuximab + Camrelizumab treatment continued. At 2021-12-01, the patient took oral Vemurafenib for CA19-9 elevation voluntarily, further triggering severe pancreatitis, and then Immunotherapy and targeted therapy were suspended. On 04/01/2022, the regimen was adjusted to Vemurafenib combined with Cetuximab and further adjusted to Trametinib + Dabrafenib + Cetuximab in February 2022. She eventually underwent anterior rectal resection in April 2022. The postoperative pathological biopsy found no signs of malignancy and only suggested chronic inflammation of the mucosa with focal lymphoid tissue reactive hyperplasia . Meanwhile, immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed tiny amounts of CD3 (+) , scattered CD8 (+) , and minor amounts of PD-1 (+) .