An 18-year-old male patient visited our outpatient department with redness and pain in the right eye that lasted for 2 months. He was previously diagnosed with developmental delay, mental retardation, high myopia, and VKC accompanied by atopic dermatitis. He was presumptively treated for corneal ulcer under topical use of levofloxacin (Cravit®, Santen, Osaka, Japan) and 0.1% fluorometholone (FML®, Allergan, Dublin, Ireland) four times daily in a local clinic in his right eye. However, the patient developed quick progressive whitening and bulging of the cornea accompanied by symptoms of severe pain and photophobia. He was subsequently referred to our outpatient department for further evaluation.
At initial examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was hand motion at 10 cm in the right eye and 6/20 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 35 mmHg in the right eye and 17 mmHg in the left eye upon Tono-Pen measurement. He was noted to have lagophthalmos with proliferative changes in the tarsal conjunctiva. Slit-lamp examination showed pictures of acute corneal hydrops and dense corneal opacity with clustered neovascularization around the limbus, even without views of the anterior chamber in the right eye. Visualization of the anterior chamber and iris was obscured due to corneal opacity.
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings of his right eye revealed a thickened cornea with superficial bullae and high refractivity of the entire layer . The central corneal thickness, axial length, and corneal curvature in the right eye/left eye were 2070 µm/587 µm, 29.76 mm/28.53 mm, and nonavailable/60 D, respectively. The topography of the right eye was not available due to severe ectasia, and the left eye presented typical features of keratoconus—central steepening and inferior-superior dioptric asymmetry . The IOP was 35 mmHg in the right eye. The IOP elevation in the right eye might have been related to marked corneal stromal edema with anterior chamber collapse or steroid-induced glaucoma. Culture tests for bacteria, viruses, and fungi were negative. The patient was finally diagnosed with advanced keratoconus with hydrops and secondary glaucoma.
Because of mental retardation and lagophthalmos, the patient was unable to cooperate in wearing a rigid contact lens. In addition, it was challenging to inject intracameral gas due to limbus-to-limbus total opacity of the cornea (the details of the iris and pupil in the anterior chamber were totally obscured). As for corneal ectasia, the corneal curvature was too severe to receive collagen cross-linking. Three days after the initial evaluation at our hospital, there was rapid progression of corneal ectasia with total opacification . Two weeks later, 360-degree peripheral corneal neovascularization was noted with poor IOP control. The patient then received preoperative subconjunctival injection of bevacizumab (Avastin®, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, US) for severe peripheral corneal neovascularization and therapeutic PK with a donor diameter of 9.5 mm with combination of interrupted and unique intrastromal running suturing technique . The technique was performed first with eight radial interrupted sutures, followed by intrastromal sutures. The needle’s entry and exit points were the same to ensure that the intrastromal sutures passed over the intrastromal and deeper layers rather than the epithelial layer. Finally, the graft-host junction was strengthened using eight additional interrupted sutures .
Histopathological examination of the recipient cornea under light microscopy showed focal thickening with detachment of the Bowman’s layer and focal vascularization of the stroma . Collagen fibril disarray over Bowman’s layer and focal vascularization of the stroma were observed by transmission electron microscopy .
Postoperatively, the patient presented with a persistent paracentral shield ulcer over the corneal graft . The epithelial defect persisted for weeks due to refractory VKC and mild trichiasis despite aggressive lubrication. After blepharoplasty and application of 0.1% tacrolimus dermatological ointment (Protopic®, Astellas Pharma, Tokyo, Japan) on the eyelid, the shield-shaped epithelial defect healed thereafter. The postoperative IOP in the right eye was within the normal range. Eye drops of 0.1% cyclosporine (Ikervis®, Santen, Osaka, Japan) QID, 0.5% loteprednol (Lotemax®, Bausch & Lomb, Quebec, Canada) QID, levofloxacin (Cravit®) QID, and artificial tears (Artelac®, Bausch & Lomb, Quebec, Canada; Duratears®, Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, USA) with 0.1% tacrolimus ointment (Protopic®) BID over the eyelid were offered initially and tapered gradually within 18 months after surgery. The patient and his family were continuously educated on how to avoid eye rubbing. Two years after corneal transplantation, the patient’s best-corrected visual acuity improved from hand motion at 10 cm to 6/20 in the right eye, and the graft remained clear with no apparent epithelial defect (endothelial cell count, 1416; central corneal thickness, 556 μm) .