A 35-year-old man with history of cardiac surgery during childhood for which no record was available, was referred to our institute for cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging after the echocardiographic evaluation that was also done outside of our hospital and no images were available for the review.
CMR was done on 1.5 Tesla, Siemens Avanto scanner. There were prominent muscle bundles in the left ventricle, dividing the left ventricle into two chambers (double-chambered left ventricle) . Left ventricular volumes were in the upper range of normal with normal left ventricular systolic function/ejection fraction (LVEF 59%). Overall left ventricular mass was normal. Aortic valve was tri-commissural with moderate aortic regurgitation with regurgitation fraction of 34%. A small thin sub-aortic membrane was also visualized. Right ventricular volumes were normal with normal right ventricular systolic function. There was no evidence of myocardial enhancement in the left or right ventricle, on late gadolinium images. . Patient was managed conservatively with a plan for follow-up imaging, as he was asymptomatic with moderate aortic regurgitation and no clinical signs of cardiac decompensation or heart failure. Follow-up imaging was advised to look for the severity of aortic regurgitation, left ventricular volumes and function, but the patient did not come back on follow-up, and we were unable to record his clinical progress on the conservative management.
A 26 days old baby girl with the diagnosis of large left ventricular out-pouching/aneurysm (14 × 10 mm) on fetal echocardiography that was done outside of our institute and no record of images were available except a written report with suspicion of DCLV versus true aneurysm, was referred to us for CMR.
Postal natal echocardiography showed large out-pouching, most probably aneurysm versus diverticulum of left ventricular posterior wall with wide open connection with left ventricle and some dyskinetic contractility. The infant was electively intubated for CMR, which was done on 1.5 Tesla, Siemens Avanto scanner. CMR showed a large out-pouching of left ventricle from basal lateral wall, with a broad base and measuring up to 27 mm in the long axis along lateral wall and 14 mm in the short axis. It was giving the appearance of double-chambered left ventricle; with contracting but hypokinetic walls . Its walls were of normal thickness except in certain regions and was composed of all the three layers. Overall left ventricular systolic function was moderately reduced (LVEF 33%). There was no evidence of thrombus on early gadolinium images. No myocardial enhancement was observed on late gadolinium images. . This patient was likewise lost to follow-up.
Both our patients did not undergo transesophageal echocardiographic assessment and/or cardiac catheterization.