A 17-year-old Chinese adolescent female presented with two sudden red raised rashes on her left calf in December 2021 without pain, itching, or ulceration, which gradually crusted over and exfoliated to form hyperpigmented plaques. Numbness, pain, and weakness in both hands occurred in February 2022. And due to worsening symptoms, she presented to a local hospital neurology department in March 2022. A peripheral blood test showed a series of positive auto-antibodies, including anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1:80, anti-RNP, anti-Sulfatide, and anti-GM3 antibody IgG. Electromyography showed partial peripheral nervous system damage in both upper extremities. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both hands demonstrated edema of interosseous muscles, pinky-to-metacarpal muscles, and pinky flexors in both hands. In addition, abnormalities in the cerebrospinal fluid examination, as well as MRI and angiography of her head, did not reveal any abnormalities. She was diagnosed with connective tissue disease and secondary peripheral neuropathy. After methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg/day × 3 days), the feeling of weakness in both hands gradually improved, but the numbness was the same as before. At the end of March 2022, she grew three red rashes on her left leg, which showed the same characteristics as those previously occurred in the left calf. The patient had a left-sided facial rash with ulceration in November 2013 when she was eight. Skin biopsy revealed a facial lymphocytic infiltrate, and serum auto-antibodies revealed positive anti-RNP (+++); the patient was subsequently diagnosed with granuloma annulare. She was treated with hydroxychloroquine and thalidomide for 4 months, and the rash subsided, with several follow-up tests turning antibody negative and no recurrence for 3 years. There was no history of mosquito bites or drug abuse.
For treatment, she was admitted to the department of Immunology and Rheumatology of our hospital in May 2022. Physical examination showed a temperature of 36.6 °C, pulse rate of 104 bpm, respiratory rate of 20 bpm, and blood pressure of 104/73 mmHg. The patient had atrophy of both hands , grade 4 distal muscle strength of both upper limbs, and reduced superficial sensation in the dorsum of the hands. Two hyperpigmented plaques of approximately 1 × 2 cm in size and three crusted rashes of about 1 × 1.5 cm in length, all hard in texture, were visible on her left lower leg . Superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, liver, and spleen were not palpated.
Laboratory investigations on this admission showed a complete blood count suggesting leukocyte count 2.63 × 109/L (39.9% neutrophils), hemoglobin 109 g/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 267.4 U/L, EBV-DNA 1160copies/ml. Auto-antibodies such as extractable nuclear antigen, ANA, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-Sulfatide antibody IgG, and anti-GM3 antibody IgG were negative. HIV, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis infection were excluded, and no abnormal tumor markers were observed. Bone marrow smear and biopsy, T cell receptor (TCR) γ gene rearrangement, and Ig gene rearrangement did not reveal any abnormalities. Nasopharyngoscopy showed residual adenoids and chronic pharyngitis. Electromyography showed symmetrical and multiple chronic electrophysiological damages of peripheral neurogenic origin in the upper and lower extremities; proximal nerve root demyelination damage, distal peripheral nerve fiber demyelination, and mixed axonal damage was apparent; Bilateral short thumb extensors and little finger extensors were found to have significant denervation potential, suggesting active damage. Positron emission tomography (PET-CT) scan showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism in the left forearm, both lower extremities, and subcutaneously in the feet, at the medial-posterior muscle group in the right knee, and the left posterior muscle group, bilateral groin, and spleen, with the highest located at the right knee muscle group and a SUVmax of 8.6 .
On the first day after admission, the patient presented with a new subcutaneous nodule on each upper extremity and left lower extremity, each about 1 × 1 cm in size, with a hard texture and clear borders. A skin biopsy was subsequently scheduled. Partial excisional biopsy of the left arm nodes showed focal or sheet-like infiltration of heterogeneous lymphocytes in the dermis and subcutaneous adipose tissue, with medium-sized cells, round or irregular nuclei, moderate cytoplasm, visible nuclear fragmentation, and nuclear fission. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positivity staining for CD3, CD7, CD56 and TiA-1, weak positive for CD4, CD8, CD30 (3%+),and negative for CD20, ALKp80. The positive rate of the Ki-67 hot spot region in the cells was 50%. Monoclonal rearrangement of T lymphocyte genes was negative. However, the fever began appearing on the 6th day after admission, with the highest body temperature of 40 degrees Celsius. Lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, and triglycerides increased progressively; and leukocytes, hemoglobin, platelets, and fibrinogen showed a downward trend; soluble CD25 (SIL-2R) value of 2263 U/ml (greater than three times the upper limit of normal) and NK cell activity of 3.04%, all suggesting the occurrence of hemophagocytic syndrome. Another skin biopsy was scheduled. A whole excisional biopsy was taken of the neoplastic node in the right arm. The cell morphology was similar to that of the left arm, and cancer cells were found to invade nerves and blood vessels . IHC of the right arm node revealed positive staining for CD3, CD7, CD56, and TiA-1, weakly positive for CD4, and negative for CD5, CD8, and CD20. CD30 hot spot showed a 10% positive rate, and the Ki-67 positive rate was 30% . Both biopsies were positive for EBV-encoded small nuclear RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization and negative for monoclonal rearrangement of T lymphocyte genes. The immunophenotypes were all consistent with the diagnosis of ENKTCL-NT.
The patient was finally diagnosed with ENKTCL-NT (stage IV), secondary peripheral neuropathy, and hemophagocytic syndrome. Due to the rapid deterioration of the patient’s condition and the late appearance of the second pathological biopsy results, chemotherapy was first administered for the hemophagocytic syndrome using HLH-94 protocol in combination with the ruxolitinib, followed by the P-Gemox regimen for the primary disease. Her temperature dropped to normal. A follow-up PET-CT at the end of the 4th chemotherapy cycle showed a marked decrease in radioactive uptake in the left forearm, both lower limbs, and both feet subcutaneously (current SUVmax 1.27, previous SUVmax 6.81), bilateral groin (current SUVmax 1.06, previous SUVmax 3.84), and spleen (current SUVmax 2.40, previous SUVmax 3.9) compared to the previous, with Deauville score 1–2. The previously increased FDG metabolism in the right posterior infrapatellar muscle group and left posterior muscle group nodes was not shown, which indicated partial remission. Until October 2022, the patient had completed five cycles of P-Gemox chemotherapy. The generalized rash had subsided mainly, with only a rash of approximately 0.4 × 1.2 cm on the left calf visible on the exterior. For financial reasons, the patient has not yet been considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.