A 52-year-old right-handed male was referred to our movement disorders clinic by a general neurologist for evaluation of “hand dystonia.” He reported uncomfortable, mildly painful “spasms” of the right hand for approximately 3.5 months. Although initially triggered by workplace activities with the right hand, the spasms intermittently occurred at rest within weeks of onset. At the time of neurological presentation, the spasms were present during most of the waking day and associated with dimpling or creasing of the right hypothenar eminence ( and ). The patient described almost daily prolonged and repetitive use of pipettes during his work in a molecular biology laboratory. Precise pipetting of microliter and submicroliter volumes required substantial activation of the pinky finger for stabilization of the pipettor body or handle . In addition, he routinely used a computer mouse without a mouse pad. He had worn down the countertop on the computer table where the mouse was stationed . His almost daily use of pipettors and computer mice had been ongoing for over 15 years. Approximately four to five years prior to neurological presentation, he experienced a brief period with similar discomfort in his right hand that resolved on its own accord.
The patient reported subjective numbness in his small finger and the ulnar half of his ring finger. However, sensory examination was normal. EMG and nerve conduction studies of the upper extremities were also normal. The right median motor showed a normal distal latency of 3.1 ms, normal amplitude of 14.6 mV, and normal conduction velocity of 62.6 m/s. The right ulnar motor showed a normal distal latency of 2.7 ms, normal amplitude of 13.7 mV, and normal conduction velocity of 51.2 m/s. The right median showed a normal F wave latency of 26.4 ms, and right ulnar showed a normal F wave latency of 27.8 ms. Sensory nerve conduction examination was normal with a right median peak latency of 2.6 ms and amplitude of 60.5 μV; right ulnar peak latency of 2.3 ms and amplitude of 22.7 μV; and right radial peak latency of 2.3 ms and amplitude of 35.8 μV. Needle EMG of the right first dorsal interosseous, flexor carpi radialis, brachioradialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, biceps, deltoid, abductor digiti minimi, flexor digiti minimi brevis, and abductor pollicis brevis was within normal limits. Needle EMG of the palmaris brevis showed prolonged bursts of spontaneous motor unit activity of fluctuating amplitude .
EMG guidance (30-gauge needle) was used for injection of 12.5 units of onabotulinumtoxinA diluted in a total volume of 0.25 cc sterile preservative free saline through three cutaneous entry sites along the proximal to distal extent of the right palmaris brevis muscle. The palmaris brevis muscle was injected at locations of maximal EMG activity which required horizontal movement of the injection needle within the subdermal space. The patient tolerated the injections without complication. He was told to purchase a larger ergonomic mouse, and mouse pad with wrist cushion. He was also instructed to wear large disposable gloves over a padded fingerless glove when pipetting and increase use of the left hand when pipetting and performing other routine laboratory duties such as opening bottles with screw tops. He reported approximately 75% improvement at 6-week follow-up. There was continued improvement over the subsequent 6 months with no need for repeat injections of botulinum toxin. His condition continued to improve over the course of the subsequent year and largely resolved within 2 years of onset.