A 70-year-old male patient, who was diagnosed with gastric cancer 4 d ago, was admitted to the hospital with a chief complaint of epigastric pain for 3 mo.
The patient presented with abdominal pain, requiring gastroscopy. The pathology revealed adenocarcinoma in the gastric antrum, prompting the patient to seek surgical intervention at the hospital.
The patient underwent urolithotomy > 60 years ago.
He has no family history of related diseases or any other hereditary conditions.
The abdomen appeared flat without tenderness, rebound pain, or muscle tension. The tympanic sound was heard on percussion, and there were no signs of displaced fluid or turbidity. Bowel sounds were observed at a rate of 3-5 beats per minute.
All laboratory tests were within normal limits.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed gastric antrum cancer and perigastric lymph node metastasis. As shown in Figure , the distal colon at the hepatic flexure was accompanied by the ascending colon in the right iliac fossa and continued as the sigmoid colon. The jejuno-ileum was located mainly on the left side of the abdomen. The superior mesenteric artery originated from the abdominal aorta at the level of the first lumbar vertebra , supplying most of the jejunoileum on the left and the terminal ileum, the ascending colon, and part of the descending colon on the right. The abdominal aorta branched into the inferior mesenteric artery inferiorly to the right at the level of the second lumbar vertebra to supply a portion of the descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and a portion of the rectum .
Regarding the venous course, the splenic vein joined the superior mesenteric vein in the portal vein from the left at the level of the first lumbar vertebra . The inferior mesenteric vein joined the superior mesenteric vein on the right side at the level of the third and fourth lumbar vertebrae . As a result of mesenteric malrotation, the position of superior and inferior mesenteric vessels was altered .