A 66-year-old female patient with no previous cardiac history was admitted in a local hospital in December 2021 due to significant weight loss and symptoms of heart failure (exertional dyspnoea, fatigue, lower extremity oedema). Patient's initial weight of 79 kg was gradually reduced to 49 kg during past 3 years, with particular acceleration of weight loss in the past 3 months before admission. Her past medical history included bronchial asthma, chronic pansinusitis, and hypothyroidism. Due to significant cachexia, patient underwent comprehensive cancer screening—with all negative results including Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scan. At the same time, echocardiographic examination revealed a large right ventricular formation filling up to two-thirds of the right ventricle, resembling a tumourous mass. Patient was thus referred to our medical centre in order to complete the diagnostic process of presumed malignant cardiac tumour as an underlying cause of cachexia.
At admission to general cardiology department in our medical centre in January 2022, asthenic patient with body mass index 18 kg/m2 presented with holosystolic apical murmur and right-sided pleural effusion. Lower extremity oedemas had already been removed after diuretic treatment. Electrocardiogram (ECG) at admission showed signs of subendocardial injury in anterolateral leads .
The initial laboratory findings were as follows: the white blood cell count was within normal limits (5.02 × 109/L, normal range 4.0–10.0 × 109/L), with boundary elevation of peripheral eosinophilia (absolute eosinophil count 0.67 × 109/L, normal range 0.0–0.5 × 109/L, relative eosinophil count 13.3%, normal range 0.0–5.0%), C-reactive protein level was increased to 51.3 mg/L (normal range 1.0–5.0), level of N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide was elevated to 4400 ng/L (normal range 0.0–125.0), troponin level was mildly increased (high sensitive troponin T 125 ng/L, normal range 0.0–14.0), and D-dimer was elevated to 4.03 mg/L (normal range 0.0–0.55).
Echocardiography showed dilated right ventricle with a large tumourous mass, dilated right atrium, normal left chamber size with preserved systolic function and with significantly impaired diastolic function, and moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. Also, moderate pericardial effusion was present predominately around inferolateral left ventricular wall, with maximal diastolic dimension 12 mm, with no signs of cardiac tamponade (; see , ).
Targeted biopsy of the intracardiac mass was performed. The procedure was carried out in analgosedation with transoesophageal echocardiography guidance. Eight samples were obtained from the apical third of the right ventricle. However, the procedure was complicated by right ventricular perforation causing haemopericardium and cardiac tamponade. Immediate pericardiocentesis was conducted in the cath-lab, and haemopericardium was successfully removed.
Subsequently, patient was admitted to our department of acute cardiology. On follow-up transthoracic echocardiography, besides large right ventricle mass, an echodense mass was observed in the left ventricular apex (size 12 × 13 mm) (; see , ). Presence of formations in both ventricular apexes, together with laboratory findings of eosinophilia and pathological ECG, led us to presumption of non-malignant disease aetiology, specifically eosinophilic endomyocarditis.
After detailed search of patient's past pneumology reports, record of peripheral hypereosinophilia was found, with relative eosinophil count 51% 6 months before admission. At that time, temporary administration of systemic corticosteroid treatment (7 days of prednisone 20 mg with subsequent gradual removal) had been accompanied by transient decrease in relative eosinophil count to 33%. Also, elevated levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE) and rheumatoid factor (RF) had been identified (IgE 831 UI/mL, normal range 0–100; RF 60.3 IU/mL, normal range 0–15.9; Anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies level had not been examined). Thus, hypereosinophilia, bronchial asthma, and chronic pansinusitis supported the presumption of eosinophilic endomyocarditis as a cause of biventricular intracardiac thrombosis. Consequently, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed and showed late gadolinium enhancement with diffuse subendocardial distribution in apical and mid-ventricular segments of both ventricles and in both papillary muscles . Further, presence of several intracardiac thrombi was detected: besides large thrombus obliterating apex and mid-ventricular part of the right ventricle, smaller thrombi were described in left ventricular apex (9 × 13 mm), right atrium (5 × 5 mm), and right atrial auricle (8 × 6 mm) . Cardiac magnetic resonance thus confirmed signs of eosinophilic endomyocarditis.
Histological results from endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) definitely ruled out initially presumed diagnosis of cardiac tumour, since no signs of malignant proliferation were detected. Biopsy showed predominantly parts of fibrin clot and fragments of myocardial and vessel tissue; samples were not sufficient for further examination. Histological evaluation of evacuated haemopericardium revealed high concentration of eosinophils (up to 50 eosinophils per one high-power field) without cytogenetic or molecular abnormalities. Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular bone marrow with adequate trilineage haematopoiesis, with marked eosinophilia in maturated stages of granulopoiesis. Genetic testing showed no signs of specific gene aberrations. These results excluded clonal causes of hypereosinophilia. At the same time, drugs, allergies, and parasite infections were excluded as secondary causes of hypereosinophilia, suggesting idiopathic HES.
Anticoagulant and corticosteroid treatment was initiated, alongside with nutrition support and heart failure treatment. Given the patient's cachexia, fragility, and poor overall status, surgical treatment or heart transplant was not considered. Despite the treatment, patient continued to deteriorate and died due to progressive heart failure 3 months later. Autopsy was not performed.