A 32-year-old man initially presented with a mild sensory-motor paralysis of the right side. Extensive neurological work-up, including MRI, electrophysiology (somatosensory and motor potentials, electroencephalography), ultrasound of cerebral arteries, and laboratory findings including examination of cerebrospinal fluid were normal. Transesophageal echocardiography had shown mild contrast medium flow from the right to the left atrium under Valsalva maneuver without demonstration of an atrial septal aneurysm (due to strong retching further description was not possible). At discharge 11 days later, a very mild paresis of the right arm was described. The patient was discharged with a suspected brainstem ischemia and a suspected open foramen ovale. He was started on Aspirin 100 mg/day.
Three months later he returned to the emergency department with transiently worsened right-sided sensory-motor hemiparesis and in addition transient speech problems (mainly consisting of difficulties of his wife understanding him, which he was not able to describe in more detail retrospectively). The transient speech problems could not be categorized definitely, but seemed more likely of a dysphonic/dysarthric nature. Though it is of importance to distinguish between dysphasia and dysarthria, this can be a difficult and sometimes impossible task in transient symptoms . The neurological examination at admission was unremarkable except for minor hypoesthesia of the right arm. No other neurological signs were revealed, and there was no evidence for internal inconsistency of the neurological examination, i.e. positive neurological signs. Again, additional laboratory work-up including MR-angiography gave no hints for the etiology. At this second admission, the psychosomatic liaison service was contacted very early on by the neurology team with the question of a possible conversion disorder. Furthermore, the patient was distressed by the re-occurrence of his neurological deficits. Therefore, the task of the psychosomatic physician was to support him during his hospital stay, in addition to evaluating diagnostic issues.
The patient was married, had two children and was working fulltime as a shift leader in a cement plant. His biography showed several strains, e.g. an alcohol dependent father. Due to strong conflicts with his family of origin he had moved to an aunt at age 16. His life had been devoted to an excessive amount of work. Prior to his first admission, the work situation had been heavily strained due to illnesses of co-workers. In talking to the psychosomatic physician, he pondered that all his life he has had great difficulties in rejecting requests of others. His psychosocial activities and his family life however seemed rather intact, and he had not attended to psychological treatment before. He was very irritated by his neurological symptoms, in particular as there had not been a definite cause during his first stay. Our board-certified psychosomatic consultant (KB) considered the work-related strains prior to the first admission as unspecific. Further she concluded that there was not sufficient evidence of conflict or stress in temporal association with the current neurologic symptomatology at the second admission - although there were obvious strains in his earlier biography. Sticking to ICD-10 and its diagnostic criteria, she abstained from supporting the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder. Furthermore, there was no associated affective co-morbidity justifying an ICD-diagnosis (e.g. adjustment disorder). In effect, no further psychotherapeutic intervention after the hospital stay was recommended.
The case was discussed with the neurology team extensively and further evaluation followed immediately. As a next step, ultrasound of the right leg was carried out due to a minor ache in his right calf ad admission – even though D-dimers had been negative initially. This proved a deep vein thrombosis above knee (into the femoral vein), which had probably resulted in a paradoxical embolism. The patient was discharged on oral anticoagulation.