A 34-year-old Caucasian Albanian woman was admitted during the 26th week of her second pregnancy for severe anemia and diffuse abdominal pain, and with the suspicion of uterine rupture. She had given birth 14 years previously to a healthy child by caesarean section. Her medical history included no other episodes of surgery and no internal disease. This second pregnancy was considered normal by the family obstetrician; two months before her urgent admission, our patient had undergone routine sonography, which had given normal results.
Upon admission, our patient had profound anemia with a red blood cell count of 1.71 × 106/mL (normal 4.-6.2 × 106/mL) and hemoglobin of 5.6 g/dL (normal 11.5-16.5 g/dL). No fetal sounds could be heard, and the overall state of our patient was deeply compromised because of the acute and painful abdominal process. Following resuscitation she was sent for emergency surgery
A midline laparotomy was urgently performed, and approximately 1800 mL of intra-abdominal blood was drained. A rupture was detected at the left superior angle of the uterus; the fetus was dead, and was still implanted inside the uterine cavity. The fetus was removed through the wide rupture line . Intra-operatively, it was considered impossible to save the uterus, especially in terms of another possible pregnancy. Because the quantity of intra-abdominal blood removed was considerable and the uterine rupture was considered sufficiently large to prevent a uterus-saving procedure, the surgeon opted not to use an arterial ligature.
The uterine tissue was sent for pathologic evaluation. Trophoblastic islands were found inside the myometrium . Fresh red blood cells were found in the rupture line . Progressive and aggressive infiltrates of polymorphonuclear lymphocytes were also found inside the uterine wall .
Our patient received a transfusion of four units of fresh whole blood (group A, Rh positive), along with saline perfusions and antibiotics. Two weeks after the hysterectomy, her red blood cell count was 3.6 × 106/ml, and the hemoglobin level 11.2 g/dl. The sutures were removed on the eighth postoperative day, and she was discharged the next day in a stable situation.