A 70-year-old man was diagnosed with type 0–IIc gastric cancer by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and referred to our hospital for further examination. The type 0–IIc lesion was 30 × 15 mm in size and located at the anterior wall near the greater curvature of the gastric corpus. In addition to gastric cancer, a submucosal tumor (SMT) 7 mm in diameter was revealed at the greater curvature of the angulus , which was also detected by contrast-enhanced computed tomography(CT) . Laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with regional lymph node dissection was performed for both the gastric cancer and the SMT. The operation time was 299 min and the blood loss was 75 ml. The resected SMT lesion was 7 × 5 mm in size .
Pathology revealed the type 0–IIc lesion to be poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet-ring cells . The cancer cells were localized in the mucosal layer, and no lymph node metastasis was identified. The SMT at the posterior wall was covered by normal gastric mucosa, but the submucosal layer was expanded by a dense and diffuse infiltrate of plasma cells and lymphocytes associated with lymphoid follicles, storiform fibrosis and obliterative phlebitis . The interstitium of the muscularis propria and the bottom of the mucosa also showed plasma cell and lymphocyte infiltrates . Immunostaining for IgG and IgG4 showed abundant IgG-positive plasma cells, of which over 80% were IgG4-positive. The number of IgG4-positive cells exceeded 200 per high-power field . These findings were consistent with the histological criteria for IgG4-RD. In addition to plasma cells, an elevated number of eosinophils, immunoglobulin E (IgE)-positive mast cells, and forkhead box P3 (FOXP3)-positive regulatory T-lymphocytes showed infiltration (data not shown).
Further histological examination of the resected tissue revealed several IgG4-related inflammatory foci discontinuously distributed throughout the stomach. They were predominantly located in the submucosa and muscularis propria, occasionally causing wall thickening. Regional lymph nodes also contained fibrotic foci with lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, occasionally with obliterative phlebitis.
In addition to obliterative phlebitis, small-sized arteries were thickened and narrowed with marked intimal and medial inflammation by lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate . The arterial endothelium and smooth muscle appeared to be damaged, but without evidence of neutrophil infiltration, fibrinoid necrosis, or thrombus. Numerous IgG4-positive plasma cells were identified within the intima and media of inflamed arteries . Multinucleated giant cells were also observed .
A postoperative laboratory test revealed elevation of the serum IgG4 level (1,178 mg/dl), with no increase in myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies (MPO-ANCA), proteinase 3(PR3)-ANCA, or interleukin 6 (IL-6). There was no clinical evidence of systemic vasculitis.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patients were discharged on the 15th postoperative day. The patient has been followed for 2 years after surgery without recurrence of cancer, during which time only skin lesions of IgG4-RD have appeared. Cutaneous IgG4-related lesions have shown repeated exacerbations and remissions despite corticosteroid treatment.