A 38-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital on June 26, 2018 for breathing difficulty. The patient had a five-year history of epilepsy and usually took oxcarbazepine and topiramate to control symptoms. One day prior, the patient was found unconscious with his face immersed in a small pond and with limb convulsions. Ten minutes later, he was rescued and sent to a basic hospital. The patient’s urine volume was decreased, and no improvement was found in dyspnoea after orotracheal intubation. Then, he was sent to our hospital for further treatment. On physical examination at admission, the pulse was 100 beats per minute, the blood pressure was 142/70 mmHg, the temperature was 36.7 °C, and the oxygen saturation was 98% with mechanical ventilation. Laboratory evaluation showed a leucocyte count of 23.22 × 109/L (reference range: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) with 88.4% neutrophils (reference range: 45–70%), a C-reactive protein level of 313.04 mg/L (reference range: 0–10 mg/L), and a negative result of an HIV serology test. The PaO2/FiO2 was 259.1 mmHg. A chest radiograph showed diffuse ground-glass opacity in both lungs . The head CT showed bilateral frontotemporal lobe softening and hydrocephalus, which were sequelae of craniocerebral trauma surgery 5 years prior. The patient was diagnosed with severe pneumonia complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), epilepsy, and acute kidney injury (AKI). Bronchoalveolar lavage and sputum aspiration were performed immediately at the bedside, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was sent for culture and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). A blood culture and G test for beta-D-glucan were performed at the same time. The patient received continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) and was treated with imipenem intravenously as empirical anti-infection therapy.
On June 30, 2018, drug-susceptible Klebsiella pneumoniae and Candida glabrata were isolated in the BALF. The value of the G test was less than 10 pg/ml. The results of BALF NGS were returned on July 1, 2018 and showed the presence of Streptococcus sp., Enterobacter sp. and Klebsiella sp., but no fungi or viruses were found. On July 2, 2018, the blood culture of two bottles from different limbs all showed positive growth of “gram-positive cocci”. Based on the results of NGS, BALF culture, and blood culture, the patient’s treatment was changed to combination therapy with cefoperazone sulbactam, linezolid and voriconazole. After 10 days of triple antibiotic combination therapy, the patient’s general condition improved. His blood and sputum culture were negative, renal function recovered, and severe pneumonia improved. Afterwards, the patient was discharged from the hospital and returned to a local hospital for continuing treatment on July 12, 2018. The antimicrobial regimen history, symptoms and laboratory data are shown in Fig. .
The strain isolated from the patient’s blood showed yellow-pigmented, non-photochromogenic colonies, which took 5 days to grow on Columbia blood agar. The strain was gram-staining variable and acid-fast staining positive, as shown in Fig. . The 16S rDNA was amplified and identified by sequencing. The nucleotide sequences were analysed with the National Center for Biotechnology Information BLAST . The almost full-length (1474-bp) 16S rDNA gene sequence of the bloodstream isolate shared 100% identity with that of M. monacense strain B9–21-178 . Susceptibility testing was performed using the broth microdilution method as recommended , showing the following minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs, g/ml): linezolid 2, ciprofloxacin 0.25, cefoxitin 8, imipenem 2, clarithromycin 2, tobramycin 4, amikacin 1 and moxifloxacin 0.25. All of the above MICs were interpreted as “susceptible” based on the breakpoints listed in the CLSI Document M24-2A . The patient was informed of the diagnosis of M. monacense bloodstream infection by phone, and he did not return for further consultation. During the one-year follow-up time, the patient did not relapse.