A 56-year-old woman with a 2-month history of nausea and progressive gait disturbance visited our department after experiencing gradual worsening of swallowing difficulty over a 2-week period. On admission, she complained of severe nausea and truncal ataxia, and she had left glossopharyngeal and vagal nerve palsies. MRI of the brain showed hypointensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and hyperintensity on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) of the medulla oblongata and cerebellar peduncle. Gadolinium (Gd) administration showed moderate enhancement mainly within the medulla oblongata . At first glance, the images were considered compatible with an infiltrative malignant glioma, and the issue was the early introduction of chemoradiotherapy treatment. However, a more careful analysis using MRI emphasized that there were abnormal dilated veins clearly demonstrated around the brain stem and in front of the cervical spinal cord [ and ], and a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2-WI) in the medulla, with an abnormal signal flow void extending to the cervical portion of the spinal cord . This characteristic radiological finding suggested the possibility of a vascular malformation due to a DAVF, and cerebral angiography was thus performed. Cerebral angiography and three-dimensional contrast-enhanced computed tomography images showed a left-sided spinal DAVF at the location of the C4/C5 vertebral foramen with arterial supply through the C5 radicular artery arising from the left vertebral artery. The draining vein was single, and it drained into the cortical vein localized retrograde along the left aspect of the medulla oblongata through spinal perimedullary veins . Thus, the involvement of the brain stem and cerebellar peduncle was due to venous congestive injury. Therefore, the surgical disconnection of the spinal DAVF by a posterior approach was performed . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and the lower cranial nerve palsy and nausea were markedly improved over a few days after the treatment, and 3 weeks later, she returned to her normal lifestyle with slight truncal ataxia. Cerebral angiography 2 weeks after surgery showed complete disappearance of the spinal DAVF [ and ], resulting in marked reductions of the hyperintense sign of the medulla oblongata on FLAIR and disappearance of the atypical perimedullary vein on Gd- enhanced T1-WI on MRI [ and ].
The clinical study of the above-mentioned case report was approved by the Ethics Committee for Clinical Research of Ehime University Hospital, and informed consent was obtained from the patient before initiating the study.