A 37-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for the evaluation of pancytopenia, hypocomplementemia, positivity of anti-nuclear antibody and proteinuria.
Physical examination on admission revealed height of 155 cm, body weight of 48.0 kg, body temperature of 39.1 ºC, pulse rate of 100 beats/min and blood pressure of 161/112 mmHg. There was no previous history of herpes zoster and were no symptoms including muscle weakness, difficulty of swallowing, shortness of breath, thickening of skin, and dry eyes or skin.
Laboratory studies on admission revealed a white blood cell count of 2,600 /mm3, hemoglobin of 7.7 g/dl, platelet count of 3.5 × 104 /mm3, serum creatinine of 1.45 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 34 mL/min/1.73 m2, hypocomplementemia, positivity of anti-nuclear antibody and anti-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibody, proteinuria and hematuria . In cardiac ultrasonography, bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion were observed. Base on the criterion for the classification of SLE by American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) , she was diagnosed as SLE. The Safety of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus National Assessment-Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SELENA-SLEDAI) score was 33. The initial induction therapy with 40 mg of prednisolone (PSL) daily was started without hydroxychloroquine. One month after starting PSL, 1500 mg of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) daily was added. Two months after starting the induction therapy consisting of PSL and MMF, she suddenly developed abdominal pain. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and computed tomography (CT) scan were performed, although only mild erosion in esophagus and stomach was present, and there was no specific finding in CT scan. Three days after the onset of abdominal pain, systemic rash with small and fluid-filled blisters developed , and she was diagnosed as varicella by the result of VZV antigen test (Dermaquick VZV, Maruho, Osaka, Japan) of vesicular fluid. So, we started the administration of acyclovir. On the same day, her abdominal pain worsened and required opioid analgesics. Laboratory findings showed rapid increases of serum liver enzymes, serum ferritin levels, coagulation abnormalities. Furthermore, increased copies of VZV DNA were detected in her blood. Viral inclusion body was also observed and the staining with the antibody against VZV protein (MAB8612, EMD Millipore Corporation, Temecula, USA) was positive in the specimen of esophageal erosion obtained from upper gastrointestinal endoscopy . Therefore, she was diagnosed as visceral disseminated VZV infection. In addition to the administration of acyclovir, the treatment with antibiotics (meropenem 0.5 g × 3 daily) and immunoglobulin (5 g daily) was immediately and empirically started, the dose of PSL was reduced to from 40 to 30 mg daily, and MMF was withdrawn. Her general condition became serious, but her abdominal pain and skin blisters were subsequently resolved . Finally, she discharged 3 months after the onset of VZV infection without the recurrence of SLE (SELENA-SLEDAI score was 4).