The proband presented here was a 41-year-old asymptomatic Caucasian male visiting his family physician for genetic testing of VHL disease. The proband’s sister was diagnosed with VHL disease after experiencing multiple tumors including paraganglioma of left carotid, spinal neuroma, bilateral adrenal PHEO and a skull based tumor with intracranial extension. Review of the family history identified that the proband’s father, paternal grandmother and paternal great grandfather all had clinical history of PHEO .
The proband’s test results revealed a heterozygous mutation from A to G at the nucleotide position 414 in the coding sequence of VHL transcript NM_000551, which surprisingly is a synonymous mutation that does not change the coded amino acid (p.Pro138Pro) of the protein pVHL. His clinical record is summarized in Supplementary Table
. Six years after diagnosis, proband remained asymptomatic and at age of 47 he decided to take magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, abdomen, pelvis and cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine. MRI revealed a PHEO in the left adrenal gland , five small HGB along the spine at C2, T12, L1 and L2 and multiple lesions within the posterior fossa of the brain. The patient underwent laproscopic adrenalectomy 2 months later to remove the PHEO without complications. Further evaluation of the brain tumors identified two large tumors in the right cerebellum (9 mm and 17 mm) and a 4 mm ill-defined left posterior cerebellar enhancement, along with mild edema and displacement of the right cerebellar tonsil. The patient underwent gamma knife radiotherapy to the brain tumors and was re-evaluated. Repeat MRI of the brain showed that the prior right cerebellar tumors had evolved into one large conglomerate tumor (22x25x28mm), edema had increased and spread to majority of right cerebellar hemisphere. The right cerebellar horn was further displaced and the patient developed hydrocephalus with trans ependymal flow of cerebrospinal fluid and mass-effect on the inferior 4th ventricle. Subsequently, the patient underwent a posterior fossa craniotomy with resection of the large HGB. Postoperative MRI of the brain revealed resolution of the hydrocephalus. Repeat MRI in 3-month intervals (in 10/2008 and 01/2009) revealed normal brain without recurrence of tumors. From 2013 to 2019 small tumors of spine and cerebellar hemisphere persisted but remained unchanged. The patient is now 57 years old.
The proband’s wife has wild type VHL, and together they have three children: a son and younger fraternal twin daughters. Children underwent genetic testing and confirmed that the son had wild type VHL and the twins both inherited the c.414A > G mutation. The twins were diagnosed in 2012 at age 4. Subsequently, both began annual ophthalmology, endocrinology and otology screening along with routine physical exams. During an ophthalmology consult in 2015 (age 7), Twin 1 was noted to have a retinal HGB in both eyes: the left eye HGB was surrounded by sub-retinal fluid , and a small intra-retinal HGB of the right eye was located in close proximity to the optic nerve and therefore not operated on . Her left eye was treated with laser photocoagulation to dry the fluid and stabilize the fundus. Two months later, evaluation of the left eye revealed a residual retinal HGB (2.5 mm), which was treated with laser again. The blood flow to the tumor persisted and was treated two more times with laser on an outpatient basis to completely resolve the left eye HGB. Right eye HGB has remained unchanged. Twin 1 receives ophthalmologic exams three times a year to monitor the eye tumors along with brain, spine and abdominal MRI screenings. No other tumors have been found.
Twin 2 also underwent ophthalmology, endocrinology and hearing screening to identify any tumors and symptoms. In 2015, at age 7, a very small retinal HGB was identified in the central vision of the left eye. Due to its size and delicate surgical location, physicians decided to continue to monitor twice yearly. There is currently no fluid accumulation within the eye and the patient does not complain of any visual disturbances. The right eye is clear. Yearly MRI’s of the brain, spine and abdomen have all been negative for tumors. The twins were 11 years old in June 2019.
To confirm the synonymous mutation c.414A > G and examine the mechanism how it causes VHL disease, we established primary skin fibroblast cell lines from the skin biopsies of the 5 individuals of the proband’s family: Proband, his wife, the son and the twin daughters. The fibroblasts were established as described and cultured in DMEM, 10% fetal bovine serum and 1X Penicillin-Streptomycin, and all experiments using them were performed with early passages (< 8 passages). Genomic DNA was extracted from the fibroblast cells. The VHL exons were amplified using intronic primer pairs flanking each exon. The three exons of the VHL gene were determined through Sanger sequencing. The c.414A > G mutation was confirmed for the carriers . To examine whether this mutation affects splicing and gene expression, we first performed Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) on the 5 fibroblast cell lines using primers that locate in Exon 1 (F1: 5′-GCGTCGTGCTGCCCGTATG-3′) and Exon 3 (R1: 5′-TTCTGCACATTTGGGTGGTCTT-3′) of VHL transcript (shown schematically in Fig. a). We saw a significant change in the pattern of expressed VHL transcripts, with a higher expression level of the E1E3 mRNA at the expense of lower level of E1E2E3 mRNA for Proband, Twin 1 and Twin 2 fibroblasts relative to the two VHLWT fibroblasts . These results suggest alternative splicing, specifically, increased exon 2 skipping as an effect of the mutation. At the protein level, pVHL160 was the predominant isoform while pVHL213 and pVHL172 were also detectable in the fibroblasts . Consistent with downregulated E1E2E3 transcript, pVHL213 was downregulated in mutant fibroblasts compared with WT fibroblasts . Contrary to our expectation, pVHL172 was also downregulated in mutant fibroblasts .