An 11-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat weighing 5.9 kg, with a history of hyperthyroidism treated with carbimazole for the past 7 months, was presented for a check-up after a few episodes of vomiting. Total thyroxine, haematology and biochemistry were monitored routinely every 3 months. Since the beginning of the therapy, the owner had been compliant with the medication and the screening. The treatment started on carbimazole 15 mg PO q24h and the dosage was fixed accordingly with monitoring to reach a dose of 10 mg PO q24h where the cat was stable. The cat was also receiving prednisolone at 0.5 mg/kg PO q12h for recent pancreatitis and concurrent inflammation of liver and small intestines, confirmed with biopsies.
At presentation, the cat was alert and responsive. Its body condition score was 2/5 and the cat had gained 200 ;g in body weight during the previous month. Mucous membranes were pale and capillary refill time was normal. Heart rate was 164 beats per minute, with no identifiable heart murmur and the lung sounds were clear. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable. Blood was collected for a comprehensive panel and manual packed cell volume (PCV).
Abnormalities on haematology and serum biochemistry were confined to mild hypoproteinaemia (57 g/l; reference interval [RI] 60–80), mild hypoalbuminaemia (22 ;g/l; RI 25–46) and decreased creatinine serum concentration (69 μmol/l; RI 88–177). Serum total thyroxine was within normal limits for the species (45 nmol/l; RI 19–50 ;nmol/l) but borderline for a cat on treatment with carbimazole. Manual PCV was markedly low (16%). Reticulocyte count revealed a regenerative anaemia (0.17 ;109/ml) and on the blood smear red blood cells showed polychromasia and anisocytosis. Few lymphocytes appeared reactive with deeply basophilic cytoplasm and occasionally with abundant pale basophilic cytoplasm. Platelet number was adequate on the film. The in-saline agglutination test was positive. Feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) tests were negative (IDEXX Snap Test). A coagulative panel showed that prothrombin time (42 s; RI 7.0–11.0 s), partial thromboplastin time (>120 s; RI 13.0–20.0 s) and fibrinogen serum concentration (3.5 g/l; RI 0.5–3.0) were all increased.
Fluid therapy with Hartmann’s solution (Aqupharm 11; Animalcare) was initiated.
Whole-body radiographs were performed and were unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound and T-fast were also normal and no pericardial, pleural or peritoneal effusion were found. The liver appeared heterogeneous with no overt masses; the spleen was homogenous and small. The right kidney was 4.3 cm in length, the left one measured 3.7 cm and the architecture of both appeared normal. The pancreas was not enlarged and was surrounded by hyperechoic fat bilaterally.
Based on these results, we could rule out the most common causes of immune-mediated anaemia and conclude that the haematological disorder was secondary to chronic carbimazole administration.
Prednisolone was increased to 2 mg/kg PO q24h and carbimazole discontinued. Doxycycline was started at 5 ;mg/kg PO q12h with the purpose of treating an undetected Mycoplasma haemofelis infection. Omeprazole was also started at 1 mg/kg PO q24h to prevent gastrointestinal ulceration due to the prednisolone immunosuppressive dose.
The possibility of a blood transfusion was mentioned to the owner, who declined the procedure owing to the potential for complications. Blood pressure was measured every 2 h, while PCV was monitored every 8 h. Body temperature was maintained within normal ranges for the species by active warming. Despite close monitoring and intensive care, the cat died the same evening of admission to the hospital. Post-mortem examination was declined.