A previously healthy 42-year-old woman presented to our clinic with blurring of vision and visual loss in the left eye (LE) for 4 days, associated with mild eye pain. There were no auditory, dermatological, or neurological symptoms. The patient's family, medical, and ocular histories were unremarkable, except for a type A behavioral pattern. She denied the use of drugs. She had been diagnosed at another clinic with presumed unilateral Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease. The patient was referred to our clinic for differential diagnosis, workup, and treatment before starting further therapy.
At the initial visit, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) on presentation was 25/20 in the right eye and 20/40 in the LE. The patient's cycloplegic spherical equivalent error was +0.50 dpt on the right, and −1.00 dpt on the left. Intraocular pressure was normal, and no remarkable inflammation was observed in either the AC or posterior segment in both eyes, except for +1 cells in the anterior vitreous of the LE. A shallow left AC was readily apparent with slit-lamp microscopy, and was quantified with optical biometry.
The dilated funduscopic exam was unremarkable for the right eye, but the LE revealed large areas of retinal elevation consistent with subretinal serous fluid, as well mild optic disc hyperemia, and fuzzy margins of the optic disc. Serous retinal detachments were mainly located around the optic disc, extending up to the inferior and superior arcades beyond the posterior pole, short of equatorial region involving the papillomacular bundle, as well as the nasal retina and macula in the LE . Her right eye was fundoscopically normal.
We used spectral-domain OCT (3D OCT-1 Maestro, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan), which allows visualization of the retina, and ocular biometry measurements provided by an optical biometer (AL-Scan; Nidek Co, Ltd., Gamagori, Japan), which is based on partial coherence interferometry. Unfortunately, the OCT imaging did not include the enhanced depth imaging function needed to assess choroidal thickness. The patient refused FA, despite being informed about its potential use in the differential diagnosis. Neither fundus FA nor indocyanine green angiography were authorized by the patient.
OCT showed serous elevation of the sensory retina in the macular area involving the fovea, with papillomacular, juxtapapillary, peripapillary neurosensorial detachment . Anterior chamber depth (ACD) was shallower in the CSC eye than in the opposite eye by 0.62 mm at baseline. In addition, axial length was shorter in the CSC eye than in the opposite eye by 0.16 mm in the acute phase of the disease .
An initial diagnosis of atypical unilateral CSC was made based on the fundus appearance and spectral OCT findings, and the patient was followed closely and started on topical nepafenac (0.1% three times daily) administration to the LE for 2 months, until complete resolution of subretinal fluid and full recovery of visual acuity were achieved.
After taking a short holiday, the patient returned to the clinic with improved vision in the LE (20/32), as well as subjective and other objective visual improvements, including resolution of the ocular pain. Improvements were recorded as starting on day 12; refractive error was +0.50 dpt (SE) and +0.25 dpt (SE) in the right and LEs, respectively. Fundus examination demonstrated significant reduction in retinal elevations from the patient's previous exam. The OCT on day 12 demonstrated significant resorption of submacular fluid, as well as reduced elevation of the peripapillary retina . The difference between ACD of the right and left eyes decreased to 0.09 mm .
By day 37, BCVA in the LE improved to 20/25, with some mild subjective visual complaints. SE in the involved eye was determined to be +0.00 dpt; in addition, anterior vitreous cells were absent. OCT displayed normal foveal contour and structure . The AC of the LE was just 0.07 mm deeper than the right eye .
On week 19, the patient's BCVA had improved to 20/20, without any residual subjective visual disturbances, and her ocular exam was unremarkable. Refractive error was +0.50 dpt in both eyes. The OCT showed complete resorption of the subretinal fluid and reestablishment of normal retinal anatomy.
After complete resolution of subretinal fluid, the ACD of the involved eye was only 0.06 mm shallower than the opposite eye. On the other hand, the left (involved eye) axial length was 0.07 mm longer than that in the opposite eye .