The patient was a 65-year-old man without any symptoms who had undergone colonoscopy for cancer screening at a local clinic. Colonoscopy showed a 3-mm yellowish polypoid lesion on the lower rectum, and cold snare polypectomy (CSP) was performed . The histopathological diagnosis was NET G1 with positive horizontal and vertical margins . He was referred to our hospital for further treatment. He had no history of specific diseases, including ulcerative colitis, gastric NET, and other NETs. None of his relatives had been diagnosed with NETs. Blood examinations showed no abnormalities. Hormones related to NET (e.g., gastrin) were not examined because he had no symptoms. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of distant metastasis and other NETs. Colonoscopy showed only a post-CSP scar without submucosal elevation, or any residual and other NET lesions . For a further histopathological evaluation, the post-CSP scar was removed by endoscopic submucosal resection (ESD). With ESD, a sufficient horizontal margin of 5–10 mm from the scar was obtained. The histopathological examination showed 4 NETs and ECMs distant from the post-CSP scar, with a positive margin . Immunohistochemistry showed chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 positivity. Additionally, lymphatic invasion was detected with D2-40. Thus, we thought the possibility of a residual NET, multiple other rectal NETs, and lymph node metastasis of NET. According to these possibilities, we treated the patient surgically. Robotic-assisted laparoscopic intersphincteric resection and D2 lymph node dissection was performed due to the positive margin and lymphatic invasion . A histopathological examination showed 11 NETs and ECMs in the whole rectum. ECMs were found in the mucosa and submucosa . There were no findings of chronic inflammation in the background mucosa. The vertical and horizontal margins were negative, and no LNM was observed. The patient, who received annual colonoscopy and CT, showed no recurrence within 24 months after the surgery.