A 14-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with left lower extremity (LLE) bruising, swelling, and pain. Two months prior, during a softball game, she collided with another player’s cleat and that day was diagnosed with a hairline fracture of the left tibial diaphysis with an overlying hematoma. She followed up with orthopedic surgery in the outpatient setting, participated in physical therapy for several weeks, and received clearance to resume sports 6 weeks before the current presentation.
Six days before this presentation, she participated in 2 softball games. She denied any significant trauma or sliding events during these games. The next day (5 days before presentation), she woke up with pain and bruising of her left lateral shin. She treated the associated pain with ibuprofen. This was the 1st time she took non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the past 2 months. Over the following days, the pain and bruising worsened and she developed edema of the LLE.
She presented again to the emergency department with significant pain, requiring morphine. She was mildly hypertensive, secondary to pain, with otherwise normal vitals. Her examination was notable for extensive bruising, pain with light palpation or weight-bearing, and edema of the left calf .
No erythema, abrasions, or skin tightness was noted. Distal dorsalis pedis pulses were 2/4 and equal bilaterally. Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the ankle caused moderate distress secondary to calf pain, but she had full range of motion in all joints. Homan sign was negative. Laboratory studies, including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, creatinine kinase, C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, and uric acid, were within normal limits for age.
Frontal and lateral X-rays of the left lower leg demonstrated anterior, medial, and lateral subcutaneous soft-tissue edema of the proximal and mid leg . An ultrasound image demonstrated complex fluid collection in the lateral subcutaneous soft tissues which prompted further workup with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast.
She was admitted to the Pediatric Hospital Medicine service for further workup, including MRI, and management. While on the acute care medical floor, the patient’s LLE was closely monitored without any significant changes in examination, including girth .
The patient stated that she had regular periods, on her heaviest day, she uses 3-4 pads but does not bleed through them. She denied any history of epistaxis but has a distant relative with an unknown bleeding disorder. She denied abdominal pain, headache, fever, easy bruising, weight loss, petechiae, and fatigue.
The differential diagnosis included hematologic and oncologic causes such as hematoma, coagulopathies, platelet disorders, and leukemia. Orthopedic etiologies included trauma, bursitis, compartment syndrome, or fat necrosis. Medication-induced ecchymosis and alcohol abuse were also considered [, , ]. MRI of the LLE was notable for a MLL along with some soft-tissue inflammation concerning for cellulitis.
On the day of discharge, she had improvement in her bruising but continued to have pain with ambulation that was somewhat alleviated with the use of a compression stocking. Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery and Interventional Radiology were consulted and recommended a conservative approach with 3 months of LLE compression. Her cellulitis was treated with 7 days of clindamycin. At her 1-week outpatient follow-up with Orthopedics, she reported improvement in her pain, edema, and bruising, and she was able to ambulate without difficulty. She continued to use acetaminophen for pain, elevate her leg after exercise, and wear her compression stocking as advised. Both sclerotherapy and consultation with Pediatric Plastic Surgery were deferred due to her marked improvement.