A 49-year-old male was brought to the emergency department of a medical center after suffering from an electrical injury. The patient was right-handed and had been working as an electrician for more than 30 years, with 4 years at his current job at a resort. This work primarily involves weight-bearing, climbing up and down, and using hand tools to repair machines and electronics such as lights and air-conditioners. Tools used include screwdrivers, drills, wrenches, scissors, etc., and only a few are electrically powered. He works 8-9 hours per day and sometimes up to 12 hours with rotating shifts. The patient stated that he does not routinely work with his hands outside of his job, and had no systemic diseases that may involve the nerves such as diabetes and thyroid disease.
The patient was injured from a 220 V alternating current while repairing a machine on a rainy day. While holding a pair of scissors in his right hand, he accidentally touched a bare cable with his left hand. He wore rubber shoes but did not wear gloves. The patient lost consciousness and fell down backwards after being shocked, but regained consciousness after hitting his back on a cabinet. He was sent to the emergency department, where a first-degree burn approximately 1 cm in diameter was observed on his left hand, which was most likely caused by the electrical injury. His laboratory tests were generally within normal ranges, except for a slightly elevated myoglobin level, and imaging studies revealed normal findings. He was discharged on the same day after being diagnosed with an electrical injury. After discharge, he received follow-ups in the outpatient department as suggested.
A few days later, the patient developed bilateral lower leg soreness and pain and returned to the hospital. Mild rhabdomyolysis was suspected on the basis of these symptoms and the elevated level of myoglobin noted in the emergency department, and he rested for 2 months as suggested. However, during these 2 months he gradually developed numbness in both hands, causing him to wake up once or twice a night due to discomfort. After 2 months of rest, he returned to the same job, but the numbness in both hands progressed. He visited the occupational medicine outpatient department where the physical examination showed a positive Phalen's test but not Tinel's sign. A nerve conduction velocity (NCV) test showed bilateral CTS and bilateral cubital tunnel syndrome , and the NCV test result was near the lower normal limit. Because of the severe numbness in both hands, he was treated with physical therapy and occupational therapy for about half a year. Following significant improvements in CTS symptoms, the patient was able to return to work.