A 53-year-old female with KTS (height: 165 cm and body weight: 78 kg) presented to our hip clinic because of incremental right-sided hip pain. She underwent a resection of a persistent lateral marginal vein (of Servelle) 30 years earlier.
Physical examination revealed overgrowth of her right leg and port-wine stains on the lateral and anterolateral aspect of her right thigh .
Radiographs revealed a dysplastic right hip with joint space narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, and acetabular cyst formation, but without osteophytes .
Conservative treatment was initiated including regular use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, physiotherapy, and an intra-articular injection with corticosteroids. Unfortunately, her symptoms worsened and follow-up radiographs showed rapid deterioration of the hip joint (, ). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to investigate the extent of the vascular malformations surrounding the hip. Widespread networks of varicose veins were seen on the lateral and posterior aspects of the hip, impeding the use of a posterolateral or direct lateral approach for THA. However, the anterior soft tissues, but also the proximal femur and the acetabulum, appeared relatively free of vascular deformities .
After multi-disciplinary consultation, she was offered a THA through a direct anterior approach. Blood works revealed completely normal coagulation tests, that is, PT (sec) 12.5, PT (%) 83.0, International normalized ratio (prothrombin time) 1.1, and Activated partial thromboplastin time (sec) 30.7.
On the day of surgery, a vascular surgeon was standby in case of uncontrollable bleeding and four cross-matched packed cells were available. A cell-saver was installed to collect blood for auto-transfusion. Following general anesthesia, a urinary catheter, two large bore peripheral venous catheters, and an arterial line were inserted. Standard prophylactic antibiotics (Cefazolin) and tranexamic acid were given. A slightly larger than normal incision was used .
Several large veins were encountered overlying the Tensor fascia latae and underneath the innominate fascia. Care was taken to place all retractors under direct vision. Massive hydrops was met when opening the joint capsule.
After osteotomy of the femoral neck, limited releases of the superior and inferior capsule were performed. The acetabulum was reamed and a hemispherical cup with a highly cross-linked polyethylene liner (Pinnacle cup, DePuy Synthes, Warsaw, Indiana) was impacted. The femoral canal was broached sequentially and no major intraosseous bleeding was encountered. A fully coated and collared uncemented stem was impacted (Corail Stem, DePuy Synthes, Warsaw, Indiana) and a ceramic head was seated onto its taper. Meticulous hemostasis was followed by a layered closure. Estimated blood loss totaled 600 ml. The cell saver had collected 300 ml and this was considered not enough for auto-transfusion. Hemoglobin levels dropped from 14.1 g/dL preoperatively to 10.1 g/dL on day 1 and 9.4 g/dL on day 3. The patient was mobilizing on the day of surgery. VTE prophylaxis consisted of Enoxaparine 40 mg subcutaneous injections once daily continued for 6 weeks and the patient’s own graded compression garment. The post-operative course remained uneventful and she could be discharged home on the 3rd post-operative day. At outpatient follow-up 6 weeks later, PROMs had improved from Hip disability and osteoarthritis outcome score (HOOS) 19, Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) 26, HSS 43, European Quality of Life Five Dimension (EQ-5D) 42431, Visual analog scale (VAS) 40 preoperatively to HOOS 89, WOMAC 91, Harris Hip Score 84, EQ-5D 11111, and VAS 75 postoperatively, respectively. At 8 weeks after, the patient was admitted to the emergency department with pain around the right hip. A superficial thrombophlebitis of the malformations was diagnosed with ultrasound investigation and low molecular weight heparin was prescribed as treatment.