45-year-old Hispanic, diabetic male presented with decreased vision, pain, and conjunctival injection in both eyes. He denied any intravenous drug use, recent travel, trauma, sexually transmitted diseases, malignancy or immunocompromised state. His most striking risk factors included type 1 diabetes mellitus and bilateral shoulder abscesses surgically removed four months prior to onset of visual symptoms. The visual acuity on presentation was 20/50 in the right eye, and 20/150 in the left eye. Examination demonstrated bilateral EFE, and blood cultures confirmed growth for Candida albicans. Initial management included intravitreal vancomycin (1 mg/0.1 ml), ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 ml) and voriconazole (100 μg/0.1 ml) in both eyes. The patient was started on oral fluconazole 600 mg daily for four weeks and received four additional intravitreal voriconazole injections to both eyes. Three months after his last injection, there was improvement of the vitritis and chorioretinitis with visual acuity returning to baseline of 20/25 in both eyes.
One year later, the patient returned with pain and blurry vision in both eyes. Visual acuity was 20/40 in both eyes. The examination revealed recurrent moderate vitritis and chorioretinal lesions in both eyes . Oral voriconazole 600 mg daily was restarted by the infectious disease consultant. He received two intravitreal injections of voriconazole in both eyes but had not improvement. At that time, his visual acuity dropped to 20/100 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye. Given the lack of initial improvement of the vitreous infiltration and worsening vision, the patient underwent 25-gauge core vitrectomy and vitreous base shaving. The right eye had surgery first and one week later, the left eye underwent vitrectomy. The vitreous specimens were sent for culture in both eyes, which confirmed Candida albicans. During surgery, focal endolaser was applied to each chorioretinal lesion in both eyes . Intravitreal voriconazole was administered at the end of surgery to each eye. The patient resumed oral fluconazole under the guidance of the infectious disease physicians. At one year after vitrectomy surgery, visual acuity improved to 20/25 in both eyes, with resolution of vitritis. The lesions that had laser application demonstrated atrophy and scarring . OCT performed through one of the laser-treated lesions in the right eye showed slight elevation and fibrosis.