A 48-year-old woman visited the hospital for evaluation of facial swelling and fatigue lasting for more than one year. She reported 5 kg of weight gain, hypertension, insomnia, weakness, and easy bruising. She denied any fever, oligouria, chest distress or shortness of breath. She went to the local hospital and the examinations were unremarkable except “hypokalemia.” She had been treated with irbesartan at a daily dose of 150 mg for 1 year. The social history and family history was unremarkable.
On examination, the blood pressure was 164/84 mm Hg, the pulse 56 beats per minute, the weight 53.7 kg, the height 146 cm and the body mass index (BMI) 25.19 kg/m2. She had moon face, dorsal fat pad, abdominal obesity and ecchymosis, but no striae. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Initial investigations were summarized in . A midnight serum cortisol was 16.2 ng/dl and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was 94.9 pg/ml 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) was 813.5 μg/day. Cortisol failed to suppress during a 48-h low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (16.1 ng/dl). These findings were consistent with an ACTH-dependent CS. No suppression was seen with high-dose dexamethasone test. A pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 1.2 cm adenoma . Inferior petrosal sinus (IPS) sampling confirmed a pituitary source of ACTH secretion. At the same time, the chest computed tomography revealed multiple lung nodules . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and serum cryptococcal antigen was positive. Lung biopsy histology confirmed pulmonary Cryptococcus neoformans. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cryptococcal antigen was negative.
Immediate transsphenoidal selective adenomectomy (TSS) was not an option due to cryptococcus infection and possible postoperative cryptococcal meningitis. Intravenous fluconazole was started with 400 mg daily. One week later, the patient was discharged and continued with oral fluconazole 400 mg per day. At 3 months follow-up the pulmonary infection improved and the UFC was 42.2 μg/day. Fluconazole was withdrawn and TSS was performed. Histopathology confirmed ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma.
Three months after TSS, the patient was in good general health and her serum cortisol and UFC normalized.