A 62-year-old Caucasian woman of Anglo-Saxon background with resistant hypertension developed a sore throat, mouth ulcers and otalgia after several months of constitutional symptoms consisting of lethargy, night sweats and significant weight loss. She then proceeded to develop a rash over her right lower limb. Her past medical history consisted of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, rheumatic heart disease, hyperlipidemia and recurrent deep venous thromboses due to the factor V Leiden mutation for which she was on lifelong warfarin. Other medications taken regularly consisted of: hydralazine 100mg in the morning, 50mg at night which she had taken for three years; perindopril 10mg daily; metoprolol 50mg twice daily; clonidine 50mg twice daily; thyroxine 50mcg and 25mcg on alternate days; and rosuvastatin 5mg at night. An examination revealed hypertension (blood pressure 160/70mmHg), a pansystolic murmur, an aphthous ulcer at the base of her tongue and a rash over her right ankle and foot (Figure ). Baseline blood tests revealed a leucocytosis of 19.2×109/L with a neutrophilia of 16.85×109/L and raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 123mm/hour. Blood cultures taken on admission yielded S. pyogenes and she was immediately treated with intravenous lincomycin because of a previous penicillin allergy. A transesophageal echo was carried out which excluded infectious endocarditis. Blood tests revealed impaired kidney function, a serum creatinine concentration of 102μmol/L, and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 48mL/min/1.73m2 which is at her baseline renal function. Her urine revealed microscopic hematuria with 360×106/L red blood cells without any urinary tract infection and she only had mild proteinuria of 460mg/L, and a protein:creatinine ratio of 48g/mol. Further investigations revealed an anti-nuclear antibody >2560, double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibody elevated at 14 (<7), perinuclear (P)-ANCA >2560 and anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) antibody >100μ/mL with positive anti-histone antibodies. Because of glomerular blood cells in a repeat midstream urine sample taken on day 17 after presentation, acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of now 195μmol/L, eGFR 23mL/min/1.73m2, worsening proteinuria (810mg/L), normal serum complement levels and high titres of vasculitic markers, a drug-associated ANCA vasculitis was suspected. However, due to the temporal relation of two weeks between a streptococcal bloodstream infection and the development of an acute nephritic syndrome, post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis was also considered. The associated skin rash (Figures and
) did not have a clear role in her presentation but was initially thought to be early Sweet’s syndrome associated with a drug-associated vasculitis. Hydralazine was withdrawn and the patient underwent a transjugular renal biopsy to confirm the diagnosis (Figure ). The patient was commenced on treatment consisting of three intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone followed by high dose prednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil 1g twice daily. Her urine immediately became clear and her skin rash resolved quickly when the mycophenolate mofetil was started and her renal function improved, suggesting that the cause of the rash was immunological in etiology. Serum creatinine concentration on discharge (day 35) was 144μmol/L. The patient attended an out-patient follow-up clinic a fortnight and then a month later to commence prednisone tapering as per the European Vasculitis Study Group protocol and to continue her mycophenolate mofetil for six months. A repeat serum creatinine concentration was 96μmol/L and anti-MPO was 16u/mL.