A 61-year-old Caucasian post-menopausal female with a history of stage I signet ring cell carcinoma of the stomach at age 36 was evaluated for a change in bowel habits and abdominal discomfort. There was a known family history of breast cancer in a second degree relative (aunt). Physical examination discovered a palpable resistance in the lower right quadrant. Colonoscopy identified a large stenosing mass in the cecum. An endoscopic biopsy was performed showing a poorly differentiated carcinoma with extensive necrosis. Computed tomography (CT) imaging confirmed the diagnosis of a 9.6-cm cecal mass and identified four hepatic metastases with a maximum diameter of 2.6 cm . There was no evidence of a lesion involving the ovaries, the uterus, or a locoregional recurrence of gastric carcinoma. A right hemicolectomy with primary end-to-end anastomosis was performed. A diagnosis of primary colorectal choriocarcinoma in clinical stage IV was made. Pathological tumor stage according to the UICC TNM classification, 7th edition was pT4a, pN0 (0/29), cM1 (HEPAR), L0, V1, Pn0, G3, and R0. Laboratory examinations showed significantly elevated serum β-HCG levels of 70.173 IU/ml (internal reference <2 IU/ml), a normal level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 1.9 μg/l; internal reference <5.0 μg/l), and CA19.9 (6.7 kU/l; internal reference <35 kU/l). The patient was first treated with oxaliplatin, capecitabine, irinotecan, and bevacizumab (XELOXIRI/bevacizumab) for two cycles according to the standard protocols . Rapid radiographic progression of disease and increasing serum levels of β-HCG were recorded under treatment. The therapeutic strategy was therefore adapted toward bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin (BEP) which has shown efficacy in high-risk gestational and extra-gestational trophoblastic neoplasia . A partial remission [RECIST 1.1 ] with radiographic evidence of a decrease in the sum of the diameters of the hepatic lesions of over 50% and a decrease in serum β-HCG levels to 8 IU/ml (internal reference range <2 IU/ml) was documented. Close follow-up was maintained.
Fifteen months later, laboratory and radiographic evidence of intra-abdominal tumor progression with new peritoneal lesions was recorded. Third line therapy with five cycles of carboplatin and bleomycin was initiated, leading to stabilization of disease . New peritoneal, splenic, uterine, ovarian, and rectal lesions were noted on follow-up studies 6 weeks later. Salvage therapy with ifosfamide and vinblastine was started leading to a partial remission [RECIST 1.1 ]. The patient recovered well and surgical tumor debulking was performed 2 months later with resection of peritoneal lesions, the rectosigmoid, spleen, and uterus. Following recovery, two cycles of paclitaxel monotherapy were administered. Further treatment was delayed as a result of an intravascular catheter infection. There was rapid progression of hepatic disease with hilar compression. New bone metastases were detected in the spinal column. Due to rapid deterioration, the patient was entered into best supportive care and deceased 34 months after diagnosis. An autopsy was not performed.