A 53-year-old man with a medical history of coronary artery disease (single-vessel coronary artery bypass grafting that was performed 15 years ago), chronic atrial fibrillation, and arterial hypertension was referred to our unit for further evaluation due to severe left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). He had a past medical history of acroparesthesias, angiokeratomas, severe kidney impairment with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 30 mL/min/1.73m² by the age of 16, and microalbuminuria. Genetic testing had shown carriage of the D313Y variant in the GLA gene (ChrX(GRCh37):g.100653420C>A) . Specialized blood testing of a-galactosidase A (a-GalA) activity had shown reduced activity and in turn serum lyso-Gb3 enzyme activity that was found borderline abnormal. At the time of the evaluation, the patient was under migalastat treatment. He was also treated with aspirin 100 mg o.d., isosorbide mononitrate 60 mg o.d., atorvastatin 10 mg o.d., ezetimibe 10 mg o.d., nifedipine 40 mg b.d., spironolactone 25 mg o.d., torasemide 10 mg, o.d., apixaban 2.5 mg b.d., febuxostat 80 mg o.d., and folic acid 5 mg o.d.
On initial assessment, the clinical examination of respiratory, cardiovascular system was normal, but he presented with skin pigmentation and angiokeratomas. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with slow ventricular response, high QRS voltages, and negative inferolateral T waves . Echocardiogram showed impaired left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (45%), LV concentric hypertrophy (basal segments of 16–18 mm), and a dilated left atrium . Given the known AFD, to confirm/exclude myocardial involvement, a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was ordered which showed normal LV volumes with severely increased LV wall thickness (maximum wall thickness of 18 mm at the basal anteroseptum) and akinesia of the basal anterior and the entirety of the septum and the true apex, due to a large subendocardial scar (>50% of wall thickness) in the LAD territory . Interestingly, there were low T1-mapping values in the interventricular septum suggestive of lipomatous metaplasia of the ischaemic scar in the periinfarct region, while remote myocardial segments had normal to high native T1 (1045–1097 ms) suggesting diffuse fibrosis and pseudo-normalization of native T1 values in the context of Fabry disease . In addition, there was evidence of low-grade myocardial inflammation (i.e. increased values in myocardial T2 on T2 mapping, ) and mid-wall fibrosis in the basal inferior and inferolateral wall of non-ischaemic origin , findings that could not be explained by either well-controlled arterial hypertension or ischaemic heart disease.