A previously healthy 27-year-old Asian woman (original from Vietnam) (body weight 45 kg) was admitted to the emergency department of a peripheral hospital in Brussels due to intoxication of unknown origin. The patient had no past medical history, no previous pregnancies, and a degree in economic sciences, and had been working in an economic consulting agency since 3 years previously; she had no chronic medical therapy prior to this intoxication, did not smoke, and rarely consumed alcohol. Also, no particular medical history from her family was reported. On the day of admission, she had been in a nightclub and was found on the floor with rigor, tachycardia, hypertension (190/100 mmHg), hyperthermia (41.6 °C), agitation, and altered consciousness. Direct intubation was performed; blood and urine drug screening checked positive for 3.4-methylendioxy-N-methylamphetamine without concomitant alcohol intake. Upon admission to the emergency department, she was sedated and paralyzed and had dilated pupils; no abnormalities were found on lung, abdominal, cutaneous, and joint examination. No other focal neurological signs were observed (that is, asymmetric reflexes or pyramidal syndrome). Heart rate was 130 bpm, blood pressure dropped to 75/35 mmHg, and body temperature increased to 41.8 °C. She showed no signs of cyanosis or hypoperfusion. Initial echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%; chest X-ray revealed bilateral infiltrates (probably due to aspiration), while electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Initial blood gas indicated the following: pH 7.28, PaCO2 32 mmHg, PaO2 182 mmHg (on FiO2 100%), lactate 3.0 mmol/L, base excess −10.9 mmol/L, and metHb 1.1%. Laboratory tests showed: creatinine 1.6 mg/dL, glucose 55 mg/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 4.9 mg/L, creatine kinase (CK) 3800 IU/L . Over the next 2 hours she developed a severe shock state necessitating initiation of norepinephrine infusion. Meanwhile, serum lactate levels increased to 8.5 mmol/L and the patient exhibited diffuse bleeding in the throat, on puncture sites, the bladder probe but also from her rectum. Initial therapy consisted of fluid administration (that is 6000 mL crystalloids within 3 hours), intravenous glucose, and norepinephrine at 0.4 µg/kg/minute; also, fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex concentrates, tranexamic acid, and fibrinogen were given. At that point, the patient had hepatic failure, distributive shock, hypoglycemia, acute kidney injury, rhabdomyolysis, and severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Due to the option for potential liver transplantation, the patient was transferred to the Department of Intensive Care at Erasme Hospital, Brussels. On admission, she exhibited severe ARDS (pH 7.19, PaCO2 33 mmHg, PaO2 72 mmHg on FiO2 100%, lactate 5.5 mmol/L, and metHb 1.2%), hemodynamic instability (that is, requirement for vasopressors), and persistent capillary leakage. Ongoing therapies included: propofol (2.0 mg/kg hour via continuous intravenous infusion—ivc), sufentanil (0.2 μg/kg hour ivc), norepinephrine (1.3 µg/kg/minute ivc), pantoprazole (20 mg iv q24h), cisatracurium (0.03 mg/kg ivc), and N-acetylcysteine (100 mg/kg day ivc). Results of blood samples are presented in Table . As a consequence, antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (2 g q8h) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated; the device was set in hemodiafiltration mode with a blood flow rate of 160 mL/minute, a total CRRT dose (that is cumulative ultrafiltration and dialysate flows) of 55 mL/kg hour, and citrate anticoagulation. Additionally, administration of IV methylene blue (2 mg/kg one dose) was prescribed to reduce vasoplegia and to reduce the norepinephrine requirement. Nevertheless, immediately after dye injection, the skin of the patient became green/blue, oxygen saturation (SpO2) fell to 75%, and blood analysis revealed MetHb of 21% and lactate of 8.1 mmol/L, indicating severe tissue hypoxia. While the patient was rapidly treated with a veno-venous extracorporeal membrane (ECMO) device, it was discovered that Patent Blue V had been erroneously administered instead of methylene blue (both drugs being one beside the other in the pharmacy), resulting in life-threatening methemoglobinemia. As no significant improvement was observed on SpO2 and persistent metHb > 15% was observed after a few hours of ECMO and CRRT therapy, a CytoSorb adsorber (CytoSorbents Europe GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was installed into the extracorporeal CRRT circuit before the hemofilter and CRRT prescription remained unchanged. After 15 hours, the adsorber was changed and a second absorber was used for another 20 hours. This treatment resulted in a progressive and significant reduction in plasma metHb accompanied by a decrease in norepinephrine dose and of lactate levels ; removal of toxic Patent Blue V into the Cytosorb cartridge was also observed . Analysis of urines (that is blood, proteins, and sediment), different serological tests (that is herpes virus, different hepatitis viruses, human immunodeficiency virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum, Coxiella burnetii, and Rickettsia spp) and microbiological samples (that is, blood cultures, tracheal aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavage, and urines) all tested negative. The follow-up period after cessation of CytoSorb treatment consisted of weaning from ECMO on day 5, from CRRT on day 7, tracheostomy on day 19, and weaning from mechanical ventilation on day 26. The patient was transferred to the ward on day 30 and was successfully weaned from tracheostomy on day 41, before being discharged to a rehabilitation facility on day 56 and finally back home on day 75. At 2 years after ICU admission, the patient presented full physical recovery and is dialysis independent. Since this event, methylene blue has been placed into the ICU pharmacy and Patent Blue V into the general hospital pharmacy.