We report the case of an 8-month-old Caucasian girl referred to us for observation due to intense pallor, jaundice, lethargy and fever. Serological evaluations revealed severe anemia (Hb = 2.8 g/dL) with a strongly positive direct antiglobulin test and high-titer warm IgG autoantibody. AIHA was diagnosed and steroid therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone at 2 mg/kg/day was administered for 5 days . An adequate Hb increase was obtained and the child was discharged after 10 days with oral prednisone at 2 mg/kg/day.
During the subsequent months, several attempts were made to taper off the prednisone, but the patient had developed steroid dependence. Considering this dependence on high steroid doses, a therapeutic course with four doses of rituximab was performed (375 mg/m2/dose) at weekly intervals . Before rituximab infusion, serum immunoglobulin levels were normal and subpopulation lymphocyte counts were within the normal range. The treatment with rituximab was well tolerated and the patient received intravenous substitutive therapy with commercially available immunoglobulin preparations (400 mg/kg, every 3 weeks for 6 months). One month after the end of the first course of rituximab, while still receiving low-dose steroids, the patient presented with a clinical relapse of AIHA, so prednisone was increased to 2 mg/kg/day and two further rituximab infusions were performed . After these infusions, B lymphocytes became undetectable and the count returned to normal values 8 months after treatment. The patient remained in clinical remission and free from immunosuppressive drugs for 7 months, before presenting with a further relapse. A more intensive treatment was performed with cyclophosphamide 10 mg/kg/day for 10 days and methylprednisolone 40 mg/kg/day for 5 days, which was tapered over 20 days. Hb level increased and the patient was discharged 10 days later in good clinical condition, without any antifungal or antiviral prophylaxis.
Two weeks later, the child was referred to the Emergency Room for respiratory failure, persistent fever and abdominal pain. Laboratory examination showed an Hb level of 12.8 g/dL, total leukocyte count (WBC) of 710/μL, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 90/μL, a platelet count (PLT) of 339,000/μL, and low levels of immunoglobulin (IgG = 360 mg/dL, IgA = 10 mg/dL, IgM = 33 mg/dL). Chest X-ray and CT scan revealed an interstitial pneumonia . Therapy with amikacin, ceftazidime, G-CSF and voriconazole was started. Within a few hours, her clinical condition deteriorated and the patient developed Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), which required immediate admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). Acceptable gas exchange was initially maintained by non-invasive continuous positive airway pressure . Serologic tests showed a level of Aspergillus galactomannan antigen of 0.8. All tested virus and microbial antigens were negative. On day 4, concomitantly with an elevation of WBC from 400 to 10,400/μL (ANC = 4900/μL), respiratory conditions precipitated and endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were started . A protective ventilatory strategy with tidal volume of 6 mL/kg and positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 10 cmH2O was instituted.
In the following days, gas exchange deteriorated and PEEP levels rose to 17 cmH2O. Recruitment manoeuvres, prone positioning, and high doses of inhaled nitric oxide (NOi) were necessary to maintain viable gas exchange. Endotracheal instillation of porcine surfactant and a trial with High Frequency Oscillation were ineffective. On day 10, owing to the refractory hypoxia, worsening hypercapnia, and chest X-ray evidence of a pneumomediastinum, the patient was placed on venous-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) . A double lumen 15 french catheter (Maquet, Jostra Medizintechnik AG, Hirrlingen, Germany) was inserted into the right internal jugular vein. The ECMO circuit consisted of a polymethylpentene membrane oxygenator, permanent life support and a centrifugal Rotaflow pump (Maquet, Jostra Medizintechnik AG, Hirrlingen, Germany). ECMO was started with a blood flow of 0.8 to 0.9 L/minute and gas flow of 1 L/minute of 100% oxygen. Following the institution of ECMO, respiratory rate decreased from 45 to 10 breaths/minute, and it was possible to stop NOi.
After commencing caspofungin with voriconazole, WBC, ANC and C reactive protein (CRP) slowly decreased, while pulmonary function slightly improved. On day 19, a multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from bronchoaspirate . In spite of antibiotic reinforcement with levofloxacin, Pseudomonas aeruginosa antibiogram showed increased resistance to all antibiotics and to colimicine which was started on day 26. On day 28, a sudden increase in resistance on the return part of the circuit caused a massive thrombosis in the oxygenator. The entire circuit and the cannula were immediately changed and ECMO restarted within 2 hours. Following the development of pulmonary embolism, the gas exchange rapidly worsened and NOi had to be restarted. An echocardiographic assessment showed right ventricular dilatation, with paradoxical septal wall motion and pulmonary hypertension (systolic pressure 90 mmHg). Prostacyclin and sildenafil improved the right heart function and effectively attenuated pulmonary hypertension. In the following days, WBC, ANC and CRP slowly decreased, while pulmonary function improved. Thirty days from ICU admission, ECMO was stopped, the patient rapidly restored her spontaneous ventilatory functions and she was extubated 10 days later. She was finally discharged from the ICU on day 44. At 16-month follow-up, the patient is alive and free from immunosuppressive drugs. At the time of last follow-up, Hb level was 13.5 g/dL, reticulocyte count was 11 × 109/L, with total bilirubin, lactic dehydrogenase and haptoglobin all within the normal ranges.