A 52-year-old man was transferred to our hospital due to chest pain and syncope following excessive alcohol consumption. He had no medical history except for a prescription of valsartan for systemic hypertension, and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) noted no left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction 3 years ago. On admission, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 90/56 mmHg, pulse rate of 93 bpm, and O2 saturation of 99% on room air. On physical examination, there were no significant findings except for a cold sweat. An initial 12-lead electrocardiogram showed ST-segment depression on the anterior and inferior leads and sinus tachycardia . Serum troponin T level was 0.028 ng/mL (normal range: 0–0.014 ng/mL). TTE on admission demonstrated no any regional wall motion abnormality but a hypertrophic myocardial septum on the LVOT and severe mitral regurgitation (MR) with mosaic-like flow due to systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (see , ). The maximum peak pressure gradient of the LVOT was measured at 139.6 mmHg . An emergent cardiac catheterization was performed to assess and control his persistent chest pain. There was no coronary artery stenosis . Diagnosing the chest pain as an acute exacerbation of the LVOT obstruction, we attempted to measure the pressure gradient between the aorta and left ventricle. Initially, an angiographic diagnostic catheter (Goodtech 5Fr-Judkins Right 4.0, Goodman Medical Ireland Limited, Ireland) was placed in the left ventricle. However, the diagnostic catheter provoked multiple premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) induced by the attachment to the ventricular wall. To avoid them, an angiographic diagnostic catheter and a pressure wire (PressureWire™ X, Abbott, USA) were used to measure aortic and left ventricular pressure and successfully recorded continuous, simultaneous pressures . The patients initial subaortic systolic pressure gradient was measured at 147 mmHg (104 mmHg, aorta; 251 mmHg, left ventricle) . After administering 4 mg propranolol, his subaortic pressure gradient decreased to 35 mmHg . Despite the reduce in pressure gradient, his chest pain persisted. Therefore, 70 mg cibenzoline was administered and his pressure gradient further reduced to 13 mmHg . A subsequent TTE showed that his MR improved from severe to mild grade (see , ) and the peak subaortic pressure gradient decreased to 24.6 mmHg . Eventually, his chest pain resolved. Based on these findings, oral cibenzoline and bisoprolol were subsequently prescribed. On Day 7, a follow-up TTE showed that the pressure gradient on the LVOT remained to be decreased at 12 mmHg with mild MR. The patient did not have recurrent chest discomfort and was discharged on hospital Day 11.