A 2 year-old male child was brought to pediatric outpatient department with swelling in temporal region and history of convulsions one week back. For which he was treated by some private practioner and was reffered at our centre for further management. The patient had a history of recent trauma. Considering this, X-Ray was advised, which revealed a mass lesion in left temporal region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed a well-defined 5 cm × 3 cm enhancing lesion with altered signal intensity in the left temporal region. The lesion showed intense contrast enhancement with underlying bone erosion and involving the left cerebellopontine angle . Imaging findings were suspected of a metastatic lesion. On reviewing the records of the patient, we came to know that patient is a known case of Down’s syndrome.
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the mass was performed which showed small, uniform, blue, round cells which at places were forming rosettes . Considering these findings, a diagnosis of small blue round cell tumor favouring neuroblastoma was rendered. Incisional Biopsy of the mass was performed which revealed a tumor in multiple nodules surrounding the skeletal muscles. Tumor was composed of highly atypical cells, arranged diffusely and in infiltrative pattern in the fibrovascular background. Tumor cells were pleomorphic, round to oval, with vesicular nuclei. Fair number of typical and atypical mitosis was also seen (A–C). On IHC, these cells were strongly and diffusely positive for MPO, CD 117 and CD 34, focally positive for CD 99, vimentin and HLA DR and negative for LCA, CD 20, CD3, CD 10, CD 56, Tdt, CK, NB84 and synaptophysin (A–D). Myogenin and Desmin were negative ruling out possibility of rhabdomyosarcoma. Histopathological diagnosis of myeloid sarcoma was made.
Extensive haematological workup, including bone marrow biopsy and immunophenotyping, cytogenetics and positron emission tomography (PET) scan were performed, all yielded negative results and the patient was discharged from hospital without additional treatment and the decision to begin induction chemotherapy with daunorubicin and cytarabine was made. After a month patient returned for his treatment. At that time peripheral blood examination revealed 90% atypical cells/blasts conforming to morphology of myeloid blasts . Child was admitted for chemotherapy and is on regular follow up. He is doing well and is in complete remission.