In November 2009, a 70-year-old man presented with a mass in his left occipital region of the scalp. His ECOG status was 0. He has a history of hepatitis-C virus (HCV) positivity for 30 years. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 6.5 × 6.0 cm mass invading bone in the left occipital region of the scalp which has extra and intracranial components . Fine needle aspiration biopsy showed a malign tumour.
The mass was completely resected. The macroscopic size of mass was measured 6.0 × 5.5 × 2.0 cm. Pathology of the mass showed a characteristic metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) invading the occipital bone. All surgical margins were free of tumour. Immunohistochemical staining showed Pan-CK, CK8, CEA(p) and CD10 positivity.
Complete blood count, liver function tests, and α-fetoprotein (AFP) level were normal. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormalities; that’s why no adjuvant treatment was given after the surgery. Five months later (on April 2010) he noticed a mass at the same region. MRI revealed a 5.2 × 2.3 cm mass invading bone in his left posterior parietal portion of the scalp. For the second time the surgery was performed and once again the metastasis of HCC was confirmed on the histopathological examination of the resected tissue specimen. Postoperative MRI of the brain revealed a contrast enhancing mass on the left parietal region . CT of the abdomen showed a hypodens lesion in the right lobe of the liver . Due to the bone invasion and residual disease, the palliative external beam radiation therapy (XRT) was applied after the surgery. Three-dimensional treatment planning was used and the radiation dose to the scalp was 300 cGy per day for 5 days a week; the total dose was 3000 cGy . Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was administered to the metastatic mass of the right liver and the systemic therapy with a targeting agent (sorafenib) treatment was started. A follow-up MRI of the brain showed no recurrent disease 9 months from XRT . After 17-month follow-up from the diagnosis, the patient could perform his daily activities although he developed hypo albuminemia and fatigue.