A 23-year-old woman, asymptomatic, presented in a gynaecological examination a pelvic tumour in the left iliac fosse. Physical examination showed a 9 cm mobile mass in the left iliac fosse compatible with fibroid or adnexal mass. She was a non-alcoholic, non-smoker with no co-morbid medical or surgical ailment.
Transvaginal ultrasound shows an anteversion uterus with a proliferative endometrium, normal ovaries and a mass of about 9 cm, which does not seem to have a clear relationship with the uterus.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging describes a 9 cm semi-solid mass compatible with pedunculated fibroid or primary retroperitoneal lesion. Cerebral MRI shows no abnormalities.
Abdominal CT scan during the portal phase showed a pelvic mass of 6.5 x 5.5 cm, which seemed to originate from the left ovary, predominantly cystic with solid areas compatible with cystic ovarian neoplasm. Retroperitoneal or pelvic lymph nodes were not identified. There was no ascites. There were multiple bilocular masses informed as metastatic lesions in liver parenchyma. The rest was normal ( A and B).
CEA, Ca 12.5 and Ca 19.9 tumour markers were normal. Alpha-fetoprotein, testosterone, SDHEA and delta-4-androstenedione were also normal.
After discovering these surprising findings, our gynaecologic Tumours Committee decided to perform a guided needle core biopsy of the liver lesions to discart an advanced ovarian cancer. Histologically these lesions corresponded to a vascular tumour compatible with EH.
We decided to perform a diagnostic laparoscopy. During the exploration of the abdominal cavity, an enlarged liver with multiple intra-parenchymal hepatic lesions and a tumour with a large blood vessel originating from the greater omentum could be seen. Partial omentectomy resection, including the mass, was performed and was extracted in an endobag ( A and B).
Macroscopically the lump was fleshy, filled with blood and presented whitish areas. Anatomopathological study confirmed an EH. Immunohistochemical profile was CD31+, CD34+, CKAE1/AE3-, CK8/18-, C-kit-, EMA-, vimentin +, progesterone (+ weak, focal), estrogen-, mitotic activity <1 × 10 fields of large increased (, ).
After the results, liver resection was discarded due to multicentre lesions, involving pretty much the totality of the liver; making the patient a candidate for liver transplant. Six months later the patient was subjected to a successful liver transplant.
Consent was obtained for the publication of the case report and the images from the patient.