A 55-year-old man with past medical history of erectile dysfunction was admitted in the emergency department after an aborted sudden death due to ventricular fibrillation. His wife reported that she woke in the middle of the night and found the patient in gasping breathing with anomalous movements of the limbs. Current medication included irregular intake of avanafil; no previous allergies were described. There was no family history of SCD. The patient was assisted at home and spontaneous circulation was obtained after six cycles of conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The patient was haemodynamically stable at admission and cardiac and pulmonary auscultation showed no significant changes. Immediate electrocardiogram after recovery showed atrial fibrillation with left bundle branch blockage and apparent concordant ST-segment elevation in the inferior precordial leads. Emergency coronary angiography excluded significant epicardial coronary disease. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple areas of encephalomalacia corresponding to hypoxic lesions. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed severe encephalopathy but excluded any EEG patterns consistent with poor prognosis.
During the stay in the intensive care unit, the patient remained invasively ventilated for 1 week and was submitted to the hypothermia protocol during the first 24 h. Electrocardiographic re-evaluation showed sinus bradycardia (heart rate of 50 b.p.m.) and symmetrical and profound inversion of T wave in the lateral precordial leads . Corrected QT-interval was normal. No other high-risk rhythmic patterns were found. A 24-h Holter monitoring was normal. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed left ventricular apical hypertrophy (maximum thickness of 17 mm in the distal interventricular septum and apex), suggesting an apical variant of HCM. Cardiac MRI corroborated the apical LVH. Left ventricular mass was normal (71.43 g/m2, normal range, NR: 42–78 g/m2) (. The global and regional systolic function of both ventricles was normal. No foci of fibrosis or necrosis were found .
Clinical and imaging findings were compatible with the diagnosis of ApHCM. Estimated risk of SCD was 2.8% at a 5-year analysis according to the European Society of Cardiology risk score. Due to paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation was initiated. A cardiac defibrillator was implanted for secondary prevention of SCD. Single-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was implanted during hospitalization and the procedure was uneventful. The patient had a favourable neurologic recovery despite maintaining reduced limb strength. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient did not display new rhythmic events or needed further treatment. Genetic testing showed a heterozygous mutation in the MYBPC3 gene.
This case highlights the importance of medical history in predicting SCD, even in patients with HCM with a low estimated SCD risk. New variables must be found to segregate patients with ApHCM in low and high-risk groups for SCD.