A 49-year-old woman presented at Shengjing Hospital (affiliated with China Medical University) after noticing that a massive sacrococcygeal tumor she had since birth had been growing over the past year. One month before her visit, the patient felt pain in her hip owing to a rapidly enlarging mass. The patient didn't receive any medical intervention and the symptoms were not released over past year. The patient was previously healthy with no history of chronic cardiovascular diseases, infectious diseases, allergy, or surgery. She did not smoke or consume alcohol, and had no familial diseases.
Physical examination revealed a palpable 16 cm long × 25 cm wide solid mass in the sacrococcygeal region, with a clear boundary and good mobility. There was an obvious osteal protuberance in the center of the mass that had poor mobility. Preoperative laboratory workups including complete blood count, urinalysis, liver function test, and renal panel were within normal range. Pelvic radiography revealed a long rod-like bone in the pelvic cavity, while pelvic enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a massive space-occupying lesion in the pelvic-sacrococcygeal region that was 14.5 cm × 10.5 cm × 21.5 cm. Pelvic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a massive sacrococcygeal multiloculated teratoma comprised mainly of a fatty, sebaceous material as well as a long bone lacking any obvious abnormalities on enhanced scanning .
A multidisciplinary consultation was arranged to decide on the optimal therapeutic approach based on 3D reconstruction and mixed reality (MR) technology, which were used to ensure precise surgical resection. The 3D reconstruction was performed using the “visual volume” software (Shenyang, China) with CT-derived data. The 3D model was then uploaded into the mixed reality (MR) image system, whereupon the surgeon could visualize the 3D model through the mixed reality (MR) helmet (Microsoft Corp, Redmond, WA, United States) . This enabled to discern the relationship between the teratoma and surrounding tissues (such as vessels and nerves) directly. Furthermore, the mixed reality (MR) visual software allowed the operator to move, rotate, hide, and delete elements of the 3D model, thereby allowing him to simulate the surgery and eliminate potential errors. The multidisciplinary team had concluded that the lesion was likely a sacrococcygeal teratoma, and that its final diagnosis ought to be verified via postoperative pathological analysis.
The surgery was performed on March 26, 2021. After administering general anesthesia and disinfecting the area, a 40 cm arced incision was created in the sacrococcygeal region from the posterior superior iliac spine to the contralateral posterior superior iliac spine along with the lower boundary of the tumor (i.e., resembling a smiley face). An intact encapsulated mass was found under the deep fascia; its upper boundary reached the sacral 5 vertebra, its lower boundary reached the anococcygeal ligament, and its bilateral boundaries were adjacent to the gluteus and surrounding soft tissue. The tumor protruded into the pelvic cavity and compressed the ampulla recti. Given that it had an intact capsule, the tumor did not invade the surrounding organs and we decided to remove the teratoma integrally to decrease the recurrence rate. The teratoma was rigid and lacked elasticity because of the two bones inside, which may break the capsule leading to incomplete resection if the surgical area was small. Therefore, we removed the coccyx to expose an enough space for surgical operation. Next, we separated the tumor from the pelvic cavity with the guidance of 3D reconstruction and mixed reality (MR) technology. Especially, when separating the deep bottom of the teratoma, meticulous operation was necessary to avoid bladder and rectum injury. Finally, we reconstructed the sacral structure to help recover sciatic function by anchoring a mesh through the suture to the surrounding tissue in order to provide mechanical support. Muscle reconstruction was achieved by suturing the anococcygeal ligament to the coccygeal stump . Surgery was completed with no complications.
The excised specimen was transferred to the Pathology Department for cytological diagnosis. Macroscopically, it was 24 cm × 23 cm × 15 cm, and weighed 5 kg. The surface of the mass was capsulated and bosselated. The cut surface exhibited multiple cysts that contained yellow fat, gray viscous sebaceous matter, hair, muscle, and bone tissue. Of particular interest, two intact irregular bones that formed a pseudoarthrosis were isolated from the mass; one was 11 cm long and the other 6 cm . Microscopically, fibrous squamous epithelium with cutaneous appendages, hair follicles, sebaceous glands, bony trabeculae, and fat tissue was observed in the section . There were no immature neural or embryonic tissues (which are markers of malignant transformation) in the section. The final diagnosis was a mature sacrococcygeal teratoma.
The postoperative routine blood tests were drawn every 3 days. The labs showed a slight elevation of white blood cell count, C-reactive protein level, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, which were appropriate for a normal physiological response postoperatively. She was discharged on postoperative day 7 with no complications. Her treatment course was summarized in .