An 11-year-old boy reported pain in his left hip. At the initial evaluation, he appeared normally developed. He was not an active athlete, but he did participate in school gymnastic classes a few hours each week. At the physical evaluation, his hip joint had a full range of motion and was the same bilaterally. Tenderness over the lateral side of the left great trochanter was observed. No particular finding was evident based on the examination of plain radiographs . The MRI showed bone marrow edema characterized by low signal intensity on a T1-weighted image and a high signal intensity on a fat- suppressed T2-weighted image of the entire left trochanteric area, involving the metaphysis and the apophysis . The finding was compatible with a reported FOPE zone. Discontinuity of the cartilaginous growth plate was observed, suggesting bony continuity at the FOPE zone. The size of the discontinuous area was 4.5 mm at the growth plate. No abnormal signals were observed on the MRI of the asymptomatic trochanter apophysis on the right side .
An 11-year-old boy reported pain in his left hip. At the initial evaluation, he appeared normally developed. He was not an active athlete, but he did participate in school gymnastic classes a few hours each week. No particular finding was evident based on the examination of plain radiographs . The MRI showed the lesion of bone marrow edema was characterized by a low signal intensity on a T1-weighted image, and a high signal intensity was noted on a fat- suppressed T2-weighted image when assessing the entire left trochanteric area, which involved the metaphysis and the apophysis . The finding was compatible with a reported FOPE zone. Discontinuity of the cartilaginous growth plate was observed, suggesting bony continuity at the FOPE zone. The size of the discontinuous area was 4.5 mm at the growth plate. No abnormal signals were observed on the MRI of the asymptomatic trochanter apophysis on the right side . The diagnosis of chronic physeal injury was rejected for the current case because chronic physeal injury is characterized by widening of the physis and irregularity of the metaphyseal line , which were not seen. Since there was no traumatic episode in the current case, differential diagnosis included neoplastic and inflammatory lesions. A follow-up MRI examination a week later showed the surrounding marrow edema pattern that was decreased on the T1-weighted image and on the fat-suppressed T2-weighted image . A follow-up MRI examination 6 weeks after the initial MRI revealed that the abnormal signal intensity had almost completely diminished . Therefore, the diagnosis of neoplastic lesions could be ruled out. As for infected lesions, osteomyelitis at the epiphysis, or apophyseal infection, was a possibility. However, the pain experienced was mild, and the bone marrow the greater edema seemed not to have substantially manifested. On diagnosing, the possibility of an infection as highly unlikely, a wait, and see strategy was adopted. Blood examination was not performed. In fact, the hip pain had subsided 4 weeks after onset, and the MRI abnormality had improved without any treatment and by the patient abstaining from sport activities, including gymnastics. After ruling out the differential diagnoses of neoplastic and infected lesions, FOPE became the final diagnosis.