A previously healthy 11-year-old girl (weight 30 kg and height 143 cm) was transported to a local hospital following a road traffic accident. On arrival, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), systolic blood pressure (sBP), heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (RR), and body temperature (BT) were E4V4M6, 103 mmHg, 113/min, 30/min, and 36.3°C, respectively. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma revealed perisplenic echo-free space. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed grade V liver laceration (American Association for the Surgery of Trauma Organ Injury Scale) with massive intraperitoneal contrast extravasation . An emergency trauma surgery was unavailable at the local hospital. Therefore, the patient was transported after undergoing REBOA inflation to our hospital by a firefighting helicopter. Rescue Balloon® (Tokai Medical Products, Inc., Aichi, Japan) was inserted into the left femoral artery and placed in the thoracic descending aorta (zone 1). REBOA inflation of 20 mL elevated sBP to approximately 160 mmHg; REBOA was deflated to 15 mL. REBOA deflation before transport reduced sBP to approximately 90 mmHg; REBOA was inflated 15 mL during transport.
On arrival at our hospital, GCS, sBP, HR, RR, and BT were E4V4M6, 145 mmHg, 136/min, 26/min, and 34.4°C, respectively. REBOA deflation after arrival reduced sBP to 98 mmHg and elevated HR. REBOA was inflated again. Immediately, the patient underwent damage control laparotomy, which revealed 1000 mL of intraperitoned hemorrhage due to complex liver laceration in the right lobe without active bleeding under balloon occlusion. REBOA deflation was performed after portal triad clamping. Complete hemostasis was achieved by following perihepatic packing and transcatheter arterial embolization of the right hepatic artery. The vital signs, REBOA inflation volume, transfusion volume, arterial blood gas, and procedures performed before intensive care unit admission are shown in Figure . She underwent hepatic suturing and omental packing for the liver laceration at a second-look laparotomy on the following day . The injury severity score (ISS) was 34, the revised trauma score was 7.55, and the probability of survival was 0.94 in this case.
Postoperatively, serum aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels were elevated to a maximum of 2270 and 1144 IU/L, respectively, on day 3. Serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels were elevated to a maximum of 4.78 and 86 mg/dL, respectively, on day 5. After a month, the blood tests were normal. Six months after the accident, she was discharged from the hospital without organ failure.