A 56-year-old man was admitted to the hospital for the management of recurrent massive hemoptysis. The patient had a history of recurrent pneumonia, including an episode complicated by empyema requiring a left lower lobe thoracotomy, and recurrent sinus infections requiring surgery. In addition, he had a long-standing history of pneumatoceles, cystic bronchiectasis , multiple Aspergillomas on CT , and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) with sputum cultures positive for Aspergillus. Aspergillomas had been treated in the past with intravenous (IV) amphotericin B and oral itraconazole, right upper lobe lung wedge resection, IV capsofungin therapy, and most recently, participation in the National Institutes of Health anti-microbial treatment protocol for HIES with trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole, posaconazole, and prednisone for the past 9 years. Other medical history included a diverticular abscess, a Mallory-Weiss tear, osteopenia, scoliosis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. His family history was unremarkable. Prior investigations revealed eosinophilia, elevated serum immunoglobulin (Ig) E levels of 31,850 kU/l (normal range 0 to 115 kU/l), and normal IgA, IgG and IgM levels. The diagnosis of HIES was confirmed by the detection of a sporadic STAT3 mutation.
The patient first presented with persistent blood-tinged sputum and hematemesis 8 months prior to admission. At that time, esophagogastroduodenoscopy was done to rule out upper gastrointestinal bleeding. A chest CT with contrast for bronchial circulation showed a RLL basilar infiltrate consistent with blood, but no extravasation of contrast into the lung parenchyma. Arteriography of the right bronchial artery showed mildly abnormal vascularity without frank arterial extravasation or secondary angiographic signs of hemoptysis. The right bronchial and right 8th posterior intercostal arteries were embolized using 500–700 μm polyvinyl alcohol particles. The patient’s hemoptysis ceased and he was discharged home after 24 h.
The patient had no further hemoptysis for approximately 7 months and then developed sub-acute hemoptysis of approximately 10-20 cc per day for 2 weeks. After treatment with a course of oral antibiotics, he was admitted for evaluation. Chest CT without contrast showed no new abnormalities. Bronchoscopy did not demonstrate any active bleeding or an endobronchial source of bleeding. The hemoptysis improved and the patient was discharged home, but was re-admitted 23 days later after several episodes of hemoptysis > 200 cc. Laryngocospy was done to rule out sino-pharyngeal sources of bleeding. Percutaneous instillation of Amphotericin B paste into a cavitary mycetoma was considered [, ], but it was not clear which cavity was bleeding. Bronchial arteriography was repeated. Mild abnormal vascularity in the right lung was supplied by a slightly enlarged, tortuous right bronchial artery, but no active hemorrhage was observed. Notably, more intense bronchial vascularity is typically seen in the setting of Aspergillomas [, ]. Repeat embolization of the right bronchial artery and the distal right 6th intercostal artery was achieved using 250–355 μm polyvinyl alcohol particles. The hemoptysis stabilized and the patient was discharged after 4 days.
The patient experienced another episode of massive hemoptysis the following week and underwent interrogation of the pulmonary arteries via angiography. This revealed a small outpouching from a subsegmental pulmonary artery branch in the lateral segment of the right lower lobe . Contrast injection within the subsegmental branch confirmed the presence of the small pseudoaneurysm, with contrast actively extravasating into an adjacent cavity in the lung . The patient developed gross hemoptysis at this time, and was suctioned for 250 cc of blood. Embolization was achieved using seven 0.035 in. gauge Nester coils (Cook, Bloomington, IN) distal, across, and proximal to the orifice of the pseudoaneurysm, along with one 6 mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug II (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN) in between the coils. After this branch was occluded, no further filling of the pseudoaneurysm or extravasation was seen , and the patient’s hemoptysis resolved. The patient had no further hemoptysis and was discharged home, with no further hemoptysis as of this writing.