A 40-year-old male with jaundice was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. During the initial visit, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) demonstrated a 35-mm hypo-attenuated mass in the pancreatic head . No obvious regional lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis was detected. Although there was no histological confirmation due to the absence of a tumor biopsy, the radiological findings strongly indicated the presence of invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) with lymph node dissection, which achieved R0 resection . Histopathological diagnosis revealed that the tumor was a PNET G2 (3.5 cm; mitotic count 6 per 10 high-power fields; Ki67 proliferative index, 10%) . According to the UICC TNM classification of malignant tumors 8th edition , the PNET was classified as pT3N0M0 Stage II with invasion into the common bile duct’s epithelium and the duodenum’s submucosa.
The patient underwent regular postoperative follow-up imaging examinations. Six liver lesions were detected in segments (S) 5, 7, and 8 after 45 months, raising suspicion of multiple metastases of PNET. Evaluating the resectability of the lesions and considering the patient’s liver function assessed through indocyanine green clearance (R15: 3.3%, K: 0.22709, Child–Pugh classification A), we performed three partial hepatectomies. Histopathological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of PNET metastases for all lesions, classified as G2 (Ki67 index, 12%) . Approximately one year after liver resection, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple liver metastases and enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes. Due to the small size of the liver metastases, observation was planned without immediate resection. After careful monitoring, the lesions exhibited slight growth over 17 months, making them amenable to resection . Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) with 111In-pentetreotide and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed multiple liver metastases with substantial SRS detection of accumulation (scores 3–4) in the early phase . Furthermore, in the delayed phase, SRS detected accumulation in the lymph node near the superior mesenteric vein as well as in the liver lesions . Subsequently, 13 partial liver resections and mesenteric lymphadenectomies were performed, yielding 18 liver metastases and one mesenteric lymph node metastasis.
Eleven months after the second hepatectomy, CT revealed 16 multiple liver metastases and bone metastasis in the first lumbar vertebra (L1). SRS detected multiple nodules with score 3 as well as the accumulation in the liver and L1 vertebral body, indicating liver and bone metastases . The liver metastases were judged unresectable due to the presence of extrahepatic lesions. The patient was administered the SSA lanreotide, but the sizes of the lesions increased . Subsequently, the patient expressed interest in PRRT and was referred to another hospital. To initiate PRRT therapy, the patient provided informed consent to participate in the F-1515 phase I/II clinical trial . The patient had no adverse events during PRRT. Following the administration of four cycles of PRRT with 177Lu-DOTATATE, most liver metastases diminished on imaging, and the remaining two hepatic lesions continued to shrink. While the liver metastases remained under control for a prolonged period, a new intrahepatic lesion was suspected 20 months after the completion of PRRT. After reintroducing lanreotide, the new intrahepatic lesion disappeared, and we could visualize only previously detected two lesions. Bone metastasis was well controlled with no remarkable change . In the referral hospital, continued lanreotide therapy was proposed because there was no long-term progression of both liver and bone metastases. However, the patient wished to undergo tumor resection if possible, and further evaluation was performed in the referral hospital. A gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylene-triamine-pentaacetic acid-enhanced MRI showed no apparent liver metastasis other than the two lesions. In addition, MRI showed no change in the size of bone metastasis and no other extrahepatic lesions except for the bone metastasis . Based on these findings, the disease was considered stable, and we thought the surgical resection of the remaining liver metastases was appropriate.
After being referred again to our hospital, the patient underwent a partial hepatectomy (S2 and S8). This marked the third liver resection, and severe intraperitoneal adhesions were noted during the procedure. Intraoperative ultrasound findings indicated the absence of tumors, except for the two lesions, which were difficult to distinguish between scars or tumors. Therefore, two partial hepatectomies were performed. Because the tumors were difficult to detect in the resected specimens from both S2 and S8, additional liver resections were conducted to fully include the tumor area respectively. Operative time was 557 min, and blood loss was 1892 mL. There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 10. The resected specimens were S2 (2.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm, 5.0 × 2.5 × 0.5 cm) and S8 (3.5 × 3.0 × 1.0 cm, 3.0 × 2.5 × 0.6 cm). Gross examination revealed the presence of a grayish-white lesion resembling scar tissue on the surface of the liver S8 specimen; however, no apparent tumor was identified . Histopathological analysis did not detect viable tumor cells in both specimens . Seventeen months after surgery, the bone metastasis remained stable, and no other recurrence was identified via imaging modalities, including CECT and SRS, without administering drug therapy. The patient’s clinical course is summarized in Additional file : Figure S1.