The patient studied was a 58-year-old man who had been working as a shipbuilding supervisor in an office setting performing primarily sedentary jobs. However, he was expected to start working on a construction site for ships used to transport gas and oil, which involved 3 h of field supervising per 8-h workday. His field tasks involved climbing stairs, walking, and moving in small, enclosed spaces. He was a smoker and complained of dyspnea when walking or climbing. He visited the Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine to examine his capacity to work and perform scheduled tasks without negative health consequences, with respect to cardiopulmonary function. Figure depicts the steps taken to test the patient’s fitness to work. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Haeundae Paik Hospital.
Ship construction site workers may be exposed to iron oxide dust, heavy metals, and harmful gases. Following a work environment evaluation performed in the same workplace in the latter half of 2013, we calculated the amount of harmful inhalable substances the patient could be exposed to in the process of welding and grinding. The arithmetic mean exposure to welding fumes and iron oxide dust were 2.73 (±1.35) and 2.94 (±1.04) mg/m3 respectively, which does not exceed the acceptable limit in Korea. The welding fumes included iron oxide, titanium dioxide, manganese and manganese compounds, and aluminum and aluminum compounds. Grinding generated various types of dust.
The patient’s baseline physical characteristics and lifestyle traits were as follows: height, 179 cm; body weight, 132 kg; waist circumference, 129 cm; body mass index, 41.1 kg/m2; blood pressure, 160/90 mmHg; pulse, 89 beats/min; respiratory rate, 23 breaths/min; body temperature, 36.8 °C; 40 pack-year smoking history; and consumption of 10–12 units of alcohol per week. Stethoscope examination indicated mild wheezing. He had been medicated for hypertension and dyslipidemia for the past 2 years.
Although the patient was not affected by a chronic cough or sputum production, he was suspected of having COPD because of his 40 pack-year smoking history, mild wheezing, and dyspnea during exercise. To rule out other conditions with similar symptoms, such as asthma, his pre-bronchodilator spirometry results (FEV1/FVC, 0.46; FEV1, 1.81 L, 47 % predicted; FVC, 3.90 L, 82 % predicted) were compared with his post-bronchodilator spirometry results (FEV1/FVC, 0.46; FEV1, 1.89 L, 49 % predicted; FVC, 4.09 L, 86 % predicted). Post-bronchodilator spirometry was performed 15 min after the inhalation of 400 μg bronchodilator salbutamol. The patient was diagnosed with COPD as the improvements in both FEV1 and FVC were less than the predicted 12 %, the absolute increase was below 0.2 L, and the FEV1/FVC ratio was < 0.7. These results indicate that the patient’s airflow limitations correspond to a GOLD 3 rating (severe, FEV1/FVC < 0.7, 30 % ≤ FEV1 < 50 % predicted).
To evaluate the severity of COPD, the patient’s degree of dyspnea was assessed using the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea scale, and his symptoms were assessed using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT). He had no history of acute COPD exacerbation, but experienced shortness of breath and flagging pace when walking on level ground, resulting in a mMRC grade of 2. He experienced shortness of breath when climbing slopes and stairs and also complained of chest pain that limited normal life at home, resulting in a CAT score of 12. High-risk individuals are characterized by a history of acute exacerbations twice per year or an exacerbation leading to hospital admission once per year. Regardless of exacerbation history, patients are categorized into the high-risk group if they are affected by an GOLD airflow limitation score of 3 or 4 according to the pulmonary function test. High-risk individuals with CAT scores > 10, or mMRC grades > 2, are classified as belonging to patient group D . Since the patient had a GOLD airflow limitation rating of 3, a mMRC dyspnea grade of 2, and a score of 12 on the CAT, he was classified into patient group D .
Because FEV1 exceeded 40 % and the patient did not show signs of ventilatory failure, arterial blood gas analysis was not performed. Moreover, the alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency-screening test was not conducted because the patient was > 45 years of age and there was no family history of this disorder. Chest X-rays revealed no specific findings and we did not detect polycythemia, which can occur in relation to hypoxemia.
The exercise stress test was performed to evaluate exercise capacity and to discover possible abnormalities during exercise. The test was stopped at Stage 4 (6.7 km/h) because the patient showed abnormal elevation of systolic blood pressure (210/80 mmHg) and complained of dyspnea. He did not experience chest pain and his electrocardiography did not show ST segment depression. The maximum oxygen uptake (VO2max) was calculated to be 19.16 ml/kg/min (total time completed = 5 min 38 s), which was classified as ‘very poor’ for his age group .
The patient’s tasks at work included the following physical activities and durations: sedentary work, 300 min; car driving, 30 min; walking slowly, 60 min; walking normally, 20 min; standing and speaking, 30 min; ascending stairs, 20 min; and descending stairs, 20 min. Ainsworth et al. provided aerobic demands (VO2work) for each of the following tasks: sedentary work, 5.3 ml/kg/min; car driving, 7.0 ml/kg/min; walking slowly, 7.0 ml/kg/min; walking normally, 12.3 ml/kg/min; standing and speaking, 10.5 ml/kg/min; ascending stairs, 14.0 ml/kg/min; and descending stairs, 12.25 ml/kg/min. The mean aerobic demand for the patient’s activities was 6.89 ml/kg/min . Wu and Wang suggested that 34 % of an individual’s VO2max is an acceptable workload for a general 8-h physical workday, such that 6.51 ml/kg/min (34 % of the VO2max of 19.16 ml/kg/min) was recommended as the patient’s workload . However, the expected tasks required 6.89 ml/kg/min, which exceeded the 6.51 ml/kg/min cut-off, and thus these tasks were found to be unsuitable for the patient.
Since the patient was in patient group D (high risk, more symptoms) and required medication for COPD, it was necessary to limit his tasks to sedentary work. COPD exacerbation could endanger the patient and his colleagues at work; therefore, health personnel at his place of employment recognized that continuing certain tasks could impose considerable physical burden on the patient. Moreover, smoking cessation and wearing a powered air purifying respirator (PARP) when exposed to environmental factors that could aggravate the disease were essential to the patient’s health.