A 63-year-old man presented to our outpatient clinic complaining of epigastric pain for 2 months. Gastroscopy showed an ulcerative lesion in the gastric sinus, located on the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum, about 2.5 cm × 1.2 cm in size. Biopsy pathology showed high-medium differentiated adenocarcinoma, and the perfected CT of the patient showed horizontal turning of the intra-abdominal organs and local thickening of the gastric wall in the sinus with enlargement of small adjacent lymph nodes. Enhanced CT examination showed hepatic vascular variation. The common hepatic artery extended directly to bridge the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) without the proper hepatic artery, the right hepatic artery (RHA) emanated from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and the left hepatic lobe is supplied by the accessory left hepatic artery (ALHA) from the left gastric artery (LGA), and the celiac trunk and portal system were normal . The preoperative examination did not reveal any operational contraindications for the patient. After inviting the medical oncology department and radiotherapy department for the multi-disciplinary treatment (MDT) discussion, the patient was diagnosed with gastric cancer CT3N0M0 (stage IIB). Considering that the tumor was small and no obvious lymph node metastasis was suggested by imaging, the patient could be operated on with radical resection of the tumor although he had local vascular variation, which did not affect the surgical operation. Finally, D2 surgical resection was directly performed on the patient without preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in a combination of the patient's age and economy, followed by laparoscopic-assisted distal gastrectomy and D2 lymph node dissection and Billroth I anastomosis in this patient.
For the surgical approach, we adopted the opposite stance and perforation to conventional gastric cancer surgery and used a 3D laparoscope to allow a more detailed view of the anatomical levels. The patient was placed in a supine split-legged position, and the lead surgeon operated on the right side of the patient. A 10 mm trocar was placed in the umbilicus and a camera was put in to explore that there were no malignant ascites in the abdominal cavity and the tumor did not break through the surface of the gastric sinus, but in the right midclavicular line in the flat umbilical position. A 12 mm trocar was placed and three 5 mm trocars were placed on the remaining side. The gastric colon ligament was separated by an ultrasonic blade at the upper edge of the transverse colon, followed by free cutting of the splenic colic ligament and splenic ligament to the splenic hilum to the right, dissection of the left vascular of the gastric omentum and the short gastric vessels, clearing of station 4 lymph nodes, and stripping of the anterior lobe of the transverse mesocolon. The posterior wall of the gastric antrum was excised from the transverse mesocolon, which then was dissected upward to the superior margin of the pancreas and separated to the right to the lower margin of the duodenal bulb, followed by separation and ligation of the right gastroepiploic vein and the right gastroepiploic artery, and clearing of station 6 lymph nodes. After that, the gastric body and greater omentum were turned cephalad, and the accessory left hepatic artery was ligated and dissected after separating the left gastric artery and protecting, followed by the clearing of the lymph nodes of station 7 and station 9, the clearing of station 8 lymph nodes along the common hepatic artery to the left, and the clearing of station 11 lymph nodes along the splenic artery to the right. The stomach and greater omentum were then turned caudally, and the hepatoduodenal ligament was opened over the pylorus to find the right gastric artery, which was dissected at the root of its confluence with the common hepatic artery, and station 5 lymph nodes were cleared, freeing the superior duodenum by about 3 cm; the hepatogastric ligament was dissected immediately over the liver to the right side of the cardia and the lymph nodes of station 1 and station 3 were cleared, and the 12 groups of lymph nodes were cleared over the common hepatic artery.
The postoperative pathology showed ulcerated high-medium differentiated adenocarcinoma (2 cm × 3 cm) and muscular infiltration, without nerve involvement, and the examination results of upper and lower margins were all negative. No cancerous tissue was seen in the omental tissue, 14 lymph nodes in the small curved side did not show cancer metastasis, and 6 lymph nodes in the large curved side did not show cancer metastasis . The postoperative diagnosis was gastric cancer (PT2N0M0 stage IB).
The patient recovered well after surgery and was discharged 10 days after surgery, with no serious complications, abnormal liver function, and obvious tumor recurrence after 6 months of follow-up.