A 64-year-old Moroccan man was admitted to our department for left flank pain with no particular irradiation that had started one month previously and nausea and vomiting of one day's duration. He reported no digestive or urinary symptoms and was afebrile. He had no significant medical history apart from new-onset arterial hypertension one year before (systolic blood pressure, 170 mmHg to 190 mmHg; diastolic blood pressure, 90 mmHg to 100 mmHg) requiring combination therapy with bisoprolol and amlodipine. He denied any contact with dogs or sheep.
His physical examination was unremarkable and a standing abdominal radiography was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a large hypoechoic mass, containing an internal cystic component adjacent to the superior pole of his left kidney. Initially it was almost impossible to find its contacts and origin . A computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen showed a giant hypoattenuated cystic mass in the top of his left kidney measuring 14.5 cm × 7.2 cm with daughter cysts filing the lesion, which had a honeycomb appearance in his left adrenal gland, with a mass effect on surrounding structures . An exploration of the rest of his abdominal cavity and chest didn't find any further evidence of HD, including his liver and lungs. A hematological examination was characterized by a slight augmentation of white blood cells (11 cells/mm3) and by eosinophilia (7% eosinophils). His blood biochemistry was normal. Other laboratory results were normal, including his renin, aldosterone and 24-hour urinary vanillylmandelic acid and metanephrine levels. A serologic test of the hydatid cyst was negative.
After the radiological findings, the mass was diagnosed as a giant primary adrenal hydatid cyst; although our patient denied animal contact, the cyst was presumed to be hydatid, and surgical exploration was planned, based on these data.
Our patient underwent an open laparotomy through a midline incision and the cystic lesion of his left adrenal gland was identified. The exploration found a multivesicular hydatid cyst of the upper pole of the left adrenal measuring 18 cm×10 cm×8 cm. The abdominal cavity and especially the region around the cyst was carefully protected and isolated by pads soaked in hypertonic 20% saline solution. The cyst was not drained nor aspirated during the surgical procedure. An appropriate dissection plane between the cyst and the adrenal gland could not be found, so both the cyst and the adrenal gland were removed. It is noteworthy that our patient remained hemodynamically stable without any hypertensive crisis during the operation. A macroscopic examination revealed a germinate membrane and daughter cysts and a microscopic examination revealed scolices in the cyst fluid. A histological examination confirmed the diagnosis. The postoperative course was uneventful. Our patient underwent therapy with albendazole (800 mg/day) for one month. There was a progressive reduction in his arterial pressure after the operation, and three months after the surgery his blood pressure was about 130/80 mmHg, with no medication and no particular diet. At the most recent follow-up, 24 months later, ultrasound monitoring did not detect any hydatid recurrence, and our patient was doing well and symptom free.