A 6-months old boy was transferred to our hospital with a 4-days history of jaundice and pruritus. On examination he was jaundiced with no organomegaly. There was a rash on the trunk and extremities. Liver function tests revealed a direct bilirubin level of 109 μmol/L (normal below 17), alkaline phosphatas level of 11.62 μkat/L (normal up to 1.74) and γGT level of 3.23 μkat/L (normal up to 0.63).
An ultrasound scan (US) of his abdomen identified a 40 mm large mass in the head of the pancreas. The common bile duct was dilated, the gall-bladder was extremely enlarged, but there was no dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts and pancreatic duct . The results of US-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy wasn’t conclusive regarding the nature of the tumor. MRI confirmed well circumscribed tumor mass, with a diameter of 37 mm. The tumor originated from the head of the pancreas and uncinate process. 3D reconstruction showed no infiltration in the surrounding tissue, including major vessels . However, there was evidence, that the tumor impressed on the caval vein and pushed the superior mesenteric artery and vein ventrally and laterally.
Whipple’s procedure was performed due to biliary obstruction and possible malignancy .
Histological examination revealed an infiltrative growth in the pancreatic head, mainly surrounding and destroying pancreatic acini , but also encroaching on papila of Vater and duodenal wall. The lesion was composed of bland spindle cells forming a storiform and vague fascicular growth pattern, admixed with areas displaying more epithelioid morphology and variably prominent inflammatory cell infiltrate , composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophilic granulocytes .
By immunohistochemistry, the lesional cells were smooth muscle actin positive proliferation of bland spindle cells forming a storiform and vague fascicular growth pattern, admixed with areas displaying more epithelioid morphology and variably prominent inflammatory cell infiltrate, composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophilic granulocytes, while stainings for cytokeratins, S100, desmin, H-caldesmon and ALK were negative, confirming myofibroblastic differentiation of the lesional cells. Although the histological and immunohistochemical features were suggestive of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour, an unusual form of chronic pancreatitis could not be reliably excluded.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The boy was discharged on the 14th postoperative day. Over the next 3.5 years of follow up, he remains well and with no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence.