A 32-year-old man proceed in our unit suffered from painful erections. Our patient noticed over 10 days the appearance of a painful cord on the dorsal aspect of his penis, near the penis root, being more painful during erections. He denied any history of recent trauma, vigorous sexual activity or use of constrictor devices. In addition, he reported that he did not have fever or symptoms from the lower urinary tract.
Physical examination revealed a stressed out but physically healthy man with a dorsal cord-like swelling, extending from the pubic symphysis to mid-shaft of his penis, painful during palpation . Genitourinary examination was normal and the standard laboratory tests (blood and urine) were without pathologic findings. The patient underwent ultrasonography examination which revealed a non-compressible portion of superficial dorsal vein as well as the lack of venous flow signals in Doppler ultrasonography .
The diagnosis indicated superficial dorsal vein trombophlebitis and conservative treatment was prescribed. Treatment included local dressing with heparin ointment and oral treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (8 mg Lornoxicam), 325 mg of acid salicylic and 500 mg Cefuroxime. The patient was advised to abstain from sexual activity until the symptoms resolved and was scheduled for follow-up in a week, a month and two months.
One week after his first visit patient reported a significant decrease of the pain but the swelling was palpable. Antibiotic discontinued at that time and he was instructed to continue his treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory and acid salicylic.
At his second medical examination, after a month, about 40 days after the first episode of pain, he had no symptom and the physical examination did not revealed anything pathologic. The patient mentioned the total absence of any symptom approximately 10 days ago. In addition, a Doppler ultrasonography of the superficial dorsal penile vein demonstrated the presence of normal blood flow . Oral treatment stopped and the last visit was considered unnecessary.