A 75-year-old woman presented with abdominal pain and altered general condition. Her medical history was left colectomy for localised colonic adenocarcinoma 12 years ago, radiotherapy for anal epidermoid carcinoma diagnosed on a histologic piece of hemorrhoidectomy 3 years ago, type II diabetes, and IgG-kappa monoclonal gammopathy. She reported an abdominal discomfort for more than 1 year then weight loss in the past 6 months. These symptoms were explored a year ago with CT-scan and colonoscopy that were normal. At admission, CT-scan showed a pseudotumoural thickening of the right colonic wall with diffuse peritoneal effusion but the colonoscopy without biopsies revealed no mucosal abnormalities. A surgical exploration was decided: per-operative examination revealed a mass infiltrating the right colon, the caecum, and the peritoneum leading the surgeon to perform a right hemicolectomy. First histological conclusion was desmoid-type abdominal fibromatosis and after review fibroblastic/myofibroblastic tumour of intermediate malignancy. No treatment was proposed, and the patient was addressed to our institution.
The patient’s condition worsened within 6 months with a loss of 12 kg, diarrhoea, abdominal pain a slowing down of her intestinal tract and dysphagia, without vomiting. Clinical examination showed a sub-mandibular tumefaction which was confirmed on a CT-scan . Abdominal imaging showed peritoneal effusion and multiples nodules suggesting carcinosis. Biopsy of the sub-mandibular mass showed numerous histiocytes with intracytoplasmic eosinophilic crystals, engulfed within a dense reactional fibroblastic population . Those findings allowed a diagnosis of CSH. Immunohistochemistry confirmed macrophagic nature of the cell infiltrate, positive for CD163 . Crystals were stained with an anti-kappa antibody and not with an anti-lambda antibody, consistent with a monoclonal light chain. The review of the colonic mass histology confirmed the diagnosis and allowed us to classify it as a generalized CSH .
Haematological explorations detected a monoclonal IgG-kappa at 26 g/l and imbalanced kappa/lambda free light chains . Serum creatinine and calcium were normal. Haemoglobin level was 10.8 g/dL. A bone marrow aspiration found 16% of dysmorphic plasma cells. Cytogenetics identified a t(11;14) translocation. PET-scan was normal. A diagnosis of indolent IgG-kappa multiple myeloma (MM) complicated with diffuse CSH was made. A first line treatment based on proteasome inhibitor was proposed with bortezomib (1.3 mg/m2 D1;D4;D8;D11), cyclophosphamide (350 mg/m2 D1;D8;D15) and dexamethasone (40 mg D1-D4). After three cycles, the general status of the patient worsened with persistent abdominal pain and a marked inflammatory syndrome. Introduction of continuous corticosteroid therapy with prednisone at 0.8 mg/kg/d improved the abdominal pain.
A second-line regimen based on immunodulatory agents and monoclonal antibody was done, with daratumumab (1400 mg), lenalidomide (25 mg D1-D21) and dexamethasone (40 mg/week). Partial response (PR), defined by reduction of 50% of gammopathy level, was obtained with significant improvement of the patient’s condition. Although abdominal CT-scan showed persistence of peritoneal nodules, we noticed a disappearance of peritoneal effusion. After 6 months of treatment, immunochemical PR persisted and albumin normalized . Medullar biopsy was normal. Unfortunately, 2 months later a mechanical occlusion of the intestine with perforation occurred. The evolution was rapidly fatal with multiple organ failure syndrome and death of the patient despite intensive care and surgical management.