A 42-year-old Caucasian male with unremarkable medical history was referred to our cardiac intensive care unit for suspected CS. He presented in another hospital with fever, low blood pressure (BP), diffuse electrocardiogram (ECG)-abnormalities, and elevated troponin (4.930 µg/L; normal range <0.013 µg/L) levels.
At admission, he was hypotensive [blood pressure (BP) 85/47 mmHg] with tachycardia (97–110 b.p.m.) and signs of impaired peripheral circulation (cold, prolonged capillary refill, and confusion). Central venous oxygen saturation was only 37% and serum lactate was 2.7 mmol/L. His ECG showed sinus rhythm, biatrial dilation, small QRS voltage with right axis, and non-specific repolarization abnormality. Echocardiography was performed and showed severe left ventricular dysfunction. The right ventricular (RV) function was mild to moderately impaired, but without dilation (Video 1). There was also a small pericardial effusion, but without signs of tamponade. An urgent coronary angiogram was performed and it was completely normal. Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was 22 mmHg despite low BP. Since haemodynamic conditions rapidly deteriorated, an ImpellaTM CP device was implanted whilst being awake. Right ventricular myocardial biopsies were obtained once he was stable and a Swan-Ganz catheter was inserted per institutional ImpellaTM protocol.
The patient never required intubation. Soon after implantation of the device, suction events (automatic ImpellaTM flow reductions based on motor current changes indicating contact between the pump inlet and ventricular structures) occurred and the ImpellaTM flow had to be reduced to only minimal support. Pulmonary artery wedge pressure was decreasing while central venous pressure (CVP) had risen to 20 mmHg and pulmonary artery (PA) pulsatility index [(systolic PA pressure – diastolic PA pressure)/CVP] was only 0.45 (reference >1), indicating RV failure. Urgent transthoracic echocardiography complemented invasive measurements by showing severe RV dysfunction (Video 2) and confirmed an adequate ImpellaTM position. A low dose of milrinone (0.3 mcg/kg/min) was started, leading to an increase in the cardiac output, a decrease in CVP, and a successful uptitration of the ImpellaTM flow level to 3.5 L/min. Milrinone was chosen because it has pulmonary vasodilator properties in addition to the inotropic effects. Lactate levels rapidly decreased, and the patient was clinically well perfused.
Pathological staining of the RV sample showed a high load of infiltration with inflammatory cells, mainly eosinophils, compatible with eosinophilic myocarditis. Serum eosinophilic count was surprisingly within the normal range . The serum anti-cytoplasmic antibody test was negative, as were serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) tests, and screening for parasites. Repetitive blood cultures remained sterile. There was also no recent drug exposure. We presumed idiopathic eosinophilic myocarditis and high dose methylprednisone was started at 2 mg/kg during the first week. C-reactive protein and troponin levels decreased soon after unloading with the ImpellaTM was initiated and rapidly normalized after methylprednisone treatment. Renal function normalized after 24 h of ImpellaTM support. Left as well as right ventricular function started to recover on a daily echocardiogram. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition was initiated on Day 3. Over the next couple of days, cardiac function recovered and ImpellaTM-explantation was successful at Day 5. On Day 14, his cardiac function had completely recovered on magnetic resonance imaging, which showed some residual inflammation. On Day 16, the patient was discharged on an ACE-inhibitor and methylprednisone 24 mg, which was tapered by 4 mg every week. At follow-up visit after 4 months and complete steroid taper, his cardiac function remained completely normalized.