A 41-year-old woman presented to our hospital for further evaluation and management of persistent liver dysfunction, painless xanthochromia, and skin itching for 3 months.
On admission, a physical examination showed severe icteric sclera and skin without abdominal tenderness or positive shifting dullness. Liver function showed severe hepatic injury and obstructive jaundice . US showed a 5.0 × 5.3 cm, well-circumscribed anechoic lesion with many separations, increased through-transmission of sound, and no evidence of mural nodularity. Epigastric enhanced CT showed a cystic mass with sharply defined margins and smooth, thin, non-reinforced walls in the left medial liver lobe, and obstruction of the biliary tract. The contents of the mass were homogeneous, with water-density lesions, suggesting that it was a cyst. MRI showed a homogeneously hypointense lesion on T1-weighted imaging and this was homogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging. US, CT, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a slightly ectatic right hepatic duct, a greatly ectatic left hepatic duct and common bile duct, an enlarged gallbladder, and a normal distal end of the choledochus . Possible reasons for biliary obstruction were bile duct tumor, common bile duct stones, or compression of the common bile duct by a hepatic cyst.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) was performed to define the cause of obstruction. This procedure showed that the right hepatic duct was ectatic, but the left hepatic duct and common bile duct were not observed. There were no stone, but a large lump was observed in the common bile duct, which suggested suspicious bile duct tumor. Endoscopic sphincterotomy, endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage(ERBD), and endoscopic nasobiliary draingage(ENBD) were successfully performed to drain bile for severe hepatic injury and jaundice, rather than laparotomy, because of coagulation disorders . After these procedures, the icteric sclera and skin gradually faded, liver function was obviously improved, and coagulation disorders were close to normal levels .
Four weeks later, an open operation was performed for suspicion of bile duct tumor. In exploration of the common bile duct by a choledochoscope, a large pedunculated lump protruding into the common bile duct from the left hepatic duct was discovered. This lump was completely removed from the root of the lump by endoscopic needle-knife electrotomy without active hemorrhage . The morphology of the lump was similar to the gallbladder with a capsule wall and capsular space . The choledochoscope was inserted into the hepatic duct from the stump of the lump and there was no viscous liquid secreted by cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma. Postoperative pathology of the lump suggested a hepatic cyst wall without heterocysts or tumor cells . A T tube was retained in the common bile duct in order to prevent bile leakage and observe the recovery of the root incision of the lump and postoperative bleeding.
Two months later, all of the liver function indices recovered to the normal range . Epigastric US and CT showed a normal hepatic duct and the hepatic cyst was the same size compared with preoperatively. A choledochoscopic examination was performed through a T-tube fistula. There was no evidence of bile duct tumor. The choledochoscope could enter into the cyst from the defect of the bile duct wall, and the mucosa around the incision recovered well, with no signs of stricture.
Three years after the procedure, the patient was in a good general condition, without signs of cholestasis or bile duct stones. The cyst had barely changed .