In 2004, a 68-year-old female received an RT after six months of dialysis for uremia. After RT, the patient has been using immunosuppressants, and the regimen is: cyclosporin A(CsA) + mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) + prednisone(Pred). No rejection was observed after transplantation and the function of the transplanted kidney was good. In 2022, the patient developed hematuria. An enhanced CT showed a shadow in the transplanted kidney in the right iliac fossa and that the renal pelvis and some renal calyces were dilated and contained an effusion . The volume of both autologous kidneys had become smaller and the cortex and medulla had become thinner. Two round, slightly low-density shadows were seen in the middle and lower parts of the autologous left kidney, some of which protruded beyond the contour of the kidney, with unclear boundaries . No abnormalities were found in the bladder. A laparoscopic resection of the left kidney and ureter was performed. Gross pathological examination showed a soft and friable mass (I) in the left renal parenchyma, 2*1.8*1.5 cm in size, with a grayish-red section, thin papillary, that was clear from the surrounding boundary and protruded from the renal capsule. A cauliflower-like mass (II), 5*2.5*2 cm in size, was seen in the renal pelvis adjacent to mass (I), with a grayish-red section, soft and friable texture, and unclear boundary from the surrounding area. Microscopically, mass (I) was adjacent to mass (II) . Mass (I) had a clear boundary from the surrounding tissues and was formed mainly by complex branching papillary structures with a fibrovascular axis . The papillae were covered with a single layer of cubic cells, with abundant cytoplasm and eosinophilia. The nuclei were round and located at the top of the cell away from the nuclear basement membrane, and were characterized by "reverse polarity", with no obvious nucleolus. The nuclei were classified as grade 1 according to the WHO/ISUP classification system. Eosinophilic hobnail cells, intracytoplasmic vacuoles, and hemosiderin deposition could be seen locally in mass (I) . Mass (I) exhibited small focal invasions into the renal parenchyma, and a hemorrhage and a small amount of lymphocyte infiltration in the local interstitium . Mass (II) showed papillary growth, local papillae that merged with each other, an increased number of cell layers, disordered polarity, and mild atypia of the cells with occasional mitotic division . We performed IHC staining that showed the tumor cells in mass (I) diffusely and strongly expressed GATA3, MUC1, EMA, E-cadherin, 34bE12, Ksp-cadherin, CK7, and PAX-8 , while CD117, CAIX, CK20, RCC, and TFE3 were negative. Vimentin, CD10, and P504s were locally expressed in different degrees, and the positive index of Ki67 was about 1% . Mass (I) was diagnosed as a PRNRP with a pathologic stage of pT1a N0 M0, and histological grade (WHO/ISUP nuclear grade) of 1. Because microsatellite instability (MSI) is common in upper urinary tract UC (UTUC) , the staining IHC for MLH1, MLH2, PMS2, and MSH6 in mass (II) were all positive, while HER2 was negative. Mass (II) was diagnosed as an invasive low-grade UC with a pathological stage of pT1b N0 M0. In August of last year, cystoscopy revealed seven masses in the anterior, bottom, and lateral wall of the bladder and the left ureter opening. The maximum diameter of the masses was about four mm, and they had a pedicle. Two regions were biopsied with, and the samples were then sent for pathology, which showed a papillary urothelial neoplasm with low malignant potential. This was followed by infusion chemotherapy, and part of the left ureter was resected in July of this year. Postoperative pathology confirmed non-invasive low-grade UC. The patient was followed up until September 1, 2023, and the patient was still alive.
PCR analysis revealed a KRAS (G12D in exon 2) mutation in the PRNRP, while NGS analysis showed FGFR3 (S249C in exon 7), KDM6A (Q271Ter in exon 10 and A782Lfs in exon 17) mutations in the UC .