A 69-year-old woman presented with a 6-month history of diarrhoea and left iliac fossa pain of short duration that had progressively worsened prompting emergency admission. Since the onset of her symptoms, she had not sought any medical advice and had no records of previous hospital admissions with the above symptoms. Her only past medical history was of peptic ulcer disease. On examination, she had a temperature of 37.8°C and was tender in the lower abdomen but had no signs of peritonitis. No other clinical signs of septicaemia were present. Initial investigations revealed a raised white cell count of 23.0 × 109 (neutrophilia) and an elevated CRP. Urine microscopy revealed white cells and culture confirmed an E. coli urinary tract infection. She was treated initially with intravenous gentamicin, benzyl penicillin and metronidazole for an intra abdominal cause of sepsis according to the hospital microbiology protocol. The following day, she developed swinging pyrexia and blood cultures were taken. She proceeded to have a CT scan that revealed a distal sigmoid mass with extensive circumferential wall thickening and air beyond the bowel wall lumen suggesting localised perforation. There was no evidence of a pneumoperitoneum or of metastatic disease . In view of the clinical and radiological findings, an emergency laparotomy was performed on day 3 of admission. Immediately pre-operatively, she was found to have C.septicum positive blood cultures. Preoperatively, 1.2 g of benzylpenicillin and 500 mg of metronidazole were administered intravenously and gentamicin was discontinued following microbiology advice. Intra operatively, a bulky inflammatory mass was identified in the upper rectum with localised perforation and pus. In view of the sepsis and oedematous rectal wall, a low Hartmann's procedure was carried out rather than a restorative resection. Cultures from the pus swab taken intra-operatively subsequently grew a heavy growth of C.septicum. Postoperatively she remained on intravenous antibiotics (benzylpenicillin 1.2 g QDS, and metronidazole 500 mg tds) for 5 days and made an uneventful recovery.
Histology revealed a poorly differentiated Dukes B (pT3N0 Mx) adenocarcinoma. In view of the fact that she had a perforated rectal cancer, she was subsequently referred for adjuvant chemotherapy.