A 32-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a 5-year history of a slowly growing, painful mass in the medial aspect of the right ankle. There was no history of antecedent trauma. A family history of NF2 or schwannomatosis was not evident. The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable. On physical examination, an elastic-hard, poorly mobile, tender mass was noted in the medial aspect of the ankle , with extension into the medial plantar aspect of the foot. Tinel sign was elicited with radiation into the plantar aspect of the foot. Abnormal sensations including numbness and burning were present in the plantar aspect of the foot. Manual muscle testing revealed mild weakness (grade 4) in the right toe flexor muscles (I–IV). Laboratory data were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated multiple nodular lesions with iso-signal intensity relative to skeletal muscle on T1-weighted sequences and heterogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences. Contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted sequences showed mild to moderate enhancement . There was no evidence of osseous involvement. Based on these features, a multinodular/plexiform schwannoma was strongly suspected.
Following an open biopsy, the surgical enucleation was performed under general anesthesia with pneumatic tourniquet control and loupe magnification. The patient was placed in the supine position. The skin incision was made in the center over the tumor and extended along the course of the posterior tibial nerve and its larger terminal blanch (the medial plantar nerve) . The tumor was observed to cohesively follow the course of the posterior tibial nerve through the tarsal tunnel, as well as the medial plantar nerve through the plantar aspect of the foot to the proximal phalanx . We carefully made a longitudinal incision in the epineurium far away from the fascicles. The epineurial layers were gently peeled out until the shiny surface of the tumor was exposed. We did not carry out intraoperative nerve conduction studies to identify nonfunctioning fascicles. Fifty-eight separate tumors were shelled out in one piece. The dissected window of the epineurium was left open. The subcutaneous tissue was reapproximated using 4–0 absorbable sutures. Skin closure was achieved with 4–0 nonabsorbable sutures. A dry, sterile, minimally compressive dressing was applied to the patient’s foot and ankle. A short leg posterior splint was then applied. Macroscopically, individual tumors were yellowish-white and ranged from 0.2 to 3.0 cm in greatest diameter . Microscopically, all enucleated tumors showed a proliferation of spindle-shaped cells arranged in fascicles with occasional nuclear palisade arrangement in Antoni A areas . Loosely arranged reticular portions (Antoni B areas) were also focally seen . Neither highly cellular areas nor mitotic figures were found. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of multinodular/plexiform schwannoma.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The burning sensation was relieved immediately after surgery. The sutures were removed 2 weeks after surgery, by the same time the patient started progressive weight bearing. The patient then resumed full weight bearing activities within 6 weeks. At 5 months postoperatively, the patient had excellent pain relief and no aggravated neurological deficit except for mild hypoesthesia in the medial plantar aspect of the foot .