A 63-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with facial and bilateral pedal oedema and progressive dyspnoea on exertion. She had no past medical history, family history, and allergies, and was previously healthy until she received her COVID-19 vaccinations. The oedema emerged the day following her first COVID-19 vaccination (Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccines, Pfizer, New York, NY, USA) but resolved on its own. The bilateral leg oedema occurred again after her second COVID-19 vaccination (Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccines), and dyspnoea on exertion gradually developed. As the oedema and dyspnoea did not improve and facial oedema was newly developed, the patient visited our hospital 6 weeks following her second vaccination. On admission, her physical examination revealed a jugular venous distention with bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema. Echocardiography revealed substantially elevated right heart pressure with a D-shaped left ventricle and a high tricuspid regurgitation peak gradient (TRPG, 57 mmHg) ( and ). Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no apparent thrombus in the pulmonary arteries or lower extremity veins . Venous echography of the lower extremities also showed no evidence of thrombi. Electrocardiogram revealed right-axis deviation, incomplete right bundle branch block, an S wave in lead I, a Q wave in lead III, and an inverted T wave in lead III ( and B). On the Day 2 of admission, right cardiac catheterization revealed elevated mean pulmonary artery pressure (mean PAP, 30 mmHg) with normal pulmonary artery wedge pressure (11 mmHg). Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scintigraphy on Day 3 revealed no V/Q mismatch (see , ). Blood tests revealed no sign of collagen or malignant illness, but D-dimer level was 9.0 μg/mL and mildly elevated (normal range: <0.4 μg/mL). The C-reactive protein level (normal range: 0.8–1.0 mg/dL) and white blood cell count (normal range: 4.5–11.0 × 103/μL) were both within the normal range . Because neither enhanced CT scan nor V/Q scintigraphy illustrated evidence of a thrombus, the elevated D-dimer level suggested the involvement of microthrombi; thus, intravenous heparin therapy (infusion rate: 1.5 mL/h) was initiated on Day 3 and it continued until Day 7. Her symptoms improved substantially as her D-dimer levels dropped, and we began edoxaban treatment at 30 mg following heparin on Day 8. Edoxaban treatment ended on Day 16. Her 6 min walk test results improved from 120 m on Day 7 to 405 m on Day 14, and echocardiography on Day 11 showed decreased TRPG (20 mmHg; , , ). Follow-up right heart catheterization on Day 14 showed decreased mean PAP (15 mmHg) indicating improvement in PH. As the symptoms substantially improved, the patient refused all the medications, including anticoagulants, and she was discharged on Day 16. A 1 month follow-up echocardiogram revealed normal right heart pressure, no tricuspid valve regurgitation, and a normal D-dimer level (, , ). The patient has been asymptomatic at the 8 month follow-up.