This is a 51-year-old right-hand dominant female, who presented to the Emergency Department with pain and swelling to the right wrist after a history of fall. She had this fall while jogging, where she tripped and fell with an outstretched hand. It was an isolated injury and no other injuries were recorded.
On examination of her right wrist, there was obvious swelling to the ulnar side of the wrist. Some bruising was present on the palmar aspect on the ulnar side of the wrist. Specific tenderness was elicited on the hypothenar eminence as well on the ulnar corner of the wrist. Furthermore, the range of motion of the wrist was restricted because of pain. The neurovascular status was intact with no distal sensory loss and she had good distal circulation with palpable radial and ulnar pulse. Her finger movements were also satisfactory.
Based on the above history and clinical findings anteroposterior, lateral and oblique views of the wrist were taken. The radiographs (-) showed loss of normal metacarpal cascade and a fracture-dislocation of the 4th and 5th Carpometacarpal joint over the volar side. She was placed in an ulnar-gutter plaster of paris slab and was advised strict hand elevation while a CT scan was organized. The CT scan confirmed the above findings along with undisplaced fractures of the 3rd metacarpal as well as the hamate bone. The 4th metacarpal had a displaced partial articular fracture of the base, associated with volar dislocation of the carpometacarpal joint. Whereas, the 5th metacarpal was just a pure volar dislocation. A decision was taken to operate on it keeping in line with the evidence, which shows chronic pain and poor functional outcome in untreated/delayed cases.
The treatment offered was closed/open reduction of the fracture-dislocation with fixation. In theatre, after appropriate traction and manipulation under anesthesia, under image intensifier, the fracture-dislocation was satisfactorily reduced in a closed manner and the 5th carpometacarpal joint was fixed with a single Kirschner wire. The 4th carpometacarpal joint also fell in place and was stable under image intensifier. The joint was well reduced in both the planes with the single wire and the fixation provided was deemed sufficient (-). She was placed in a below-elbow volar slab and was advised limb elevation along with active finger movements.
She was reviewed at 2 weeks and the X-rays showed satisfactory alignment. She was then referred to our hand therapists who then worked on her to improve her functional range of motion of the fingers and its strength. We reviewed her again at 4 weeks and the follow-up X-rays were satisfactory with no specific complaints.
At the end of 6 weeks, the follow-up radiographs were satisfactory and the Kirschner wire was removed in the outpatient department. The volar slab was also discarded. Her range of motion of wrist was good albeit some stiffness and there was minimal stiffness in her fingers. The carpometacarpal joint was also stable and she was told to resume her normal activities other than axial loading activities of her upper limb for another 4 weeks along with the involvement of hand therapists. The hand therapists initiated focused exercises with active-assisted wrist range of motion and strengthening exercises.
At one year follow-up, the check radiographs were satisfactory (, ) and the patient was noted to have full range of wrist and finger movements with grip strength comparable to the contra-lateral side (-). She also went back to her pre-injury activity levels with no discomfort.