A 13-year-old girl presented 2 weeks prior to a referring hospital with complaints of cough, nasal congestion, chest and abdominal pain, and a fever up to 39.3 °C. She had a history of bicuspid aortic valve status post valvuloplasty in 2007 and 2016 with residual aortic insufficiency and aortic stenosis with aortic root enlargement. She reported no recreational drug use and no known domestic or feral cat or other animal contact history. Her family history was unremarkable except for an uncle with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). She was found to have acute kidney injury (creatinine 2.5 mg/dl) with metabolic acidosis, hypertension, nephrotic-range proteinuria, microscopic hematuria (urine RBC > 100/high power field), hypoalbuminemia, and low serum complement C3 and C4 levels. She underwent kidney biopsy which showed diffuse proliferative crescentic glomerulonephritis with full house pattern immunofluorescence finding, which was considered compatible with lupus nephritis. The suspicion for SLE triggered her transfer to our tertiary care center, where further work up was pursued.
Temperature 36.7 °C, Blood pressure 114/79 mmHg, heart rate 97/minute, respiration rate 21/minute, oxygen saturation 96%, regular heart rate and rhythm, 2–3/6 systolic ejection murmur best heard at right upper sternal border and 2/4 diastolic murmur at lower sternal border, no wheezes or crackles in lungs, soft, non-tender and non-distended abdomen, and no rashes, petechiae or edema on skin.
Laboratory test results were summarized in Table . Peripheral blood smear showed normocytic anemia, anisocytosis, rouleaux and a few spherocytes with no schistocytes. Blood cultures (10 times) were negative.
Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram showed bicuspid and thickened aortic valve with thickening of the posterior leaflet of aortic valve, irregular tissue attached to the aortic valve suspicious for vegetation and a pocket area suspicious for a para-valvular abscess .
The kidney biopsy material was requested from the referring hospital, including slides of light microscopy with hematoxin-eosin (H&E), periodic acid Schiff (PAS) and Jones methenamine silver stains, and images of direct immunofluorescence microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (EM). Sections of light microcopy showed 33 glomeruli with one globally obsolescent. The remaining glomeruli showed diffuse and severe endocapillary hypercellularity with scattered infiltration of neutrophils in glomerular capillary lumina . Fourteen glomeruli displayed cellular crescentic lesions, three of which also showed fibrinoid necrosis. Two glomeruli had fibrocellular crescents. There were no spikes or duplication of glomerular basement membranes (GBM) on Jones methenamine silver stain. Mild to focally moderate infiltrates of mononuclear cells were present in interstitium without neutrophils or eosinophils. There was focal interstitial fibrosis (about 10% of cortex). Arteries and arterioles were patent with no vasculitis or thrombi.
Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed diffuse granular mesangial and glomerular capillary loop reaction for fluorescein-tagged antibodies to IgG (2+), IgA (2–3+), IgM (3+), C3 (2–3+) and C1q (3+) on a scale of 0–3+. Fibrinogen reaction (3+) was detected in the crescentic area .
Electron microscopy showed frequent glomerular subendothelial and scattered mesangial immune complex-type electron dense deposits . There were no subepithelial deposits, including no hump-like deposits. There was severe endocapillary hypercellularity. Focal rupture of glomerular basement membrane was observed with adjacent crescent formation. Podocytes display limited effacement of foot processes (about 10%). Glomerular basement membranes showed even contour with normal thickness. Tubuloreticular inclusions were not identified in endothelial cytoplasm.
Multiple additional blood cultures were performed and all resulted negative. Blood sample was sent for Karius next generation sequencing (Redwood City, CA) which revealed Bartonella genomic material. Subsequently, blood Bartonella antibody testing showed anti-B. henselae IgG 1:1024 and IgM 1:256; anti-B. quinata IgG 1:512 and IgM < 1:16. (reference range for IgG: negative: < 1:64; equivocal 1:64–1:128; positive: ≥ 1:256; for IgM: negative: < 1:16, positive: ≥1:16). Blood was sent to ARUP Laboratory (Salt Lake City, Utah) for Bartonella DNA PCR which detected Bartonella species DNA. Kidney biopsy findings, interpreted in concert with her clinical presentation and new laboratory data, were considered compatible with infection-related acute crescentic proliferative glomerulonephritis, likely associated with clinically diagnosed Bartonella endocarditis. She was started on doxycycline and gentamicin dual agent therapy for 2 weeks.
After ten additional days of doxycycline therapy, she underwent cardiac surgery. During the operation, it is observed that the ascending aorta was aneurysmal and thin-walled. The left coronary and the noncoronary aortic valve leaflets were heavily calcified and the right coronary leaflet showed a large perforation. There was mass-like material in the right coronary sinus with a pseudoaneurysm through the aortic wall. All the valve tissue was excised in its entirety and the ascending aorta was transected at the juncture. Bentall aortic root replacement was performed with a 23-mm On-X mechanical valve conduit with a 24-mm graft. After the surgery, echocardiogram showed minimal aortic insufficiency, minimal aortic stenosis, improved mitral regurgitation and stenosis, and mildly diminished left ventricular function.
Pathologic examination of the aortic valve tissue revealed multi-foci of necrosis and acute inflammation with calcification, consistent with acute endocarditis. The valve tissue was sent to ARUP Laboratory for Bartonella DNA PCR and showed positive for Bartonella species DNA. Valve tissue culture for both fungal and mycobacteria returned negative.
The patient received kidney replacement therapy post-operatively for 5 days. Her kidney function gradually improved and she was discharged home 2 weeks after surgery with serum creatinine 0.95 mg/dl. She received doxycycline for another 6 weeks post-surgery. At the one-year fellow up, her serum creatinine was 0.68 mg/dl and urinalysis showed urine protein creatinine ratio 0.98 and RBC 3–5/HPF.