A 26-year-old woman patient was admitted to Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital on December 13, 2013 for constant gastric pain for 1 month. One month before the hospital admission, the patient started to experience gastric pain accompanied with acid reflux for no apparent cause. The pain became worse on an empty stomach. The patient did not present swallowing difficulties, belching, nausea, vomiting blood, black stool, fever, fatigue, diarrhea, or tenesmus at hospital admission. The patient had no previous exposure to tuberculosis.Gastroscopy revealed a hemispherical bulge with smooth surface and two small ulcers on the posterior wall of the lesser curvature of the stomach . Endoscopic ultrasound showed hypoechoic masses around the lesion , ununiform echo with some area of strong echo inside the lesion, and rich blood flow inside the lesion . The lesion was located in the fourth echo layer and showed a dimension of 26 mm × 21.5 mm . The patient was originally suspected to have gastric stromal tumor. The pathology of gastroscopic biopsy displayed acid-fast staining negative, reticular fiber staining negative, periodic acid Schiff staining negative, and ammoniacal silver staining negative. Haematoxylin & eosin staining of the gastroscopic biopsy specimen showed patches of caseating necrosis and granulomatous inflammation . Gene sequencing by polymerase chain reaction(PCR)analysis of the gastroscopic biopsy specimen found Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. TB) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) fragments.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated: 1) patchy densities and calcified nodular shadows in the upper right lung , suggesting a possible previous lung TB; 2) calcified pleural nodules in the lower right pleural ; 3) nodular shadows in the lesser curvature soft tissue of the stomach . Chest CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy on the pleural nodules found necrotic tissue and inflammatory cells, The acid-fast stain smear was negative, Along with other findings in chest CT and gastric pathology and positive TB-PCR, these pathologic changes may be in favor of TB pleural involvement. Electronic Bronchoscopy showed normal lumen and mucosal membrane. The patient did not have a previous diagnosis of TB. She had normal routine blood and chemistry test results. Tuberculin skin test (TST) showed an induration of 22 mm × 18 mm. M. TB antibody test and T-SPOT.TB test (A30 and B10) were positive. Based on these clinical data, the patient was diagnosed as gastric TB. First acid-fast bacilli smear and culture tests were negative.
The patient was hospitalized and underwent the systematic antitubercular therapy(ATT) HREZ for 1 week (0.3 g once daily oral isoniazid., rifampicin 0.45 g once a day on an empty stomach, 0.75 g once daily oral ethambutol, pyrazinamide orally, 0.5 g three times a day. Oral protection of liver is also given). The patient insisted on an outpatient review every month, with routine blood tests and liver and kidney function tests. After 3 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment, the patient developed gastrointestinal reaction and blurred vision, and the adjustment programme was HRptZLfx,(Isoniazid 0.3 g 1 day orally, rifapentini 0.45 a week twice fasting, pyrazinamide 0.5 g a day three times, levofloxacin 0.5 g 1 day orally). The above side effects were alleviated.After 6 months of treatment, levofloxacin was discontinued and continued HRptZ treatment. She had normal monthly reexamination of the normal liver and kidney function, and acid-fast bacilli smear and culture tests were negative for every 3 months. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein were negative before the drug withdrawal. Her gastroscopy showed normal results. Her chest CT scan revealed calcified nodules in the upper right lung , bilateral pleural thickening , calcified pleural nodules , and substantially smaller nodules with some calcification in the lesser curvature compared with the chest CT scan results on the hospital admission . Her sputum acid-fast bacilli smear and culture tests in March and May 2015 showed negative results. The antitubercular therapy was ended in May 2015. Her total treatment course was 18 months.
Deparaffinisation and DNA extractionTissue sections 5 μm thick were cut from paraffin blocks, and 10 sections were placed in 1.5 ml sterile EP tube. The tissues were deparaffinised by adding 1 ml of xylene to each microtube and the samples were mixed gently for 20 min at 65 °C. The samples were then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 2 min and the supernatants were discarded. Residual xylene was removed by washing the samples twice with 1 ml of 100% ethanol for 5 min and centrifuging at 13000 rpm for 2 min. The pellets were dried in a speed vacuum, and 200 μl of FTL and 25 μl of OB Protease (OMEGA). Genomic DNA was isolated using the FFPE DNA kit from Omega Biotek Inc. (Norcross, GA, USA) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. The contents and purity of the extracted DNA were assayed by measuring absorbance at 260 and 280 nm using a spectrophotometer.PCR amplificationIS6110 gene is specific for MTBC and 16SrRNA gene is specific for mycobacterium genus. The following primer sets were used for PCR: IS6110 (sense 5 ‘-CCTGCGAGCGTAGGCGTCGG-3′, anti-sense 5′- CCTGCGAGCGTAGGCGTCGG-3′); the product size of IS6110 was 123 bp a. Reactions were run in 25ul volumes containing 2ul of sample DNA. The remaining volumes was added using PCR master Mix (2×) from Thermo according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. The amplification program was consisted of initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 45 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30s, extension at 72 °C for 45 s, and a final extension at 72 °C for10 min. The PCR products were analyzed by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis .
We searched PubMed for the keyword “gastric tuberculosis” and found that 22 cases of gastric TB were reported from 2000 to 2016 [–, –]. The summary of these cases is displayed in Table . The patients were 21 to 80 years of age, and the mean age was 38.6 ± 15.3 years. The average history of disease were 6.4 ± 6.06 months. The shortest is 1 month. Of the 22 cases, 45.5% (10/22) were men; 59.1% (13/22) were primary gastric TB; 31.8% (7/22) had gastric outlet obstruction . Two cases were gastric TB with concomitant cancer [, ]. PCR was commonly used to diagnose gastric TB since 2011 [, , –]. Most cases presented caseating granuloma in endoscopic biopsy specimens or surgical specimens . Notably, a few cases did not show confirmed diagnosis of gastric TB but responded well to empiric ATT [, ]. All the patients survived and respond well to routine ATT.