A 43-year-old female patient with localized intrahepatic bile duct dilatation was found by physical examination for 20 years. For recent 3 years, the patient felt repeated right upper abdominal pain and distension, and aggravated for half a year, without fever and jaundice. She was admitted to our hospital for further examination and treatment. The patient's physical examination and hematological tests, including tumor markers Ca-199 were unremarkable. Enhanced CT and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) suggested that the intrahepatic bile duct dilatation in segment 4(S4) with an extent of 2.5*3.0 cm . Hepatobiliary ultrasound revealed localized dilatation of bile duct with local acoustic enhancement in S4 of the liver . On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of S4 localized bile duct dilatation with lithiasis was made. Given the recurrent and persistent symptoms, the patient opted for surgical resection of biliary dilatation. Correspondingly, we selected to perform a combined resection of segment 4b and part of 4a with the guidance of subsegmental ICG staining, so as to facilitate the laparoscopic operation more simply and accurately, as well as to retain normal tissues in a certain extent.
Intraoperatively, after mobilization of the liver, relationships of the pathological segment with the hepatic vessels were confirmed by LUS, which was consistent with the preoperative CT imaging . ICG fluorescence positive staining method was performed to define the exact anatomical location of the lesion. Portal vein branch of the target hepatic segment was super-selected and visualized longitudinally, followed by punctured with a 18G needle by LUS guidance, then an injection of 0.05 mg ICG was performed gently . The specific configuration method of dilution was as follows: 25 mg ICG was dissolved in 10 ml sterilized water, and then taken 1 ml of which into 100 ml saline. Significantly, special attention must be paid to avoid the dye entering to other hepatic lobes. After injection of ICG, fluorescence imaging could highlight the segmental resection line, the non-fluorescent hepatic tissues were also identified . Fusion fluorescence images were obtained using the PINPOINT imaging system (Stryker, Kalamazoo, USA). The imaging was switched to the fluorescent mode when predicting that the surgical boundary of the lesion would be exposed, then enabled visualization of the lesion as a clearly distinguished region of green fluorescence during operation . Since the lesion was located between S4a and S4b, indicating the need for partial resection of the segment 4 rather than removing the whole S4. There were no complications during the procedure, with an operation time of 90 min and a bleeding volume of 100 ml, and the size of the resected hepatic segment was 9*4 cm . Final pathology revealed presence of chronic and fibrosing inflammation with dilatation and cholelithiasis in local bile duct , and post-operative enhanced CT confirmed the integrity of the resection . The patient was recovered soon, then discharged 6 days after operation, and she has not experienced similar symptoms as before during the first three month of follow-up.