A 65-year-old man was hospitalized with experiencing retrosternal pain for 4 h on September 7th, 2020. His past medical history included a 5-year history of hypertension and no history of diabetes mellitus. This was his first heart attack, which had never happened before. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 145/78 mmHg, a heart rate of 72 beats per minute, and a systolic murmur of 2/6 degrees in the apical and aortic auscultation areas. The resting electrocardiogram showed the T-wave inversion in V2-V6 of the precordial leads, but the Troponin I was negative and the NT-proBNP was 469 pg/ml (reference value range: 0-125). Echocardiography showed a normal-sized left ventricle with a thickened left ventricular wall, especially in the apical region up to 20 mm in thickness. The blood flow signal was visible in the apical segment wall, which was more obvious in the subepicardial, and the subendocardial blood flow was connected to the left ventricle . Left ventricular systolic function was normal (EF=77%), with moderate mitral and aortic regurgitation (mitral regurgitation area 4.5 cm2; aortic regurgitation area 4.7 cm2). He then received a CAG examination, which showed that during the left coronary angiography, the contrast agent entered from the diagonal branch, and rapidly flowed into the left ventricle via a diffuse plexus of multiple intramyocardial fistulas, and completely turbidized the left ventricle. Subsequently, the contrast agent was discharged from the left ventricle during systole . An additional movie file showed this in more detail (see Additional file ). There was severe stenosis in the distal of the right coronary artery (RCA) . We performed drug-eluting stent implantation on the distal right coronary artery, followed by dual antiplatelet, statin, and beta-blocker therapy, and his angina symptoms were completely resolved. To further examine the effect of CAF on the myocardium, we performed myocardial strain examination with global longitudinal strain (GLS) measurements, which showed decreased left ventricular myocardial strain capacity (significantly decreased hypertrophic myocardial strain), decreased left ventricular wall synchrony, GLS of -12% (reference value, ≤-18%), and peak strain dispersion (PSD) of 111 ms (reference value, <45 ms). We also performed emission computed tomography (ECT) on the patient and found that the radiation distribution of 99mTC-MIBI (925MBq) in the left ventricular myocardium was uneven, especially decrease at the apex, which was consistent with the area supplied by the left anterior descending artery , independent of stenosis of distal to the right coronary artery. Regretfully, the patient did not received further cardiac magnetic resonance due to financial reasons. Then he discharged on September 13th, 2020， and during the 12-month follow-up, there were no cardiovascular events occurred. Figure shows the timeline of the patient’s entire medical process.