A 28-year-old Asian female hairstylist with hypertension and ESRD secondary to IgA nephropathy presented to an outside hospital with one week of facial swelling, head pressure that worsened when lying on the right side, headache when bending forward, nausea, dizziness and fever . Six weeks prior to presentation, she initiated hemodialysis via a tunneled right internal jugular (IJ) HD catheter. Her substance use, social, and family history were unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and neck performed on the day of admission demonstrated the HD catheter tip in the inferior right atrium, with thrombus formed around the HD catheter and extending along the catheter from the junction of the right IJ and right subclavian vein, through the SVC and to the level of the cavoatrial junction. In the setting of SVC thrombus, she was initiated on a continuous intravenous (IV) heparin infusion.
Based on blood cultures obtained on admission to the outside hospital (4 days prior to transfer to our hospital), the patient was found to have Staphylococcus epidermidis bacteremia, prompting initiation of IV vancomycin. Repeat blood cultures were negative. Since the thrombus was situated proximal to the catheter lumen, hemodialysis was considered safe and continued without incident. Given the need for possible advanced interventions for the tunneled HD catheter, 4 days after admission she was transferred to our tertiary care hospital for further management.
Upon transfer, her vital signs were: temperature 38.3 ℃, heart rate 96 beats per minute, blood pressure of 134/61 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 99 % on room air. Her physical exam was notable for diffuse facial swelling and neck fullness. The heparin drip, vancomycin, analgesics and hemodialysis were continued. Warfarin was considered but held in anticipation of possible HD catheter replacement. A hypercoagulable workup was negative.
In the first 4 days at our hospital, the symptoms of SVC syndrome persisted despite continuous IV heparin, with worsening headache and facial pressure along with persistent fever despite negative blood cultures. Repeat contrasted CT of the chest demonstrated unchanged adherent, non-occlusive thrombus around the catheter without extension beyond the SVC . Pharmacological thrombolysis was considered but not performed in the setting of bacteremia, out of concern for bacterial shedding of a possibly infected clot (despite negative repeat blood cultures). Given the persistent thrombus-associated SVC syndrome with worsening headache and possibility of an infected thrombus with persistent fever, the interventional radiology team removed and replaced the right IJ HD catheter without incident, using ultrasound- and fluoroscopy-guided methods. Using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) during fluoroscopy, an eccentric, adherent intraluminal thrombus measuring approximately 2 cm was visualized on the right lateral aspect of the SVC. After replacement of the HD catheter, both the IV heparin drip and vancomycin along with analgesia were resumed, and warfarin was initiated.
Nine days into admission and 5 days after new HD catheter replacement, the patient developed acute right-sided pleuritic chest pain with high-grade fevers. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest demonstrated an interval decrease in size of the SVC thrombus, along with new pulmonary embolism involving the right main, middle, and lower lobe pulmonary arteries . Because the patient was hemodynamically stable and had no signs of right ventricular dysfunction on transthoracic echocardiogram, thrombolysis was not considered. Regarding her fever, repeat blood cultures were negative, lending suspicion to fever secondary to clot burden. However, out of concern for infected thrombus in a patient undergoing kidney transplant evaluation, vancomycin was continued based on a recommendation of the infectious disease team. The patient was therefore continued on continuous IV heparin, warfarin, IV vancomycin, analgesics, and antipyretics.
Three days after the pulmonary embolism, the patient again developed pleuritic chest pain, but this time accompanied by blood-tinged sputum. A non-contrasted CT scan of the chest showed multifocal peripheral wedge-shaped ground glass areas in the right lower and middle lobes, consistent with pulmonary infarction . In the setting of a subtherapeutic international normalized ratio (INR) for prothrombin time (PT), both heparin and warfarin were continued. Once the INR reached therapeutic levels (goal range 2.0–3.0), the heparin infusion was discontinued.
Eighteen days after transfer to our hospital and 22 days after her initial hospital admission, the patient’s symptoms had remitted completely and she was discharged with prescriptions for a 6-month course of coumadin, completion of a 28-day course of vancomycin (starting from the day of her catheter removal), and oral pain medications. Outpatient hemodialysis continued uneventfully through the new-tunneled HD catheter. Her INR was monitored closely with no adverse events noted. Nine months after discharge, she underwent successful renal transplantation.