We report a 34-year old right handed male patient from rural town in South Western Ethiopia, presented with abnormal body movement (ABM) involving his right hemibody associated with loss of consciousness lasting few minutes of two weeks duration. The abnormal body movement (ABM) occurred frequently (> five times per week) and associated with frothy and excessive salivation. He reported headache following each spells. In addition, he reported he had witnessed whitish oral lesions since the past two months. He was running a small private business. He has no history of fever, nuchal pain, motor weakness, and projectile vomiting. No history of illicit drug use, except khat chewing and occasionally drinks alcohol. No diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and cardiac illness. He was fully conscious and oriented. Neurological examinations were normal. Complete blood counts showed mild anemia and thrombocytopenia. His HIV serology test was positive. CD4 lymphocyte count was 185cells/uL. Anti-Toxoplasma gondii serology was not performed, because of patient’s financial problem.
He had 2–5 times elevated liver enzymes, normal kidney function, and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was 65 mm/hr. Brain MRI showed bilateral frontal T2 and FLAIR hyperintensity and T1 hypointensity; post contrast study showed bilateral small ring enhancing lesion with perilesional oedema, the biggest one on the left hemisphere, with a 10 mm diameter; considering patient advanced immunosuppression and underlying HIV infection, the brain MRI findings were consistent with cerebral toxoplasmosis. Bipolar montage electroencephalography study showed generalized background slowing, prominent in the left fronto-centeral region . Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with advanced HIV/AIDS presenting with focal motor seizure with impaired awareness likely secondary to cerebral toxoplasmosis infection, bicytopenia (mild anemia and thrombocytopenia), and elevated liver enzymes.
He was linked to chronic HIV care service and subsequently started on cART regimen containing Tenofovir/Lamivudine/Efavirenz. He is also started on anti-toxoplasmosis medication, Sulfamethoxazole 800 mg and trimethoprim 160 mg twice daily for 4 weeks and followed by 1 tablet daily for two months. In addition, the patient was started on sodium valproate 25 mg twice daily. Serum viral load and genotypic drug-resistance tests were not done as these services are not available at our setup. The patient was evaluated after fourth weeks of anti-toxoplasmosis treatment and one week after antiretroviral treatment. However, we couldn’t able to have a follow up brain imaging and monitoring of liver and renal function because of financial constrain. However, the frequency of seizure attack has significantly reduced.