A 30-year-old Japanese woman (height 161cm, weight 57kg) was diagnosed with an ovarian germ cell tumor at age 12 and underwent total hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy. The histological diagnosis was an immature teratoma with metastasis to her lymph nodes. She underwent chemotherapy for a short time after the surgery, but then dropped out of treatment and did not receive further therapy. She gradually developed a recurrent abdominal mass and remained under observation. At age 30, she presented to our hospital requiring an operation, and tumor extirpation was scheduled.
A physical examination revealed a huge abdominal mass and a chest X-ray revealed bilateral diaphragmatic elevation. She could not adopt a supine position because of the tumor causing respiratory distress . A computed tomography scan showed a 40×40cm mass . Her vital signs were blood pressure 100/70mmHg, heart rate 100 beats per minute, and pulse oximeter oxygen saturation (SpO2) 88 to 90%. Laboratory tests revealed an increased fibrin degradation product of 15.3μg/mL and D-dimer of 2.6μg/mL. Pulmonary function tests showed a low vital capacity (VC) based on the predicted value (%VC 37.7%) and arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxia (partial pressure of carbon dioxide, PaCO2, 44.6mmHg; partial pressure of oxygen, PaO2, 56.2mmHg while breathing room air).
Prior to induction of general anesthesia, an arterial catheter (JELCO I.V. Catheter®; Smith Medical Japan Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into her radial artery and a central venous catheter (PreSep Oximetry Catheter®; Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted in her left internal jugular vein. Furthermore, percutaneous sheaths (5 Fr Radifocus Introducer®; Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) were inserted in her femoral artery and vein to use for percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS) as necessary. Radial arterial pressure, electrocardiogram, capnography, SpO2, and cerebral regional oxygen saturation (INVOS 5100®; Somanetics, Troy, MI, USA) were continuously monitored throughout the surgery. After the percutaneous sheaths were inserted, lidocaine 4% was sprayed on her upper airway, while midazolam 1mg and fentanyl 50μg were given intravenously and awake fiberoptic intubation was performed in the Semi-Fowler’s position. We did not use muscle relaxant before the operation because we were concerned about ventilation if spontaneous respiration was lost. During intubation, her tidal volume (TV) decreased slightly because of weakness of spontaneous respiration, but SpO2 was maintained and intubation was performed uneventfully. After intubation, midazolam 4mg was administered and anesthesia was maintained with 1.5% sevoflurane. Her TV with spontaneous respiration controlled by pressure support ventilation and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5cmH2O was kept between 250 and 350mL.
After surgeons completed preparation for the operation and the surgical site was disinfected, a muscle relaxant (rocuronium 50mg), fentanyl 200μg and 0.3μg/kg/minute remifentanil were administered. Spontaneous respiration was lost and we were unable to obtain a sufficient TV with less than the 20cmH2O airway pressure under pressure controlled ventilation or manual ventilation. However, an abdominal midline incision was performed by the surgeon and her TV gradually increased. Her TV further increased and SpO2 recovered after median sternotomy. An inspiratory pressure of 20cmH2O and PEEP of 8cmH2O resulted in a TV of 300 to 350mL. Arterial blood gas analysis at a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.6 gave results of PaCO2 41.8mmHg and PaO2 197.5mmHg.
Resection of her tumor caused massive blood loss that required blood transfusion. During the operation, 3 to 5μg/kg/minute dopamine was given and her mean arterial pressure was kept above 60mmHg. Finally, her tumor was removed completely and had a weight of 10.5kg. On histological examination, the tumor was diagnosed as a mature teratoma without malignancy. Her total blood loss was 9790mL and 22 units of red cell concentrate, 19 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 20 units of platelet concentrate were transfused. After removal of her tumor, the same TV was maintained with lower inspiratory pressures and PEEP to prevent re-expansion pulmonary edema (RPE). On completion of the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and ventilated with an inspiratory pressure of 18cmH2O and PEEP of 8cmH2O, which resulted in a TV of 350mL. After her spontaneous respiration recovered, she was ventilated with pressure support and PEEP to maintain a TV of 300 to 350mL. She was extubated on postoperative day (POD) 2 and discharged from the ICU without any complication on POD 5.