A 26-year-old fit and healthy man presented to the Emergency Department with sudden onset penile pain during vaginal sexual intercourse. He had been attempting to repenetrate his erect penis, when he thrusted against his partner’s perineum and felt his penis “bend and pop.” This was associated with extreme pain and immediate detumescence, followed by penile swelling and an inability to void. He had no past history of previous penile deformity or urethral injury. Consent has been obtained from the patient for the publication of the case.
On examination, he had normal vital signs and a soft nontender abdomen. Penoscrotal examination revealed a flaccid uncircumcised penis with significant swelling, ecchymosis (“eggplant deformity”) and mild penile curvature to the right side. There was blood at the meatus. Bladder scan found 465 mL in his bladder.
A clinical diagnosis of penile fracture with urethral injury was made and he was taken to emergency operating room for surgical repair.
On table flexible urethroscopy revealed a urethral injury 12 cm from the urethral meatus. A midline penoscrotal incision was made, and the corpus spongiosum and both corpora cavernosa were exposed. A complete traumatic transection of the urethra was encountered with total bilateral corpus cavernosa disruption . Hematoma was evacuated, and both corpora cavernosa were closed using 2/0 polydioxanone sutures, with the dartos fascia placed in between. The urethra was repaired with interrupted 5/0 polyglactin braided absorbable suture. Artificial erection and leak test confirmed a watertight closure of the corpora. A 14-Fr indwelling catheter was placed. The wound was irrigated and surgical incision was closed in layers.
The patient was discharged home on postoperative Day 2 and was advised to abstain from sexual intercourse for at least 6 weeks. Postoperative reviews in the clinic on Days 5 and 29 were unremarkable and his wounds were healing well. At 4 weeks, he underwent a retrograde pericatheter urethrogram which showed no extravasation from the urethral repair and the indwelling catheter was removed. At 5 weeks, through telehealth, the patient reported that he was doing well with usual erections and had resumed normal sexual activity without any physical or psychological issues. Patient did not attend any further follow-up appointments.