A 35-year-old man emigrated from Ukraine presented to our Emergency Department with an irregular penile mass associated with erectile dysfunction and voiding difficulty. The patient reported that the penile mass had progressively grown over the last year up to become, in the last month, hard and painful. Physical examination revealed a tender, poorly delimited, subcutaneous indurated mass that extended on the whole surface of the penile shaft, from the coronal sulcus to the cranial part of the scrotum whereby the granulation tissue was palpable under the skin. The mass had no adherence to the overlying planes and was painful on palpation. There was no ulceration or inguinal lymphadenopathy.
There were no relevant findings in patient’s medical history and he reluctantly admitted that 7 years before he had received 6 injections of paraffin oil into the penis, performed by an untrained person, for penile enlargement purposes; therefore, penile paraffinoma was diagnosed. He was scheduled for definite surgical treatment involving complete removal of the newly-formed penile mass and penile shaft reconstruction. In view of the extent of tissue to be removed and the risk of scrotal tissue as well being involved by scarring, thus leading to its removal rather than its use for reconstruction, the patient underwent preoperative penile MRI to properly plan surgery.Penile MRI was performed with a 1.5 T whole body MR unit (Philips Achieva) with the patient supine. The penis was flexed dorsally against the lower abdomen and taped in position to reduce motion of the organ during the examination. A SENSE Torso coil (8 elements) was positioned on the pelvis. First, axial T2-weighted TSE (Turbo Spin Echo) images (TR/TE, 10111/120 ms; ETL, 20) and axial T1-weighted TSE images (889/12) were acquired. Then, coronal FFE T2-weighted images (500/13), sagittal and coronal TSE T2-weighted (6009/120) were acquired. Finally, axial T1-weighted GRE images (10,9/5,4) were acquired with fat suppression before and after a bolus injection of gadopentate dimegluine (0.5 mmol/mL; 0.2 mL/Kg). During all pulse sequences we used the following common parameters: a field of view of 260 mm, a slice thickness of 4 mm, and a matrix of 320 × 224. MRI showed a 18 mm thick lesion in the subcutaneous tissues of the penile shaft, surrounding the cavernous bodies up to spraining them in some points, causing a minimal distortion of the glans and a moderate narrowing of the bulbar urethra . Such lesion showed a homogeneous signal, iso-hypointense relative to muscle on T1-weighted sequences, and a low signal intensity at T2-weighted sequences . On T1-weighted fat suppressed sequences, it did not enhance with contrast administration. MRI features were therefore consistent with a fibrotic scar-tissue between dartos and Buck’s fascia, attached but not infiltrating the latter, which remained visible as a thin line hypointense in all pulse sequences. MRI also showed, in the cranial part of the scrotum, a granulation tissue with high signal intensity on T2-weighted turbo spin-echo sequence, low signal intensity on T1-weighted turbo spin-echo sequence, and significant homogeneous contrast enhancement .
On the basis of these findings the patient was scheduled for surgical removal of the lesion, taking care to preserve Buck’s fascia and the underlying dorsal penile neurovascular bundle and to reconstruct with vital tissue the penile shaft. Postoperative course was uneventful; the urethral catheter was removed on the following morning and the patient discharged. At six weeks follow-up, he reported to be very satisfied with the cosmetic result as well as with his sexual function. Histological examination of the removed tissue confirmed the diagnosis of paraffinoma, showing optical empty spaces indicative of the presence of large fat globules dissolved during the staining process, along with a heavy inflammation mainly consisting of lymphocytes and histiocytes, throughout the whole specimen .