A 52-year-old female with a history of fibromyalgia, left shoulder osteoarthritis, and chronic pain in her left arm, neck and back presented to the ED with an exacerbation of her chronic pain for two days. She had suffered a fall while in the shower one year prior to presentation and attributed her chronic neck, back, and radicular left arm pain to this injury. She had tried chiropractic manipulation, acupuncture, intraarticular glucocorticoid injections, physical therapy, and topical creams and patches, as well as a variety of over-the-counter medications. Despite these interventions, her pain persisted. Her vital signs on presentation to the ED were all within normal limits, and on physical examination her pain was rated as 10/10 on the left side including her lateral neck, back, circumferential upper arm, and lateral aspect of her elbow.
She exhibited allodynia in these regions and had pain-limited range of motion at the shoulder and elbow. There were no areas of skin erythema, induration, or fluctuance. Plain radiographs of her shoulder and elbow revealed no acute findings. She had received 10 milligrams of oxycodone while waiting in the triage area, but this gave her minimal symptom relief, likely due to the severity of her pain. After explaining the risks and benefits to the patient, an ultrasound-guided ESPB was performed with 60 milliliters of 0.25% ropivacaine (–).
The block was performed at the level of the second thoracic (T2) vertebrae with the patient in prone position and the ultrasound probe oriented parasagittally. An in-plane approach was used with the needle tip oriented cephalad. During the instillation of the local anesthetic, manual compression caudal to the site of injection was applied to influence spread of the injectate cephalad toward the vertebral levels where the patient was experiencing pain .
The procedure was performed without complication. After 30 minutes, the patient reported complete relief of her neck, shoulder, thorax, and back symptoms and had complete restoration of range of motion. She did not experience any motor blockade and had full strength in her extremity. She rated her pain at a 0/10 and expressed satisfaction at the quality of her pain control. Only minimal elbow pain persisted and after a period of monitoring in the ED, the patient was discharged home. On follow up, she reported that she had complete relief of pain for the next five days, after which her symptoms gradually returned at a more tolerable level.