A 66-year-old female patient without cardiovascular risk factors and a history of varicose veins lower extremities and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia in December 2020 underwent a clinical evaluation for an unexplained heart murmur. She was in New York Heart Association class I and her physical examination was negative except for grade II/VI non-radiating continuous murmur, louder in diastole, in the fourth intercostal space, and visible varicose veins in the lower limbs with skin pigmentation. Electrocardiogram showed right bundle branch block and chest X-ray revealed signs of mildly increased pulmonary flow and right chambers dilatation. Two-dimensional (2D) transthoracic/transesophageal Echocardiography (TTE/TEE) color Doppler demonstrated preserved left ventricular ejection fraction, mild mitral regurgitation, RV overload (end-diastolic diameter of 3.2 cm), tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 2.1 cm, slightly enlarged right atrium (dimensions 5.5 × 4.3 cm, area 18 cm2), significant compression of the right ventricular cavity by a thin-wall round-shaped chamber resulting in dislocation of the tricuspid valve structures toward the ventricular septum with marked tricuspid flow reduction . The RV apical four-chamber view showed two systolic-diastolic flows with a width of 7 and 5 mm, respectively, with a pressure gradient of 46 mm Hg and moderate tricuspid regurgitation and an estimated pulmonary pressure of 40 mmHg. The anterior cusp of the tricuspid valve was lengthened and attached closer to the outlet tract, while the septal cusp was moderately displaced, the width of the transtricuspid flow was 1.4 cm, the intraventricular pressure gradient was 16 mm Hg.
Three-dimensional multidetector CT angiography (3D-MDCTA) confirmed the presence of severely dilated and tortuous distal RCA and LCx and precisely defined entry point of the distal right coronary fistula and two drainage sites draining into the a round-shaped chamber within the right ventricle (, ).
The patient underwent cardiac catheterization and selective coronary artery angiography in multiple projections showing severely dilated and tortuous RCA and LCx draining distally in a large round-shaped chamber within the RV (, , ) confirming the diagnosis of two CCFs connecting to the RV. After the heart team discussion, the decision to proceed with a catheter-based treatment was confirmed to solve the tricuspid flow compression and prevent fistula-related complications, particularly rupture or endoarteritis. Written informed consent, after explanation, was obtained from the patient. Under mild sedation, 2D TEE color Doppler guidance, and local anesthesia, both radial arteries and the right femoral artery were cannulated. We elected to close the large fistulas via a direct arterial approach with a new stent-assisted coil occlusion technique to avoid the risk of embolization. The RCA was cannulated using a 6-Fr Judkins Right 4 guiding catheter and a 0.014 in Fielder guidewire (Abbott Vascular) was advanced distally and over it, a Medtronic Resolute Onyx™ DES 5 × 15 mm (Medtronic)was placed in the target point (third segment of RCA); concomitantly, a Cook Mreye (r) Flipper coil 40 × 5 mm through 6-Fr multipurpose catheter with stylet inside was placed distally to Onyx™ stent not taking out the stylet from the Flipper to prevent coiling. Then, the balloon of the stent was inflated and the stylet was pulled out from the Mreye (r) Flipper system, getting the system more stable and preventing the stent deformation. The Flipper coil was fixed to the arterial wall, the balloon of the stent deflated and taken out and finally, the coil was pushed ahead and detached. Due to the persistent coronary blood flow across the first implanted coil, two additional 8 cm × 5 mm Gianturco coils were deployed proximally to the Flipper coil achieving complete occlusion of the fistula without compromising the flow in coronary side branches (, ). Likewise, the left coronary artery was cannulated using a 5-Fr through a Cordis extra back-up (XB) 3.5 guiding catheter (Cordis) and a Resolute Onyx™ DES 4.0 × 18 mm was implanted in the target point (mid-segment of LCx) pinning down the Cook Mreye ® Flipper coil delivered through 5-Fr Cobra C1 with stylet inside. Subsequently, keeping the 0.014 in Fielder guidewire in the distal segment and withdrawing the balloon of the stent, Flipper's stylet was withdrawn and the Flipper coil pushed distally near the stent. Two additional Gianturco coils (10 cm × 5 mm + 8 cm × 5 mm) were deployed proximally to the Flipper coil. Postprocedure left coronary angiogram showed abolition of the coronary flow by the implanted coils (, ).
The patient was discharged 2 days after the procedure in good clinical conditions. At 3-month follow-up, 2D TTE color Doppler showed decompression of the round-shaped chamber, marked increase in the transtricuspid flow due to the tricuspid valve structures re-expansion with significant improvement of right ventricular systolic function .