A 30-year-old male visited our outpatient clinic in March 2019, presented with irregular fever and newly-onset proteinuria. He was from Shanxi province in the northwestern part of China. His fever started in April 2018, with the highest body temperature reaching 40 °C. Meanwhile, he only experienced a slight cough. Doctors in local hospitals found an enlarged spleen by physical examination, while the routine tests were mostly normal, including complete blood count (CBC), urinalysis, and tests for liver functions. His serum creatinine (SCr) was 72.5 μmol/L, and total serum protein level was 102.65 g/L, dominated with immunoglobulin (Ig) G (51.2 g/L). The inflammatory markers were elevated (C reactive protein 31.93 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 68 mm/h). Abdominal ultrasound revealed enlarged spleen and kidneys. Empirical antibiotic and antiviral treatments were administered without significant effect. The patient reported a weight loss of 25 kg within 3 months. In October 2018, a positron emission tomography-computed tomography scanning showed an enlarged spleen with a longitudinal diameter of 30 cm and a standardized uptake value (SUV) of 5.92. The max SUV of his bone marrow also reached 4.66. Malignant diseases were suspected, and he underwent bone marrow biopsy and splenectomy. Pathology of bone marrow indicated scattered infiltration of the plasma cell, and necrosis with reactive hyperplasia was seen in the spleen. Further tests for fusion genes, chromosomes, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) were not remarkable. His fever and increased serum IgG remained after the splenectomy, while SCr increased to 100 μmol/L. Repeated urinalysis indicated moderate protein and blood. His past medical history was generally nonremarkable.
In March 2019, his tests in our outpatient clinic showed proteinuria (24-h urine protein 6.88 g) and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 23 g/L). His SCr was 93 μmol/L, and serum IgG level was higher than the normal upper range (99 g/L), dominated with IgG1 (106 g/L). None monoclonal protein was found after performing serum protein electrophoresis, immunofixation electrophoresis, and urine free light chain test. Finally, we repeated bone marrow biopsy and found Leishmania inside and outside the phagocytes . A diagnosis of Leishmaniasis was established, but inquiries of travel history or contact history were nonremarkable. From March 2019 to October 2019, the patient underwent treatments of sodium antimony gluconate , after which a repeated bone marrow biopsy proved the clearance of Leishmania. However, the elevation of his serum IgG level and urine protein persisted.
In November 2019, he was admitted to our nephrology department. Physical examination was mostly normal, without palpable lymph nodes or extremity edema. His SCr and proteinuria improved (SCr 58 μmol/L, 24-h urine protein 3.71 g, serum albumin 33 g/L). His urine protein was composed of albumin (45.6%), IgG (39.6%), transferrin (9.8%), free light chain (1.0%), and unknown proteins (4.0%), as shown by the electrophoresis. The flow cytometry of peripheral blood mononuclear cells revealed elevated count B cells (894/μL) and normal counts of T cells and natural killer cells. The urinary transferrin, β2-MG, and α1-MG were also above the normal upper range. The longitudinal diameters of kidneys, measured by ultrasound, were l5.6cm and 14.7 cm, respectively. A renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed mild segmental mesangial proliferation and glomerular hypertrophy, without tubulointerstitial lesions . The immunofluorescent stainings of immunoglobulin and complements were negative. Electron microscope showed the increased lysosomes in proximal tubules, but immune complex deposits were not found in the mesangial area .
Based on renal biopsy findings, we did not recommend immune-suppressive therapies but administrated Valsartan to decrease urinary protein. The urine protein gradually dropped to 1.59 g during the following 3 months, and the serum IgG level decreased to 45 g/L. His serum albumin and SCr levels remained stable .