A 21-year-old man complained of transient muscle stiffness since 10 years. He experienced difficulty in initiating movement and felt muscle weakness after rest. However the symptoms typically improved after repeated contraction (warm-up phenomenon). The symptoms tended to aggravate during cold weather. He was unable to open his eyes immediately after washing his face with cold water. He had non-consanguineous parents and there was no significant family history. Further, the patient showed normal growth and development. Medical examination showed generalized muscle hypertrophy and normal muscle strength as assessed with the Medical Research Council (MRC) sum score. Deep tendon reflexes were attenuated. No nerve dysfunction or sensory deficit was noted. The serum creatine kinase level was 2-fold higher than the upper limit of the normal reference level. Electromyogram showed myotonic discharges. Biceps muscle biopsy specimen was obtained after written informed consent of the patient. The specimen was precooled with isopentane and frozen in liquid nitrogen. A section of muscle biopsy specimen was stained with hematoxylin-eosin (HE) and modified Gomori’s trichrome (MGT). Activity of oxidative enzymes such as succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), NADH-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) were normal. Next generation sequencing of the DNA sample of this patient identified a novel splice mutation (c.1401 + 1G > A) (which was inherited from his father) and a known mutation (c.1657A > T, p.Ile553Phe) (which was inherited from his mother) . The novel splice mutation was not detected in Human Gene Mutation Database or any of the 200 healthy controls. The splicing site, analyzed by Human Splicing Finder, is implicated in the alteration of the wild-type donor site and most probably have an impact on splicing. Mutation Taster software predicted the effects of the mutation to be ‘disease causing’. The patient was prescribed mexiletine 100 mg three times per day for about 6 months. The patient responded well to the treatment and was completely relieved of his symptoms.