We present the case of a 36-year-old right-handed woman who was diagnosed with RRMS, following the 2017 revised McDonald criteria, and promptly included in our national health program for MS patients . Given the clinical history of our patient, who presented a single clinical exacerbation, and the MRI findings, which reported a single active lesion, we initiated the administration of beta-interferon-1a (Avonex) once per week. Following 9 months of weekly im injections, the patient was admitted after developing multiple bruises and ecchymosis on her limbs and torso, associated with epistaxis and gingival bleeding (a,b). A few days before the onset of her symptomatology, the patient complained of a severe headache that was non-responsive to common analgesics (naproxen 220 mg).
During the interferon treatment, the patient’s blood pressure and blood tests were monitored every 3 months, including complete blood count (CBC), liver enzymes and renal function, with no abnormal results. Moreover, she has had no clinical relapse since the initiation of Avonex. The initial diagnosis screening revealed severe thrombocytopenia (4000/mm3), increased WBC, lymphocytopenia and microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia with frequent schistocytes on the peripheral blood smear (b). A brain and cervical spine MRI showed no active demyelinating lesions compared to the moment of MS diagnosis.
Repeated blood tests revealed increased lactate dehydrogenase levels, normal liver enzymes and normal kidney function. Coagulation assay and fibrinogen were within range. Immunological tests (anti-dsDNA, anti-La/SS-B antibodies, IgM and IgG anti-phospholipid antibodies, complement levels), as well as infectious disease tests (hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus) and cancer markers, were within range. To exclude other causes of purpura we tested for known coagulopathies, including the Von Willebrand Factor Antigen (Factor VIII: R), which rendered a normal value. Hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal or pelvic bleeding and pregnancy were excluded by performing ultrasound.
Given the progressive decrease in the thrombocytes count, the haematologist report strongly advised for platelet mass transfusion (PMT), hence the patient received 6 units of PMT. Upon the interruption of interferon administration and the initiation of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day for 3 consecutive days) the patient had a complete remission of the symptoms and the normalization of the blood tests.