A 13-year-old girl with severe learning disability presented to the Special Care Dentistry clinic with the complaints of “toothache, sialorrhea, bad breath, and decreased oral intake”. Her mother reported that she became agitated, anxious, refused eating or drinking, and clenched at her teeth for most of the day during the last week. The family tried over the counter pain killers but there was no improvement.
The girl was born at full term normal delivery to non-consanguineous parents, and her medical history was unremarkable for systemic diseases, drug allergy, or use of medications. The family reported that the girl never spoke nor walked since she was born. Furthermore, the mother noticed an abnormal breathing pattern since birth, especially at night, characterized by periods of hyperventilation followed by shorter periods of apnea. Whole- exome sequencing performed at the age of five concluded the presence of heterozygous variant (a de novo stop gain mutation) in the gene TCF4 (NM_001243226.2): c.[1459 C > T].[(Arg487*)]; confirming the genetic diagnosis of PTHS. The girl never went to school because of learning disability, but the family reported that they send her occasionally to a rehabilitation center for people with intellectual disability. Th parents denied any history of epilepsy or episodes of seizure.
Physical examination carried out when the patient was 13 years old revealed global developmental and growth delay (height = 128 cm [5 percentile]; weight 27 kg [10 percentile]).
Head and neck examination revealed brachycephaly, strabismus, prominent and long eyelashes, up-slanted palpebral fissures, cup-like ears, and wide nasal bridge. Her mouth was wide, and her lips and cheeks were full and fleshy . Intra-oral examination was performed while the patient was sitting in her wheelchair, and showed generalized attrition, microdontia, multiple carious lesions on upper and lower teeth with badly destructed lower left first molar. Soft tissue examination revealed generalized gingival enlargement, shallow and U-shaped wide palatal vault, absence of lingual frenum . In order to exclude the possibility that the lingual frenum is hidden or being submucosal, the tongue was elevated and placed posteriorly, nevertheless there was no evidence of the presence of lingual frenum. Salivary flow was within normal range and the saliva was of normal consistency however the patient was presented with clinical evidence of sialorrhea due to muscular hypotonia. Her fingers and toes were thin, tapered, and slightly clubbed, and she exhibited hand flapping and clapping behavior. The case evolved with hypotonia and inability to respond to verbal or non-verbal communication.
Comprehensive dental treatment was planned under general anesthesia because she was unable to tolerate dental treatment under local anesthesia. Pre-anesthetic assessment included cardio-respiratory, neurological, and hematological evaluation. All clinical assessment and laboratory tests (i.e. complete blood count (CBC), liver function and kidney function tests (LFT/KFT), and arterial blood gases (ABGs)) were within normal. Naso-endotracheal intubation was performed smoothly in the semi supine position because of difficulty in lying down, and dental treatment, including extraction of an unrestorable lower left first molar, restorative treatment of dental caries, and gingival prophylaxis, was performed in a single session. The patient was agitated slightly upon extubation with normal O2 saturation (97%) and normal deep breaths and respiratory rate. The patient was observed for 24 h post-op for any signs of respiratory distress and was discharged then uneventfully.
The mother explained that she doesn’t know how to brush her teeth and was afraid of causing her any accidental injury while brushing. Furthermore, she reported that her diet was based mainly on soft food because of the difficulty in swallowing and the long chewing time. Tailored oral hygiene instructions and dietary advice were given to parents. The patient was placed on a three-monthly oral hygiene promotion schedule.