A 91-year-old previously healthy Australian-born Caucasian woman living in a BU endemic area in Victoria, Australia, presented with a three-week history of a painful lesion on the anterior aspect of her right ankle. On examination she had an indurated, oedematous lesion of 210 × 120mm in diameter with central necrosis of 20 × 10mm diameter, classified as a WHO category 3 lesion . She weighed 52kgs, and had an estimated glomerular filtration rate of approximately 60mLs/minute. A diagnosis of an oedematous BU lesion was made based on the clinical appearance of the lesion and a positive M. ulcerans PCR of a swab of the lesion.
She was commenced on rifampicin 450mg daily and ciprofloxacin 500mg twice daily. As we were concerned she was at risk of further tissue necrosis, pre-emptive prednisolone of 30mg daily (0.5mg/kg/day) was initiated at the same time.
After three days the induration associated with the lesion had reduced by 74% to 120 × 55mm in diameter and the size of the ulceration remained stable . Further reduction in induration had occurred by day 6 and after four weeks of prednisolone combined with antibiotics there was no induration associated with the lesion and the size of the ulceration remained stable .
The ciprofloxacin dose was reduced at day 3 to 250 mg twice daily because of nausea potentially caused by relatively high systemic ciprofloxacin levels related to her advanced age and moderately reduced renal function, and after 26 days of antibiotics she developed a rash and the ciprofloxacin was replaced by clarithromycin 250mg twice daily. Antibiotics were ceased after a total of 56 days. The prednisolone was well tolerated and was initially weaned off over 44 days. However, due to a subsequent increase in induration associated with the lesion, it was recommenced at a low dose (5mg daily) 83 days after antibiotics commenced, then weaned off 130 days after antibiotics commenced . No surgical debridement or reconstruction was required.
The lesion healed to a dry scab six months after commencing antibiotics, and had completely healed by 10 months . There was no permanent disability or limitation of movement at the ankle joint. There was no recurrence 12 months after treatment commenced.