An 11-year, 5-month-old girl presented to our clinic with a chief complaint of discomfort on the right side of the maxilla. Her medical history was noncontributory. No history of dental trauma was reported. Extraoral examination revealed non-significant findings. Intraoral examination showed a mixed dentition with satisfactory oral hygiene. The maxillary right second primary molar (tooth no. 55) presented an important degree of mobility. Two bitewings confirmed the absence of interproximal caries and the complete radicular resorption of tooth no. 55. An intracoronal radiolucency on the unerupted maxillary right second premolar was detected . Based on clinical and radiographic aspects, the lesion was presumed to be a PEIR.
Considering the chief complaint, it was decided to extract tooth number 55 and to wait for the clinical eruption of the underlying PEIR-affected premolar. One month after the extraction, the PEIR-affected tooth has partially erupted. It was asymptomatic and had no caries or enamel defects with deep pits and fissures. Ostensibly, no differences were found between the affected premolar and the contralateral tooth. A control periapical radiograph was taken. The radiolucent area was oval-shaped extending from the middle to the distal portion of the crown underneath the occlusal dentinoenamel junction, reaching half of the dentin thickness . Approximately two-thirds of the root length had developed with no periapical pathology. Preventive treatment was initiated immediately. Since the tooth has partially erupted, cotton rolls were placed instead of the rubber dam to obtain proper isolation. A resin sealant (Concise Light Cure White Sealant, 3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN, USA) was applied to the affected premolar. The other premolars were sealed as well for caries prevention . A follow-up was scheduled every 6 months to monitor the tooth clinically and radiologically to determine the nature of the lesion and to assess the tooth development and the efficacy of the treatment provided.
When the patient was 12 years old, the clinical examination showed that the affected tooth had completely erupted with no symptoms reported. No alteration was observed in the sealant. A periapical radiograph proved that the lesion did not increase in size and normal root development was observed.
Twelve- and 18-month recall checkups revealed that the tooth remained vital and asymptomatic with no evidence of caries. The sealant was intact. During the radiographic examination, no changes were detected regarding the extent of the lesion. The root development process was uninterrupted .
The patient complied with the first three follow-up appointments then she ceased to show up for 2 years and 5 months. At the age of 15 years, 5 months (approximately 4 years following diagnosis), the patient presented again to the clinic for a routine dental check-up. Clinically, the affected premolar was still symptom-free with no history of pain and responded positively to the electric pulp test and cold test. The fissure sealant was undamaged. Radiographically, no progression of the lesion was noticed and a complete root development with the absence of periapical pathology was detected. Consequently, it was planned to continue following up the PEIR-affected premolar twice per year.
The latest recall appointment was when the patient was at 16 years, 11 months old. It showed no clinical or radiological changes on the affected tooth ( and ). The follow-up period (5 years and 5 months) proved that the preventive treatment was successful so far, and the type of the lesion is static.