A 61-year-old Caucasian woman presented with 5-year history of abdominal pain and distension, fatigue, and 1-year history of abnormal uterine bleeding. Initial workup revealed a carcinoembryonic antigen value of 8.1 ng/mL (normal < 3.9 ng/mL), cancer antigen-125 value of 134 U/mL (normal < 38.1 ng/mL), and a large left adnexal mass on ultrasound. Preoperative CT of the patient’s abdomen and pelvis without oral contrast initially revealed hypodense, ovoid lesions in the left lower quadrant mesentery adjacent to a short segment of small bowel .
The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy which confirmed a diagnosis of mucinous ovarian carcinoma. One-month postoperative surveillance CT of the abdomen and pelvis with oral contrast demonstrated marked decrease in ascites and a 7–8-cm segment of small bowel in the left lower quadrant with low-density mural wall and bowel fold thickening. Additionally, there were hypodense ovoid lesions in the adjacent mesentery, which are the same lesions seen on the preoperative CT . These findings were thought to represent persistent presence of peritoneal and serosal tumor implants.
The patient subsequently began chemotherapy with folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) and completed two treatment cycles. Trastuzumab was then added, and the patient underwent an additional three cycles of FOLFOX–trastuzumab. A repeat abdominopelvic CT 4 months after the exploratory laparotomy showed resolution of ascites, but redemonstrated unchanged findings in the short segment of small bowel and adjacent mesentery in the left lower quadrant. These findings were again thought to represent persistent peritoneal and serosal tumor implants despite chemotherapy.
Shortly after the repeat CT, the patient underwent extensive tumor debulking. Intraoperatively, an 8-cm segment of jejunum with rubbery-like texture and adjacent mesentery was excised . Histologic examination revealed a lymphatic malformation with variously sized lymphatic channels lined by a single, continuous layer of endothelia . No residual intraperitoneal tumor was identified. The patient was subsequently discharged with a plan to complete FOLFOX–trastuzumab chemotherapy for her metastatic ovarian carcinoma.