A 73-year-old woman presented with gross hematuria, and a large right renal mass was discovered. She underwent right radical nephrectomy, and pathology revealed clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Postoperative imaging showed nodularity in the nephrectomy bed, multiple hepatic lesions, bilateral pulmonary nodules, and mediastinal adenopathy, giving concern for residual metastatic disease. She started pazopanib 600 mg daily, initially 25% dose-reduced due to frailty. Due to hypertensive urgency, the dose was further decreased to 400 mg daily during the first month of treatment. Other early treatment side effects included elevated TSH with normal T3 and T4 and grade 1 thrombocytopenia. Follow-up imaging after 3 months of treatment showed a partial response, with tumor regression noted in all affected areas.
After 6 months of treatment with pazopanib 400 mg, she presented to the clinic for routine follow-up and reported 9 days of progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness, ultimately requiring wheelchair use. She also reported worsening of her chronic lower back pain. She had intentionally decreased her fluid intake in order to decrease her urine output, as it had become too difficult to get to the bathroom at home. Physical examination revealed mildly decreased but symmetrical lower extremity strength and diffuse tenderness of the lumbar and sacral spine and paraspinal region. Initial laboratory findings were notable for a BUN level of 51 mg/dL and creatinine of 2.82 mg/dL, up from her baseline of 1.5 mg/dL. She also had a new transaminitis with AST of 172 IU/L (normal 5–40 IU/L) and ALT of 158 IU/L (normal 5–50 IU/L).
She was given intravenous fluids and admitted to the hospital for further workup. MRI of the lumbosacral spine revealed diffuse paraspinal muscle edema from L2 to the sacrum, without evidence of osseous metastasis to the spine . Further evaluation revealed creatine kinase of 5,719 IU/L (normal 50–160 IU/L) and a fractional excretion of sodium of 2.42%, consistent with intrinsic renal injury caused by rhabdomyolysis. On review of her home medications, she had been taking rosuvastatin 40 mg daily for several years for hyperlipidemia. Her statin was stopped due to concern for statin-induced rhabdomyolysis. Pazopanib was also stopped. With continued fluid resuscitation, her creatine kinase normalized and her renal and hepatic function recovered to baseline. After several weeks of physical therapy, she returned to her baseline physical functioning and performance status.