A 6-month-old male entire domestic shorthair cat was surrendered to our institution with no known owner or history. The patient’s body weight was 1.8 kg and its body condition score was 2/9.
Pertinent physical examination findings included pale pink mucous membranes, tachycardia (200 beats per minute) and a heavy infestation of fleas (Ctenocephalides felis). Neurological examination revealed an ambulatory, mild, uncoordinated, swaying gait, restricted to the pelvic limbs. No pain was elicited on palpation of the whole vertebral column. The remainder of the neurological examination was considered normal. The gait abnormality was classified as mild pelvic limb proprioceptive ataxia, most consistent with T3–L3 spinal cord segment neuroanatomical localisation.
Haematology identified a non-regenerative anaemia and mild lymphocytosis. Serum biochemistry revealed a mild increase in alanine aminotransferase activity. An ELISA (Snap Combo; IDEXX) for feline leukaemia virus antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus antibody was negative. Mycoplasma haemofelis PCR testing was also negative.
Radiographs of the vertebral column showed seven cervical, 12 thoracic and seven lumbar vertebrae. T1–T3 vertebral bodies were fused, forming a block vertebra . Additional block vertebrae due to partial fusion were also present at T4–T5 and T10–T11. The inter-vertebral disc spaces at T3/T4 and T9/10 were narrowed. There was also ventral deviation of the cranial thoracic vertebral column at T2 resulting in focal lordosis.
Two months later, proprioceptive ataxia was more pronounced and the cat became poorly ambulatory and paraparetic. Pelvic limb postural reactions, including paw replacement, hopping and extensor postural thrust, were inconsistently delayed. The patellar reflex was exaggerated and muscle tone increased in the pelvic limbs. Withdrawal reflexes were normal in all four limbs. The cutaneous trunci reflex was not assessed. The cat’s bladder was firm and distended with intermittent overflow urinary incontinence. Urinalysis was not performed. The clinical signs were consistent with T3–L3 myelopathy. The cat was treated empirically with prednisolone (1 mg/kg PO q24h [Pred-X 5; APEX]) for 4 weeks with minimal improvement in clinical signs.
For further investigation, the cat was anaesthetised for MRI of the vertebral column. MRI examination was performed on a high-field (1.5 T) system (GE Signa Excite), with the patient positioned in dorsal recumbency on a spinal coil. Sequences to evaluate the vertebral column included T2-weighted (T2W) fast relaxation, fast spin echo (FRFSE) sagittal (cervicothoracic, thoracolumbar), T1-weighted (T1W) fast spin echo (FSE) sagittal (cervicothoracic, thoracolumbar), T2W FRFSE transverse (C7–T5) and T1W FSE transverse (C7–T5). Gadolinium-based contrast media was not administered.
MRI confirmed the block vertebrae at T1–T3 with lordosis, as well as block formation with partial fusion at T4–T5. At the level of T3/T4 there was T2W hypointense extradural material in the ventral vertebral canal. This material was confluent with the dorsal aspect of the intervertebral disc annulus, and most consistent with intervertebral disc protrusion (IVDP). Additionally, there was dorsal angulation of the intervertebral disc due to lordosis between T3 and T4. The angulation and slight bulging of the intervertebral disc caused severe compression of the spinal cord (59% cross-sectional area compared with adjacent normal spinal cord), with attenuation of the subarachnoid space and localised increased T2W signal of the spinal cord parenchyma. Caudal to the site of compression, there was increased intraparenchymal spinal cord fluid signal in the T2W image, most compatible with syringohydromyelia, but other possibilities include oedema or gliosis ( and ). The remaining nucleus pulposi of the intervertebral discs had reduced (non-homogenous grey to black) T2W signal and loss of distinction between the nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosus, compatible with generalised intervertebral disc degeneration. There were similar changes in the cervical and thoracic vertebral column. Surgical decompression was recommended due to the progressive neurological signs.
The cat was anaesthetised and placed in sternal recumbency. A standard approach to the caudal cervical and cranial thoracic vertebrae was performed. The median raphe was incised and sharp and blunt dissection exposed the dorsal spinous processes of T1–T4. The dorsal spinous processes of T2 and T3 were removed with bone rongeurs to the level of the lamina and spinal decompression was executed by a dorsal laminectomy of T3 and T4 utilising Kerrison rongeurs and a high-speed spinal burr (B Braun Hilan XS). At the level of T3/T4, a focal devascularised region of the dura mater was noted during surgery, which resolved following decompression. Prior to routine closure of the surgical site, a gelatin sponge (Gelfoam; Pfizer) was placed over the laminectomy site. Antimicrobial prophylaxis with cephazolin (22 mg/kg IV [Cefazolin; AFT]) was initiated perioperatively and postoperatively at 2, 4 and 12 h. This was followed by amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (22 mg/kg PO q12h [Amoxclav; APEX]) for 7 days. The prolonged use of postoperative antibiotics was not in accordance with current perioperative antibiotic therapy guidelines. Postoperative analgesia included a constant rate infusion of morphine (0.1 mg/kg/h [DBL Morphine Sulfate Injection BP; Hospira]), with lidocaine (1 mg/kg/h [Lignocaine 20; Ilium]) and ketamine (0.3 mg/kg/h [Ketamine; Ceva]). This was followed by buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IV q8h [Temvet; Troy]). Prednisolone was tapered from 1 mg/kg q24h to 0.5 mg/kg q24h for 7 days, then 0.5 mg/kg q48h for 7 days and then discontinued.
The day after surgery, the cat remained ambulatory but paraparetic with marked proprioceptive ataxia. Six weeks after surgery, the cat was able to ambulate with mild-to-moderate proprioceptive ataxia and the paraparesis had resolved. Four years later, with ongoing phys-iotherapy, there was proprioceptive ataxia, similar to initial presentation. The cat showed marked improvement in coordination and strength, postural reactions and spinal reflexes remained normal and no urinary incontinence was reported.