A 25-year-old male presented to the emergency department with pain and swelling in his right elbow and wrist following a fall on his right hand from a height. The patient had no significant medical, family, or drug history. On examination, the patient had deformity and tenderness in his right elbow and wrist, with ecchymosis present around the elbow but no open wounds. The neurovascular examination was intact. Radiographs revealed a posterolateral elbow fracture-dislocation , a distal radius fracture, and a scaphoid waist fracture . A closed reduction was performed for the elbow under intravenous sedation, and a long arm splint was applied. A computed tomography scan revealed a coronoid fracture and a highly comminuted radial head fracture . Surgery was performed the next day. The radial head was resected through Kocher’s approach, and the lateral collateral ligament was repaired with an anchor suture. In the next step, due to the elbow’s instability shown in the clinical examination, a medial approach was used to transpose the ulnar nerve to the anterior of the epicondyle. Additionally, the medial collateral ligament was repaired using a trans-osseous technique. During the clinical examination, it was found that the elbow was still unstable. Here, we decided to implant an external fixator but suddenly noticed a gap posterior to the elbow during the palpation. The posterior midline approach revealed a ruptured triceps in its tendinous part. The triceps were repaired with a Krackow 4-strand and three tunnels in the olecranon . Finally, the elbow joint was found to be stable both clinically and radiologically , with no limitation of flexion-extension and pronation-supination. In the same surgery, the distal radius fracture was fixed with open reduction and internal fixation by a volar locking plate and three pins. The scaphoid fracture was fixed with a Herbert screw in an open method . After surgery, the elbow was immobilized in 90° of flexion and neutral forearm rotation for 3 weeks, followed by progressive passive extension and active assisted elbow flexion. The patient started working on a range of motion (ROM) and stretching with the help of a physiotherapist. The distal radius fracture pins were removed after 6 weeks, and active extension of the triceps was initiated after 3 months. Valgus and Varus force was prohibited for the first 3 months due to the terrible triad injury. After 4 months, the patient’s ROM was complete ( and ).