A 77-year-old man who was treated in another hospital due to dysuria, hematuria, and bloating was transferred to Hebei General Hospital as his symptoms did not improve despite treatment.
Two weeks before admission, the patient developed intermittent dysuria and hematuria. For six months, he had abdominal distension and constipation without significant weight loss, fever, and night sweats. Due to persistent symptoms, the patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
He had a history of prostate cancer diagnosed 7 years before his visit. Pathology of puncture biopsy confirmed vesicular adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 8. Immunohistochemical staining showed the following results: Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (++++), P504s (++), 34βE12 (-), P63 (-), androgen receptor (++++), and Ki-67 positive rate of about 5%. Radiotherapy combined with endocrine therapy was given. Gross tumor volume (GTV): Visible tumor in the prostate, CTV: Pelvic lymphatic drainage area. Prescribed dose: 100 % GTV: 6400 cGy, 98% CTV: 5800 cGy. Endocrine therapy regimen included bicalutamide (50 mg per day) and goserelin extended-release implant (1/28 d). Efficacy was assessed as a partial response at the end of radiotherapy. Endocrine therapy was performed for 1 year. Then, it was discontinued for personal reasons. There was no specific family history.
Physical examination on admission showed coarse breath sounds, rales, scattered dry rales at the base of both lungs and pressure pain in the right epigastric region without rebound and muscle tension. In anal palpation, we also found pressure pain in the front of the anus and irregular swelling with brittle texture. The finger sleeve was stained with blood.
After admission, serum total protein was 66.2 g/L (normal range: 65-85 g/L) and serum albumin was 38.3 g/L (normal range: 40-55 g/L). Total PSA was 0.835 ng/mL (normal range: < 4.4 ng/mL). Lactate dehydrogenase was 426.2 (normal range: 109-245 U/L). Coagulation was normal except for mildly elevated D-dimer level (0.94 mg/L, normal range < 0.55 mg/L). Urine analysis showed 3+ occult blood. Screening for human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, and hepatitis B were negative.
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed marked thickening of the rectal wall and a space-occupying lesion in the apical posterior segment of the upper lobe of the left lung . Colonoscopy showed narrowing of the rectal lumen from the dentate line to 5 cm above the dentate line, with congestive and swollen infiltrative changes in the mucosa, irregular surface structure, and brittle texture.