A 38-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a fever and dyspnoea. Her history was obtained from her husband. He did not know about her underlying diseases, and she had no history of drug allergies or surgical treatment and no family history of thrombotic diseases. Not having received antenatal care, she had had a spontaneous home birth and developed a low-grade fever after delivery. The infant died 1 h after birth due to an unknown cause. On the second day following the vaginal delivery, the patient developed a foul odour from the vagina and bloody vaginal discharge but did not seek treatment. On the fifth day after delivery, the patient developed a high-grade fever. The antipyretic acetaminophen was administered but her condition did not improve; her husband then brought her to the hospital that same day. Her most recent period had been eight months prior. She had two sons, aged 5 and 2 years, who were both born at home and were healthy.
At the emergency room, her temperature was 38.6 °C, pulse rate 121 bpm, blood pressure 101/58 mmHg and room-air oxygen saturation 94%. On examination, the lungs, abdomen and legs were all normal. The patient experienced suprapubic pain without rebound tenderness. Blood analysis revealed a white blood cell count of 20,740/L with a neutrophil percentage of 89.4%. A urine test was normal. An ultrasound scan of the pelvis was negative. The presumptive diagnosis was endometritis. Intravenous ampicillin and gentamycin were administered before the patient was admitted to the obstetrics and gynaecology ward. Signs of vaginal delivery were detected by per vagina examination, with foul-smelling lochia and swollen perineum observed by the obstetrician. After 72 h of intravenous antibiotic treatment, the patient's condition did not improve. However, the room-air oxygen saturation was 96% despite her continuing fever and dyspnoea.
A physician specialising in infectious diseases was consulted, and additional investigations were considered. Blood analysis revealed a negligible change in the white blood cell count, which was now at 15,730/L with 85.2% neutrophils. Three days of negative haematology were followed by a positive sputum culture for moderate Klebsiella pneumoniae. Postpartum endometritis with pneumonia was suspected. Endocarditis was evaluated with an echocardiogram, and the result was normal. The antibiotic therapy was changed to 2 g of meropenem every 8 h. Despite two days of meropenem treatment, the patient's fever continued to increase. A CT scan was requested to investigate additional causes of prolonged fever.
The CT scan revealed multiple small nodular opacities with associated ground-glass opacities scattered bilaterally in the lungs. Some of these lesions showed central cavitations along with some abscess formation and bilateral pleural effusion. Septic pulmonary embolism was suspected . The enlarged size of both ovaries and the uterus with heterogeneous enhancement, minimal free fluid and few air bubbles in the uterine cavity, as well as multiple small rim-enhancing hypodense lesions at the right-side uterine wall, suggested endometritis with abscesses. Moreover, the uterus was suspected to be enlarged postpartum, and the CT scan confirmed this suspicion.
Based on these findings, SPT with complications became a concern. The patient received broad-spectrum antibiotics (2 g of meropenem every 8 h) and 0.1 mg/kg of enoxaparin twice daily. After 2 days of combined antibiotic and anticoagulant treatment, a positive clinical response was observed, with no worsening of her fever or dyspnoea. The patient's room-air oxygen saturation was 97–99%. After 7 days of anticoagulant therapy, a repeat CT scan revealed that the condition of the lungs and uterus had improved . The infectious process of the lungs and uterus and the size of the pulmonary septic embolism had decreased, and pleural effusion was absent. The uterus was mildly enlarged with homogeneous enhancement, and a small thrombus was observed in both ovarian veins. As a result, the patient's blood quality had also improved (white blood cell count of 7850/L with 78.5% neutrophils). The patient was discharged in a stable condition with a prescription for 1 g of amoxicillin-clavulanate twice daily for 7 days and 3 mg per day of oral warfarin (target international normalized ratio 2–3) for 6 weeks. At the 6-week follow-up appointment, the patient was doing well.