A 64-year-old male was referred for surgical cataract treatment of the left eye. Ophthalmic history was complex and significant in the right eye for trauma (boxing and baseball injuries as youth) resulting in secondary traumatic glaucoma, cataract, and traumatic optic neuropathy. Numerous surgical treatments were performed 17 years prior to presentation, including 2 trabeculectomy surgeries, cataract extraction with intraocular lens implantation, and Nd:YAG laser for posterior capsular opacification (4 years prior to presentation). The right eye additionally had a history of endophthalmitis complicated by hypotony and subretinal fibrosis (7 years prior to presentation) and had a small central island of vision remaining from numerous pathologies. The left eye history was significant for high myopia optically corrected with a soft contact lens. By history, the patient used his left eye for essentially all tasks due to the constricted visual field and quality of vision of the right eye.
Best corrected visual acuity was 20/30 and 20/60 in the right and left eye, respectively. Refractive correction in diopters (dpt) was +3.00 dpt + 1.00 × 082 with spectacles for the right eye and −13.75 + 4.75 × 085 with a soft contact lens. A polycarbonate plano spectacle lens was used as protective eye wear for the left eye. A 4+ relative afferent pupillary defect for the right side was noted. Tonometry of the right eye was 7 and 18 mm Hg for the left eye. Slit-lamp exam revealed a functioning superior bleb for the right eye, a posterior chamber intraocular lens (PCIOL) and surgical iridectomy site superiorly. Posterior exam of the right eye revealed significant glaucomatous cupping of the optic nerve and subretinal fibrosis. Left eye exam was significant for combined cataract with nuclear, cortical, and posterior subcapsular changes as well as myopic fundus changes. The left eye also appeared to be buphthalmic in association with its high axial length. After counseling of risks and benefits, consent for left eye cataract treatment was obtained and biometric measurements were taken after 2 weeks of a contact lens holiday. A refractive target of −0.5 dpt was set for the patient.
Uncomplicated cataract surgery and intraocular lens implantation for the left eye was performed with topical anesthesia. Of note was very poor dilation of the left pupil at about 4.5 mm. Due to the functionally monocular status, a 10-O nylon suture was used to close the keratome wound for additional wound closure during recovery. At the 1-day postoperative visit, the patient's uncorrected distance visual acuity (UCDVA) was 20/150 with pinhole-assisted acuity of 20/60. Tonometry was 19 mm Hg for the left eye. Anterior segment exam was significant for a tight-appearing 10-O nylon suture at the keratome site, which was Seidel negative, 1+ cell and flare in the anterior chamber, and an appropriately centered PCIOL. The patient was prescribed a regimen of postoperative topical anti-inflammatory and antibiotic eye drops with follow-up recommended for 1 week. At the following 1-week visit, the patient reported no issues, but minimal improvement of vision. UCDVA was 20/200 improving to 20/150 with pinhole assistance. Inflammation had reduced to trace cell and flare with a deep anterior segment and centered PCIOL. IOP was measured at 9 mm Hg by tonometry. Clinical judgement was made to remove the 10-O nylon suture, after which the patient reported vision changes. A dilated fundus exam was performed revealing posterior scleral wall collapse in the context of clinical hypotony. Urgent measures were put in place and 1 mL of filtered air was injected at the pars plana in the inferior temporal quadrant for volumetric replacement in the eye. The patient reported an immediate subjective improvement in vision and resolution of the globe collapse with indirect ophthalmoscopy. Postinjection pressure was measured at 10 mm Hg. Topical antibiotics and a bandage contact lens were utilized in addition to the topical anti-inflammatory eye drops. The next day exam revealed uncorrected visual acuity of 20/50 with improvement to 20/30 with pinhole. The IOP was measured at 15 mm Hg over the contact lens. Anterior exam revealed a formed chamber with a centered PCIOL and posterior exam revealed a 50% remnant air bubble, flat retina, and formed globe. Examination at 1 week postinjection revealed complete resorption of the air bubble and stable eye exam findings with UCDVA stabilized at 20/40 uncorrected and IOP of 18 mm Hg over the bandage contact lens .