An 80-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 2-week history of worsening back pain, a 5-day history of dyspnoea on exertion, and high temperature. Approximately 2 weeks before admission she had an episode of back pain and high temperature, and 2 days before admission, she had transient unconsciousness and elevated temperature (40°C). She was a passive smoker on oral antidiabetic medication, and had no documented medical history of prior TTP or autoimmune disorder. On physical examination, she was conscious, had dyspnoea without chest pain, a body temperature of 38.2°C, blood pressure of 106/72 mmHg, pulse of 110 b.p.m. with 90% oxygen saturation (room air), and bilateral rales; regular heart rhythm; II/VI systolic murmur at apical; distension of the neck veins; jaundice; and petechiae and purpura in her toes. A neurological examination revealed no focal neurologic deficit. Laboratory tests revealed decreased platelet count of 13 000/μL and estimated glomerular filtration rate of 22 mL/min/1.73 mm2, increased level of total bilirubin of 7.3 mg/dL, increased level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 812 IU/L, and elevated levels of brain natriuretic peptide and cardiac enzymes [411 IU/L creatine kinase (CK), 40 IU/L CK-MB, and 19 966 pg/mL cardiac troponin I]. Chest radiography revealed congestion , and a 12-lead electrocardiogram on admission showed ST depression in V5 and V6 leads with normal sinus rhythm and a heart rate of 105 b.p.m. . TTDE revealed a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (50%) with hypokinesis of the inferior-posterior wall, suggesting non-ST-segment myocardial infarction. Chest computed tomography (CT) examination revealed lung congestion but no signs of infection. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT showed no evidence of cerebral haemorrhage (see , ure ) or infarction (see , ure ).
Considering the severe thrombocytopaenia, the management of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction and heart failure was conservative, with non-invasive respiratory support of the BiPAP, carperitide (0.025 μg/kg/mL), and diuretics (furosemide, 20 mg/day), in the intensive care unit. On Day 2, the patient had transient neurologic deficits, including 2/5 weakness in both arms, 2/5 weakness in both legs, dysarthria, and unconsciousness. Given the presence of the classic pentad of TTP, including fever, thrombocytopaenia, haemolytic anaemia, renal dysfunction, and neurologic deficit, the initial diagnosis was TTP, and the patient was managed by a multidisciplinary team including specialists from Cardiology, Haematology, Orthopaedics, and Neurology departments. After administration of FFP infusion, her platelet count decreased to 6000/μL with worsening leg purpura . From Day 3 onwards, plasma exchange was performed three times a week. Steroid pulse therapy (1 g/day for 3 days) was administered, followed by high-dose oral steroid therapy (prednisolone 40 mg/day). On Day 5, oral aspirin (100 mg/day) was administered, after recovery of her platelet count to >50 000/µL.
Spine MRI was performed to investigate the underlying reason for the back pain and weakness of extremities. The MRI revealed an iliopsoas abscess due to methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci, supporting our diagnosis of TTP/TMA caused by infection. In addition, the patient had discitis, potentially caused by the iliopsoas abscess. We evaluated her microcirculation using TTDE, which showed impaired CFR in the left anterior descending artery (LAD; ), suggesting CMD caused by TTP/TMA. On Day 10, a cardiac MRI showed no evidence of an acute infarct area in the left ventricular myocardium . Plasma exchange was stopped based on the recovery of platelet count (21.3 × 104/count; LDH 263 IU/L) on Day 21, and corticosteroid therapy was tapered. The patient was haemodynamically stable without symptoms of unconsciousness and recovered from TTP/TMA. On Day 22, coronary angiography was performed to exclude significant obstructive CAD. Coronary angiography revealed no significant luminal stenosis in the LAD and left circumflex artery (see , ure ), while the right coronary artery was small (the left dominance of coronary arteries is shown in , ). A follow-up assessment of the CFR on Day 30 demonstrated an improvement (CFR = 2.5), indicating recovery of the transient impaired CMD as well as improvement in thrombocytopaenia. ADAMTS13 activity (Day 4) was preserved (34%, 2 weeks after the test), and the diagnosis was TMA. Oral prednisolone was gradually reduced, and the iliopsoas abscess was treated with antibiotics for 3 months. The patient was discharged without any symptom of heart or renal failure, and continued the rehabilitation for several months because of a drop in her activities of daily living.