An 8-year-old boy presented to us in our OPD with a swelling in the anterolateral aspect of right lower thigh since 1 year. It was gradually increasing in size and for the last 2 months was painful. There was no significant history of preceding trauma. His medical history was unremarkable, no associated constitutional symptoms or bleeding tendencies. He had received symptomatic treatment for the last 2 months without any improvement.
Examination revealed an asymmetric, boggy, non-compressible, and non-pulsatile swelling in the anteromedial aspect of right lower thigh measuring about 10 cm × 7 cm. The overlying skin was normal without any discoloration, venous engorgement or inflammatory signs. There was fullness of medial para-patellar fossa without any joint effusion. There was tenderness over the quadriceps muscle more on the anteromedial aspect. There was no distal neurovascular deficit or bruit. Limb length was equal to the contra-lateral limb. Knee exhibited full range of motion.
With the differential diagnosis of lipoma, cold abscess, suprapatellar bursitis, synovitis, sarcoma, fibroma or other extra-articular soft tissue tumors, the patient was subjected to further investigations.
MRI of the thigh was done which revealed soft tissue mass of about 14 cm × 5 cm in the vastusmedialis and intermedius which was of high-signal intensity on T1, T2, and PD FAT-SAT images, indicating the mass could be an intramuscular hemangioma .
The patient underwent surgical excision of the tumor under general anesthesia. An anterolateral approach to the distal thigh was used. A vascular mass involving the lower half of vastusmedialis andintermedius muscles of size 14 cm × 8 cm × 5 cm was encountered with bluish discoloration, feeder vessels from the profunda femoris artery were ligated, and total excision of the tumor was done and sent for histopathological examination. The biopsy revealed dilated interconnecting thin-walled vascular channels with a combination of arteries and veins. Many of these vascular spaces were filled with blood, some of the which were thrombosed and organized and others show features of recanalization, suggestive of arteriovenous (AV) hemangioma. Many of these vascular spaces were filled with blood, some of the which were thrombosed and organized and others show features of recanalization, suggestive of arteriovenous (AV) hemangioma .
The patient had an uneventful post-operative period. Repeat MRI was done after 1 year showed no evidence of recurrence . He was followed up for 2 years and was found to be free of symptoms.