A 76-year-old man had follow-up at our hospital after esophagectomy with retrosternal gastric conduit reconstruction for esophageal cancer, which had been performed 8 years earlier. Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) revealed a low-dense mass of 24 × 20 mm in the pancreatic head and infiltration to the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (ASPDA). The tumor also had attachment to the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) of less than 180 degrees . The gastric conduit was receiving its blood supply mainly from the RGEA, according to the arterial phase of dynamic CT. The RGEA was involved in the tumor. Furthermore, in this case, the celiac axis had severe stenosis. There was considerable calcification around the stenosis of the celiac artery; therefore, the cause of the stenosis was suspected to be arteriosclerosis. Although the arterial pathway between the proper hepatic artery (PHA) and the SMA were developed through the GDA, we identified well-developed collateral flow from the SMA to the splenic artery (SPA) via the DPA . Tumor markers were elevated, with a CEA of 5.6 ng/ml, and CA19-9 of 706 U/ml. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) revealed adenocarcinoma. The patient was diagnosed with advanced pancreatic head cancer as T2, N1, M0, and Stage IIB, according to the UICC-TNM classification, 8th Edition . The tumor had no contact to SMA nor celiac axis, and contact to SMV was less than 180 degrees. According to NCCN guidelines, the resectability status would be resectable. However, we judged this case as unresectable due to the infiltration of the RGEA, because only this artery supplied arterial blood flow to the gastric conduit. Therefore, the patient received chemotherapy (nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine for 14 cycles). In our institution, we discuss the indication of conversion surgery after chemotherapy in case-by-case situation. In this case after 11 months of chemotherapy, we planned to perform a pancreaticoduodenectomy, because there was neither progression of the tumor nor distant metastases, CEA decreased to 5.0 ng/ml and CA19-9 to 344 U/ml, and the patient strongly requested to receive the operation. For CAS, before performing a pancreaticoduodenectomy, we tried inserting an endovascular stent for the purpose of securing blood flow of the PHA when dissecting the GDA during pancreaticoduodenectomy. We failed to place the stent due to severe stenosis, but confirmed blood flow from the SMA to the SPA via the DPA, which was detected at MDCT .
Next, we planned to reconstruct the RGEA using the middle colic artery (MCA) during pancreaticoduodenectomy for preserving blood flow of the gastric conduit. We also planned to revascularize the PHA using the jejunal artery of the Roux-en-Y loop in case we could not preserve the DPA, which is the collateral pathway from the SMA to the SPA, or in case of deficient blood flow in the CHA after division of the PHA or the GDA in spite of preserving the DPA . If the root of the GDA is involved in the tumor, the PHA should be cut and reconstructed. If the root of the GDA is tumor-free, the GDA is ligated and divided, and should be reconstructed in case of insufficient blood flow in the PHA after clamping of the GDA.
The root of the RGEA showed tumor involvement on the preoperative CT, and the RGEA was cut at the marginal site of the remnant gastric conduit during the operation. There was no backflow from the cut end of the gastric conduit side; therefore, it was reconstructed using MCA microscopically. The RGEV could be preserved because of its distance from the tumor. Although the right gastric artery had been preserved during esophagectomy in this case, this artery was not detected at MDCT before PD. Furthermore, during PD, the right gastric artery was not palpable, and we divided this artery at the root. Using a supra-colic anterior artery-first approach , we dissected the trunk of the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (IPDA) and the first jejunal artery (J1a). The second nerve plexus of the pancreatic head (PLph-II) was dissected, preserving the nerve plexus around the SMA (PL sma). At the lower edge of the pancreatic body, the DPA, which communicated with the SPA, was identified . The gastric conduit was divided on the oral side of pyloric ring. In this case, the GDA was confirmed tumor-free intraoperatively, and blood flow after clamping of the GDA was sufficient by color Doppler ultrasonography, suggesting that the collateral circulation from the SMA to the SPA via the DPA worked sufficiently. As a result, reconstructing the PHA was unnecessary . When the GDA was divided , we confirmed that the tumor had also invaded the SMV; therefore, we performed a pancreatic transection, with en bloc portal vein resection (20 mm long), and end-to-end reconstruction. The left branch of the middle colic artery (lt. MCA) was used to reconstruct the RGEA. End-to-end suturing of lt. MCA and RGEA was performed with 9–0 NYLON suture (CROWNJUN Inc., Japan) under an operating microscope . A retrocolic pancreaticojejunostomy, a choledochojejunostomy, and an antecolic gastrojejunostomy were performed, in this order, with a single jejunal loop. Then, a Braun anastomosis was performed between the afferent and efferent parts of the jejunal loop, which were involved in the gastrojejunostomy. Good blood flow of the remnant gastric conduit was confirmed by ICG-fluorescence imaging.
The total length of the operation was 598 min and the total blood loss was 350 ml. A blood transfusion with 280 ml was performed. We did not use antithrombotic therapy. A minor leakage of the gastrojejunostomy occurred in day 22. Endoscopy showed no ischemic change at the gastric conduit, and the case could be managed conservatively. We judged as functional recovery at day 43, and started S-1. However, the patient developed minor aspiration pneumonia after starting S-1, and needed swallowing rehabilitation for a while and discharged from hospital on postoperative day 90. Postoperative enhanced CT showed that sufficient inflow was provided from the lt. MCA to the RGEA, and sufficient inflow from the SMA to the SPA via the DPA . Macroscopically, a 2.8 × 3.2 × 3.0 cm-sized, ill-circumscribed and whitish mass was seen, mainly located in the pancreatic head. Microscopically, the tumor was an invasive ductal carcinoma mainly composed of moderately differentiated tubular components. The carcinoma infiltrated the common bile duct, duodenum, peripancreatic fat tissue, and portal vein. Metastasis of the carcinoma to a lymph node (No. 13) located in the peripancreatic head was found. All surgical margins of the bile duct, duodenum, and pancreas were free from carcinoma. The chemotherapeutic effect determined by pathological observation was Grade IIa according to the EVANS classification, and Grade 3 according to the CAP classification [, ]. The overall pathological stage was T3, N1, M0, and Stage IIB, according to the UICC-TNM classification . Fifteen months after the surgery, the patient was alive with no recurrence.