A 29-year-old man without a significant past medical history visited our hospital emergency room with severe generalized muscle weakness and bilateral leg numbness that continued for several hours. He had no specific family history including diabetes mellitus and hypokalemia. His motor power values were 3 of 5 in all four extremities with normal reflexes and sensation. Blood pressure was within normal range and no other abnormalities were found on his physical examination. The patient was not under medication with herbal medicines (such as licorice), diuretics, or laxatives. No documented endocrinal dysfunction was noted. He had no symptoms such as fever, dyspnea, chest pain, palpitations, abdominal pain, or diarrhea.
His symptom onset was relatively rapid. He felt no discomfort for several years before the symptoms presented. First he felt progressive generalized muscle weakness and fatigue; after a few hours, the muscle weakness and numbness became intolerable. His laboratory examination data demonstrated considerable hypokalemia (2.6 mmol/L as K+), decreased serum renin (0.14 ng/mL/hr, reported 8 days after testing) and aldosterone (11.81 pg/mL, reported 8 days after testing), metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation, and diluted urine (decreased urine osmolality, 130 mOsm/kg H2O) . The transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG) was 2.43, but it was not valid because the urine osmolality was less than plasma osmolality. The spot urine potassium/creatinine ratio was 16 mEq/gCr. He was discharged from the emergency room after the muscle weakness improved by 40 mEq of intravenous potassium replacement. His potassium level was 4.4 mmol/L and he refused to be admitted for evaluation of the cause of hypokalemia. When he visited an outpatient clinic a few days later, the potassium level was within the normal range (4.3 mmol/L). Sixteen months after the first event, he visited the emergency room again with the same symptoms and signs. Serum and urine laboratory test results were similar to those of the first event: serum potassium, 2.9 mmol/L; serum renin, 0.48 ng/mL/hr; and aldosterone, 7.39 pg/mL. When the patient visited the emergency room at the first event, symptoms improved rapidly after intravenous potassium replacement and were discharged without a 24-hour urine test. In the second event, the 24-hour urine potassium excretion was measured at 57.4 mEq/24-hours while intravenous potassium replacement was performed. Two months later, a third event occurred with the same symptoms and signs. Potassium levels during the third hypokalemia event improved to 4.1 mEq/L in the next day only by recommending discontinuation of caffeine drink, without intravenous or oral potassium supplementation. As the potassium level was corrected, his generalized weakness resolved. Hypokalemia was suspected as the main cause of his muscle weakness and numbness.
Hypokalemic paralysis occurred three times over 18 months. After the third episode, he agreed to be admitted and to evaluate the cause of the intermittently recurrent hypokalemia. Upon further questioning, we found that his eating habits were extremely unbalanced, and he tended to overconsume convenience and fast foods such as ramen, burger, pizza, fried chicken, and fried chips. He stated that he drank large amounts of caffeinated coffee, i.e., more than 12–20 cups a day, regardless of coffee type. His mother also mentioned that he consumed 1.5 L of Coke and fell asleep on the day of his third visit to the emergency room. Using the analytical contents of coffee, his caffeine ingestion was estimated to be > 1000 mg/day up to a maximum of 3000–4000 mg [, , , ].
Besides the hypokalemia, he showed abnormal liver function test results (aspartate transaminase, 48 IU/L and alanine transaminase, 102 IU/L) with a moderate degree of fatty liver, an abnormal lipid profile (total cholesterol, 255 mg/dL; triglyceride, 136 mg/dL; low-density lipoprotein, 187 mg/dL; and high-density lipoprotein, 40 mg/dL), and undiagnosed diabetes mellitus (hemoglobin A1c, 6.2 %; fasting glucose, 134 mg/dL; and post-prandial 2-hour glucose, 237 mg/dL). His body mass index was 26.0 kg/m2 (height 171.9 cm, body weight 76.8 kg).
Three days after he stopped the coffee and coke ingestion, his diluted urine was concentrated (from 111 to 438 mOsm/kg H2O), and the serum potassium level remained normal without supplementation. He was diagnosed with caffeine-induced hypokalemia. We educated him about healthy diet habits and prescribed lipid-lowering agents and metformin. After discharge, he drastically altered his lifestyle, including a reduction in his caffeine intake, regular exercise, and a decrease in his intake of convenience foods. At the last visit, an examination revealed a normal potassium level, normal liver function test results, and well-controlled diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia.