A 75 years old lady was admitted via the Accident and Emergency to the surgical ward with a three-day history of abdominal pain and vomiting. The pain had started suddenly in the evening three days ago accompanied with vomiting three to four times. The vomitus consisted of dark brown fluid. The pain was initially in the left hypochondrial region and had lately become more generalised, constant, and increased in intensity. Her General Practioner, who had prescribed antiemetics for her symptoms, initially saw the patient. She had appendicectomy in the past, and had been diagnosed with diverticular disease on Barium enema and colonoscopy.
On examination, her vital parameters were normal. She had abdominal distension with generalised tenderness, abdomen was resonant on percussion, and she had decreased bowel sounds. Her routine blood tests were normal, and urine analysis showed increased ketones.
X-rays of the abdomen and chest were suggestive of dilated loops of small bowel . A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed dilated fluid filled small bowel loops with a point of abrupt change in calibre and angulation of bowel loop in the central abdomen. The small bowel beyond that point was collapsed. There was a small amount of free fluid in the pelvis. The CT scan was suggestive of adhesive small bowel obstruction, probably affecting a distal jejunal loop, with diverticular disease in sigmoid colon without any overt signs of active inflammation, and no free intraperitoneal air .
A clinical decision was made to proceed with laparoscopy. On laparoscopy, there was dilatation of the small intestine up to the distal jejunum with collapsed bowel beyond that point. The serosal surface of the small intestine looked normal. There were no adhesions between bowel loops; mesentery was normal with no evidence of lymphadenopathy. There was an area of sudden change in calibre with dilated proximal and collapsed distal segment in distal jejunum. The dilated segment of distal jejunum was brought out by a midline mini-laparotomy of five centimetres . A foreign body, dried undigested apricot, was extracted . The bowel at the point of impaction was normal and closed in two layers. Laparoscopically, we were unable to identify any other abnormality in the small bowel.
The patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery, and went home after ten days. On questioning she informed us that she had eaten few dried apricots while shopping three days before admission in A&E. She was followed up in the outpatient clinic with a Barium meal and follow-through, which was normal and did not show any abnormality in small intestine .