I clinical case: A 54-year-old, menopausal (gravida 0, para 0) woman presented with lower abdominal pain.
II clinical case: A 45-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1) arrived to National Cancer Institute of Lithuania with histologically confirmed uterine cancer with no complaints.
I clinical case: The complaints lasted for last six months.
II clinical case: Hysteroscopy was performed because endometrial polyp was detected by ultrasound. Final histology confirmed well differentiated (G1) endometrioid endometrial cancer.
I cinical case: There were no other comorbidities, body mass index (BMI) 22.4 kg/m2.
II clinical case: There were no comorbidities, she had a BMI of 27.8 kg/m2.
I clinical case: Her medical and family histories were unremarkable for any type of cancer.
II clinical case: There were no history of malignancy in the family.
I clinical case: The clinical examination revealed mobile pelvic mass 15 cm in diameter which was extended till the umbilicus. Pelvic ultrasound examination identified: Thickened endometrium up to 11 mm and left adnexal multilocular cystic tumor with papillary structures. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis revealed left cystic ovary mass approximately 136 mm × 114 mm × 114 mm in size with several septum and papillary component.
II clinical case: On clinical examination left adnexal mass was identified. Transvaginal ultrasound showed normal sized uterus with endometrial thickness of 6 mm, and 7 cm × 8 cm left adnexal solid mass with mixed echogenicity and cystic inclusion, right ovary cyst up to 3 cm is likely to be functional cyst. Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdominal and pelvis showed irregularly shaped, solid, left adnexal mass up to 60 mm × 77 mm × 80 mm, suspected paraaortic and iliac lymph nodes.
I clinical case: Cancer antigen 125 was evaluated 209 U/mL (normal range < 35 U/mL).
II clinical case: Cancer antigen 125 was not evaluated 32 U/mL (normal range < 35 U/mL).
I clinical case: Figure shows hematoxylin-eosin stains of the endometrial and Figure shows ovarian tumor specimens. Peritoneal cytological washing and additional peritoneal biopsies, as well as lymph nodes, were negative for malignant cells. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained slide at low power (lens objective × 4) shows closely packed irregular glandular structures. H&E-stained slide at medium power (lens objective × 14) shows columnar epithelium with oval, stratified nuclei and visible nucleoli . H&E-stained slide at low power (lens objective × 4) shows closely packed irregular glandular structures and focal solid growth. H&E-stained slide at medium power (lens objective × 14) shows tumor composed of moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm with slightly polymorphous nuclei and visible nucleoli .
II clinical case: Figure and shows hematoxylin-eosin stains of the endometrial and Figure and shows ovarian tumor specimens. H&E-stained slide at low power (lens objective × 4) shows closely packed irregular glandular structures. H&E-stained slide at medium power (lens objective × 14) shows tall columnar epithelium with oval, stratified nuclei with visible nucleoli .
H&E-stained slide at low power (lens objective × 4) shows closely packed irregular glandular structures with focal necrosis. H&E-stained slide at medium power (lens objective × 14) shows columnar epithelium with oval, stratified nuclei, and visible nucleoli .