A 53-year-old Caucasian female with history of hemochromatosis and myeloproliferative (MF) neoplasm with myelofibrosis, MF-2. She was also diagnosed with heterozygous factor 5 Leiden mutation and abnormal lupus anticoagulant profile leading to portal vein thrombus. She had previously undergone TIPS placement for portal vein thrombosis with resultant abdominal pain which initially improved her symptoms. She had originally undergone TIPS in 2019 with placement of a PTFE-covered stent graft. One year later, she underwent revision whereby venoplasty was performed of the TIPS. This patient sought our care in 2022 due to worsening abdominal pain. The evaluation included a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen with contrast and a liver doppler ultrasound. Both studies demonstrated occlusion of the TIPS. She was referred to interventional radiology (IR) for revision. Given the TIPS thrombosis, a transhepatic puncture of the occluded portion of the TIPS was performed and a wire was advanced towards the right atrium. This wire was snared from a right internal jugular access such that access to the thrombosed TIPS was gained. Venogram confirmed occlusion of the TIPS . This was initially treated with venoplasty. Subsequent venogram demonstrated a persistent narrowing at the hepatic venous end of the TIPS, which was treated by placing a longer stent within the existing stent, covering the stenosis and extending the TIPS to the Inferior Vena Cava (IVC) confluence. A 10 cm stent graft (8 cm covered, 2 cm uncovered) (Viatorr, Gore, Flagstaff, AZ) was utilized and dilated to 10 mm. The portosystemic gradient was reduced from 12 to 2 mmHg following the revision.
Three weeks later, the patient presented with dark urine and dyspnea on exertion and was found to have new onset hemolytic anemia . She underwent an extensive evaluation for hemolytic anemia and ultimately the temporal association of recent TIPS revision and development of her symptoms led to the diagnosis. Follow-up liver ultrasound with doppler demonstrated mildly elevated velocities with patent TIPS shunt. The images were reviewed with IR who did not see any evidence of clinically significant TIPS dysfunction. The patient was managed conservatively with improvement in her lab work within 16 weeks post-TIPS revision and no development of subsequent symptoms . Repeat liver ultrasound with doppler at that time demonstrated normal flow through the TIPS with resolution of the elevated velocities.