A 77-year-old man who was hepatitis B virus carrier underwent laparoscopic lateral segment hepatectomy for HCC eight years ago. The pathological findings revealed no vessel invasion. He visited the hospital regularly for follow-ups. Protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) remained elevated from two years ago, but imaging tests for the liver revealed no metastasis. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 27 mm nodule with mediastinal pleural invasion in the right apical segment (S1) . The patient was pathologically diagnosed with a metastatic lung tumor from HCC via transbronchoscopic biopsy. We planned to perform right S1 segmentectomy because the resection margin was expected to be suboptimal by wedge resection. Before surgery, contrast-enhanced CT in the pulmonary vessel phase for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction showed that the tumor extended into the adjusting peripheral pulmonary vein, and we diagnosed tumor thrombus invasion in V1a . An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file ]. The surgery was conducted under 3-port video-assisted thoracic surgery. The tumor had invaded the mediastinal pleura, so it was resected. First, the right superior pulmonary vein was exposed and the central part of V1 was ligated and cut to prevent tumor thrombus dispersal . Tumor thrombus in V1a was not recognized before cut because the procedure for recognition of the extent of the tumor thrombus by palpation was risk for dispersal. Subsequently, A1 and B1 were cut respectively using a mechanical stapler. The intersegmental plane was identified by an inflation-deflation line after air inflation to the right lung, and subsequently cut with mechanical staplers. Finally, an intraoperative pathological examination of the frozen section demonstrated a malignant negative margin in V1. An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file ]. The operative time was 185 min, and the operative blood loss was minimal. A prolonged postoperative pulmonary air leakage was resolved by the conservative treatment. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 14. Pathological examination revealed moderately-differentiated metastatic HCC with tumor thrombus invasion in many pulmonary veins, that was present contiguously with the tumor and contained cancer cells . The molecular pattern resulted as follows; CK8/18, AMACR and HepPar1 were positive, and alpha-fetoprotein and Glyican-3 were negative. The features of this tumor were homologous to HCC in 8 years ago. Postoperatively, PIVKA-II returned to normal ranges and no additional treatments were performed. He has not shown the recurrence of HCC for 13 months.