A 6-year-old boy was diagnosed with T-lymphoblastic lymphoma and received chemotherapy and radiotherapy; he achieved complete remission and underwent annual follow-up with positron emission tomography/computed tomography (CT) using 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose. At the age of 13, he was referred to our department for further evaluation of a rectal tumor identified by positron emission tomography/CT.
Physical examination revealed several café au lait macules and multiple cutaneous hemangiomas. Abdominal enhanced CT revealed irregular rectal wall thickening without lymphadenopathy or distant metastases . Total colonoscopy and endoscopic biopsy revealed a 45-mm sessile adenocarcinoma with a central depression in the rectosigmoid area and more than 100 adenomatous polyps, 2–15 mm in size, distributed throughout the colon and rectum . Additionally, one duodenal adenoma, 10 mm in size, was identified by esophagoduodenoscopy and capsule endoscopy. Serum levels of immunoglobulin G and G4 were 434 (normal, 870–1700) and < 2.0 (normal, 11–121) mg/dL, respectively.
CMMRD was considered in the differential diagnosis based on these findings and the CMMRD scoring system, although the patient did not fulfill the Amsterdam criteria for Lynch syndrome [, ]. Therefore, testing after obtaining informed consent revealed the rectal cancer harbored high microsatellite instability. After obtaining further written informed consent, subsequent genetic testing performed for hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes, including those associated with mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, PMS2, and MSH6), adenomatous polyposis coli, and mutYH-associated polyposis revealed one homozygous frame shift mutation in MSH6 (NM_000179.2; c.3261del p.Phe1088SerfsTer2), which was reported as pathogenic (ClinVar accession VCV000089363.14, , last accessed May 15, 2021), confirming the diagnosis of CMMRD . Genetic testing showed that the patient’s mother and father were heterozygous carriers of the MSH6 c.3261del mutation, leading to the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome based on the same germline mutation in both parents . Both parents had normal findings by colonoscopy and esophagoduodenoscopy.
The patient and his parents were carefully and repeatedly informed about the risks and benefits of colectomy and proctocolectomy for rectal cancer and colorectal polyposis, which they declined because of the high risk of small intestinal and non-gastrointestinal cancers in future. Therefore, the patient underwent low anterior resection (LAR) of the rectosigmoid colon for rectal cancer and surveillance endoscopy was planned for the remaining colon polyposis and duodenal adenoma. Histopathologically, the excised rectal mass was an intramucosal, moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (pTis) in tubulovillous adenoma without lymph node metastasis. The patient was diagnosed with Stage I rectal cancer according to the Tumor-Node-Metastasis staging system . After surgery, colonoscopy was planned with the following goals: (1) polypectomy every 4–6 months until only polyps sized < 4 mm remained; (2) histological evaluation of polyps sized > 10 mm and polyps sized < 10 mm with suspicion of cancer based on endoscopic appearance .
During the first colonoscopy after surgery, two polyps were pathologically diagnosed as intramucosal adenocarcinoma (pTis) in adenoma. However, in the third colonoscopy, one polyp, sized 8 mm, in descending colon was diagnosed as invasive adenocarcinoma without lymphovascular invasion (> 1000 μm, pT1). The patient refused the recommended additional surgery including colectomy. Subsequently, surveillance endoscopy and CT examination were continued, and lymph node and distant metastases were not present at last follow-up at three years after initial surgery. During the 3-year follow-up period with short-interval surveillance colonoscopy, 130 colon polyps were removed without adverse events, and the number of detected polyps gradually decreased . The duodenal adenoma was treated with endoscopic mucosal resection after LAR. Until the last follow-up, the subsequently performed annual esophagoduodenoscopy and capsule endoscopy led to the identification of three duodenal adenomas, sized < 5 mm, which were removed.