A 38-year-old male with body mass index (BMI) 31.5 kg/m2 was presented in 1998 with more than 12 months of progressive pain in both hips. Radiographs and computer tomography scanning revealed avascular necrosis of the femoral heads (Ficat stage IV on the right and Ficat stage III on the left side). The right hip was treated with an uncemented THA through a standard posterior approach. A screw-in titanium-alloy (TiAl6V4) acetabular cup size 56 mm with polyethylene insert (RCM, Cremascoli Ortho) was inserted and the used femoral component was a size 6 proximally plasma-spray hydroxyapatite-coated, and anatomically shaped titanium-alloy modular stem (An.C.A. Fit, Cremascoli Ortho) with long straight titanium modular neck of the same material and 28-mm, + 3.5 mm (L) length cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) femoral head. Next year, the patient’s left hip was treated through a standard posterior approach by the same orthopaedic surgeon with a 60 mm screw-in titanium-alloy acetabular cup with polyethylene insert (RCM, Cremascoli Ortho) and the size 7 femoral component (An.C.A. Fit, Cremascoli Ortho) with long straight titanium modular neck and 28-mm alumina ceramic (Biolox Forte, CeramTec, Plochingen, Germany) femoral head with + 3.5 mm (L) length. The same surgeon performed both surgeries and the patient recovered from both with no postoperative complications.
Three years after primary left THA, the patient presented with sudden left groin pain and inability to bear weight on the affected leg. Radiographs revealed a fracture of the left modular femoral neck . At revision, no signs of polyethylene wear, local tissue adverse reaction or pseudotumor formation were present. However, it was impossible to disengage the modular neck from the femoral taper. An extended trochanteric osteotomy was performed to remove the original implant and a Wagner-type revision modular stem (Limacorporate S.p.A., Udine, Italy) was inserted. Tissue samples were sent for bacteriology and have remained sterile. However, the patient underwent subsequent revision surgeries for stem subsidence, instability and eventually for Staphyloccocus Epidermidis infection. The infection was eliminated through a two-staged procedure and the patient was finally successfully reconstructed in 2017 with Alloclassic Zweymüller SL stem, Continuum acetabular component and Biolox Delta ceramic femoral head (Zimmer Biomet). Radiographs taken 2 years after revision demonstrated stable fixation of all THA components of the left hip.
Unfortunately, 20 years after the right THA insertion, the patient presented again to the Emergency Clinics with a fracture of the right-side modular neck . At revision, no significant local tissue adverse reaction or pseudotumor formation were present. Again, it was impossible to disengage the modular neck from the femoral taper . The femoral component was extracted via a single longitudinal proximal splitting and two-chisel technique. The acetabular component was revised as well due to excessive polyethylene wear. A replacement liner was not available. The hip was reconstructed with a long Wagner-type revision stem (Limacorporate), Continuum acetabular component (Zimmer Biomet) and ceramic femoral head (Biolox Delta). Tissue samples taken during revision surgery and sent for cultures remain sterile. Immediate postoperative course was uneventful and patient was discharged as usual. However, he was readmitted 1 month after surgery with signs of deep wound infection. The revision procedure was debridement, antibiotics and implant retention (DAIR) with exchange of femoral head and liner only. Operative cultures found Cutibacterium (Propionibacterium) acnes. The patient was treated with antibiotics for 3 months.
14 months after the last revision, the patient was complaining of mild occasional pain and ambulated without walking aids or shoe lift. The patient’s Harris Hip Score (HHS) was 84 for the right hip and 87 for the left hip, respectively. His University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) activity score (min 0 - max 10) was 4. The SF-36 outcome scores for general health, health change, pain, physical functioning, and limitations due to physical health were 75, 50, 60, 45 and 25%, respectively, 40% each for social functioning, emotional wellbeing and energy/fatigue, and 0% for role limitations due to emotional problems. The radiographs demonstrated stable fixation of all THA components of both hips .