A 15-year-old woman with purpura presented to her primary care physician who prescribed betamethasone dipropionate ointment for a provisional diagnosis of immunoglobulin A (IgA) vasculitis. One week after the initial examination, she visited the pediatric outpatient clinic at our hospital complaining of sudden pain in the left lower abdominal area. At presentation, she experienced no fever, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea and had no history of metrorrhagia or abnormal vaginal discharge. There was no history of abdominal surgery or sexual intercourse. Her menstrual periods were usually regular and without complications, including dysmenorrhea or menorrhagia. She had been receiving medications for schizophrenia—olanzapine, suvorexant, sodium valproate, and paliperidone were administered daily; risperidone and biperiden were administered as needed.
On examination, her abdomen was soft, but tender in the left lower quadrant. No signs of peritoneal irritation were noted. She had a brown rash on the chest and abdomen. After admission, transabdominal US revealed left hydronephrosis and a dilated tubal structure on the left side of the bladder, while contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a suspected left adnexal tumor. In the evaluation at our obstetrics and gynecology department, her abdominal pain had completely resolved, and the transrectal US showed a cystic structure and normal uterus and ovaries . MRI revealed a tortuous tubular structure in the left pelvis, with the inner part of the lesion showing a water-like density, with no signs of malignancy . Laboratory test results were unremarkable except for a slightly elevated white blood cell count (9100/μL). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with hydrosalpinx, which her abdominal pain was attributed to. The pain completely resolved thereafter, and we decided to treat her conservatively as an outpatient.
Her abdominal pain continued to diminish; however, she complained of a large volume of watery discharge one month after the initial presentation. MRI, which was performed every three months during the observation period, showed a gradual decrease in the size of the hydrosalpinx ; hence, we continued to monitor her symptoms carefully. Nine months after her first admission, the left hydrosalpinx had not completely disappeared, and watery discharge continued. Therefore, we counseled the patient about laparoscopy as a treatment for the hydrosalpinx, which was the most likely cause of the watery discharge.
We performed laparoscopic surgery using three ports (one umbilical and two lateral ports in the lower abdomen). Intra-abdominal observation revealed a left fallopian tube with torsion (360° clockwise rotation) and swelling of the entire tube . Although no sign of malignancy was indicated by the series of MRI, pathological evaluation was required to determine the cause of the persistent tubal cystic tumor. Moreover, there was a high risk of recurrent torsion due to continuous hydrosalpinx. Based on the patient's condition, we decided to perform a left salpingectomy. The total surgical duration was 40 minutes, and blood loss was minimal. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. She had no further watery discharge. Histopathological examination confirmed the hydrosalpinx. Focal nuclear hyperchromasia was observed; however, the tubal epithelial structures were preserved . Immunohistochemistry showed nonspecific weak staining for p53, with no evidence of malignancy .