We describe the case of an 83-year-old man with a history of arterial hypertension, mild chronic renal insufficiency, and prostate cancer treated with radiation therapy, bicalutamide, tamoxifen and triptorelin. He had had a previous mild ischaemic stroke with transient right facio-brachio-crural hemiparesis followed by pneumonia caused by Staphylococcus aureus with complete recovery. At that time, blood glucose levels were 114 and 99 mg/dl (normal values 65–110 mg/dl). After 6 years he presented with thrombosis of the right common iliac vein treated with low-molecular-weight heparin, closely followed by myocardial infarction, consequent coronary stent implantation and double antiplatelet therapy (dipyridamole 200 mg/day plus acetylsalicylic acid 150 mg/day).
Four months later, worsening of walking ability was closely followed by dysarthria about 1 week later. The patient was admitted to our hospital where he was diagnosed with mild ischaemic stroke, showing mild left hemiparesis without sensory impairment. An emergent brain CT was negative for acute lesions and only former small chronic ischaemic lesions were reported (, –26 days). Later review showed mild bilateral hypodensity of the striata was already present, which became clearer on another CT scan performed 2 days later (, −24 days). No involuntary movements were reported at admission or during the following days while the patient was in the university neurology ward. Blood tests showed very high blood glucose (505 mg/dl) and glycated haemoglobin of 15.7% (normal values 4.3–5.8%). Subcutaneous insulin therapy was started as suggested by the consultant diabetologist. Mild dysphagia was present but no parenteral nutrition was necessary. Twenty-seven days after admission, while the patient was in the neurorehabilitation ward, he developed involuntary movements on the left side of his body, consistent with moderate HCHB. He was diagnosed with glycaemic HCHB and started treatment with olanzapine (up to 5 mg/day for 7 days), then haloperidol (up to 3 mg/day for 20 days) and finally tetrabenazine (up to 25 mg/day for about 6 months), with a partial reduction in involuntary movements.
The first brain MRI was performed 7 days after HCHB onset and confirmed an increase in signal intensity on axial T1-weighted imaging in both striata . Notably, the hyperintensity was asymmetrical since the right striatum, contralateral to the affected side of the body, was clearly more hyperintense than the left striatum; DWI and ADC were negative. Such asymmetry was much less evident on CT scans. The patient underwent neurological follow-up which showed a gradual reduction in HCHB. Tetrabenazine was stopped and involuntary movement reappeared only while the patient was speaking . This condition remained unaltered during 26 months of follow-up.
To monitor how lesions evolved, brain CT and MRI were repeated for up to 1.5 years after HCHB onset. Striatal hyperdensity on CT scans was no longer detectable after about 3 months . Striatal hyperintensity on T1 MRI disappeared completely after 10 months, while striatal hypointensity on SWI and T2*-GRE still persisted 1.5 years later . shows the times and results of blood glucose and glycated haemoglobin tests and brain neuroimaging.