A 31-year-old Chinese female was admitted to the Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery with the unexpected discovery of two thyroid nodules (0.51 × 0.47 × 0.47 cm and 0.50 × 0.54 × 0.28 cm, respectively) during a routine physical examination 7 days prior . The Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System (TI-RADS) scores of the nodules were classified as 4b and 4b, respectively. The patient was in a good general condition and did not have a history of chronic illness or smoking or drinking habits. Additionally, she did not complain about neck swelling or other discomforts when her medical history was collected. Only the serum levels of the thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb, 127.6 IU/ml, reference 0.0–34 IU/ml) and thyroid globulin antibody (TgAb, 438.9 IU/ml, reference 0.0–115 IU/ml) were elevated according to the laboratory test results. After admission, a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy and BRAFV600E gene test were performed. The results (atypical cells and BRAFV600E mutation) revealed that these nodules were strongly suspected to be malignant.
Therefore, with for a goal of a satisfactory postoperative neck appearance, the patient underwent endoscopic thyroidectomy via the bilateral axillo-breast approach (BABA) on the 3rd day of hospitalization. Initially, the operational vision and manipulation spaces were established through two subcutaneous tunnels in the chest wall. Then, with the aid of endoscopy, a coagulation hook was used to separate the neck white line and anterior cervical muscles and further expose the whole thyroid gland. The two nodules were located in the superior part and the isthmus of the right thyroid gland, and they had hard and fixed surfaces and unclear boundaries. Thus, the right lobe and isthmus of the thyroid gland were simultaneously removed by an ultrasound knife, and then, all the samples were sent for intraoperative frozen section biopsies (FSBs). The results of the FSBs suggested papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (PTMC, Fig. ) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT, Fig. ). For this reason, the central lymph node (CLN) and residual thyroid tissue were resected. The postoperative pathological examination findings were consistent with the FSBs results and did not show lymph node metastasis (0/2).
However, on the 3rd postoperative day, the patient complained of upper eyelid drooping on the left side . Thus, a comprehensive ocular examination was performed by a neurologist and ophthalmologist together. The left upper eyelid ptosis covered the corneal limbus for nearly 4 mm with an unequal pupil diameter (right: 4 mm, left: 2 mm). In addition, ipsilateral anhidrosis was also confirmed on the face. These symptoms led to the final diagnosis of HS. Hence, the patient received a detailed and reasonable explanation of this rare complication and was told that HS is a curable symptom. Then, she agreed to receive adjuvant neurotrophic therapy with mecobalamin (0.5 mg, oral administration, three times a day) and vitamin B1 (0.1 g, intramuscular injection, once a day) for 7 days before being discharged. No other complications, such as dyspnea, inflammation, or vocal cord palsy, were observed in this patient during the 12-day hospitalization period.
During the first 3-month follow-up, all symptoms of HS were significantly resolved without recurrence, and the patient did not report other symptoms, such as vision loss, photophobia, or cognitive dysfunction. In addition, she appreciated the timely diagnosis and treatment of HS and was fully satisfied with the aesthetic result of ETS. The timeline is described in Table .