A 40-year-old female with a 4-month history of polydipsia, polyuria, headache, menstrual disorder and fatigue was admitted to the hospital. Examinations revealed a urine osmolality of 63 mOsm/kg when plasma osmolality reached 307 mOsm/kg and serum sodium was 148 mmol/L, and deficiencies of adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and gonadotropins. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed homogeneous signals in the pituitary gland as well as thickening of the pituitary stalk , which supported a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus. FDG PET was performed with a dose of 5.55 MBq (0.15 mCi) per kilogram of body weight to localize the pituitary and/or the pituitary stalk lesions and revealed radioactivity at both sites . However, the elevated FDG uptake was inadequate for an etiological diagnosis, and FDS (5.55 MBq/kg) was utilized to further explore the nature of the disease. The lesions also showed increased FDS uptake at 30 min and 120 min after FDS injection , both of which were significantly higher than normal brain uptake. The patient was suspected to have autoimmune or infectious pituitary inflammation based on FDG and FDS activity, and both tracers also excluded possible extracranial involvement.
Transnasal biopsy was performed for a definitive diagnosis. A lesion was found locating at posterior pituitary, while the anterior pituitary remained normal. Histopathology of the posterior pituitary lesion revealed lymphocyte infiltration and fibrosis of the pituitary gland, while no evidence of malignant elements or infection was seen, which indicated a diagnosis of autoimmune hypophysitis. The patient was then treated with oral prednisone (starting dosage of 40 mg/day, gradually decreased every 3 weeks to a maintenance dosage of 10 mg/day), desmopressin acetate (0.2 mg/8 h) and levothyroxine (50 μg/day) and showed an improvement in clinical symptoms and on radiological examination . However, hypopituitarism remained stable and hormonal replacement was consistently needed.