A 41-year-old male with uncomplicated type 2 diabetes mellitus presented with fever and progressive exertional dyspnoea for 1 week. His respiratory system examination revealed bilateral fine end-inspiratory crackles. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed sub pleural patchy air space consolidation and ground glass opacification with air bronchogram in bilateral basal regions with sparing of upper and middle zones . Trans-bronchial lung biopsy showed alveoli which are filled with sheets of foamy macrophages with few scattered neutrophils and fibrotic plugs. Alveolar septae appeared thickened. A diagnosis of OP was made based on these findings. During this presentation he did not complain any muscle pain, weakness, joint pains or skin thickening in fingers. He was successfully managed with steroids, which were tailed off after 10 months. Subsequently he was lost to follow up as he failed to show-up at scheduled clinic visits. However 2 years later, he presented with a 2 week history of progressively worsening proximal muscle pain mainly involving the neck and upper limbs. He also had low-grade fever with no skin rashes, arthralgia or respiratory symptoms. There was no history of exposure to dust or medication except metformin. On examination both upper and lower limbs were neurologically normal except proximal muscle tenderness. His respiratory system examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations revealed creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 14820 U/L, C reactive protein (CRP) 110 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 70 mm/1st h, thyroid stimulating test (TSH) 1.84 mIU/L and free T4 0.94 ng/dL. The electro-myography (EMG) did not show evidence of myositis or myopathy. Anti-Jo-1 antibody and the anti-nuclear-antibody were positive. Deltoid muscle biopsy and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were compatible with polymyositis. Repeat HRCT and CXR were compatible with a relapse of an ILD.
Based on the clinical presentation and investigations, diagnosis of anti-synthetase syndrome was made. He was treated with high dose prednisolone and azathioprine. After 1 month of treatment the CPK and inflammatory markers normalized.