A 14-year-old Iranian female presented to the outpatient clinic of rheumatology at Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences in 2017. She complained of thickening, itching, and swelling of her skin, which progressed within 1 month and involved the trunk and lower and upper limbs with sparing of face, hands, and feet. She had no history of diabetes mellitus or febrile sickness before the initiation of skin thickness. She denied Raynaud’s phenomenon, dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux, dyspnea, and cough. Her past medical history and familial history were negative for autoimmune or connective tissue disorders.
Before this meeting, she had been evaluated in hematology and dermatology clinics for possible underlying malignancy and hypereosinophilic syndrome due to serum eosinophilia. At that time laboratory findings included hemoglobin of 14.4 mg/dl, white blood cell count (WBC) of 8.6 × 103/mm3 (differential count: neutrophils 59.8%, lymphocyte 29.5%, eosinophil 10.7%), platelet count of 264 × 103/mm3, and normal serum protein electrophoresis. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was within normal limits. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody, hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, and hepatitis B surface (HBS) antigen were negative. Abdominopelvic sonography was unremarkable. Tumor markers (CEA, CA-125, CA 19-9, CA 15-3, AFP) were negative. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were normal. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiment for JAK-2 mutation was carried out, and the result was negative. Genetic evaluation for PDGFRA, PDGFRB, and FGFR1 rearrangements was normal; therefore, hypereosinophilic syndrome was excluded.
Additional workup was done in our rheumatology clinic. Physical examination was unremarkable except for generalized skin thickening, swelling, and hyperpigmentation with sparing of hands and feet . Echocardiography was normal (ejection fraction = 60% and pulmonary artery pressure = 15 mmHg). A capillaroscopy was performed, and the findings were non-significant. Immunological tests were done. Antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-ds DNA) antibody, anti-SCL-70 antibody, anti-centromer antibody, perinuclear and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (P & C-ANCA), anti-Ro, anti-La, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), C3, C4, CH50, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), and rheumatoid factor (RF) were negative.
A skin biopsy was taken from the right forearm, which showed a thickened dermis with excessive collagen fibers separated by wide edematous spaces. Epidermis and eccrine ducts were unaffected . Diagnosis of scleredema adultorum of Buschke was confirmed, and the patient was started on prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily with gradual tapering to 10 mg/day and methotrexate 15 mg/weekly. No significant improvement was seen after 3 months. Therefore, methotrexate (MTX) was replaced by mycophenolate mofetil 2000 mg/daily. And 2 g/kg of intravenous immunoglobulin (IG) was administered in four divided doses. Gradual improvement was reported by the patient, and resolution of the skin thickness and induration was observed by expert rheumatologist. After 5 years, she is still under follow-up in the rheumatology clinic and maintains on prednisolone 2.5 mg daily and methotrexate 10 mg weekly. Her skin thickness has been improved significantly.