A 1-day-old female neonate presented to our department with prominent swelling in the sacrococcygeal region. As her parents during the pregnancy had elected not to learn the sex of the baby in advance, ultrasound examination had not included the fetal public region. However, fetal hydrops and/or abnormal amniotic fluid volume had not been found throughout the prenatal checkup.
The baby was born at 37 gestational weeks via spontaneous vaginal delivery from a 39-year-old woman. At the time of delivery, the baby weighed 2965 g and the Apgar scores were 4/10 at 1 min. Neither meconium staining nor nuchal chord was observed. After oxygen administration and bagging, the Apgar scores were improved to 9/10 at 5 min.
Laboratory investigations were conducted. Her hemoglobin was 15.9 g/dl, alpha fetoprotein was 1.83 × 105 ng/ml, and the other results were within normal limits. Ultrasonography over the sacrum revealed a mostly solid tumor. MRI at 1-day-old confirmed an 11 × 11 cm sacrococcygeal tumor associated with hydrocolpos, a slightly dilated urinary bladder , and bilateral hydronephrosis. From these findings, she was diagnosed with Altman classification typeII SCT.
After admission, she showed difficulty urinating, so we tried to insert an indwelling urinary catheter (IUC) via her urethral orifice, but the catheter passed into the vaginal cavity rather than into the bladder. Residues caused the repeated obstruction of the indwelled catheter, but urine intermittently flowed out through the outer part of the catheter. Daily urinary output was 359 ml at 2 days and 273 ml at 3 days.
Computed tomography at 2 days showed a shrunken hydrocolpos with an inversely dilated urinary bladder and bilateral grade 2 hydronephrosis .
At 5 days of age, the SCT was excised totally along with a coccygectomy. First, we ligated a median sacral artery, which was a feeding vessel of the tumor and exfoliated the tumor as much as possible through an abdominal approach. We then performed en bloc tumor excision, including the coccyx, using a posterior approach . Throughout the operation, there were no injuries to the urethra or rectum. Pathological findings revealed mostly mature tissue elements originating from all 3 germ layers with foci of immature neuroepithelium, consistent with grade 2 immature teratoma .
After the operation, urine flowed intermittently to the diaper, but urinary output appeared unstable. Therefore, a cystoscopic examination was performed on the third postoperative day.
This revealed the presence of a UV fistula approximately 1 cm from the urethral orifice . The proximal urethra was unobstructed and connected to the bladder. A cystoscope allowed for the passage of a urinary catheter through the urethra. Since suture closure of the UV fistula was expected to be difficult during the neonatal period, an IUC was placed for 1 month to ensure that the bladder would empty and that the upper urinary tract would be safe, and in anticipation of a spontaneous closure of the UV fistula. After removal of the catheter, steady urination was observed, and she was discharged from the hospital at 57 days of age. Follow-up was uneventful, with neither urinary infection nor retention. To check for tumor recurrence, she will undergo a cystoscopic evaluation of the UV fistula and follow-up tumor marker and imaging studies.