The patient was a 32-year-old Korean woman referred because of a cystic lesion below the mandibular right first molar at a local dental clinic. She had no pain or significant systemic disease. Several clinical tests, including electric pulp test, were performed and the affected tooth showed the presence of pulp vitality. There was no tooth mobility.
Panoramic radiography revealed a round, mixed lesion below the mandibular right first molar . The border of the lesion was clear, but no clear cortication was observed. The effects on the adjacent teeth and inferior alveolar canal were unclear. The lesion was generally radiolucent, but a mixed radiopaque portion was seen adjacent to the anterior boundary of the lesion, resembling the shape of a mixed lesion.
In the additionally obtained cone-beam computed tomography scan, a slightly ovoid lesion was observed anteriorly and backwards . Likewise, the boundaries were clear, but no clear cortication was observed. Although thinning of the adjacent cortical bone was observed, no apparent expansion pattern was observed. The radiopaque portion inside the radiolucent portion was mixed at the anterior site of the lesion. The anterior part of the lesion showed the characteristics of COD. The middle and posterior parts of the lesion were suspected of cystic changes, showing low attenuation. The size of the area considered as a cystic portion was not sufficiently large, so it was difficult to distinguish it as a secondary cystic lesion. Considering all radiologic findings, the imaging diagnosis was COD with a cystic lesion, such as ABC or SBC.
Surgical excision and histopathologic examination were performed. Histopathologically, stromal tissue was composed of spindle-shaped fibroblasts with small blood vessels . Cystic aneurysmal components showed blood-filled cystic cavities lined with a thick membranous structure that comprised multinucleated giant cells and mononuclear cells . The anterior part of the lesion showed a sclerotic mass of cemento-osseous material . Considering both histopathological and radiographic properties, the final diagnosis was concomitant COD and ABC.
One-year follow-up was done and there was no evidence of recurrence. Normal bone healing was seen without pathological findings.