A 46-year-old woman presented to the clinic with recurrent episodes of upper abdominal pain including the epigastric and right hypochondriac areas, with radiation sometimes to the right shoulder. The patient had generalized arthralgia and eructation for several hours but no nausea or vomiting. She did not use alcohol and quit smoking a year ago. The patient was diagnosed with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) for ten years, which was diagnosed clinically because the genetic tests were not available and she took colchicine without important symptoms improvement. She also underwent an oophorectomy due to ovarian cyst and hysterectomy due to endometrial polyp. Moreover, the patient had an allergy to penicillin. Physical examination showed localized tenderness in the right hypochondriac area and a palpable liver swelling. Murphy's sign was positive, but no splenomegaly, guarding and jaundice were found. Her vital signs were within normal limits. Straight away, analysis of the mutation in the MEFV gene was performed and was negative. Thereby, the diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever was eliminated and colchisine was discontinued. Afterward, laboratory tests including hemoglobin - Complete blood count (CBC) - white blood cell (WBC) - glucose - blood urea - serum creatinine - internal normalized ratio (INR) - total serum bilirubin and both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin - Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) - Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) all were within normal. Anti-HCV antibodies and hepatitis B surface antigen were negative, and C- reactive protein was 95 mg (high). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) findings revealed inflammatory features, Helicobacter Pylori (HP) was treated with triple therapy combination. Inspite of treatment was completed the patient was still suffering. Thus, abdominal computed tomography scan (CT) showed no abnormalities and abdominal ultrasound showed semi contracted gallbladder without wall thickening or calculi and a dilated common bile duct (CBD), so an obstructive disorder was Suspected. The abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) were performed to rule out the presence of obstructive causes and showed no abnormalities . The patient was anxious and the previous findings are compatible with the criteria of Rome III for Sphincter of Oddi disorder (SOD). Subsequently, the diagnosis of SOD was highly suggested. Afterward, the patient underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) which showed a severe contractile of the sphincter of Oddi and biliary sphincterotomy was performed immediately because the Manometry of the SO is not available in Syria. Depending on the previous clinical and radiographic findings, the diagnosis of sphincter of Oddi disorder was confirmed and according to Milwaukee classification for biliary SOD, the patient had (SOD) type 2. Consequently, the patient was given sulpiride 50 mg daily, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) during the episodes and the patient was recommended to have a fat free diet. Because of generalized arthralgia in addition to the previous oophorectomy, a Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan was performed and showed evidence of osteoporosis due to T scores of −3.2 at the lumbar spine and −2.3 at the femoral neck. Consequently, alendronate sodium trihydrate 70 mg, vitamin D supplements and Calcium compounds were given. The patient's repeating follow-up revealed a lack in the recurrence of the episodes but not resolved completely.