A 71-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of right upper extremity weakness, a 1-year history of left upper extremity weakness and a 1½-year history of weakness in both lower limbs. When this patient arrived at our hospital he was ambulating in a wheelchair and could stand for only a few seconds. He had other underlying diseases as well-epilepsy, angina pectoris and pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE). There was no family history of similar disease or exposure to any toxins or drugs. In the physical examination, weakness of upper limbs with Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4 and weakness of lower limbs with MRC grade 3–4 were observed. Upper motor neuron signs were seen in the cervical region (Hoffman sign) and lower motor neuron signs were seen in bulbar (dysphagia, tongue atrophy and fasciculation) and lumbar regions (lower extremity atrophy and fasciculation). To confirm MND, electromyography (EMG) was performed and revealed normal neuronal conduction, but in needle EMGs there were frequent fasciculations and fibrillations in the upper and lower extremities (biceps, triceps, abductor pollicis brevis, vastus medialis, tibialis anterior muscles), the thoracic paraspinal muscles and bulbar muscles . These findings were compatible with motor neuron involvement.
He also had memory impairment, decreased speech, inappropriate affect, apathy and irritability. He was a middle school graduate. He scored 16 on the Korean version of Mini-Mental State Examination. On the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery, his verbal and visual memory functions showed impairment and he got particularly low scores on frontal executive function. Scores on stroop test color reading, semantic word fluency, and phonemic word fluency all fell below normal limits, suggestive of frontotemporal dysfunction . In brain magnetic resonance imaging, cortical atrophy in both parietal and anterior temporal lobes was seen . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomopraphy imaging demonstrated hypometabolism in the bilateral fronto-temporo-parietal cortex . He was diagnosed with FTD with MND based on the neuropsychological and electrophysiological background.
To rule out secondary causes of the disease further laboratory tests were done. Lupus anticoagulant was positive and anti-cardiolipin Ab and anti-B2 glycoprotein 1 were negative. A follow-up lupus anticoagulant was done after three months and also showed a positive result. The patient was diagnosed with APS because he had a clinical episode of PTE and two laboratory lupus anticoagulant occasions at 12 weeks apart. He was treated as anticoagulant because he had APS and PTE.