A boy aged 3 years was referred to our emergency room after falling from a height of 3 m. He was conscious with slight tachycardia (140 per min). A physical examination revealed a 4 cm skin injury on the posteromedial side of his right elbow. The neurovascular examination was normal with intact radial and ulnar pulses. Antero-posterior and lateral plain radiographs displayed a supracondylar humerus fracture with segmental bone loss. In light of above findings, the initial diagnosis was considered as a Gustilo-Anderson Type-IIIA supracondylar humerus fracture. An intravenous antibiotic regimen was introduced with cefazolin 500 mg 4 times daily for 7 days, gentamicin 40 mg twice daily for 3 days, and metronidazole 200 mg twice daily for 3 days. No additional cranial, chest and abdominal injury were evaluated.
The patient was immediately taken to the operating theater, which was within 4 h of the injury. Under general anesthesia, the patient was put to sleep in the supine position without fastening a tourniquet. First, radical debridement was enforced, and a 3 cm × 4 cm segment of avascular and grossly contaminated bone was noted and removed (, ). Acceptable thick periosteal coverage was achieved after the debridement of contaminated tissues including the segmental bone. After the repair of the remaining periosteum, the lack of sufficient bone mass in the distal humerus was observed. A defect spanning multiplanar tubular external fixator that bridged the elbow was considered as a suitable choice of treatment to restore the original length of the humerus. After making this decision, a fixator was employed at 90° of elbow flexion, neutral forearm rotation, and proper humeral rotation, to ensure the length and alignment of the humerus (-).
The patient was closely monitored in the inpatients unit in terms of vascular compromise and compartment syndrome. Gentamicin and metronidazole were stopped on the 3rd day of the follow-up period, and the patient was discharged. Intravenous cefazolin 500 mg 4 times daily was continued until the 7th post-operative day. A standard dressing was applied, and sutures were extracted 2 weeks after the operation. No sign of infection was noted during follow-up. To check healing of the bone defect, post-operative serial elbow radiographs were taken at the 1st, 2nd, 4th, and 6th week follow-ups. The external fixator was removed in the 6th week of follow-up after three cortices were seen in the plain radiograph . Gentle elbow range of motion exercises were started as soon as the fixator was the 12th month follow-up, supination and pronation were full. At 48th month follow-up, 120° of elbow flexion, full extension, and full forearm rotation were observed ( and ). A physical examination showed that carrying angle was 15° of a cubitus varus ; radiologic examination showed a slight varus angulation of the distal humerus, a decreased Baumann’s angle, and a normal lateral capitellohumeral angle, when compared with the healthy side . In addition to the above findings, pain intensity, motion, stability, and function parameters of the elbow were assessed as being excellent with 100 points using the Mayo elbow performance score.