The patient was a 19-year-old man who had been suffering from headaches and dizziness for 7 years prior to presentation, during which he complained of intermittent pain in the left zygomatic region. Neurological and laboratory investigations showed normal results. Brain MRI (Magnetom Verio 3.0T; Siemens, Germany) revealed a 4.4 cm × 3.6 cm × 2.5 cm well-circumscribed mass in the left cerebellopontine angle and mild compression of the left middle cerebellar peduncle and left cerebellar hemisphere. The tumor appeared homogeneously hypointense on T1WI , mix iso to hyperintense on T2WI and T2WI-Flair , and showed heterogeneous moderate enhancement on contrast-enhanced imaging .
On perfusion MRI, the tumor showed increased perfusion, and both relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) and relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF) were elevated. The tumor appeared homogenously isointense on DWI . Apparent diffusion coefficients (ADCs) were measured in 5 non-overlapping circular regions of interest on tumor, CSF and adjacent brain parenchyma respectively, The mean ADC values of the tumor were 0.91 × 10−3 mm2/s, compared to 3.69 ×10−3 mm2/s for CSF (measured in the contralateral cerebellopontine angle) and 0.79 × 10−3 mm2/s for adjacent brain parenchyma (measured in the left cerebellum). A fractional anisotropy (FA) color map showed that although the adjacent white matter fiber tracts were not damaged, they had shifted because of pressure from the tumor. Additionally, the tumor showed a characteristic whorled appearance . On SWI, black low-signal were absence in the tumor, suggesting the absence of bleeding or calcification within the tumor . On single-voxel proton MRS, the tumor region didn’t show markedly elevated choline (Cho),but show slightly lower levels of N-acetylaspartate (NAA), and Cho/creatine (Cr) and NAA/Cr, and a slightly higher Cho/NAA ratio compare to adjacent cerebellum .
On the basis of imaging findings and lesion location, the patient was preoperatively diagnosed with a neurogenic tumor. He underwent left suboccipital craniotomy and tumor excision. Pathological examination showed that the tumor was solid and well-circumscribed and closely adhered to the trigeminal nerve. HE staining showed that the tumor comprised abundant collagen stroma and spindle-shaped cells, along with clustered mature ganglion cells. Immunohistochemical analysis showed S-100 (+), NeuN (+), GFAP (+), NF (+), and a Ki-67 of approximately 1%, which confirmed a pathological diagnosis of ganglioneuroma.