A 24-year-old male, from eastern Nepal, with no prior co-morbidities, presented following mass envenomation by hornet stings 36 h ago. Initially, local redness, pruritis, and pain developed at the sting site within 30 min. For this, the patient took some over-the-counter medications for pain and pruritus relief. There was no history of previous hornet stings and immediate severe manifestations. The next day he developed gradually progressive yellowish discoloration of skin and sclera, myalgia, fever, and dizziness. It was associated with passage of reddish tea-coloured urine followed by decreased urine output. On presentation, urinary catheterization was done, and urine output was monitored, which came out to be less than 50 ml in 24 h. There was no history of loss of consciousness, chest pain, abdominal pain, headache, limb weakness, or palpitation. On examination, he had icterus. Multiple hornet stings, thirty-two in number were visible in the patient’s torso and upper and lower extremities. His height was 157 cm and weight of 62 kgs, body mass index of 25.1 kg/m2. His vitals were stable, and systemic examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory parameters showed features suggestive of acute hepatitis and acute kidney injury with hyperkalemia. Raised creatine phosphokinase with hyperuricemia was suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. Also, he had leucocytosis (total leucocyte count: 30,000 cells/mm3). His urinalysis revealed 3 + proteinuria, 1–2 pus cells, and 0–2 red blood cells. Serum amylase and lipase were 181 and 421 U/l, respectively. Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis showed enlarged bilateral kidneys with increased echogenicity with compression of renal sinuses and mild ascites.
The patient was managed under the supervision of a nephrologist and internists. We diagnosed acute kidney injury, acute hepatitis, and hyperkalemia secondary to mass hornet envenomation. The patient underwent emergency haemodialysis for anuria with refractory hyperkalemia. He was managed with intravenous fluids, antipyretics, and alternate-day haemodialysis because of persistent anuria. He underwent seven haemodialysis sessions in 2 weeks for anuria . The first haemodialysis session was of 2 h while rest of the sessions were of 3 h and 30 min each. His urine output was persistently less than 100 ml in the first week. During the second week, urine output gradually improved. At 2 weeks, urine output doubled to 200 ml in 24 h and improved to 400 ml in the next 24 h. At discharge, he was advised adequate hydration with twice-a-week haemodialysis until normalization of renal function. After 1 month’s follow-up, he had normal urine output with normal renal function.