A 53-year-old male was referred to us four years after suffering a massive trauma of his right foot, sustaining an intraarticular calcaneal fracture treated with internal fixation at the time. Afterward, the patient suffered multiple episodes of local infection, with purulent drainage. The patient was submitted to several calcaneal and soft tissue debridements (twice using a gentamicin sulfate biodegradable implant to fill the bone defect) as well as hardware removal, but the infection recurred every time (osteomyelitis was documented in bone samples). On physical examination, the patient had a small soft tissue deficiency (3 × 3 cm) in the lateral border of the foot and a sinus tract. The MRI confirmed calcaneal osteomyelitis (a). The patient was then submitted to extensive debridement of necrotic bone and the area was covered with a neurocutaneous reverse flow sural flap. Even though the flap was totally viable and healed well, the sinus drainage recurred a few weeks afterward (b).
Several treatment options were discussed (including transtibial amputation) and it was decided to perform a partial calcanectomy and reconstruction with a free osteomuscular fibular flap. Pre-operative angio-CT of the lower limbs showed that the main vascular pedicles were patent on both legs.
We conducted an extensive bone debridement to healthy tissue, removing the scar and inflammatory tissue in the vicinity of the wound. This required the removal of a significant amount of calcaneal bone . Tissue samples (bone and skin) were collected for microbiological analysis. The wound was irrigated with saline and oxygen peroxide. The shape and size for the missing bone were calculated by filling the defect with bone wax and it was approximately 4.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm. After the thorough debridement, the free fibula-flexor hallucis longus was harvested from the same leg (the patient did not want to be operated on the contralateral leg). The dissection proceeded as classically described, but a portion of the muscle belly of flexor hallucis longus was incorporated in the flap. The fibula was transected distally at approximately 6 cm from the lateral malleolus with a vascular pedicle of 7 cm (a). After harvesting the flap, the bone was shaped appropriately with an oscillating saw and a bone rongeur paying particular attention to not harming the main pedicle. The final dimensions of the flap (b) were 4.5 × 1.5 × 1.2 (bone) and 4 × 1.5 × 0.5 cm (muscle component). The flap was inset and stabilized with Kirschner wires to the remaining calcaneus and cuboid bone under fluoroscopy. The Achilles tendon was contracted secondary to several episodes of distal tendinitis and was elongated using a modification of the Hoke method (semi-open triple hemi-section), and the tibiotarsal joint was fused at 90 degrees with the use of a Steinmann pin (c). The peroneal artery was anastomosed end-to-side with the dorsalis pedis artery with interposition of a vein graft, and one of the accompanying veins was anastomosed end-to-end with the lateral marginal vein of the foot. The vein graft was harvested from the great saphenous vein at the distal third of the ipsilateral thigh. Since there was a small skin defect around the area of the interpositional graft, we opted to cover it with a partial thickness skin graft, preventing excessive tension. The donor site was the lower abdomen and the wound closed directly. At the end of the surgery, a foot cast was applied.
The post-operative course was uneventful. The bone specimen revealed the presence of Staphylococcus Aureus methicillin sensible (MSSA) and culture-specific antibiotics (ciprofloxacin and clindamycin) were administered intravenously during the hospital stay and orally for eight more weeks. The patient was discharged 16 days after the operation. At ten weeks post-op, the patient was readmitted for the removal of osteosynthesis material. Two weeks later, the cast was removed, and the patient began physical therapy. Nine months post-operatively bone union was evident radiographically (a) with no signs of recurrent infection or avascular necrosis. One year after surgery, the patient could walk without assistance and sustain full weight-bearing (b). The patient started using a personalized calcaneal pad for better contact between the foot and the ground.