A 49-year-old man was referred in March 2018 to Hadjout public hospital (80 km west of Algiers, Algeria) for a suspected cutaneous fungal infection. He was a primary school guardian who lived in a village in Chlef, 200 km far from Algiers. The primitive clinical examinations revealed a brownish ulcer, 10 cm diameter, and 0.3 cm depth, with a congestive necrotic border under epidermis on the left heel’s posterior surface, progressed during 10 months . The patient was diagnosed diabetic one year ago and suffered from white coat syndrome without regular medical follow-up. There was no notion of maternally inherited disorders or injury due to unexplained causes. Additionally, no notion of smoking, obesity, or AIDS was recorded for this patient. Skin examination revealed the presence of papules with a swelling in the left foot. According to the patient, the cutaneous lesion was initiated in June 2017 by a small insect-bite-like red spot.
Blood analysis revealed a high glycated hemoglobin level (7.8%, compared to 4–6% of normal hemoglobin). The histopathological examination showed deep ulceration of the left foot with a large polymorphous inflamed granuloma compatible with pyoderma gangrenosum. No structures suggestive of Leishmania were observed in the histopathological examination. A bone demineralization with multiple small lacunar images involving the foot bones with an infectious origin was reported by radiography. There was necrosis in the ankle’s posterior soft parts with no notion of joint damage.
Three swabs were prepared from the patient’s lesion for mycological, bacteriological, and parasitological examinations. An etiological investigation revealed no fungal infection after direct examination or culture. The bacteriological examination demonstrated bacilliform bacteria, further identified as Klebsiella pneumoniae in differential media. Initial parasitological examination of the Giemsa-stained smear prepared from the patient’s lesion revealed no Leishmania infection by microscopy. On the contrary, DNA extraction of the Giemsa-stained smear and bidirectional sequencing of the ITS1-rDNA fragment amplification using conventional PCR , revealed the infection by L. major. The sequence was deposited in GenBank under the accession number XN348136.
The patient underwent an initial antibiotic therapy by oral pyostacine (3 g/day) for 10 days, leading to the elimination of bacterial infection one month post-treatment. Regrettably, the patient left the treatment incomplete for 5 months without receiving specific leishmaniasis treatment. This delay led to unfavorable CL lesion evolution and advanced infection culminating in extended wet gangrene, worsened over the time with no other treatment option, necessitating an above-the-knee amputation of his left leg in September 2018.