A 34-year-old female presented with bilateral neglected clubfoot. She presented with pain and callosities on the lateral border of the feet and was unable to fit the left foot into regular shoes . All toes had flexion and adduction deformities at the metatarsophalangeal joint level, and the toe deformities were not fixed. The rigid equinocavovarus deformity on the left was visibly worse with forefoot adduction and pronation , resulting in weight bearing only on the dorsolateral surface of the foot. Of note was the presence of a flat-top talus on the left foot , indicative of abnormal growth of the talus. The presence of the flat-top talus resulted in restricted movement of the ankle and an equinus deformity that could only be fully corrected with an osteotomy. The severity of the left foot deformity and rigidity resulted in pre-operative AOFAS scores of8 for the hindfoot and 0 for the midfoot. The left foot was operated on first, followed by the right. The Ponsetaylor technique was used to correct the left foot using a Taylor Spatial Frame . The right foot was treated in a similar fashion using a TrueLok-Hex Frame (Orthofix Verona, Italy) . The procedures were combined with triple arthrodesis, and reduction and union were achieved using distraction osteogenesis. Both feet followed the same sequence. A plantar fascia release was performed to get some correction of the cavus to facilitate fixation in the frame. The Hoke procedure was performed to lengthen the Achilles tendon with percutaneous step cuts, allowing for its excursion during the correction process. The subtalar and calcaneocuboid joints were prepared for arthrodesis through a lateral approach. The medial approach was used for the talonavicular joint. The external fixator was applied with a full ring on the tibia and the foot. A laterally placed olive wire was placed in the talus to act as a fulcrum for correction. This was initially attached to the tibial frame, allowing correction to occur primarily through the subtalar joint. After a lag period of 7 days, gradual correction was started. Programming for the correction involved correction of the varus and internal rotation. After correction of these components, the talar wire was attached to the foot ring and equinus was corrected through the ankle joint by running a second adjustment programme. The frame was left in situ until consolidation of the arthrodesis had taken place. Intramedullary K-wires were inserted into the toes and kept throughout the duration of the correction to protect the metatarsophalangeal joints and prevent clawing of the toes. Time in frame for the left foot was 4 months and 4.1 months for the right. The arthrodesis was united at the time of frame removal for both feet, and no further casts or orthotics were needed. Pin track complications were minimal, and no antibiotics or exchanges were needed. The only complication was a posterior talar subluxation on the right during the equinus correction phase, which was corrected with a residual program. The patient was followed up 12 months after the Ponseti-Hex procedures and reported no chronic pain. Both feet were corrected to achieve plantigrade painless feet. On the right, a residual equinus deformity of 20° remained shows a united triple arthrodesis on the left and right. On the right, there is residual posterior subluxation of the ankle, and this is thought to be responsible for the residual equinus. This represents one of the risks of the technique, and we emphasize vigilance during the equinus correction phase to avoid posterior subluxation. and 7show the correction achieved clinically. The patient was satisfied with the result and scored both feet at 0 on a visual analog score. The score was set between 0 and 10, with 0 being extremely happy and 10 being extremely unhappy. Her post-operative AOFAS score after 12 months of follow-up was 51 for the midfoot and 55 for the hindfoot on the left, representing a vast improvement from the pre-operative scores. The patient’s walking distance improved from 50m to approximately 600m, with the use of crutches. She could also walk without crutches for short distance indoors. Her ankle range of motion on the right was 10°–10°–30° on the right, with the foot unable to reach neutral. On the left, it was 20°–0°–10°. The midfoot and forefoot joints showed functional ranges of motion. The Laaveg and Ponseti functional score was 72 on the left, which is rated as fair . Finally, gait analysis showed results consistent with that of stiff feet, with the patient having no real heel strike or toe off. The general gait pattern, along with the use of crutches, compensated for this. Although further surgery can correct residual equinus, the patient elected not to have additional surgery performed as she was comfortable with her functional outcome and appearance.