The case was a 10-month-old boy who had a surgical history of bilateral open inguinal hernia repair at 4 months of age at our institution. He presented with a bulge on his left groin and vomiting . A left incarcerated recurrent inguinal hernia was suspected, and manual reduction was performed. The hernia was apparently reduced successfully, but abdominal distention and vomiting persisted. Therefore, he was admitted for further observation due to the symptoms.
Immediately after manual reduction and on the first day after admission, abdominal X-ray showed mild small bowel dilatation. On the second day after admission, abdominal X-ray showed extensive dilatation of the small bowel and a paucity of gas in the colon . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to investigate causes of small bowel obstruction (SBO). It revealed protrusion of the small bowel with a closed-loop in the left groin . SBO with a closed-loop due to postoperative adhesion or internal hernia was suspected. To clarify the cause of the SBO, emergent laparoscopic exploration with recurrent inguinal hernia repair was planned.
Under general anesthesia with the patient in a supine position, the umbilicus was opened through a 1.5-cm longitudinal incision, and a wound retractor (LAP PROTECTOR Mini-mini; Hakko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was applied. Two 5-mm trocars (scope and operator’s right hand, respectively) were inserted through a multichannel port device (E・Z access; Hakko Co., Ltd.) to attach to the wound retractor, and pneumoperitoneum was established (8 mm Hg, 5 L/min CO2 insufflation). Laparoscopy revealed a small amount of ascites, small bowel dilatation and a loop of small remained trapped in the hernia with a thickened peritoneum at the neck of the sac in the left inguinal lesion . Laparoscopic reduction was performed by grasping and pulling the incarcerated small intestine using an atraumatic grasper. After successful reduction, the incarcerated small bowel showed no signs of ischemia, so intestinal anastomosis was not performed. Laparoscopy and inserting forceps revealed that the processus vaginalis (PV) had remained closed by a previous operation for IH. The hernia sac at the laparoscopic procedure was not associated with the PV that had been closed by previous open IH repair. It was also located away from the testicular artery and vein as well as the vas deferens, and not inside of the inferior gastric artery . To ligate the neck of the hernia sac, a Lapa-Her-Closure needle™ (Hakko Co., Ltd.) was percutaneously inserted into the preperitoneal space just above the neck of the sac. The needle came down halfway around the neck, passed through the peritoneum, released a suture, and then went back, this time coming through the opposite side halfway around the neck and catching the suture before exiting the body . The neck was encircled without skipping, and the thickened peritoneum was high ligated . Because direct hernia was also suspected, we additionally performed iliopubic tract repair via the previous inguinal incision. The postoperative course was uneventful (Additional file ).