A 64-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to a hospital in Copenhagen, Denmark with hematuria on 7 March 2020. Within one day of admission, he became febrile with respiratory symptoms interpreted as nosocomial pneumonia. Four days later, the patient was discharged with moxifloxacin scheduled for a follow-up transurethral prostatectomy. The patient was, however, readmitted with worsening respiratory symptoms on 13 March. Only then was he tested for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and tested positive. At admission, the patient had elevated inflammation markers: C-reactive protein of 231 mg/L (< 10 mg/L), slight neutrophilic leukocytosis of 8,7/10,3 × 109/L (3.5–8.8 × 109/L), and elevated lactate dehydrogenase of 526 U/L (105–205 U/L). Procalcitonin was not measured at admission but was elevated at 2.31 (< 50 μg/L) 4 days later. X-ray on 14 March showed bilateral infiltrates . Due to respiratory deterioration, the patient was soon after transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score of 4 and an O2 requirement of 15 L. He rapidly deteriorated with hypoxic respiratory failure and needed mechanical ventilation (Drager V500, PS). One day later, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated and maintained for 6 days; during ECMO treatment the patient was heparinized. Subsequently, the patient was again placed on mechanical ventilation (highest p plateau 14 cm H2O, PS) for 3 days. After extubation, the O2 requirement steadily decreased, and no oxygen treatment was needed for the last 3 days of hospitalization. Neither steroids nor tocilizumab were given, as these treatments were not implemented as part of COVID-19 treatment at the time. Total duration of stay at the ICU and hospital was 12 and 24 days, respectively. During the COVID-19 infection, the patient developed kidney impairment with a maximum creatinine of 302 (reference 60–105) µmol/L. Within the following months, the patient recovered completely and was able to resume work full-time. Five months post-COVID-19, the lung diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was mildly impaired (64% of predicted), while ventilation capacity was normal (forced expiratory volume in the first second 120% predicted, forced vital capacity 112% predicted, and total lung capacity 90% predicted) and respiratory muscle strength was normal (maximum expiratory and inspiratory pressure 72% and 100% predicted, respectively).
Interestingly, 4 years prior, the patient had experienced a very similar clinical and radiological picture due to an H1N1 infection requiring 5 weeks of hospital admission including ICU stay, mechanical ventilation, and dialysis. The patient had in the intervening period been without significant health problems except for known prostate hypertrophy and palpitations and marginally increased blood pressure treated with beta blockers. A CT scan had been performed at a follow-up post-H1N1 outpatient visit . The findings included ground-glass opacities (GGO), reticulations, and traction bronchiectasis with an upper region dominance . No further scans were available prior to the patient being diagnosed with COVID-19. A CT scan 1 month after onset of COVID-19 revealed a large extent of GGO in both upper and lower regions. There was volume loss and bronchiectasis, all suggesting ongoing infection and inflammation with a component of organizing pneumonia . Five months after onset of COVID-19 symptoms, there was marked improvement, almost to the level of post-H1N1 infection .
Severe infection with H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2 have both been associated with genetic variants impairing the signaling pathways inducing type I IFN [, ]. We therefore investigated the patient’s ability to mount an innate immune response upon viral infection. PBMCs from P1 and healthy controls were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.5 for 24 hours, and the induction of IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines was measured in the supernatants. PBMCs from P1 demonstrated significantly impaired production of both type I and III IFNs , whereas the production of IFNγ was significantly increased compared with healthy controls . Patient PBMCs also exhibited significantly decreased CXCL10 levels in response to infection . Finally, of the three proinflammatory cytokines measured, only tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) was significantly increased, as both interleukin 6 (IL-6) and IL-1β were expressed at levels comparable to the controls .
Despite the deficient type I and III IFN responses, genetic testing by whole exome sequencing for the recently reported disease-causing genetic mutations within the IFN signaling pathway [, ] was negative (see below). Additional rare gene variants with a high prediction for deleteriousness/disease-causing potential are presented in Table .
Finally, presence of IFN autoantibodies has been demonstrated in plasma from up to 10% of cases with severe COVID-19 , thereby functionally impairing IFN activities, in the absence of disease-causing genetic variants. However, investigation for autoantibodies against IFNα or IFNω in patient plasma by ELISA did not reveal the presence of such autoantibodies (data not shown).