A 29-year-old Moroccan woman came to our institution complaining of numbness and tingling of four months' duration in both lower limbs, with unsteady gait and easy falling and urine incontinence. The patient's background and history did not reveal preexisting diabetes mellitus, alcohol addiction, vegetarian food preference or gastrointestinal symptoms. She did not mention any fever, night sweats or itching. On physical examination, her temperature was 37.4°C, her pulse was 80 beats/minute and her blood pressure was 120/83 mmHg. She had no pallor or icterus and no lymphadenopathy, edema, splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. On neurological examination, her deep tendon reflexes were hyperactive in the upper and lower extremities. Babinski's sign, Romberg's sign and Lhermitte's sign were present. Vibration and joint position sense examination were evaluated as decreased. However, there was no decrease in light touch sensation. Her laboratory examination values were unremarkable: white blood cell count 8,500/mm3, hemoglobin 13 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume 97/μ3, platelets 225,000/mm3 and thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.5 mU/L.
The initial MRI examination of the cervical and dorsal spine was performed using a 1.5-T unit and showed an area of hyperintensity involving the dorsal and lateral columns from the medulla oblongata to the thoracic spine on T2-weighted images. This area was not enhanced after the addition of gadolinium. The axial images revealed involvement of the posterior and lateral columns bilaterally , which was highly suggestive of SCD. The serum vitamin B12 level was collapsed to 25 pg/mL (normal range, 180 to 914 pg/mL), and her serum vitamin E level was normal.
Bone marrow aspirates showed a medullary megaloblastosis. A Schilling test was not available. Upper gastrointestinal examination revealed fundic atrophic gastritis. Parietal cell antibodies and anti-intrinsic factor were positive. The neurological symptoms totally disappeared two months after intramuscular supplementation of vitamin B12 1,000 μg daily for one week, then weekly for two weeks, and then monthly. The MRI scan abnormalities were significantly improved .