A 65-year-old man presented for repeat washout of his left total knee arthroplasty due to ongoing drainage following revision 20 days prior. The patient’s past medical history was significant for anxiety treated with sertraline. He had undergone multiple previous revisions of his knee arthroplasty and left femoral replacement, initially placed in the 1980s . In 2008, he developed hardware infections with coagulase-negative staphylococci and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, treated with daptomycin and ciprofloxacin, followed by suppression with ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. His labs were only notable for mild normocytic anemia.
During his most recent revision of the tibial component and hinge mechanism for hardware failure 20 days prior to this admission, operative reports noted no concern for infection and pathology was negative for acute inflammation. One of six intra-operative cultures grew Staphylococcus hominis and Dermacoccus species; the patient continued oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole suppressive therapy but discontinued oral ciprofloxacin based on cultures and concern for toxicity with long-term use.
During this admission, debridement of his left total knee wound and further revision of the left total femur arthroplasty revealed severe metallosis and a large hematoma. Operative tissue cultures were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus haemolyticus, methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus epidermidis and Corynebacterium striatum via MALDI-TOF MS, in six of six cultures obtained. Daptomycin 6 mg/kg every 24 h was initiated empirically due to a previous rash from vancomycin. Linezolid was avoided at this time due to an anticipated treatment duration of more than 3 weeks and concern for subsequent adverse effects with prolonged linezolid therapy. Given concern for daptomycin resistance and the reliability of vancomycin susceptibility, daptomycin was discontinued and a vancomycin graded challenge was performed and tolerated on post-operative day four.
On day 4 of vancomycin, the patient developed a diffuse, blanching, erythematous, maculopapular rash and daptomycin was restarted. Over the next 72 h, his rash progressed, he became febrile to 38.9 , developed peripheral eosinophilia (1.45 K/cu mm, 13.8%; ref: 0–0.50 k/cu mm, 1.0–3.0%) and mildly elevated liver enzymes (AST 51 U/L, ALT 63 U/L), meeting criteria for drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome. Daptomycin was stopped. His rash began to improve and he was started on oral linezolid 600 mg every 12 h on post-operative day 13. At this time, sertraline was continued despite increased risk of serotonin syndrome, as linezolid was intended to be temporary while awaiting susceptibilities. C. striatum susceptibilities returned on post-operative day 15 and revealed susceptibility to gentamicin, linezolid, vancomycin and daptomycin (MIC 0.064 µg/mL via E-test, breakpoint < 1 µg/mL per CLSI m-45) and resistance to ceftriaxone, clindamycin, doxycycline, meropenem, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; while no interpretation was available, levofloxacin had an MIC > 8 µg/mL. The patient was re-started on daptomycin.
The patient tolerated daptomycin for 20 days but then noted increasing purulent drainage from his incision. He underwent another arthroplasty revision, washout and gastrocnemius rotational flap. One operative tissue culture from this surgery was positive for Enterobacter cloacae complex, and five of six operative tissue cultures were again positive for rare C. striatum. Antibiotics were changed to linezolid and cefepime. Cefepime was selected due to concern for AmpC induction with the use of third generation cephalosporins over long courses of antibiotic therapy in Enterobacter cloacae. Due to the risk of serotonin syndrome when sertraline is combined with linezolid and the patient reporting little benefit from sertraline therapy, a taper was initiated. Repeat C. striatum susceptibilities revealed resistance to daptomycin (reported as MIC > 1 µg/mL), via E-test but retained susceptibility to linezolid (MIC 0.5 µg/mL). He completed six weeks of linezolid and cefepime followed by linezolid 600 mg daily for suppression, due to the presence of retained hardware. The linezolid suppression was continued for just under a year and a half (522 days) until the patient ultimately opted for disarticulation. At that time the patient noted symptoms consistent with optic neuritis and peripheral neuropathy, so linezolid was discontinued. The patient was treated post-operatively for 6 weeks with oral doxycycline as repeat cultures grew C. striatum susceptible to doxycycline and has not re-presented with infection after 12 months.