A 53-year-old female presented to the Ophthalmology department with exophthalmos of the right eye and reduced vision. She was seen by the Ophthalmologist who noted reduced visual acuity in right eye (6/15) compared to the left eye (6/12). Visual field testing revealed a defect in the left upper quadrant of the right eye with enlargement of the blind spot. Both pupils were however of equal size, diameter of 2.5 mm and equally reactive to light. The patient was referred for a computerized tomographical (CT) scan, which showed osteolytic honeycomb radial changes of the outer plate of the skull, with external protrusion . The lesion originated from the right wing of the sphenoid bone, destroyed the outer plate and inner plate, extended to the ipsilateral middle cranial fossa and orbit, and showed a helioradial change. The trabecula of the bone was arranged from the center to the periphery in the shape of chrysanthemum petals. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed to obtain further details. T1-weighted (T1W) imaging showed slightly low signal mixed with small patchy high signal. T2-weighted (T2W) imaging showed uneven high signal. There was obvious enhancement in the middle and no enhancement in the peripheral bars . Based on the destructive nature of this lesion, a decision was made to surgically manage this case. Using a left frontotemporal approach, the scalp and temporal muscle were dissected and the right frontotemporal bone flap was removed. The tumor tissue was found to be involving the right superior and lateral wall of the orbit and this was invading the dura matter. The tumor also extended to the right temporal bone and the right skull base. The tumor excised fully and the lesion was sent for histopathology. Free abdominal fat was taken to reconstruct the lateral wall of the orbit. The right frontal temporal bone flap was restored and fixed with cranial locking. Histopathology results revealed a cavernous hemangioma . A post-operative CT scan showed the lesion was successfully resected . A post-operative MRI scan also showed full resection and enhanced signal from the presence of fat . The patient was assessed immediately following the surgery by the operative surgeon. The exophthalmos in her right eye had resolved and the visual field was normal. Follow-up telephone consultation was performed 1 month after the surgery. The patient reported improved vision in the right eye compared to the left eye.