A nine-year-old male had complained of palpitations, tremors, and paresthesia for approximately two months. No weight loss, polyphagy, or change in mood were reported. The clinical examination showed generalized leanness associated with dry skin, rhythmic, and concited cardiac activity, fine tremors of the hands, palpable and globose thyroid, bilateral exophthalmos, retained ocular motility, and mild bilateral conjunctival hyperaemia. A direct and consensual pupillary reflex was present. Vital signs showed no fever, a heart rate of 140 beats per minute, blood pressure of 100/65 mmHg and a body temperature of 36 °C. His weight was 24.5 kg (7th percentile, −1.45 SDS), his height was 141 cm (84th percentile, 1.01 SDS), and his body mass index (BMI) was 12.32 (0.0 percentile, −3.60 SDS), according to the Italian Society for Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes charts .
At admission, electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia (140 beats per minute), in the absence of other significant alterations. Thyroid function laboratory tests showed hyperthyroidism: Elevated free thyroxine (FT4) and free triiodothyronine (FT3) levels, at 2.75 ng/dL (normal value [n.v.]: 0.7–1.48), and 4.10 pg/mL (n.v.: 1.71–3.71), respectively; and suppressed and suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels, at 0.0001 µUI/mL (n.v.: 0.350–4.940). A thyroid ultrasound showed a significantly increased glandular size for age. The total volume (approximately 17.1 mL, with a right lobe of approximately 8.8 mL and a left lobe of approximately 8.3 mL) turned out to be quadrupled with respect to the age reference value: 3.1 mL +/− 1.05 mL; ultrasound also showed hypoechoic and diffusely inhomogeneous echo-structure and intensely increased vascularization of the gland.
Ophthalmologic evaluation confirmed the presence of exophthalmos and the absence of lagophthalmos or visual acuity deficiency, with normal ocular motility, slight congestion of the eyelids (non-inflammatory oedema), and modest bulbar conjunctival hyperaemia. No diplopia was observed. The exophthalmometry detected a value of 17.00 mm for the right eye and a value of 17.5 mm for the left eye. Clinical Activity Score (CAS) was 6 and NOSPECS was IVa. These findings, combined with clinical conditions and TSH receptor antibody positivity, led to a diagnosis of Graves’ disease. Anti-peroxidase and anti-tireoglobulin antibodies were also found to be positive. Therefore, methimazole was administered at the starting dose of 0.4 mg/kg/day in two administrations, confirming that blood count and liver function were in the normal range. During hospitalization, the clinical conditions of the young patient improved, and the patient was discharged.
After one month, when the patient returned to our clinic, weight increased from 24.4 kg to 26.5 kg, while the BMI remained under the 3rd percentile, with a value of 13.10. Blood count, liver function, albumin, and total protein, checked to assess possible adverse effects of the methimazole therapy, were normal. Thyroid function improved: FT3 was 7.32 pg/mL, FT4 was 1.65 ng/dL, and TSH was 0.005 µUI/mL. Clinical examination showed good clinical conditions and bilateral exophthalmos, greater on the right eye. CAS was 7 and NOSPECS was again IVa. The heart rate was 88 beats per minute. During the follow-up visits, at two and three months after discharge, blood count and liver function were also normal, thyroid function improved, and thyroid volume decreased; thus, the therapy was reduced to 0.27 mg/kg/day.
After four months, thyroid function clearly improved: FT3 of 3.53 pg/mL, FT4 of 1.17 ng/dL, and TSH of 0.007 µUI/mL. Blood count and liver function were in the normal range, but the eye examination showed worsening of the ophthalmopathy, with the following signs of activity: Increase in the exophthalmos of the right eye with palpebral retraction, soft tissue involvement (succulent eyelids with associated oedema, caruncular and conjunctival hyperaemia, and oedema) and keratopathy resulting from exposure. CAS was 9 and NOSPECS Va. On the basis of the ocular findings, steroid therapy was initiated by oral administration of prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) for four weeks, and then gradually tapered. Thyroid function improved again; five months after discharge, thyroid hormones remained in the normal range: FT3 was 2.450 pg/mL, FT4 was 0.97 ng/dL, and TSH increased to 0.127 µUI/mL. A clinical examination showed a reduced thyroid volume, which was confirmed by the thyroid ultrasound that showed dimensions of 13 mL (17.1 mL at previous control) and reduced echogenicity, with non-homogeneous eco-structure, and increased vascularization of the left lobe. Therefore, therapy with methimazole was further reduced to 0.18 mg/kg/day. Thyroid function was normal, with an FT3 value of 3.59 pg/mL (n.v.: 2–4.4), and an FT4 value of 1.49 ng/dL (n.v.: 0.90–1.70), although TSH was slightly reduced with a value of 0.182 µUI/mL (n.v.: 0.270–4.200). Blood count and liver function remained normal, so therapy with methimazole was confirmed. At the last clinical follow-up, after eight months, thyroid function remained good, the exophthalmos was reduced and the patient did not have tremors. Weight increased from the first visit at admission, from 24.4 kg (3–10th percentile) to 30 kg (23rd percentile, −0.73 SDS), with a BMI of 14.37 (3rd percentile, −1.84 SDS) . Furthermore, puberty started in our patient. Regarding the Graves’ ophthalmopathy trend, it has been in progressive improvement after beginning prednisone therapy. After one week of therapy, the eye assessment showed reduced retraction of the upper eyelid of the right eye, improvement of the right eye exophthalmometry and reduction of conjunctival hyperaemia. CAS was 4 and NOSPECS IIIb. After four weeks of therapy, the eye assessment showed reduction of the right palpebral retraction, without conjunctival hyperaemia, and no other signs of inflammation of the anterior segment were observed. CAS was 3 and NOSPECS IIb. After twelve weeks, the eye assessment showed a notable decrease of the right palpebral retraction and absence of keratitis and conjunctival hyperaemia. CAS was 2 and NOSPECS IVa.
shows the clinical and laboratory parameters in our patient, at admission, and during the follow-up. Management of the case was approved by the Ethics Committee of Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Perugia, Italy (2018-PED-06). The patient’s parents provided their written informed consent and the child his written assent for the management and the publication of the case report.