A 10-month-old fulani (African) male infant was referred to our paediatric surgery department for a scrotal mass. The mass was first detected during the neonatal period and gradually increased in size. The infant had no known medical, surgical or family history. Clinical examination revealed an infant in good general condition, good nutritional status and an afebrile state with a voluminous right scrotal mass that was painless, spherical, soft, regular in shape and 10 cm in diameter, with some collateral venous circulation. A mass effect on the penis and perineum could be observed . There was no transillumination. The right testicle was not found, and the left testicle was in the testicular bursa and appeared to be healthy. The clinical impression was initially oriented towards a testicular tumour diagnosis. Ultrasound examination revealed a large structural mass, with the heterogeneous echo measuring 10 × 7 × 6 cm. The two testes were upwardly displaced by the mass. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large intrascrotal tissue mass communicating with the abdomen with no visible air component, leading to the decision that the mass was probably an inguinal mesenteric hernia.
Serum tumour biomarkers, including α-fetoprotein and β-human chorionic gonadotropin levels, were all within normal limits. Surgery for the testicular tumour was proposed. Two combined surgical incision approaches were adopted, in which the right inguinal approach made it possible to locate the healthy right testicle in the inguino-scrotal region. The scrotal route was chosen for wide excision. During surgery, a vascular mass that displaced the testis upwards was found between the spermatic fascia and the skin . The boundary of the tumour was not well circumscribed, and the originating organ of the tumour could not be determined. Scrotoplasty and right orchidopexy were performed. The dimensions of the lump were 11 × 9.5 × 8.5 cm and it weighed 400 g. The lump had two different appearances: one portion had the appearance of a typical solid tumour and the other showed mixed tumour growth. Microscopy examination revealed that the tumour had the histological appearance of a benign fibroblastic tumour, which was initially suggestive of angiomyxoma ; the absence of malignancy suggested the need for an immunohistochemistry study to support this diagnosis.
Immunohistochemical staining for CD34, smooth muscle actin, desmin, myogenin and protein S was performed, with positive staining found only for CD34 in the tumor . Actin staining was seen in the walls of the vessels and bundles of smooth muscle cells encompassing the tumour ; desmin staining was observed in the bundles of smooth muscle cells . Staining for the other markers was negative. This study confirmed the diagnosis of benign scrotal angiomyxoma and ruled out cell-based fusiform rhabdomyosarcoma. There were no postoperative surgical complications. No further recurrence was identified in the 6 months following surgery .