A 27-year-old Hispanic man with no significant past medical history presented to an emergency department with a 5-day history of headache, pain with ocular movements, and intermittent blurred vision starting 1 day after being immunized with DTaP-IPV. Magnetic resonance imaging and a magnetic resonance venogram of his brain were unremarkable. A lumbar puncture revealed a normal opening pressure and cerebrospinal fluid studies were positive for myelin basic protein but negative for oligoclonal bands and neuromyelitis optica autoantibody serology.
On examination, his best corrected vision was 20/100 in his right eye and 20/70 in his left eye. Intraocular pressures, pupil examination, ocular alignment, and extraocular movements were normal. Confrontational visual fields were restricted in both eyes. Posterior segment examination showed optic nerve swelling and hyperemia in both eyes and two microaneurysms in the mid periphery of his left eye. No evidence of vitritis, retinal vasculitis, or choroiditis was seen in either eye.
Serum laboratory testing showed elevated glycated hemoglobin (A1C) at 6.9%, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Other liver tests including bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and hepatitis serologies were normal. Tests for infectious and inflammatory etiologies including angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), lysozyme, antinuclear antibody (ANA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA), lupus panel, rapid plasma reagin (RPR), fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS), chest X-ray, and QuantiFERON Gold assay, which were normal. Over the next 5 days, his vision declined to counting fingers at 30.5 cm (1 foot) in both eyes. A relative afferent pupil defect and dyschromatopsia developed on the left. Automated Humphrey visual field (HVF) testing demonstrated global depression in both eyes .
He was diagnosed as having DTaP-IPV vaccination-related optic neuritis and started on intravenously administered Solu-Medrol (methylprednisolone). One week later, his headache resolved and vision improved to 20/20 in his right eye and 20/25 in his left eye with less optic nerve hyperemia and swelling. He was discharged on a prednisone taper and an orally administered diabetic medication. One month later, his vision improved to 20/20 with resolution of the optic neuritis without residual visual field deficit in both eyes.