A 3-year-old white boy with a history of headache, abdominal pain, and walking abnormalities of 6 months’ duration was admitted to our hospital with worsening ataxia, intense headache, and irritability. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass in his posterior fossa causing hydrocephalus; therefore, he underwent an endoscopic third ventriculocisternostomy. Two days later a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan confirmed the presence of a lesion in his posterior fossa associated to spinal nodules (C4, C6, C7). Therefore he underwent a gross total resection with good motor function recovery. The histopathological diagnosis was classic medulloblastoma. An analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed positive cytology for neoplastic cells. He started a chemotherapy program with two courses of high-dose regimen and autologous stem cell rescue after an induction phase, according to the Italian protocol for infants with high-grade central nervous system (CNS) tumors . At the end of treatment a MRI scan showed complete remission and the CSF cytology was negative for neoplastic cells. The child began the follow-up when after only 4 months a MRI scan showed contrast enhancement at cerebellum and spinal cord (C1 to C3, D11), which was consistent with disease progression. Therefore, he underwent a second-line therapy with weekly vinorelbine 30 mg/m2 and craniospinal hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy with a total dose of 31.2 Gy on the craniospinal axis (bi-fractionated, 1.3 Gy/fraction), a boost dose of 59.7 Gy (bi-fractionated, 1.5 Gy/fraction) on his posterior fossa, and a boost dose of 9 Gy on cervical C1 to C3 and dorsal D11 levels (1.4 Gy/fraction) . The MRI evaluation after radiotherapy showed a good response and he started maintenance chemotherapy with gemcitabine-oxaliplatin cycles (750 mg/m2 and 75 mg/m2 respectively, reducing the doses to 75% of the total) every 21 days for a total of five courses, which lasted 12 weeks.
Five months after the beginning of gemcitabine therapy, his overall clinical condition worsened. A physical examination revealed only pulmonary clinical signs, specifically crackles localized in the middle field of his right lung. A chest X-ray showed a slight accentuation of bilateral perihilar peribronchovascular interstitium. Concomitantly he was transfused for the detection of acute anemia and thrombocytopenia.
After platelet transfusion a sudden dyspnea appeared and, with the suspicion of an allergic reaction, chlorpheniramine maleate was administered without clinical improvement. A second chest X-ray showed a diffuse interstitiopathy and an initial right costophrenic effusion . Empirical antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin and teicoplanin was started. Blood cultures were negative. Captopril and furosemide were administered because of the appearance of high blood pressure and initial acute renal failure. Anemia and thrombocytopenia persisted with a worsening of his pulmonary and renal impairment at each transfusion. Therefore, hypothesizing a thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), he was no longer transfused. After an event of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit of our hospital. He was subjected to renal ultra-filtration and high-flow oxygen and therapy with amine in combination with broad spectrum antibiotics and antifungals. Serology results for viruses, bacteria, and fungi were negative. Several tests were carried out on blood samples and bronchoalveolar lavage. Finally, polymerase chain reaction for cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Klebsiella, pneumococcus, Staphylococcus, and pneumocystosis were also negative. The involvement of lung (ARDS) and kidney (renal failure treated with dialysis), the hypertension associated with hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, and the undetectable haptoglobin made us suspect an antibody-mediated microangiopathy. His disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13 (ADAMTS 13), activity was normal. The dosage of the complement proteins C3 and C4 was within normal limits. Thus, he was treated with defibrotide, four cycles of rituximab with a transient response, immunoglobulins, and plasma exchange. Considering his persistent poor clinical condition, with suspicion of a complement-mediated microangiopathy, he started a therapy with eculizumab at a dosage of 600 mg every 3 weeks for a total of seven infusions. He was previously vaccinated for meningococcus and started antibiotic prophylaxis. His neurological status considerably improved within 48 hours after the first infusion, then we observed an improvement in his general clinical condition and of the laboratory disease activity markers; he was rapidly dismissed from the Intensive Care Unit . He continued the follow-up showing a gradual improvement in his clinical condition: he no longer showed any respiratory symptoms and he recovered his kidney function progressively, reducing the frequency of dialysis sessions until he did not need it anymore. On the neurological side, his neurocognitive functioning gradually improved; his interaction and speech improved. In fact we observed an increase in platelets and red cells count and sufficiently stable levels.
Unfortunately, after seven infusions, there were no improvements, so the therapy with eculizumab was suspended. After 1 month he showed respiratory difficulties with almost daily episodes of apnea. MRI scans evidenced radionecrosis areas on the medulla, which disappeared after a month of corticosteroid therapy. Subsequently, he presented two episodes of pneumonia in bone marrow aplasia. Five months after the end of the previous treatment with eculizumab, considering his respiratory difficulties associated with new episodes of apnea, we decided to re-administer therapy with eculizumab suspecting a microangiopathy reactivation. In fact blood test results showed a worsening anemia and thrombocytopenia, which confirmed our suspicion.
Despite two cycles of eculizumab carried out in 1 month, unfortunately he died from a sudden cardiovascular instability, with persistent respiratory distress, peripheral edema, and pericardial effusion.