A 30-year-old male patient with a 1-year history of left-side tinnitus.
The patient had 1-year of persistent tinnitus and 5 mo of hearing loss on the left side. He developed progressive facial paralysis on the left side, accompanied by hoarseness, left tongue extension, choking while drinking, and occasional difficulty swallowing. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed a mass surrounding the jugular foramen.
The patient had no systematic diseases, and no significant personal and family history.
The patient had no systematic diseases, and no significant personal and family history.
He presented with a swollen external auditory canal containing a dark red mass within the tympanic cavity that pulsated in sync with his pulse rate, facial (House-Brackmann IV grade), glossopharyngeal, and vagal palsy, as well as hearing loss. All the symptoms above appeared on his left side.
The blood serum levels of norepinephrine were 84.86 μg/24 h (normal reference ≤ 40.65 μg/24 h) and all serum inflammatory biomarkers were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the temporal bone showed bone destruction of the left jugular foramen and the horizontal segment of the internal carotid artery . Enhanced MRI of the temporal bone showed an uneven enhanced mass with a size of 47 mm × 38 mm × 34 mm involving the left jugular foramen, which partially wrapped around the internal carotid artery and extended to the cerebellar pontine region with invasion within the meninges .
According to the patient's medical history, and physical examination results, the tumor is likely a paraganglioma. A two-stage surgery was designed for the resection of the mass. The patient underwent first-stage surgery to remove the extradural portion of the tumor. The pathological findings suggested a paraganglioma. Furthermore, the abdominal fat and the temporal flap were transposed in order to fill the cavities deficit. The surgery was successful. The patient received an intravenous infusion of ceftriaxone (2 g qd) for 7 d after surgery and was replaced with ceftazidime (1 g q12h) due to elevated blood transaminase. After the replacement, the antibiotics were continued for 2 wk until the inflammatory biomarkers returned to normal and then therapy was stopped. However, 25 d post-surgery, the patient suddenly developed swelling and tenderness under his left ear, with his body temperature reaching 40.5℃. A yellow purulent secretion appeared on the left buccal mucosa, followed by ulceration of the swollen area under the left ear. Laboratory examination indicated a 15.12 × 109/L total white blood cell count (normal reference ≤ 9.5 × 109/L) and a neutral granule percentage of 83.1% (normal reference ≤ 75%). Neck CT showed a hypodensity shadow in the caudal lobe of the left parotid gland . The diagnosis of suppurative parotitis was confirmed, and ceftazidime was given intravenously (2 g q8h) for 9 d. The swelling and tenderness in the parotid gland area gradually subsided, and no abnormalities were found within the surgical incision. However, the skin under the left ear ruptured and yellow fluid was discharged. Liquefaction necrosis occurred within the transposed abdominal fat of the skull base surgical site. Bacterial culture revealed a pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. According to the time sequence of suppurative parotitis and liquefaction necrosis, the infection of the surgical site was considered to be caused by suppurative parotitis.