The patient was a 48-day-old Iranian male infant born near term with gestational age of 374/7 weeks, birth weight of 3400 g, and birth head circumference of 37 cm, from nonconsanguineous parents, by elective cesarean section. His mother had gestational diabetes mellitus, but the patient had no family history of bullous disorders or other dermal disorders. After birth, he was hospitalized at the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for 14 days due to respiratory distress syndrome. He also had bullous skin eruptions from birth. Therefore, he underwent skin biopsy at 1 month old and was diagnosed with EB.
He was brought to the pediatrics center with apnea and respiratory distress, was intubated on the emergency ward, and then admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). His symptoms started 4 days before the admission with vomiting and poor feeding, for which a primary care physician prescribed antibiotics as outpatient therapy. After intubation and resuscitation, physical examination revealed a pulse rate of 154 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 70 per minute, temporal temperature of 36.5 °C, nondetectable blood pressure, and oxygen saturation of 96%. His body weight was 3700 g. He had a tense 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 fontanel, reactive normal-sized pupils that subsequently became miotic and nonreactive, and subcostal and suprasternal retraction. Heart sounds and abdominal examination were normal. There were multiple bolus eruptions all over the body but not in mucosal membranes . Laboratory investigations showed white blood cell count of 41,000/mm3 with 68% neutrophils and 26% lymphocytes, hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL, platelet count of 856,000/mm2, negative C-reactive protein (CRP), blood sugar of 514 mg/dL, urea of 129 mg/dL, serum creatinine (seCr) of 1.7 mg/dL, sodium (Na) of 98 mg/dL, Na (corrected for hyperglycemia) of 105 mg/dL, potassium (K) of 5.5 mg/dL, serum interleukin (IL)6 of 83.4 pg/mL, serum procalcitonin of more than 75 ng/mL, and venous blood gas (VBG) results of pH 6.80, pCO2 26.2 mmHg, HCO3: 4.1 meq/L, and calculated serum osmolality of 223 mOsm/kg.
On admission, he was anuric, so he receive three normal-saline stat doses (20 mg/kg). The first urine sample we could obtain was after rehydration of the patient and showed specific gravity of 1.015, pH 5, blood 3+, protein 1+, glucose 1+, WBC: 5–6/HPF, RBC: many/HPF, nitrite: negative, and bacteria: few. The patient had metabolic and respiratory acidosis, which was corrected after hydration. Table presents the temporal patterns of the patient’s laboratory values.
He had loss of consciousness, tense fontanel, and miotic pupils. Thus, brain computed tomography (CT) scan was requested, indicating loss of differentiation between gray and white matter and effacement of cortical sulci . These findings suggest severe cytotoxic brain edema. Given the evidence of severe brain edema due to hyponatremia, 3% hypertonic saline was started, and plasma sodium was corrected. Although we had attempted to correct his sodium level, because of the increasing plasma osmolality due to using mannitol and the state of hyperglycemia, this correction was not completed. The brain edema also persisted after sodium correction, but its acute symptoms disappeared. At this point, he received several doses of mannitol.
Because of the leukocytosis, he was put on intravenous cefotaxime and ampicillin. Also, a sepsis workup was done, which came back negative (negative blood culture, negative urine culture, and normal chest X-ray). However, starting antibiotics before sending culture samples could have confounded the culture results.
Subsequently, after 3 days in PICU, the symptoms of brain edema resolved, and after 4 days, he was weaned from the ventilator and extubated. Afterward, he was discharged from the PICU and transferred to the ward for further evaluation.