The patient was a 26-month-old girl born to first-degree consanguineous Iranian/Turkish parents. She was born at term gestational age with 3200 g weight and underwent routine age-matched vaccination in Iran including BCG vaccine at birth, Polio, Hepatitis B, Diphtheria, Tetanus, Haemophilus Influenza type B, Pertussis, and MMR (mumps, measles, rubella) until 18 months old, without remarkable adverse event. She had an older sister who died at the age of 1.5 years with diarrhea as the main clinical symptom . At 18 months of age, she was hospitalized due to pneumonia and otitis media with perforated tympanic membrane and pus discharge. By that time, her growth and developmental state were age-appropriate and she had not experienced prior hospitalization or considerable infection. Only a few days after her discharge, she developed right thigh swelling, tenderness, and heat, unable of weight-bearing. Therefore, she was admitted once more for suspected acute osteomyelitis. The right femur X-ray showed evidence of osteomyelitis . Later, she underwent an open biopsy and the mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) DNA complex was detected in the tissue sections obtained from her right femur, using Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra assay which is a rapid and accurate diagnostic tool, especially in extra-pulmonary tuberculosis . Plus, the smear of skeletal canal fluid specimen confirmed the presence of many acid-fast positive bacilli. Meantime, chest radiographs of the patient and her parents were evaluated and although her parents had no lesion compatible with pulmonary TB, the patient’s X-ray showed round density in the middle lobe of the right lung. They had no contact history of TB. She was treated with Isoniazid, Rifampin, Ethambutol, Pyrazinamide, and vitamin B6 for 9 months with the diagnosis of skeletal tuberculosis. The patient’s unusual infection with an uncommon microorganism prompted an immunological workup to detect the possible underlying immunodeficiency . Based on her clinical and initial laboratory data, she was recommended for a thorough evaluation, but her parents refused further investigation.
A few months later, she was referred to our hospital with fever, cough, and shortness of breath and eventually admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) due to severe tachypnea and respiratory distress with the diagnosis of severe pneumonia. During her admission, she received empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics with full coverage of bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Nonetheless, no pathogenic microorganism was isolated from the patient and despite receiving the standard treatment, her respiratory condition worsened and she got intubated.
Her inadequate response to standard treatment led to afresh immunological workup. The laboratory results revealed anemia, lymphopenia along with decreased CD4 + count, and CD4/CD8 ratio similar to her previous records . She also had increased CD19 +, CD20 +, CD16 +, and CD56 + cell counts. Her anti-diphtheria antibody titer was beneath the protective level despite the age-matched vaccination. She had hyper immunoglobulin (Ig) E and a slightly reduced IgM level . Based on her results, a probable CID was suspected and genetic analysis was performed on whole blood samples using WES. The WES analysis and Sanger sequencing revealed a homozygous frameshift deletion mutation c.1512delG (p.I505Sfs*28) at exon 16 in the DOCK2 gene loci.
Meanwhile, her serum creatinine and urea level increased significantly (2.5 and 248.5 mg/dL, respectively) and she underwent peritoneal dialysis. During her admission, she suffered from pneumothorax and few episodes of seizure as well. Unfortunately, she was deceased at the age of 27-month-old due to multi-organ failure.