A 12-year-old boy reported to the Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry complaining of pain in the lower left back tooth since 1 month. On intraoral examination, the mandibular left second premolar had a deep caries involving pulp with mild discoloration and the tooth was tender on percussion. The medical status was noncontributory. The tooth did not respond to cold and electric pulp tests and also exhibited deep periodontal pocket on the distal side. On intraoral periapical radiographic examination, the same tooth revealed deep intrabony defect on the distal side. The tooth also showed an immature root, thin dentinal walls, and open apex with a widening of the periodontal ligament space. Finally, based on clinical and radiographic findings, the diagnosis of the class IV fracture with apical periodontitis was made and treatment of performing a regenerative endodontic treatment using the amniotic membrane was planned. Parents were informed about the treatment protocol and written informed consent was obtained. The protocol and the consent form were approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee (College of Dental Sciences, Davangere, India) to perform the treatment.
Local anesthesia was given using 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine and a rubber dam was applied. Access opening was prepared using a round endo access bur (Dentsply Maillefer, Switzerland) and complete pulp extirpation was done, finally, the canal was copiously irrigated using 10 mL of 5.25% of sodium hypochlorite solution (Rasayan Laboratory, Mumbai, India). The working length was determined using a size 30 k file (Mani, Japan) and the canal was dried with paper points. An equal proportion of ciprofloxacin (Cifran 500 mg, Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd., Mumbai, India), metronidazole (Metrogyl 400 mg, J.B. Chemicals, Mumbai, India), and minocycline (Minoz 50 mg, Ranbaxy Ltd., Mumbai, India) was taken, mixed with distilled water, and the paste was placed into the canal to a depth of 1 mm short of the apex using an endodontic plugger (Mani, Japan). The access opening was temporarily restored with Cavit (3M ESPE, Germany) and the patient was recalled after 1 week and the tooth was found asymptomatic. The access cavity was reopened under rubber dam isolation and the canal was thoroughly irrigated using the saline solution to remove the antibiotic paste. Finally, the canal was dried with paper points. The amniotic membrane was obtained and placed inside the canal and pushed 1 mm beyond the working length and coronally up to the level of cementoenamel junction (CEJ) using an endodontic hand plugger (Dentsply Maillefer, Switzerland). A thick paste of white mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) (Pro Root MTA; Dentsply, Switzerland) was placed directly over the amniotic membrane (AM) followed by a wet cotton pellet and the tooth was temporarily restored using the Cavit. The patient was recalled after 1 day to remove the cotton and the access cavity was restored using the glass ionomer cement [GIC (Universal Restorative, Tokyo, Japan)]. The patient was recalled every 1, 3, and 6 months for clinical and radiographic evaluation. After 6 months, clinical examination revealed normal responses to percussion and palpation with decreased pocket depth. The tooth did not respond to cold and electric pulp tests. On radiographic examination, the tooth showed continued root elongation, closure in the periapical opening, thick root dentinal walls with narrowing of the canal space, and normal periradicular architecture .