A 53-year-old woman, resident in Germany, was admitted to the emergency department because of confusion, aphasia and agitation. Her partner reported that she had complained about neck pain for a few weeks which had been interpreted as being related to a herniated cervical disk in an X-ray examination seven days ago and treated with analgesics. Furthermore, the patient had suffered from unspecific flu-like symptoms in the previous week and intermittent diarrhea during the previous two months. Her past medical history revealed a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease based on nicotine addiction, a chronic pain syndrome following repeated vertebral disk herniation, obesity, and appendectomy as well as surgical repair of an epigastric and umbilical hernia six years ago. Because of the chronic lumbar pain, she had been under long-term morphine treatment with suspicion of morphine addiction, but had not received intraspinal steroid/analgesics injections for several months.
On physical examination, she had a body temperature of 38.6 °C; pulse rate and blood pressure were within the normal range. In the examination of respiratory system, cardiovascular system, and abdomen, no abnormalities were detected. The neurological examination also showed no abnormalities, especially no meningism and no neurological deficits, apart from the confusion, aphasia and agitation. Laboratory analysis at admission revealed a pronounced leukocytosis with an increase mainly in the neutrophil granulocytes, and a strongly elevated serum C-reactive protein level, indicating an infectious cause of the patient’s symptoms. Furthermore, a rise of lactate dehydrogenase, liver enzymes and cholestasis parameters, and a hyponatremia were observed. In the emergency department, a magnetic resonance tomography of the brain was performed, but demonstrated no abnormalities apart from first signs of a subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy.
An immediate lumbar puncture was not successful because of the patient’s agitation, but was conducted on the second day of admission, when nuchal rigidity emerged. Because of strongly suspected bacterial meningitis, antimicrobial treatment with ceftriaxone (4 g daily in two divided doses) and ampicillin (12 g daily in six divided doses) was started. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid was consistent with bacterial meningitis, showing 1,657 leukocytes per μl, increased protein, undetectable glucose and increased lactate. Cerebrospinal fluid was also subjected to microscopic Gram stain examination and routine culture: The Gram stain revealed a high number of Gram-negative rods, and Escherichia coli grew on the culture plates. Species identification was performed by Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption / Ionization (MALDI) Time of Flight (TOF) Mass Spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), and antimicrobial susceptibility testing was done by microdilution in accordance with European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) recommendations , using pre-configured microtiter plates (MERLIN Diagnostika GmbH, Bornheim-Hersel, Germany). The Escherichia coli strain exhibited elevated minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for aminopenicillins (amoxicillin: >128 mg/l, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid: 128/2 mg/l), oxyimino-cephalosporins (cefotaxime: 16 mg/l, ceftazidime: 2 mg/l), fourth-generation cephalosporins (cefepime: 64 mg/l) and monobactams (aztreonam: 16 mg/l), a synergy phenomenon in the double-disk synergy test with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid consistent with an ESBL, and a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for blaCTX-M-9 group. In contrast, it showed low MICs to piperacillin/tazobactam (≤1/4 mg/l), carbapenems (imipenem: 0.0625 mg/l, meropenem: ≤0.03125 mg/l, ertapenem: ≤0.0625 mg/l, doripenem: ≤0.03125 mg/l) and fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin: ≤0.015625 mg/l, levofloxacin: ≤0.0625 mg/l), and was also susceptible to several other types of antibiotics such as aminoglycosides, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, tigecycline, colistin and fosfomycin. In multilocus sequence typing (MLST), the strain was assigned to ST73. On the second day after admission, the initially taken blood cultures also flagged positive for ESBL-producing Escherichia coli. Of note, the patient’s ESBL carriage was not previously known. The antimicrobial therapy was switched to meropenem (6 g daily in three divided doses).
After pathogen identification, additional diagnostics was performed to exclude a primary focus of infection: Although a urine culture yielded an Escherichia coli strain having the same antimicrobial susceptibility pattern, the patient’s past medical history was negative for urinary tract infection symptoms. Furthermore, chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound and transesophageal echocardiography conducted at admission and / or during the further hospital stay merely showed degenerative changes in the spine and an early-stage atherosclerosis, but did not reveal a primary focus. Thus, a magnetic resonance tomography of the spine was added in consideration of the patient’s neck pain even though that pain had already been attributed to a herniated cervical disk. However, magnetic resonance tomography showed a large descending retropharyngeal abscess with a cervical spondylodiscitis at C2-C3 down to C4-C5 and a secondary spinal canal stenosis . Additionally, multiple disk protrusions were found, especially in the lumbar spine. Thus, the search for a source of meningitis, initiated because of the unexpected pathogen identification, led to diagnosis of previously unrecognized retropharyngeal abscess and cervical spondylodiscitis. In addition to continued meropenem treatment, the patient was immediately subjected to neurosurgery: The abscess was evacuated including polymethylmethacrylate-assisted ventral diskectomy. Intraoperative swabs also yielded the ESBL-producing Escherichia coli.
Initially, therapy was complicated by morphine withdrawal delirium requiring sedation of the patient. Then, the patient’s condition rapidly improved, and she had fully recovered without any neurological sequelae when meropenem treatment was stopped after 21 days (14 days after source-control surgery). Control computer tomography and magnetic resonance tomography three weeks and two months after admission, respectively, both proved complete remission of the retropharyngeal abscess and the spondylodiscitis. Nevertheless, hospitalization was prolonged because of secondary complications including prolonged dysphagia subsequent to the retropharyngeal abscess and several hospital-acquired infections. Specifically, the patient required mechanical ventilation in the course of two hospital-acquired pneumonia episodes, the first episode empirically treated with 7 days ceftriaxone and erythromycin, the second with 7 days imipenem. Then, she received 7 days vancomycin for treatment of Enterococcus faecium bacteremia. In addition, she developed bilateral trochanteric decubitus ulcers due to being bedridden for weeks. ESBL-producing Escherichia coli was isolated from those decubitus which were subsequently treated surgically and with 10 days ciprofloxacin. Finally, the patient received 12 days caspofungin because of candidemia. Of the antimicrobials used for therapy of the hospital-acquired infections, imipenem and ciprofloxacin also had in vitro activity against the meningitis-causing Escherichia coli strain. However, neither clinical nor radiological signs of a meningitis relapse occurred after cessation of meropenem, which may indicate that the meningitis had already been cured at the time-point of meropenem cessation. After all, the patient was discharged from hospital in good health three months after admission.