A 39-year-old Japanese man sustained an injury to his left foot. He had fallen from his motorcycle and was unable to remember the precise mechanism of injury. He visited his local hospital where he was diagnosed with a navicular fracture and treated with a short-leg cast for six weeks. He was referred to our institution because of nonresolution of his prolonged foot pain six months after the initial injury.
Physical examination revealed that his left foot was slightly swollen, but the skin color was normal and there was no local heat on his instep. Blood tests did not indicate infection or inflammatory disease. There was tenderness over his middle foot, and he had active toe plantar flexion and dorsal flexion without restriction. Injections of lidocaine on the navicular bone resulted in temporary resolution of pain. Radiographs and CT scans revealed that navicular bone union had not been obtained and the fragments were atrophic. There was also associated incongruity of the cuneonavicular joint . T1-weighted MRI showed low-signal intensity on the lateral fragment, and T2-weighted MRI revealed high-signal intensity on the talonavicular joint and a slightly ragged joint cartilage, and a homogenous high-signal intense cystic lesion in the talus . We suspected there was avascular necrosis of the navicular bone fragment, and primitive osteoarthritis of the talonavicular joint because of the preserved joint space.
The surgical technique used two longitudinal incisions on the lateral and medial fragment of the navicular bone. The gap of pseudarthrosis was filled with soft tissue and there was no movement between the two fragments. The talonavicular joint capsule was opened widely to expose the articular surfaces of the talar head and proximal navicular. The articular cartilage was damaged and partially eburnated. After opening the joint capsule we removed the remainder of the cartilage from the articular surface of the talar head and navicular bone by roughening the subchondral bone using a shaver and chisel. Compression and fixation of the talonavicular joint were achieved using two 6.5 mm partially threaded cancellous screws (SYNTHES), which were both inserted in a distal- to- proximal orientation . Postoperatively, a short leg cast was applied for six weeks. Progressive weight-bearing as tolerated was allowed after removing the cast.
The patient was followed clinically and radiographically at regular intervals, and one year after the operation, joint fusion was radiographically obtained, and he reported no pain or disability .