A 63-year-old male of Indian ethnicity, nonsmoker, nonalcoholic, vegetarian, self-employed professional, without any coexisting disease, developed fever and dry cough for 7 days and mild difficulty in breathing for 1 day before he visited his local general practitioner. He lived alone as his family was visiting their relatives in another city. He was empirically started on oral azithromycin 500 mg and cetirizine 10 mg once daily along with Paracetamol 650 mg twice daily, and was advised to undergo a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing for SARS CoV-2 and sputum bacterial culture.
RT-PCR for SARS CoV-2 was positive, and in view of rapidly progressing breathing difficulty, he was admitted to ICU facility of our COVID-19 hospital. At time of hospital admission patient was conscious, oriented, with normal cough power, and adequate swallowing. Upper and lower limb power was around 4/5. His consciousness level was normal initially but after sometime he started becoming drowsy, his respiratory rate was 34–36 breaths per minute and with SpO2 of 84% on room air; he was hemodynamically stable [blood pressure (BP) 136/82, heart rate of 114 beats per minute]. Laboratory parameters such as hemogram, renal function test, liver function test, and procalcitonin were within normal limits, certain parameters were deranged like C-reactive protein (CRP) 45 ng/ml, serum ferritin 611 ng/ml, D dimer 2.8 µg/ml, and plasma fibrinogen level 575 mg/dl. Chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy infiltrates.
He required continuous non-invasive ventilation (NIV) for moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and received intravenous remdesivir 100 mg for 10 days and tocilizumab 400 mg once. Later on, he received intravenous methyl prednisolone 60 mg twice daily for 5 days and then continued as once daily. He also received enoxaparin 60 mg subcutaneously (s/c) twice daily, with other supportive care over next 3 weeks. During 2nd week, empiric antibiotic cefoperazone sulbactam 1.5 mg twice daily was started. However, his clinical condition did not improve much, and was shifted to non-COVID-19 ICU for further management once he became negative for SARS CoV-2 in RT-PCR.
At admission to non-COVID-19 ICU (5th week of illness, W-5), he continued to require NIV for hypoxemia. His hemogram, bilirubin, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), and serum glutamic pyruvic transferase (SGPT) were within normal limits. His urea and creatinine were mildly elevated, and he had dyselectrolytemia (sodium 132 mEq/l, potasium 3.3 mmol/l). Blood and urine cultures were negative; he had high HbA1c 8.3% (diabetes of recent onset) with severity score, sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score of 5, and acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) II score of 10. The high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed extensive lung parenchyma involvement with features of fibrosis (bilaterally). Over the next 3 weeks, steroids were gradually tapered, antibiotics were deescalated from cefoperazone–sulbactam to clarithromycin and later stopped. Initially, patient was put on intermittent ventilation by NIV with alternate non-rebreather mask (NRBM), and later on his oxygenation was maintained on venturi mask at 0.3 FiO2. Throughout his stay, the patient was on anticoagulant medication and received daltaperin 5000 IU s/c once daily.
During the 9th week (W-9) of illness his condition (hypoxemia) started deteriorating. He became tachypnoeic with retention of CO2 for which he received intermittent NIV again with increased FiO2 up to 0.6%; however, he became drowsy, with PaCO2 rising up to 108 mmHg, for which he was intubated and invasive mechanical ventilation initiated. Repeat bacterial cultures, fungal cultures, and CMV RT-PCR on blood were negative, but serum galactomannan was positive (1.3 ODI units) and intravenous voriconazole (4 mg/kg twice daily) with empiric intravenous antibiotic cefoperazone-sulbactum (2 gm twice daily) was started. Over the next week (W-10), his clinical condition rapidly worsened as he developed circulatory shock, and required vasopressors and hydrocortisone 200 mg/day. His oxygenation worsened, with increased oxygen requirement and multiple cycles of prone ventilation performed. Antimicrobials escalated (meropenem and teicoplanin). Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) was done to rule out pulmonary thromboembolic condition. Cardiac event was also ruled out. Serum galactomannan decreased to 0.7 ODI units, tracheal aspirate bacterial and fungal culture showed no growth, coagulase negative staphylococcus was isolated in one blood culture bottle, and cytomegalovirus RT-PCR showed 21,86,000 copies/ml in tracheal aspirates .
The patient was CMV Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody positive and an infectious disease specialist diagnosed the case as CMV reactivation, and suggested intravenous injection of ganciclovir 5 mg/kg/day. Over the next 3–4 days, he recovered from circulatory shock. After 2 weeks of ganciclovir treatment, the patient improved clinically and repeat CMV RTPCR in tracheal aspirate showed 60,900 copies/ml . However, at the time of weaning, he again had increased tracheal secretion with new infiltrate on his chest X-ray. Repeat tracheal culture showed growth of extremely drug resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae sensitive only to colistin, so colistin (4 million IU 8 hourly) was administered for 10 days. Ganciclovir was continued for a total of 4 weeks with gradual reduction of CMV copies in tracheal aspirates and clearing of chest X-ray.. His clinical condition improved, and he was successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation (4-week duration). Subsequently, after 15th week of the illness (W-15), patient got discharged home on 2 l per minute oxygen through nasal prongs, valgenciclovir 450 mg tablet orally twice daily, and levofloxacin 750 mg tablet orally once daily for 5 days. Patient was required to take prednisolone 5 mg tablet once daily at 10 a.m. for 5 days, then 2.5 mg once daily for 5 days, and then 2.5 mg every alternate day for a final 5 days. In further follow-up after 12 months of discharge, he was doing well and able to do his routine activity without the need for oxygen.