A 41-year-old male patient was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe and planned to undergo VATS right upper lobe lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection. He was previously diagnosed with hypertension, which was controlled by 2.5 mg qd felodipine, and had a five-year history of cervical spondylosis. He had never taken beta blockers. The patient was a non-athlete and had no family history of malignant tumors. Pre-operative laboratory tests included full blood cell count, blood biochemistry, coagulation tests, myocardial enzyme, and tumor markers, and were unremarkable except for a slightly elevated triglyceride (2.54 mmol/L) and neuron specific enolase (19.65 ng/mL). Chest CT and PET-CT showed a 21 × 18 mm nodule in the right upper lobe with a maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.7. There was no enlargement of mediastinal or hilar lymph nodes and cranial CT showed no clear signs of metastasis.
Notably, the patient said that his heart rate (HR) was normally around 50 beats/min (bpm) and his electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia with an HR of 44 bpm. Ambulatory ECG monitoring for 24 h showed a sinus rhythm with an average HR of 42 bpm, a minimum HR of 38 bpm, and without arrest intervals greater than 2 s. The patient had no symptoms of syncope or amaurosis fugax. The intensivist was consulted and advised that there was no need to place a temporary pacemaker.
Standard monitoring on the day of the operation included measurement of the patient’s arterial blood pressure (ABP), HR, pulse oxygen saturation (SpO2), electrocardiography, and bispectral index (BIS). The patient remained in stable condition with a HR of 52 bpm, ABP of 155/61 mmHg, and SpO2 of 97% on room air. Blood gas analysis was unremarkable except for slightly elevated lactic acid of 1.9mmol/L.
Anesthesia was induced by sufentanil, propofol, etomidate, and cisatracurium. Just after induction of anesthesia severe sinus bradycardia occurred and the patient’s HR fell significantly from 52 to 28 bpm. The patient was immediately intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube guided by visual laryngoscope. The patient’s HR remained at 35–48 bpm and 0.5 mg of atropine was administered intravenously with no response. Isoproterenol was administered continuously for two hours at 0.01 µg per kg per minute to keep HR around 50 bpm. The patient’s ABP was 100–112/60–75 mmHg. Anesthesia was maintained by propofol, remifentanil, sevoflurane and cisatracurium. Infusion heating and a forced air warmer were used to preserve the body temperature above 36℃. During the operation, it was noted that the right upper mediastinal lymph nodes (groups R2 and R4) were calcified and very close to the vagus nerve . Following resection of lymph nodes by ultrasonic knife, the patient’s HR increased to 60–68 bpm and ABP was about 130–145/80–90 mmHg. The anesthesiologist stopped isoproterenol, but HR and ABP did not decrease. We suggest that compression of the vagus nerve by the mediastinal lymph nodes may have contributed to bradycardia. The patient exhibited no postoperative complications and was discharged on post-operative day 5. The pathological findings were invasive adenocarcinoma of 3.0*2.0*1.5 cm without lymph node metastases. The stage was pT1cN0M0 (Stage 1A3). There was no post-operative adjuvant treatment plan for this patient.
Based on these conditions, we requested that the patient repeat 24-h Holter monitoring. One month after surgery, 24-h Holter monitoring revealed a sinus rhythm with an average heart rate of 67 bpm and without intervals of more than 2 s. Six months after surgery no sinus bradycardia has occurred thus far and the patient has reported that his heart rate is now 60–80 bpm normally.