A 38-year-old Chinese woman with Gravida 0 and Parity 0, claimed no history or family history of chronic disease. The pregnancy was conceived by assisted reproductive technology, and she received routine prenatal care at Peking University First Hospital, China. Ultrasound at 12 weeks of gestation indicated a dichorionic-diamniotic (DCDA) twin pregnancy: foetus A’s nuchal translucency (NT) was 2.36 mm and crown–rump length (CRL)was 64.5 mm; foetus B’s NT was 0.72 mm and CRL was 58.3 mm. The pregnant woman chose to undergo non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), the results of which showed low risk. At 19+1 weeks of gestation, sonographic biometrics revealed that foetus A was larger than expected, while foetus B showed no obvious abnormalities. At 22+2 weeks of gestation, Anomaly scan indicated that Foetus A’s abdominal circumference (AC) and estimated foetal weight (EFW) were both greater than the 97th percentile , complicated with polyhydramnios and hyperechoic kidneys , while foetus B followed the normal growth curve with no abnormal findings. Amniocentesis was then performed for the Foetus A at 23 weeks of gestation. The karyotype and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) were unremarkable. Meantime, the cervix was measured 22.1 mm. Therefore, the pregnant woman was admitted to the hospital to undergo cervical cerclage due to short cervix at 24 weeks of gestation. Three days after the cerclage, membrane of Foetus A ruptured. After tocolytic, anti-inflammatory and lung-maturing treatments, no more vaginal leaking was observed. Afterwards, series of ultrasound examinations still indicated that the measurements of foetus A remained to be more than 90th centile according to the fetal growth standrds for Chinese twin pregnancies , complicated with hyperechoic renal cortex and polyhydramnios. At 30 weeks of gestation, foetal echocardiography revealed that foetus A had a first-degree atrioventricular block. The pregnant woman and her family members requested to continue the pregnancy. At 31+5 weeks of gestation, forceps delivery was performed due to "foetal distress and intrauterine infection". The first male baby weighed 2250 g with an Apgar score 1 min and 5 min of 7 and 8; the second male baby weighed 1550 g with an Apgar score 1 min and 5 min of 9 and 9. Both foetuses were transferred to the new-born intensive care unit (NICU) for due to prematurity. In the NICU, the first newborn was significantly larger than the normal reference at this gestation age, with manifestations of abnormal appearance, stubby toes, gastric perforation, a ventricular septal defect (1.8 mm), hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, accessory breast, cryptorchidism, and hydrocele. A laparotomic gastric perforation repair and advanced genetic testing were performed on the 7th day after birth. The genetic testing results returned with ChrX: 132,888,130–132,888,133: c.408-c.411delCCTG , indicative of Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome. The paediatric patient was treated in the NICU for 51 days after birth, and her family requested discharge from the hospital strongly, despite of severe sepsis and difficulties.