This case report has been approved by the ethics committee of Maoming People’s Hospital.
A 54-year-old man with diabetes mellitus was admitted to Maoming People’s Hospital on 26, April 2020. He was diagnosed with PF ten months prior to admission. The diagnosis was based on clinical manifestations and laboratory findings , 1) Localized superficial blisters with erosion and crusts appeared on the area of upper trunk 2) Punch biopsy from anterior chest revealed decreased intercellular adhesions and acantholysis 3) Direct immunofluorescence showed intercellular IgG deposition in the epidermis 4) Detection of serum anti-desmoglein-1 (Dsg-1) antibody with a level more than 150 U/mL (ELISA method) whereas the serum anti-desmoglein-3 (Dsg-3) antibody was within the normal range .He was initially prescribed daily oral prednisone(60 mg) for PF and achieved complete remission. After 3 months of maintenance therapy, the dose of prednisone was gradually and carefully tapered to 20 mg P.O. daily. The patient was also diagnosed with diabetes mellitus 1 year ago, but did not follow medical advice for management. Consequentially, he had poorly-controlled blood glucose levels. He worked as a farmer and had a 10 pack-year smoking history.
Three months before admission the patient was wounded by a tree branch on the anterior chest but didn’t seek medical service at the time. He began feeling fatigued about a month later which was followed gradually by a productive cough and right-sided chest pain. The patient presented to the local clinic with a sudden high grade fever(39.6 °C), chills, sputum evolution and shortness of breath, where he was thought to have bacterial pneumonia and received oral and intravenous antibiotic therapy. However, he failed to respond to the therapy and was transferred to Maoming People’s Hospital.
During primary evaluation, the patient exhibited a poor general condition and strong breathlessness. Initial vital signs were: Body temperature: 39.4 °C; Heart rate: 116 bpm; Respiratory rate: 26 breaths/min; Blood pressure: 101/60; Oxygen saturation: 75%. Physical examination revealed multiple skin lesions on the chest, shoulder, and upper back. An old scar was visible on the right sternal border- on the same area as the skin lesions . Lung auscultation revealed end-inspiratory rales in both lung bases. Blood tests showed a WBC count of 12,910 cells/ul, Rapid C-Reactive Protein count of over 200 mg/L and Hemoglobin count of 11.7 g/dl. His glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 10.10%.Human immunodeficiency serology was negative. A chest CT was performed and revealed several ‘fungal ball’ like inclusions in thick-walled cavities present in multiple lobes of both lungs .Blood culture, Tuberculin test, Xpert MTB/RIF test, serum (1,3)-β-D-glucan (BDG) and serum galactomannan (GM) antigen detection test returned negative. However, specimen from Broncho-alveolar Lavage fluid (BAL) and multiple sputum cultures revealed Nocardia spp. . The organism was later identified as Nocardia brasiliensis by rRNA gene sequencing. Results of other complementary studies to detect extra-pulmonary organ involvement were negative.
A combination of intravenous cefotaxime (2.25 g,Q8h), amikacin (0.4 g/day) and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (0.32 g trimethoprim, 1.6 g sulfamethoxazole) daily were initiated after diagnosing Nocardia asteroides, along with continuation of prednisone (20 mg/day) for pemphigus. Insulin was also administered to manage blood glucose levels.
Seven days post-admission, his body temperature became normal and we was told by the patient that the symptoms of cough and breathlessness were markedly improved as well. Blood tests showed WBC counts and levels of Rapid C-Reactive protein within the normal range. Following another 7 days of sequential therapy, the patient was discharged with instructions to continue therapy with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for next 3 months.
After discharge, the patient did well. His pemphigus was completely under control with a daily oral dose of 20 mg prednisone and progressive improvements took place in cough and breathlessness up to the last visit on August 1, 2020. A follow-up CT was performed in the meanwhile, which revealed further improvement from nocardia pneumonia .