The patient is a 64 year old White male who presented to dermatology with a lesion at the lateral aspect of the right thigh. The lesion was first noted 40 years prior and had grown from 1.5 cm to 6.5 cm in the ensuing years. On examination the lesion was raised, hypopigmented, with pearly borders and central ulceration. Wide excision with lymph node dissection demonstrated invasive squamous cell carcinoma, basaloid type, with negative margins. Tumor cells were positive for CK5/6, CKAE1/AE3 and p40 immunostatins. Pathology from the right inguinal node was positive for metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. The patient has been treated with cetuximab, pembrolizumab, carbo/taxol, with progression, but stabilized on cimiplimab-rwlc. He had sterotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) to a single right lung nodule.
The patient had radiation therapy of the right inguinal nodes. He had chemoradiation which delivered 6000cGy to the right thigh and 5000cGy to the right inguinal and iliac nodes completed 1 year ago. Recently a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed treated lung metastases, persistent ground-glass nodule in the upper lobe and a recurrent 1.2 cm distal right para external iliac metastasis. He was symptomatic with right abdominopelvic pain. He had 3000cGy radiation to the distal right para-external iliac metastasis.
Patient subsequently noted a new “blister” on the right upper thigh, distinct from his previous squamous cell cancer, which progressed over time to flat, polygonal, intensely pruritic lesions that covered the right lateral thigh from just distal to the hip to the distal third of the femur . There were no oral or conjunctival lesions. He denied oral sensitivity. There were no other skin lesions noted, and nail beds were unremarkable. The rest of the physical exam was nondiagnostic. Skin biopsy demonstrated saw-tooth epidermal hyperplasia with wedge-shaped hypergranulosis and basilar vacuoles diagnostic for lichen planus. He was started on topical triamcinolone with salutary effects on appearance and pruritus within 1 week, which continued to improve over the next several months.