A 59 year-old female patient, who has been employed as rehabilitation worker, has observed gradually enlarging formations under both her right and left scapula for approximately eight months. In anteflexion, elevation of the upper extremities and when stretching the arms forward, swellings reaching up to the rear axillary lines appear bilaterally subscapularly. They were of soft consistency at palpation. The patient also described pain in the upper extremities, and in the region of arms. She had no recollection of any accident or fall. However, she had undergone neurosurgical operating procedures of disc extrusion in the cervical and thoracic spine, and the findings of bilateral resistances were present already pre-operatively. In the another surgical workplace repeated punctures and partial resection of the swelling on the right side were implemented 5 months ago, and it came to its subsequent recurrence.
The magnetic resonance ((b) and (c)) on thoracic wall showed in dorsolateral parts in subscapular regions in the level of 3rd to 7th rib symmetrical limited fluid collections with dimensions of 120 × 37 x 115 mm on the right side with a volume of 250 ml and on the left side 120 × 24 x 90 mm with a volume of 130 ml. The collections were localised in the intermuscular spaces between the external intercostal muscles and the heads of the muscle serratus anterior. The contents of collections were moderately heterogeneous with sporadic internal septa. Cystic formations had slightly distinct signal, native image in T1 weighing displayed hypersensitive contents on the right side. It could be a case of chronic post haemorrhagic changes. Postcontrastly the collections were without amplification of signal intensity. On the left side postcontrastly there was present a moderate reinforcement of capsule of fluid collection. In diffuse weighing the lesions were without marks of diffusion restriction. Axillary lymphatic nodes were of physiological size, the displayed pulmonary parenchyma was without inflammatory and focal changes, without mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy, the pleural cavities without effusion, the pleura was without hypertrophy, the recorded skeleton was without traumatic change.
Owing to progressing swelling and increasing difficulties a surgical resection was indicated in the female patient. She was operated on under general anaesthesia, and a resection of the encapsulated collections of fluid was implemented bilaterally ((d)), two Redon drains were introduced. In the left collection serous fluid was present, on the right side also serous fluid with admixture of old blood was present. A histological examination of cystic collections proved that it concerned pseudocystic lesions with relation to subscapular bursa without marks of malignancy. Their walls were created by collagenous, hyalinised and vascularised connective tissue with predominately perivascular nonspecific chronic inflammatory cellulation ((a)), the internal surface of which was lined by a layer of fibrin and by a nonspecific granulation tissue with a focally accentuated xanthogranulomatous, siderophagous and giant-cell reaction without epithelium ((b)). In the lumen of the cysts there were remnants of blood clots with fibrinous or fibrinoid substances with dispersive admixture of siderophages, lymphocytes, neutrophils and giant polynuclear cells ((c)). The proof of amyloid by Congo red was negative. On the lesion periphery soft-tissue structures were caught, including striated muscularis. The drains were removed the 10th postoperative day due to higher production, the surgical wounds were healed-up per primam intentionem. After the operation the female patient had a full range of movements and was without trouble and pains.