The patient is a 65-year-old male with psoriatic disease under treatment with the IL-17 inhibitor secukinumab. Before treatment, the patient suffered from extended, recent-onset plaque psoriasis (body surface area of 15%) and his disease spectrum did not include gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, or other visceral symptoms (hidradenitis, uveitis, etc.). According to his medical history, the patient is a former smoker (20 pack-years), has a body mass index of 24 kg/m and is treated for heart failure (NYHA II, ejection fracture of 55%) due to ischemic heart disease (bypass surgery 8 years ago), abdominal aortic aneurysm (diameter of 4 cm with mural clot), dyslipidaemia, depressive disorder, and unilateral cataract. The patient is HLA-B27 negative, and his family history does not include IBD. He had already failed treatment with apremilast and, as per protocol, the treating dermatologist prescribed secukinumab at a dosage of 300 mg (induction with 300mg weekly for one month and maintenance with 300mg monthly).
After completing the induction scheme, the patient reported abdominal pain and 5–6 daily episodes of bloody diarrhoea. He was admitted to the hospital and laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis, anaemia, thrombocytosis, moderately increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), while faecal calprotectin was disproportionately increased . Further workup excluded infectious causes (including cytomegalovirus) and intestinal malignancy. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed bowel wall thickening from the descending colon to the caecum. Flexible sigmoidoscopy revealed numerous round, deep, invasive ulcers with elevated margins . Endoscopy was strongly suggestive of severe Crohn’s disease, possibly triggered by secukinumab, which was subsequently discontinued. Due to both clinical and endoscopic severity, the patient was started on prednisolone (0.7 mg/kg/d) and his symptoms rapidly subsided.
A month later and whilst the patient was weaning off steroids, he presented with a new episode of abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Laboratory tests were still suggestive of systemic inflammation and faecal calprotectin was increased . Endoscopy confirmed persistent inflammation with large, linear, deep ulcers accompanied by exudates, mucosal erosions and pseudopolyps . Infectious causes were discarded anew. Steroid-dependency was considered, and treatment options discussed with the dermatologists. The patient was started on subcutaneous certolizumab pegol (induction with 400mg at 0-2-4 weeks and maintenance with 400mg eow), but minimal response was recorded at three months. This was also documented in the magnetic resonance enterography whilst on certolizumab pegol treatment . Subsequently, certolizumab was discontinued and a month later, treatment with the anti-IL-23 antibody risankizumab was commenced (induction 150mg at 0 and 4 weeks and maintenance with 150mg every 12 weeks). Three months later, intestinal symptoms and psoriatic skin lesions were effectively controlled, whereas biochemical remission was also achieved . Steroids were successfully suspended. After 12 months under risankizumab, the patient remains in remission, with a Harvey Bradshaw index (HBI) for intestinal inflammation equal to zero and a body surface index (BSI) for psoriasis equal to 1%.