A 46-year-old man with severe, stricturing Crohn’s ileocolitis diagnosed at age 28, with a history of multiple stricturoplasties and ileocolic resection presented to the emergency department for severe abdominal pain and weight loss (day 0). His prior medical therapies included azathioprine, infliximab, methotrexate, adalimumab, certolizumab, and natalizumab, which were all characterized by either adverse reactions or disease progression. His current medical therapy was methotrexate and ustekinumab. He underwent radiographic imaging (CT enterography) 7 days prior to this presentation, which indicated multiple areas of high-grade luminal narrowing with evidence of chronic and active inflammation, associated dilation of the proximal small bowel, and entero-enteric fistula formation. Urgent surgery was considered however given prior small bowel resection, there was a concern for short bowel syndrome with further surgery. The estimated Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) score at the time of presentation was greater than 300. Documented weight history reflected an around 30-pound weight loss (~17%; body mass index decrease from 24 kg/m2 to 19.8 kg/m2) over the previous year.
Following emergency department presentation, his IBD care team instituted the following plan of care: antibiotics (ciprofloxacin and metronidatzole) given fistulous disease, stop methotrexate and start 6-mercaptopurine, start vedolizumab, start budesonide, start exclusive EN diet utilizing elemental or semi-elemental formula, and colorectal surgery evaluation. A timeline of interventions is illustrated in . The formula of choice for the exclusive EN diet was vanilla-flavored Peptamen 1.5. Due to logistical limitations obtaining the formula, the exclusive enteral formula diet was not started until day 3. No other oral intake was allowed, other than water (city water) for hydration. Antibiotics were stopped on day 12.
The patient was initiated on a regimen of 4 cartons of formula per day, which was estimated to provide 1500 kcal/day (24 kcal/kg) and 68 g protein/day (1.1 g/kg). This was subsequently increased to 6 cartons of formula per day [2250 kcal/day (37 kcal/kg) and 102 g protein/day (1.7 g/kg)] after 4 days due to continued weight loss. Additionally, after 4 days of the exclusive enteral formula diet, the patient began chewing sugar-free gum to help with a reported “funny taste” in his mouth.
Follow-up radiographic imaging (MR enterography) was obtained 34 days after original CT enterography (day 27), which demonstrated decreased inflammation, improved stricturing, and fistula healing. Nutritionally, he was able to maintain a stable weight on his exclusive enteral formula regimen. His CDAI score was estimated to be around 170 (remission <150).
The decision was made to continue the patient on exclusive EN until he was weaned off of budesonide. Ultimately, the patient remained on an exclusive enteral formula diet for 75 days. During this time he consistently reported 2–3 loose stools per day, which he anecdotally noted improved following course of antibiotics and later with the cessation of gum chewing. Bowel movements (BMs) did not become formed, however, until solid food was reintroduced. The patient pursued a conservative food reintroduction strategy per his preference. On day 95, the patient reported a daily intake of 4 cartons of Peptamen 1.5, 16 ounces chicken broth, 1–2 prepackaged Jell-O cups, a fruit smoothie (1 cup tropical fruit blend, 1 cup vanilla-flavored almond milk), 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1 tablespoon of almond butter, and an evening meal of 3 ounces lean meat or fish and a starch (white rice, potato, and gluten-free toast). At this time he reported 1–2 formed BMs per day and had an estimated CDAI score of around 60. The patient did not completely wean himself off of shakes until day 152 at which time he reported an average of 1 formed BM per day and a weight increase of around 10 pounds (7%; body mass index 21.2 kg/m2) since initiating the exclusive enteral formula diet regimen. He continued on 6-mercaptopurine and vedolizumab without recurrence of symptoms.
Planned microbiota samples were collected throughout the course of EN through an IRB-approved stool collection protocol. At the phylum level , the observed increase in the relative abundance of Firmicutes and decreased relative abundance of Bacteroidetes was similar to previous findings in a pediatric population utilizing exclusive EN as an induction therapy. At the genus level, there was a notable decrease in the relative abundance of Enterobacteriaceae Escherichia/Shigella .