A 65-year-old female from Chaohu, Anhui, China attended our hospital, complaining of slimy stool with mucus for more than 10 years. She had no history of schistosomiasis epidemiology and exposure. She had no family history of colon cancer. The patient did not have any organomegaly on examination. Her blood tests (blood routine, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, tumor marker CA199, CEA, CA125, AFP) and stool tests were normal. Colonoscopy revealed a polypoid-like hump of approximately 2.5 cm × 3.0 cm behind the ileocecal valve, with a thickened superficial duct opening, congestion, and exudation of purulent discharge. The surrounding mucosa was hyperemic, and the appendix was not visible , the remaining colonic mucosa had no lesions or inflammation. The histopathology of the ileocecal area showed severe chronic inflammation and lymphoid follicular hyperplasia. The entire abdominal CT scan before the colonoscopy showed a soft tissue approximately 2.3 cm × 1.8 cm in the ileocecal area with irregular borders, and moderately continuous enhancement after enhancement .
We initially diagnosed the bulge of the ileocecal as intestinal polyps and prepared to undergo endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) surgical resection, however, during the operation we found that the lesions may not be completely cleared, the patient finally decided to undergo surgery. In this colonoscopy, we performed the pathological examination of the same part, and the results were similar to the previous results. Laparoscopy showed no ascites in the abdominal cavity, rich omentum tissue, no metastasis in the liver and peritoneum, and the ileocecum and ascending colon omentum were wrapped inside the abdominal wall. The tumor was located at the opening of the appendix in the ileocecal region, which was also the root of the appendix, without invading the serosa.
The tumor markers of the patient were normal, but the malignant tumor could not be ruled out. The surgeon and his family decided to completely remove the right half colon after consultation. Histopathology clearly showed that there were a large number of schistosome eggs deposited in the ileocecal region and the appendix, with a lot of lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils infiltrated, lymphoid tissue proliferation, and lymphoid follicle formation . We carried out a total of three pathological tests and finally diagnosed with intestinal schistosomiasis (ileucopia, appendix).