A 56 year-old non-smoking north African woman, with no familial history of cancer, followed at the National Institute of Oncology of Rabat Morocco since March 1999 for breast cancer in premenopausal setting; presented in consultation on January 2011 with dysphagia. Her past medical history was not significant for any gastrointestinal disorders or alcohol intake. Her initial breast cancer was ductal infiltrating carcinoma of the two lower quadrants of the right breast, classified T4b N2 M0 according to TNM classification adopted by the AJCC, grade 2 of SBR (Scaff Bloom and Richardson), with vascular invasion and positive hormone receptors. She underwent modified radical mastectomy then 6 courses of adjuvant chemotherapy with CMF regimen cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 metotrexate 500 mg/m2 and 5FU 500 mg/m2. Adjuvant radiotherapy then was delivered 50 grays to the right breast, upper clavicular and the inner right mammary nodes. The patient received also 12 grays radiation to pelvis as castration. No adjuvant oral hormone therapy was given. Treatment achieved on August 1999. On April 2000 an incidental right renal mass, measuring 6 cm, discovered by abdominal ultrasound. Enlarged right nephrectomy was performed and the diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma of the kidney was done. On 2007, the patient presented local breast recurrence and distant relapse to bone and the pleura confirmed by a biopsy of skin nodules in mastectomy area. Both ER and PR were positive (90% and 100% respectively). HER 2 was negative. Chemotherapy with AC regimen as first line treatment (doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 was given with progression after 3 cycles. Docetaxel/capecitabine regimen was given as second line treatment for a total of 8 courses. A partial response then stabilization were achieved. Letrozole was given as maintenance therapy with ibandronate. Disease was stable until October 2010 where the patient presented bone progression. Patient was given Tamoxifen as second line hormonotherapy and remains stable. On January 2011 she presented dysphagia. Oesogastric endoscopy showed middle un-crossable esophagus stenosing mass. CT (computed tomography) scan showed the esophageal stenosis and stable pleural and lung breast cancer metastasis . Biopsy of the esophageal mass revealed an adenocarcinoma with dissociated cells . Immunochemistry was negative for hormone receptors and HER 2. Cytokeratines 7 and 20 were positives . No evidence of distant metastases or breast cancer progression on CT scan and markers was detected. Palliative brachytherapy to esophagus was delivered. Patient presented dysphagia due to progressive disease 4 months later. Jejunostomy was proposed but the patient refused any treatment. She died on July 2011 due to a esophageal progressive disease.