Dyspnoea in a patient early after liver transplantation.
A 40-year-old Caucasian male underwent orthotopic liver transplantation for alcoholic liver cirrhosis (see Figure for timeline). He received a full graft from an ABO-compatible 74-year-old cadaveric donor. Cold ischemia time was 3 h 21 min. The transplantation was performed using piggyback technique with side-to-side caval anastomosis (Belghiti Technique) and standard end-to-end hilar anastomoses. The duration of the procedure was 2 h 52 min. The postoperative course was uneventful. The immunosuppressive regimen consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and corticosteroids. A month later, the patient presented with symptomatic ascites, large right-sided pleural effusion and normal liver function. Upper endoscopy revealed esophageal varices and the consequent catheterization of the hepatic veins showed a portosystemic gradient of 28 mmHg. Liver biopsy revealed microvascular damage corresponding to sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS) . The patient was subsequently indicated for placement of a TIPS stent graft. This procedure was successfully performed and reduced the portosystemic gradient to 11 mmHg . Immediately after placement of the shunt, a rise in cholestatic enzyme levels was observed.
In the pre-transplant period, the patient was diagnosed with alcoholic liver cirrhosis but displayed no other significant comorbidities. He suffered from several severe episodes of hepatic encephalopathy (including coma) and was also treated for hepatorenal syndrome. At the time of transplantation, he had a MELD score of 27 and his Child-Pugh class was C (14 points).
The patient had a history of alcohol addiction but had been abstaining from alcohol for 2 years before liver transplantation. He had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 20 years prior to quitting 18 mo prior to the present illness. His family history was unremarkable.
Upon initial examination, the patient was sarcopenic, pale, anicteric and dyspneic at rest with an oxygen saturation of 88%. He had tachycardia at 102 pulses per minute but blood pressure was within normal values. Breath sounds were inaudible on the right side and percussion in the right chest was dull. The patient exhibited large ascites and a palpable liver but no lower-limb oedema. No remarkable abdominal wall collateral vessels were noted on physical examination. After TIPS placement, we observed a significant regression in physical signs of both ascites and pleural effusion.
Upon admission, bilirubin and liver enzymes were within normal limits (total bilirubin 0.86 mg/dL, AST 18.67 U/L, ALT 26.51 U/L, ALP 96.58 U/L and GGT 62.99 U/L). Total serum protein was 46.5 g/L and the albumin level was 23.7 g/L. After shunt placement, we observed an elevated ALP (292.74 U/L) and GGT (435.51 U/L), but levels of bilirubin, AST and ALT remained at normal values.
The initial abdominal ultrasound showed marked hepatomegaly (20.5 cm in the craniocaudal length) and massive ascites. After TIPS placement, liver ultrasound revealed a patent shunt with appropriate blood flow. Subsequent magnetic resonance analysis revealed tight stenosis of the right dorsal hepatic duct caused by the compression of the previously placed stent graft with prestenotic tract dilation and multiple small abscesses .