A 62-year-old man of Jehovah’s Witness faith developed a life threatening rapid progressive necrotizing fasciitis of his right lower extremity. His comorbidities consisted of type 2 diabetes mellitus, alcohol use disorder, nicotine use, and depression. He was non-compliant with his long-acting nocturnal insulin. The patient developed a non-healing right heel ulcer which began in the fall of the preceding year. He initially presented with his wound to the first health care institution 3 months later and was admitted for approximately 7 weeks. The patient subsequently underwent 4 surgical debridements and received IV antibiotics. Since that recent hospital admission, he had been following up at a local Wound Clinic.
Three weeks after discharge the patient subsequently developed increasing severe lightheadedness, generalized weakness, and dizziness which prompted patient to be evaluated in the Emergency Department (ED) of the second institution. In the ED the patient vitals were: temperature 37 °C, pulse 86 beats/min, respiratory rate 25 breaths/min, oxygen saturation of 98%, and a blood pressure of 98/59 mmHg. Physical examination was significant for right heel ulcer with purulent drainage. Initial laboratory results were significant for: WBC 32,700/mm3, hemoglobin 7.3 g/dL, MCV 83.4 fL, sodium 128 mmol/L, Creatinine 3.38 mg/dL, BUN 45 mg/dL, lactate 3.8 mmol/L and blood glucose level of 606 mg/dL. The patient was then admitted with septic shock, a heel ulcer with suspected osteomyelitis, and acute kidney injury. He was treated with IV antibiotics and epoetin alfa and iron sucrose parenterally. In-patient MRI of the right foot showed osteomyelitis of the calcaneus with a ruptured Achilles tendon and surrounding edema indicating infectious tenosynovitis. Subsequently during inpatient course, he developed severe right lower extremity pain and fever which prompted an emergent X-Ray of the right lower extremity. Imaging results showed prominent areas of subcutaneous emphysema throughout the soft tissue extending to the distal right femur suspicious for NF. The patient immediately underwent right-sided above the knee guillotine amputation with lateral thigh debridement. He was in critical condition post-op and a facility transfer was deemed necessary.
On arrival via ambulance to the intensive care unit trauma service at the 3rd institution (our hospital) the patient was in critical condition, with waxing and waning mentation, he was only oriented to self and examination revealed foul smelling AKA amputation wound which had crepitus to palpation. Significant laboratory results were: WBC of 24,800/mm3, hemoglobin 4.7 g/dL, MCV 75.4 fL, sodium 142 mmol/L, Creatinine 1.0, BUN 55 mg/dl, lactate 1.9 and serum glucose 300 mg/dL. The patient was resuscitated with IV fluids, IV antibiotic therapy, and pain management. He subsequently went for CT scan of the right residual limb to assess the extent of subcutaneous tissue involvement. Imaging showed subcutaneous emphysema extending to the neck of the femur . Subsequently he had emergent operative wound debridement using a micro debridement tool to enhance bloodless surgery. Intraoperative discussion of a possible hip disarticulation and hemipelvectomy occurred with determination of a poor prognosis of survival. The patient therefore underwent 6 debridement surgeries over the next 14 days with the 1st surgery consisting of a revision amputation .
Post operatively he improved significantly to a regular diet, stabilized vital signs, and normal mental status. The patient was discharged one month after initial admission to our institution to a rehabilitation facility. His wound at the time of discharge had healthy granulation tissue with a wound vac in place . He was subsequently seen 2 weeks after at trauma surgeon’s office for his first outpatient follow up.