We report the case of a 6-year-old boy presenting with advanced pubarche associated with left testicular swelling. First symptoms were observed a year prior to diagnosis by the patient’s mother, who noticed the appearance of pubic hair on the left side of the root of the penis. Levels of tumor markers, including human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha fetoprotein, and lactate dehydrogenase, were normal. Follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone levels were normal. Testosterone level was 0.8 nmol/mL (considered as upper limit of normal), and estradiol level was slightly increased (50 pmol/mL, N < 35 pmol/mL). US examination (Mach 30, Supersonic Imagine, Aix-en-Provence) showed an enlarged left testicle (estimated volume: 1.5 mL vs 0.6 mL on the right side), with a nodular ovoid-shaped hypoechoic lesion at its upper pole. The tumor exhibited a peripheral hyperechoic ring, with smooth margins and a shaped demarcation with adjacent pulp, the whole measuring 7.4 × 6 mm. color Doppler showed a hypervascular tumor compared to the surrounding tissue, with predominant central vascularization at ultrasensitive Doppler. Shear-wave elastography of the tumor, surrounding parenchyma, and contralateral testis indicated a mean stiffness of 11.7 kPa, 6.1 kPa, and 5.4 kPa, respectively .
Scrotal MRI using a 1.5-T scanner and a surface coil indicated that the tumor had a low-intensity signal on a T2-weighted image (with a peripheral hyperintense rim) and an iso-intensity signal on a T1-weighted image. Fast, strong and homogeneous enhancement was observed after dynamic gadolinium injection with a type 2 time–signal intensity curve without any significant wash-out, compared to the normal contralateral testis. MRI also showed slightly restricted diffusion on high b-value diffusion-weighted sequences (b = 1000 s/mm2) and hypo-intensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps (ADC = 600 × 10−3 mm2/s) . The overall ADC of the parenchyma surrounding the tumor was low compared to the contralateral testis (ADC = 800 × 10−3 mm2/s vs 1100 × 10−3 mm2/s). No intraoperative frozen section was performed as lesion size was inferior to 7 mm after surgical removal. . No significant postoperative complication was reported. The pathology report confirmed a 6 mm LCT, with clear surgical margins. Interestingly, an area of increased spermatogenesis around the lesion was also noted. After the procedure, plasmatic testosterone level was measured at 0.07 nmol/mL (vs 0.8 preoperatively). Clinical features remained stable during follow-up, without further increase in hair growth or new sign of precocious puberty.