A 30-year-old female patient presented to our Department of Hematology Medicine complaining of fatigue, abdominal distension for 1 mo, and yellow staining of skin and scattered erythema for 10 d.
She had been treated with antibiotics and Chinese patent drug for 3 d for a cold before admission to our hospital. However, the symptoms were not significantly improved. Abdominal distension became more serious with nausea and vomiting, then yellow staining and dense flaky erythema appeared across the whole body skin, mucous membranes and sclera. She was presented to our hospital.
There was no history of past illness.
She and her family had no specific disease history. Both parents and one older brother were in good health.
Physical examination revealed that the whole skin, mucous membranes and sclera were yellow stained, and dense flaky erythema with scattered bleeding spots of different sizes were found on the forehead, behind the ears, neck and chest , and the liver and spleen were obviously enlarged.
The blood cell counts were as follows: hemoglobin (HGB) 97 g/L, platelets (PLTs) 15 × 109/L and leukocytes 22.92 × 109/L. Biochemical tests showed marked increased level of total bilirubin to 250.6 μmol/L, direct bilirubin to 221.6 μmol/L, alanine transaminase to 270 U/L, aspartate transaminase to 341 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase to 8527 U/L, and marked decreased level of the total protein to 53.1 g/L. The laboratory findings also found coagulopathy [high level of D-dimer (1.51 μg/mL) and fibrinogen degradation product (5.70 μg/mL)]. Bone marrow aspiration showed that cells with unknown classification and abnormality were easy to see, accounting for 94% . Bone marrow biopsy test showed that hematopoietic tissue proliferation was heterogeneous, granulocyte and erythrocytic proliferation were decreased, megakaryocytic hyperplasia (0–4/high-power field) was scattered . Immunohistochemistry of bone marrow biopsy showed that these atypical cells were positive for cCD3, CD20, CD34, CD68, CD56, CD2, CD7, and negative for sCD3 . Serological tests for EBV revealed that EBV DNA was 7.22 ´ 106 copies. Multicolor flow cytometry revealed that abnormal cell populations of 90% were seen in areas where CD45 was strongly positive, expressing HLA-DR, CD2, CD7, CD38 and cCD3, and partially expressing CD56. Abnormal NK cells could be seen in the samples, considering the possible source of NK/T cells. TCR gene rearrangement test was negative.
Positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) of the whole body showed that metabolism was increased in multiple parts . PET/CT revealed that malignant tumor cells of the lymphoid hematopoietic system accumulated in multiple organs.