A 63-year-old woman with a medical history of arterial hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus suffered multiple spontaneous haemorrhagic strokes. The patient had never received anticoagulation therapy. During her stroke work-up, the patient was found to have various cerebral aneurysms and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was detected on ambulatory cardiac monitoring. The patient was subjected to surgical aneurysmal clipping. Following clipping, the patient was deemed at high risk of rebleeding and the neurosurgical team recommended absolute avoidance of anticoagulation. Given this patient’s risk for thrombo-embolic events (CHA2DS2-VASC 6/9) and her poor candidacy for anticoagulation (HAS-BLED 3/9), the patient was referred to an electrophysiologist for insertion of an LAA occlusion device 3 months after her initial stroke episodes.
At the time of the electrophysiologist’s evaluation, the patient was found to have only minimal aphasia without overt sensory or motor deficits. The patient’s medication regimen consisted of lisinopril 10 mg daily, metformin 500 mg daily, and rosuvastatin 20 mg daily. The patient had never been treated with antiaggregant therapy. The pre-procedure Transeosphageal Echocardiography (TEE) failed to visualize the LAA. Both 2D and 3D TEE modalities were performed. TEE evidenced preserved ejection fraction, normal left atrial dimensions, mild mitral regurgitation, and no other congenital anomalies. The obtained TEE images were not available for the report. Insertion of LAA occlusion device could not be performed. Follow-up imaging with a contrast cardiac CT (CCT) showed an incidental rudimentary/diminutive LAA, within the spectrum of congenital absence of LAA. and are representative images from the CCT performed in this patient. is a 3D multiple volume-rendered multiplanar 3D reconstructions of the heart in multiple anatomic views.
No changes were made to the patient’s medication regimen following confirmation of LAA absence. The patient had not experienced thrombo-embolic events, nor haemorrhagic stroke recurrence at her 6 months follow-up visit with the electrophysiologist. Following this appointment, the patient received no additional follow-up care with an electrophysiologist. The patient established regular preventive care with a general cardiologist and is doing well.