An 81-year-old woman presented with chest pain, which was diagnosed as angina caused by total occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) on cardiac CT findings. The lesion difficulty was assessed using the j-CTO score (1 point) and CT rector score (1 point). Physical examination revealed normal findings, and transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricular wall motion. Coronary angiography was attempted via the left radial artery. However, it was difficult to engage the catheter in the RCA. Unsuccessful attempts using three different types of catheters (JR4.0, AL1.0, and AL2.0) were performed before finally achieving successful RCA angiography using a JR5.0 catheter with a hand-made curve. The procedure lasted 65 min, using 150 mL contrast medium and involved a 1390 mGy exposure dose (air kerma). The angiography showed total occlusion of the RCA #1 and poor collateral channels via septal and epicardial atrial circumflex branches . The inferior wall seemed to be viable from echocardiography and electrocardiogram; therefore, revascularization for the RCA was planned.
Regarding the difficulty of catheter engagement for RCA in initial coronary angiography, VR-guided GC simulation was performed before PCI of the RCA. Analysing the cardiac CT using a DICOM proved challenging in demonstrating the difficulty of catheter engagement due to the nearly normal height of the RCA (15 mm) and its origin from the right coronary cusp. However, the simulation identified the acute angle between the axis of the ostial RCA and the ascending aorta as the primary reason for the difficulty in catheter engagement. This distinction played a critical role in determining the appropriate tip direction of the GC, including JR and AL types, concerning the nearest position for ostial RCA and its axis. Initially, attempts were made with JR3.5, JR4.0, and IM catheters, but none of them successfully engaged the ostial RCA . However, the AL type catheter exhibited a similar trend, and it was the modified SAL0.75 (Hyperion) approach from the right upper limb that proved to be the most suitable (, , ). The tip of the GC was bent by heating it with a flame for a second and then shaping the tip . During the PCI procedure, the time from inserting the GC via the sheath to GC engagement in the RCA using the modified SAL0.75 was 2 min, and 6 mL of contrast was used. The procedure was successfully performed using the antegrade approach, lasting 152 min and requiring 175 mL of contrast and 1550 mGy of exposure . Following the procedure, the patient's angina symptoms improved.