A 74-year-old male patient who was a passenger in Sydney to Istanbul commercial flight presented to our hospital with a history of sudden onset of painful swelling in the right eye which occurred 8 hours ago, while the aircraft was descending for landing. The patient had subconjunctival haemorrhage, upper eyelid swelling and proptosis in the right eye. We performed a complete ophthalmic examination. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Direct and indirect pupillary light reflexes were normal. We didn’t observe relative afferent pupillary defect. There wasn’t any colour vision deficiency. The Hertel exophthalmometry measurements were 19 mm and 17 mm in the right and left eye respectively. There was lateral gaze restriction in the right eye which was causing diplopia . Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 21 mmHg in right eye and 16 mmHg in left eye which was measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry. Dilated fundus examination was normal.
There weren’t any systemic disease, medication, bleeding disorder, surgery or general anaesthesia, sinus infection or mucocele and previous trauma in the medical history of the patient. Laboratory examinations were within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a subperisotal haematoma at the retrobulbar-extraconal region of the right orbit . We did an orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to support our diagnosis and the results confirmed haematoma in the right orbit .
We adopted a conservative approach with close observation. Systemic corticosteroid and topical dorzolamide/timolol combination were administered to the right eye of the patient. We followed up visual acuity, pupillary reflexes, IOP, Hertel exophthalmometry and fundus examinations every 4 hours for the first two days and then daily for two weeks. After 24 hours, IOP decreased to 18 mmHg; visual acuity, pupillary reflexes and fundus examination were normal. The patient was stable for the following 10 days. At the 19th day, patient had minimal subconjonctival haemorrhage and slight proptosis whereas upper eyelid swelling, lateral gaze restriction and diplopia resolved. We stopped topical dorzolamide/timolol combination and reduced systemic corticosteroid dosage. Intraorbital haematoma resolved without sequelae on the control CT at the first month follow-up so that we stopped all medication. At the third month follow-up, patient didn’t have any sequelae and complete ophthalmic examination was normal.