A 5-year-old girl, a previously healthy child, presented with a one-week history of high-grade intermittent fever, headache, and right ear pain. She complained of paroxysmal right ear pain but without any history of ear discharge, tinnitus, dizziness, or seizures. She had a headache with nausea but no vomiting or loss of consciousness. This was associated with some abdominal distension and pain. Her bowel and urine output was normal, however, she had dysuria. The patient’s mother denied any history of insect or tick bite even though the child usually plays in the fields during the day. Both parents are farmers.
On the 7th day after the onset of illness, she complained of reduced hearing in her right ear without tinnitus, which gradually progressed to unilateral hearing loss.
Physical examination was notable for fever of 39 °C and cervical lymphadenopathy. There was no evidence of any rash or eschar. Examination of the throat revealed mildly enlarged tonsils without signs of inflammation. Initial otoscopic examination of the ears was unremarkable. Unilateral right ear sensorineural hearing loss was noted using Weber’s tuning fork test since audiometric tests weren’t available at our district hospital. She was mildly tachypneic but did not require oxygen. Bilateral pleural effusion was noted. Abdominal examination was notable for mild hepatosplenomegaly.
Laboratory tests revealed thrombocytopenia (platelets 76,000 cells/mm3), mild anemia (hemoglobin 10.6 g/dL) and slightly raised neutrophils (70%). Subsequently, over the next few days, her platelet counts gradually decreased to a nadir of 47,000 cells/mm3. The C-reactive protein was 105 mg/dL with an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 20 mm/hr. Urine revealed mild proteinuria. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion with bilateral infiltrates . An abdominal ultrasonogram confirmed mild hepatosplenomegaly. Rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) for leishmaniasis were negative but positive for dengue IgG. SD BIOLINE Tsutsugamushi RDT for scrub typhus was noted to be positive. SD BIOLINE Tsutsugamushi test is a rapid, qualitative, and differential test for the detection of Orientia Tsutsugamushi antibodies (IgG, IgM, IgA) in our setting .
Empiric treatment was started with intravenous ceftriaxone and oral doxycycline. On the 6th day of admission, an otoscopic examination was repeated because of persistent mild ear pain and worsening hearing impairment. This revealed a chigger mite in the external auditory canal which was promptly removed . However, there was no evidence of otitis media or inner ear abnormalities. Her pain settled soon after the removal of the mite and her fever resolved 2 days after the initiation of antibiotics.
At one-week follow-up, she did not have any residual hearing loss and the otalgia had resolved completely.