A 50-year-old female with a past medical history remarkable for generalized anxiety disorder initially presented to the emergency department with a one-day history of retrosternal chest pain. Her other medications included ASA, Ramipril, and Citalopram. In the emergency department her electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated ST segment changes suggestive of a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) which prompted urgent coronary artery catheterization. Her coronary angiogram demonstrated Type 3 spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) with diffuse coronary ectasia and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. She was treated conservatively with Acetylsalicylic acid 81 mg daily, Ramipril 2.5 mg daily, and Atorvastatin 80 mg daily and discharged two days later.
She presented to the emergency department 20 days later with a 4-day history of fevers (> 38.5 °C) and bilateral flank pain that were non-responsive to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Laboratory investigations in the emergency department were remarkable for leukocytosis (16.6 K/µL), normal eosinophils (300 cells/µL), ALP 365 U/L, ALT 265 U/L, GGT 185 U/L and total bilirubin of 10 mg/dL. Her lipase was normal. Urinalysis in the emergency department demonstrated pyuria and trace ketones without nitrites. She had an unremarkable chest x-ray and computed tomography of the abdomen/pelvis. She was treated with a single dose of Ceftriaxone for presumptive pyelonephritis due to vague complaints of bilateral flank pain and discharged with follow up to her family physician.
Despite this, she continued to have persistent fevers, myalgias, malaise, lower limb weakness, and abdominal pain prompting a return to the emergency department two days later where she was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of fever of unknown origin (FUO).
On admission her eosinophils were 500 cell/µL, leukocytes 20.2 K/ µL, ALP 666 U/L, ALT 236 U/L, GGT 236 U/L. Her lipase and urinalysis were normal. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated borderline gallbladder thickening but no evidence of infection. Blood cultures from two days prior were normal. She had a negative nasopharyngeal swab for Sars-Cov-2 virus. Her vital signs on admission were as follows: Temperature 38.5 °C, heart rate of 72, blood pressure of 93/51, and oxygen saturation of 100 percent on room air. Her physical examination demonstrated a low jugular venous pressure but otherwise normal cardiorespiratory examination. Abdominal examination was normal with a soft, non-tender abdomen and no hepatosplenomegaly. Skin and joint examination were also unremarkable, as were her conjunctivae, and oral mucosa. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy.
On admission she was given a single dose of metronidazole and Ceftriaxone, with her antibiotic regimen subsequently broadened to Piperacillin-Tazobactam. Her serology for Hepatitis A, B and C were negative. Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus serologies were negative. Antinuclear Antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) as well mitochondrial antibody, smooth muscle antibody were also negative. Gastroenterology was consulted for her elevated liver enzyme tests and abdominal pain. Eosinophils were elevated at 1900 cells/µL, raising the question of a drug reaction causing her hepatitis as opposed to sepsis. Infectious Disease (ID) physician felt that this was drug induced liver injury with eosinophilia and “probable” DRESS syndrome secondary to Atorvastatin as the culprit, given her lack of response to antibiotics and increasing eosinophils.
Ceftriaxone, metronidazole and Atorvastatin were held. Her liver enzymes started to trend downwards, and her symptoms improved. She was discharged in stable condition 2 days later. Eosinophils peaked at 3100 cells/µL prior to discharge. Three weeks into her follow up, eosinophils and liver function test abnormalities had completely normalized. She was asymptomatic one month post discharge and remained off Atorvastatin.