A 64-year-old woman without any significant medical history was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of an LA tumor.
She visited her primary clinic complaining of fatigue on light effort and stated her symptoms had been recognized after receiving her fifth vaccination for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) four weeks earlier. Her vital signs at that time were within normal limits except her pulse rate was at a regular rhythm of 121 per minute. Echocardiography performed by the physician in the primary clinic revealed an oval tumor measuring approximately 25 × 35 mm in the LA. There was a 12-mm round hypoechoic area within the tumor. The patient had no symptoms at that time. Therefore, she drove her own car to our hospital following the instructions of the physician. Upon arrival at our hospital, she stated no symptoms at rest. Her vital signs on arrival were a blood pressure of 140/82 mmHg, a regular pulse rate of 142 per minute, and 98% oxygen saturation in room air.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed at our hospital revealed a mobile myxomatous LA tumor approximately 40 × 50 mm in size originating from the LA septum. There was a 20 × 30-mm oval cystic lesion within the tumor. The tumor and its internal cystic lesion were obviously expanded compared to those in the image captured at the primary clinic two hours earlier . The mitral valve obstruction due to the expanding tumor was remarkable. Therefore, we conducted emergency surgery for tumor resection. During preparations for the surgery, the patient started complaining of dyspnea and her oxygen saturation gradually decreased to 88% under 100% of oxygen.
In the operating room, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) disclosed that the tumor had been morphologically changing rapidly over time. Longitudinal expansion and lobing changes were remarkable . Under cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest, a transseptal supra-atrial incision was made. The tumor pedicle was attached to the inter-atrial septum and the free LA wall. Resection of the tumor with the surrounding atrial wall and reconstruction of the defects using a bovine patch were performed. The myxomatous mass with multiple protruding hematomas measured 50 × 38 mm. Multiple myxomatous tissue defects were formed due to fresh intratumor bleeding . Microscopic findings showed spindle-shaped cells and hyperchromatic nuclei segregated by abundant myxomatous stroma. Hemosiderin pigmentation and the presence of erythrocytes in the myxoid matrix indicated chronic and fresh bleeding. The myxomatous capsule right above the site of multiple hemorrhages was extremely thin . The postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12 without any complications.