In November 2021, a 16-year-old boy was admitted to the urology department of Saint Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University. The patient demonstrated a clinical picture of painful urinary syndrome for the past 2 years, with post-micturition urinary dribbling of up to 10 ml for 3−4 min after each urination, without urinary tract infection (UTI) manifestations. Anamnesis: 2 years ago, hard seating on the chair, there was a short-term moderate urethrorrhagia and a severe urethral pain, followed by the appearance of post-micturition urinary dribbling, not accompanied by urinary urgency and frequency, nocturia, and persistent or intermittent pelvic pain in the absence of proven infection . There were no catheterization, surgical, or instrumental interventions on the urethra or bladder prior to the complaints. A radiological examination was carried out in the patient's region of residence. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed two paraurethral cavities in the bulbous urethra: 62.4 mm × 14.4 mm on the left and 48.9 mm × 13.0 mm on the right. In retrograde urethrography, the cavities were contrasted from the urethral lumen, with the contrast agent thrown into the duct of the bulbourethral gland . There was no specific treatment for urinary dribbling, and therefore, admission to another hospital was recommended. When the patient was examined in our department, uroflowmetry was performed, which revealed that the urine flow rate was up to 38 ml per second, the median flow rate was 10.3 ml per second, and the bell-shaped flow rate showed no rapid amplitude changes, which was in the 25%–75% percentile range. There was no residual urine. Urethroscopy revealed an opening at 6 o'clock on the conditional clock leading into the left CS, with the right chamber opening into it through the common medial wall, and an examination of the chambers proximally revealed dilated ducts of the right and left bulbourethral glands . The CS on the left was larger than that on the right, which was preliminarily confirmed by an MRI. The double-chambered cyst was a urine reservoir, defining the clinical symptomatology and post-micturition urinary dribbling. Endoscopic marsupialization of the double-chamber CS and removal of the common medial wall, up to the hanging urethra, was performed. A 14 Fr rigid ureterocystoscope, with a 4 Fr light guide, 30 W YAG-Ni laser, and fibrotome mode, was used. As a result, a wide connection to the lumen of the urethra was achieved . A 14 Fr Foley catheter was placed after the operation. The duration of the postoperative stay, antibiotic prophylaxis, and catheterization was 7 days. An examination of the dissected CS walls showed that they contained edematous fibrous tissue, and the lining was composed of prismatic epithelium . The postoperative period was without complications. At follow-up examination after 7 months, positive dynamics were observed, and the patient's complaints of urinary incontinence and painful urination had completely ceased. The urine culture was sterile. No pathology was observed in the retrograde and voiding urethrography in the lateral view. After emptying, the urethra contained no remaining contrast. Upon control urethroscopy using a 14 Fr rigid urethrocystoscope, the lower parts of the chambers were visible in the CS resection area, with no formation of scar narrowing. The left bulbourethral duct retained a partial gaping . On uroflowmetry, the maximum urine flow was 35 ml/s, the median flow rate was 23.1 ml/s, and the voided percentage was 99. The volume voiding rate curve was bell-shaped, in the 25%–75% percentile . There was no significant residual urine. What makes this clinical case unique is precisely the extremely rare bilateral pathology of the excretory ducts of the Cowper's glands, with the formation of two intraurethral cavities of considerable size, which determine the clinical manifestations in the form of secondary post-micturition urine leakage.