An 80-year-old woman with a history of UC presented with painful erythema of the labia majora that began approximately 3 months earlier . The lesion did not improve after using topical steroids and dimethyl isopropylazulene.
The patient had undergone transurethral resection of a HG (G2 > G3) UC (pTa) 7 years prior to her current presentation. Postoperatively, intravesical BCG was administered resulting in Reiter's syndrome symptoms. Then, urine cytology remained positive; however, no recurrence of UC was identified on cystoscopy, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging. Transurethral biopsy and bilateral retrograde pyelogram were repeated three times over 2 years postoperatively, with no malignant tumors detected. The patient refused additional examinations thereafter.
The patient complained of painful erythema of the labia majora 7 years later. A skin biopsy performed by a dermatologist revealed non-invasive secondary EMPD. The diagnosis was confirmed via immunostaining (CK20-positive and GCDFP-15) .
Transurethral bladder biopsy and retrograde pyelography were conducted to determine the primary carcinoma. Bladder CIS was identified, and the cytologic sample from the left ureter was positive. No distant or lymph node metastasis was detected by precision imaging. No other suggestive lesions were observed on gynecological or gastroenterological examinations. The lesion was diagnosed as EMPD secondary to UC. Although the standard treatment for vulvar EMPD is vulvectomy, the patient did not consent to the operation. Intravesical BCG was contraindicated as she had previously developed Reiter's syndrome following BCG administration. Therefore, systemic chemotherapy was chosen, considering the UC (bladder and left upper urinary tract).
The patient was administered nine courses of platinum-based chemotherapy (two courses of gemcitabine and cisplatin and seven courses of gemcitabine and carboplatin) for 18 months. The cisplatin combination regimen was changed to a carboplatin-based regimen owing to declining renal function. During chemotherapy, the vulvar pain and erythema remained stable.
Wedge resection of the erythema and a transurethral bladder biopsy, including retrograde pyelography, were conducted after chemotherapy to determine the patient's pathological outcome. No remarkable tumor or suggestive lesions were identified throughout the urinary tract. Immunostaining of the vulvar specimen was positive for CK20, CK-7, and GATA-binding protein 3, suggesting EMPD secondary to UC . The specimen was unremarkable concerning possible histopathological effects of platinum-based chemotherapy, such as protein denaturation or necrosis. As the lesion was not fully responsive to cisplatin-based systemic chemotherapy, pembrolizumab was planned for the treatment of residual EMPD. On the last follow-up examination 2 years after diagnosis, the patient showed no evidence of disease.