We report a 52-year-old old female who presented to our hospital with tetraplegia for the past 1 h before admission after falling from her house’s roof, approximately 4m height. Primary survey was notable for neck pain, abdominal labored breathing, signs of spinal shock with blood pressure of 77/46 mmHg, tetraplegia, scalp laceration at right parietal, deformed left femur, flaccid anal sphincter, and absent bulbocavernosus reflex. The patient was fully conscious during the examination. Blood pressure improved after initial fluid resuscitation only to redeteriorated around 2 h afterward and therefore vasopressor was started.
Cervical CT scan reveals a burst fracture and translational injury of C5 and split fracture of C6 . The patient was then taken for emergent cervical MRI, on which a massive spinal cord edema was seen extending to the level of C2 and T1 from the epicenter of injury. Unilateral left facet dislocation between C4 and C5 was identified . The spinal cord was seen kinked at the level of C7-T1 . Brain CT scan revealed no abnormality. Plain X-ray showed fractured left femoral shaft. After radiologic workup, the patient experienced apnea and was, therefore, intubated and transferred to ICU.
The patient was assessed with complete SCI (ASIA type A), translational injury of C5 (AOSpine C) and split fracture of C6 (AOSpine A2). Rather than looking to refer the patient, immediate surgery on the following day (22 h after admission) was preferred after respiratory and hemodynamic stability in the ICU was achieved. Combined anterior and posterior approach was preferred for this patient. Anterior cervical corpectomy and fusion with hollow cage at C5 and subsequent anterior plating were performed first. After anterior approach was completed, the patient was positioned prone for total laminectomy of C4 and C5 and lateral mass screw of C3, C4, and C6 . Rupture of posterior supraspinous and interspinous ligaments was found during surgery.
Postoperative cervical evaluation showed satisfactory position of lateral mass screw . Postoperative Cobb angle was corrected to 17° lordotic angle, whereas the preoperative was 19° kyphotic angle .