The patient was a 44-year-old man from Bangladesh who immigrated to France twenty years ago and worked in several dusty embroidery workshops. Eight months prior to his admission in our hospital, he developed right chronic headaches resisting usual painkillers with right hypoacusia and tinnitus. The right ear examination was consistent with chronic otitis media. A sinus CT scan showed pansinusitis predominating on the right side with right mastoiditis and otitis media. A cerebral MRI showed pachymeningitis of the cerebellopontine angle. Right myringotomy yielded culture-negative drainage. The patient underwent several unsuccessful antibiotic treatments.
Eight months after the onset of the disease, the patient was referred to our ward, complaining, in addition to the other symptoms, of signs of severe intracranial hypertension (persistant right headaches and vomiting), significant weight loss, and a change in his voice. Otorhinological examination showed an unchanged right ear, a paralysis of the left vocal cord responsible for the dysphonia, an abolition of the gag reflex, and a palatal paralysis. The blood pressure was 140/65 mmHg, the heart rate of 75 bpm and the general examination was normal aside from a three out of four diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation, without any other cardiac signs and a normal electrocardiogram.
An abdominal CT-scan showed a focal thickening of the aortic arch and an identical thickening of the superior mesenteric vein, interpreted as focal aortic and mesenteric vasculitis. A mesenteric panniculitis was also apparent. Laboratory studies included the following values: C-reactive protein 35 mg/l, serum urea nitrogen 4.6 mM/l, creatinine 86 mcM/l, total leukocyte count 10.3 × 10^9/l, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, negative antiphospholipid antibodies, positive antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) with positive antimyeloperoxidase antibodies and negative antiproteinase 3 antibodies. The cerebrospinal fluid contained 60 cells per mm3 with 28% lymphocytes and 1.11 g/l of protein; the bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial cultures were negative. The cerebral MRI performed on admission was unchanged. Inferior nasal concha biopsies showed nonspecific inflammation; temporal artery biopsies were normal. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography revealed septal hypertrophy leading to a restriction of aortic valvular closure and thus to massive aortic regurgitation .
The presumptive diagnosis was ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis, most probably Wegener's granulomatosis, with aortic valvular involvement. Treatment with prednisone (1 mg/kg) and intravenous cyclophosphamide (700 mg/m2 every two weeks during one month then every four weeks) was started. With this immunosuppressive therapy the palatal paralysis subsided, the headaches lessened and the patient, slowly regaining weight and energy, was able to return home.
Four months after the beginning of treatment there was an absence of echocardiographic improvement of the septal hypertrophy and aortic regurgitation and the patient had developed congestive heart failure, so the decision was made to perform an aortic Bicarbon™valve replacement. Upon inspection, the aorta wall and the aortic valve leaflets appeared diffusely thickened. There was a focal thickening of the interventricular septum covered with fibrous tissue. Fibrous tissue was also found on the aortic ring and on the large mitral leaflet. No vegetations were seen. At the end of surgery the patient was in persistent complete heart block requiring a pacemaker implantation.
The microscopic examination of the septum showed chronic remodelling with fibrous and hyaline tissue, and an intense polymorphic inflammatory infiltrate. Fibrosis as well as a local fragmentation of the elastic fibers was found in the intima and media of the aortic wall. No inflammatory infiltrate nor granuloma were seen in the aortic specimens.
Two years after surgery, the patient is doing well on azathioprine (see Table ).