A previously well 16-year-old female from Central Queensland, Australia presented to a regional hospital with a three-day history of high fevers (39.8 °C) accompanied by myalgia, anorexia and diarrhoea with a single bloody motion on the day of admission. She had not had any sick contacts, recent travel, sexual contact or prior illicit drug use. Her previous history was significant for a hernia repair in 2008, appendectomy in 2011, adenotonsillectomy in 2012, depression, lactose intolerance and autoimmune hypothyroidism. Her immunisations were up-to-date. There were no recent changes to her regular medications with doses of sertraline 25 mg daily and thyroxine 100 micrograms (mcg) during weekdays and 75mcg on weekends. There was a family history of ulcerative colitis and bronchiectasis.
On examination, at initial presentation, she was febrile and appeared unwell. An erythematous maculopapular rash extended over her abdomen and arms; however, no focal signs of infection were apparent.
Her laboratory investigations on admission are presented in Table .
The patient was commenced empirically on cefotaxime 1 g intravenous (IV) 6 hourly and doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly to cover a potential pulmonary infective source. As noted, she had abnormal liver function tests with a cholestatic predominance. An abdominal ultrasound, performed on Day 4 following symptom onset, demonstrated that her liver measured 15.1 cm in length and had a mildly hyperechoic echotexture. The Gallbladder was reportedly normal with no calculi present. Prominent abdominal lymphadenopathy up to 6 mm was noted.
An infective cause for the fevers was not found despite extensive testing. This included serial blood cultures, serology for Hepatitis A/B/C/E, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Q Fever, Mycoplasma Pneumonia, Leptospirosis, Brucellosis, Anti Streptolysin, Rickettsia, Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV-1), Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB), Legionella pneumophila and Dengue.
Autoimmune studies were negative including Antinuclear Antibodies, antibodies to Extractable Nuclear Antigens, anti-tissue transglutaminase (anti-tTG), anti–liver-kidney microsomal antibody-1 (anti-LKM1) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA).
Subsequently, on day 5 following symptom onset, she developed a diffuse swelling of her hands and feet with an associated progression of her rash that resulted in desquamation of her digits. Her tongue took on a strawberry red appearance, prominent cervical lymphadenopathy developed, her sclera became injected and she became visibly jaundiced.
By day 6 of symptom onset, her serum bilirubin reached its peak of 163umol/L (< 20). The patient then developed an oxygen requirement. Chest x-ray demonstrated mild prominence of pulmonary interstitium suggesting a potential atypical infection. Despite antibiotics she continued to have recurrent febrile episodes with chest imaging, on Day 7 post symptom onset, demonstrating the development of left lower lobe consolidation.
She was given a provisional diagnosis of Kawasaki disease with the differential including an undetected infective aetiology. Assessment for cardiac involvement demonstrated no ECG changes, Troponin I was initially normal on presentation and an echocardiogram was normal for age.
Treatment was commenced on day 8 post symptom onset, with Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG) 2 g/kg total in divided doses, low dose Aspirin 150 mg per day and transfer to a tertiary facility for ongoing specialist management. The patient developed acute pulmonary oedema following her last dose of IVIg which responded to intravenous diuretics. Repeat chest x-ray demonstrated bi-basal opacification that was concerning for an inflammatory process. A CT Pulmonary Angiogram demonstrated bi-basal opacification with a differential diagnosis of infection, pulmonary oedema or atelectasis. There was no evidence of a Pulmonary Embolus.
Repeat ultrasound of her liver demonstrated non-specific hepatic artery tapering to 2.5 mm at the porta hepatis, the Gallbladder had a normal appearance and with no other hepatic or biliary changes. A Renal Artery Duplex ultrasound did not demonstrate renal involvement. Stool polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative for viral/bacterial/parasitic aetiology though calprotectin was significantly elevated 2200 μg/g (< 50).
Her Troponin I peaked at 0.051μg/L (< 0.04) on Day 8 following symptom onset. A CT coronary angiogram (CTCA) was performed which demonstrated no evidence of stenosis, ectasia or aneurysm. Repeat echocardiography demonstrated a mild pericardial effusion but was otherwise normal.
After 72 h, antibiotics were ceased given marked improvement in chest x-ray finding with diuresis and associated clinical improvement. The patient had a single low-grade fever 2 days after receiving IVIG though continued to improve in all other clinical parameters.
She was subsequently discharged on low-dose aspirin with plans for follow up by multiple specialists.
One week following discharge she was experiencing ongoing low-grade fevers (37.6 °C) and left sided pleuritic chest pain. Over the subsequent days, she became progressively unwell with continued low-grade fevers, malaise, lymphadenopathy and a recurrence of conjunctival injection. She received a further 1 g/kg of IVIg over 2 days. Blood tests at this time demonstrated ESR 80 mm/Hr (1–20), CRP 29 mg/L (0–6), total bilirubin 25umol/L (2–20), normal liver function, normal white cell count though elevated eosinophils 1.53 × 109 (0.04–0.40).
One month later she had made a full clinical and biochemical recovery and aspirin was ceased. Repeat hepatic ultrasound demonstrated resolution of hepatic artery narrowing, a normal appearance of the gall bladder with no intra or extrahepatic bile duct dilation.