We focused on a 54-year-old male patient known to have stage 5 KDOQI chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis, unilateral renal agenesis, right renal artery stenosis, and secondary hypertension, present with a 17-year-old functional but aneurysmatic dilated, calcified left radio-cephalic fistula, with an approximately 1 x 1 cm skin necrosis at the level of the vein. As the first surgical approach, ligation of the fistula using a circular section of a Dacron prosthesis as a cerclage and a new brachiocephalic fistula in the left arm were performed .
This new fistula was immediately used for dialysis. This approach was chosen for technical reasons as the cephalic vein was heavily calcified, rendering a cut through it and then suture impossible. Therefore, closing the fistula was merely prophylactic to avoid cardiac insufficiency onset and the disruption of the fistula until the definitive solution of completely resecting the calcified vein, followed by the performing of a new fistula.
Before the planned surgical intervention, the patient was presented to the Emergency Room with active bleeding in the left forearm and edema of the left half of the body. A Computed Tomography angiography (CTA) described a left central brachiocephalic vein thrombosis. The surgical exploration showed the recanalization of the ligated radiocephalic fistula and rupture at the level of the skin ulceration. As an emergency intervention, the patient underwent a second ligation and suture of the ruptured fistula for life salvage. Despite the life-saving operation, the fundamental problem was not solved; further interventions were necessary .
Complete resection of the ruptured fistula, including a small part of the radial artery at the level of the anastomosis, was performed. A short radial interposition using the great saphenous vein harvested from the left lower limb ended the intervention. In addition, the ligation of the newly created left brachiocephalic fistula became mandatory because of venous hypertension caused by the left central brachiocephalic vein thrombosis. Two reinterventions were needed due to hemorrhagic complications.
The histopathological examination of the excised vein confirmed heavy calcification within the atherosclerotic modifications.
Completing the patient’s journey, a forearm skin reconstruction with a split-thickness skin graft (STSG) was performed. The patient’s hemodialysis was managed using a temporary tunneled catheter in the left femoral vein during all this time.
One month after discharge, a new radiocephalic fistula was performed in the right forearm, which would also be closed later because of symptomatic ischemic steal syndrome. Atherosclerosis-affecting antebrachial arteries led the surgeons not to ligate the radial artery distal to the anastomosis.
After multiple surgical procedures involving both upper extremities to reestablish functional vascular access for dialysis, it was decided to try, as the last possibility, an arteriovenous fistula in the lower limb. After ultrasound mapping of the right lower limb vessels, the vascular surgeons performed a fistula between the great saphenous vein and the anterior tibial artery with the aid of a sciatic lumbar plexus block. The ligation of all of the collateral branches of the vein was performed. Due to massive atherosclerosis, the shunt between the saphenous vein and the posterior tibial artery (preferred in this situation) was not possible. The procedure had no hemorrhagic complications .
After 4 weeks, the right lower limb became critically ischemic. In the absence of other hemodynamical explanations, peripheral angiography was decided. Several serial critical stenoses of the posterior tibial artery were identified and managed by balloon dilatations and stent implantation at the distal level of the posterior tibial artery. The angiographical result, as well as the clinical evolution, was good.