A 41-year-old man was admitted to the hospital after a multi-fracture traumatic episode with severe hyperparathyroid hypercalcemia. Ionized calcium (Ca2+) was 3.54 mmol/L (1.18 - 1.32 mmol/L) and plasma PTH was 111.6 pmol/L (1.6 - 6.9 pmol/L). The patient had a history of mandibular pain and loose teeth. X-rays of the mandible showed abnormal bone tissue as a result of a jaw tumor. A computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral kidney stones and dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) revealed osteoporosis with a T-score of -2.5 at the lumbar spine and -4.0 at the total hip. The patient also presented with moderate renal insufficiency (eGFR/creatinine ca 45 mL/minute).
Preoperatively, localization studies were performed with ultrasound of the neck, and sestamibi scintigraphy. On ultrasound, there was a tumor posterior to the left thyroid gland measuring 51 × 20 × 22 mm, without enlarged lymph nodes. The patient was operated on with a unilateral neck exploration in August 2009 with a resection of one very enlarged parathyroid gland (11.3 g). Postoperatively, the patient developed symptoms of hungry bones with low plasma calcium levels, a PTH elevation, and clinical symptoms of hypocalcemia. Medical treatment reversed these symptoms. The pathology report revealed a carcinoma in the removed parathyroid gland.
Genetic analyses revealed a mutation in CDC73 (c.358C > T) causing an amino acid change (p.R120X) with a stop of the transcription at exon 4. A family screening was performed showing that other family members were carriers of the same mutation. However, so far, none of the family members have shown any signs of hyperparathyroidism (HPT) .
A second operation was performed in December 2009 with a total PTX and a unilateral hemithyroidectomy. No further malignancy was found in the pathology report. As expected, the patient developed hypoparathyroidism and was treated with calcium, vitamin D3, and alfacalcidol.
During the follow up in March 2014, there was evidence of recurrent hyperparathyroid hypercalcemia. Ionized calcium increased to 1.55 mmol/L and PTH increased to 16.0 pmol/L. The patient also reported hypercalcemic symptoms with thirst and polyuria. Furthermore, a sestamibi scintigraphy and an 11-C MET PET scan concordantly revealed a probable recurrence on the left side of the trachea ( - ). The patient subsequently underwent a third neck operation (April 2014) with the removal of a tumor on the left side of the trachea ( - ). The pathology report revealed that this was a lymph node metastasis from the previous parathyroid carcinoma. The calcium values normalized after the surgery and returned to medical follow-up. Six months after the third operation, there was still measurable PTH levels and ionized calcium levels around the upper normal range . At present, we have no plans for further surgical intervention.
The lower left parathyroid gland was removed in 2009. Macroscopically, the gland measured 45 × 25 × 8 mm and weighed 11.3 g ( - ). An irregular surface and calcification was noted. The histological examination revealed a uniform hypercellular tumor intersected by broad fibrous bands and surrounded by a thick fibrous capsule. The tumor cells, which were chief cells, appeared well differentiated without any significant pleomorphism. Several foci showed capsular and vascular invasions. In a small area it was doubtful whether the resection had been sufficient. Immunohistochemistry revealed that tumor cells expressed PTH and the proliferation marker Ki-67 showed a proliferation of less than 1%. The parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis was based on these findings.
In April 2014 a lymph node to the left of the trachea was removed and a metastasis from the parathyroid carcinoma was confirmed .