A 43-year-old man of Malagasy nationality with phototype V (Fitzpatrick) skin was admitted to the oncology department for dyspnea, which had been evolving for a few weeks with progressive worsening. He reported dysphonia, dysphagia, and associated episodes of dry cough. He had asthenia and weight loss without fever. He was followed by the thoracic surgery team for a right cervical lymphadenopathy, which had been evolving for 4 months and for which the histological result of the biopsy was pending.
He had a history of alcoholism and chronic weaned smoking. He had no history of skin pigmentation or skin surgery, and no personal or family history of cancer.
On admission, hemodynamic parameters were stable. General condition was impaired with a World Health Organization performance status score of 3. Examination revealed facial edema and venous collateral circulation in the neck. He had painless right cervical lymphadenopathy and a swelling in the right buttock that was painful to palpation and firm in consistency . Careful examination of the skin and mucous membranes did not reveal any abnormal or suspicious lesions. The rest of the examination was normal.
The blood count showed a white blood cell count of 23 g/L with a predominance of neutrophils. The C-reactive protein was 40 mg/L. Serum ionogram, calcium, and creatinine levels and liver function tests were normal. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B and C serologies were negative. The lactate dehydrogenase level was 1705 U/L. The carcinoembryonic antigen test was negative.
The thoracic-abdominal-pelvic computed tomography scan revealed cervical, mediastinal, and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy and compression of the superior vena cava . The mass in the right buttock was well-limited and heterogeneous, measuring 63 × 127 mm, and was located at the expense of the gluteus maximus muscle with low enhancement .
The result of the histological examination of the cervical lymph node biopsy showed invasion of the lymph node and capsular architecture by globular cells with abundant cytoplasm, cytonuclear atypia, and melanin pigments . A cytopuncture of the gluteus maximus was performed and cytology showed an infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages, tattooed with melanin pigments.
BRAF V600 mutation testing could not be performed due to the technical platform.
A stage IV malignant melanoma with lymph node metastases and extension to the right gluteus maximus was suggested. No primary skin site was identified. This is equivalent to stage TxN3M1c. The dyspnea was related to the superior vena cava syndrome, secondary to lymph node compression. A brain scan was performed and showed no secondary lesions.
Corticosteroid therapy with methylprednisolone and preventive anticoagulation with enoxaparin were taken for superior vena cava syndrome. After multidisciplinary discussion, mediastinal radiotherapy for decompression was started in the first instance. Treatment with dacarbazine was planned, depending on the availability of chemotherapy molecules.
The short-term course was marked by rapid regression of the superior vena cava syndrome and improvement in respiratory symptomatology. No suspicious skin patches appeared during follow-up.