An 84-year-old woman with a history of atrial fibrillation and hypertension who was taking warfarin and antihypertensive medications presented to our emergency department with a sudden disorder of consciousness. The patient had no traumatic events associated with her symptoms. On initial assessment, the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3, with bilateral pupil diameters of 4 mm and a dull light reflex. Computed tomography (CT) revealed right convexity and interhemispheric acute subdural hematoma (ASDH), mass lesions in the left frontal lobes, and brain herniation . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed vascular structures within the mass lesion . CT angiography (CTA) revealed no aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation , and the venous phase exhibited occlusion in the anterior portion of the superior sagittal sinus . The initial differential diagnosis based on imaging and clinical presentation included traumatic intracranial hemorrhage, hemorrhagic metastatic lesion, primary intra-axial tumor, and hemorrhagic meningioma.
The patient was intubated for airway protection. Tranexamic acid, menatetrenone, and 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate were intravenously administered. During emergency surgery, a right frontal minicraniotomy and dural incision were performed. The patient had her right convexity and interhemispheric ASDH removed endoscopically. A mass lesion located on the falx, which was easily bleeding, soft, and suctionable, was immediately detected. After the removal of the lesion, bleeding from the falx was stopped through cauterization and packing with gelatin sponge and BioGlue. No other active bleeding points, such as cortical arteries or bridging veins, were observed in the subdural space. Brain swelling was insignificant. Histopathological examination revealed that spindle-shaped tumor cells proliferated in fascicular or storiform patterns with collagenous stroma. The tumor tissue revealed no mitosis, nuclear atypia, and tumor necrosis . Furthermore, immunostaining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for epithelial membrane antigen and had a Ki-67 labeling index of <3%. These findings suggested a histopathological diagnosis of fibrous meningioma, which is a benign meningioma of the WHO grade 1. Postoperative CT confirmed the successful removal of the right frontal tumor and ASDH . Despite undergoing aggressive treatment, the patient’s general condition deteriorated. The patient ultimately died with a postoperative GCS score of 3.