The patient in this case was a 21-year-old woman diagnosed with a ventricular septal defect (VSD) soon after birth. The VSD closed spontaneously at 3 years and 6 months of age, and she was discharged from follow-up.
In May 2022, the patient visited a clinic with a chief complaint of worsening dyspnoea and presented with severe hypoxaemia. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed an ASD. The patient was transferred to our hospital to determine whether the ASD with RLS should be closed. Physical examination showed an SpO2 of 88% in the room air, blood pressure of 96/64 mmHg, and a regular pulse of 60 b.p.m. There were no significant heart murmurs, split heart sound, or specific findings in the jugular vein. Laboratory findings demonstrated haemoglobin and haematocrit levels were relatively high at 14.1 g/dL (normal range: 12–16g/dL) and 42.8% (normal range: 35–45%) for a young woman with menorrhagia, respectively, and no increase in brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level to 12.3 pg/mL (normal range: <18.4pg/mL). Chest radiography revealed mild cardiomegaly, with no abnormal findings in the lung field . The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without any conduction abnormalities . V1 and V2 showed prominent R- and minor negative T-waves but no P-wave augmentation indicative of increased RA load. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a mildly reduced left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 47%, with LV end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes of 78 and 41 mL, respectively (, ). Atrial septal defect with bidirectional shunting was visible, and TTE with microbubble test revealed a Grade 4 RLS at the atrial level, even without the Valsalva manoeuver (, , ). Basal and mid-cavity RV linear dimension at end-diastole in the RV-focused view were 35 and 30 mm, respectively. Similarly, transoesophageal echocardiography showed a bidirectional shunt on colour Doppler, with an 11 mm secundum ASD located anterosuperiorly (, , ). On cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI), the indexed RV end-diastolic volume was 47 mL/m2 (female normal range: 67 ± 10), indicating borderline RV hypoplasia. The ratio of LV to RV at end-diastolic volume was 1.4, indicating no RV enlargement despite the ASD. No late gadolinium enhancement was identified in the RV wall. An abnormal inflow from the right to the left atrium (LA) was observed (, ). Right heart catheterization performed at the time of admission revealed a decreased Qp/Qs ratio of 0.89 with reduced oxygen saturations in the LA sample compared with the pulmonary venous sample, indicating right-to-left shunting at the level of the atria. A step-down of oxygen saturation from the RA to the RV reflected the inflow from the inferior and superior vena cava, while a step-up from the LA to the LV reflected the inflow from the pulmonary veins. Pulmonary hypertension was ruled out, as pulmonary arterial pressure was within normal limits at 13/4 (8) mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance was low at 1.0 Wood unit ( and ). The pressure waveform showed a giant ‘A’-wave, even though the mean RA pressure was not high, at 4 mmHg. The RV pressure waveform showed like a dip-and-plateau pattern, suggesting a diminished filling capacity. The simultaneous LV–RV pressure waveforms showed little difference between the two ventricles, and the RV end-diastolic pressure (RVEDP) was relatively high, suggesting RV diastolic dysfunction but was considered mild . Right ventriculography revealed a relatively hypoplastic RV apex, an enlarged RA, and contrast flow from the RA to the LA (, ). Myocardial biopsy was performed at the RV septum to exclude specific cardiomyopathy with identifiable cause. The RV endomyocardial biopsy showed evidence of increased fibrosis at a young age, size irregularities, as well as myocyte atrophy and hypertrophy, particularly around the interstitial fibrosis . In quantitative assessment, 74 cardiomyocyte diameters were measured from 7 different RV biopsy specimens. The mean RV myocyte diameter was 16.2 µm, the maximum 28.4 µm, and the minimum 6.3 µm (reference value <15 µm). Because of the relatively large standard deviation of 5.2 µm, the RV cardiomyocytes were identified as irregular in size. These findings led us to conclude that her severe hypoxaemia was due to a bidirectional shunt via an ASD, complicated by IRVH.
Prior to transcatheter ASD closure, a balloon occlusion test was performed while intraoperative volume loading with 500 mL normal saline. The occlusion test proved that ASD closure was feasible, as the patient was kept for 10 min with the shunt completely occluded and oxygen saturation increased without any increase in central venous pressure or RA pressure . ASD closure was then safely performed using the GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder 37 mm closure device. TTE with microbubble test 1 month post-operatively showed residual Grade 4 RLS. However, SpO2 remained the normal range in room air. Interestingly, the BNP level was increased to 153 pg/dL 6 months after ASD closure and then peaked. However, right heart failure (HF) symptoms such as pretibial oedema and pleural effusion did not occur throughout the post-operative course. After 1 year without diuretics, BNP level dropped to 85.6 pg/dL. TTE was performed 9 months after ASD closure. The atrial septum was fixed with a closure device, and colour Doppler did not reveal any residual shunting. The continuous-wave Doppler waveform of the pulmonary regurgitation showed a steep decrease in the pressure gradient, indicating an increase in diastolic RV pressure .