The patient was a 27-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of previous orthodontic treatment. A severe car accident led to the loss of five anterior teeth and alveolar bone. The patient had been unsuccessfully treated orthodontically; an alveolar bone graft had been previously placed.
Clinical examination revealed no evident skeletal disharmony; she had an Angle’s Class II subdivision with crowded mandibular incisors. There was slight asymmetry of her lower lip due to a scar caused by the accident. All permanent maxillary incisors, the left canine, and the mandibular right first molar were absent. Initial panoramic radiograph confirmed the absence of teeth and the extent of alveolar bone loss . The patient had been orthodontically treated, and an alveolar bone graft from the patient’s iliac crest had already been placed. One year after this treatment, she was not satisfied with the treatment outcomes and sought a second treatment option .
The treatment objectives were to: 1) open enough space for mandibular right first molar rehabilitation; 2) align and upright the mandibular incisors; 3) obtain a canine Class I relationship on the right side; 3) establish functional occlusion; and 4) improve the balance of the subnasal region while smiling and, consequently, improve the patient’s self-esteem. Uprighting of the mandibular incisors was necessary to establish the correct positioning of the maxillary implants in the anterior area.
The patient had three treatment alternatives for loss of the maxillary incisors and bone: 1) alveolar bone grafting, orthodontic treatment and implant rehabilitation; 2) orthodontic treatment and placement of a prosthetic bridge; 3) orthodontic treatment and placement of removable partial dentures. It is important to consider the biological and functional factors, aesthetics, and costs when determining the best treatment option.
The steps, benefits and risks of the procedure were explained to the patient, and written informed consent was obtained prior to treatment. After consent was obtained, a multidisciplinary approach involving the previous alveolar bone grafting, orthodontic treatment, and placement of five dental implants was selected for the maxilla, and placement of one dental implant was planned for the mandible. The main risks in this case involved the success of bone grafting and osseointegration of the dental implants. The major treatment challenge was achievement of satisfactory gingival aesthetics because of the extent of the edentulous area. The minimal gingival exposure during smiling was an advantage.
A 0.022-in standard non-torqued, non-angulated bonded Edgewise appliance was used. Alignment and leveling of the maxillary teeth were performed, as well as placement of a removable appliance in the anterior region, to maintain the space and improve aesthetics. Posteriorly, artificial teeth were bonded to the brackets and fixed on a 0.019 x 0.025-in rectangular archwire to function as temporary prostheses. In the mandibular arch, the crowded incisors were aligned and leveled. An open coil spring was used to open the space for the dental implant by moving the right first molar to the distal aspect and moving the canines to the mesial aspect, to obtain a Class I canine relationship . Improvement in mandibular incisor positioning was necessary to establish the correct position of the maxillary implants in the anterior area. Finally, the prosthesis was created with a more convex shape in the cervical region of the maxillary incisors, to support the subnasal region, and aesthetic and functional rehabilitation was completed .
Once the correct occlusion was established, five dental implants were placed in the anterior area, and one was placed in the right first molar area. The prostheses were placed to complete the aesthetic and functional rehabilitation . The long-term maintenance of these results after 2 years of follow-up , with a pleasing smile and adequate overbite and overjet, and adequate positioning of the implants are shown in .