A 14-year-old boy presented to our Accident and Emergency Department with an alleged history of the high-energy injury to the thumb of dominant hand due to a fall while playing cricket. The postulated mechanism of injury was forced hyperextension of thumb and axial loading of hand in the prone position. Immediately after the injury, he felt severe pain in right thumb and was unable to move it due to pain. Furthermore, he noticed deformity of thumb in the form of abnormal bony prominence over base of thumb and carpometacarpal (CMC)joint.
There was no history of such episode in the past or any history suggestive of generalized ligament laxity in the boy.
On clinical examination, there was prominent bony swelling over the dorsal aspect of CMC and MCP joints which was very tender with diffuse swelling over entire thumb. There was a palpable step over palmer aspect of MCP joint through which head of 1st MC was palpable on applying pressure. At CMC joint, the prominence of 1st MC base dorsally made the anatomical snuff box practically not palpable with tendons of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis pushed to the sides. Both the joints were locked in the dislocated position with any attempt for movement caused extreme pain to the patient. The base of proximal phalanx stood over the center of MC neck dorsally, making a major ligamentous injury/tear unlikely. Sensations and capillary refill time were normal over the distal part of the thumb making a vascular compression or nerve injury unlikely. The movements at interphalangeal joint of the thumb were restricted, mainly due to mechanical pressure due to diffuse swelling. There was no external injury or clinical sign suggestive of any other joint injury in the hand.
Clinically the differential diagnosis ranged from subluxation/dislocation involving both joints, with no or partial ligamentous injury. Though no bony crepitus was felt on clinical examination, a subtle bony injury or volar plate avulsion cannot be ruled out completely.
Thus, a clinical diagnosis of floating 1st MC was made due to dorsal dislocation/subluxation of both CMC and MCP joints without a likely bony/ligamentous injury (though could not be confirmed clinically).
To investigate further, an X-ray was done, which showed dorsal dislocation of both MCP and CMC joints without any fracture (bony avulsion) or volar plate avulsion [Figs. and ]. We believe the MCP joint dislocation occurred first due to hyperextension and axial loading followed by CMC joint which dislocated during continued pronation of the hand during the fall.
Immediately, in view of increasing swelling and severe pain, a decision of trial close reduction under regional block was taken. Closed reduction was performed by axial traction followed by forced flexion at MCP joint with continuous pressure over the dorsal aspect of the joint. The reduction of CMC joint was done by direct pressure over the dorsal aspect and full abduction of thumb.
Following reduction, the thumb was immobilized in a thumb spica and a check X-ray was performed to confirm the reduction and to rule out any fracture or growth plate injury .
Clinically, there were no sign suggestive of vascular compression or loss of sensation after application of thumb spica.
Initially, the patient was followed-up regularly as an outpatient every week, and follow-up X-rays were done every week for first 2 weeks and later 2 weekly till 6 weeks from injury. The spica cast was removed at 6 weeks, and the thumb was examined for any instability due to collateral ligament damage.
He was evaluated again after 2 weeks of plaster removal for residual pain, swelling, thumb range of motion, stiffness, and grip strength. No restriction of movement, instability, or weakness was found as compared to opposite normal thumb. An MRI scan performed at 8 weeks showed minimal residual edema in ulnar collateral ligament with small capsular tear near MC end of MCP joint.
Clinically and radiologically, there were no signs suggestive of growth plate injury or ligament injury resulting in laxity, during follow-up visits.
At present, the patient is 4 years follow-up, he is actively engaged in sports activities, and there is no complaint regarding restriction of movement or stiffness of the hand. Since then there has been no history of any similar episode either