A 37-year-old woman with a complaint of left-sided headache and ipsilateral blepharospasm was referred to our oculoplastic clinic. The symptoms began 10 years ago as severe left-sided headache that gradually involved the entire head; the headache was not pulsatile but was sometimes associated with nausea. Primarily, the headache was episodic; however, over time, it became constant and was accompanied by mild depression and anxiety symptoms. At the time of headache, left-sided unilateral blepharospasm, ipsilateral photophobia, tearing, and rhinorrhea were also present . She often experienced headache at night and at waking time. The recurrence rate was very severe, and she was free from headaches only a few days a month. When the headache remitted, the blepharospasm also improved. In the last 10 years, the patient had received five Dysport injections in the left periorbital area, which induced provisional remission of blepharospasm but had no effect on the headache. The patient had also systemic hypertension for 10 years, which was partially controlled by the daily use of 100-mg atenolol.
Systemic work up did not reveal any secondary cause of hypertension; therefore, she was diagnosed with essential hypertension. Brain MRI findings were also normal. At the time of headache, the patient was recommended to use 100% oxygen at a rate of 8 L/min, but it had no effect on the headache and blepharospasm. We also administered two doses of 100-mg sumatriptan at 2-hour intervals, but these were also not effective. Thereafter, Dysport was injected to the periorbital, temporal, and occipital areas in small unit doses, and this resulted in an improvement in blepharospasm and, to some extent, tearing and rhinorrhea after 4 days; however, the headache continued as before .
Since the headache did not respond to the above-mentioned therapy, we consulted a neurologist and administered a combination therapy with 125-mg sodium valproate two times a day for 1 week, 40-mg propranolol tablets every 12 hours, 25-mg nortriptyline every night, and 4-mg perphenazine every night for 1 month. This combined medical therapy alleviated the headache significantly, and the patient reported a 70% reduction in the recurrence rate and severity of headache over 1 month, as well as a remission of blepharospasm.
After 1 month, the drug dosage was increased to 250-mg sodium valproate every 12 hours, 50-mg nortriptyline every night, and 8-mg perphenazine every night; moreover 50-mg pregabalin tablets every night were added to the treatment regimen. Six months after the initiation of treatment, the patient reported that the severity and recurrence rate of headache was controlled up to 90% and that the blepharospasm did not relapse. Moreover, her anxiety and depression symptoms were considerably improved, and systemic hypertension was well controlled.