An 11-year-old, right-hand dominant boy presented in casualty with history of fall from window on his left hand 1 day back with pain, swelling and deformity in the left forearm with bleeding from left forearm which was dressed at local hospital and loss of movement of thumb and fingers of left hand. On examination, there was a wound of size 1 cm on mid-forearm over the ulnar aspect . Extension of fingers at metacarpophalangeal joints and thumb was lost with intact sensations suggestive of posterior interosseus nerve involvement. Wrist movements could not be assessed due to pain in the wrist. No vascular was deficit was present. X-rays were performed which suggested type two epiphyseal separation of the proximal radius with fracture shaft of the ulna with lateral angulation . Radiocapitellar joint congruity was maintained in the views performed. X-rays of wrist suggested fracture both bones distal forearm, with Salter-Harris Type 2 epiphyseal injury in distal radius and fracture of distal shaft of ulna . Intravenous antibiotics were started, and splintage was given, and the patient kept for surgery the following morning.
Surgery was performed under tourniquet. Fractures of proximal radius and ulna were approached using separate incisions , as recent literature supports use of separate approaches to decrease the chances of radio-ulnar synostosis as seen with Boyd’s approach . It also avoids contamination of the closed proximal radius fracture. Open wound was thoroughly debrided and irrigated. The debrided wound was extended both proximaly and distally and open reduction of ulna was easily performed. Ulna was fixed first using a 2 mm Kirschner wire. Proximal radius was approached using Kocher approach. Skin incision was started just proximal to lateral epicondyle of the humerus continuing distally toward direction of proximal ulna. Plane between extensor carpi ulnaris and anconeus was identified and dissection continued in line of extensor carpi ulnaris fibers, keeping the forearm pronated to protect the posterior interosseus nerve. Joint capsule was identified and incised and fracture was reached. Fracture was easily reduced as ulna had been fixed earlier, and fixed with two crossed smooth K-wires avoiding radio-capitellar joint . Annular ligament was found to be intact intraoperatively. Posterior interosseus nerve was not explored as we presumed the nerve injury was neuropraxia. For the distal forearm fracture, only the radius was fixed after open reduction using dorsal approach to avoid vigorous closed manipulation. Distal ulna shaft was left as it seemed to fall back in place after other fractures were fixed. Wounds were closed over separate drains, and plaster slab was applied in mid-prone position.
At 4 weeks follow-up, patient’s posterior interosseus nerve neuropraxia had recovered as expected. Proximal and distal K-wires of radius were removed and plaster slab applied in supination for further 2 weeks . Elbow range of motion was started at 6 weeks along with pronation and supination. X-rays showed union at this stage in all the fractures. Ulna K-wire was removed at 12 weeks. At final follow-up at 6 months, fractures were consolidated with near normal range of motion (-). Patient’s father was advised regular follow-up of child, as premature closure of physis is expected secondary to epiphyseal separation, as noticed in the final follow-up X-rays of the distal radius.