A 39-year-old right hand dominant male sought our services with a history of eight months of pain in the posterior region of the left shoulder, with no history of acute trauma. The patient stated that the pain began after starting a job where he carried sandbags of approximately 25 kg on the affected shoulder. The pain began after two months on the new job and progressively worsened with time. The pain was worse with exertion. The pain was partially relieved with rest and the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. At the time of his first appointment, the patient was unable to work, and he did not report any comorbidity.
Physical examination of the left shoulder revealed no gross deformity. On palpation, the patient reported pain over the scapular spine, approximately 5 cm medial to the lateral border of the acromion. The passive range of motion was normal, and active forward elevation, abduction and external rotation were limited to 130°, 90° and 30°, respectively. The patient exhibited pain and decreased strength on the Jobe and infraspinatus tests as well as negative signs for a superior labrum anterior and posterior (SLAP) lesion and acromioclavicular arthrosis. The functional assessment scored 10 points on the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) Shoulder Rating scale and 7 points on the visual analog scale.The initial radiographs revealed a transverse fracture of the base of the acromion on the spinoglenoid notch without deviation . A non-surgical treatment with analgesics, rest, absence from work, and physical therapy (analgesia, stretching, and strengthening) was used for four months, with no clinical improvement. New imaging exams (radiography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)) revealed the absence of consolidation . Thus, after 4 months of conservative treatment and 1 year after the onset of symptoms, surgical treatment was recommended.
The patient was placed in the prone position, and a 10 cm incision was made along the scapular spine towards the lateral edge of the acromion. The trapezius-deltoid fascia was opened towards the spine. The deltoid and trapezius muscles were detached, exposing the pseudarthrosis focus, with hypertrophic callus. A partial resection of the hypertrophic callus was performed, and the scapular spine was anatomically reduced. The osteosynthesis was performed with a 6-hole 3.5-mm locking compression plate (LCP) with 3 screws locked proximally and 2 distal screws, 1 of them locked and 1 cortical screw placed eccentrically, resulting in an interfragmentary compression of 1 mm . The lateral fixation with 3 screws was not possible due to the location of the fracture. No bone graft was used, and the incision was closed in layers, reinserting the muscles using transosseous sutures.The operated limb was immobilized with an arm sling for 6 weeks, and the mobilization of the hand, wrist, and elbow was performed beginning on the 1st postoperative day. Passive shoulder movements were started at 3 weeks, free active movements at 6 weeks and resistance movements at 8 weeks. After 4 postoperative months, the patient had recovered full range of motion. The radiograph and the CT performed at 5 postoperative months revealed the healed fracture. After 6 months, the patient rarely reported mild pain and returned to his work. The UCLA scale was 33 at 6 months of follow-up and 35 at 12 months. The maximum UCLA score is 35 points. The patient recovered full painless range of motion and normal strenght.