A 42-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for a kidney transplant. According to the referral form, he had no medical history except for hypertension that had been left untreated for a decade. He had bilateral pretibial edema and exacerbating respiratory distress for one month. When he visited a nearby hospital, hemodialysis initiation was necessary as his kidney function was terminal (serum creatinine: 14.8 mg/dL) and he had severe dyspnea. The patient had 3 + proteinuria (8.36 g/gCre) and 1 + urinary occult blood. Serum laboratory data showed that his albumin level was 2.9 g/dL, and he was negative for the anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, and anti-nuclear antibody. Abnormalities in complement and immunoglobulin levels were not observed. Renal biopsy showed widespread collapsed glomeruli (8/8), and immunofluorescence microscopy (IF) revealed negative results, and electron microscopy (EM) demonstrated minor changes. The final diagnosis was acute kidney injury associated with minor glomerular abnormalities (MGA) accompanied with chronic histological changes caused by untreated hypertension. As the patient did not recover from dialysis-dependent renal failure, he was referred for kidney transplantation.
At initial admission, his body weight was 80.0 kg (BMI 27), and blood pressure was 127/88 mmHg. Dyslipidemia and diabetes mellitus were not observed (triglyceride level: 136 mg/dL, and HbA1c 4.7%). Five months later, a living-donor kidney transplant was performed with his mother as the donor. His clinical course is shown in Fig. . Induction therapies for transplantation included methylprednisolone, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and everolimus. A kidney biopsy performed 0 h after transplantation showed MGA (data not shown). The transplantation was successful, and laboratory data at the time of discharge were urinary protein 1 + (1.02 g/gCre), urinary occult blood 1 + , and serum creatinine 1.07 mg/dL.
In the first month after transplantation, his urinary protein level increased to 1.95 g/gCre, with an increase in triglyceride level to 552 mg/dL. Three months after transplantation, a protocol biopsy was performed (Supplementary Figure ). The formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections contained 24 glomeruli, 3 of which showed global sclerosis but no crescents. IF findings were negative. The overall histological diagnosis was MGA; however, immunohistochemical analysis revealed mild to moderate glomerular infiltration of CD3+, CD8+, and CD68+ cells. At this point, his urinary protein level further increased to 3.36 g/gCre, but there was no deterioration in renal function .
Six months after the transplantation, his kidney function was still stable; however, his triglyceride level increased further to 685 mg/dL, along with a decrease in high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels. The patient’s serum lipid profile is summarized in Table . LCAT activity was normal. A substantial increase in triglycerides together with an increase in the lipoprotein fraction of pre-β (very-low-density lipoprotein [VLDL]-cholesterol) and a decrease in lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity were observed. These findings suggested that the patient has asymptomatic type V hyperlipidemia. The HbA1c was elevated to 7.5% at this time but improved under 7.0% immediately after induction of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor. Soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) and CRP levels were relatively high at 500 U/mL and 1.13 mg/dL, respectively, suggesting some underlying inflammatory status. However, there were no serologic findings suggestive of specific viral infection . A renal biopsy was performed again, which contained 21 glomeruli of which 5 showed global sclerosis and no crescents. The remaining glomeruli showed the characteristic diffuse feature of extensive accumulation of foam cells . IF findings were all negative (data not shown). Under EM, many glomerular foam cells were observed, but there were no electron-dense deposits. Immunoperoxidase staining revealed that cells with a foamy appearance in the capillary loops were positive for CD68, and there was extensive infiltration of CD3+ T-cells (predominantly CD8+ cells) . Further analysis using double immunostaining revealed frequent contact between these cells , and the existence of activated (HLA-DR+) CD8+ T-cells .
After the histological characteristics were clarified, intensive lipid-lowering therapy with pemafibrate was performed aiming at reducing the glomerular lipid deposition. Results of the protocol biopsy performed 1 year after transplantation are shown in Fig. . The 21 glomeruli showed no crescents, but 4 showed global sclerosis and 3 showed segmental sclerosis. Foamy changes were no longer observed in the glomerular capillary lumen. Mild interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy were observed. The overall clinicopathological diagnosis was secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Immunoperoxidase staining revealed an apparent decrease in lipid accumulation in CD68+ histiocytes; however, the number of CD8+ cells and CD68+ histiocytes remained at almost a similar level . Despite the significant decrease in triglyceride levels, proteinuria did not improve but was in a worsening trend between 9 months and 1 year after the transplantation with pemafibrate treatment . Clinically, however, there were no changes in body weight or blood pressure during this period.