A female patient of 63-year-old presented to our orthopaedic department with prosthetic loosening of the isoelastic stem , also femur and acetabulum with massive osteolytic defect performed by modular aloprosthesis of proximal femur and acetabulum of tantalum, and metal on polyethylene pair of friction . Patient had good clinical evolution with the drain removed at the first postoperative day with output of 100 cc. serohematic. Patient was discharged in good condition on the fifth postoperative day. Five days later, patient was re-admitted to the emergency room for increased volume in relation to wound without infectious signs. The blood inflammatory parameters are normal. Soft tissue ultrasonography subfascial evidence seroma with estimated volume of 500 cc is taken. .
To avoid superinfection of a large extent surgery, it was decided to make an early cleaning surgery, in order to drain and take tissue samples and fluid culture. A collection is located under muscle planes adjacent to the aloprotesis, with communication between up fascia lata muscleplane. After the cleaning surgery and drainage, equally the seroma is maintained for 5 days with daily output of 200 cc of serous fluid. It was decided to perform a new scouring, with obliteration of third space, massage and Compression bandages. Negative cultures were obtained. Given the persistence of seroma, a literature review was undertaken to obtain therapeutic alternatives.
Finally, surgical cleanliness was performed with resection of pseudocapsule seroma with curettage, making crops and application of 2 g. erythromycin diluted in 200 cc.of 0.9% saline solution. Customary closing was performed flat leaving a aspiration drainage N° 9 undert he fascia, which was measured daily. The next day, the drainage measured serohematic liquid 100cc, and 60cc was measured on the 2nd day. On the 3rd day, 10 cc of liquid was measured, and the drainage was removed on the 4th day. Subsequently, the patient was discharged in good condition without signs of infection, tension, edema or collection in the thigh wound.