A 33-year-old male previously presented to another institution with 2 months of worsening shortness of breath. Echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30–35%. Left heart catheterization revealed normal coronary anatomy and right heart catheterization showed reduced cardiac output. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was non-diagnostic due to patient’s inability to hold his breath. He was previously discharged on guideline-directed medical therapy without a clear aetiology to explain his cardiomyopathy. He now presents with a productive cough, worsening dyspnoea on exertion, and diarrhoea.
The patient had no known past medical history. He emigrated from Honduras to the USA 15 years ago. He had no history of tobacco, drug, or alcohol use, and no known tuberculosis exposures, history of rheumatic fever, or family history of cardiovascular disease. Physical exam was notable for elevated jugular venous pulse, an S3 heart sound, rales on lung auscultation, abdominal tenderness, and bilateral lower extremity oedema.
Laboratory testing was notable for high sensitivity troponin T 216 ng/L (ref <19), NTproBNP 8403 pg/mL (ref <125), aspartate transaminase 56 IU/L, alanine transaminase 112 IU/L, and lactate 3.3 mmol/L. Additional workup included drug screening, iron studies, human immunodeficiency virus testing, hepatitis testing, Trypanosoma Cruzi antibodies, stool studies, quantiferon, antinuclear antibody, thiamine, selenium, and carnitine, which were all negative.
Echocardiography showed mild left ventricular enlargement (left ventricular internal diameter end diastole 5.5 cm), severely reduced LV systolic function with global hypokinesis (LVEF 9%), severely reduced right ventricular (RV) function, biatrial dilation, and severe tricuspid regurgitation with estimated pulmonary artery (PA) systolic pressure of 43 mmHg. Right heart catheterization revealed right atrium 18 mmHg, right ventricle 35/18 mmHg, PA 35/25 (mean 28) mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 23 mmHg. Cardiac output 1.8 L/min, cardiac index 1 L/min/m2, pulmonary vascular resistance 2.78 Woods units, and systemic vascular resistance 1798 Dynes.
Differential diagnosis for aetiology of nonischaemic cardiomyopathy in this patient included infectious cardiomyopathy (i.e. Chagas or viral myocarditis), genetic cardiomyopathy, and toxic cardiomyopathy.
Based on haemodynamics, the patient was started on milrinone. Given that the patient was applying for emergency health insurance, he was not initially a candidate for OHT, thus he had a durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implanted as a bridge to transplant. Due to significant RV dysfunction, the patient underwent placement of a temporary, percutaneous RV assist device (RVAD) during LVAD (HeartMate3) implantation. Pathology of the apical core was consistent with Giant Cell Myocarditis . After pathologic diagnosis of GCM, the patient received a subcutaneous defibrillator.
Despite immunosuppressive therapy, with tacrolimus and prednisone, the patient developed worsening RV failure manifested by low flow alarms and ventricular arrhythmias (VAs). Eighteen months after LVAD implantation, he developed RV failure requiring placement of a temporary RVAD and expedited transplant evaluation. His transplant listing was further complicated by an incidental lung nodule on computerized tomography (CT), which was positive for cryptococcus, requiring treatment with fluconazole. After 6 weeks of cryptococcus treatment followed by repeat CT imaging showing stable disease, he underwent OHT with basiliximab induction and was initiated on maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisone. Pathology of the explanted heart confirmed GCM with prominent myocardial fibrosis and intracardiac and PA thrombi.
Post-discharge, surveillance EMB 6 weeks after transplant demonstrated recurrent GCM . The patient had mild LV dysfunction but no other evidence of graft failure. After discussion with a multidisciplinary team including cardiothoracic surgery, cardiology, infectious disease, and pharmacy, he was treated with pulse dose steroids and increased dosing of maintenance immunosuppression (tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisone). Repeat EMB 1 week after treatment did not show evidence of GCM. The patient continued to undergo surveillance EMB and was treated for 2R rejection 10 weeks after transplant with prednisone 100 mg for 3 days. Five months after the initial positive biopsy, he had recurrent GCM . He was treated with pulse dose steroids with the addition of anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) with a cumulative dose of 4 mg/kg given over 8 days. He continued a three-drug immunosuppression regimen of tacrolimus (goal trough 10–15), mycophenolate (1500 mg twice a day), and prednisone (slow taper).
With the intensification of immunosuppression, the patient developed significant infectious sequelae. He developed several courses of diarrhoea (Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli, norovirus, and Shiga-like toxin producing E. coli) and subsequently presented with decreased oral intake, weakness, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Computerized tomography of the chest demonstrated a cavitary right upper lobe lesion , and MRI of the brain showed a contrast-enhancing lesion concerning for abscesses . Transbronchial needle aspiration of a lymph node demonstrated bacilliform structures with positive acid fast bacilli stain and cultures confirmed Nocardia Asiatica . A multidisciplinary consensus involving neurosurgery and infectious disease was to manage disseminated nocardia with prolonged antibiotics, decreased immunosuppression (prednisone and mycophenolate), and interval surveillance with imaging.
While the patient was being treated for Nocardia infection, surveillance EMB demonstrated a third recurrence of GCM . Given significant infectious sequelae, high-dose prednisone was avoided and sirolimus was added to tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisone.
This patient is doing well and followed in heart transplantation clinic with close attention to cardiac allograft function and further infectious complications. In particular, he is undergoing frequent clinical examinations, echocardiograms, laboratory monitoring of cardiac injury, biopsies, and monitoring of infectious complications.