A 48-year-old woman presented as an emergency on the surgical intake with a 24-hour history of severe generalised abdominal pain. She had vomited once prior to admission but there had been no alteration in bowel habit. No other symptoms were reported. She had a 4-year history of inflammatory bowel disease of ulcerative colitis type for which she was being prescribed azathioprine (50 mg/day) and prednisolone (5 mg/day).
On examination, she was shocked with a heart rate of 100 beats/minute, a blood pressure of 70/55, pyrexia of 38.2°C, a respiratory rate of 25 breaths/minute and oxygen saturation levels on air of 90%. Her abdomen was distended and diffusely tender with signs of peritonism. She was aggressively resuscitated. Her full blood count showed a neutropaenia of 3.6 × 109/litre. An erect chest radiograph demonstrated free gas under the left hemidiaphragm. She was taken for a laparotomy at which point a small amount of turbid fluid was identified but there was no direct evidence of an intra-abdominal perforation. A peritoneal lavage was performed and she was taken to the intensive care unit.
On the sixth postoperative day, her condition deteriorated and she was returned to the theatre for a second laparotomy. Again, there was turbid fluid but no obvious perforation was identified. Methylene blue was instilled via a nasogastric tube to try and delineate a perforation of the foregut. However, as no leak was seen and since she had a history of colitis, it was presumed that the perforation must have been somewhere in the colon and so a total colectomy and ileostomy were performed. After which, she was returned to the intensive care unit for ventilatory and cardiovascular support. Her condition deteriorated and blood cultures following the operation revealed the presence of Gram-positive cocci. She made little postoperative improvement and had a cardiac arrest and died 7 days after the second laparotomy.
Histopathological examination of the gross colectomy specimen showed impacted hard faeces together with inspissated pale mucus. There was a fibrinous material covering much of the peritoneal surface. No obvious perforation site was seen but numerous 'diaphragms' were noted, most marked within the caecum. There were approximately 30 thin-walled diaphragms, 10 of which were complete . The diaphragm within the more distal part of the bowel reduced the lumen to a pin-hole. The mucosa in the area of the diaphragms appeared flattened but otherwise there were no signs macroscopically of active inflammatory bowel disease.
Microscopic examination of the specimen showed numerous elongated plicae (diaphragms) with submucosal fibrosis. In these areas the mucosa showed architectural distortion and mild acute inflammation . The background bowel showed mild architectural distortion and patchy acute inflammation within the lamina propria with possible focal cryptitis.
Review of the previous biopsies confirmed the histological diagnosis of active chronic inflammatory bowel disease in keeping with ulcerative colitis. Post-mortem examination concluded that stercoral perforation had led to sepsis and subsequent adult respiratory distress syndrome.