In April 2019, a 55- year-old man with uncontrolled diabetes was referred to Masih Daneshvari Hospital, Tehran, Iran, with complaints of fever, weakness, productive cough, and occasional hemoptysis for three months. He was addicted to cannabis for 20 years and had experienced localized one-side facial pain and swelling seven days after dental extraction.
In this recumbent patient, the Glasgow coma scale was determined as 15 without focal neurologic shortage or meningeal signs, dehydrated skin and mucosal membrane, and awareness of his environment. His medical history showed that he had uncontrolled diabetes for many years with fasting blood sugar level, weight, and height of 273 mg/dL, 70 kg, and 170 cm, respectively. His chest examination and chest x-ray were normal (intensity, pitch, duration, and chest percussion quality). Precordial auscultation showed normal heart sounds, and abdominal exploration was normal as well. The chest CT imaging showed ground‑glass opacities in the right lower lung in both lungs Vital signs and the laboratory results at the time of admission are presented in . Upon hospital admission, the chest radiography of posterior-anterior projection view revealed right upper lobe alveolar infiltration . A thorax computed tomography (CT) showed tree-in-bud infiltration infiltrations in the right lower lung ; .
The early antibiotic regimen included liposomal amphotericin B, piperacillin, tazobactam, and teicoplanin. Due to the high likelihood of mucormycosis rhinosinusitis, nasal sinus endoscopy was performed with a positive result. Considering the high probability of pulmonary tuberculosis, a direct smear was prepared from sputum and induced sputum samples.
Acid-fast bacillus was detected from three frequency sputum specimens and the presence
of M. tuberculosis mycobacterial DNA was confirmed in molecular diagnosis using real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In brief, the specimen was cultured in a Lowenstein-Jensen medium, and DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). A quantitative RT-PCR assay was conducted using a Rotor-Gene 6000 RT-PCR cycler (Qiagen Corbett, Hilden, Germany) and PCR kit qPCR master mix (QuantiTect SYBR® Green; Yekta Tajhiz Azuma, Tehran, Iran).
In the second week of hospitalization, angioembolisation was performed and the histopathological report of functional endoscopic sinus surgery from the nasal cavity revealed respiratory-type mucosa with necroinflammation and the presence of fragmented and thick hyaline fungal hyphae, compatible with Mucorales Mucoral species .
In addition, a biopsy of the nasal cavity ( prepared in KOH wet mount) confirmed mucormycosis by the presence of fungal elements (aseptate hyphae) .
A final diagnosis of mucormycosis and tuberculosis coinfection was made. The treatment was initiated with the administration of rifampicin 600 mg PO q24 h, isoniazid 300 mg PO q24 h, pyrazinamide 1500 mg PO q24 h, and ethambutol 1200 mg PO q24 h, followed by liposomal administration of Amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/d for 3 weeks). His rhinosinus mucormycosis was treated with a total dose of 6.5 g tazobactam 4.5g q 8 h teicoplanin 400mg q1 2 h for three doses and then 400 mg daily. Paranasal sinus endoscopy was performed. Ophthalmology consultation was also performed several times.
The patient was discharged 30 days after admission due to clinical improvement. Directly observed therapy was continued and oral posaconazole (400 mg bid) was administered as an antifungal. No histopathological findings of sinus mucormycosis were reported in the last surgical endoscopic piece biopsy report.