A 17-year-old white man was referred by his ophthalmologist to the University Department of Ophthalmology in Larissa, Greece, with the diagnosis of central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) in his left eye. The patient's ophthalmic history was negative, whereas his general medical history was only significant for acne, for which he had been treated with oral isotretinoin 20 mg three times daily (13-cis-retinoic acid, Accutane®) for the previous 6 weeks. He denied smoking, alcohol consumption and illicit substance use. The patient successfully participated in all regular sports activities at school, and presented a normal body mass index of 23.77. Besides cheilitis with dry, cracked and crusted lips, his initial physical examination was negative.
His uncorrected visual acuity was 12/10 in each eye and the intraocular pressure in his right and left eye was 14 and 17 mmHg, respectively. Funduscopy revealed optic disc oedema with retinal haemorrhages and engorged, tortuous veins in the left eye . His right eye had a normal fundus with an optic nerve head having a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.4. Visual fields examination revealed a superior arcuate scotoma in his left eye .
A detailed clinical investigation of all systems, including cardiovascular and neurological assessment was unremarkable. Total blood count with differential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and routine laboratory testing were within normal ranges, except for a mild increase in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol that was attributed to isotretinoin use. Urine analysis and 24-hour urine selection specimens were within normal ranges. Moreover, no viral or other systemic or localised infection was detected. Further investigation with plasma protein electrophoresis, autoimmune and tumour markers, screening for antiphospholipid syndrome, and cryoglobulinaemia was also negative. Finally, the patient presented normal values of protein C, protein S, antithrombin, and homocysteine. DNA testing for potential genetic thrombophilic predisposition revealed that the patient was a heterozygous carrier of the G20210A mutation of the prothrombin gene . However, his family history was negative for thrombotic incidents even for senior relatives (grandparents). On the other hand, chest computed tomography (CT), abdominal ultrasound, brain and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, as well as brain and orbit magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), were all negative.
Isotretinoin treatment was discontinued and the patient was initially given low molecular weight heparin, followed by oral anticoagulants (acenocoumarol, Sintrom®). Based on the notion that elevated intraocular pressure may be a risk factor for CRVO, intraocular pressure lowering medication was administered (brimonidine BID, Alphagan®). Due to the patient's slow response to the treatment, systemic steroids were added to the therapeutic scheme (methylprednisolone sodium acetate 500 mg intravenously for 3 days, then oral methylprednisolone 24 mg once daily for 1 month with gradual dosage decrease). Six months after the CRVO, the optic disc oedema had regressed and the haemorrhages had been absorbed. The patient's visual acuity remains 12/10 without signs of posterior- or anterior segment neovascularisation, whereas the visual field defect has slightly decreased in depth. Cheilitis was attributed to isotretinoin and resolved gradually after its discontinuation.