A 17-year-old male patient known diabetic, diagnosed in the health center as type1 diabetes for 8 months. He was on insulin for 3 months and discontinued the medication for 5 months because he cannot afford to buy insulin. He presented with polydipsia, polyuria, and weight loss of 5 months duration (Since he discontinued insulin). He had a complaint of intermittent abdominal pain and bloating since 3 years back, but he has no vomiting, diarrhea, shortness of breath, cough, and fever. He is an orphan (both parents died in his early childhood with unknown cause, and he was living with his relatives. On examination: He was chronically sick looking but normal vital signs. Anthropometry: Wt-25 kg, Ht-159 cm, BMI-10 kg/m2, WFH- severely wasted, WFA- severely underweight. On LGS-, bilateral parotid enlargement with no discharge, tenderness, and no color change of skin. The patient was conscious and oriented.
On investigation; he had hyperglycemia, glucosuria but no ketonuria. Otherwise, Complete blood count (CBC), renal function test, Liver enzymes, Lipid profile, Plain-x-ray of the abdomen, and abdominal U/S were normal . The patient was admitted with the diagnosis of Type 1 Diabetes and Severe acute malnutrition. He started insulin (1 IU/Kg/day) SQ and nutritional management. On subsequent follow up of RBS (three times per day) and FBS (one times per day), both remained high and insulin was escalated to 3.5 IU/kg/day . After the insulin dose was reached to 3.5 IU/kg/day, Serial RBS and FBS were in the acceptable range and the patient was gaining Weight progressively. As the weight increases, his demand for insulin was decreased and the dose of insulin was de-escalated to 1.2 IU/Kg/day over four months. The blood sugar (both RBS and FBS) remains within the acceptable ranges. Because of this atypical presentation, the findings of the investigation, different management (high insulin demand to control hyperglycemia), and his responses for the treatment, the patient was evaluated meticulously for other types of DM. Based on the diagnostic criteria suggested by Bajaj et al, for MRDM (Malnutrition -Modulated Diabetes previously called PDPD), our patient fulfilled the criteria (scored −11) and he was diagnosed after 6 weeks of hospital stay . Finally, the patient was discharged with 1.2 IU/Kg/day with a weight of 44 kg over 4 months of total hospital course. On the subsequent follow-ups, the patient is taking 1.6 IU/kg/day with good glycemic control in the endocrinology clinic.