A 49-year-old, immunocompetent and fully vaccinated female patient with past medical history of asthma and obesity (BMI 53.2) presented to the emergency department with dyspnoea at rest and hypoxia following a three-week history of productive cough and progressively worsening dyspnoea. Her symptoms had only partially responded to antibiotics and steroids. Her COVID-19 lateral flow test became positive three days before admission.
On admission, non-invasive ventilation (NIV), nebulised salbutamol and ipratropium bromide, and magnesium sulphate were promptly administered without effect. Due to continuous deterioration the patient was admitted to ICU. The timeline of events, including biochemical and microbiology results, antimicrobial therapies, organ dysfunction, and organ supportive therapies are demonstrated graphically in .
On ICU admission, the patient was intubated and ventilated. She was proned daily from day two to seven for 16 hours per day. This was discontinued due to lack of effectiveness. She received 6.6mg IV dexamethasone daily on days one to ten and a dose of sarilumab 400mg IV on day one.
During the first 12 days in ICU, the patient demonstrated gradual improvement in her ventilation and gas exchange . Pyrexia resolved and the function of all organ systems except the lungs was normalised. She remained intubated and on invasive mechanical ventilation. Multiple-site cultures were tested during her ICU stay for bacterial, fungal and opportunistic infections. All infections were covered with appropriate antimicrobial therapies.
From day 13, the patient deteriorated with pyrexia (38.4-39.5°C) and worsening skin lesions over lips, tongue, and cheeks (, ). C-reactive protein (CRP) levels began to increase. MODS developed with a further deterioration of respiratory function, cardiovascular compromise requiring a noradrenaline infusion, and acute kidney injury stage two which, due to refractory fluid overload, required continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) at 25ml/kg/hour. All medication doses were adjusted according to renal function. Bilateral diffuse infiltrates in chest x-ray worsened while computed tomography showed bilateral dense consolidations and extensive ground glass changes .
Skin lesion swabs and blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for HSV-1 were performed which proved positive in high titres in all specimens (cycle threshold 18.80 and 35.69 for facial swab and blood PCRs respectively). As such, IV acyclovir was given for 10 days at 10mg/kg (ideal body weight) every eight hours to treat HSV-1 reactivation.
A significant improvement of MODS was noted , the pyrexia resolved, facial rash improved , CRP reduced, vasopressor support weaned off, CRRT was discontinued. Respiratory function improved, and the patient begun weaning off pressure support ventilation. Surgical tracheostomy was performed after an extubation trial failed (due to critical care-induced neuro-muscular weakness). Patient was successfully decannulated on day 48, discharged to the respiratory ward on day 49, and discharged home on day 63.