A 60-year-old male presented with slowly progressive drowsiness was admitted to our hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an obstructive hydrocephalus caused by midbrain tumors [Figure and ]. He had past history of a malignant lymphoma of the stomach, which had occurred 10 years earlier. ETV and an endoscopic biopsy were performed to treat the hydrocephalus and to confirm the histology of the tumor.
The operating sheath was inserted into the right lateral ventricle through a right-sided coronal burr hole. The endoscope was advanced into the third ventricle through the sheath and the foramen of Monro. The floor of the third ventricle was thin and translucent. Under continuous visual control, the biopsy forceps and a 4-French Fogarty balloon catheter were used to perforate and widen the stoma. The basilar tip and bilateral posterior cerebral artery were visible below the stoma, but there was no injury to these arteries. A biopsy was not performed because the tumor did not appear on the surface of the ventricle, but cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology revealed malignant lymphoma cells. After some minutes of irrigation, no bleeding was confirmed, and external ventricular drainage was then inserted into the right lateral ventricle.
The patient was in our intensive care unit with continuous monitoring of heart rate and blood pressure. His systolic blood pressure was stable in the range of 130–110 mmHg. He was drowsy, but did not exhibit confusion or other signs of significant pain. After the procedure, the initial level of ventricular drainage was 10 cm H2O. About 220 ml of CSF was drained in the first day after surgery. The patient remained drowsy, but a computed tomography (CT) scan the day after the operation showed no abnormal findings except dilated lateral ventricles. The CSF continued to drain. Two days after the operation, we set the level of ventricular drainage to be the same as that on the first day. About 300 ml of CSF was gradually drained with about 16 h before the bleeding began. The patient suddenly became comatose, and the bloody CSF was rapidly drained immediately. An emergency CT scan revealed a diffuse SAH . Cerebral angiograms demonstrated a saccular aneurysm of the left internal carotid-posterior communicating artery . No other causes for the SAH were found. Endovascular coil embolization of the ruptured aneurysm was then performed, and the conditions of the patient gradually improved. Subsequently, he received systemic chemotherapy and irradiation for intracerebral malignant lymphomas. After a month of rehabilitation, he returned to his previous state of consciousness.