A healthy 42-year-old man was found to have an abnormal chest shadow during an annual medical examination and was referred to our hospital . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a thrombosed aberrant artery with a maximum diameter of 33 mm arising from the celiac artery and flowing to the left lower lobe through the pulmonary ligament, draining into the left inferior pulmonary vein . Based on the above findings, we diagnosed ABLL with giant aberrant artery. In addition, we considered the possibility of concomitant pulmonary arteriovenous fistula because the aberrant artery was too large for a single disease of ABLL, and aneurysmal aberrant artery was assumed to be an effect of pulmonary arteriovenous fistula. Therefore, we performed surgical therapy to shut down abnormal blood flow and reduce the risk of rupture . In addition, according to a prior report, the stump of an aberrant artery may form an aneurysm; therefore, we planned to perform left lower lobectomy with subsequent coil embolization of the remnant aberrant artery when the blood supply was confirmed postoperatively .
We performed the left lower lobectomy with aberrant artery excision under thoracotomy (20 cm antero-axial incision). The giant aberrant artery was located along the pulmonary ligament. The left inferior pulmonary vein was resected firstly to prevent thromboembolism given the possible pulmonary arteriovenous fistula; thereafter, the left lower lobe gradually became congested before the aberrant artery shut down. Although subsequent procedures were complicated by the congested lung, the aberrant artery was divided with the pulmonary ligament using an endoscopic stapler (Echelon FlexTM GST System with 45-mm black reloads; three cartridges [Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA]) under decompression using a clamp at the proximal portion of the aneurysmal aberrant artery. Although the aberrant artery had aneurysms, the aortic wall revealed enough elasticity and firmness; therefore, we resected the aneurysmal aberrant artery with pulmonary ligament using auto-suture device and the stump was reinforced using Teflon pledgets . The operation time was 210 min with a total blood loss of 1586 mL without blood transfusion. Most of the bleeding originated from a damaged pleural of the congested left lower lobe itself, from the stapled cut ends of the pulmonary artery, and vein in resected lung, and not from the central side of the aberrant artery. Preoperative CT showed that most parts of the aberrant artery lumen were thrombosed; we expected central thrombotic occlusion of the aberrant artery after resection of the peripheral aberrant artery. However, we confirmed by enhanced CT that the blood supply to the remnant aberrant artery remained; therefore, we planned to perform coil embolization. At 18 days after the first operation, angiography revealed slight residual blood flow in the aberrant artery toward the surgical stump through the diaphragm, which was completely embolized using a fibered interlocking detachable coil (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) . The two surgeries and postoperative course were uneventful.
Pathologically, the tunica media of the aberrant artery contained abundant elastic fibers, and dissection of the tunica media and mural thrombus were observed; however, arteriovenous fistula was not confirmed . At 6 postoperative months, the patient did not show any symptoms, and enhanced CT findings confirmed the aberrant artery to be completely occluded with no aneurysms .