The patient, a 12-month-old boy was the third child of non-consanguineous, healthy parents. He had healthy sisters of 5 and 4 years of age. The patient was born via vaginal delivery without asphyxia at 35 weeks of gestational age. The patient’s birth weight, length and head circumference were 2342 g (0.0 SD), 45.2 cm (0.0 SD) and 33.4 cm (1.2 SD), respectively. The placental weight was 850 g. Oliguria continued from birth, and the serum creatinine level was elevated to 2.63 mg/dl on the 5th day of age. Congenital nephrotic syndrome was suspected based on the detection of hypoalbuminemia (2.1 g/dl) and proteinuria (3+ on dipstick).
He was transferred to our hospital at 6 days of age. On admission, his consciousness was alert and his vital signs were stable: respiratory rate 37/min, heart rate 149/min, and blood pressure 84/54 mmHg. Bilateral microcoria and nystagmus were evident. The body posture and voluntary movements were normal. The muscular tone appeared normal. Deep tendon reflex was brisk. Laboratory tests confirmed that the urine protein/creatinine ratio was increased to 95.1 mg/mg Cre. Renal ultrasonography showed hyperechoic signals in both kidneys with unclear cortico-medullary structures. Continuous hemodiafiltration was introduced at 7 days of age, which was then replaced by peritoneal dialysis from 12 days of age. He became anuric during the course and continued peritoneal dialysis afterwards. With these renal replacement therapies, he survived the first 12 months of life.
Intestinal malrotation was diagnosed after the patient began experiencing recurrent vomiting started at 6 months of age . The volvulus was successfully relieved by surgery. However, the vomiting signs persisted beyond the surgical repair due to the presence of another digestive dysfunction, gastroesophageal reflux . Although duodenal tube feeding was introduced, only limited amounts of nutrition could be provided, which proved insufficient to achieve weight gain during the 12-month follow-up period. Thus, tulobuterol (0.2 mg/day) was given orally from 12 months. The patient’s vomiting disappeared immediately after tulobuterol treatment, and his weight continued to increase until the time of writing this report. In the last month, it reached 5300 g (+ 300 g). Patients on peritoneal dialysis are also known to develop thyroid dysfunctions . We verified that serum thyroid stimulating hormone (2.70 μIU/mL) and free thyroxine (1.48 ng/dL) levels remained unaltered. We thus did not interpret hyper- or hypothyroidism as a primary cause of his gastrointestinal problems.
Serial neurological assessments demonstrated that he had started gazing at and pursuing the objects from 2 months of age. However, generalized muscle weakness and hypotonia became prominent from 3 months of age. Presently at 12 months of age, his developmental quotient score is considered to be less than 20 (equivalent to the score of an infant of 2–3 months of age). He has been unable to control his neck, roll over, or sit unaided. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm and a normal axis with a corrected QT interval of 356 msec. The coefficient of variation in electrocardiographic R-R intervals (13.5%) remained within the normal range. Echocardiography demonstrated the balance of the 4 chambers and a normal left-heart function with an ejection fraction of 82.9%.
The clinical features of congenital nephrotic syndrome with microcoria prompted us to conduct the genetic testing for the diagnosis of PS. Whole-exome sequencing followed by the Sanger method showed that the patient harbored a compound heterozygous mutations in exon 14 (NM_002292.3:c.1648C > T:p.Arg550X) and exon 27 (NM_002292.3:c.4519C > T:p.Glu1507X) in the LAMB2 gene . An inheritance analysis demonstrated that his father and mother carried the heterozygous mutations in exon 14 (NM_002292.3:c.4519C > T:p.Glu1507X) and exon 27 (NM_002292.3:c.4519C > T:p.Glu1507X), respectively. Thus, the patient was genetically diagnosed with PS.
We found 19 patients with PS, who have been reported to manifest severe neuro-muscular problems . All of these patients showed neurological signs of hypotonia or developmental delay, whereas their onset or time course was not described in detail. Eight patients survived 12 months after birth, and 7 of them received renal replacement therapy (dialysis or kidney transplantation) in early infancy. Among them, only one patient was reported to show gastrointestinal problems. No detailed information was available on the gastrointestinal features of the other long-term survivors.
Mutation maps of these 19 patients are graphically summarized in Fig. b. Notably, all truncating mutations were located outside the laminin N-terminal (LAMNT) globular domain and the missense or in-frame deletions were mapped to the LAMNT domain. This result indicated both the pathogenic impacts of the disrupted LAMB2 protein and the functional significance of the LAMNT domain.