A 35-year-old Iranian male, with no previous history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, immune-compromised diseases, or obesity, presented to the emergency department of a tertiary eye care center in Tehran, Iran with painless decreased vision in his left eye starting a week before the presentation. Familial and habitual history (for example, smoking) were unremarkable. The patient had been hospitalized with the diagnosis of COVID-19 4 months before the current ocular symptoms, confirmed by a positive SARS-Cov-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test and a spiral chest computed tomography (CT) scan . There was a history of mild blurry vision in his left eye that started acutely after COVID-19 infection. However, the vision was significantly lower in the current presentation. The patient did not seek an ophthalmic exam due to mild visual symptoms at the previous presentation. During hospitalization due to COVID-19, the patient received azithromycin, dexamethasone, ceftriaxone, and enoxaparin for 3 days.
His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 20/20, while it was reported as counting fingers (CF) at 2 m in the left eye. Ocular motility, pupillary reaction, intraocular pressure, and anterior segment examinations were normal. Fundus examination of the left eye showed multiple cotton wool spots, flame-shaped hemorrhages, and dot and blot hemorrhages along with the inferior retinal quadrants. Tortuosity and engorgement of veins and arteriolar narrowing in supratemporal vascular branches were also detected .
Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) of the left eye demonstrated severe macular edema, subretinal fluid, intraretinal cyst formation, and hyper-reflectivity of inner retinal layers. Fundus fluorescein angiogram of the left eye indicated nonperfusion areas and vascular wall staining due to ischemia in the inferior half of the retina, which was compatible with inferior hemi-CRVO with a probable ischemic nature. Additionally, tortuosity and staining of a few vessels superior to the fovea and staining of a supratemporal branch of the retinal vein without an adjacent nonperfusion area were detected.
Laboratory evaluations of the suspected hypercoagulability state were found normal, including activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), international normalized ratio (INR), lupus anticoagulant dilute Russell’s viper venom test (LAC dRVVT screen), LAC-sensitive PTT, antithrombin-III, lupus anticoagulant silica clotting time ratio (LAC SCT ratio), protein S antigen, anticardiolipin IgM and IgG, factor V Leiden PCR, and prothrombin (G20210A). Protein C activity and homocysteine level results were borderline. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene assessment revealed heterozygosity for both MTHFR 677 and MTHFR 1298.
The patient was scheduled to receive three monthly intravitreal injections of antivascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) to treat RVO-related macular edema.