A 38-year-old man was hospitalized due to intermittent diarrhea, weight loss and recurrent respiratory infections. The diarrhea was intermittent, with recurrent episodes in the prior nineteen years. He was unemployed and made a living from collecting recyclable material from household waste to sell in junkyards. Since the symptoms had begun, he sought medical help just a few times, when they became severe. The diarrheic periods caused 5 to 6 daily bowel movements, with no blood, fat or worms in the stool. The most severe episodes lasted up to 10 days and were eventually accompanied by vomiting, fever and weight loss, resembling infections or parasitic infestations. Despite a weight loss of 35 kg, there were no triggering factors such as medications or specific foods, and he had no family members with similar symptoms.
The medical investigation of his intermittent diarrhea had commenced about 15 years previously, when the first diagnostic hypothesis was Crohn's disease. However, he had missed follow-up, preventing further investigation. After seeking medical help in other hospitals for many years, he was finally attended again in our hospital 2 years ago due to the same symptoms, when he was already malnourished and weighed 40 kg (body mass index = 16.2 kg/m2). At that time, he also complained of a daily cough that had begun concomitantly with the diarrhea. The cough led to sputum production, and eventually to the elimination of some blood streaks. The episodes lasted from 1 to 3 weeks and were usually treated with antibiotics. Consequently, he had received many different antibiotics since the onset of these symptoms. He never had had dyspnea and was sure that his respiratory condition had not worsened. Besides malnutrition, no other relevant changes were noticed on physical examination. Tuberculosis tests had been performed through sputum examinations and chest X-ray exams, and had ruled out this possibility.
Infectious and parasitic diseases were ruled out through stool and blood tests. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed atrophic gastritis and duodenitis. The gastric biopsies revealed chronic gastritis, mucosal atrophy and intestinal metaplasia due to Hp infection. Duodenal biopsies showed chronic duodenitis, mucosal atrophy and intraepithelial lymphocytosis. Colonoscopy displayed only a few shallow, confluent ulcers up to 5 mm in the terminal ileum, with no typical signs of Crohn’s disease in the histological evaluation. The colon and rectum were normal and celiac disease antibody tests were negative.
The respiratory investigation also began ruling out infectious diseases. No tuberculosis bacilli, fungi or cancer cells were found in his sputum samples. Chest computed tomography showed mucus hypersecretion (black arrows), thickening of the peri-bronchiolar walls (white arrowheads) and a ‘tree-in-bud’ pattern due to bronchiolar mucoid impaction involving the adjacent alveoli (black arrowheads). Transbronchial biopsy of the right upper lobe, where a ground-glass alveolar infiltrate was noted, revealed neutrophilic exudate and lymphocyte infiltrate, with no sign of tuberculosis, fungi or cancer.
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) showed a marked gamma globulin reduction (arrow). The gamma globulin dosage was 0.15 g/dL (normal values: 0.6 to 2 g/dL). The beta globulin dosage was 0.55 g/dL (normal values: 0.69 to 1.57 g/dL), albumin 3.69 g/dL (normal values: 3 to 5 g/dL), alpha 1 globulin 0.21 g/dL (normal values: 0.1 to 0.38 g/dL) and alpha 2 globulin 0.60 g/dL (normal values: 0.46 to 1.14 g/dL).
Immunoglobulin A, G and M dosages were significantly reduced. IgA was 40 mg/dl (normal values: 70 to 400 mg/dL) while IgG was 270 mg/dL (normal values: 700 to 1600 mg/dL) and IgM was 25 mg/dl (normal values: 40 to 230 mg/dL). Peripheral blood lymphocyte count performed through flow cytometry showed B lymphocyte decrease to 2.12% (normal values: 5 to 15%). The CD4 count was 539 cells/µl (normal values: 410 to 1590 cells/µl), whereas that of CD8 was 1101 cells/µl (normal values: 190 to 1140 cells/µl). Therefore, the CD4/CD8 ratio was 0.47 (normal values: 0.9 to 2.6). The percentage of NK lymphocytes was 7.36% (normal values: 5 to 15%).
After confirming the CVID diagnosis, the patient missed follow-up again and returned two years later, complaining of epigastric pain. EGD and biopsies revealed poorly differentiated intestinal type gastric adenocarcinoma in the posterior wall of the gastric body. He was operated on, but did not tolerate the chemotherapy and passed away one year after the surgery, due to pneumonia and septic shock.