A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital for further examination of an aortic bifurcation lymph node swelling of approximately 30 mm. The bilateral testes were normal. He had a history of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, but cystoscopy showed no evidence of recurrence. Clinical examination revealed no palpable lymphadenopathy. Cancer of unknown primary origin was suspected rather than metastatic bladder cancer. Tumor markers screening revealed high HCG (1990 mIU/mL) and β-HCG (55 mIU/mL) levels. Other tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein and lactate dehydrogenase, were within normal limits. As the swollen lymph node at the aortic bifurcation rapidly grew, open peritoneal lymph node biopsy was performed, and pathological examination revealed GCT with a histological pattern suggestive of a choriocarcinoma. Aortic bifurcation lymph node swelling further increased to 45 mm with bilateral common iliac artery and inferior vena cava invasion, multiple pulmonary metastases, and subclavian lymph node swelling. His HCG level increased to 7930 mIU/mL, and his β-HCG level was 160 mIU/mL. He was clinically diagnosed with stage IIIB disease and was classified into the intermediate prognosis group according to the International Germ Cell Consensus Classification. After 4 courses of VIP chemotherapy (vincristine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin), 2 courses of TGP chemotherapy (cisplatin, gemcitabine, and paclitaxel), and 1 course of EP chemotherapy (etoposide and cisplatin), CT revealed 90% and 30% reductions of the metastatic and the primary lesion sizes, respectively. His HCG and β-HCG levels were normalized. We dissected the residual mass at the aortic bifurcation with resection of the inferior vena cava and right common iliac vein. The pathological diagnosis confirmed choriocarcinoma with a small amount of residual viable cells. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered because of his old age and poor health status. After 4 months of chemotherapy, his HCG levels increased to 96.3 mIU/mL, but conventional imaging analysis (CT, bone scintigraphy, and FDG-PET) showed no evidence of recurrence . We then performed DWIBS, revealing an increased signal from the mass near the sacrum . Spinal MRI revealed GCT recurrence with S1–S3 sacral invasion . Then, the patient developed lower extremity pain, which was considered a neuropathic pain caused by GCT metastases. We started steroid pulse therapy immediately, and then administered radiotherapy (40 Gy/10 Fr) for the sacrum and salvage TGP chemotherapy. His tumor marker levels decreased to normal limits, and CT showed a remarkable reduction in the metastatic lesion size. Right lower extremity pain was reduced, and the patient achieved complete remission. Two years and 9 months after the last chemotherapy, CT showed that the metastatic lesion remained shrunk, and his tumor marker levels remained within normal limits. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.