A 40-year-old Persian female patient was referred to a tertiary trauma center one day after the motor-vehicle-accident. Patient had no significant past medical history. Following the primary wound management, a digital X-ray was obtained from her shoulder that demonstrated a concomitant 3-part head-splitting proximal humerus and comminuted humeral shaft fractures . The patient was referred to our center for surgical treatment. Initial evaluations in our center revealed no other associated major injury, and the neurovascular assessments were normal. The wound at the location of injury sized about 14 cm in length and 5 cm in width, located on anteromedial aspect of upper portion of the arm, showing a Gustilo-Anderson type of IIIB fracture. A long arm splint was applied after wound irrigation and dressing.
Surgery was performed in semi-sitting position on the following day. First, the wound was irrigated with low pressure pulsatile manner with more than 6 L of normal saline serum, followed by the debridement of the unviable tissues. Through a deltopectoral approach, reduction of greater tubercle, anatomical neck and head-split component (about 20% of head) attained and were fixed by 3 screws. Afterwards, two small incisions were made over both epicondyles of humerus, and after awl insertion, fluoroscopic guided closed reduction of humerus was achieved by longitudinal traction, external rotation, and abduction. Two titanium elastic nail (TEN) were inserted with rotational forces and anchored to the subchondral bone since the humeral head had a fracture. The post-operative neurovascular tests were normal. The patient was discharged and advised to use a 10-day vacuum dressing. Following the confirmation of absence of any infection and growth of the granulation tissue, patient was readmitted for skin graft. After 5 days, patient was discharged with necessary post-operative instructions after graft site healing assurance.
After 20 days while full healing of the donor and graft sites were achieved, the sutures and splint were removed. Splint was replaced with Sarmiento brace and the elbow movements were initiated. Two months after the trauma, full elbow range of motion (ROM) was achieved. A partial union (consolidation) was found on the X-ray unexpectedly, and considering the presence of comminution and fixation with elastic nails which is a non-rigid fixation, we continued the splint until the partial union was achieved and then removed it so that the patient could go through the recovery period with less discomfort. Thereafter, the brace was discontinued and passive pendulum shoulder exercise commenced . After 6 months, a near total union was observed in X-ray; therefore, all screws and TENs were removed. Thereafter physiotherapy for patient was done for 20 sessions. At the end of the 7th month of the follow-up period, complete union of the fracture was achieved , with no signs of infection and full elbow ROM. However, a small limitation of abduction and forward flexion in terminal ROM were detected and the assessed disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) score was10.