A 62-year-old male presented to the hospital’s emergency department with right-sided mild hemiataxia and mild hemiparesis. Fourteen days prior to admission, the patient had noticed numbness of the fourth and fifth finger of the right hand, which continued to spread up the entire arm. The medical history included hypertension with a prescription of ramipril 5 mg daily.
Initial physical examination revealed a mild hemiparesis with hemiataxia and choreiform movements of the right leg. His left extremities showed increased reflexes-levels as well as a right-sided positive Babinski sign. Otherwise he was in good medical condition. Blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg.
Initial sonographic studies showed a right-sided pulsatile Doppler-signal in the common and internal carotid arteries, suggestive of distal stenosis. In addition, there was moderate increase in flow velocities in the basilar-artery. In contrast the Doppler-spectrum in the intracranial vessels indicated widespread obliteration. Numerous arterial vessels suggestive of leptomeningeal and lenticulostriate collateral arteries revealed a strong collateral flow . These findings were interpreted as evidence of moyamoya-syndrome. MRI-angiography (3 Tesla) also suggested the suspected disorder; both middle cerebral arteries were obliterated . The diagnosis was eventually verified using conventional angiography, which revealed severe stenoses of the internal carotid arteries in the siphon portion, the obliterated vessels of the circle of Willis and the extended collateral leptomeningeal and lenticulostriate network .
Further diagnostic including brain imaging revealed the disease burden caused by the vasculopathy. A hypodense lesion dorsolateral to the left-sided caudate nucleus, measuring 15 × 7mm, was detected in the CT scan. Magnetic resonance imaging (diffusion weighted imaging on MRI) showed bilateral water shed ischemic lesions at various stages of development suggesting a haemodynamic infarction mechanism . MRI findings also indicated previous old haemorrhage in the left-sided putamen.
A cardiac workup revealed a persistent foramen ovale without any indication for deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. Holter-ECG provided no evidence for an arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation. An etiological workup ruled out autoimmune disorders and the cerebrospinal fluid showed no abnormalities. As no cause was found, the patient was diagnosed with moyamoya disease.
The patient was prescribed a medication with aspirin and simvastatin. Due to recurrent symptoms during hospitalization (dysarthria, worsening of hemiparesis) clopidogrel was added to the treatment plan for 3 months. At discharge, the patient only suffered from mild hemiparesis. On subsequent follow-up, the vascular status did not change and clinically the patient recovered entirely. After 3 months, the secondary prevention treatment plan was reduced to aspirin as single therapy.