A 52-year-old Black female with history of iron deficiency anemia presented to the emergency department with four days of right periorbital pain, ipsilateral temporal headache, diplopia, and photophobia. Incidentally, the patient reported sinus congestion one month prior that had responded to fluticasone propionate intranasal. Triage vital signs were within normal limits. Physical examination of the right eye demonstrated blurry vision with positive light perception, pupil equal, round, and reactive to light, an increased ocular pressure of 39 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) (reference range: 10–21 mm Hg), and mild proptosis. Cranial nerves III and VI paresis was observed resulting in ptosis and impaired abduction, adduction, and upward and downward gaze. The patient did not tolerate a fundoscopic examination and voluntarily kept her right eyelid closed due to photophobia.
Laboratory tests, including a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and urine pregnancy, were unremarkable. The electrocardiogram demonstrated a normal sinus rhythm. Computed tomography (CT) brain and CT angiogram brain and carotids revealed a cavernous sinus filling defect concerning for sinus venous thrombosis, and a heparin infusion was initiated. Magnetic resonance venogram and magnetic resonance imaging orbits with contrast demonstrated an abnormal signal surrounding the right cavernous sinus and petrous apex .
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome (THS) was diagnosed, and the heparin infusion was discontinued. Neurology was consulted; 250 milligrams (mg) solumedrol intravenous (IV) was administered, and the patient was admitted to the intermediate medical care unit. She underwent a lumbar puncture, which demonstrated a normal opening pressure and negative cerebrospinal fluid analysis. Per neurology recommendations, she was placed on a steroid regimen consisting of three days of 250 mg solumedrol IV daily followed by one week of 80 mg prednisone per os daily followed by a taper of 20 mg per week over the course of three weeks. The patient was discharged on hospital day 9 following resolution of symptoms. She had no recurrence of symptoms nor residual deficits noted at her two-week follow-up appointment.