The patient is a 62-year-old woman with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma who presented to the emergency department (ED) via emergency medical service (EMS) with a chief complaint of vomiting, nausea, and abdominal cramping that started 4 h prior to her arrival. The patient stated that she had spent the day exerting herself performing various outdoor gardening and yard maintenance activities. She did not remain hydrated during this time. Additionally, she felt progressive musculoskeletal lower extremity joint pain as she mowed the lawn. She consulted her family for modalities of pain relief. Her son in law recommended kratom, which he was allegedly prescribed by a pain management practitioner who is attempting to transition him from opioid dependence to an alternative substance. The patient took two “scoops” (each estimated by the patient to be approximately a teaspoon) of a commercially available powdered preparation. She had never consumed kratom previously. At 11:30 pm, she felt nauseated, went to bed, and vomited four times—her emesis was non-bloody and non-bilious, consisting of food. She additionally had abdominal pain, which was described as mild upper and lower crampy non-radiating abdominal pain. There was no associated diarrhea or constipation. There was no associated fever. The patient denied other symptoms. The patient’s family noted all other family members ate the same recent meals as the patient, with no family members reporting similar symptoms. Prior to arrival to the ED at 4:27 am, she continued to have nausea and abdominal pain, for which she called EMS and presented to the ED. En route, EMS noted the patient’s vital signs to be stable and a finger stick glucose reading within normal limits.
On arrival to the hospital, her presenting vital signs were a heart rate of 92, respiratory rate of 16, oxygen saturation of 97% on room air, and a temperature of 36.1 °C. On physical examination, she was found to be well appearing with moist mucous membranes. She had tachycardia. She had a soft abdomen with upper abdominal tenderness. Her skin was warm and dry with brisk capillary refill and no rash. A differential diagnosis was entertained that included small bowel obstruction, diabetic ketoacidosis/hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (DKA/HHS), acute gastroenteritis, food poisoning, pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis and other gallbladder pathology, intracranial pathology, kratom toxicity, and pregnancy/hyperemesis gravidarum. Small bowel obstruction was deemed less likely due to the lack of prior surgeries and normal bowel movements. Acute gastroenteritis was deemed less likely with normal bowel movements. DKA/HHS was deemed sufficiently evaluated for with no history of diabetes and normal EMS blood glucose reading. Intracranial pathology was considered due to vomiting without diarrhea, but was less likely due to associated abdominal pain.
A complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), liver function tests (LFT), and lipase were ordered. All CBC values were within normal limits except for a white blood cell count of 11,600 cells/mm3. BMP was within normal limits except for elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 22 mg/dl and glucose of 165 mg/dl. LFTs and lipase were also within normal limits. The leukocytosis was considered to be nonspecific leukocytosis in the setting of vomiting. The BUN was evidence of mild dehydration secondary to vomiting. During her stay, she was medicated with ondansetron 4 mg IV administered at 04:24 and at 04:47, and for refractory nausea, promethazine 12.5 mg IV at 07:00. She was also given famotidine 20 mg IV at 04:46 and 2 l of normal saline during ED stay. She was reassessed at 07:00 and 08:30 and found to have cessation of her symptoms. She was discharged with kratom avoidance precautions as obtained from Internet sources.