A 48-year-old Caucasian previously healthy female without a history of recreational drug use developed confusion syndrome and haemorrhagic cystitis during a travel to The Gambia . There she presented to a local hospital, where trichomoniasis was diagnosed and treated with antiparasitic chemotherapy. She decided to interrupt the trip and returned to Munich, Germany after only 6 days of travel (corresponds to “day one after onset of symptoms” (DOS 1)). Upon return, the patient was directly referred to a community hospital with dizziness, blurred vision, confusion syndrome, and upper arm pain. In the emergency department, she acutely developed a delirious state with fluctuating vigilance and had to be intubated. Laboratory testing revealed hyponatremia which was carefully corrected. While IL6 was already slightly elevated (17.7 pg/μl [< 5.9 pg/ml]), CRP (0.5 mg/dl [< 0.5 mg/dl]) and body temperature were normal, no rash or neck stiffness were observed . Based on CSF pleocytosis (CSF cell count 33 cells/μl [< 5 cells/μl], CSF protein 30 mg/dl [15–45 mg/dl], CSF lactate 2.47 mmol/l [1.1–2.4 mmol/l], CSF glucose 78 mg/dl [50–90 mg/dl], intact blood-CSF barrier), empiric antibiotic and antiviral treatment with ampicillin (12 g/d i.v. for 11 days), ceftriaxone (4 g/d i.v. for 16 days) and acyclovir (750 mg i.v. tid for 3 days) was started immediately upon admission to the emergency room, however, as HSV-PCR was negative and imaging of the head and brain (CT and MRI including angiography) was unsuspicious, acyclovir treatment was ceased after 3 days. Comprehensive microbiological testing for numerous infectious pathogens including tropical and sexually transmissible pathogens, as well as search for autoantibodies were unsuccessful (see Table ). The results of testing for yellow fever virus were compatible with a previous vaccination which had been administered 10 days before the travel to Africa. The EEG showed patterns of severe diffuse encephalopathy. Since pulmonary gas exchange and protective reflexes were adequate, the patient could be extubated and was respiratory and hemodynamically stable, though still unresponsive and alternating agitated or somnolent. Ten days after the onset of symptoms, the patient was transferred to a university hospital, where microbiological and laboratory testing were intensified. As the aetiology of the encephalitic syndrome was still unclear, steroid pulse therapy was initiated under the rationale of suspected limbic encephalitis 12 days after symptom onset and continued for 5 days, but no clinical improvement could be achieved. However, as on MRI new bihemispheric insular and frontobasal signal enhancement appeared and since in parallel inflammatory markers started increasing, empiric antibiotic therapy was again applied (meropenem 2 g i.v. tid from DOS 16 on, vancomycin i.v. [trough level 10–15 μg/dl] from DOS 18 on). Since the state of vigilance was still unchanged and protective reflexes were absent, the patient was re-intubated. Moreover, facial myoclonus emerged, which was treated with levetiracetam and phenytoin. As the anticonvulsive therapy was insufficient to control the myoclonus, therapeutic sedation was initiated, under which no spikes were detectable any more on EEG. Two days later, anisocoria (r > l) was noticed and conservative treatment of the underlying increased intracranial pressure (ICP) was started with osmotherapeutics, deep anaesthesia (including barbiturate), and hyperventilation. Neurosurgical therapy options were discussed, however, not feasible because of progressive and generalized oedematous brain swelling with transtentorial and foraminal herniation. The patient showed fixed dilated pupils and died 1 day later, 21 days after first symptom onset. As the cause of the disease was completely unclear, autoptic examination was sought which could help to explain at least the final course of the disease. Below, the most important results of the diagnostic investigations are presented and discussed in detail.
During the course of the disease, numerous laboratory examinations were performed in an attempt to identify infectious pathogens potentially responsible for the patient’s encephalitis (see Table ). For this reason, blood, CSF, urine, stool, and respiratory samples were also repeatedly applied to microbiological cultures which did not detect any relevant pathogens. For differential diagnosis, methods were selected according to different criteria: (I) The most common pathogens were analysed by multiplex PCR from CSF (cytomegalovirus (CMV), enterovirus, herpes simplex virus-1/2 (HSV-1/2), human herpes virus 6 (HHV6), human parechovirus, varicella zoster virus (VZV), Escherichia coli K1, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Cryptococcus neoformans/gattii). (II) A group of pathogens was investigated because of the travel history (chikungunya virus, dengue virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Plasmodium sp., rabies virus, Rift Valley virus, sandfly fever virus, Trypanosoma sp., West Nile virus, yellow fever virus, Zika virus) or (III) because of a potential risk profile that could not be specifically asked (HIV, hepatitis viruses, Treponema pallidum). (IV) Moreover, (zoonotic) pathogens which may have been acquired before the journey (Borna disease virus 1 (BoDV-1), Borrelia burgdorferi, Japanese encephalitis virus, Leptospira sp., tick-borne encephalitis virus) or (V) which are rare or very rare pathogens of encephalitis (Ebstein Barr virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, measels virus, rubella virus) were examined.
Since the patient had received yellow fever vaccination in preparation for her travel, the presence of a yellow fever vaccine associated neurotropic syndrome was considered. Anti-yellow fever antibodies in the patient’s serum were within the range of a normal post-vaccination immune response and were not detected in the cerebrospinal fluid. No yellow fever vaccine virus RNA could be amplified from any sample (brain biopsies, cerebrospinal fluid, serum, urine). Therefore, YEL-AND could not be confirmed.
The investigation of a broad spectrum of neuronal autoantibodies (against AMPAR1/2, amphiphysin, aquaporin 4, Ca-channel, CASPR2, CV2 (CRMP5), GABARB1/2, GAD, Hu, LGI-1, Ma1/2, NMDAR, Purkinje cells, Ri, Yo) remained without pathological findings and thus, no evidence for an autoimmune-mediated encephalitis existed.
On autopsy, neuropathological examination of the brain demonstrated macroscopically oedematous swelling and signs of increased intracranial pressure with sulcal effacement, uncus herniation, and discretely prominent cerebellar tonsils . Temporally accentuated haemorrhagic necrosis, which is typically observed in classical cases of herpesviral encephalitis, were not seen . Histological examination revealed lymphocytic meningoencephalitis with plenty of perivascular and intraparenchymal T-lymphocytes . The diagnosis of herpesviral encephalitis was made based on the immunohistochemical detection of numerous infected neurons that stained positive for HSV-1 .
NGS analysis was performed with DNA and RNA isolated from native autopsy tissue of the frontal lobe and cerebellum together with preserved serum from DOS 21. The number of reads that could be assigned to viral specimens was highest in material from the frontal lobe . The majority of those reads belonged to the human alpha-herpesvirus type 1 (HSV-1) .
After HSV DNA and antigen were detected in autopsy specimens of the brain by NGS analysis and immunohistochemical detection, respectively, retrospective conventional single PCR analyses from archived CSF, serum and tissue were performed to confirm these results (see below and Table ).