A 12-year-old male patient presented with cervical pain with onset several months before and no reported history of trauma or overuse. After a detailed anamnesis, the pain appeared to be both mechanical and inflammatory in nature, causing the interruption of sleep and achieving only slight relief with basic analgesia. The patient also reported a recent weight loss of 3 kg. On examination, his neck appeared tilted to the left side and the pain was localized posteriorly on his lower cervical spine, irradiating to the left arm. Spurling test was negative, with limited motion of the neck and tenderness of the paravertebral muscles bilaterally. Strength and sensitivity were preserved in both upper and lower limbs.
Simple anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the cervical spine were taken on the initial visit . Further examination by Computerized Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed a significant destructive bone lesion in C7, with vertebral body collapse, subluxation, partial destruction of the left lamina and spinous process and large associated anterior and posterior soft tissue components. The spinal canal was markedly narrowed at C6–C7, partly due to altered alignment and partly due to invasion by the tumor, obliterating the left posterolateral subarachnoid space . There was also partial involvement of the left pedicle, lamina, and spinous process of C6 and, to a lesser extent, the T1 left pedicle. The left vertebral artery was not visible, suggesting tumoral invasion and blockage which was later confirmed by CT angiography.
A CT-guided percutaneous core needle biopsy was suggestive of GCRO. Extension studies ruled out distant disease, being staged as: stage IIB of the Enneking and American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) systems ; Tomita type 6, this being an extra-compartmental tumor with adjacent vertebral extension and 1–10/A–D of the Weinstein-Boriani-Biagini (WBB) tumor classification system . The Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS) was 16 points indicating instability.
According to the national protocol for localized osteosarcoma in children (SEHOP-SO-2010) , the patient underwent ten cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, two of them being omitted due to nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity. He remained immobilized during this time with a plain cervical collar. Once neoadjuvant ChT was over, new imaging examinations were done, showing minimal bone tumor size reduction, but delimitation and a slight decrease of the soft tissue component. Also, spinal canal compromise was evidenced on MR myelography that manifested clinically with increased left radiculopathy.
Consecutively, surgical resection of the tumoral mass and reconstruction was performed at week 15. Firstly, with the patient in a supine position, a standard left sternocleidomastoid anterior cervical approach was used to expose the anterior longitudinal ligament and C6–C7 vertebral bodies. With a gentle and thorough dissection, laterally to the vertebral bodies, the tumor was found to have invaded the left pedicle and the posterior part of the C7 vertebral body and the inferior part of C6, as seen in the preoperative images. Resection of the tumoral mass in C6 and C7 vertebral bodies was performed followed by an anterior reconstruction, placing a titanium mesh (DePuy Synthes®) filled with iliac crest allograft and completing the first stage fixation with an anterior plate and screws secured to C5 and T1 vertebral bodies (SkylineTM Anterior Cervical Plate, DePuy Synthes®). Subsequently, with the patient in a prone position and through a longitudinal posterior approach, ligaments and muscles were dissected to expose the tumoral mass and C7 posterior elements. A solid cystic tumoral mass was identified in the left paravertebral region, and infiltration of the left posterior arch was also perceived. Wide resection of the posterior arch of C7 and left part of C6 was completed, performing a total spondylectomy of C7 and partial of C6, thereby releasing the spinal cord, preserving the dura intact and verifying bilateral decompression of C6-T1 roots. T1 left pedicle was also resected due to apparent tumoral invasion. To provide spinal stability, adequate alignment, and balance, a C5-T3 fusion was performed, with bilateral screws to the lateral masses of C5 and right C6, as well as pedicle screws to T1 right and bilaterally to T2 and T3 pedicles plus transitional rods (Synapse System, DePuy Synthes®). Drainage was applied and the wound was closed in layers. Neurophysiological monitoring showed no alterations during the procedure, and fluoroscopic control was satisfactory.
The histopathological results mentioned that the surgical resection piece consisted of a bony tissue measuring 7 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm covered by muscular tissue . Osteoforming neoplastic proliferations infiltrating into adjacent reticular bone trabeculae were identified. They were arranged in a fibrovascular stroma in which numerous osteoclastic multinucleated giant cells could be observed. Ki-67 proliferative index was 26%. A larger piece showed various cystic areas, accompanied by areas of postchemotherapy necrosis that accounted for 30% of the total area of the neoplasm.
During the immediate postoperative period, the patient evolved positively, and the surgical wound showed no signs of infection. The patient initiated sitting and ambulation with a rigid cervical collar for two weeks and no neurological symptoms or other complications appeared. Two weeks after surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy was started and subsequently radiotherapy was added as indicated in the proposed protocol. The cervical and upper dorsal spine C4-D1 was irradiated with Volumetric Intensity Modulated Arcotherapy technique with daily Cone Beam CT, 6 MV photons, using isocentric technique, planned with CT at a dose of 50.4 Gy with fractions of 1.8 Gy/fraction. Periodical clinical and radiological visits were set for 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 months after surgery at the spine clinic, as well as closer visits by the oncologists, with the patient being disease-free to date. In the last evaluation, he was healthy, did not require technical aids for walking or cervical immobilization, and had neither pain nor neurological symptoms. The last radiological examination can be seen in .