A 55-year-old Sinhalese woman presented to the gynecology ward with a vulval abscess. She also complained of involuntary leakage of urine for the last 7 years. The incontinence was throughout both day and night. She did not have an urge to pass urine. The urinary flow was intermittent. There was no fecal incontinence. Sexual activity was also compromised due to coital incontinence.
Over the last 7 years, she had been admitted on three occasions for urinary tract infections to a gynecology ward at a tertiary hospital. The reason for pyelonephritis on the last admission was attributed to hydronephrosis. She had also been on clinic follow-up for urinary incontinence and had been treated with antimuscarinics and lifestyle modifications. She had not undergone any surgery for urinary incontinence. As there had not been any improvement, she had later defaulted follow-up.
On abdominal examination, a distended bladder was found. Neurological examination revealed a saddle sensory loss of S2–S4 dermatomes. There was no sensory loss over the lower limbs. Bladder sensation was absent, but there was some degree (reduced) of anal sphincter tone. Motor functions and reflexes were normal in the limbs.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed L5–S1 spondylolisthesis . Computerized tomography (CT) of the brain was normal. Ultrasound imaging revealed a distended bladder with bilateral hydroureter and hydronephrosis.
An incision and drainage with concomitant intravenous antibiotics were started for the vulval abscess. An indwelling catheter was placed to decompress the distended bladder and to reduce vulval excoriations due to urine. Despite bladder decompression, serum creatinine remained elevated with persistent bilateral hydronephrosis indicative of secondary bilateral vesicoureteric junctional obstruction due to a grossly thickened bladder wall. Thus, bilateral ureteric stents were placed. Subsequently the serum creatinine improved from 6.54 to 2.57 mg/dL, and upper tract dilation reduced significantly.