A 47-year-old white woman, from Beirut, Lebanon, presented for general surgery consultation for a suspicious left breast mass discovered on routine mammogram. Our patient was premenopausal and had given birth to two children whom she had breastfed for 6 months each. She had had no previous medical problems and no previous surgeries. She had no family history of malignancy. She said she used to take calcium and vitamin D supplementation and denied taking oral contraceptives.
Our patient had no medical complaints. On physical examination, there was a 3 cm mass in the medial middle aspect of her left breast, with no nipple retraction or discharge, no changes in the overlying skin, and no palpable axillary lymph nodes. A digital mammogram showed a 30×26×29 mm round mass at the junction of the inner quadrants of the left breast.
An ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the lesion was performed, and it showed a small cell neuroendocrine tumor on pathology . PET CT scan imaging and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were conducted to investigate the possibility of any other primary diseases, and the results were negative .
Our patient underwent a left total mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Four sentinel nodes were retrieved using both the blue dye and the radioisotope methods. Pathology revealed a high-grade small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, a Ki-67 proliferation index of 50%, estrogen receptor-negative disease , 20% progesterone receptor-positive cells , and negative Her2/neu. Chromogranin, CD56, and synaptophysin were all positive in more than 50% of tumor cells with evidence of ductal carcinoma in situ . The surgical margins were free of tumor, and the four sentinel lymph nodes were negative. Our patient was diagnosed with small cell carcinoma of the breast (stage IIA), and she subsequently received adjuvant chemotherapy with four cycles of cisplatin 80 mg/m2 on day 1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 for 3 days, followed by four cycles of 5-fluorouracil (5FU) 500 mg/m2, epirubicin 75 mg/m2, and cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 (FEC).
Our patient has received adjuvant hormonal treatment with tamoxifen for 10 months so far. She is on regular follow-up in the cancer center, and she remains free of disease to date.