A 65-year-old right-hand dominant male chef presented to our clinic with right shoulder pain and dysfunction. The patient was previously healthy, had no previous surgeries in his affected joint, and had normal shoulder function until he pushed on a heavy door and felt a snap in his shoulder 2 months before his presentation. He attempted physical therapy before his clinical presentation and noted mild improvement in his range of motion but persistence of pain and dysfunction. He was using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications for pain control. He has no pertinent medical history, and his surgical history includes a previous hernia repair.
On physical assessment, he exhibited full passive range of motion and was able to reach 170° in active forward elevation, 80° in active abduction, 30° in active external rotation, and his upper lumbar spine in active internal rotation. The patient had positive Jobe’s and Hawkin’s tests and had a negative belly press test. He had no apprehension or signs of instability, and he had no bruising or swelling in his affected upper extremity. He was neurovascularly intact. His American shoulder and elbow surgeons (ASES) score was 39.5; his visual analog scale (VAS) pain score was 5/10; and his single assessment numeric evaluation (SANE) score was 25%. Xray imaging revealed mild arthritic changes with no significant lesions or fractures . The patient had the clinical vignette of a rotator cuff tear in the setting of his recent injury, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study was ordered to fully assess his presentation.
The MRI study showed a massive posterosuperior rotator cuff tear involving the supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons with retraction medial to the level of the glenoid margin . There was an effusion evident in the subacromial space and around the subscapularis tendon, but no significant tear in the subscapularis tendon was appreciated . On sagittal view, the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle bellies showed grade 4 Goutailler fatty infiltrations, while the subscapularis and teres minor muscle bellies showed no atrophy . There was minimal osteoarthritis present. Given the patient’s clinical presentation and imaging findings, he was diagnosed with a MIRCT–acute on chronic presentation–of both his supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons.
The patient was informed about his diagnosis and possible management options. Given his preserved range of motion, his minimal osteoarthritis, and the good condition of his subscapularis muscle, the treatment plan was decided on the placement of a subacromial balloon spacer in his right shoulder. During the procedure, the subacromial space was assessed, and the subscapularis tendon was deemed in good condition and did not necessitate repair. A medium-sized balloon was chosen in accordance with device indications, and 15 mL of saline were used to inflate the balloon inside the patient’s joint. The procedure was well tolerated, and the patient was placed in a sling for 10 days up until his first post-operative visit, after which the sling was removed and the patient was instructed to start physical therapy.
The patient was doing well with his post-operative recovery. At around the 2-month mark, the patient had 130° of active forward elevation, and his VAS pain score decreased to 3.5 . However, at around 3-month post-operative, the patient returned with exacerbated pain and function. He described having a moderately aggressive physical therapy session and waking up the next day feeling sore in his right shoulder. The soreness developed into significant pain and dysfunction, and his VAS pain score deteriorated to 7/10 and his ASES score decreased to 22 ( and ). He still had preserved range of motion, but with pain and mild guarding. Given the pertinent circumstances, the patient was instructed to continue physical therapy and to conduct frequent clinical visits to carefully monitor his recovery.
Following his 3rd month visit, the patient was reassured and told to return to physical therapy. He then started noting gradual improvements in his pain and function. He returned at 6-month postoperatively with improved symptoms, scoring a 4.5/10 on the VAS pain score and a 60 on the ASES score . His improvement continued to show at 8 months postoperatively, with the VAS pain score improving to 3/10 and the ASES score improving to 73 . At the 9th month mark, his VAS pain score was 1.5 and his ASES score was 74.5, and at the 1-year mark, his VAS pain score was 1 and his ASES score was 83. At that point, the patient had full range of motion and was noting continuous improvements with his recovery ( and ). He was very satisfied with his outcomes and stated that he would have conducted the balloon again if he had the chance.