A 24-year-old Japanese man presented to the emergency department (ED) with fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting. He had a history of mental retardation and epilepsy, and he could not express his emotions verbally. On arrival at the ED, the patient had a blood pressure of 75/30 mmHg, a pulse rate of 160 beats/min with a sinus rhythm, and a respiratory rate of 44 breaths/min. A physical examination revealed that his whole abdomen had a board-like rigidity. Laboratory investigations revealed leukocytosis of 20,600 cells/μl, an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 28.6 mg/dl, and a procalcitonin level of 278.99 ng/ml (reference range: ≤0.03 ng/ml). Arterial blood-gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.411, bicarbonate at 12.6 mmol/l, and lactate at 6.8 mmol/l. A plain abdominal radiograph revealed a diffuse gaseous distention of the small bowel and HPVG. A non-contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan confirmed the presence of the diffuse gaseous distention that was accompanied by pneumatosis of the small bowel and a dendritic gas image that extended to the liver surface on both the right and left lobes .
Following aggressive fluid resuscitation, an urgent laparotomy was performed because septic shock with diffuse peritonitis caused by perforated appendicitis and bowel necrosis caused by NOMI were strongly suspected. Although we found purulent ascites and a perforated appendix when we explored the abdomen surgically, neither gangrenous nor transmural ischemic changes were observed within the small bowel or colon . Therefore, we performed an appendectomy without a bowel resection and we selected open abdomen management with negative-pressure wound therapy, because a planned re-operation was scheduled. After the initial operation, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit where he was mechanically ventilated under sedation, and he was required a continuous intravenous infusion of noradrenaline. We administered a meropenem (0.5 g) infusion via a drip 4 times per day. On postoperative day 3, the planned re-operation was performed, and we did not find any ischemic changes within the small bowel or colon. We completed the operation with a formal abdominal closure. His leukocyte, CRP, and procalcitonin levels improved after the initial operation. On postoperative day 9, contrast-enhanced CT was performed, which demonstrated a thickening of the small-bowel wall, but no evidence of bowel ischemia or vascular occlusion. The patient’s blood cultures at the time of admission were positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis, and cultures of the intraoperative ascites fluid were positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Streptococcus anginosus, all of which are sensitive to meropenem, which was administered for 14 days. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on an oral diet.
Four days after discharge, the patient returned to the ED having experienced several vomiting episodes. A plain abdominal radiograph revealed a partial gaseous distention of the small bowel. Abdominal CT scanning, which was performed on the day following the patient’s readmission to hospital, enabled us to diagnose postoperative paralytic ileus. The patient’s only symptom was vomiting, and he had no symptoms that suggested an abdominal abscess. Non-operative management was chosen that including nasogastric tube decompression. After the discharge from the nasogastric tube declined, we began oral nutrition; however, the patient vomited again and we managed him using a long intestinal tube. The patient’s symptoms did not improve under non-operative management, and we decided to perform a laparotomy 40 days after the initial operation, because an upper gastrointestinal series using a long intestinal tube had revealed a small intestinal stenosis. A considerable adhesion was present in the upper jejunum to the abdominal wall, which were considered to be the cause of the passage disorder, and there was no evidence of a bowel stricture. Based on these intraoperative findings, we performed a synechotomy only.
After undergoing the re-operation, the patient’s course was uneventful. However, 57 days after the initial operation, the patient experienced symptoms associated with a bowel obstruction. An upper gastrointestinal series revealed a small intestinal stenosis within the proximal jejunum. Fifty-nine days after the initial operation, a partial resection of the jejunum was performed. A severe luminal stricture of the jejunum was evident that was accompanied by marked structural changes, which were not apparent during the second operation . The pathological findings revealed an ischemic inflammation accompanied by an ulcer and necrosis. A wide-ranging exclusion of the membranes had occurred, with ulcer formation, and the inflammation and fibrosis reached the sub-mucosal and sub-serosal layers were observed . After the third operation, the patient’s course was uneventful, and he was discharged on an oral diet.