A 31-year-old female patient felt a slowly growing swelling and mild pain in the right maxilla and consulted her private dentist, who performed a local incision and drainage. As symptoms persisted, the dentist referred the patient to the Department of Oral Surgery and Stomatology at the University of Bern. The patient was a smoker (10 cigarettes per day, cumulative dose of 10 pack years). Chronic bronchitis and penicillin intolerance were noticed in the medical history.
The clinical head and neck examination showed a mild prominence of the right cheek and intact sensorimotor functions. No lymph nodes were palpable. Intraorally, a hard, non-fluctuating, and painless swelling in the vestibule of the right maxilla (FDI regions 15–17) was present . The dentition was unsuspicious, all teeth in the right maxilla showed sensitivity upon CO2 dry ice testing, physiological mobility, and regular probing depths.
In the periapical radiograph, a well-demarcated radiolucency was visible in the apical region between the roots of the upper second premolar, first and second molar . Subsequently, a cone beam computed tomography (Accuitomo 170; Morita Corp., Kyoto, Japan, field of view 6 × 6 cm, 90 kV, 5 mA, 180°) was obtained which showed a space-occupying ovoid osteolysis in the right maxilla (30 × 20x12 mm). The osteolysis expanded into the maxillary sinus as well as the the buccal vestibule and was demarcated by a thin radiopaque line with small interruptions. Direct contact with the roots of the second premolar, first and second molar, but no visible signs of resorptions or displacement of the roots were noticed .
Clinically and radiologically an odontogenic keratocyst was most likely suspected. Although predominantly affecting the lower jaw, 23% of odontogenic keratocysts occur in the maxilla with a predilection to the molar region . Although a lateral periodontal cyst, a central giant cell granuloma, and odontogenic tumors were among the differential diagnoses considered, they were deemed less likely in this case.
The planned surgical treatment consisted of the enucleation of the entire lesion and its histopathologic examination. Anticipating intraoperative findings potentially indicating malignancy, such as irregular tumorous tissue presentation, destruction, or invasion of adjacent structures, an incisional biopsy was considered the preferred method. As devitalization of the first and second molar during surgery was highly probable, root canal treatments were performed before surgery.
After the onset of the local anesthesia, the surgery was initiated by a buccal sulcular incision and the preparation of a mucoperiosteal flap . Subsequently, the lesion was outlined by osteotomy. Upon presentation of a well-defined capsule and no invasion of adjacent structures, the surgeons agreed to perfom complete enucleation. Subsequently, the tumor was dissected bluntly from the surrounding tissues . The yellow tissue showed a surprisingly rubbery-solid texture upon palpation. It was removed in toto and fixed in formalin 4% for subsequent histopathological examination. Due to the intrasurgical presentation and structure, a keratocyst was ruled out and a solid odontogenic tumor was considered the most likely diagnosis. After the resection, the inspection of the surgery situs revealed a small rupture of the maxillary sinus mucosa medially, which was left in place , and primary wound closure was performed . The patient was prescribed postoperative antibiotics, analgesics and a decongestant nasal spray. She was instructed on the usual postsurgical measures and not to blow her nose.
One week after the surgery, wound healing was slightly retarded with redness of the marginal gingiva whereas two weeks postoperatively, the patient showed regular wound healing .
Due to the rarity of the finding, the biopsy was evaluated by pathologists at both Institutes of Pathology of the University of Bern and the Bone Tumor and DOESAK (German-Swiss-Austrian Working Group of Maxillofacial Tumors) reference registry in Basel. The specimen showed a proliferation of monomorphic spindle cells with focal dystopic calcifications and a background rich in collagen fibers. An epithelial component was ruled out by an immunohistochemical stain against pan-cytokeratin (AE1/3). Considering the clinical-radiological context, the diagnosis of an odontogenic fibroma was made .
Six months after the surgery the patient was symptom-free. The intraoral clinical examination presented normal findings . The CBCT (6 × 6 cm, 90 kV, 5 mA, 180°) showed the restitution of the regular sinus anatomy with a small residual defect in the facial maxillary sinus wall and circumferential flat thickening of the sinus membrane . One year postoperatively, a clinical examination showed physiological and unsuspicious intraoral findings. Due to the patient’s pregnancy, no radiological examination was performed. Further annual clinical and radiological control examinations are scheduled to exclude a possible recurrence.