A 17-year-old boy came with a chief complaint of lump and pain on his left elbow. He previously fell from the stairs about 1 m in height with the elbow hitting the ground, but the pain is subsided in two days. One month later, the patient felt there was a lump with a size of a marbleon the left elbow, which getting bigger to a size of a tenis ball, and was accompanied by pain. General examination showed there was no abnormality but the patient complained of decrease 5 kg of total bodyweight. The local state of the left elbow shows fixed, solid mass on the posterior aspect of the elbow, with the size 14x12cm, 30 cm circumferentially (contralateral 27 cm) . The range of motion of the left elbow joint could not be measured because of pain. On radiographs obtained at the first examination, an osteolytic lesion and periosteal reaction of the distal humerus was observed . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a low intensity was observed on T2-weighted imaging . Computed tomography of the chest showed that there was no abnormality. The patient underwent histopathological and immunohistochemistry examination, with the result of conventional osteosarcoma . The diagnosis of osteosarcoma was made.
The patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, ifosfamide, and adriamycin for 3 cycles. Limb salvage surgery by wide excision, cryosurgery followed by total elbow arthroplasty and ORIF with plate and screw. The patient was positioned right lateral decubitus position under general anaesthesia. The tumor was exposed and shaft humerus osteotomy within 5 cm above the tumor was performed. The radial artery, radial nerve, and ulnar nerve was identified and preserved. The bony segment was resected and prepared for autoclave processing. A thorough debridement of all the tumor and soft tissues from the resected bony segment was performed and the excised bony segment was frozen in pot containing liquid nitrogen for 20 min, thawed at room temperature for 15 min, thawed at room temperature for 15 min. The excised segment then thawed in distilled water for 10 min and reimplanted and fixed in place. Total elbow arthroplasty and ORIF with plate and screw was performed, the bone cement was also added. The implant was secured using advancement of extensor carpi ulnaris muscle and the wound was closed using primary suture..
Postoperatively we performed an X-Ray to evaluate the reconstruction. From the X-ray, the plate and screws are well-fixated . One month postoperatively, the implant was well-fixated and the patient can slowly move his elbow without limitation.