A 72-year-old female patient was referred to our institute due to chest discomfort. The radiologic investigations revealed a giant aneurysm of the ascending aorta, extending but confined to the proximal aortic arch and 7.5 cm in size .
We performed a median sternotomy with initial arterial cannulation of the right axillary artery using an 8 mm vascular graft and the right femoral artery for a second arterial line with a Y-limb preparing the circuit. The arm of the circuit going to the femoral artery was clamped. A two-stage venous cannula was inserted into the right atrium. The bypass was initiated via the right axillary arterial line and systemic cooling was applied to reach a bladder temperature of 32 °C. During cooling, vessel loops with tourniquets were placed around the completely freed innominate and left common carotid arteries . Once the vessel loop on the innominate artery was secured, a cross clamp was applied distal to the innominate artery in an oblique fashion , and then the arm of the circuit going to the femoral artery was unclamped. One pump circuit was used for the axillary and femoral artery, and the perfusion pressure was maintained at approximately 50~60 mmHg, as measured in the bilateral radial artery. Cerebral saturation was monitored using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRO 300: Hamamatsu Phototonics, Hamamatsu, Japan). The anterior arch resection was performed via a long beveled incision, starting at the right side of the origin of the innominate artery and ending in the lesser curvature of the arch in front of the clamp. The distal hemiarch anastomosis was carried out by means of a continuous 3–0 polypropylene suture with interrupted U-shape pledget stitches, and the graft was cross-clamped proximally; the pump flow was then returned to the antegrade arterial inflow through the axillary arterial line, and the proximal end of the aortic graft was completed just up to the sinotubular junction . The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative computed tomography showed a well-reconstructed aorta . At the one-year follow-up, there was no sign of a thromboembolic event or renal or hepatic failure.