A 19-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital due to a constellation of symptoms, including dizziness, nausea, and vomiting that commenced 1 year prior, reoccurred 2 mo ago, and were accompanied by visual blurring that also began 2 mo ago. Additionally, she presented with slurred speech and ptosis, both of which emerged 1 mo ago. Notably, her symptoms deteriorated 10 d prior to admission, leading to the onset of arm and leg weakness.
One year ago, the patient experienced dizziness, nausea, and vomiting, leading her to seek examination by a gastroenterologist at a nearby hospital. Gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and revealed no significant abnormalities. Her symptoms were completely alleviated with proton pump inhibitor treatment.
Two months prior to admission, she had a recurrence of dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and mild visual blurring. She was re-examined by the gastroenterology department, where another endoscopic examination showed no obvious abnormalities. Additionally, she visited the ophthalmology clinic for an eye exam and visual acuity test, which revealed nearsightedness in both eyes, with a naked eye visual acuity of 0.4 in her left eye and 0.6 in her right eye, and a corrected visual acuity of 1.0 in both eyes. No evident abnormalities were found in her eye fundus. Her symptoms slightly improved after receiving antacid and antiemetic medication, leading to her discharge from the hospital.
One month prior to admission, her symptoms worsened, characterized by increased dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and visual blurring, as well as the development of slurred speech and drooping eyelids. She was subsequently admitted to the local hospital's neurology department. The patient had previously sought medical attention at a local grass-roots hospital, where her magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was reviewed and revealed new findings. It is worth noting that the limited expertise of radiologists at such hospitals may contribute to potential inaccuracies in the diagnosis. Her brain MRI report initially indicated no obvious abnormalities, but upon further review, the MRI showed abnormal T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) signals , high T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery (T2-FLAIR) signals , slightly high and equal diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) signals , and normal apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values .
Ten days prior to admission, her symptoms worsened further, and she developed weakness in her arms and legs. As a result, she was transferred to our hospital’s neurology department.
The patient had no previous history of similar conditions.
The patient denied any family history of similar conditions.
A neurological examination revealed both vertical and horizontal nystagmus, slurred speech, drooping eyelids, and muscle strength of grade 4 in the bilateral lower extremities according to the muscle strength grading scale (maximum score 5); her Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score was 7 points. She had hyperactive reflexes in the biceps, triceps, knees, and Achilles tendons, and positive bilateral Babinski’s sign.
Laboratory tests for various antibodies were performed, including serum anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody (MOG-IgG), anti-myelin basic protein antibody (MBP-IgG), GFAP-IgG, and anti-autoimmune encephalitis antibodies, all of which yielded negative results. However, the serum antibody of AQP4-IgG tested positive at a dilution of 1:100. Lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 115 mm water, with normal levels of CSF protein, glucose, and leukocyte count, and undetectable oligoclonal bands. CSF antibody testing showed positive results for GFAP-IgG at a dilution of 1:10 and AQP4-IgG at a dilution of 1:32, while CSF MBP-IgG, MOG-IgG, and autoimmune encephalitis antibodies were negative. The antibody detection test employed a transfected cell assay, which was further confirmed by the normality of the negative control from the same period.
The patient had previously sought medical attention at a local grass-roots hospital, where her MRI was reviewed and revealed new findings. It is worth noting that the limited expertise of radiologists at such hospitals may contribute to potential inaccuracies in the diagnosis. Her brain MRI report initially indicated no obvious abnormalities, but upon further review, the MRI showed abnormal T1WI signals , high T2-FLAIR signals , slightly high and equal DWI signals , and normal ADC values .
One month after the patient's initial MRI scan, a follow-up scan was performed, which showed low signal intensity on T1WI , high signal intensity on T2-FLAIR , slightly high and equal signal intensity on DWI , and normal ADC values in the medulla oblongata. The location of the abnormal signals remained consistent with the first scan but showed a reduced range and decreased high signal intensity on T2-FLAIR. Additionally, a spinal MRI was conducted, yielding normal results.