A 62-year-old Caucasian woman, 5.4 ft and 165 lbs, with no history of drug use was admitted to a neurological emergency unit after a first epileptic seizure event reporting of monthly recurrent ill temper. She reported past cholecystectomy 2001, positive family history for prostate cancer (father) and Alzheimer's disease (mother). The patient had two uncomplicated vaginal deliveries, no smoking history and alcohol consumption occasionally. No medication separate to this case. Neurological workup included EEG, CT of the brain, MRT but no intracranial pathology could be demonstrated. Blood and CSF chemistry were unremarkable and serum as well as CSF tested negative for bacterial, viral, fungal or parasitic pathogens, Thus it was suspected that the patient suffered from epilepsia and abdominal pain was thought to represent an epigastric aura. Treatment with CBZ at a dose of 200 mg twice daily was started.
Ten days after introduction of CBZ the patient developed a reddish maculo-papulous rash with pruritus affecting her entire body except the face and legs; simultaneously, she developed fever and watery diarrhea. CBZ was decreased to 200 mg once daily, antihistaminic and antipyretic drugs were started, which resulted in an improvement of symptoms (temperature normalized, skin lesions disappeared and diarrhea improved). The plasma CBZ level was 3.0 mg/L (therapeutic range 4 to 12 mg/L).
Twenty days later the patient's condition dramatically worsened. The exanthema reappeared and became generalized, she developed again watery diarrhea and her temperature rose to 39 degrees centigrade. She was admitted to hospital and CBZ was replaced with valproic acid (VPA). Laboratory findings showed a normal white blood cell count with relative eosinophilia (8% of total leukocytes) and elevated transaminases (AST of 45 U/L, ALT of 53 U/L, γGT of 65 U/L). C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 2.2 mg/dL. Serum creatinine was elevated to 1.3 mg/dl and serum potassium level was increased at 5.5 mmol/L. Chest x-ray and abdomen ultrasound were unremarkable, but the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed terminal negative T waves in I, II, aVL, V5 and V6 with normalizing tendency after strain. An ischemic cardiac event was excluded by normal myocardial scintigraphy and negative angina history and normal troponine T and creatinine kinase (including myocardial specific CK). Transesophageal echocardiography showed no signs of myocardial hypertrophy, a good ventricular function but a small pericardial effusion. Stool cultures were negative for enteric pathogens and no occult blood could be detected.
Following withdrawal of CBZ and application of corticosteroids (i.v. methylprednisolone at a dose of 16 mg daily for one weeks) and antihistamines, the patients condition rapidly improved, diarrhea stopped, she defeveresced and the ECG normalized .