The 55-year-old female patient arrived in our emergency room with epigastric for two days.
The patients’ prior events are sown on Table .
Twenty two years before, in 1995, a vertical banded gastroplasty by Mason was performed (Starting weight 185 kg). After an adequate weight loss of 95 kg in the next years, a rapid weight regain of 87 kg occurred in 2013 due to a gastrogastric fistula. Therefore, the gastroplasty was converted into a biliopancreatic diversion by Scopinaro . The procedure was started minimal invasively, but had to be converted to open surgery, due to a short jejunal loop. The remnant stomach was not resected. Following the last surgery, an adequate weight loss of 107 kg took place. Starting in early 2017 the patient was regularly admitted to our hospital with tarry stools and iron deficiency anemia despite substitution. Esophagogastroduodenoscopies repeatedly showed a gastrojejunal anastomotic ulcer. At this point, the ulcer appeared to be the cause of the anemia. After interdisciplinary discussion the decision was made to convert the BPD to a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass with resection of the problematical gastrojejunostomy.
On arrival in our emergency room, the blood work showed normal leucocyte counts and a normal CRP value, but elevated transaminases and hyperbilirubinemia. An ultrasound in the emergency room showed a hyperechoic mass in the liver hilum and intrahepatic cholestasis. With the epigastric pain continuing, we decided to perform a CT-scan with oral contrastation , in which evidence was seen of an intussusception reaching the ligament of Treitz with consecutive intrahepatic cholestasis. A complete antegrade intussusception of the remnant stomach into the duodenum reaching up to the ligament of Treitz was found during surgery. The intussusception was reduced and the remnant stomach was resected . The gastrojejunal anastomosis ulcer was resected as a short segment. A new anastomosis was fashioned using a linear stapler. The biliary as well as the common channel remained unchanged with 250 cm and 100 cm respectively. The alimentary channel was shortened to 80 cm.
Following the procedure, no further blood transfusion was needed, and the patient was discharged on the sixth day after surgery. The pathological examination showed a tumor free specimen with chronic antrum gastritis and no indication of malignancy.