A 52-kg, 71-year-old woman developed a slight fever (37.2 °C), chest discomfort, and dyspnea 2 weeks before hospitalization. Her external jugular veins were distended, her legs were edematous, and her oxygen saturation was low (88%) in room air. An electrocardiogram revealed ST elevation and a QS pattern in leads V1–4 without reciprocal change. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed akinesis of the anterior septum, thinning (6 mm), a low ejection fraction (43%), hypokinesis at the interventricular apex, a dilated left atrium (50 mm), and mild tricuspid regurgitation peak pressure gradient (TRPG); 43 mmHg and moderate MR without MS. Her abnormal laboratory data were as follows: C-reactive protein (CRP), 2.95 mg/dl; alanine aminotransferase, 57 IU/l; gamma-glutamyl transferase, 64 IU/l; creatine phosphokinase-MB, 30 IU/l; Troponin T, 1.040 ng/mL; creatinine, 0.83 mg/dl; white blood cells, 10,000/μl; prothrombin time–international normalized ratio (PT-INR), 1.19; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 26.2 s; D-dimers, 11.5 μg/ml; and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, 11,265 pg/ml. These findings suggested liver congestion, renal dysfunction, and semi-acute myocardial infarction of the anterior septum. Cardiologists followed-up the ECG and cardiac enzyme 3 h later and found that the myocardial infarction had already peaked; they diagnosed that ST elevations with QS pattern misleadingly occurred because of semi-acute ischemia , suggesting that urgent coronary angiography (CAG) was unnecessary. Therefore, they decided to treat congestive heart failure first and avoided CAG to prevent further kidney injury (creatinine; 0.83 mg/dl). Diuretics (20 mg furosemide + 200 mg spironolactone/day), a coronary vasodilator (nicorandil + isosorbide mononitrate), and anticoagulant therapy (heparin at 15,000 U/day) were administered after hospitalization, resulted in an increase of APTT . Consequently, her symptoms improved. The TRPG decreased from 43 to 24 mmHg, the MR changed from moderate to mild, and the E/A improved from “restrictive to impaired” on day 3 in the cardiac care unit.
Four days after hospitalization, her CRP concentration was increased again to 11 mg/dl, indicating an inflammatory response possibly indicating infectious endocarditis (IE), and her antithrombin and fibrinogen levels were 49% and 420 mg/dl. Another TTE examination revealed a thrombus (24 × 14 mm) in the left atrial appendage (LAA) , moderate MR, and increased TRPG (40 mmHg). IE was first suspected, and emergency cardiac catheterization performed on day 5 of hospitalization indicated left anterior descending coronary artery #6, 90%; #7, 50–75%; and #9, 90%. Therefore, the patient had to undergo an emergency operation (thrombus removal, mitral valve replacement (MVR), coronary bypass, and LAA closure) despite having an uncontrolled heart failure.
General anesthesia was induced using fentanyl (0.2 mg), midazolam (3 mg), and rocuronium bromide (0.6 mg/kg), with nitroglycerin and nicorandil infusion. Intraoperative anesthesia was maintained by intravenously infusing remifentanil (0.2–0.5 μg/kg/min) and/or fentanyl with sevoflurane (1–3%) and/or propofol (2–3 μg/ml) with target-controlled infusion (Diprifusor™; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). Furthermore, the radial arterial line, bispectral index (Nihon Kohden, Tokyo, Japan), regional SO2 (INVOS 5100C™; Edwards Lifesciences, Unterschleissheim, Germany), transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, continuous cardiac output, and SvO2 (Vigilance II™; Edwards Lifesciences) were considered for routine monitoring. A thrombus was attached to the LAA as confirmed by three-dimensional TEE (Video 1). The operative procedure comprised thrombus removal with LAA closure , MVR with a 27-mm biological valve (St. Jude Medical, Saint Paul, MN, USA), and coronary artery bypass grafting (aorta–saphenous vein–left anterior descending artery). The cardiopulmonary bypass was weaned without any untoward effects, and dopamine and milrinone were infused without any transvalvular leakage and other problems. The patient was discharged on the 17th postoperative day with no complications. Pathological examination of the excised mitral valve revealed fibrinolysis, hyalinosis, and mucoid degeneration without vegetative endocarditis. The thrombus consisted of the blood clot with fibrin, with no solid organization. In PAS, Grocott, and Gram staining, no bacterial colonies were detected on thrombus cultivation.