A 60-year-old female presented with complaints of pain and swelling in the right knee for 1 day. The patient was operated with total knee replacement 6 years back for Grade 3 osteoarthritis of the knee. The patient was known case of hypertension and was on medication for the same. On clinical examination, the patient presented withlocalized tenderness and painful restriction of movement around the knee joint. An old scar mark of total knee replacement was present. The scar mark was clean and healthy. Plain radiographs of the right knee with a total length of the femur was taken in ap and lateral view. The radiographs showed extraarticular long oblique distal femur fracture with the prosthesis in situ. On radiographs, Tkr implant was stable and no loosening was observed. CT scan was done to know the extent of the fracture and congruity of the condyles. Blood investigations were done to rule out the infections and they were observed normal. Hypertension was controlled before the planned surgery. Swabs were sent from the axilla, groin, nasal cavity, and ear to rule out any superficial skin infection with due consent. Patient was planned for open reduction and internal fixation with a locking plate. Under all aseptic precautions, the patient was kept in the supine position. The knee was placed in 30 degree flexion. Incision was taken on the lateral aspect of the thigh with schwas-buckler approach. Soft tissue was dissected in layers and fracture site was identified. Hematoma was removed and edges were freshened. The reduction was obtained with bone holding clamps, confirmed under c arm guidance. Temporary thick K wires were placed for holding the reduction. Distal femur locking plate of 11 holes with locking screw was used for fixation. Formal inspection of the tkr implant was done to know the position and any signs of loosening. Procedure was uneventful and wound was closed in layers. The limb was protected with a rigid long knee brace. Check dress was done on day 5 and it was healthy. Patient was discharged on day 12 with all sutures removed. Patient was kept on nil weight bearing on the affected limb with the help of walker for 1 month . Physiotherapy for operated limbs was advised. Follow-up was taken on day 21, 1 month, and 3 months, respectively. Follow-up X-rays were taken with respective visits. Patient being housewife by profession went back to her routine life.