A 62-year-old man with history of chronic intermittent abdominal pain was presented to our department. The pain was postprandial and resolved by fasting. Moreover, he suffered from an unintentional weight loss, i.e., more than 50 % during the last two years. He underwent full investigation including hematology and blood chemistry tests, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and colonoscopy revealing no specific diagnosis. However, concomitant stenoses of superior mesenteric and celiac arteries were detected at the ultrasound Doppler sonography and then computed tomography (CT) angiography of abdomen which reported 70 stenosis of SMA and celiac artery. Before the admission to our department, celiac and superior mesenteric artery stenting had been performed resulting in short-term relieving of symptoms. However, after six months, he complained of severe postprandial abdominal pain resulting in food intolerance. Abdominal CT angiography was repeated showing extensive and complete thromboses of both arteries and stents (, ). Moreover, CT angiography showed appropriate runoff vessels and enough length of SMA in the remaining parts (two to three centimeters after the occulted stent). Endovascular approach was proposed; however, the patient did not accept the risk of restenosis and higher risks of open surgery in case of its occurrence. Subsequently, the patients underwent open laparotomy in the supine position with transmesenteric approach to perform retrograde C loop graft to the distal mesenteric artery. However, during the surgical exploration, an aneurysmal-like iliac artery was detected which was not an appropriate candidate for anastomosis and bypass the stenosis using dacron graft . Therefore, it was decided to transection distal part of the occlusions SMA and reimplant the SMA on the anterolateral face of the infrarenal aorta as the end-to-side anastomosis. The patient was followed postoperatively every month by physical examination, showing a weight gain and after one- and six-month abdominal CT angiography was done which normal blood flow of the end-to-side anastomosis was reported .