A 61-year-old woman was referred to our department because of synchronous hepatic metastasized carcinoma of the colon sigmoideum. Physical examination revealed no significant abnormalities. Blood investigations were within normal range except for mild anemia and serum carcinoembryonic antigen level of 10 ng/ml. Fecal occult blood test was strongly positive.
Colonoscopy found a sigmoid lesion 20 cm from the anus, and pathological result of the biopsy specimen demonstrated a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The gene detection found no mutation in KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF. Magnetic resonance imaging of the liver revealed multiple metastases and the largest measured 15 cm × 11 cm × 13 cm (staging according the seventh edition of the UICC: cT3, cN1, cM1a) .
The multi-disciplinary team (MDT) suggested a conversion strategy consisting of preoperative FOLFIRI (irinotecan, fluoruracil) regimen with cetuximab for the initially unresectable colorectal liver metastasis. If the conversion of liver metastasis was achieved, a right trisectionectomy would be performed.
After 6 cycles, the liver metastasis significantly shrank (staging according to RECIST version 1.1: PR), but the largest metastasis was adjacent to the left branch of portal vein . The CT volumetry revealed that total liver volume (TLV) was 1495 ml, and the volume of the future liver remnant (FLR) was 415 ml, which was below the volume cutoff value for safe resection (more than 40% of TLV) . So, according to MDT, terminal branches portal vein embolization (TBPVE) was performed to block the anterior and posterior branch of the right portal vein as previously reported for sufficient hypertrophy of the left lateral lobe .
Five days after the TBPVE, the FLR was 513 ml (47.5% of TLV). On the 11th day, the FLR was 550 ml (50.9% of TLV) and laparoscopic sigmoidectomy and right trisectionectomy were performed . There were no intraoperative complications, and the histology of the FLR showed a low-grade steatohepatitis after chemotherapy. The postoperative histology revealed pT3, pN2b (11/17), pM1, L0, V1, G2, and R0 resection margin. The postsurgical course was uneventful and the patient continued to undertake 6 cycles of systemic therapy of FOLFIRI with cetuximab. Heretofore, 7 months of recurrence-free survival have been witnessed.