A 48-year-old Chinese man was admitted with melena (hemoglobin = 64 g/L). Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed that the mass was located in the descending duodenum, a cross section of approximately 1.8 cm × 2.0 cm. The values of plain and three-phase contrast-enhanced CT scans were about 35/90/90/73HU . Duodenoscopy confirmed that the mass originated from the duodenal papilla and projected into the lumen of the duodenum without invading the intestinal wall . Endoscopic biopsy of the tumor showed a proliferation of polygonal cells, which were a dense arrangement and accompanied by visible mitosis and pleomorphic giant cells. Tumor cells were positive for CD68, Ki67 (50%), and Vimentin , while negative for CD117, CD20, CD3, CD34, chromogranin A, CK7, Desmin, DOG1, HMB-45, melon-A, and Synaptophysin (data not provided). Then, the diagnosis considered a high-grade sarcoma, and a complete resection of the tumor was recommended for further examination.
What is noteworthy is that the patient was admitted to our hospital 8 years ago with obstructive jaundice (bilirubin = 286 μmol/L, especially direct). Ultrasound and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) were performed at that time, both of which indicated mass in the distal common bile duct . A biopsy specimen obtained from the mass revealed blood clots and multinucleated giant cell reaction . Subsequently, the patient underwent cholecystectomy, choledochectomy, and Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. No mass was found in the bile duct during the operation, but stenosis was observed in the pancreatic segment of the common bile duct with a thickness of 0.3 cm. The distal bile duct was resected approximately 0.6 cm below the stenosis. Postoperative pathology showed chronic inflammation of the bile duct with mild hyperplasia of glandular epithelium and adenomyosis. The patient was asymptomatic for 8 years.
Based on medical history and the biopsy results during the second admission, the final surgical method was determined as duodenal papilla and tumor resection, rather than pancreaticoduodenectomy. The histopathological findings revealed an UPS. Microscopically, multiple multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells were evenly distributed on the mononucleated stromal cells. Giant cells contained numerous nuclei with eosinophilic cytoplasm. The pleomorphic stromal cells were spindle-shaped and atypical round, which were similar to the high-grade sarcoma. Nucleoli could be seen in several stromal cells. A small number of stromal cells showed a high degree of mitosis, which is a sign of malignancy. Immunohistochemical stains for CD68 and Vimentin were positive in the neoplastic cells, the proliferative marker Ki67 showing approximately 80% nuclear staining , and CD117, CD34, HMB45, CD45, CD56, S-100, smooth muscle actin (SMA), or desmin were negative (data not provided). The patient declined further chemotherapy and was discharged.
Two months later, the patient was admitted to our hospital again with complaints of melena. CT scan showed a recurrent duodenal mass and multiple metastatic foci in the liver , and the patient died of metastasis 2 weeks later. The episode of care is organized as a timeline in .