A 52-year-old male with a body mass index of 23.6 kg/m2 and no comorbidities was referred to our institution for surgical consultation due to a chronic post-bariatric gastrocutaneous fistula. His bariatric history started in 2002, after he underwent an open modified Scopinaro procedure at an initial weight of 216 kg (BMI 57.4 kg/m2). Despite midterm satisfactory results (44% total weight loss), the patient presented with weight reganance and an incisional hernia. Bariatric revisional surgery and hernia repair were performed in 2017 at a weight of 170 kg (BMI 45.1). He soon developed a gastric pouch leak with multiple intra-abdominal collections and sepsis, which required a long period of conservative management with open abdomen and negative wound pressure therapy, parenteral nutrition, and intravenous antibiotics.
Over the course of several months, he developed an epithelized gastrocutaneous fistula with controlled but persistent drainage out of the proximal edge of his planned ventral hernia . An upper endoscopy identified a fistulous orifice at the proximal edge of the vertical staple line, just below the esophagogastric junction, measuring approximately 8 mm , with extraluminal extravasation that led to a recurrent left subphrenic abscess . Endoscopic treatment was considered the preferred choice for this case, given the poor nutritional status and hostile abdomen. For years, he had undergone multiple attempts at fistula closure using argon plasma coagulation, internal and external drainages, clipping, fibrin sealants, e-vac therapy, and stenting.
Discouraged with multiple failed repair attempts, he was referred for further evaluation in our center. After a multidisciplinary team discussion, a decision was made to proceed with an innovative endoscopic technique. The placement of a CSDO across the fistula orifice was planned with the agreement and written consent of the patient.
An Occlutech® muscular VSD occluder (Occlutech International AB, Helsingborg, Sweden) was selected due to the long funnel-shaped aspect of the defect, similar to a ventricular septal defect. This device consists of a braided nitinol disc designed to adapt to the shape of the defect and effectively achieve immediate closure. The patch material also serves as a matrix for subsequent tissue ingrowth and granulation that may contribute to fistula closure .
The procedure was performed in the catheterization laboratory under intravenous sedation and topic anesthesia. The fistula was cannulated from the esophagus by a biliary stent deployment system under direct endoscopic guidance and the extraluminal leakage was documented by contrast injection. An AmplatzTM extra stiff guidewire (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was inserted through the fistula orifice and its adequate position was confirmed by fluoroscopy. The delivery system was introduced over the guidewire and the CSDO was deployed under endoscopic and fluoroscopic guidance with no immediate adverse events . A contrast study after the CSDO placement demonstrated no extravasation of contrast material through the device.
After the procedure, restricted oral intake was required for 24 h. The patient was placed on a liquid diet for 10 days and was advanced to a regular diet on day 12, despite the 10–15cc remaining daily drainage through the pigtail drain positioned at his left subphrenic abscess. Nearly 6 weeks later, the pigtail was accidentally displaced, and the patient progressively developed systemic signs of sepsis. Computed tomography and fluoroscopy documented recurrence of the abscess and partial dislodgment of the 8-mm mVSD CSDO . The device probably tore the friable tissue around the fistulous orifice and got stuck in the tunnel-shaped tract, and it was not possible to see or snare the device by endoscopic view. Given the apparent (though limited) success of the device, a second attempt with an oversized disc (Occlutech® Figulla Flex II UNI 24-mm) was made , ultimately sealing the fistulous orifice with the former device positioned between the two discs of the new one .
At the 6-month clinical and imaging follow-up, upper endoscopy and contrast-enhanced CT scan showed the device already engrafted and a significant reduction of the chronic abscess, with no signs of fistula recurrence . The pigtail was maintained in the subphrenic space to monitor any sign of fistula recurrence and occasionally drained debris from the chronic abscess. It was finally removed after the follow-up imaging, and no drainage was observed from its insertion orifice or the previous cutaneous fistulous tract.