We report on a 65-year-old Caucasian female patient who presented in March 2017 with persistent right wrist pain and swelling .
She suffered from arterial hypertension and asymptomatic cerebral aneurysm and had chronic alcohol (2–3 units/day) and tobacco consumption (50 pack-years). She had a history of surgery for a trigeminal neuralgia 4 years previously. She took amlodipine [10 mg/day per os (PO)] and aliskiren (300 mg/day PO) for her hypertension and low-dose aspirin (100 mg/day PO) for the cerebral aneurysm. She had no history of prior tuberculosis, thrombosis, or miscarriage or abortion. Her family history was negative for autoimmune, rheumatic diseases and psoriasis. She did not have an aquarium or any contact with animals and had not traveled in the previous year, but she gardened. She was a retired waitress, was married, and had a son.
The patient had no inflammatory low back pain, respiratory symptoms, psoriasis, or uveitis. She had no history of trauma, but she had a carpal tunnel release the previous year. During surgery, a tenosynovitis of all deep and superficial finger flexor tendons was detected, so a tenosynovectomy was performed. As soon as 2 months later, the tenosynovitis reoccurred and a second tenosynovectomy was performed. Still, the patient suffered a second relapse after another 4 months, and was referred to our rheumatology clinic for further investigation. Besides right wrist pain, she also complained of left wrist and bilateral shoulder pain. Blood pressure was 142/86 mmHg, pulse 64 beats per minute, body temperature 36.7 °C, height 157 cm, and body weight 50 kg. Joint examination showed no abnormalities besides the flexor-tendon tenosynovitis, and general examination was normal, including lymph node status as well as heart and lung auscultation. Equally, there was no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Neurologic evaluation showed normal gait, strength, and sensibility.
Paraclinical investigations showed slightly elevated inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein 32 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 28 mm per hour, leukocytes 12.8 G/L, neutrophils 11.65 G/L, lymphocytes 0.64 G/L, thrombocytes 430 G/L), normal hemoglobin (157 g/L), and no eosinophils or basophils. Antinuclear antibodies were at 1:160, without specificity, and rheumatoid factor, cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, and HLA B-27 were negative. The following parameters were normal: corrected calcium (2.36 mmol/L), phosphate (1.01 mmol/L), creatinine (56 μmol/L), urate (286 μmol/L), iron (17.3 μmol/L), transferrin (31 μmol/L), transferrin saturation coefficient (0.28), glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT) (24 U/L), glutamic pyruvic transaminase (GPT) (26 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (78 U/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) (23 U/L), 25(OH) vitamin D (28.4 μg/L), parathyroid hormone (10 ng/L), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (1.27 mU/L). Ferritin was slightly elevated at 335 U/L (normal ≤ 300 μg/L), most probably in the context of inflammation as well as the chronic alcohol consumption. Urine analysis was normal. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and viral hepatitis B and C serology as well as ELISPOT for latent tuberculosis were negative.
Hand X-rays revealed no erosion or chondrocalcinosis, and chest X-rays showed no sign of sarcoidosis or latent tuberculosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and X-rays showed no signs of spondylarthritis. Besides the flexor tenosynovitis, ultrasound examination revealed a synovitis of the wrist and of metacarpophalangeal joints (MCP) 2–4 of the right hand, a small, asymptomatic effusion of the right knee, and a bilateral subacromial bursitis.
The hand magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the highly inflammatory finger flexor tenosynovitis and an revealed an erosive carpal synovitis.
Histopathological analysis of the first two synovectomy specimens showed a lymphocytic infiltrate with rare granulomatous reaction, with a negative periodic acid Schiff stain in the second synovectomy. No microbiological investigation was done on the first specimen; Gram stain and the standard bacteriological cultures, both aerobic and anaerobic, were negative in the second synovectomy. Further analysis of the synovial fluid of the wrist was negative for mycobacteria-specific culture, auramine stain, and crystals. In the absence of fever, blood cultures were not obtained.
A preliminary diagnosis of seronegative polyarthritis was made. As differential diagnoses, we discussed polymyalgia rheumatica (discarded because the massive tenosynovitis did not fit with the clinical picture) as well as peripheral spondylarthritis (less probable because the arthritis was mainly symmetrical, located on the upper limbs, and the HLA B-27 was negative).
Glucocorticoids (prednisolone up to 30 mg/day) and methotrexate (15 mg subcutaneously weekly) were prescribed, resulting in no significant clinical improvement of the wrist, but leading to remission in the other joints and normalization of inflammatory parameters. The treatment was stopped 10 months later because of side effects. Due to a massive worsening of the tenosynovitis, a third synovectomy was performed during the same period, showing nontuberculous granulomatous inflammatory infiltrates. The analysis was negative for mycobacteria, including auramine stain, Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and pan-mycobacterial PCR (for the detection of NTM). Mycobacterium malmoense was identified after 26 days of incubation with the mycobacteria-specific culture, with antimicrobial susceptibility to clarithromycin, ethambutol, moxifloxacin, linezolid, rifabutin, clofazimine, and rifampicin. We therefore concluded that the cause of the tenosynovitis was infectious, and initiated an antituberculous therapy with ethambutol (600 mg/day PO), rifampicin (450 mg/day PO), and clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily PO). Clarithromycin was replaced by azithromycin (350 mg/day PO) soon afterwards because of a severe glossitis. Two months under treatment, in the absence of any improvement, a concomitant rheumatic inflammatory component was suspected, and after careful consideration and in agreement with the infectious disease specialists, low-dose leflunomide (10 mg/day PO) was added. We equally performed a glucocorticoid injection with betamethasone of the flexor tendon sheath to avoid a fourth synovectomy, and the swelling partially improved after a further month. After 6 months of antituberculous treatment, the patient regained nearly normal wrist mobility. Although some degree of tenosynovitis persisted, the patient decided to stop antimicrobial therapy against medical advice, but agreed to increase the leflunomide dose to 20 mg/day. At the last visit, 10 months after the antituberculous therapy and after 1 year on leflunomide, the situation remained stable. Despite our recommendation, the patient interrupted the treatment, as well as the follow-up. Contacted by phone 2 years later, she reported an unchanged situation, with good functional status of her right hand and absence of joint pain elsewhere. A summary of the clinical case is depicted in Fig. .