A 29-year-old Caucasian male who was previously fit and well was transferred to our renal unit with significant acute kidney injury (AKI).
He first presented to his local hospital with palpitations, a weeklong history of fever, myalgia, progressive generalised muscle weakness and a diarrhoeal illness. He denied any headaches or confusion. His symptoms started approximately 24 h after attending a barbeque. No one else that attended the barbeque was unwell. There was no history of foreign travel or any illicit drug abuse.
He works as an office fitter. He likes fishing regularly but has not indulged in this activity of recent. He admitted to caring for his mother’s pet, a cat, in the past 2 weeks.
On examination, he was clinically jaundiced. His temperature was 38.4°c; blood pressure (BP) 121/57 mmHg; and pulse 70 bpm. Cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and neurological examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Urinalysis showed presence of blood 3+ and protein 2+. Electrocardiogram only showed sinus tachycardia with no evidence to suggest pericarditis.
Initial investigations on Day 1 of admission revealed a haemoglobin level of 9.4 g/dl, white cell count 11.5 × 109/L and marked thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 17 × 109/L. His urea was raised at 23.7 mmol/L with a creatinine level of 534 μmol/L. His potassium was 4.1 mmol/L with a bicarbonate level of 18 mmol/L. His liver function test was also deranged with an albumin of 23 g/L, bilirubin 281 μmol/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 58 unit/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 212 unit/L. International normalized ratio was minimally raised at 1.2 and with a normal prothrombin time of 12.4 s. His creatine kinase was elevated at 8776 unit/L with a normal troponin level. C- reactive protein was also elevated at 200 mg/dL. Both haptoglobin and fibrinogen levels were raised at 466 mg/dL and 5.64 g/L; consistent with an infective process. The lactate dehydrogenase level was significantly raised at 1109 unit/L. C3 level was normal but C4 level was reduced at 0.06 g/L. Autoimmune markers including antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies and antiphospholipid screen were negative.
The initial blood film at the local hospital and a repeat at our tertiary unit showed presence of schistocytes. His direct antiglobulin test screen was negative.
In light of his history of diarrhoea, acute kidney injury, and thrombocytopenia with evidence of haemolysis, a presumptive diagnosis of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli induced haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) was made. He was given platelet transfusion and initiated on daily plasma exchange (PEX). The decision was also made to prescribe Piperacillin/Tazobactam in view of his raised inflammatory markers, pyrexia and chest x-ray suggesting a hospital-acquired pneumonia. After 12 h of antibiotic administration and PEX on Day 1, he became unwell with evidence of shock. He had further temperature spikes of 38°c, BP dropped to 60/40 mmHg and tachycardia of 150 bpm. Repeat investigations showed worsening inflammatory markers and evidence of ongoing haemolysis with marked anaemia. He required inotropic support for 4 h as he was resuscitated with fluid and blood products. He remained profoundly polyuric since admission.
Ultrasound abdomen showed normal sized kidneys and no abnormalities seen in other visceral organs. Echocardiogram was unremarkable.
On Day 3 when both blood and stool cultures were found to be negative, a probability of systemic infection was explored. Serum antibodies for brucella, bartonella, cytomegalovirus, Ebstein-Barr virus, human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis were negative. A positive Microscopic Agglutination Test (MAT) with raised titres at 1:320 and the presence of anti-leptospira IgM by ELISA at a titre of 1:2560 confirmed the suspicion of leptospirosis on illness day 14 (admission day 7).
He continued to improve clinically. A renal biopsy was not attempted due to his presentation with profound thrombocytopenia and his renal function improved rapidly with treatment. He completed 5 days of intravenous antibiotics and 10 days of oral doxycycline. He only received 4 sessions of PEX and never required dialysis. He was discharged on Day 10 with a creatinine level of 82 μmol/L and a platelet count of 294 × 10^9/L. His liver function tests were gradually improving with a bilirubin of 264 μmol/L (peak bilirubin 705 μmol/L), ALT 148 unit/L (peak ALT 212 unit/L) and ALP 147 unit/L (peak ALP 200 unit/L).