A 77-year-old-woman, with history of chronic smoking and drinking for over 45 years, was admitted for a progressive worsening jaundice with tea-colored urine, clay-colored stool, upper abdominal discomfort, accompanied by fever, chills, and asthenia.
In the emergency room, the patient’s fever reached 39°C, associated with tachycardia at a 105 beats per minute.
Her physical examination showed frank jaundice, a non-distended abdomen with mild right upper quadrant tenderness. No hepatomegaly or large palpable gallbladder was palpable.
Laboratory tests revealed an obstructive pattern on liver function tests with alkaline phosphatase = 458 UI/L, γ-glutamyl transferase = 1289 UI/L, total bilirubin = 169 mg/dL; an aspartate aminotransferase = 107 UI/L and an alanine transaminase = 158 UI/L; associated with an increased CRP level of 250 mg/L and a white blood cell count of 16 545/mm3.
The clinical and laboratory results were highly suggestive of a hepatobiliary sepsis due to ascending cholangitis.
Blood cultures were positive for Escherichia Coli. The patient received antibiotics: ceftriaxone + metronidazole for 7 days, improving recovery of her clinical and biological signs of infection.
Ultrasound of the abdomen revealed a dilated common bile duct with no sign of biliary lithiasis.
A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) performed showed intra- and extra-hepatic biliary dilatation at the level of the ampulla.
Three very large fluid and air filled periampullary duodenal diverticula were also noted measuring: 41 × 25, 24 × 21, and 27 × 20 mm.
A gastroduodenoscopy confirmed the presence of the 3 large peri-duodenal diverticula in D2 .
Imaging and endoscopic findings showed no obstacle other than the 3-giant diverticula, suggesting a Lemmel Syndrome complicated by acute cholangitis.
Due to technical difficulties during the ERCP procedure, the family requested surgical treatment and the patient had biliary derivation with an end-to-side Roux-en-Y choledocho-jejunostomy technique performed.
She was discharged 2 weeks later with regression of jaundice and good follow-up.