A 29-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 3, para 1, abortion 1, gave birth to a female infant at 39 weeks and 1 day of GA. She is a kindergarten teacher with no previous medical history. She was only immune for rubella and toxoplasmosis before pregnancy. Other infectious serology (CMV, hepatitis B/C, HIV and syphilis) was negative. Pregnancy was complicated with CMV seroconversion during the first trimester. Amniocentesis at 20 weeks revealed a positive PCR for CMV DNA. NSG at GA of 22 weeks was negative. At 24 weeks, it showed a hyperechogenic periventrical zone bilaterally. This was confirmed at 26 and 27 weeks of gestation. In addition, also mild lenticulostriate vasculopathy was seen. iuMRI at 27 weeks of GA showed normal to slightly delayed gyration for the GA, bilateral small temporal cysts, a region of increased signal intensity at the crossroads against the basal ganglia and a discrete band-shaped zone of increased signal intensity cranial to the lateral ventricles, slightly more on the left side than on the right but with normal apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). NSG at 30 weeks showed more severe lenticulostriate vasculopathy and bilateral temporal cysts. The lateral ventricular lining was slightly irregularly shaped. A follow up iuMRI at 30 weeks was performed and confirmed the NSG findings with an improvement in gyration, now in accordance with the GA of 30 weeks. Parents were counseled about the risk of hearing loss and mild to moderate motor impairment. Severe to very severe motor dysfunction like cerebral palsy, was not expected. The follow up of the remainder of the pregnancy occurred in the referral hospital.
Labor was induced at 39 weeks and 1 day because of fetal growth arrest. Due to fetal distress and meconium stained amniotic fluid, a vacuum extraction was performed. The girl was well at birth, with an Apgar score of 9/9/10, and did not need immediate life support. She had a birth weight of 2440 g (percentile 3), a birth length of 44.5 cm (<P3) and a head circumference of 32 cm (P3-P10). Shortly after birth, she developed petechiae due to severe thrombocytopenia of 13 × 109/L and hypoglycemia, for which she was transferred to a tertiary NICU center.
During hospitalization, she received a platelet transfusion on day 1, day 2, day 4 and day 7 of life. Hypoglycemia recovered with an adequate intake, initially parenteral then fully enteral, with a normal glucose load. cCMV infection was confirmed by a strongly positive urine PCR (> 5,000,000 CMV IU/mL). Brainstem Evoked Response Audiometry (BERA) was abnormal with suspicion of bilateral severe sensorineural hearing loss. There were no signs of CMV infection at funduscopic examination. Postnatal US of the brain at day 1 showed germinolysis, temporal cysts and extensive bilateral calcifications, mainly periventricular, previously not visualized on prenatal imaging (shown in Fig. ). Oral valganciclovir was started on day 5.
After discharge, the patient underwent a MRI of the brain on day 19 of life. MRI confirmed multiple periventricular and subependymal calcifications and showed a delayed myelination at the posterior limb of the internal capsule (PLIC), cerebellar hypoplasia, diffuse WM signal alterations with increased ADC on DWI and suspicion of polymicrogyria (shown in Figs. and ). All findings were compatible with cCMV infection. Furthermore, sequelae of intracranial haemorrhage, presumably related to the known cCMV-induced thrombocytopenia and the vacuum extraction, were seen on brain imaging.
Currently, the infant is 8 months old and receives physiotherapy twice a week. She has a mild motor development delay with limited hypertonia in the upper and lower limbs. There has been a recovery of the bilateral hearing loss with almost a normalization on the left side and persistent moderate SNHL on the right side. Therapy with oral valganciclovir was given for a total of 6 months.