A 66-year-old woman (height 159 cm, weight 45 kg) suffering from right elbow and right knee deformity associated with RA was scheduled for a right total knee arthroplasty and right elbow synovectomy. She had a long history of RA and had been aware of joint pain in her right elbow and right knee for 30 years. She had been receiving medical treatment for 15 years prior to the surgery. She did not report any symptoms related to the cervical spine or spinal cord.
On preoperative examination, the patient appeared to have normal mandibular size, without retrognathia, and adequate thyromental distance, despite her overall small stature and small facial features . The opening was two transverse fingers. Mallampati classification was class III, with a slightly visible base of the palatine roof at opening. Cervical retroflexion was judged to be unrestricted. Based on these findings, we predicted moderate intubation difficulty in this patient.
General anesthesia with tracheal intubation and echo-guided peripheral nerve blocks for axillary brachial plexus and femoral nerve were planned. In the operating room, standard monitoring was applied followed by administration of the echo-guided peripheral nerve blocks. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 90 mg and rocuronium 50 mg, and after confirmation of mask ventilation, continuous remifentanil 0.25 µg/kg/min was started. Direct visualization of the larynx with the direct laryngoscope was more difficult than predicted; the epiglottis was not visible with thyroid cartilage compression, indicating Cormack-Lehane grade IV. Using a video laryngoscope Airway Scope® AWS-S200 (Pentax, Tokyo, Japan), the glottis was fully visualized, and the trachea was easily intubated. After the surgery, the patient was extubated uneventfully and had a safe postoperative period.
We performed postoperative radiographic examination for elucidating the causes of difficult laryngoscopy with the consent of the patient. Cervical radiograph demonstrated no change in the distance between the occiput and the spinous process of the axis with neck retroflexion , suggesting an immobilized craniocervical junction. Computed tomography revealed a bony integration of the occiput, atlas, and axis, which may have limited the range of motion of the upper cervical spine and was thought to be the primary cause of difficult direct laryngoscopy .
In order to verify whether the difficulty in direct laryngoscopy was predictable, another postoperative physical examination was performed with the patient’s consent. The mandibular protrusion test was class B, with the mandibular incisors in contact with the maxillary incisors . Cervical retroflexion (64°) was obtained ; however, cervical rotation was highly restricted (18°) . The thyromental distance was 6.5 cm, the hyomental distance was 4 cm, and the sternomental distance was 14.5 cm, suggesting moderate difficulty of tracheal intubation.