The patient, a 31-year-old female, presented to our emergency department with complaints of fatigue and muscle pain in both lower extremities for two days, which had worsened a day earlier and manifested difficulties with daily activities. She initially presented to the local hospital with chills, fever, and headache. In response to treatment, the symptoms were temporarily relieved (unavailable medication information). Blood results showed thrombocytopenia and compromised liver function. Given the complexity of her condition, the primary care physician recommended a referral to an advanced hospital. The patient underwent a medication abortion and curettage at 11 weeks’ gestation five days ago. There was no discomfort during the operation or in the postoperative period, except for a very small amount of brown secretion. She had a cesarean section in 2005. There was an absence of exposure to grass or animals recently. It was evident from the physical examination that both lower extremities were tender and that bilateral tonsils were enlarged to a first degree. Vital signs were a temperature of 37.4 °C, a pulse of 119 bpm, 28 breaths per minute, 98% oxygen saturation (in room air), and normal blood pressure. The results reported tachycardia on electrocardiogram, normal echocardiogram, and mild enlargement of the liver on abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan.
By CARE guidelines, the timeline in Table illustrates the chronological sequence of pertinent events in the patient's medical file .
Gynecologic evaluation revealed a small amount of brown secretion and an enlarged uterus with slight tenderness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain were free of abnormalities. In the cases of human SDSD, clinical documentations are not well defined. The results of multi-specimen cultures were decisive in confirming the diagnosis of SDSD. The application of piperacillin-tazobactam (a broad-spectrum antibiotic) failed to improve the clinical picture. There was a parallel improvement in clinical symptoms and laboratory values with the switch to penicillin, which is effective against streptococci. Differentiation of polymyositis presenting as progressive muscle weakness is necessary because the initial treatment regimen includes high doses of corticosteroids rather than antibiotics. We strongly recommended a muscle biopsy for polymyositis, which was rejected by the patient and her husband for financial reasons.
She complained of dry mouth, blurred vision, orbital pain in both eyes, as well as decreased urine output and hypotension. The ophthalmic examination was unremarkable, and the serum-specific antibody test was negative, hence the epidemic hemorrhagic fever was exonerated. The lumbar puncture procedure revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid and an open pressure of 220 mm Hg. Meanwhile, neurologists helped to identify Guillain-Barré syndrome or other neurological disorders. Because SDSD symptoms overlap with multiple diseases, clinicians need to make the necessary differential diagnosis and select agents depending on illness progression and exam findings. Penicillin is an effective treatment for SDSD infections, but one should be wary of the incidence of multidrug resistance.
It is essential to collect specimens for laboratory culture and identification prior to initiating empirical antibiotic therapy. Antibiotics should be altered according to one’s symptoms, inflammatory markers, and susceptibility testing results. In terms of treatment, she received nutritional support and albumin infusion to correct hypoalbuminemia, as well as multidisciplinary consultation for clinical diagnosis and medication direction. To facilitate the management of her condition, central venous catheters and urinary catheters are inserted to monitor fluid intake and output. It was initially prescribed with Doxycycline Hydrochloride at 0.2 g every 12 h and later switched to Moxifloxacin at 0.4 g daily. Drug sensitivity test confirmed that SDSD was sensitive to penicillin G, vancomycin, linezolid, ampicillin, and levofloxacin, but resistant to clindamycin and tetracycline. Accordingly, an alternative dose of piperacillin-tazobactam sodium 4.5 g every 8 h was administered. There was an improvement in muscle strength with piperacillin-tazobactam sodium, while the fever had not resolved. It was eventually shifted to a dose of 4.8 million units of penicillin twice daily through multidisciplinary consultation and discussion. With nine days of penicillin monotherapy, the condition improved remarkably, and the laboratory values normalized. She was discharged on the 19th day of admission. Table illustrates the relevant laboratory results and antibiotic profiles.
Multidisciplinary consultation and laboratory results helped to discriminate the condition. Neurologists and rheumatologists indicated that myalgia and elevated creatine kinase were signs of multisystem involvement in the setting of severe infection, and multiple cultures were SDSD, further ruling out polymyositis. Endocrinologist confirmed that a lack of endocrine dysfunction affected her muscle strength. In the absence of a history of thyroid disease, hypothyroidism due to T3 syndrome was related to her current underlying disease and hypoproteinemia. For the full treatment period, the patient has not received corticosteroids and recovered completely within one month of follow-up. She developed generalized oedema upon admission, sudden onset of chest tightness and shortness of breath at night, and a significant rise in NT-proBNP. It was noted that the decreased creatinine value remained at a high level, so the sharp increase in NT-proBNP was linked to renal compromise. Moreover, the failure of diuretics to increase urine output, coupled with low CVP, was highly assumed to be multi-organ dysfunction. In a further, there was a pressure injury to the sacrococcygeal skin due to being bedridden for eight days. A final multidrug resistance to extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) produced by Escherichia coli was detected in midstream urine cultures. The retained urinary catheter was considered for possible colonizing bacterial infection due to the absence of symptoms of urinary tract irritation.
There were 534 reads of Streptococcus dysgalactiae from peripheral blood detected by comparison with the reference database. The NGS-related information is shown in Table and Fig. .