A 66-year-old Japanese male presented to the referring hospital with a chief complaint of abdominal pain, diarrhea, and dark urine that had persisted for 1 month. The patient was referred to our hospital because of liver dysfunction on a blood examination. He had a history of treatment for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia, but no history of liver dysfunction or habitual alcohol consumption.
Laboratory results of the blood on the day of admission showed that total and direct bilirubin levels (12.0 mg/dL and 9.6 mg/dL) were markedly increased. Mild elevations in the aspartate aminotransferase (56 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (50 U/L), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (296 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (196 U/L), and amylase levels (249 U/L) were observed. Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 was elevated at 48.9 U/mL, but the carcinoembryonic antigen level was normal at 3.6 ng/mL. Tests for hepatitis B virus surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibodies were negative.
An endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) tube was inserted for obstructive jaundice, and endoscopic and imaging evaluations were performed continuously. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a 60-mm lesion in the area of the 2nd portion of the duodenum and pancreatic head, associated with gallbladder enlargement, bile duct dilation due to stenosis of the lower bile duct, and dilation of the main pancreatic duct. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the lesion originated from the medial wall of the duodenum, with irregular wall thickening, and extended consecutively to the pancreatic head, with the invasion of the common bile duct and main pancreatic duct. The anterior superior, posterior superior, and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries (IPDA), forming the network between the gastroduodenal and superior mesenteric arteries (SMA), were considered the feeding arteries. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed accumulation (SUV: 13.3) at the lesion; however, there were no abnormal accumulation findings at other sites . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a protuberant lesion with deep ulceration in the second portion of duodenum. The lesion was located orally and was separated from the duodenal ampulla . Pathological result of the endoscopic biopsy specimen was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Although elective PD was planned, the patient experienced hemorrhagic shock with melena on 2 days before the scheduled surgery. Emergency gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and found out the bleeding origin, the deep ulceration area in the duodenal tumor . However, the endoscopic attempt of achieving hemostasis was failed. His hemoglobin level was decreased to 8.1 from 11.2 g/dl 2 days earlier. With the arterial pressure recovered to 100 mmHg by blood transfusion, the patient underwent CT with contrast. The CT showed a high-density region in the ulceration space of the tumor, suggesting intraluminal hemorrhage and pseudoaneurysm formation in the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) branch (anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery) at the bottom of the ulceration .
Due to the failure of hemostasis by endoscopic intervention and poor control of hemodynamic circulation despite blood transfusion, radiological embolization and hemostasis on angiography were attempted . Since the IPDA branch from SMA was thin and irregular with suspicious invasion of the cancer , the cannulation to the artery was failed. Although a catheter was inserted to the aneurysm and tried to reach the distal lumen of IPDA, the guide-wire strayed out to the duodenal lumen and the distal lumen of the arterial arcade could not be reached. His systolic arterial pressure temporarily decreased to 50 mmHg during the IVR. The route only from the GDA and pseudoaneurysm areas was embolized to reduce bleeding, and ePD was continuously performed with a massive blood transfusion for maintaining the circulation. At the beginning of the surgery, his hemoglobin level was 6.6 g/dl even after 10-unit transfusion of packed red blood cells.
During surgery, there were no ascites or peritoneal seeding findings, and a > 80 mm tumor was found in the pancreaticoduodenal region. The intestinal tract, mainly from the duodenum to the jejunum, was tense, with blood stored in the lumen, although there was no intraabdominal bleeding. The first part of the jejunum was transected to close the tract and reduce bleeding. It was dissected from the transverse mesocolon toward the ligament of Treitz. The right side of the transverse mesocolon was incised, and the first part of the jejunum was pulled out from the ligament of Treitz to the right. The right side of the superior mesenteric artery was approached to control bleeding by blocking the blood supply from the SMA into the tumor. However, as the mesentery on the right side of the SMA was tightly constricted, only the caudal side could be dissected. The gastrocolic ligament was opened, the stomach was resected at the pylorus, and the hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected by transecting the common hepatic duct and GDA. Since the tumor was so large that the usual tunneling procedure between the pancreas and superior mesenteric vein (SMV) was difficult, the pancreas was gradually divided from the caudal side without a tunneling procedure, and the SMV anterior surface was exposed. Thereafter, the right side of the SMV/SMA/plexus was dissected from the uncinate process of the pancreas in an anterior-to-posterior direction. Finally, the pancreatic head and duodenum containing the tumor were dissected from the retroperitoneum and removed. The operation was completed using an anterior approach without Kocherization or tunneling. The operation time was 4 h and 32 min, and blood loss was 595 mL. The hemoglobin level was elevated to 9.8 g/dl after the surgery with total of 26-unit red blood cells transfusion.
The resected specimen showed an 8-cm type 3 tumor that invaded from the duodenum to the pancreatic head and formed a deep ulcer with vascular embolization coils at the base of the ulcer . Pathological examination of the tumor revealed carcinoma cells arranged in nests and a trabecular pattern with scattered keratinization within the nests. The majority of the carcinomas were composed of squamous cell carcinoma components, but a few areas of suspected glandular differentiation were observed . A small number of glandular ducts positive for Alcian blue staining were observed in the specimen, and the majority of tumor cells were positive for p40 and cytokeratin5/6 (CK5/6) . The tumor gland ducts were negative for mucin (MUC)2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and caudal-related homeobox transcription factor-2 (CDX-2). The final pathological diagnosis of ASC was made. In addition, three lymph node metastases were observed on the anterior and dorsal surfaces of the pancreatic head.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 17th postoperative day. On postoperative day 58, S-1 (tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil potassium) plus oxaliplatin therapy (SOX) was initiated as adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient is currently well, with no signs of recurrence 9 months after surgery.