The study was carried out according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki; informed consent has been obtained from the patient.
A 91-year-old Chinese man presented in the Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, on May 7, 2018, with a rapidly growing, solitary tumor of the right lower eyelid, which was initially noted in March 2018 without tenderness. Clinically, the tumor was a violet-colored nodule of 3.2 × 3.0 × 2.0 cm with pigmentation and an irregular ulcer in the center . Fine needle aspiration biopsy was performed at Hua Shan Hospital, Fu Dan University, on April 17, 2018, which confirmed the diagnosis of MCC. The patient suffered from prostate cancer, hypertension, coronary heart disease (CHD), chronic cardiac insufficiency (NYHA, II–III) and chronic renal insufficiency and had received treatments of Enantone (3.75 mg, H, q4w), Adalat (30 mg, po, qd), Diovan (80 mg, po, qd), Furosemide (30 mg, po, qd) and spironolactone (20 mg, po, qd). He also had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis when he was young. Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) were performed to clinically assess the tumor and cervical lymph nodes, and no signs of cervical lymph node metastasis were found. Clinical detection of lymph nodes or metastatic disease was performed via inspection and palpation, as the patient could not tolerate the long time required to complete the imaging examination. The physical examination was negative. After a multidisciplinary meeting, we decided to treat this patient with surgery, and sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) was not considered due to the negative results of the imaging examination. Mohs micrographic surgery with a 1 cm excision margin was performed on May 10, 2018. The tumor had infiltrated the periosteum, and all the infiltrated soft tissue was removed together with the tumor. After confirmation of negative margins, reconstruction was performed. A rotation flap was designed to repair skin defects. Histologically small, monomorphic, round-to-oval, low-differentiated cells with a vesicular nucleus and scant cytoplasm were observed, which invaded the muscle, nerve and blood vessels . Necrosis was prominent . The immunohistochemistry results indicated the following patterns: CK (+), CK20 (+), SYN (+), CAM5.2 (+), CD34 (+), Ki67 (80%+), Vim (−), LCA (−), S100 (−), CD99 (−), DES (−), and CHGA (−) (, ). According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system, the final clinical diagnosis was MCC of the lower right eyelid, IIB. Postoperative radiotherapy was strongly recommended. However, the patient refused.
On June 6, 2018, several subcutaneous, hard nodules were observed at the primary site of surgery . Chest CT, ultrasonography of the liver and kidneys, inspection and palpation of skin and lymph nodes ruled out distant metastasis. Considering the patient’s physical condition, surgery was abandoned after a multidisciplinary discussion. Ultimately, apatinib was used to treat MCC in this patient from June 26, 2018 (0.25 g, po, bid). As the treatment was well tolerated by the patient, two days later, we changed the dose of apatinib (0.5 g, po, qd). Blood pressure, routine blood tests, renal function, and liver function were carefully monitored . The MCC showed a strong response to apatinib, and the efficacy was significant . However, on July 20, 2018, exacerbated proteinuria and thrombocytopenia led us to reduce the dose of apatinib (0.25 g, po, qd). The patient was treated with leucogen (20 mg, po, tid), and his thrombocytopenia resolved. On September 14, 2018, we stopped the use of apatinib due to a high serum creatinine level (182 μmol/L). Hand–foot syndrome also occurred. However, these treatment-related adverse events (AEs) were well controlled with symptomatic treatment. On October 1, 2018, after another multidisciplinary meeting, we restarted treatment (0.125 g, po, five times a week). After two cycles, we changed the dose of apatinib (0.125 g, po, four times a week) to a low maintenance dose. On November 9, 2018, 4.4 months after the first administration of apatinib, the patient had a complete response (CR) . We continued administering low-dose apatinib for the treatment of MCC. In the following follow-up, the patient’s condition was stable . Unfortunately, the patient died on October 4, 2020 due to heart failure and respiratory failure with no sign of recurrence or distant metastasis.