Our patient was an 18-year-old male who presented to the emergency department with a complaint of approximately 24 h of pelvic pain. The symptoms were worsening and associated with urinary retention, nausea, and anorexia. The pain was exacerbated by movement. He reported similar symptoms approximately 1 month prior, with a negative workup by his primary care physician at that time. Past medical history was significant for intermittent loose stools, anal fissures, and a prior cyst in his neck. Surgical history included a colonoscopy as part of a workup for hematochezia several years earlier, which diagnosed an anal fissure. Excision of a reportedly benign neck cyst was also completed previously; however, no pathology was available.
On presentation, he was a well-appearing young adult male in mild distress. He was afebrile, and his vital signs were within normal limits, without evidence of tachycardia, tachypnea, or hypotension. His abdomen was soft but tender to palpation in the right lower quadrant, without evidence of generalized peritonitis. Lab values were insignificant except for leukocytosis (WBC 17.4 k) and mild hyperglycemia (blood glucose level 124 mg/dl). Computed tomography imaging obtained prior to the surgical consult demonstrated dilation of the appendix up to 11 mm with periappendiceal fluid and a 3-cm abscess adjacent to the appendiceal tip consistent with appendicitis with perforation and locally contained abscess.
Treatment options included appendectomy, treatment with antibiotics, and percutaneous drainage of the abscess, all of which were discussed with the patient and his family. After considering options, the patient and team elected to proceed to the operating room for laparoscopic appendectomy and drainage of the abscess. Antibiotic treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam (Zosyn) was initiated and the patient brought to the operating room and placed under general anesthesia for the procedure. Operative findings included purulent fluid throughout the peritoneal cavity with the appendix laying down in the pelvis. Appendiceal inflammation with obvious perforation to the appendiceal tip and adjacent abscess was noted. The patient’s postoperative course was significant for persistent nausea for 12 h after the procedure, which was treated with antiemetics and resolved. He was discharged to home on postoperative day #1 with a plan to complete a 10-day course of oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Augmentin).
Several hours after his discharge, an urgent call was received from the pathologist reviewing the appendix specimen. Surprisingly, the appendix demonstrated a high grade transmural lymphoid malignancy with extra-appendiceal deposits . The pathological diagnosis was initially classified as Burkitt lymphoma, which was later reclassified based on additional pathologic staining as a B-cell lymphoma with features between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma. Positive tumor markers included CD20 , CD10 , BCL6, and Ki67. Urgent surgical follow-up and hematology/oncology consultation was obtained.
Given the Burkitt-type features and the potentially rapid progression of a Burkitt lymphoma, the decision was made to treat as a confirmed Burkitt lymphoma. The patient promptly underwent PET scanning, lumbar puncture, and port placement. PET imaging revealed no evidence of distant disease. He also had sperm banking performed to preserve the potential for future fertility. After sperm banking, the patient underwent a total of four cycles of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, high-dose methotrexate, ifosfamide, etoposide, high-dose cytarabine (CODOX-M/IVAC) chemotherapy with an excellent response. Now more than 30 months out from treatment, he remains in complete remission.