A 61-year-old woman presented with dyspnea (New York Heart Association class 2), chest pain and lower limb edema. In past medical history, she was under treatment for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and she had a history of hospital admission twice for chest pain and ACS. Despite the hospital admissions, cardiopulmonary assessment was not perfectly performed to diagnose the main cause of her chest pain. At the first visit, initial blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate: 68/min, respiratory rate in normal range, and body temperature was 37 °C. She did not have any complaint of productive or dry cough, fever, nocturnal dyspnea or orthopnea.
Her physical examination revealed an obvious systolic machinery murmur, which was best-heard at the second left intercostal space, and the second heart sound was physiologically split suggesting an absence of significant PHTN. Pulses and diastolic murmurs were near to normal. Pulmonary rates and wheezing could not find in any of both lungs, but bilateral pretibial pitting edema was obviously seen. Echocardiogram showed; normal left ventricular chamber size and function, normal size of both atria. Furthermore, an obvious PDA (diameter = 6-7 mm) connecting the proximal of descending aorta to the left to the pulmonary artery was reported in echocardiography ( and ).
For more accurate evaluation, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed, and it showed visualized jet flow at main pulmonary artery, indicating the presence of PDA. TTE also showed mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation and showed mild diastolic dysfunction but preserved left ventricular function (ejection fraction of the left ventricle = 55%). Patients referred for cardiac catheterization and computed tomographic (CT) angiography. CT angiography was revealed a PDA with 5.5-7 mm luminal width interposed between the roof of left pulmonary artery and descending aorta (both at origins) .
No lung congestion and evidence for PHTN was reported by CT angiography (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure: 30 mmHg). Saturation study showed a step up from right pulmonary artery to the right ventricle (72-60 %). Measured pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) through oxygen saturation was 1.26. Renal dysfunction, thyroid imbalance, and other etiology of edema were ruled out. The patient was treated with aspirin (80 mg/day), Lasix , losartan , atorvastatin , nitrocontin , and atenolol . After 1 and 3 months follow-up, edema and other symptoms were resolved.