A 61 year old man of Chinese ethnicity with no significant past medical history presented with a 6 week history of behavioural change including aggression, poor memory, praxis problems, slurred speech and loss of balance. There was a recent history of weight loss and vomiting. On examination he appeared to understand and speak English but the content of his speech was disorganised and he appeared confused. Examination revealed normal eye movements. He was dysarthric and demonstrated ataxia in all four limbs with truncal ataxia also. There was no myoclonus, or pyramidal or extrapyramidal signs at this stage.
The patient’s father died aged 61 of a non-neurological condition, the status of the patient’s mother is not known. There were no prior diagnoses of CJD or dementia in the wider family known to the patient’s children.
Initial work-up showed normal full blood count, standard biochemical profile, B12 and folate. Paraneoplastic, VGKC and anti-NMDA antibodies were negative as were HIV, syphilis and hepatitis serology. EEG was reported as mild slowing only, with no periodic sharp wave complexes. A brain MRI showed abnormal symmetric restricted diffusion in the corpus striatum bilaterally and cortical diffusion restriction in the frontal lobes and around the parieto-occipital fissure bilaterally . CSF was acellular, with normal protein and glucose. CSF Viral PCR was negative but 14–3-3 and S-100b were abnormal. A diagnosis of CJD was confirmed by a positive reaction when CSF was analysed in quadruplicate by RT-QuIC (real-time quaking induced conversion, Fig. ). The E200D mutation was detected by bidirectional sequencing and was linked to a methionine homozygous genotype at polymorphic codon 129.
Over the course of his admission his neurological state rapidly worsened. He began to exhibit startle responses and multifocal myoclonus. Later he became increasingly agitated with distressing visual hallucinations which were managed with lorazepam. In the final days of his illness he became mute and bed bound with generalised spasticity. Following discussion with his family palliative care was commenced. Death was certified within 4 weeks of admission (total duration 10 weeks).