A 4-year-old boy with an unremarkable perinatal and medical history referred to us with the complaint of mucoid discharge from both sides of the neck over a duration of 6 months which had worsened upon the consumption of fluids. He had a few episodes of acute infections of the fistula which resolved upon the completion of a course of antibiotics. The patient had no family history of a similar diagnosis.
On examination, he was healthy with no craniofacial deformities. A small pin-hole-sized defect was seen at about the junction of the upper 2/3 and lower 1/3 of the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle on both sides . There was a scanty mucoid-like discharge from both cervical fistulous openings. Oropharyngeal examination revealed bilaterally enlarged tonsils (grade 2 Friedman classification). In addition, the fibreoptic nasopharyngoscopic examination was unremarkable. Normal renal ultrasound findings and profile ruled out hypertrophic or atrophic kidneys in view of the possibility of kidney maldevelopment in branchio-oto-renal syndrome.
The external ear was grossly normal, and audiometric testing (e.g., tympanogram and pure tone audiometry) ruled out the presence of conductive or sensorineural hearing loss which may present as a component of branchio-oto-renal syndrome. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck with a fistulogram was carried out by injecting normal saline into the defect, while the images were read using T1 FIESTA sequence . The MRI images showed the evidence of a complete bilateral branchial fistula. An excision was then performed under general anesthesia after 2 weeks.
The child was placed supine with the neck extended, under general anesthesia. A transverse elliptical incision was made around the cervical fistulous opening, dissected deep to the subplatysmal plane. The dissection was continued superiorly, tunneling under the subplatysmal layer to follow the path of the fistulous tract. The second transverse incision was made just above the level of the hyoid in a stepladder fashion to facilitate further superior dissection .
Identification of the tract was aided by instilling methylene blue into the tract using the cannula of a 26G branulla. The tract was located between the external and internal carotid arteries, superficial to the hypoglossal nerve and deep to the digastric muscle. The internal opening was identified at the posterior pillar of the ipsilateral tonsillar fossa superiorly. An elliptical incision was made around this opening, and the tract dissected inferiorly to meet the cervical dissection.
The whole tract was completely excised and delivered out through the upper cervical incision . The procedure was then repeated on the right side of the neck which had a fistulous tract of similar anatomical extent. The subcutaneous and skin layers were sutured using absorbable and non-absorbable suture materials (Polyglactin 4/0 and polyamide 4/0).
The patient was discharged with no post-operative complications after 3 days. Histopathological examination of the excised lesion revealed the features of respiratory epithelium and confirmed the absence of malignancy and tuberculous infection. On follow-up performed 12 months after the surgery, there was no evidence of recurrence.