A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with asthma controlled without medication. Two months before presentation, the patient had no abnormal results during a health check. However, he experienced chest pain and visited our hospital’s outpatient department. The patient had no relevant family history, did not drink or smoke, and had no allergies. The laboratory data were unremarkable. Chest radiography revealed a mass at the proximal end of the right clavicle. Computed tomography (CT) showed an approximately 36-mm tumoral lesion suspicious of infiltration into the right first rib and intercostal muscles, with changes in the density of the lung parenchyma around the mass, making it difficult to distinguish whether the mass was intrapulmonary or extrapulmonary . The findings suggested an extension of the lesion along the lymphatic vessels and stroma. The pain consistent with the same area was so severe that a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug failed to control the pain, and opioids were administered. A bronchoscopy performed on the 21st day post-admission failed to reach a diagnosis, and a computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy was performed on the 25th day post-admission.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed a partially hyalinized collagenous fibrous tissue containing abundant inflammatory cells, including neutrophils and lymphocytes. In areas with abundant fibroblast-like spindle-shaped cells, storiform fibrosis, and no cellular atypia were observed .
Immunostaining was positive for vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin and negative for anti-cytokeratin (AE)1/AE3, cytokeratin 7, cluster of differentiation (CD) 34, desmin, soluble 100 protein (S-100), and B-cell lymphoma protein 2. CD3 and CD20 showed positive staining in background small lymphocytes, and the number of CD3-positive lymphocytes was higher than that of CD20-positive lymphocytes. CD138-positive plasma cells remained in nonspecific clusters. Ki67 positivity was approximately 5%. 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18 F-FDG PET/CT) performed 4 days after CT-guided biopsy showed a tumoral lesion with a maximum standardized uptake value of 16.73 in the same area as the CT image, with no abnormal accumulation in other organs .
Based on these results, pathological malignant lymphoma was ruled out, and the patient was referred to the Respiratory Surgery Department in another hospital for surgical treatment. Additional immunostaining performed at the hospital showed that the samples were positive for nuclear BRCA1-associated protein-1 and methylthioadenosine phosphorylase; partially positive for D2-40; equivocal for protein HEG homolog 1; and negative for Calretinin, Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA (using in situ hybridization), Periodic acid–Schiff, Grocott, and Ziehl-Neelsen staining. No pathogens (Epstein–Barr virus-infected cells, fungi, or mycobacteria) were detected. Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was predominantly fibroblastic, and there were no obvious malignant findings. Additional immunostaining for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) with a D5F3 antibody revealed a very faint positive image in half of the spindle-shaped cells .
Contrast-enhanced CT was scheduled as a preoperative examination; however, due to the patient’s pre-existing bronchial asthma, the decision was made to perform CT after administering steroids. Oral prednisolone (30 mg) was administered 12 and 2 h before contrast administration. The contrast-enhanced CT showed that the mass-like structure in S1b of the right lung had shrunk and flattened compared to the previous 18 F-FDG PET/CT findings. Further, the lesion appeared continuous from the lung parenchyma to the right first rib costochondral transition area , suggesting inflammatory changes and the presence of costochondritis. Thus, the lesion was suspected to be caused by an inflammatory change, such as costochondritis. The adjacent right first rib showed sclerotic changes and reactive changes suggestive of osteomyelitis or inflammation. The parenchymal side of the lung showed a discoid shadow along the bronchovascular side, indicating atelectasis.
Therefore, surgery was avoided, and CT imaging obtained 4 months later showed that the lesion in the right lung S1b subsegment had further shrunk and became scar-like .
After oral steroid administration, the tumor, which showed bone invasion, shrank in size. As for the cause of the shrinkage of the lesions, spontaneous remission was considered a possibility; however, it was suggested that the administration of corticosteroids may have been involved as a trigger.
Based on the pathological findings and disease course, the diagnosis of IMT was made. More than 1 year later, the patient has had no symptoms and no recurrence.