A 57-year-old Chinese male who underwent CABG five years ago was recently admitted because of a left atrial mass detected by ultrasonic cardiogram at another institution. After anticoagulant therapy for one year, the mass did not change. Except for occasional chest stuffiness after an activity, he felt no obvious discomfort. At our center, transesophageal echocardiography revealed a hyperechoic lesion attached to the interatrial septum in the left atrium measuring approximately 1.8*1.1 cm . No obvious abnormalities were observed in the rest of the cardiac structures, and the aortic valve opened and closed properly. Computed tomography coronary angiography confirmed the mass and showed that the coronary artery bypass grafts were smooth without any evidence of stenosis or occlusion . The patient underwent reoperation through a right lateral mini-thoracotomy incision (6 cm) at the fourth intercostal space. An endoscope was inserted via a separate anterior axillary incision at the third intercostal space for video assistance. Dense pericardial adhesions were observed, and the ascending aorta could not be fully exposed. Body temperature was lowered to 28 ºC to induce ventricular fibrillation under the support of cardiopulmonary bypass instituted through femoro-femoral cannulation without the infusion of cardioplegic solution (perfusion pressure was maintained as high as possible, preferably above 60 mmHg). A 17 F femoral artery cannula (MAQUET) and 23 F femoral vein cannula (MAQUET) were used according to standard procedure, and the tip of the femoral vein cannula was placed near the superior vena cava. The left atrium was opened through the interatrial groove approach without aortic cross-clamping. After a left atrial retractor was implanted, we placed a drainage tube across the mitral valve to the left ventricle, and the tip of another suction tube was placed near the ostium of the left superior pulmonary vein. In addition, we continuously filled the surgical field with carbon dioxide gas, and observed that the tumor was hanging on the atrial septum, pedunculated and jelly-like, and was completely resected with the atrial septum . The interatrial groove was then closed with a running suture in two layers. After the temperature was restored and the air in the left ventricle was completely evacuated through a left ventricle drainage tube (monitored by real-time esophageal echocardiography), the heart automatically resumed beating, and the patient was successfully weaned from extracorporeal circulation. A chest drainage tube was used for drainage and pulmonary re-expansion. The total fibrillatory arrest time was 35 min, and the cardiopulmonary bypass time was 65 min. Histopathology examination confirmed the diagnosis of myxoma. The patient woke up two hours after the operation. The drainage volume was 400 ml on the first day and 100 ml on the second day. The drainage tube was removed on the third day. The intensive care unit (ICU) time was 36 h. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged seven days after surgery.