A 78-year-old right-handed female housekeeper presented to our department with pain extending from the palm to the forearm during movement of the ring and little fingers, and numbness of the median nerve-innervated area of the left hand. She had experienced intermittent pain and numbness in the hand a few years previously, and the symptoms had gradually worsened starting 1 month before her visit to our department. She had no specific medical and family history except for hypertension.
On first examination, there was tenderness along the flexor tendons of the ring and little fingers, and the range of motion of the fingers was slightly restricted because of pain. The patient had almost normal sensation in the Semmes–Weinstein monofilament test, although Tinel’s sign was positive at the entrance of the carpal tunnel. Plain radiographs and computed tomography showed a morphological abnormality of the hamate and a free body proximal to the pisiform . The hamate had a multilobed shape with a spiky bony protrusion into the carpal tunnel and rounded bony protrusion on the dorsal–ulnar side. Magnetic resonance imaging showed that the bony protrusions were connected to the hamate body and had the same intensity as bone marrow .
We performed an open carpal tunnel release and resection of the spiky bony protrusion on the hook of the hamate with the patient under regional brachial plexus anesthesia . The free body proximal to the pisiform was also resected. The flexor digitorum profundus tendons of the ring and little fingers displayed synovitis and partial laceration in the carpal tunnel . After performing partial debridement of the lacerated tendons, we confirmed smooth flexor tendon gliding without irritation at the bony protrusion.
Histological examination showed only a few regions of cartilaginous tissue in the spiky bony protrusion , whereas the free body proximal to the pisiform contained thick cartilaginous tissue such as a cartilaginous cap typical of osteochondroma .
Six months after surgery, the patient displayed smooth motion of the fingers without pain and numbness. Plain radiographs and computed tomography showed no recurrence of the tumor at the resection site .