An 18-year-old male presented to clinic with a 1-year history of the left-sided shoulder pain and symptomatic instability. The patient also described an occasional popping sensation in the anterior aspect of the shoulder. The symptoms began after the patient was pushed into a wall while playing hockey which resulted in an anteromedial directed force to the left arm and shoulder. He further described this traumatic episode as a forceful adduction and internal rotation of the left arm. He denied any other trauma or surgeries to the shoulder and had no other relevant past medical history.
On exam, the patient’s pain was localized to the bicipital groove and the posterior glenohumeral joint line. Speed’s and O’Brien’s tests were positive. The load and shift test demonstrated posterior laxity with translation of the humeral head to the posterior glenoid rim without frank dislocation; which was markedly different when compared to the contralateral shoulder. A passive range of motion (ROM) demonstrated 160of forward flexion overhead bilaterally. The patient’s active internal rotation of the left arm behind the back reached the level of the T10 vertebrae and he had a negative liftoff and belly press tests. With the elbows flexed and arms at the patient’s sides, active external rotation was measured at 65 on the left. The patient demonstrated 5/5 strength in all directions of movement of the left shoulder. Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrogram and MR imaging (MRI) of the left shoulder joint were indicated medial dislocation of the LHBT with intact subscapularis and supraspinatus tendons . No abnormalities were noted in the osseous structures of the shoulder and the posterior labrum was intact. However, the posterior capsule appeared to be enlarged on MRI studies. The treatment options were discussed with the patient, and the plan was made for open biceps tenodesis and arthroscopic posterior capsulorrhaphy with a possible labral repair if indicated.
Pre-operative examination under anesthesia demonstrated posterior subluxation, with posterior laxity noted with the arm flexed forward, internally rotated, and adducted. The load and shift test measured 1+ laxity and a marked difference was noted compared to the contralateral side. Diagnostic arthroscopy was performed using a standard posterior viewing portal and two anterior portals. The posterior capsule was patulous, consistent with pre-operative imaging findings . An instrument portal was dilated using a cannula in preparation for capsulorrhaphy. Three stitches were used in a pinch and tuck technique starting at the 6:30 position on the glenoid and progressing clockwise in a circumferential manner to the 11:30 region on the glenoid cavity, and the volume of the cavity was reduced .
The integrity of the subscapularis tendon was intact with a medially dislocated LHBT . After the LHBT was identified, it was prepared for the biceps tenodesis by tagging and releasing in the standard fashion. The left arm was prepped for a standard open deltopectoral approach. On initial inspection, the LHBT was inflamed and was densely adherent to the conjoined tendon. The LHBT was scarred down onto the subscapularis. Further, inspection revealed complete rupture of the coracohumeralligament (CHL) and superior glenohumeral ligaments (SGHLs).
The LHBT was dissected away from the subscapularis and the vessels running in the bicipital groove were protected. The proximal 20 mm segment of the LHBT was released and whipstitched to the adjacent distal 50 mm of the tendon. An 8-mm aperture was drilled with an acorn reamer for the swivel lock tenodesis screw at the middle of the bicipital groove. The swivel lock screw and whipstitch were then advanced into the humerus. When the tension and contour of the biceps were determined to be acceptable, the rescue stitches were passed back through the tendon and sutured to the subscapularis and supraspinatus to repair and close the rotator interval. The passive ROM was stable with no concerning findings. The wound was irrigated with normal saline and closed. A sterile dressing was placed overall incisions and the patient was placed in a sling with an abduction pillow to maintain neutral position of the shoulder. The patient tolerated the procedure with no complications.
The patient was last seen at a 28-month follow-up and reported no pain or crepitus and full ROM in the left shoulder and elbow. On examination, the surgical site was well-healed,and gross motor and sensory function were intact. The posterior laxity noted preoperatively was not present and there was no sign of instability in the shoulder. Active ROM was improved in all planes in comparison with those measured at the pre-operative clinic visit. Overall, the patient reported functional improvement and had no limitations due to the shoulder. The patient was seeking medical clearance to join the military and was cleared for full duty.