A 56-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with episodes of involuntary crying, dizziness, and decreased hearing over the previous 3 weeks. Prior to the emergency department visit, she had been treated by her primary care practitioner with prednisone and meclizine without improvement. Past medical history included seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and obesity. Her RA was well controlled with oral methotrexate. During the clinical encounter, she had uncontrollable outbursts of crying after each question that seemed exaggerated relative to her emotion. Each crying episode lasted for 2–5 min, and her mood returned to normal in between. Her neurological exam revealed nystagmus on the right lateral gaze.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed areas of restricted diffusion over the central/left aspect of the splenium of the corpus callosum, left parietal white matter, left basal ganglia, and anterior right cingulate gyrus . The initial etiology was determined to be embolic with an unknown source. Computed tomography angiography was negative. Echocardiogram was unremarkable. Loop recorder did not detect atrial fibrillation. Hypercoagulable workup was negative. Serum neuromyelitis optica and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein were negative. The patient was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy.
She returned in 2 weeks with acute confusion, slurred speech, and headache. She continued to have decreased hearing and tinnitus in the left ear. On examination, she was disoriented and encephalopathic. Repeat brain MRI showed a new area of diffusion restriction in the left corona radiata and expansion into the corpus callosum and right middle cerebral peduncle. There was an area of increased T2 signal without diffusion restriction over the left side of the pontine . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation showed a protein level of 277 mg/dl (normal range 12–60) and 2 white cells; otherwise, all results were normal (culture, cytology, meningitis encephalitis panel, ACE, myelin basic protein, oligoclonal bands, autoimmune encephalitis panel, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA), West Nile virus). The electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed no seizure activity. The cerebral angiogram was negative for vasculitis.
The patient received 5 days of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and methylprednisolone, which improved the overall clinical presentation. Approximately 1 week after completing steroids, the IVIG patient started developing new symptoms, including diplopia and internuclear ophthalmoplegia, with brain MRI showing a new area of diffusion restriction and enhancement.
The patient had no subjective visual loss, but an ophthalmological evaluation was requested based on suspicion of Susac’s syndrome given the corpus callosum lesions and hearing loss. The ophthalmological evaluation showed branch retinal artery occlusion. This finding led to the diagnosis of Susac’s syndrome.
After the diagnosis of Susac’s syndrome had been made, she was started on cyclophosphamide and slow prednisone taper. Additionally, she was found to be positive for hepatitis B, so tenofovir was started. She received cyclophosphamide IV monthly for 6 months. Then, six additional cyclophosphamide infusions were given, one every other month. Then, there were two further infusions once every 3 months. Cyclophosphamide was then discontinued. She remained on oral methotrexate for RA during the cyclophosphamide course.
She had one relapse a month after starting cyclophosphamide, and she has been clinically stable since then. Follow-up brain MRI 18 months after her initial presentation showed generalized brain atrophy with stable white matter lesions. There were no diffusion-restricted or diffusion-enhancing lesions . Her cognitive function and her mobility improved. Her pseudobulbar affect has been controlled with dextromethorphan HBr and quinidine sulfate. She has a hearing aid for her hearing loss.