A 84-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department after 7 weeks of severe anorexia and unintentional weight loss of 8 kg over the last 3 months to 47.7 kg. She complained of bad taste and dysphagia to solids, but not to liquids. Furthermore she mentioned regurgitation of undigested food. Clinical examination was unremarkable except of the observed weight loss. Her medical history included arterial hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, COPD, chronic atrial flutter, heart failure, previous lung embolism, radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism and previous drainage of a subdural hematoma of the thoracolumbar spine. Blood analysis showed a digitalis intoxication, a slightly elevated C-reactive protein without leucocytosis and discrete hypoalbuminemia and a grade 2 chronic kidney disease (CKD-epi). Thyroid function was normal. Her chest radiograph showed a widened mediastinum with aortic unfolding and calcification. Since anorexia might be caused by digitalis, this therapy was discontinued. However, without alleviation of the symptoms. To exclude a Zenker’s diverticulum, a barium swallow evaluation was performed, showing mild dilatation of the proximal esophagus with distal stasis of food and marked hypocontractility, presenting as a ‘bird’s beak sign’ . Endoscopic evaluation was normal, without food remnants or evidence of esophageal neoplasm . The latter is important to consider in elderly patients with dysphagia to solids. During the procedure a nasogastric tube was placed for supplemental feeding and the patient gained 4 kg.
Subsequent manometric examination displayed insufficient relaxation of the LES (IRP4 75 mmHg, normal < 20 mmHg) combined with a mean LES resting pressure of 156 mmHg (normal 10-35 mmHg) and a panesophageal pressure rise of > 30 mmHg in more than 20% of swallows, compatible with a type 2 achalasia according to the Chicago classification for esophageal motility disorders .
Since type 2 achalasia is associated with external compression of the esophagus a computed tomographic (CT) evaluation of the chest was performed to exclude pseudoachalasia, revealing compression of the distal esophagus by a dissecting aorta descendens, type Stanford B (40 mm) . The patient was not considered suitable for vascular repair given the multiple comorbidities and she was managed with a liquidised diet and discharged home. Her blood pressure was already well controlled with antihypertensive medication.
Six weeks later, the patient was readmitted. Since she was not able to maintain a stable body weight and had lost another 6 kg, she was progressively started on nasogastric tube feeding, with close biochemical monitoring to prevent refeeding syndrome. In consent with the patient, a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) was placed 2 weeks later and enteral feeding was continued. Unfortunately another 2 weeks later the patient developed a pulmonary infection complicated with severe cardiac decompensation and inevitably passed away.