A 38-year-old Japanese male was admitted to our hospital due to psychotic symptoms. His height was 165 cm, following childhood growth hormone therapy, and his weight was 76 kg. Past medical history included diabetes mellitus, hyperuricemia, hypothyroidism (due to the adverse effect of 131I therapy), and strabismus. His physical features included broad thumbs and toes, low-set ears, hypertelorism, bushy eyebrows, broad nose, and mild scoliosis, which are all typical in RTS.
He was born on term as the second of two siblings, with a birth weight of 3360 g. From 3 months to 3 years of age, he was admitted to hospitals to treat pneumonia three times a year because of his immune deficiency. At the time, he manifested epilepsy with abnormal electroencephalography records. When he reached the age of 9 months, he was diagnosed with RTS based on physical characteristics without genetic analysis. His first words were at 1.5 years of age, but he could not walk without holding onto something, and he used a walker until he entered elementary school. At age 3 years, he spoke in two-word sentences. With age, he began to show developmental delay, including intellectual disability, deficits in social interaction, impaired communication skills, and repetitive behavior. After graduating from high school and vocational school, he worked as a shop assistant but made many mistakes and did not work well.
At age 22, he showed his first clinical manifestation of psychotic symptoms: auditory hallucinations and delusions of persecution. He had withdrawn socially, and by the time he was 26, his hallucinations and delusions had intensified. He was irritable and aggressive without emotional context. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia according to DSM-IV criteria. With 600 mg/day of sultopride and risperidone 2 mg/day, he achieved remission, and sultopride was tapered off at discharge. However, the delusions remained and because he still complained of anxiety compulsively, the risperidone was continued.
At age 38, behavioral abnormalities reappeared, including wandering around his home, and talking meaninglessly. He reported three persons in his brain and that someone influenced his body. He was admitted to the hospital and found to have a recurrence of auditory hallucinations and delusions of persecution, along with incoherent thinking. On examinations, computed tomography showed mild temporal cortical atrophy and calcification of basal ganglia and falx cerebri . Cytogenetic analysis showed a normal karyotype (46, XY). Whole-exome sequencing (WES) showed a probably damaging missense variant in CREBBP (p.Leu551Ile), but this variant is not rare in East Asians with an allele frequency of more than 1% (gnomAD r2.1.1, ). No other potentially pathogenic variants were found in CREBBP or EP300. Thus, we searched for variants with potential pathogenic effects unbiasedly (see Supporting Information). We found probable 22q.11.2 deletion by WES, which was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization , and one rare loss-of-function (LoF) variant in an LoF-constrained gene (MTSS1) and three rare missense variants in missense-constrained genes (CELSR3, HERC1, and TLN1). The deletion was further confirmed by array comparative genomic hybridization (SurePrint G3 Human CGH 1x1M Microarray [Agilent]) as a deletion in chr22:18,894,339-21,464,119 in the GRCh37 coordinate.
The patient's IQ (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4th Edition) was 47. According to the DSM-5, he was diagnosed with 22q11.2 DS, autism spectrum disorder, moderate intellectual disability, and schizophrenia. He was prescribed risperidone 2 mg/day, later increasing it to 6 mg/day. Two months after admission, his psychotic symptoms were ameliorated, and the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale score decreased by 21%. However, he showed anxiety and fear of leaving the hospital, and the hospitalization was prolonged.