Patient was a 27-week premature female infant, a product of a 36-year-old mother via an in vitro fertilization. Patient was delivered via cesarean section for preterm premature rupture of membrane lasted for 50 h. The mother received antibiotics during her antenatal period and during cesarean section. The birth weight was 1100 g. The Apgar scores at one and five minutes were 8 and 9 respectively. The mother’s prenatal labs were normal, and mother denied any infections, radiation exposure or drug uses during the pregnancy.
The patient was intubated on admission into neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and received one dose of surfactant for respiratory distress syndrome. She received intravenous ampicillin and cefotaxime for seven days for suspected clinical sepsis with negative blood culture. She was successfully extubated to nasal continuous positive airway pressure (N-CPAP) on day of life 1. A peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) was placed on day of life 1 and removed on day of life 42. On day of life 30, she was noted to have repeated apnea that required intubation and mechanical ventilation. She had a sepsis work up and was treated with a 10-day course of intravenous imipenem (10 mg/kg/dose, every 12 h) for a multi-drug resistant Klebsiella Pneumoniae growing from a culture of trachea secretion. Complete blood count showed a leukocyte count of 19.3 × 103/ μ L with 68% neutrophils, 32% lymphocytes, 1.3% monocytes and 0.7% eosinophils, hemoglobin of 10.5 g / dl, and platelet count of 716 × 103/ μ L. C-reactive protein increased to 15 mg/ L and decreased to normal level after administration of antibiotics for one day. The blood culture obtained before the administration of antibiotic was negative. Patient recovered and was weaned to N-CPAP again on day of life 37, and further weaned to nasal cannula oxygen therapy on day of life 41 for chronic lung disease. On day of life 55, MRI was conducted to evaluate the central nervous system due to high risk for developmental delay. MRI revealed two brain abscesses measuring 3.3 cm × 3.1 cm × 3.1 cm in diameter in the right frontal region, and another 2.5 cm × 2.1 cm × 2.6 cm in diameter in the right parietal region . The brain abscesses were not communicating with the ventricles. Neurological examination revealed normal occipito-frontal circumference, reflexes, wakefulness and physiological hypotonia. Examination of other systems was normal. Congenital heart disease was ruled out by echocardiography and the arterial duct was closed. Results of complete blood count and C-reactive protein were normal. Patient was started with intravenous meropenem (40 mg/kg/dose, every eight hours) and underwent surgical aspirations with antibiotic irrigation of the abscesses twice by pediatric neurosurgeon on day of life 64 and life 83 in operating room. A total of 20 ml yellowish purulent fluids were obtained from the abscesses. The bacterial culture of the cerebral-spinal fluids and the purulent essudate were both negative for any bacterial pathogens. Purulent fluids from the right frontal region were drained for 6 days and the purulent essudate from the right parietal region was drained for 8 days after aspirations until no fluids flowing out of the drainage tubes. The follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan 5 days after the first surgical aspiration showed a decreased size of abscess in the frontal lobe . Patient was treated with meropenem for a total of 7 weeks. A follow-up brain MRI scan obtained prior to discharge showed near complete resolution of the abscesses. The follow up cerebrospinal fluid examination results were normal. Patient was discharged home on day of life 106.
At 10-month (7 months corrected age) follow-up, her weight was 8 kg. She had normal neurological examination along with normal ophthalmology and hearing evaluations. At 2-year-old, the patient was 92 cm in height (95th percentile) and her weight was 13 kg (50th percentile). The child was in good health and her parents reported no abnormal physical or behavior activities. At the age of 8 and 11, the patient had convulsions in nocturnal sleeping and the convulsions lasted for approximately three minutes with spontaneous resolution. She was admitted to the hospital twice, clinical symptoms, physical examination, laboratory screening and electroencephalography did not reveal any abnormalities. At the age of 11, MRI was conducted and the imaging finding mostly manifested as encephalomalacia in the frontal and parietal lobes of the right hemisphere. In addition, bilateral periventricular leukomalacia was observed. At the age of 12, her weight and height were in the 50th percentile and she had the test of Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 4th edition . The Full-scale IQ was 89 (23th percentile). The girl was subjected to neurocognitive evaluation with the following results: working memory (score = 100, 50th percentile), processing speed (score = 92, 30th percentile), verbal comprehension (score = 89, 23th percentile), and perceptual reasoning (score = 92, 30th percentile) were within normal range. The girl earned good grades in primary school and was particularly gifted for drawing. She did not receive rehabilitation therapy in the long-time follow-up because of normal result in every developmental milestone and she learned to swim, dance, paint, and play guitar at her early age.