A 35-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with progressive chest tightness, dyspnea, and palpitations. The patient’s chest tightness and shortness of breath began 3 days before presentation and worsened upon exertion. This was accompanied by palpitations and nocturnal paroxysmal dyspnea, without chest pain, headache, or sweating. His symptoms did not improve with administration of oral theophylline. Nine years previously this patient underwent surgical resection of cerebellar hemangioblastomas, and his father had also had cerebellar hemangioblastomas removed surgically. A year before the present hospitalization, the patient acquired paroxysmal hypertension, with blood pressure up to 180/140 mmHg, but had recently achieved a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg without medication. There was no history of diabetes or cardiovascular disease. The physical examination revealed no fever, tachycardia at 126 bpm, blood pressure 145/97 mmHg, and pulmonary rales.
Upon hospital admittance, the patient’s N-terminal-pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level was significantly elevated (9920 ng/L; normal range 300–400 ng/L), but cardiac injury biomarkers and D-dimer levels were normal. Troponin I remained normal the next day. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with pathological Q waves, slightly elevated ST segments in leads V1-V3, and inverted T waves in leads V4-V6 . Transthoracic echocardiography showed enlargement of the left atrium (LA, 49.9 × 55.4 × 55.9 mm) and left ventricle (LV, 69 mm), diffuse LV hypokinesia, and decreased cardiac function (LV ejection fraction 23.8%). No apical ballooning changes characteristic of Takotsubo syndrome were detected. Furthermore, there was a thrombus at the apex of the LV (27.1 × 13.1 mm). Lung computed tomography (CT) indicated bilateral pulmonary edema. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed postoperative changes in the brain with multiple lesions in both cerebellar hemispheres that were consistent with the imaging findings of hemangioblastoma . To identify secondary hypertension, contrast-enhanced abdominal CT was performed, which showed multiple cysts in the kidneys and the pancreas. A bilateral adrenal mass was considered most likely pheochromocytoma, and a left kidney mass, neoplastic lesions . A detailed hormonal analysis was performed to assess the metabolic activity of the adrenal mass. The methoxy adrenaline level was 1.34 nmol/L (normal range < 0.5), and the methoxy norepinephrine level higher than 20 nmol/L (normal range < 0.9). The 24-hour urinary free cortisol level was slightly elevated (668.99 µg, normal range 50–437). The patient had normal aldosterone levels, whether when upright or decubitus. Further cardiac MRI showed obvious enlargement of the heart and an obvious reduction in LV systolic and diastolic function . Additionally, the trabecular muscle of the lateral wall, inferior wall, and apex of the LV was enlarged and disordered. Neither abnormal myocardial perfusion, nor abnormal enhancement with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) was observed. These findings indicated nonischemic cardiomyopathy . The genetic analysis revealed a missense mutation of the VHL gene, c.269 A > T (p.Asn90Ile, Het) that resulted in the replacement of asparagine by isoleucine in the ninetieth amino acid of the gene-encoded protein.
Thus, based on the medical history, symptoms, and auxiliary examination, a diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and VHL syndrome type 2 was determined. Surgery was recommended to the patient to remove the adrenal and kidney masses, but he refused. Sacubitril valsartan (50 mg, b.i.d.), phentolamine (25 mg t.i.d.), metoprolol (47.5 mg q.d.), furosemide (20 mg b.i.d.), and spironolactone (20 mg b.i.d.) were administered. The ventricular thrombus was initially treated with subcutaneous injection of low-molecular-weight heparin, and then oral rivaroxaban for 1 month. The patient was in stable condition when discharged. ECG showed that T waves were inverted in leads V1-V6, and I, II, III, avL, and avF , and echocardiography remained unchanged. During the 3-month follow-up, the patient had no obvious chest tightness, palpitations, or dyspnea. ECG showed sinus tachycardia without ischemic changes , but echocardiography indicated no significant improvement in cardiac function. Sacubitril valsartan (100 mg b.i.d.) and metoprolol (95 mg q.d.) were prescribed at the third-month follow-up. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient had remained asymptomatic. The 6-minute walk distance was 650 m, and the NT-proBNP level was normal. Echocardiography showed that the LV end diastolic diameter was 60 mm, and LV ejection fraction was 34%. Coronary CT angiography showed no significant coronary artery stenosis.