A 51-year old male was admitted to Chosun University Hospital with fever and low blood pressure. He was treated with a hepatitis B and C antiviral agent, and had a Foley catheter placed due to severe benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) for 2 months before admission. When he arrived at the hospital, his vital signs revealed hypotension (40/20 mmHg) and fever (37.9 °C). Laboratory tests revealed thrombocytepenia (100,000/μL) and elevated liver function [Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 131 U/L, Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 95.9 U/L], elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (6.03 mg/dL), decreased renal function [Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 28.5 mg/dL, Creatinine 2.54 mg/dL], hematuria 4+ (RBC many/high-power field [HPF]), proteinuria 2+, and WBC 5–9/HPF in urine analysis. He was a farmer by occupation and therefore worked outdoors. He had marked leukocytosis (24.83 × 103 /μL), elevated procalcitonin (100 ng/mL), hematuria, and conjunctival hemorrhage. Therefore, we thought that the patient had an acute febrile illness during the autumn season, such as hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). PCR tests and antibody tests for O. tsutsugamushi and Hantavirus virus were performed, but all were negative. We initiated treatment for septic shock, followed by Hanta virus, L. interogans, and O. tsutsugamushi serologic follow-up tests. However, all results were negative. Nested reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (nested RT-PCR), real-time RT-PCR, and indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) were performed based on the suspicion of SFTS [, ]. The nested RT-PCR targeting M segment was positive and real-time RT-PCR targeting the S segment (Ct value of 41.21) was negative. DNA sequence analysis revealed the presence of SFTS virus in the patient specimens. Sequence similarity analysis with the M segment partial sequences of the PCR product (2016–058 plasma) showed 99.2% similarity (473/477) with the SFTS virus strain 16KS19 isolated from a Korean patient (accession no. MF094760.1). The phylogenetic tree also showed that the M segment partial sequence from the specimen formed a cluster with SFTS virus strains .
The SFTS IFA test results revealed immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG titers that were both < 1:32 at the time of admission. However, in follow-up IFA tests, the IFA IgG antibody titer was 1:64. However, he continued to have leukocytosis . The blood culture was performed on the day of admission, following six days, results showed the E. coli. To evaluate the portal of entry of E. coli, the abdomen and pelvis computed tomography and urine culture was performed, the result showed no sign of infected focus or bacterial growth respectively. However, the result of urine culture was reported 4 days after admission, after which we discarded the urine specimen and no further cultivation was performed. Therefore, the urinary tract as a potential entry portal for E.coli cannot be clearly ruled out.
We treated the patient for septic shock due to E. coli bacteremia, including ceftriaxone and inotropic. On the third day of hospitalization, his vital signs stabilized. Follow-up blood culture was performed on the fifth day of hospitalization, which revealed no growth of bacteria.
At the time of presentation, viral RNA was extracted from the patient’s plasma using a Viral Gene-spin Viral DNA/RNA Extraction Kit (iNTRON Biotechnology, Sungnam-si, Korea). For the nested RT-PCR, cDNA was synthesized using SuperScript VILO MasterMix (Invitrogen, CA, USA). The nested RT-PCR targeting the M segment of the SFTS virus was conducted using synthesized cDNA, M segment-specific primers, AmpliTaq Gold 360 Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and a Biosystems Veriti 96-Well Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) .
For the real-time RT-PCR targeting the S segment of the SFTS virus, previously reported primers and probes targeting the S segment were used . The PCR primers and probes used in the present study are described in Table .
The positive PCR product was purified and sequenced in both directions, using the PCR primers and an automatic sequencer (ABI Prism 3730XL DNA analyzer, Applied Biosystems) at COSMO GENTECH (Deajeon, Korea). The sequencing results were analyzed using the BlastN (Bethesda MD, USA) network service from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (National Institutes of Health). Moreover, the M segment sequences obtained from the GenBank database and patient samples were used to construct a phylogenetic tree using ClustalX (Ver 2.0; ) and Tree Explorer programs (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). Bootstrap analysis was conducted using 1000 replicates to improve the confidence level of the phylogenetic tree.
To perform the IFA, Vero E6 cells infected with SFTS virus were inoculated and fixed with 80% acetone on Teflon-coated well slides to prepare the SFTS antigen slide. The patient serum was serially diluted two-fold and then reacted with viral antigens in a moist chamber for 30 min at 37 °C. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2) and distilled water, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-human IgG and IgM as secondary antibodies (MP Biomedicals, Ohio, USA) were applied to each slide and incubated at 37 °C in a humid chamber for 30 min. Then, the slides were observed using a fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX73, magnification: 400×) after dispensing the mounting solution (VECTOR Laboratories). The final serum dilution, which indicates the specific fluorescence, was used to determine the antibody titer .