The patient was an 82-year-old Japanese Asian woman with no comorbidities, relevant family medical history, alcohol consumption, or known allergies. No previous liver disease or abnormal liver function tests were noted. However, she had been a smoker of 20 cigarettes per day until 3 years prior. After mountain climbing on 23 and 24 July 2012, she experienced numbness and pain in the right arm. On 25 July, she developed general malaise. Since her symptoms did not improve by the morning of 26 July, she visited a private hospital with facial pallor, poor dietary intake, redness, mild swelling, and pain in the right arm. She was in circulatory shock with a blood pressure of 60/48 mmHg, and was later transported by an ambulance to Fukuoka University Hospital.
Her physical findings on admission were as follows: body height, 158 cm; body weight, 51.0 kg; body mass index, 20.43 kg/m2; conscious and coherent; blood pressure, 66/33 mmHg; pulse rate, 91 beats per minute (bpm; regular); respiratory rate, 22 breaths/minute; SpO2, 97% (room air); body temperature, 37.7 °C; and redness and swelling extending from the medial part of the right upper arm to the right elbow and forearm . Blood tests showed high levels of inflammation , and computed tomography of the upper arm revealed adipose tissue turbidity . We suspected septic shock, with the infection originating in the upper arm.
First, to stabilize blood pressure, we rapidly administered 1000 mL of lactated Ringer’s solution, an initial dose of meropenem 1.0 g after blood culture specimens were collected, and noradrenaline at 0.2 µg/kg/minute. Then, under local anesthesia, a 5-cm incision was made distally from the medial right upper arm and proximally from the medial right cubital fossa. The color tones of the subcutaneous fat and fascia were normal, and we suspected cellulitis rather than necrotizing fasciitis. For the septic shock, we continued to administer meropenem (3.0 g/day) for 12 days, with linezolid (1.2 g/day) for 5 days and immunoglobulin (5 g/day) for 3 days via intravenous injection. On day 2 of hospitalization, a blood culture detected Gram-negative bacilli , and linezolid was discontinued. On day 5 of hospitalization, V. vulnificus was identified by blood culture, and we added minocycline (100 mg) twice daily for 8 days, to which V. vulnificus was susceptible . Subsequently, the inflammatory findings rapidly improved; the patient’s C-reactive protein levels dropped from 9.3 to 1.1 mg/dL in 9 days. Although there was no history of seafood intake or contact with seawater, we learned that the swelling developed in the right hand 1 day after she had shelled a large number of raw shrimp for cooking, and the swelling spread to the trunk. Therefore, we believed that the route of V. vulnificus infection was through minor skin wounds inflicted by shrimp shells.
On day 11 of hospitalization, the treatment was switched to oral levofloxacin (500 mg daily), as the redness and swelling in the upper arm had improved. After 7 days, drug-induced thrombocytopenia was observed, and levofloxacin was discontinued. No recurrence was observed, and the patient was discharged on day 28 of hospitalization .
During the course of hospitalization, persistent elevation of serum γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase levels suggested liver disease. Blood tests performed on day 5 of hospitalization showed positivity for anti-mitochondrial M2 antibodies , and abdominal echography showed a pattern of chronic liver disease, leading to the diagnosis of PBC. Since the liver damage was mild, we started to administer ursodeoxycholic acid (600 mg/day). On follow-up with the practitioner, we received no reports of exacerbations.