The patient, a 9-year-old girl, was born with congenital arhinia and raised at Guangzhou City Social Welfare Institute. Her physical and intellectual development was similar to that of normal peers but was too young to be sure of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism . However, the combination of congenital nasal deformities and microphthalmia in this patient suggested a diagnosis of BAMS . Moreover, by performing a very detailed physical examination, it was determined that her visual refraction muscle strength and tone were all functioning normally. Unfortunately, we could not exclude a later onset of a muscle phenotype as first signs of FSHD are usually only visible at the end of the second decade of life. However, an MRI examination was not conducted due to the patient’s preferences. Considering that the patient had no signs of muscular dystrophy, the diagnosis of FSHD2 was ruled out for now. Based on these findings, it was concluded that the patient was suffering from BAMS.
Genomic DNA was extracted from the patient by QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (250) (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, U.S.A). However, parental DNA of the patient were not available due to the unknown parentage. The WES analysis was mainly conducted in the Novogene Bioinformatics Institute (Beijing, China). All variants were formatted under HGVS nomenclature . After data filtration , a pathogenic heterozygous variant of SMCHD1, NC_000018.10:g.2694678G > C, NM_015295.3:c.1025G > C, NP_056110.2:p.(Trp342Ser), was identified. Sanger sequencing was further performed to validate this variant . This variant results in a change in the amino acid sequence of the ATPase active structural domain of the SMCHD1 protein, which may lead to altered ATPase activity and hence affect the characteristics of the resulting protein. It was predicted to be “disease causing” by MutationTaster, SIFT and PolyPhen2, and also was not found in the 1,000 Genome Browser, The ExAC Browser, the Exome Variant Server and GnomAD. According to ACMG standards and guidelines , this variant was categorized as pathogenic (PM1, PM2, PS3, PP3, PP5) . Although this variant was reported in a previous research, the pathogenic analysis was absent . We further performed bioinformatics analysis of the variant. Alignment of SMCHD1 amino acid sequences was highly conserved across species . Also, ConSurfServer software predicted that the affected amino acid was slightly conserved . Furthermore, there reveals a difference between the normal and mutant protein models constructed with SWISS-MODEL software, which affect highly conserved residues and hence affect the SMCHD1 protein features . Considering the clinical phenotypes and genetic results, the patient was diagnosed as BAMS.