A well-nourished 51-year-old woman visited our hospital because of fatigue, overt jaundice, and back pain on March 2016 (day 1). In the present article, each of the important clinical events occurred during the clinical course of the patient was described by “days” after the patient’s first visit to our hospital. The patient was afebrile and had no arthralgia. Physical examination revealed icteric sclera but no signs of facial erythema. No lymphadenopathy was detected. Chest and abdominal findings were noncontributory. No bruise was observed on the abdomen. She was taking no medications. Laboratory data obtained at the first visit are shown in Table . Serum amylase and calcium levels were normal. The titers of antinuclear antibody and anti-mitochondrial antibody were within normal limits. IgM antibodies for hepatitis viruses Bc, A and E were negative. Her medical history included cholecystectomy due to gall bladder polyps and cholelithiasis one year earlier, uterine myoma left untreated, and undefined complaints tentatively diagnosed as autonomic imbalance. She did not smoke or drink alcohol. When she revisited for follow-up first days later, she was admitted emergently because of severely deteriorated liver function (day 5). Serum concentrations of total bilirubin, serum alanine aminotransferase, serum aspartate aminotransferase, and serum alkaline phosphatase were 17.48 mg/dL, 1099 U/L, 708 U/L, and 460 U/L, respectively. Percent prothrombin time (PT%) also decreased to 77%, indicating ongoing acute hepatic decompensation. A CT scan revealed no signs of bile duct stenosis, cholelithiasis, and neoplasms in the hepato-pancreatic region.
Figure shows the time courses of clinical events, laboratory data and medications given to the patient during her hospitalization. On the 12th day, a percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the liver was performed. Histopathological examination revealed minimal to mild portal inflammation, mild interface hepatitis, and serious intralobular focal necrosis with plasmocytic infiltration. Inflammation was also seen around biliary canaliculi. According to the current diagnostic criteria of AIH [, ], the patient had an AIH score of 12 points. AIH scores of 10 to 15 points are consistent with a probable diagnosis, and scores ≥ 16 points with a definite diagnosis.
Since we judged that development of liver failure was imminent, we began corticosteroid pulse therapy with 1000 mg/day of methylprednisolone for 3 days under a diagnosis of fulminant AIH (day 17). After completion of the pulse therapy, oral prednisolone was started at 40 mg/day. Famotidine (40 mg/day) was also given to prevent gastric mucosal injury. Five days after the commencement of steroid pulse therapy (day 21), the patient developed mild back pain. And then, serum amylase and lipase levels abruptly increased to 575 U/L and 582 U/L, respectively. Since a plain CT scan revealed mild swelling around the pancreatic head , a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made (day 23). Assuming that the development of acute pancreatitis was associated with administration of corticosteroids, we started tapering off prednisolone (day 24). Since we were concerned that an abrupt withdrawal of prednisolone might have exacerbated AIH, we underwent an accelerated tapering off of the prednisolone doses according to the schedule shown in Fig. . Specifically, we reduced 5 to 10 mg/day every 1 to 3 days from 40 mg/day to 10 mg/day. We monitored serum liver enzymes frequently over the following 10 days and detected no signs of reactivation of AIH. After an uneventful clinical course, the patient was discharged from hospital with a maintenance dose of prednisolone (10 mg/day) on the 33rd day after admission.
We searched the MEDLINE® database and the medical journal database of Japan Medical Abstracts Society for case reports describing the development of acute pancreatitis after administration of corticosteroid pulse therapy. For MEDLINE® search the following combinations of MeSH® vocabulary terms were used: “adrenal cortex hormones”[MeSH Terms] OR “steroids”[MeSH Terms]) and “pancreatitis”[MeSH Terms] AND Case Reports [ptyp] and “humans”[MeSH Terms] and (English [lang] OR Japanese [lang]). For the search of Japan Medical Abstracts Society, the following combinations of search terms were used: (((pancreatitis / TH) AND (adrenal cortex hormone / TH)) and (PT = case report)) and (“pulse therapy (drug treatment)” / TH). We retrieved eight relevant cases of acute pancreatitis (2 from MEDLINE® and 6 from the database of Japan Medical Abstracts Society). The synopses of the cases including the present case are summarized in Table .