A 4-year-old Syrian male was admitted to the pediatric department in Tishreen University Hospital with a 15-day history of prolonged fever measured at 38.5–39 °C at a rate of four to five times daily, partly controlled with antipyretics, and associated with fatigue, backache, headache, and lower extremities weakness. The child was treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) without improvement and increased weakness. The patient lived in a village in an endemic area for brucellosis, with immediate contact with contaminated animals and reported consumption of unpasteurized dairy products.
In his medical history, he had suffered from prolonged fever with joint pain and fatigue a year ago, and was diagnosed with brucellosis by positive Wright serologic tests (more than 1/320) and treated orally for 45 days without completing the treatment. There was no significant medical family history.
On physical examination, his body weight was 15 kg (Standard Deviation (SD) −2.7) and his height was 98 cm (Standard Deviation (SD) M), temperature was 38.3 °C, oxygen saturation 98%, and arterial blood pressure 110/80 mmHg. He was stable and generally well without being able to stand unsupported while sitting alone.
A physical examination including a neurological examination showed mild paresthesia and muscle weakness. The muscle strength level of the arms was 4/5, the proximate muscle strength level of the legs was 2/5, and the distal muscle strength level was 2. He had a stiff neck with Kernig’s sign and deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were absent in the lower extremities. Plantar reflexes were normal. Proprioception in the lower extremities was impaired, but he did not have any sensory problems. Abdominal cutaneous reflexes were absent and there was no disturbance in the sphincter. The spleen was palpable 2 cm below the costal margin, but the rest of the abdominal physical examination was normal. On laboratory analysis, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) were elevated. Complete blood count (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), renal, and liver function, glucose, and urine were normal .
The Widal test was negative for typhoid (O: 1/80; H: 1/80), while the Wright test was positive (more than 1/320). We could not identify the titers of the antibodies because there were not available in our country. CSF analysis showed albumino-cytological dissociation [white blood cell counts (lymphocytes) of 10 cells/cubic millimeter, CSF glucose 57.47 mg/dL (normal value: 50–80 mg/dl); the corresponding blood glucose was 169 mg/dL (normal value: 60–100 mg/dL), and a protein level of 217.4 mg/dL (normal value: 15–45 mg/dL)]. The CSF culture was negative.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild splenomegaly without evidence of space-occupying lesions. A computed tomography scan (CT), and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and whole spine were unremarkable. Funduscopic examination and abdominal ultrasound were normal.
A nerve conduction study (NCS) and needle electromyography (EMG) revealed evidence of axonal and demyelinating polyneuropathy. The velocity of sensory nerve transmission was decreased in the legs. The neuromuscular transmission was normal. Based on previous data, the patient was diagnosed with an association between acute brucellosis and a GBS-like presentation.
Due to the lack of availability of an intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) and plasma exchange in our hospital, the patient was treated with sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim (10 mg/kg/day), rifampicin (15 mg/kg/day), gentamicin (5 mg/kg/day), and dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg/day).
After 7 days of treatment, the child’s symptoms improved (fever, headache, and backache) with the continued inability to walk and pain in the lower extremities, and the absence of tendon reflexes in the lower extremities.
After 15 days, the patient was discharged with instructions to follow the treatment of sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim (10 mg/kg/day), rifampicin (15 mg/kg/day) for 6 months, and vitamins.
The child improved gradually after discharge. The muscle weakness in the lower extremities improved, and he walked with support a month after discharge. He walked without support 2 months after discharge. Currently, the child is in good condition with a normal movement and growth rate.