A 23-year-old Caucasian man was hospitalized for persisting fever resistant to conventional therapies. On physical examination, our patient presented with marked hepatosplenomegaly and abnormal sounds at thoracic auscultation. Laboratory findings consisted of severe pancytopenia (hemoglobin 9.3 g/dL, platelets 93 × 109 cells/L, white blood cells 2.2 × 109 cells/L, neutrophils 410 × 109 cells/L, lymphocytes 1.570 × 109 cells/L), increased LDH, signs of disseminated intra-vascular coagulopathy (CID), and anti-EBV IgM positivity, while a chest X-ray showed diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. No prior immunological abnormalities were recorded.
For the suspicion of either massive bone marrow infiltration by leukemia/lymphoma or hemophagocytic syndrome a bone marrow biopsy was performed. Results from the biopsy showed the bone marrow was hypercellular, with numerous atypical lymphoid cells and occasional hemophagocytes (identified by positive staining for CD68/PGM1) . Lymphocytes were more often small and without significant atypia; a smaller percentage was represented by larger cells . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) investigation results showed atypical lymphocytes were CD79a-, CD3+, CD2+, CD8+ and TIA1+ . ISH for EBER demonstrated that the majority of lymphoid cells were positive . Finally, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis revealed a monoclonal rearrangement of the TCRγ genes. IHC, ISH and molecular analyses were carried out as previously described [,].
Based on the above findings, a final diagnosis of systemic EBV+ T cell LPD of childhood was made. Our patient was initially treated with two sequential doses of VP16 with moderate improvement of his clinical and laboratory data. In particular, the fever transiently improved, hepatosplenomegaly was reduced, and coagulation parameters were partially corrected; however, severe peripheral blood cytopenia persisted. Soon after, the patient developed a fever recrudescence in association with pulmonary fungal infection.
A second bone marrow biopsy was performed, revealing (hypo)aplasia with a minimum percentage of CD79a-, CD3+, CD4-, CD8+, EBER- small lymphocytes and absence of the previously observed CD8+ large cells. VP16 was then replaced with cyclosporine, obtaining a white blood cell count increase and a further decline of splenomegaly, but with no improvement in thrombocytopenia. A third bone marrow biopsy showed an increased cellularity with reappearance of numerous CD8+ lymphocytes and evident hemophagocytosis.
Our patient then developed rectal hemorrhages only treatable with surgery, which turned out to be sustained by microvascular thrombosis on histological examination. Finally, after a short period of relative good health, our patient had a relapse of rectal bleeding and died soon after with cerebral manifestations.