A 57-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) – in December 2020 – with complaints of slurred speech, confusion, and left upper limb weakness. Her medical history included suffering from a persistent fever, severe headache, cough, fatigue, anosmia, dysgeusia, sore throat, vomiting, dizziness, fatigue, and bony pain, and the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay of nasopharyngeal swab sample was positive for SARS-CoV-2 from one week before presentation in ED. The patient also has diabetes mellites and hypertension in her medical history. All routine diagnostic tests were done, and the patient’s blood analysis showed an increase in red blood cells (RBCs), lymphocytes count, a marked increase in C-reactive protein (CRP), and D-dimer due to infection. She had a slightly decreasing mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration and a marked increase in fasting blood glucose (FBS) as diabetes . The patient weight was 70 kg; height: 150 cm; body mass index (BMI): 31 kg/m2; and the blood pressure: 140/100 mm Hg sitting. The pulse was 90/min, and oxygen saturation was 90%. Chest computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the brain were done for the patient. CT of the lung showed few right-side apical small ground-glass consolidation patches with bilateral mild subpleural lower lobar ground-glass haze more accentuated on the right side that scientifically reefed to right-side viral pneumonia because of COVID-19. Few scattered sub-centimetric emphysematous bullae were noted with fine scattered subpleural atelectatic bands. Mediastinal structures are normal with a patent tracheobronchial tree. There is no mediastinal, hilar adenopathy, or pleural effusion . The scanned arterial tree, including the coronary vessels, involved advanced atherosclerotic changes and mild to moderate cardiac chamber enlargement. Visualized cuts of the upper abdomen revealed a well-defined right adrenal lesion with internal fat density measuring about 5.2 cm × 4 cm, primarily representing fat-rich adenoma with few bilateral simple cortical renal cysts .
Brain MRI showed acute infarction of the right basal ganglia and abnormal hyperintense signal along with the right caudate head and anterior limb of the internal capsule in (a) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence (arrow) associated with positive mass effect on the right lateral ventricle. The corresponding area of restricted diffusion was appreciated as a hyperintense signal in (b) diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and hypointense signal in (c) apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) denoting restricted distribution in the DWI and ADC map, (d) perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) showing corresponding markedly reduced perfusion in the affected area (circle) impressive of right caudate head/anterior limb of internal capsule acute infarction. The images were imported into the viewing software (OsiriX Lite®).
Intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) was given to patients within 3 hours after onset. In addition to starting the COVID-19 therapeutic course, the decision was taken to admit the patient to an intensive care unit (ICU) until stabilizing O2 saturation. We treated the patient with intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g/day for 14 days), methylprednisolone (60 mg daily over six months), and anticoagulation over three months. Symptoms resolved entirely within 72 h. The patient was discharged after two weeks of antibiotic therapy. During a follow-up period of two weeks, no new symptoms occurred, and the second nasopharyngeal swab by RT-PCR assay was negative for SARS-CoV-2.