An 88-year-old female underwent small bowel bypass surgery for postoperative ileus following rectal cancer resection and was receiving care in the surgical department of Edogawa Hospital. Postoperatively, the patient developed a fever of unknown origin and was diagnosed with bacteremia associated with a central venous catheter. After catheter removal, cefmetazole sodium 1 g/day was started.
She had conjunctival hyperemia and decreased visual acuity in the right eye during the febrile period, and she was thus referred to the ophthalmology department on August 10th, 2017. The initial examination showed visual acuity in the right eye to be finger counting, that in the left eye 0.2. Slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival hyperemia in the right eye, as well as a marked inflammatory reaction in the anterior chamber with hypopyon . Moderate cataract was also noted, but the ocular fundus could not be visualized in detail due to poor visibility caused by vitreous opacity. As gram positive cocci were detected by blood culture, the endogenous endophthalmitis was attributed to these bacteria. However, not only surgical treatment but also repeated intravitreal injections and even a vitreous tap were judged to be difficult based on her poor general condition and mental status, including dementia. Furthermore, the details of the gram-positive cocci detected from blood culture and the antibiotic sensitivities were still being examined at the time. Thus, after written informed consent had been obtained from her daughter, we selected IVI of 1.25% / 0.1 ml PI, which has broad-spectrum efficacy including against antibiotic-resistant bacteria, instead of IVI of antibiotics. This treatment was performed by one of the authors (H.N.). Adjustment of 1.25% / 0.1 ml for IVI of PI was conducted as follows; 0.1 ml of 10% PI, which is an undiluted solution, and 0.7 ml of saline solution are mixed and diluted, and 0.1 ml is then injected into the vitreous . This treatment was approved by the Ethics Committee of Nihon University Hospital. Levofloxacin 6 times daily, tropicamide 3 times daily and atropine 1 time daily were also instilled, and the antibacterial venous infusion was changed to cefepime hydrochloride 1 g daily after the gram-positive cocci were revealed to be Staphylococcus aureus and the antibiotic sensitivities were determined.
Two days after the IVI, the hypopyon was diminished and her ocular pain resolved. Then, 4 days after the IVI, the inflammation in the anterior chamber showed rapid resolution and the hypopyon had disappeared completely. The fundus was visible 7 days after the IVI . The patient showed gradual recovery of her general condition, and there was no recurrence of endophthalmitis findings, such that she was discharged from our hospital 11 days after the IVI.
One month after the IVI, the inflammatory findings had completely disappeared, and the visual acuity of the right eye (0.2) was the same as that of the left eye . This condition was maintained for 4 months after treatment. She discontinued visiting our hospital thereafter due to deterioration of her systemic condition.