A 17-year-old Caucasian female patient had presented at an emergency department with acute abdominal pain. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a hyperdense cystic mass measuring 20 cm in diameter which included solid components located on the right side and extending to the umbilical level, which was confirmed by abdominal computed tomography (CT). At that time, she underwent emergency abdominal surgery, in which torsion of her right ovary, and the mass arising from it, was seen. A frozen section indicated benign tissue, and the operation was completed with the removal of a 1600-g tumoral mass and a salpingo-oophorectomy on the right. A postoperative pathologic examination had revealed a benign cystic struma ovarii, confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin. The specimen was remarkable for lymphocytes and lymphoid follicles dispersed among the thyroid follicles, which were consistent with lymphocytic thyroiditis . Thyroid function tests, which had been performed after the urgent operation, revealed subclinical hyperthyroidism .
Two months after surgery, the woman was referred to our clinic with persistent subclinical hyperthyroidism. A thyroid ultrasound, scintigraphic imaging of her thyroid gland with Tc-99 m pertechnetate and iodine-131 whole body scanning were performed. The thyroid ultrasound demonstrated a normal thyroid gland in size and mildly heterogenic parenchymal echogenicity. Functioning ectopic thyroid tissue was not seen in her inguinal or pelvic sections in the whole body scan, but condensed accumulation was observed in her thyroid region, as expected. The thyroid scintigraphy showed condensed focal accumulation in the left thyroid lobe, while other sides of the left lobe remained mildly suppressed and the right lobe was homogenous. Autoimmune thyroiditis was thought to be responsible for this focal condensation; this supposition was later supported by laboratory investigations, which showed elevated levels of serum antithyroglobulin (465.7 IU/mL; normal range, 5 U/mL to 60 U/ml) and antithyroid peroxidase (565.3 IU/mL; normal range, 10 IU/mL to 115 IU/ml), measured by electrochemiluminescence immunoassay with a commercially available kit (Immulite 2000, Bio DPC, Los Angeles, CA, USA). A radioiodine uptake test was performed with 20 mCi I-131 and the results revealed a decreased uptake, by 16% after four hours, and 27% after 24 hours. This result showed that the thyroid gland was also affected, which decreased the iodine uptake, presumably due to the autoimmune thyroiditis that originated within the ectopic thyroid tissue. Because our patient had been symptomatic for one month, she was started on propylthiouracil (PTU), after confirming the absence of any residue or recurrence with abdominal magnetic resonance imaging. After one month of treatment her serum thyroid stimulating hormone level normalized and her thyroid antibody levels decreased, and so PTU was stopped.