A 9-year-old male patient was admitted to our emergency department with a sudden onset of headache, nausea and vomiting. and severely altered mental status. His medical history included NS. Subsequently, he underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, which depicted a massive left-side frontoparietal intracerebral hematoma with associated subarachnoid hemorrhage . However, he had no history of major trauma or severe infection. After taking into consideration the clinical signs, symptoms and imaging findings, the patient was sedated, intubated and admitted immediately to the Interventional Radiology Unit of our hospital for endovascular treatment. In particular, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) (4-vessel study) was performed, which revealed a fusiform aneurysmal dilatation in the left pericallosal artery, a distal segment of anterior cerebral artery . It also revealed delayed contrast medium filling and emptying without a clear aneurysmal neck, typical characteristics of pseudoaneurysms. Under general anesthesia, a 5F multipurpose guiding catheter was placed in the left internal carotid artery, and a microcatheter was navigated and positioned in the left callosomarginal artery. Embolization of the pseudoaneurysm of the callosomarginal artery was achieved using coils (MicroPlex 10 Hypersoft 3D 5 mm/10 cm (MicroVentionInc, Tustin, CA, USA), MicroPlex 10 HyperSoft Helical 5 mm/8 cm, MicroPlex 10 HyperSoft Helical 3 mm/6 cm and a ev3 Axium Helix 2 mm/6 cm (ev3, Irvine,CA, USA). Then, injection of Onyx18 (cv3, Irvine, CA, USA) was performed to occlude the distal part of the callosomarginal artery . Twenty-two months later, the patient was readmitted with the same clinical presentation, and the DSA demonstrated a second IAP in the frontoparietal branch of the right middle cerebral artery in the M2 segment . On the same day of the admission, the decision was to emergently proceed to endovascular repair. The aim of the endovascular approach was to occlude the pseudoaneurysm as well as the parent artery using coils and glue (Glubran 2/Lipiodol). Complete embolization of the second pseudoaneurysm was achieved following the same endovascular technique . The postoperative period presented no major complications. Seven weeks after endovascular repair, the patient was fully conscious and cooperative, with no focal neurologic deficit. The first follow-up after endovascular treatment is scheduled 3 to 6 months after the procedure, and then MRI angiography should be performed for annual surveillance.