A 47 years old Moroccan woman with a familial history of a father dead from a colorectal cancer, and a maternal aunt dead from a breast cancer, presented to our institute with complaints of nasal obstruction, headache, and ear fullness for three months, and skin changes on the right breast for two months. She did not breastfeed her four children, had a regular menstrual cycle, and took oral contraception.
On physical examination, the right breast had a 6 × 5 cm lump on retroareolar area fixed to the skin with thickening of the whole breast and nipple retraction. The axillae and the cervical regions were free of any adenopathy. Mammogram showed an increase in density on the right breast with abnormal skin thickening in the periareolar area and associated microcalcifications , the complement of ultrasound revealed a nodular lesion measuring 4 × 4 cm. On the fine needle aspiration cytology there were signs of malignancy confirmed with core biopsy of the lump suggesting a ductal infiltrating carcinoma with micropapillary component .
At presentation our patient had developed a unilateral conductive hearing loss associated with recurrent otitis media and numbness of the face. A computed tomography (CT) of the face and the skull showed an asymmetric mass in the posterior nasopharynx extended into the adjacent parapharyngeal spaces and infiltrating the sphenoid bone, no regional adenopathies were revealed, and the nasopharyngeal biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of an undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma . There were no distant metastases and we conclude the diagnosis of a locally advanced breast cancer with a synchronous stage III undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
The patient received induction chemotherapy combination of drugs sharing an activity on breast and nasopharyngeal carcinomas, association of taxanes and anthracyclines drugs was used (weekly Paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 for 12 weeks associated to Doxorubicine 50 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) for a total of 4 cycles. The treatment was generally well tolerated; the patient had 3 episodes of grade III-IV non febrile neutropenia, grade II mucositis, total alopecia, and grade II neuropathy reversible after several months thereafter. After the four cycles of chemotherapy there were a remarkable improvement on the breast and a relief in the symptoms of the nasopharyngeal tumour.
The induction therapy was followed by external beam radiation for the nasopharynx (70Gy in 35 fractions) with concurrent chemotherapy (weekly Cisplatine 40 mg/m2 for four weeks) and a prophylactic radiation to cervical lymph nodes. Evolution was marked by the improvement of the symptoms and a radiological reduction volume of the nasopharyngeal mucosa thickening which biopsy confirmed the absence of malignancy. This sequelar lesion has persisted until the last control without trend to progression.
Breast intervention was delayed until after the local control of the nasopharyngeal tumour. A right-sided modified radical mastectomy with axillary nodes dissection was carried out. Histological analysis of the mastectomy specimen revealed a 2 mm residual infiltrating ductal carcinoma grade II, neither insitu component nor lymphovascular emboli were found, hormonal receptors were positives (90% on estrogens receptor, and 30% on progesterone receptor), Her2 status was negative, and from the 11 lymph nodes dissected 4 were involved. Surgery was followed by chest wall irradiation, and the patient undergoes now an antihormonal therapy; she has accomplished 12 months of Tamoxifene. The latest medical controls show no signs of locoregional relapse for both tumours and our patient remains disease-free 27 months after beginning therapy.