A 42-year-old woman presented to a local hospital on January 1, 2019, for a persistent fever of unknown reason that had been occurring for 1 month accompanied by headache. Laboratory test results are as follows: hemoglobin 48g/L, platelet count 54×109/L, ALT 90.6U/L, AST 87.2U/L, total bilirubin 32.8umol/L, LDH 636 U/L, ferritin>2000ng/ml. Bone marrow cytology showed reactive bone marrow images, and hemophagocytic cells were occasionally observed. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed. multiple space-occupying lesions in the liver, the largest is about 3.7cm in diameter. In addition, there was a hepatic cyst with a diameter of about 1.6 cm in the liver. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed multiple density shadows of abnormally high uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in the liver, the largest being about 3.7×2.9cm, the early maximum standard uptake value (SUV max) of the liver was 6.3, and the delayed SUV max was 8.2 . A round low-density foci with no FDG uptake can be seen in the right lobe of the liver, about 1.7 × 1.5 cm in size. Abnormally increased FDG uptake in the upper abdominal cavity, retroperitoneum, and para-vascular lymph nodes with a maximum lymph node size of 1.5 × 1.1 cm and a maximum SUV of 3.1. On January 14, 2019, the patient suddenly experienced headache, nausea, vomiting, and started speaking discontinuously and illogically. She gradually developed irritability, delirium, and coma. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head just revealed a few ischemic degeneration foci in the brain. As the patient has chronic viral hepatitis B, hepatocellular carcinoma was the main differential diagnosis. On January 25, 2019, ultrasound-guided percutaneous liver biopsy was performed under the suspicion of an unusual malignant tumor at the local hospital. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CD20, CD34, and LCA and negative for CD3, CD30, CD68, MPO, CKpan, Syn, CgA, and CK8/18. The Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated to be 80%. She has no family history of hematological malignancies. In summary, she was diagnosed with IVLBCL at stage IVB according to Ann Arbor staging and had a hemophagocytic syndrome. IPI was 3 and ECOG performance status was 1.
The patient was started on induction chemotherapy with two courses of R-DEP (rituximab600mgd0, doxorubicin20mg d1, etoposide100mg d1, and prednisolone80mg d1-5) for hemophagocytic syndrome and two courses of R-CHOP (rituximab600mgd0, doxorubicin40mgd1, cyclophosphamide1.1gd1, vindesine4mgd1 and prednisolone100mg d1-5), then she attained partial remission by PET-CT. Subsequently, she experienced paroxysmal headache during the third R-CHOP chemotherapy regimen. Combined with the history of the disease, she was considered to have CNS progression, which was identified using head MRI . The head MRI showed multiple short-line and nodular enhancements in the cerebellum, the cerebral meninges and in the brain parenchyma at the junction of the right temporal-occipital lobe. Then she was administered CNS-directed chemotherapy including two courses of methotrexate (MTX)-based combination regimens (intrathecal injection MTX 10 mg, Ara-C 50 mg, dexamethasone 5 mg) and high-dose MTX therapy (rituximab 600 mg d0, MTX 5.4 g d1), but they did not work as re-examination of the head MRI after 1 month showed intracranial progress. The patient then received two courses of the adjusted treatment regimen MTX combined with Ara-C therapy (MTX5.4g d1, Ara-C 1.5g q12h d2-d3). Head MRI shows improvement compared with previous one.
To prevent the progression of the disease, she came to our hospital for CAR T-cell therapy, and we decided to perform ASCT combined with CAR T-cell therapy. The trial was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and the study was registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR-OPN-16009847). Informed consent was obtained by the patient and her family according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Before the conditioning regimen, the patient received two separate apheresis procedures, including granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-stimulated autologous hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) collection and peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) apheresis for CAR T-cell manufacturing. CAR T-cell manufacturing-related quality control and analysis were completed by Wuhan Bio-Raid Biotechnology Co., Ltd., as previously described . Due to the patient’s refractory characteristics, a cycle of standard salvage treatment with rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, and cisplatin (R-DHAP) was initiated in the mid-November 2019. Fourteen days later, autologous stem cells were harvested (3.08×106 cells/kg). The head MRI 1 month before ASCT and CAR19/22 T-cell cocktail therapy treatment is shown in . The patient was administered a standard dose of the BEAM (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, melphalan) regimen one week before ASCT. On January 14, 2020 (day 0), the patient underwent ASCT (CD34 3.31×106 cells/kg). Autologous CD22-targeted CAR T-cells (CAR22) (2.7×106 cells/kg) were infused on day +2, followed by CD19-targeted CAR T-cells (CAR19) (4.3×106 cells/kg) on day +3. The structure is as shown in . Both CAR19 and CAR22 transgene copy numbers were determined by droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) . After sequential infusion of anti-CD19 and anti-CD22 CAR T-cells, grade 1 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) was observed, and interleukin-6 and ferritin levels increased slightly and transiently . Since the patient had hepatitis B virus, we continued to monitor her hepatitis B virus titers continuously. Before and after CAR T-cell therapy, both were <1.0×102 IU/mL, and there was no hepatitis B virus activation after treatment. The dynamic changes in white blood cells and lymphocytes after CAR T-cell therapy are depicted in . The leukocytes were engrafted at 2 weeks, and bone marrow hematopoiesis recovered in about 20 days. B cell recovered in about six months. CAR T-cell number and the copies of CAR22 and CAR19 increased dramatically and reached a peak in the first week. Follow-up after ASCT and CAR19/22 T-cell cocktail therapy, the patient’s cerebrospinal fluid leukemia/lymphoma minimal residual disease immunophenotyping test continued to be negative every 3 months. Sustained complete remission on head MRI at 3 , 6 , 9 , and 12 months after ASCT and CAR T-cell therapy. Twenty-two months after ASCT and CAR19/22 T-cell cocktail therapy, the patient was still disease-free, and the head MRI image is shown in . The most recent FDG-PET/CT on November 17, 2021 was unable to detect any significant disease, and the infiltration of tumor cells into the liver continued to vanished . Liver CT showed no new lesions . No tumor cells were found in the cerebrospinal fluid. The timeline of the clinical treatment and disease status were shown in .
When it comes to her thoughts on the disease and treatment, she expressed her great gratitude to our hospital and her husband. Despite her reluctance to face the diagnosis of lymphoma, the encouragement and positivity of her family (especially her husband) fueled her courage and strength to overcome the disease. She felt hopeless and helpless when she learned of her central involvement, poor prognosis and limited treatment options. When she and her husband learned of the clinical trials being conducted at our hospital, her desire to survive was rekindled, and she volunteered to participate in the clinical trials. Currently, the patient is working again, grateful, optimistic, healthy, and is very satisfied with her situation.