A 75-year-old Caucasian, G3P3 female presented to the urology clinic at a tertiary care center with a chief complaint of vaginal bulge and constipation. Past surgical history included an abdominal hysterectomy and Burch colposuspension in 1990, followed by urethrolysis and vaginal repair of stage 3 anterior compartment prolapse in 2000 for voiding dysfunction and recurrent urinary tract infections. Since then, she denied incontinence or residual voiding complaints. However, her constipation worsened requiring digital manipulation for rectal evacuation.
Prolapse assessment using the POP-Q confirmed a significant posterior compartment bulge (Ap: −2, Bp: 0). Magnetic resonance defecography reported mild vaginal prolapse (1.7 cm), a moderate cystocele (3.2 cm), a moderate enterocele (5.7 cm), and a moderate rectocele with distal bulge (1.2 cm) along the posterior vaginal wall. Rectal intussusception was also noted with partial thickness mucosal invagination, full-thickness invagination of the posterior wall of the rectum, and partial anterior wall invagination . After consultation with the colorectal department, it was decided to proceed with robotic MSC and rectopexy to jointly address her rectocele and enterocele defects.
Intraoperatively, a lubricated, round, EEA sizer was inserted in the vagina to facilitate dissection of the vaginal cuff. Following surgical technique we previously described, the dissection of the enterocele sac, rectovaginal space, and vaginal cuff were performed. The rectum was dissected to allow full mobilization to the promontory area. Once the dissection of the vaginal cuff, rectum, and promontory areas were completed, an Atrium™ mesh was prepared on the back table to fit the vaginal cuff size and then positioned in the pelvis via the assistant port. The mesh was secured to the distal left posterior vaginal wall. While the EEA sizer was oriented upward to expose the posterior vaginal wall in preparation for the placement of the contralateral suture, the vaginal cuff split open and the EEA sizer became fully exposed at the bottom of the pelvic cavity .
Due to the risk of mesh contamination and very thin vaginal tissues, the multidisciplinary team decided to forgo mesh placement. The vaginotomy was closed with running and interrupted absorbable sutures, and the mesh was removed. A direct suture rectopexy to the promontory was performed to tent the rectum up. Next, the enterocele defect was corrected by reapproximating the right and left wings of the peritoneum flaps over the midline and in front of the rectum using running 3–0 V-Loc sutures .
On follow-up visits, patient confirmed relief of the vaginal bulging sensation with some residual constipation easily managed with stool softeners. At last assessment 2 years after robotic surgery, she still required management of her constipation; however, physical examination had remained unchanged over time and revealed POP-Q Stage 1 prolapse (Aa: −2, Ba: −2, Ap: −3, Bp: −3, TVL: 8, and C: −7) without changes in bladder function (post-void residual: 0 mL) or return of her rectal prolapse.