A 33-year-old Caucasian male presented with a history of being unwell, non-productive cough and constant abdominal discomfort in the upper abdomen for three weeks. All these symptoms started after a tooth extraction. There was no change in his bowel or bladder habits. Apart from clipping of sub arachnoid aneurysm 7 years previously, he did not have any significant past medical history. His pulse rate was 100 beats/minute and blood pressure was 110/70 mm Hg. The SaO2 and temperature were within the normal limits. Clinical examination showed bronchial breathing in the left base and some tenderness in the epigastric region without rebound or guarding. His blood tests showed an elevated white cell count of 14,000/μl and a C-reactive protein of 88 mg/dl. The rest of the blood test results were normal. A Chest X-ray showed opacity at the left lung base. Subsequently a computed tomogram (CT) of chest and abdomen was organised which demonstrated lung nodules at the left lung base with some cavitation and a small infra-renal abdominal aortic aneurysm .
Initially it was thought that the aneurysm was mycotic from his left lung abscess. The patient underwent bronchoscopy which was not successful. The aneurysm was excised partially and repaired with an internal jugular vein (IJV) graft. The aneurysm wall was sent for histology but due to a portering error the sample never reached the laboratory. The patient was discharged home on the 6th post-operative day but he returned with severe abdominal pain on the seventh post operative day. A CT scan showed free fluid in the abdomen. The patient underwent re-laparotomy which revealed a hole in the IJV graft. The IJV graft was removed and replaced with an aorto-iliac silver impregnated synthetic trouser graft. During this time bloods were sent off for connective tissue screening which was positive for anti-proteinase PR3 (>1/10). Histology of a CT guided lung biopsy showed only necrotic tissue. His CRP and WCC remained high, but his blood cultures and aortic tissue never grew any bacteria. Therefore a nasal mucosal biopsy was organised which confirmed the presence of Wegener's granulomatosis.
Microscopic examination of the nasal mucosa showed fibro vascular tissue which was partially covered by stratified squamous epithelium and extensively ulceration. There was acute inflammation with necrosis . The inflammatory cell infiltrate included predominantly neutrophils, lymphocytes and occasional eosinophils. There was also some fibrinoid necrosis of blood vessels with extravasation of red blood cells. Fungal stains showed a negative reaction.
The patient was referred to a Rheumatologist and was started on prednisolone and cyclophosphamide. A few days after initiation of medical treatment, the patient felt a lot better and was discharged home for follow up.