A-91-year-old age female presented with a painful right-sided neck swelling for two weeks that had suddenly increased in size. She had previous surgical history of eye surgery and uterine operation a long time ago. She had thyroid cancer and underwent thyroidectomy in 2010, after this operation she received radioactive iodine. She had a past medical history of hypertension, on anti-hypertensive medication and thyroxine table (100 microgram) once per day since her operation.
On clinical examination there was significant voice change with well-defined firm tender right sided neck mass that was neither ulcerated or red in the skin over the swelling. On vocal cord examination, there was right vocal cord paralysis with a normal left vocal cord.
The patient's TSH was (<0.05uUI/), ESR (52 mm/h), and S. Calcium (9.81 mg/dl). Ultrasound of the neck revealed a well-defined solid (mildly vascular) nodule (16*15*17 mm) in the lower portion of the right operation bed, most likely a suspicious lymph node. Multiple well-defined solid hypoechoic hyper-vascular nodules of lymph nodes of varying sizes were detected in the right anterior triangle of the neck, the largest one was (55*49*30 mm) in the right groups III and IV, and the second largest one was (20*15 mm) in the right group II. There were no focal lesions in the left operation bed. 2–3 tiny lymph nodes were found in groups III and IV on the left side but they had no pathological futures; the largest one was (9*4 mm). There were no localized lesions in the submandibular and parotid glands.
A CT of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed with IV contrast and revealed a 22 mm mass lesion with complement encasement of the right common carotid artery, another 11 mm oval shaped, most likely a pathological lymph node, in the parapharyngeal space and multiple smaller lymph nodes in both sides of the neck and right paratracheal region. There was also a single small 4 mm nodule in the right upper lobe of the lung. The FNAC was taken from the right cervical lymph node, and the outcome showed metastatic carcinoma with a tendency favoring thyroid cancer origin.
The patient underwent right lateral cervical lymph node dissection, and the surgical specimen was sent for histopathological examination (HPE). HPE revealed metastatic PTC with a hobnail variant and anaplastic dedifferentiation, as well as caseating granulomatous adenitis, which is indicative of tuberculosis . 6 out of 36 lymph nodes were involved with extra nodal extension of PTC and pathological stage of pTx N1b was determined.
After the operation, she was sent for radiotherapy and she took five sessions of radiotherapy which caused her severe weakness.