We report the case of a 61-year-old woman who was suffering from lower abdominal bulge formation, chronic constipation, as well as a feeling of permanent abdominal constriction and pain. These symptoms appeared eight months after bilateral breast reconstruction, which was performed following subcutaneous mastectomy that was necessary owing to ductal carcinoma in situ. The breast reconstruction was conducted using a non-muscle-sparing pedicled TRAM-flap transposition. The defect created at the donor site within the abdominal wall after harvesting the rectus muscle was closed using a continuous suture with resorbable suture material. An additional augmentation was performed by the implantation of a resorbable polyglactin mesh placed on the fascial suture.
The patient presented at the authors' outpatient clinic eight months after reconstruction. At that time her body mass index was 18.9 and she was suffering from a lower abdominal bulge formation . An ultrasound examination revealed an abdominal wall defect measuring 18 × 20 cm, with no detectable rectus abdominis muscle remaining, resembling a large rectus diastasis. A preoperative endoscopy of the colon showed signs of adhesions in the colon sigmoideum and transversum, but no other pathologies; the laboratory values were normal. Apart from an appendectomy performed 20 years ago, the patient had undergone no other previous abdominal surgery. In addition to the annoying large bulge in this otherwise slim patient, the pain experienced during everyday movement and impairment of bowel function led to an explorative laparotomy and an attempt to reconstruct the abdominal wall.
Following adequate preparations with intestinal irrigation, a re-incision through the midline scar was performed. On entering the peritoneal cavity, several dense adhesions of small intestine to the abdominal wall and interenteric to the colon were found. These were carefully dissolved without causing injury to the intestine. Further exploration revealed a near-total absence of both abdominal rectus muscles; residual muscle fibres could be detected only at the lateral side of the rectus sheath. The initially implanted absorbable mesh was not identified, and the ultrasonographic finding of a diastasis-like defect with lateralization of both lineae semilunares was verified. Following a wide-ranging mobilization of the epifascial subcutaneous tissue, the remaining parts of the anterior rectus sheaths and minimal lateral parts of the rectus muscles were exposed. The herniation sac was partly resected, leaving sufficient material to facilitate a peritoneal closure of the abdominal cavity. In order to reach an adaptation of both lateralized anterior rectus sheaths, a component separation of the abdominal wall (Ramirez procedure) was performed. In the absence of an intact rectus abdominis muscle and anterior rectus sheath, only a vertical incision lateral to the linea semilunaris and separation in the plane between oblique external and internal muscle was used. A two-layer closure of the fascia in the midline was performed using a non-resorbable single-stitch suture of the posterior wall, and a continuous suture with a slowly resorbable suture material for the remaining anterior rectus sheath. The lateral defects between the external oblique muscle and linea semilunaris were covered with a halfmoon-shaped lightweight polypropylene mesh (Ultrapro®; Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany) on each side . Punctual mesh fixation was achieved using resorbable 3/0 single-stitch sutures (Dexon®; Braun, Germany). A subcutaneous suction drain was placed on top of each mesh, after which wound closure was achieved with a continuous intracutaneous suture using non-resorbable material.
The patient's recovery was uneventful; during her hospital stay she wore an elastic abdominal belt and was provided with analgesics and physical therapy with intense respiratory training. The suction drains and suture material were removed on schedule, the postoperative ultrasonography was without pathological findings and minimal postoperative seroma resolved. The patient was discharged from hospital and made subsequent visits to the outpatient clinic. At 12 months after surgery she remained satisfied with the outcome.