A 64-year-old male with Grade I arterial hypertension was referred to a community hospital for three months of exertional dyspnoea. Physical examination showed no congestion or other notable abnormalities. Family history was inconspicuous.
Lab studies revealed elevations of C-reactive protein [CRP, 12.9 mg/dL (<0.5 mg/dL)] and erythrocyte sedimentation rate [82 mm/h (0–20 mm/h)], normal leukocyte count, and microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin 11.4 g/dL [13–17.5 g/dL]; mean corpuscular volume 69.5 fL [80–99 fL]). The glomerular filtration rate was normal with no significant proteinuria and without evidence for monoclonal protein in serum or urine. A one-week treatment with ceftriaxone did not alter the inflammatory parameters. Extensive diagnostic work-up including gastroscopy, colonoscopy, computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and the abdomen, dental inspection, and blood cultures revealed no evidence of a source of infection. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was slightly elevated [340 ng/L (<210 ng/L)] whereas high-sensitive troponin-T was within normal limits. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed signs of left ventricular hypertrophy that was confirmed by echocardiography. These results were corroborated by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI; ), and cardiac amyloidosis was considered as a potential diagnosis. ATTR amyloidosis was excluded by DPD scintigraphy. Furthermore, the free light chain ratio and immunofixation were normal, and bone marrow histology was unremarkable.
Congo red staining was repeatedly negative on endomyocardial biopsies , but Masson’s Trichrome staining was suspicious for amyloidosis in addition to interstitial fibrosis (, different purple/blue colours). Immunohistology for ATTR amyloidosis was negative but revealed marked deposits of amyloid protein A (AA) in the myocardial interstitium and in vessel walls . Cardiomyocytes did not show hypertrophy or disarray. The number of CD3+ T lymphocytes (15/mm2) but not that of CD68+ macrophages was slightly increased.
Importantly, the presence of a systemic AAA was confirmed in histopathological biopsy specimens of the salivary gland, the subcutaneous fat pad, and the upper gastrointestinal tract as well as by proteome analysis by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. Serum amyloid A (SAA) level was 561 mg/L [0–6.4 mg/L].
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission revealed marked tracer-uptake near the duodenum corresponding with a 4 cm retroperitoneal tumour. An endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle biopsy showed amyloid deposits and lymphoid cells. Unicentric Castleman’s disease was suspected, but the pathologic specimen did not allow for a definitive diagnosis.
The patient’s heart failure symptoms worsened steadily during the prolonged aetiologic work-up from NYHA functional class II to NYHA functional class IV, accompanied by increasing NT-proBNP levels (>70 000 ng/L). Standing upright was associated with dizziness and repeated collapses. Therefore, the patient was transferred to our tertiary hospital.
Repeated imaging studies confirmed former results. Echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 63%, severely reduced global longitudinal strain (−4.1%) with apical sparing, 3rd degree diastolic dysfunction (E/lateral E′ 22.6), severe biventricular hypertrophy (interventricular septum thickness 23 mm) and minimal pericardial effusion ( and , , and S). Diffuse late gadolinium enhancement was visualized on CMRI . An extracellular volume (ECV) of 40% and a T1-relaxation time of 1090 ms were measured . C-reactive protein and Interleukin-6 were elevated at 12.05 mg/dL and 67.7 ng/L [<7.0 ng/L], respectively. Procalcitonin was within normal limits. The patient tested negative for Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis Virus A, B, and C. A test for Human Herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) was not performed.
Due to the critical clinical course, it was decided to perform urgent surgical tumourectomy with partial resection of the duodenum. The patient underwent abdominal surgery with cardiac surgeons on stand-by for implantation of veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (vaECMO). Although surgery was successful, severe haemodynamic instability developed post-operatively caused by cardiac arrhythmias and recurrent bleeding at the site of the surgical anastomosis, which finally necessitated the vaECMO implantation. In the first post-operative days, SAA level decreased significantly from almost 600 mg/L to 180 mg/L, suggesting a causal relationship between the tumour and the patient’s AAA.
However, the patient’s condition worsened over the next days, and repeated attempts to wean him off vaECMO were unsuccessful. Before tumourectomy was performed, exit strategies such as implantation of a ventricular assist device or heart transplantation were discussed extensively with the patient, but he explicitly rejected both options. Therefore, best supportive care was pursued, and the patient died shortly thereafter. Histology of the excised tumour confirmed CD-HV, negative for HHV8.