A 64-year-old male visited our institute in February 2018 for a cough productive of purulent sputum for one month. He had smoked half a pack of cigarettes daily for 30 years but had stopped 12 years previously. He was clinically diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis in 2011 based on radiologic findings in the upper lobes of both lungs with multiple small dominant lung nodules . After completing six months of anti-tuberculosis treatment, he did not visit our clinic again due to improved respiratory symptoms. He had been working in a gristmill for 25 years.
His current physical examination was unremarkable, and there were no abnormal sounds in either lung field. In sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluids at admission, tests for acid-fast bacilli and pyogenic cultures were negative. Mycobacterium tuberculosis-polymerase chain reaction and Xpert® MTB/RIF also did not detect tuberculosis in the specimens. His pulmonary function tests revealed a mild obstructive pattern [forced expiratory volume in 1 (FEV1): 75% predicted, FEV1 to forced vital capacity ratio: 0.66] with a positive bronchodilator response (ΔFEV1: 310 mL). On chest radiograph and computed tomography scans in 2018, the size and number of lung nodules significantly increased compared with those from 2011, mainly in both upper lobes . The patient was hospitalized for percutaneous needle lung biopsy to differentiate between cancer and connective tissue disease. The patient’s occupational history was investigated. He had worked in a stone processing factory for 17 yr between 1972 and 1992, except for three years of military service. He processed granite for 12 h a day, six days a week without protective equipment in a poorly ventilated tent. After he quit working in the stone processing factory in 1992, he operated his own gristmill and worked seven days a week grinding rice, beans, red beans, and peppers using a granite roller grinder in a poorly ventilated underground mall without protective equipment for 25 years. His gristmill was in a poorly-ventilated small room located underground. He poured the grains directly into the funnel-shaped grinder entrance, and then put the grained grains into the bag by connecting the grinder outlet.
Histopathologic examination of the lung specimen showed diffuse infiltration of phagocytic macrophages with focal sclerosis and a few multi-nucleated giant cells . Macrophages contained anthracotic pigment , and lightly birefringent crystals were observed with polarized light microscopy . Without detailed knowledge of the patient’s history, the initial histopathologic diagnosis was silicosis with rapid progression.