A 66-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of fever and ICD shocks. The patient had a history of heart failure, ischaemic cardiomyopathy (underwent previous coronary artery bypass graft and percutaneous coronary interventions), mildly reduced ejection fraction, and previous episodes of ventricular tachycardia (VT) and is an ICD recipient. Analysis of the ICD record revealed 10 episodes of VT/ventricular fibrillation (VF) within the last 24 h. Some VT/VF episodes resolved spontaneously, while others were interrupted by an ICD shock .
Consequently, the patient was admitted to the coronary intensive care unit. A chest X-ray indicated right basal pneumonia. Serum electrolytes were normal, but C-reactive protein was elevated (10.17 mg/dL). The patient received initial treatment with empirical antibiotics for the infection and anti-arrhythmic measures such as amiodarone and magnesium sulfate.
After admission, the patient experienced sustained VT recurrence with haemodynamic instability, unresponsive to anti-tachycardia pacing, and requiring multiple shocks from the ICD. Additional anti-arrhythmic drugs (lidocaine, procainamide, and beta-blockers) were administered, and sedation was initiated using midazolam and morphine.
A coronary angiography was performed to rule out an ischaemic trigger, but no coronary obstructions were found. After the procedure, VT/VF episodes persisted, and the patient developed respiratory distress and neurologic deterioration, necessitating orotracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation.
A total of 82 VT/VF episodes and 81 ICD shocks were documented within 6 h of hospital admission. Due to the persistent anti-arrhythmic storm and the impossibility of performing an emergent electrophysiological study (EPS), a decision was made to conduct a left stellate ganglion block (SGB).
The SGB was performed using a linear probe (7–12 MHz) and a 50 mm atraumatic needle.
Due to a challenging sonographic visualization of the neck structures (because of patient conformation), the lateral portion of the transverse process of C6 was used as a landmark target, deviating from the classical ultrasound approach that uses the longus colli muscle .
The block was approached with an in-plane technique and anterolateral to posteromedial direction of the needle, aiming for contact with the bone. Once the transverse process was reached, following negative aspiration, lidocaine 2% (5 mL, 100 mg) and levobupivacaine 0.5% (8 mL, 40 mg) were injected, with the injection monitored under direct ultrasonography . This ratio of local anaesthetic would allow a rapid-onset (i.e. seconds to minutes) and long-lasting effect (i.e. some hours).
A few minutes after the SGB, complete arrhythmia suppression was observed, along with the restoration of sinus rhythm, improved haemodynamic parameters, and clinical stability. Two days later, an EPS revealed the inducibility of VT with a critical isthmus in the posterior basal region of the left ventricle . Transcatheter ablation was performed, resulting in arrhythmia interruption during ablation. Further substrate homogenization was performed. A few hours later, the patient was extubated and remained clinically stable with no further episodes of ventricular arrhythmias. At the 3-month follow-up, no additional arrhythmias were documented, and the patient was in good condition.