A 72-year-old woman presented to the clinic with ocular pain and decreased vision in the left eye. The patient had a complex ocular history in the left eye prior to presentation. Specifically, the patient underwent a pars plana vitrectomy approximately 1 year prior to presentation for a visually significant floater. The patient subsequently developed endophthalmitis and underwent a vitreous biopsy with injection of intravitreal antibiotics. Ten days following this, the patient developed a macula-off rhegmatogenous retinal detachment requiring endolaser retinopexy and placement of silicone oil. The patient underwent removal of silicone oil 2 weeks prior to presentation to her local emergency department for eye pain. In the emergency department, the patient was noted to have an IOP of 45 mm Hg and was started on topical timolol and brimonidine twice a day and dorzolamide 3 times a day.
The patient presented to our clinic 4 days later with a visual acuity of count fingers at 3 feet and an IOP of 23 mm Hg. On slit lamp examination, the pupil was dilated, the anterior chamber was hyper-deep with suspended cell present. Gonioscopy revealed a posteriorly displaced iris with an open angle. It was determined that the patient had retained viscoelastic material in the anterior chamber, present for the 2 weeks since her removal of the silicone oil in that eye. An anterior chamber tap was performed through a prior paracentesis, with obvious evacuation of viscoelastic material. The patient was seen 1 week later with an IOP of 16 on brimonidine and timolol twice a day and vision remaining at count fingers. Four months later, the patient underwent uneventful cataract surgery with iris expansion and insertion of a 1-piece in-the-bag IOL followed by a goniotomy. Of note, no zonulopathy was noted during her procedure. A single-piece SN60WF 11.5 diopter lens (Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA) was placed in the bag without complication. A planned endocyclophotocoagulation laser was aborted during the procedure secondary to the inability to enter the peripheral sulcus space and to visualize the ciliary processes. On post-operative day one, visual acuity was 20/400 and IOP was 6 mm Hg. At post-operative week 4, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/100 and IOP was 12 mm Hg on 2 classes of glaucoma medications.
Approximately 6 months later, the patient presented with mild discomfort, injection, and photophobia of her left eye. Vision was 20/200 and IOP was 20 mm Hg. Slit-lamp examination showed 1+ injection, faint corneal endopigment, 1+ cell and flare in the anterior chamber, and peripheral and mid-peripheral iris transillumination defects as seen in . Optical coherence tomography of the left macula showed mild cystoid macular edema. Repeat gonioscopy seen in showed a deep angle with a focal, 360-degree elevation of the iris at the level of the ciliary processes. Ultrasound biomicroscopy confirmed that the posterior iris was adhered to the ciliary body as seen in . Elimination of the sulcus space secondary to these adhesions, which is demonstrated in a, b, explained the nature of this unique case of UGH. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography revealed the contact and close proximity between the single-piece IOL and the posterior iris in different regions (a–c).
The patient was offered surgical options of an IOL exchange with a 3-piece IOL placed in the bag or removal of the IOL with a secondary lens but opted for continued medical management. Her macular edema and anterior chamber inflammation improved with topical prednisolone over the following 3 months. She has remained on prednisolone twice a day and at 1.5 years post-operatively maintained a best-corrected vision of 20/100 and IOP of 13 on 2 classes of topical glaucoma medications. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this report and can be accessed as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).