A 70-year-old male had a rapidly growing mass on his right thigh, with no pain, redness, and swelling observed on the surface of the mass.
The patient had underlying chronic hepatitis B virus infection, and was diagnosed with HCC. He had received a liver transplant for primary liver cancer 6 years prior. He was admitted to the hospital after finding a rapidly growing mass on his right thigh.
The patient underwent a liver transplant for primary liver cancer 6 years prior.
The patient was retired, living with his son, and had no family history of hereditary disease.
The patient was hospitalized and his physical parameters were examined. The vital signs were as follows: Body temperature 36 °C, heart rate 85 beats/min, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min, blood pressure 130/85 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air 95%. There were no apparent signs of cranial nerve dysfunction. Muscle tone, strength, and deep tendon reflexes were normal in the upper extremities, while low in the inferior extremities with more on the right side. Abdominal cutaneous reflexes were normal. The remaining physical examination was unremarkable.
After re-sectioning the right lateral femoral soft tissue mass, the patient was examined intraoperatively (right thigh mass) with a circumscribed mass of 5 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm. The findings revealed that small muscle tissue was attached to the surrounding mass, and a section of the mass was light brown, solid, and multinodular.
During admission, physical examination showed an oval-shaped mass with a diameter of about 5 cm on the anterolateral part of the right thigh. It was hard to touch, had poor mobility, and was attached to the surrounding soft tissue. He had normal blood flow from the right lower limb with adequate movement; the skin temperature was normal, no abnormality was found in the sensory nerve examination, the physiological reflex was normal, and no abnormality was found in the rest of the review. The ultrasound examination revealed a mixed echo mass in the lateral soft tissue of the middle part of the right femur, with a size of approximately 5 cm × 2 cm × 3 cm, which had a clear boundary and regular shape. Figure presents an ultrasound image of the muscularis in the right thigh in which the blood flow is indicated with undefined boundaries. Figure depicts the arterial spectrum taken by color Doppler flow imaging. The ultrasound image showed that soft tissues covered the right side of the femur, the nature of which remains to be determined. Figure presents circular abnormal signals in the middle part of the right femur near the lateral soft tissue, accompanied by surrounding soft tissue edema by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The images showed heterogeneous iso-signal intensity on T1WI and heterogeneous hyper-intensity on T2WI compared to the surrounding muscles, which had signal inhomogeneity. The size was about 4.5 cm × 1.4 cm × 3.1 cm; the boundary was slightly blurred, and there were a few pieces of long T2 signal in the adjacent soft tissue .