A 57-year-old Caucasian male, heavy smoker patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus diagnosed 15 years ago and treated with insulin during the last 4 years, was admitted to the hospital because of mild constant abdominal pain, which was exaggerated after eating and drinking water. The pain started some 5 years ago, gradually worsened, and was accompanied by reluctance to eat, weight loss, nausea, vomiting and changes in bowel habits. On admission, the patient was cachectic and vital signs were in the lower normal values. On physical examination, diffuse abdominal pain in both superficial and deep palpation was noticed. The patient had background diabetic retinopathy, proteinuria due to diabetic nephropathy and peripheral neuropathy. He has been treated with isophane insulin 15 IU in the morning and 12 IU in the evening, pentoxifylline 300 mg bid and ramipril 5 mg once a day. His HbA1c was 7.1%. The patient did not have diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state during his hospitalisation, and thus pseudoperitonitis diabeticorum, a complication which may accompany these metabolic disturbances, was ruled out. Spinal mono- or polyradiculopathy was excluded by detailed history, clinical examination and paraspinal electromyography. The patient underwent endoscopy of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract to exclude oesophageal, stomach or large bowel disease, but the examination was unremarkable. Helicobacter Pylori was not detected on biopsies obtained from the stomach. Abdominal ultrasound examination, imaging with computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pancreas were normal. Immunological studies for vasculitis were negative. Other causes of abdominal pain, such as aortic aneurysm, hepatitis, cholecystitis, pancreatitis and splenic infarctions where ruled out by paraclinical work-up. A presumptive diagnosis of arterial occlusive disease was made and the patient underwent invasive catheter celiac arteriography.
Angiography revealed 90% stenosis of the celiac artery trunk (CA) and total occlusion of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). Thus, the intestinal angina was diagnosed. The patient underwent percutaneous transluminal mesenteric angioplasty (PCTA) and stent insertion in the CA. Surgical revascularization of the IMA was not possible. The abdominal pain gradually improved 1 week post-revascularization intervention. Two months later he was free of pain and gained 2 kg in weight. Further examination by Doppler and Triplex ultrasonography did not reveal heamodynamically significant stenoses in the carotid and lower limb arteries.