A 17-year-old, right-handed female patient was referred to a movement disorders specialist to evaluate upper extremities tremor. Her parents were healthy, apparently non– consanguineous, originated from southeast Mexico in the Mayan area of Yucatan Peninsula. She was born after an uneventful pregnancy and normal childbirth. At 13 months, she started with recurrent non-febrile generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Since then, she experienced psychomotor developmental delay, exhibiting the ability to walk at the age of 4 years and incomplete language development at 5 years. Schooling was delayed and received assistance from special schools and ongoing physical and cognitive therapy. At that time, she had a non-specific diagnosis of generalized epilepsy and global development delay. During next ten years she experienced gradually neuropsychiatric symptoms including anxiety, aggressive behaviors to family members, self-injury, and irregular sleep pattern. At the age of 15, she developed upper extremity tremor and gait instability, and she was referred to a movement disorders specialist. She was on chronic treatment with levetiracetam 2 g/day and risperidone 2 mg/day.
Her general examination was normal including head circumference. The neurological examination revealed cognitive impairment, slurred speech, hypometric horizontal saccades spasticity in lower extremities, strength grade 4 of 5 in the Medical Research Council scale in the major muscles of four extremities; hyperreflexia was present in all extremities, with bilateral extensor plantar response; rest and action tremor, dysdiadochokinesia, and dysmetria on the finger-nose maneuver were present in both upper extremities; her walking was unstable, slow, with slight dragging of the legs, and inability for tandem gait . Complete blood count, biochemistry profiles, lactate, thyroid function, and blood ceruloplasmin tests were normal. Brain MRI revealed in T2W, T2-FLAIR and DWI bilateral hyperintensities in the subcortical white matter in fronto-parieto-temporal lobes, and symmetrical hyperintensities in the dentate nuclei and basal ganglia without involvement of thalamus and brainstem . Because of the high suspicion of L2HGA, a urine screening examination was performed using the total ion chromatogram method of urinary metabolites by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), which revealed elevated excretion of 2-hydroxyglutarate. Genetic test was conducted on peripheral blood using isolated genomic DNA. Sanger sequencing of the L2HGDH gene (OMIM 609582, 14q21.3) revealed a homozygous variant c.569C>T in exon 5 of L2HGDH gene. A final diagnosis of L2HGA was made and we started supplementation with multivitamins and levocarnitine 3 g/day showing improvement in upper extremities tremor and gait . She lost follow up almost two years because of SARS-CoV2 pandemic and stopped the treatment, showing a worsening of motor symptoms. After reinitiation of levocarnitine and multivitamins, she improved again.