We present a 70-year-old male with a history of elevated PSA of 23.4. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 0. A right-sided nodule and fixed rectal wall were noted on digital rectal examination. The patient was scheduled for 3T mpMRI of the prostate. This revealed a PI-RADS v.2 5 lesion involving the posterior prostate with evidence of ECE and rectal wall invasion . A second PI-RADS 4 lesion was noted within the left anterior mid-gland. There was no evidence of pelvic nodal metastasis. Subsequent ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed Gleason 4 + 4 = 8 adenocarcinoma (in 13 of 18 biopsies), Gleason 4 + 3 = 7 adenocarcinoma (in 4 of 18 biopsies), and Gleason 3 + 3 = 6 adenocarcinoma (in 1 of 18 biopsies). Bone scan was negative and the patient's clinical stage was T4 N0 M0.
Management options were discussed at a multidisciplinary tumor board. Given the local extension of disease, surgery was tabled and the patient was scheduled for consultation with medical and radiation oncology. Considering the results of the STAMPEDE trial, he was offered ADT with leuprolide plus docetaxel with plans for restaging after three cycles. He received docetaxel 75 mg/m2 IV every 21 days and Lupron 22.5 mg IM every 3 months. Following his third round of treatment, he underwent repeat 3T. This demonstrated resolution of rectal invasion .
Due to therapeutic improvement, he was offered surgery and EBRT. Following counseling, including risks of proctectomy and colostomy, the patient chose open radical prostatectomy with extended bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection. Intraoperatively there was mild reaction noted posteriorly with soft and edematous tissue planes. The prostate was dissected in standard retrograde fashion (starting with apical dissection and opening the Denonvillier's fascia to the seminal vesicles). The prostate and neurovascular bundles were bilaterally peeled off the rectal serosa easily. The tissues were slightly edematous making planes well defined. After blunt and sharp dissection, the rectum was inspected closely. The serosa was intact and without evidence of rectal damage. There were no gross abnormalities or evidence of prostatic invasion. Extended lymph node dissection was completed and all nodes were clinically negative. No post-chemotherapy scarring of the perilymphatic or perivascular areas was noted. The patient was admitted to the floor postoperatively and discharged after 36 h.
Ten days postoperatively, he presented for catheter removal and pathology review which demonstrated acinar type adenocarcinoma involving 34% of the prostate with extensive right posterior ECE, negative margins, and seminal vesicle invasion. A single 3-mm metastatic deposit was present in the left external iliac nodal chain . Gleason grade could not be assigned secondary to chemotherapeutic effects on the tissues . 1 and 4 months postoperatively, serum PSA value remains undetectable (<0.1 ng/dL). Final pathologic stage was ypT3b ypN1 M0. Pathologists had difficulty grading the cancer as there were significant post-chemotherapy changes like diffuse scarring and loss of normal architecture.