A 27-year-old Sri Lankan male was admitted to a local hospital with severe epigastric pain and vomiting following a binge of alcohol, 2 months prior to admission to our unit. He was taking three units of alcohol daily during last 6 years. The abdomen was distended with free fluid. Examination of the other systems was normal. His serum amylase was significantly elevated on admission and CRP level after 48 h was elevated .
Chest X-ray revealed a small pleural effusion on the right side. Ultra sound scan of the abdomen showed a coarse echogenic liver with gross ascites.
Following this episode he had persistent anorexia and weight loss with intermittent abdominal pain. He did not have fever or vomiting. Bowel opening was normal. He was subsequently transferred to our unit from the local hospital with worsening abdominal pain and distension. On clinical examination he was emaciated and was mildly pale. He was not icteric. He was hemodynamically stable and had a right sided small pleural effusion. Abdomen was distended and tense. Investigations revealed high amylase and low albumin .
Contrast enhanced CT scan of the chest and abdomen showed a large multilocular cystic lesion occupying almost the entire abdominal cavity. The largest locule in the right side measured 30 cm × 15 cm × 14 cm displacing the liver medially and the right dome of the diaphragm superiorly. Two smaller locules were seen in the lesser sac, compressing the central abdominal structures. Cysts contained clear fluid with no enhancement of the walls. No separations or evidence of haemorrhage was seen . There was a small right side pleural effusion with collapse consolidation of the medial segment of the right lower lobe. Pancreas appeared as a thin line likely to be due to partial atrophy and compression and there were no duct dilatations, calcifications or necrosis. A small locule of fluid was seen in relation to the tail of the pancreas. Heart was deviated to the left, due to the largest cyst which was extending into the right hemi thorax. No Para aortic or pelvic lymph node enlargement was seen. The liver, gallbladder and spleen appeared normal. Both kidneys were normal in size with normal contrast enhancement. There was a small amount of free fluid in the pelvis.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided drainage was planned as a therapeutic procedure and was performed using a large channel linear-array echoendoscope (Fujinon, Tokyo, Japan). On the EUS, the pseudocyst was visualized bulging into the posterior-lateral wall of the stomach. The cyst was entered into with an electro cautery-assisted cystotome (Wilson Cook, Winston Salem, NC, USA) and a 0.035 in. guide wire was introduced . A 15 mm × 30 mm lumen-opposing metal stent(LEMS) (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was deployed under fluoroscopic vision. Dilatation was done with a 10 mm CRE balloon. A large amount of clear fluid was drained . Repeat EUS was done a week later due to persistence of the collection on conventional ultra sound scan. A loculated portion of the cyst was seen to be persisting and a second 15 mm × 20 mm LEMS was inserted by an identical procedure . Pus discharge was noted from the previous stent, which was cleaned and washed out. Then 10Fr × 10 cm double ended pigtails were inserted into both stents. The peri-procedure period was covered with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The cysts were not visualized on subsequent ultra sound scans. Stent removal was done after 3 weeks leaving the pigtails insitu. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged to be reviewed in 6 weeks.