A 54-year-old Japanese man with no relevant medical history presented at our hospital complaining of continuous fever and malaise of one month’s duration. His family history was unremarkable, and he had never smoked and did not frequently consume alcohol. Blood tests showed elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase, soluble IL-2 receptor, and ferritin, as well as bicytopenia. A blood disorder, such as malignant lymphoma or hemophagocytic syndrome, was thus suspected. A bone marrow aspiration performed six days after admission revealed hemophagocytic syndrome, but without any evidence of malignancy. Accordingly, the patient underwent two sessions of steroid pulse therapy comprising intravenous administration of methylprednisolone sodium succinate (1000mg/day for three days) initiated on post-admission days 11 and 17. However, his general condition did not improve, and laboratory analysis revealed that his lactate dehydrogenase and soluble IL-2 receptor levels remained elevated, which was strongly suggestive of IVLBCL. Random skin biopsies of the abdominal wall, forearm, and thigh were all negative for IVLBCL. These areas were selected for ease of access. However, percutaneous liver biopsy revealed sinusoidal infiltration of lymphoma cells positive for CD20 and CD79a and negative for CD5. On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with Asian variant IVLBCL 22 days after admission.
The patient was treated with an R-CHOP-like chemotherapy regimen comprising rituximab (250mg/m2), cyclophosphamide (500mg/m2), doxorubicin (33mg/m2), and vincristine (0.9mg/m2) 24 days after admission. Prednisolone was not included because it had been administered since the diagnosis of hemophagocytic syndrome, and had been continuously administered during the 12 days before chemotherapy initiation. It is generally accepted that further prednisolone administration may have caused severe immunosuppression. Furthermore, in IVLBCL, rituximab-induced infusion reactions may occur more frequently than in other diseases because many tumor cells are lodged in blood vessels. We followed the guidelines of a Japanese IVLBCL study group, which recommended that all drug doses should be reduced by two-thirds to avoid tumor lysis syndrome after the first course of R-CHOP chemotherapy. The patient was administered cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine immediately before rituximab infusion, which was given at a calculated dose of 250mg/m2. Rituximab infusion was initiated at a rate of 25mg/h for the first hour along with acetaminophen and diphenhydramine. The infusion rate was gradually increased to 100mg/h by the second hour, at which point the patient complained of nausea. His temperature gradually increased to 41.2°C, and he had a rapid pulse of 126 beats/min. SIRS was diagnosed, and the infusion was discontinued. Arterial blood gas revealed a pH of 6.913 and high levels of lactic acid (16.0mmol/L; normal range: 0.5 to 1.8mmol/L), indicating lactic acidosis. Laboratory analysis revealed high levels of lactate dehydrogenase (2448IU/L; normal range 105 to 333IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase (635IU/L; normal range 10 to 34IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (640IU/L; normal range 10 to 40IU/L), and potassium (8.3mEq/L; normal range 3.5 to 4.5mEq/L). Unfortunately, we could not measure his serum IL-6 levels. Sustained ventricular tachycardia occurred due to metabolic derangement half an hour later. Hypotension became refractory to pressors, and the patient eventually died of asystole five hours after rituximab infusion.
Autopsy revealed invasion of tumor cells into the liver, lung, kidney, spleen, and pituitary gland. This case differs from another autopsy case in which the patient died of IVLBCL without undergoing chemotherapy. First, fewer tumor cells were present. Second, the tumor cells were too degenerated for immunohistochemical characterization (there was a loss of antigenicity). Finally, necrosis, degenerative atrophies, and ischemic changes were found in the cells and tissues of multiple organs. These findings suggest that SIRS accompanied the destruction of tumor cells by chemotherapy, which led to peripheral circulatory failure and ischemia in multiple organs. There was no evidence of active tumor lysis syndrome demonstrated by lower uric acid levels. Thus, the death of the patient was attributed to SIRS, which occurred subsequent to the rapid rituximab-induced destruction of tumor cells and the resulting cytokine release.