A 66-year-old Chinese male patient with a history of hypertension for more than 20 years was admitted to hospital due to unstable angina. He didn’t have any history of neurologic illnesses or allergies, as well as any other heart disease besides coronary artery disease. In addition, he had a family history of hypertension. Physical examination on admission showed that his heart rate was 62 beats per minute, blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, body mass index was 21.13 kg/m2 and the other findings were normal. A 12-lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm, with no ischemic ST/T abnormalities. Troponin I, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), blood glucose as well as lipid panel were within normal limits. The patient’s baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 93 mL/min/BSAc. The coronary angiography demonstrated a bifurcation lesion in left main (LM), left anterior descending (LAD) and left circumflex (LCX) coronary artery . The jailed balloon technique was used to prevent acute LCX occlusion at the time of LM-LAD drug-eluting stents implantation. After the procedure, no significant residual stenosis was observed from LM to LAD and TIMI 3 blood flow was acquired in LCX . The procedure lasted fifty-four minutes, and a total of 80 ml of non-ionic, low-osmolar, iodine-based contrast media (iopromide; Ultravist 370, Bayer Healthcare) was used. The patient returned to the ward with clear consciousness and no chest pain. Physical examination showed the heart rate was 74 beats per minute, blood pressure was 161/89 mmHg. A 12-lead ECG revealed the height of T wave was a little increased in leads I and aVL compared with the previous ECG, and the patient was given continuous ECG monitoring and tirofiban pumping. About 2 h after the procedure, the patient lost his consciousness suddenly and suffered from a status epilepticus. His bilateral pupils were generally equal in size and round, and the light reflection was sensitive. Bilateral Babinski and Chaddock signs were positive, but no neck stiffness was observed. His Glasgow Coma Scale was 8/15. A 12-lead ECG showed mild ST-segment elevation in leads I and aVL, together with ST-segment depression and T wave inversion in leads II, III and aVF. Continuous ECG monitoring did not find any malignant arrhythmias. And echocardiography confirmed no cardiac tamponade. His plasma glucose and electrolyte levels were maintained normal. Midazolam (10 mg, i.v.) was used to the patient for keeping sedation. Then, emergency re-angiography revealed TIMI 1–2 blood flow in LCX . Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) was performed immediately and the TIMI 2–3 blood flow was restored . About 60 ml iopromide was utilized this time. A 12-lead ECG after PTCA revealed a significant decrease in elevated ST-segment in leads I and aVL. The patient was still in the state of status epilepticus and unconsciousness. Emergency non-contrast brain CT examination 3 h after first surgery was subsequently performed to exclude intracranial hemorrhage or ischemic stroke and revealed no obvious abnormalities. However, typical cortical and subarachnoid enhancement as well as prolonged retention of contrast media in the middle cerebral artery were observed one hour later after PTCA . Therefore, CIE was suspected, and the patient was given intravenous hydration to accelerate contrast media excretion, midazolam 1 mg per hour to treat epilepsy, mannitol 125 mL to dehydrate and reduce intracranial pressure. About 3 h later (6 h after the first surgery), the patient suddenly regained his consciousness, the seizures ceased, and all pathological normalized. Repeat non-contrast CT-brain was conducted 42 h after the first surgery, which showed resolution of the cortical and subarachnoid enhancement . Furthermore, there was no residual retention of contrast media in the middle cerebral artery. During the following 6 months, the patient did not experience any neurological symptoms.