A 72-year-old male developed cough, sputum, coryza, fever with chills (body temperature: 37–38 °C), diarrhea, fatigue, and poor appetite since January 2019. However, the patient did not actively seek treatment for these symptoms. On February 13, 2019, the patient experienced an episode of fainting in the toilet followed by spontaneous recovery and he was admitted to the Yuhang District Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital. Results of laboratory investigations were as follows: hemoglobin, 60 g/L; serum potassium, 2.32 mmol/L; serum C-reactive protein (CRP), 74 mg/L; serum albumin, 28.3 g/L; serum creatinine, 179.8 μmol/L. On the following night, the patient suddenly became unconscious and was referred to the emergency department of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University. The patient was administered empirical and supportive treatment, including antibiotics (sulperazon), respiratory decongestants, and blood transfusion. On February 20, 2019, the patient was admitted to our hospital with chief complaints of recurrent cough, expectoration, fever, and diarrhea for 1 month, and unconsciousness for 1 week. Throat swab culture and influenza virus nucleic acid screening tests were both negative. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of head showed multiple bilateral lesions in the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem, and cerebellar hemispheres . Physical examination findings at admission were: body temperature, 38.3 °C; heart rate 103 beats/minute, respiratory rate: 18/min, BP 138/73 mmHg, SpO2 94%. The patient was comatose with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 1 + 1 + 1. The main differential diagnosis at admission was disseminated tuberculosis, including tuberculous meningoencephalitis, lymph node tuberculosis, intestinal tuberculosis. The cerebrospinal fluid, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), and sputum samples were examined on several occasions. Simultaneous amplification and testing for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (SAT_TB) test and routine TaqMan Real-Time PCR assay were separately used to detect mycobacteria RNA and DNA in the above specimens. However, the results of acid-fast staining, tuberculosis RNA, mycobacterium DNA, and GeneXpert were negative. Bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal cultures of cerebrospinal fluid were also negative. After obtaining the consent of family members, the patient was administered a trial of antituberculosis treatment (isoniazid and rifampicin, 600 mg per day, respectively). The patient also received supportive treatment, including dexamethasone to alleviate the intracranial inflammatory response. However, there was no improvement in the consciousness level (GCS score: 1 + 1 + 1). On February 24, 2019, repeat head MRI showed multiple abnormal signals in the brain and progression of meningeal thickening . In order to confirm the diagnosis, his cerebrospinal fluid specimen was sent to the Wuhan BGI clinical laboratory for PMSeq metagenomics sequencing on February 24, 2019. The qualified libraries were constructed using improved DNA Nanoballs (DNB) technology and sequenced on the BGISEQ-50 platform.
Specifically, 0.5–3 mL CSF/BALF sample from the patient was collected according to standard procedures. 0.5 mL sample and 1 g 0.5 mm glass bead were mixed in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and attached to a horizontal platform on a vortex mixer. After vigorous agitation at 2800–3200 rpm for 30 min, 0.3 mL sample was transferred into a new 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and DNA was extracted using the TIANamp Micro DNA Kit (DP316, TIANGEN BIOTECH) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA libraries were constructed through DNA-fragmentation, end-repair, adapter-ligation, and PCR amplification. Agilent 2100 and Qubit was used for quality control of the DNA libraries (200–300 bp, > 2 ng/μL). Quality qualified libraries were sequenced using the BGISEQ-50 platform. High-quality sequencing data were generated by removing low-quality reads, followed by computational subtraction of human host sequences mapped to the human reference genome (hg19) using Burrows-Wheeler Alignment. After removal of low-complexity reads, the remaining data were classified by simultaneously aligning to four Microbial Genome Databases, consisting of bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites. The classification reference databases were downloaded from the NCBI . RefSeq contains 4945 whole genome sequences of viral taxa, 6350 bacterial genomes or scaffolds, 1064 fungi related to human infection, and 234 parasites associated with human diseases. The detection of pathogen was reported based on the following criteria: 1) the detected microorganisms were related to human infections, which were confirmed by published clinical reports and records; 2) the sequence number of the detected pathogens in the sample should exceed that in the blank control; 3) the sequence number of pathogenic bacteria (except MTB complex), fungi or viruses, should be > 3; 4) the sequence number of pathogenic parasites should be > 100; 5) MTB complex was considered positively detected with more than 1 sequence. Owing to the difficulty in DNA extraction from MTB complex, these pathogens have lower threshold than the other pathogens.
On February 26, 2019, NGS identified Nocardia farcinica as the predominant pathogen (6775 sequence reads); the other pathogens identified were Nocardia. cyriacigeorgica (7 sequence reads) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (1 sequence read). The patient was then administered sulphamethoxazole (SMZ) in combination with linezolid and meropenem for anti-nocardiosis treatment; in addition, the anti-TB treatment was continued. Results of pathogen detection in BALF (March 05, 2019) identified Nocardia. farcinica (499 sequence reads); however, no Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was identified . These results suggested that the single sequence read of tuberculosis found in the cerebrospinal fluid was the result of contamination; therefore, the anti-TB treatment was discontinued. Smear staining of BALF showed gram-variable branched bacilli with weakly positive acid-fast staining , which was consistent with the morphological features of Nocardia.
On March 11, 2019, the patient was transferred to the Huashan Hospital of Fudan University. At that time, the patient’s consciousness and tingling sensations had improved (GCS score: 2 + 1 + 3). The patient was prescribed meropenem (2 g, 8 hourly) in combination with SMZ (2 tablets, 8 hourly) for anti-nocardiosis treatment. He was also administered repeated infusions of red blood cell suspension, platelets, and injections of gamma globulin. The patient showed gradual improvement with recovery of consciousness (sensitive to painful stimuli) and was able to exercise. He was discharged from the hospital on April 19, 2019 and was prescribed 3 L/min oxygen inhalation with a metal cannula.
The patient was intermittently followed up telephonically and via the WeChat application. His family members reported that the patient developed persistent diarrhea on May 26, 2019, and was taken to a local hospital in an unconscious state. His blood pressure was not recordable and he died prior to any active treatment.