A 45-year-old man was diagnosed with AMN using colonoscopy and computed tomography (CT). He had a history of perforated barium appendicitis 3 years ago. Physical examination revealed no specific abdominal findings. The results of routine blood examination and serum tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9) were within normal limits. Colonoscopy revealed appendiceal intussusception to the cecum, caused by the mucocele of the appendix. Abdominal CT revealed a cystic lesion, measuring 10 × 3 cm, in the appendix and barium around the cecum, appendix, and sigmoid colon . No regional lymph node enlargement or metastasis was observed. At the time of perforation of the appendix 3 years ago, there was no finding of AMN, and barium leaked from the tip of the appendix .
We performed ureteral stent insertion, laparoscopic ileocecal resection. The ureteral stent made it easier to identify the ureter. Laparoscopic exploration revealed severe adhesions between the greater omentum and small intestines, appendix, and sigmoid colon including some barium cast. Preoperative CT revealed that barium remained around the ileocecal region. There was no barium nodule in the anastomotic region, and careful anastomosis was performed extracorporeally.
The total operative time was 363 min, and the blood loss was 50 mL. The resected specimen was pathologically diagnosed as a low-grade AMN with myxoglobulosis. The appendiceal lumen was full of frog egg-like 1–4 mm white globules . The white globules consisted of thin laminations of mucin surrounding a granulation tissue . The appendiceal lumen had a normal appendiceal epithelium and low-grade adenoma-produced mucus . The edematous change of the appendiceal tip and occlusion of the orifice of the appendix were thought to be caused by the perforated barium appendicitis. The appendix was surrounded by granulated and fibrous tissue with barium on the side of the appendiceal serosa , but no barium was found in the appendiceal lumen or white globules. Colonoscopy performed 1 year after surgery and showed no evidence of anastomotic stricture.