A 23-year-old Tharu man from a remote village in Nepal presented to our out-patient clinic with a history of progressive difficulty in opening his mouth for the last 2 months. He had significant weight loss in that period because of the restrictions in taking oral feeds and chewing them. His symptom was not associated with any pain. There was no history of trauma, fever, joint pain, dental pain, rashes, or any other swellings associated with the symptom. His medical history was positive for having been on anti-tubercular therapy (ATT) for suspected abdominal tuberculosis for the last 3 months. There was no significant past surgical or any relevant positive family history. A local examination did not reveal any visible swelling or any features of inflammation around his temporomandibular joint (TMJ). An intra-oral examination was also normal. His mouth opening was of only one finger width. There were no palpable lymph nodes in his body. A general systemic examination was normal.
An X-ray of his TMJ was normal . Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an ill-defined lesion in his right infratemporal region extending to the pterygopalatine fossa and the maxillary sinus . There was loss of pterygoid muscle planes. Because of the severity of his symptoms and the imaging findings, an infratemporal approach was undertaken for safe resection and biopsy from the lesion. Our working differential diagnosis was of sarcoma and fibrous variant of tuberculosis. On intraoperative examination, we found an ill-defined fibrous lesion that invaded all the structures in his infratemporal region and insinuated into his maxillary sinus through the pterygopalatine fossa. Safe planes were dissected and biopsy from the lesion was taken.
Postoperatively, his mouth opening improved to three finger width. He also started gaining weight owing to the ease in eating and chewing.
Histology revealed dense fibrocollagenous tissue with moderate to heavy lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates with entrapped muscle with cells of small nuclei arranged in a linear pattern . There was no evidence of cellular atypia, mitosis, or necrosis. An IHC panel was positive for vimentin, invariably positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) but negative for desmin, S-100, and CD45 with Ki-67 value of < 1% . An acid-fast bacilli (AFB) stain was also negative.
The final diagnosis of AF (desmoid tumor) was eventually made. Our patient had been advised to start weekly methotrexate therapy but he denied it citing their poor economic status.
He has been on regular follow up with no deterioration in his symptoms in the last 4 months.