A 64-year-old Asian man was referred to the Division of Infectious Diseases with a past medical history of trismus, exophthalmos, and positive serum Aspergillus galactomannan assay. His past medical history included diabetes mellitus type 2 for 25 years and chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis for 10 years.
About 20 years prior to the current presentation, he was diagnosed with “mandibular osteomyelitis” and treated with unknown antibiotics. About 10 years prior to the presentation, he was reported to have suffered candidemia. At that time, a radioisotope bone scan showed an uptake in his mandibular and he was treated with unknown antibiotics. His symptoms of “mandibular osteomyelitis” had waxed and waned since then. About 8 years prior to the presentation, another recurrence of “mandibular osteomyelitis” occurred and multiple antibiotics were provided including clarithromycin, levofloxacin, minocycline and fluconazole.
About 2 years prior to the current presentation, swelling of his left eyelid developed and it spread to his cheek. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the area revealed a lesion consistent with inflammation around his mandibular joint and surrounding soft tissue. Left exophthalmos with pain developed 2 months later. Magnetic resonance imaging of the area found an intra-orbital mass-like lesion and a lesion consistent with inflammation around his left masseter muscle. His visual acuity was slightly declining (from 20/30 to 20/100). Most symptoms improved to some extent without specific treatment but his visual acuity remained unchanged.
Bilateral mandibular pain developed 2 months prior to the current presentation (September 2011). Levofloxacin was provided without improvement. On the following month, an ophthalmological examination revealed swelling of his left eyelid, exophthalmos, and impaired visual acuity (from 20/100 to 20/220). He was referred and admitted to the Division of Infectious Diseases service because of an elevated Aspergillus galactomannan level (0.5 optical density (OD) index; reference normal level <0.5 OD index) in December 2011.
On admission, he was alert and his vital signs were: temperature 36.7, pulse rate 79/minute regular, blood pressure 143/63mmHg, and respiratory rate 12/minute. He had trismus and was able to open his mouth only by a few centimeters. There was no muscle spasm or fasciculation. His left eyelid was swollen with exophthalmos. The light reflex of his left eye was slow and weak. Supraduction of his left eye was impaired. There were no tender to touch areas on his face. His left vision was 20/220. The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable. A blood test revealed elevated Aspergillus galactomannan level (0.5 OD index), C-reactive protein level (8.6mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (86mm/hour) but was otherwise unremarkable, including a β-D-glucan assay which was <3pg/mL (reference range <20.0pg/mL). Imaging studies demonstrated no evidence of pancreatitis, mediastinal or retroperitoneal fibrosis, Riedel’s thyroiditis or Mikulicz’s disease.
Intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (300mg/day or 5mg/kg/day) and oral voriconazole (400mg/day) combination was initiated for presumptive chronic osteomyelitis caused by Aspergillus. In addition, dexamethasone (6mg/day) was provided to try to reduce inflammation to protect his vision. However, his visual acuity continued to decline and exophthalmos worsened gradually. On the 4th day after the admission, a surgical debridement was performed to decompress the optic canal and the orbit. Upon surgery, his extra-ocular muscles and eyeball were almost intact. However, there was thickening of the periostea of the bones surrounding his orbit up to 7mm. The lesion appeared inflamed and had a greenish yellow color on visual inspection. The staining and culture of debrided specimens were negative for bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi. At histology, mildly atrophic lachrymal glands and ducts were surrounded by sclerotic fibrous stroma. Fibrosis was arranged in a concentric pattern around the ducts (periductal fibrosis). Although there were several foci of lymphocytic aggregation at the periphery of the lobules of his lachrymal glands, plasma cells or eosinophils were not dominant and only a few immunoglobulin (Ig) G4-positive cells were identified immunohistochemically. Typical obliterative phlebitis was not seen . The patient’s visual acuity, trismus, and exophthalmos partially improved after the operation. He was discharged home 15 days after the admission. Voriconazole was continued without corticosteroids.
Two months after the admission, exophthalmos and trismus on the right (opposite) side developed, accompanied by profound fatigue and appetite loss. He was readmitted to the hospital. His Aspergillus galactomannan level was 0.3 OD index. Liposomal amphotericin B was restarted and voriconazole was continued. However, he had exophthalmos, his visual acuity declined and his headache worsened. Dexamethasone was restarted (6mg/day) on the day of admission to rescue his visual acuity. Another operation for decompression was performed 10 days after the second admission, and this time, specimens were not sent for pathological examination due to a communication error. His symptoms improved since the operation. Dexamethasone was tapered off after 4 weeks. He was again discharged home on oral voriconazole.
A month after the second discharge (April 2012), however, another episode of trismus occurred. He was again hospitalized on May 1, 2012. He was not able to open his mouth at all because of trismus. There was severe tenderness on his bilateral orbits, maxilla and mandible. There were also lymphadenopathies on the left side of his neck with diameters up to 15mm.
A CT scan of the lesion showed findings consistent with osteosclerotic change on mandible, orbits and skull base, mucous thickening of maxillary sinus, and masseter muscle swelling with calcification .
His blood test was noted for elevated alkaline phosphatase level (1164mg/dL) and C-reactive protein (14.0mg/dL). His serum IgG4 level was within normal range (10.4mg/dL). Liposomal amphotericin B was added to voriconazole again, but his symptoms continued to worsen. He became febrile, and bilateral exophthalmos with eyelid swelling developed. Because of the deterioration of the patient’s systemic condition, empiric steroid therapy (prednisolone 40mg/day) was started to control the severe systematic inflammation. Five days after starting the steroid, biopsy was performed under general anesthesia on day 30 after the admission, and samples were taken from every site where pain or inflammation was observed (mandibular bone, maxillary sinus mucous, masseter muscle and cervical lymph nodes). In the biopsy specimens of maxillary and mandibular bones, trabeculae were lined by osteoblasts showing active bone remodeling, and intertrabecular spaces were filled by fine fibrous tissue with mild lymphocytic infiltration. Around the facial artery, there was dense fibrosis of which the histological findings were similar to those of the previous operation. Nasal mucosa was edematous and mild lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltration was seen. Immunohistochemistry for IgG4 was performed in bone, soft tissue around the facial artery, and nasal mucosa, and positive cells were very few in every specimen .
After a lengthy time-course, the nature of recurring chronic inflammation at head and neck, unresponsiveness to antifungal medication and fibrotic inflammatory pathologic findings, we finally concluded that the diagnosis was TFIL. His symptoms resolved within a week and the patient was discharged home on oral steroid maintenance therapy.