We report the case of a 69-year-old male patient with hypertension and CKD stage 5 of undefined etiology on hemodialysis for 4 years. Two days before hospitalization, the patient consumed 6 bilimbi fruits of greenish coloration. Three hours later, the patient started having uncontrollable hiccups, malaise, abdominal discomfort, and two episodes of macroscopic hematuria. Twenty hours later, the patient still had hiccups and started to experience nausea and vomiting. Twenty-four hours later, the patient continued with abdominal discomfort and significant asthenia, followed by a decrease in the level of consciousness, dysarthria, and myoclonus of the upper limbs, which led to first, generalized, tonic-clonic seizures that progressed to subsequent seizures despite therapeutic doses of phenytoin.
The patient was transferred to a referral emergency service in Goiânia, Brazil, with refractory seizures. At admission, the patient was under mechanical ventilation by orotracheal intubation. At physical examination, the patient was under sedation, had a Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale score of −3, was hemodynamically stable, with a blood pressure of 110/60 mm Hg, and a heart rate of 68 bpm. The patient also had some diffuse ecchymoses on the trunk and extremities, probably due to the trauma of seizures .
At admission, complementary tests revealed: hemoglobin of 13.1 g/dL, hematocrit of 39.3%, white blood cells of 13,600/mL (band form count of 3%), and 179,000 platelets/mL; urea blood levels of 86.8 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 7.11 mg/dL, serum sodium of 139 mEq/L, and serum potassium of 3.93 mEq/L. A computed tomography of the head revealed hypoattenuation in the periventricular deep white matter and centrum semiovale, probably related to gliosis or microangiopathy.
Lumbar puncture revealed transparent, colorless cerebrospinal fluid, the presence of 22 red blood cells (probably due to accidental puncture), and normal concentrations of glucose, white blood cells, and proteins. Negative results were obtained from the bacterial test, China ink test, analysis for fungi, and acid-fast staining.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, receiving phenytoin and midazolam. The first 6-h session of sustained low-efficiency daily dialysis (SLEDD) was started, which had to be discontinued before completion due to severe hypotension. The patient was using an indwelling urinary catheter, and macroscopic hematuria was detected.
On the third day of hospitalization, the patient had to receive norepinephrine due to hemodynamic worsening. Also, the laboratory tests showed a worsening of the infectious process: hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL, hematocrit of 38.8%, white blood cells of 16,700/mL (band form count of 8%), 180,000 platelets/mL, and an increase in C-reactive protein (CRP) levels to 320 mg/dL. Antibiotic therapy was started with piperacillin-tazobactam for the treatment of septic shock secondary to ventilator-associated tracheobronchitis.
On the fourth day of hospitalization, as the patient continued with seizures during attempts to reduce the dose of the sedative medications, and with no definite diagnosis, further tests were ordered for diagnostic investigation. Although the SLEDD sessions had to be discontinued due to hemodynamic instability, the patient seemed to improve from the infection. Since the diagnostic hypothesis of central nervous system vasculitis had been raised, immunosuppression with intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 consecutive days was the treatment of choice. The search for rheumatic diseases carried out was negative.
On the fifth day of hospitalization, electroencephalogram (EEG) detected epileptogenic activity, suggestive of seizure disorder, and thiopental was added to the patient's treatment. On this day, the family confirmed that the patient had consumed bilimbi fruit before the onset of the symptoms.
On the eighth day of hospitalization, the epileptogenic activity was still confirmed by EEG, which also detected a decrease in paroxysmal activity. Therapy with thiopental, midazolam, and valproic acid was continued and also an attempt to intensify hemodialysis.
On the tenth day of hospitalization at the intensive care unit, an EEG suggested improvement of the seizure disorder. Thiopental and midazolam were gradually decreased, and valproic acid increased.
On the twelfth day of hospitalization, the dose of noradrenaline had to be increased. The patient had a fever (38.5°C) and worsening of the laboratory test results: lactate of 3.9 mmol/L, white blood cells of 21,500/mL (band form count of 9%), and CRP of 107 mg/dL. With a diagnostic hypothesis of septic shock of unknown origin, he was started on the antibiotics meropenem, vancomycin, and gentamicin, and blood, tracheal aspirate, and catheter samples were collected. Isolates of multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae were cultured from tracheal aspirates, which were sensitive only to tigecycline. The antibiotic was then started.
After 14 days of hospitalization, the patient was conscious and responsive, with no sedatives, and he had received decreasing doses of noradrenaline. The patient had persistent myoclonus in the lower limbs, but with no new episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures. SLEDD was maintained with low clinical tolerability.
On the 23rd day of hospitalization, there was a worsening of the clinical status with a progressive increase in vasoactive drug doses. The patient was still on hemodialysis, continued to have a fever, leukocytosis, and increased CRP levels. On the 27th day of hospitalization, the patient died of circulatory failure.