We present a case of a 41-year-old man who was admitted to the First Hospital of Jilin University on June 11, 2020, with intermittent dyspnea for 8 years and bilateral lower limb edema for 2 years, aggravated for 3 months. He had been suffering from bilateral lower limb weakness with calf muscle atrophy for 30 years, and electromyography suggested myogenic damage, and muscle biopsy showed myotonic changes. The results of sequencing suggested a pure missense mutation (c.1366G>A) in the exon eight regions of the desmin (Desmin, DES) gene, encoding amino acid p.G456R (glycine>arginine).The patient's muscle biopsy was performed with immunohistochemical staining. Muscle fibers were not stained by Desmin staining. Consider the possibility of desmin myopathy, only whole-exon DES testing was performed. The parents of the preexisting patient were non-consanguineous, both carriers of the heterozygous variant at the locus, and had no clinical manifestations such as myasthenia gravis. The parents were tested at the same time.
Diuretics and multifunctional monitoring were promptly administered. Laboratory findings are as followed: serum creatine kinase (CK) 223 U/L. N terminal-pro B type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 1,770 pg/mL. cTnI (cardiac troponin I) was in the normal range. Blood gas analysis showed: partial pressure of oxygen of 89 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa) and partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 34 mmHg. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed: sinus rhythm, incomplete right bundle branch block, left anterior branch block, atrial premature beat, and ventricular premature beat . Radionuclide lung ventilation-perfusion imaging was not abnormal. Pulmonary function tests showed that exertional spirometry was 48% of the expected value, suggesting restrictive ventilatory dysfunction. The echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 46% (M-type Teichholz method), a right ventricular internal diameter of 26 mm, a right atrial diameter of 54 × 64 mm, diffusely attenuated right ventricular wall pulsation, and the tricuspid plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was 12 mm, and the tricuspid regurgitation was severe .
After controlling the patient's heart rate with medication, a cardiac magnetic resonance examination was performed. The result of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the left atrial and left ventricular internal diameters were normal, the right atrium was 61 mm anterior-posterior, and the right ventricular transverse diameter was 43 mm. The delayed scan showed diffuse striated enhancement of the left ventricular lateral wall, apex of heart, and right ventricular wall, with some transmural enhancement, LVEF 35%, and cardiac output 2.61 L/min.
In this patient, the diagnosis was clear: desmin myopathy caused myocardial injury, right heart dilatation, total heart failure, cardiac function class 3 (NYHA class), arrhythmia-RBBB, LAFB, atrial premature beat, ventricular premature beat. The patient was treated with a diuretic treatment (Furosemide, Spironolactone orally), cardiac stimulant (digoxin orally), and sacubitril/valsartan 50 mg 2 times/d orally, which relieved dyspnea, nocturnal paroxysmal dyspnea, and bilateral lower limb edema. Two months later, the patient's reexamination showed improvement: NT-proBNP 1,090 pg/mL.
Nevertheless, the patient was admitted to our hospital again on December 18, 2020, with palpitations for 1 day. Physical examination: pulse 98 times/min, respiration 19 times/min, blood pressure 112/70 mmHg. There is no distension of jugular veins, coarse breath sounds in both lungs, and no rales were heard. The heart rate was 98 beats/min with arrhythmias. A grade 2/6 systolic murmur could be heard under the xiphoid. The gastrocnemius muscles were atrophied bilaterally. Muscle strength examination: grade IV in the distal part of both lower limbs, grade II in the dorsal extension of both feet. Supplementary examination: B type natriuretic peptide (BNP) 934 pg/mL; digoxin concentration: 0.43 ng/mL; serum ion and cTnI levels normal range. The patient did not have an ECG at the time of the palpitations attack. Still, the ECG after admission showed ectopic rhythm, paroxysmal atrial flutter (2:1 conduction), non-specific intraventricular block, and prolonged QT interval . The echocardiogram showed an LVEF of 29% (M-type Teichholz method), an anterior-posterior right ventricular diameter of 34 mm, a right atrial diameter of 55 × 68 mm, and a TAPSE of 8 mm, a decreased right ventricular function, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The diagnosis of atrial flutter was clear, and the patient underwent cardiac radiofrequency ablation with temporary pacemaker implantation on the 5th day of admission. Preoperative esophageal echocardiography and left atrial computed tomographic angiography (CTA) did not show any left atrial or left atrial appendage thrombus.
To correct the arrhythmia, a star mapping electrode was applied, and the result was tricuspid isthmus reverse clock reentry atrial flutter. Linear radiofrequency ablation was performed along the tricuspid isthmus , which lead to atrial flutter terminating and recovering sinus rhythm, with intermittent borderline rhythm. After giving temporary cardiac pacing, the postoperative HV interval was 69 ms. The patient's postoperative ECG showed sinus rhythm with non-specific intraventricular block and prolonged QT interval. The temporary pacemaker was removed on the second postoperative day. After the discharge, the patient was given a diuretic (furosemide orally), anticoagulation (rivaroxaban orally), and coenzyme Q10 therapy. Due to low blood pressure, the dose of sacubitril/valsartan was reduced to 25 mg orally twice. The patient was followed up regularly .