A 70-year-old man with hypertension and type 2 diabetes presented at our hospital with a primary complaint of pain and a lump in his left breast. A physical examination revealed a 1-cm-diameter mass located on the border between the upper-outer and lower-outer quadrants of his left breast. A blood test revealed no abnormalities. The values of tumor markers were within normal limits (CEA, 2.3 ng/ml; CA15-3, 22.7 U/ml). Ultrasonography revealed a well-circumscribed, lobulated and hypoechoic lesion measuring 12 mm × 10 mm × 8 mm . It was not difficult to detect the tumor with physical examination and ultrasonography because it was located shallow from the body surface. Mammographic findings revealed a well-defined mass in the left breast . Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and core needle biopsy (CNB) were performed the day after the patient’s first visit. FNAC revealed numerous necrotic and degenerated cells and few sheet-like clusters of atypical ductal epithelial cells. The atypical cells had mildly enlarged nuclei with nucleoli, were focally overlapped and formed tubular patterns . The cytological diagnosis indicated a suspicion of malignancy. On the other hand, CNB revealed necrotic and degenerated cells with microcalcification and myxomatous fibrous tissue with slight inflammation . Massive infiltration of inflammatory cells was not observed. The pathological diagnosis was indeterminate because there was no area of viable atypical cells. A week after the patient’s first visit, physical examination revealed slight tumor shrinkage. Ultrasonography was performed again and showed a reduction in tumor size to 8 mm × 7 mm × 4.5 mm . Computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass lesion with a linear shadow between the mass and nipple in the patient’s left breast, although there were no swollen lymph nodes . An excisional biopsy of the left breast lesion was scheduled one month later. However, during preoperative systemic examination, the patient noticed that the tumor had decreased in size, and it was difficult to detect the tumor during physical examination and ultrasonography performed one month after the patient’s first visit . The operation was canceled, and the patient received follow-up observation. After 8 months of follow-up, ultrasonography and CT revealed reappearance of a 0.6-cm-diameter breast tumor in the same place . CNB was performed again and revealed invasive ductal carcinoma. A total mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy was performed 13 months after the first tumor disappeared. Macroscopically, a gray-white, well-circumscribed mass with a diameter of 1.2 × 0.8 cm was observed in the resected specimen. Histopathological examination revealed invasive cribriform carcinoma (ICC) without sentinel lymph node metastasis. Necrotic tissue was not observed, and inflammatory cell infiltration was mild and focal . Immunohistochemical studies showed ER-positive, PgR-positive, and HER2-negative patterns. Androgen receptor staining was also positive, and the Ki-67 labeling index was 14%. The patient did not have any complications, and adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen was started. The patient was alive without recurrence 7 months after surgery.