In June 2016, a 34-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Oral Surgery, Medical University of Gdańsk, for the extraction of three teeth (14, 15, and 27). These teeth were not eligible for conservative treatment and prosthetic reconstruction. In the second decade of his life, the patient was diagnosed with Hajdu-Cheney syndrome. In the family history, his father was diagnosed with HCS. The patient has a confirmed heterozygous c.6206delC/p.Pro2069Glnfs*8 mutation encoded by the NOTCH2 gene on chromosome 1 (locus 1p34).
The prenatal period and the patient’s early psychomotor development were normal. The first symptoms of HCS appeared in the second decade of his life. As a result of the lack of bone healing after fracture, the patient was diagnosed with Hajdu-Cheney syndrome. The presence of acroosteolysis was revealed, with resorption and shortening of the phalanges of the hands and feet. A significant advancement of lesions concerned the distal and middle phalanges and, to a lesser extent, the proximal phalanges. The man was diagnosed with dystrophy of epiphysis and metaphysis of long bones (metacarpus, forearms, and metatarsus) and wrist, excessive mobility of distal phalanges of the hands and feet, hyperkyphosis, hyperlordosis, scoliosis, pigeon chest, thickening of skull bones (hyperostosis), widening of lambdoid suture, skull elongation in the sagittal plane, Worm cubes, stomatognatic system abnormalities (retrogenia and microgenia), and osteoporosis. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spinal cord and abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormalities. Endocrine, metabolic, and inflammatory markers were unchanged. Only the increased alkaline phosphatase level was found. The patient remains under the constant care of an orthopedic, rehabilitation, and neurological outpatients clinic. Orthopedists treat the patient using denosumab (angiogenesis and receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB RANK ligand inhibitor) and vitamin D3 at an oral dose of 10,000 UI, given weekly. The patient receives denosumab every six months. It has been proven that denosumab is associated with a significantly higher risk of developing MRONJ compared to zoledronic acid. The last dose of denosumab was administered 3 months before the treatment in our clinic (May 2016). The next dose of denosumab was given in November 2016. In case of denosumab, the last administration should be given at least 3 weeks before surgical procedure. The treatment can be continued after waiting at least 4–6 weeks after surgical procedures . Scintigraphic examination showed a slight improvement in bone density after denosumab (first scintigraphy July 2016 vs. second scintigraphy January 2017).
In the extraoral examination, the characteristic features of dysmorphism were shown, including the following: dolichocephaly, prominent eyebrows and eyelashes, eyelid gaps obliquely downward in the centrifugal direction, long philtrum, low-set ears, retrogenia and microgenia , and short and thick fingers . The patient had a low and deep voice.
Intraoral examination and additional radiological tests were performed . The patient had periodontitis and teeth 14, 15, and 27 were qualified for extraction. The teeth 13, 12, 25, and 36 were treated conservatively. The patient signed an informed written consent to the procedures and to the use of the data and photos for publication.
Due to the risk of MRONJ, the procedures were performed one at the time and in a minimally invasive manner . An antibiotic prophylaxis was used. The patient started taking the antibiotic one day before the extraction (300 mg of clindamycin three times a day). The procedure was performed using an adrenaline-free local anesthetic (1.8 mL 3% mepivacaine, i.e., 54 mg mepivacaine). In the peri-operative period, mouthwash with 0.2% chlorhexidine solution was recommended twice a day for 10 days. Tooth 14 was removed in a minimally invasive manner. The wound was sutured tightly and without tension. Absorbed polyglycol sutures 4-0 were used. Hemostasis was achieved. A gauze pad was put on and the patient was instructed to bite on it and hold it for 20 min. Antibiotic therapy was continued for the next 7 days (dose of clindamycin, 300 mg, three times a day).
After 48 h, a follow-up visit took place. Wound healing was normal, without pain. The sutures were removed on day 7. Teeth 15 and 27 were removed according to the same protocol (each tooth removed at another visit). The patient had control visits after 7 days, then after 14 days, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 7 months after each procedure. The process of wounds healing was uneventful. Alveolus was filled gradually with normal granulation tissue, resulting from a remodeling hematoma. Finally, the alveolus became covered with normal gingiva.
Seven months after the last extraction, the patient came for a follow-up visit. The patient did not report any problems in the oral cavity. The intraoral examination showed complete healing of the 14, 15, and 27 alveoli. Alveoli were fully covered by gingiva. A concave profile of the alveolar ridge was observed in the place of the removed teeth on the right side, which could indicate a vertical loss of bone tissue. Dental X-rays of the 14, 15, and 27 alveoli and photographic images were taken . Radiographic examination revealed a good bone healing at the site of surgery (extraction of teeth 14 and 15). X-ray of the area of tooth 27 showed bone resorption in the distal part of the alveolus. The mesial part showed a correct regeneration.
After the next 3 months, the patient reported for the next control. Radiological and clinical examination found healing stabilization in the region of 27 .