We present the case of a 62-year-old non-alcoholic, non-smoker postmenopausal Arab woman who was diagnosed with a second primary lung adenocarcinoma four years after being initially diagnosed with stage I (T1N0M0) triple-positive (ER, PR, and HER-2/neu) invasive ductal carcinoma of the left breast. She had a strong family history of breast cancer with her sister and three of her first cousins also affected by the disease. At the time of her initial diagnosis of breast cancer, she underwent bilateral skin-sparing mastectomy, sentinel lymph node biopsy, and then adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of Taxotere and trastuzumab as well as hormonal therapy with letrozole for about four years. The patient maintained regular follow-up at our clinic and received routine blood work, which also included CA 15-3 measurements. Four years after her initial breast cancer diagnosis, the patient was found to have incidentally increased values of CA 15-3, although clinically asymptomatic. These rising values triggered a CT scan to be performed which revealed multiple sub-centimeter lung nodules that were suspicious of malignancy. Additionally, an FDG-PET scan showed FDG-avid left-sided lung nodules and left-sided pleural-based nodules with SUV measurements ranging from 6.7 to 4.2. Due to the small size of the lung nodules and the patient’s lack of symptoms, a decision was made to closely monitor the nodules and forego a bronchoscopic biopsy due to the potential risk of pneumothorax.
The patient decided to get a second opinion and, within a few weeks, was seen at a tertiary care cancer center in the US. However, by the time she reached there, her disease had progressed, and she had new liver and bone lesions along with worsening lung lesions. A biopsy of the liver lesions was performed; however, the procedure did not yield a substantial amount of sample tissue. Nevertheless, the sample was sent for next-generation sequencing analysis, while pathological analysis of the tissue revealed malignant cells suggestive of primary breast cancer origin that were ER and PR positive but HER-2 negative. It was speculated that the patient’s prior treatment with trastuzumab during her initial breast cancer diagnosis four years ago may have led to the loss of HER-2 positivity in the liver tissue biopsy sample. Hence, the patient was diagnosed with a metastatic recurrence of breast cancer to the lung, bone, and liver, and consequently, she was brought back to our institution in Saudi Arabia and switched from adjuvant letrozole to fulvestrant and palbociclib for treatment.
After two months of treatment, the patient expressed concerns about worsening shortness of breath, and chest imaging revealed pleural effusion for which she underwent diagnostic and therapeutic thoracocentesis along with biopsy of the lung nodules. Unexpectedly, the cytology analysis from the thoracocentesis revealed TTF-1 positive malignant cells consistent with lung adenocarcinoma . A re-evaluation of the prior liver pathology also found the sample to be positive for TTF-1 and Napsin . Moreover, the results of the next-generation sequencing analysis of the tissue sample sent earlier from the tertiary care cancer center in the US came back and revealed an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation with exon 19 deletion. These findings provided conclusive evidence that the patient had a second primary malignancy of stage IV lung adenocarcinoma with malignant pleural effusion as well as liver and bone metastasis. Additionally, these findings explained the reason behind the loss of HER-2 positivity observed in the initial liver biopsy.
Consequently, the treatment plan was modified to target EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer. She was then stopped on the fulvestrant and palbociclib and then started on erlotinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), along with denosumab for the bone metastasis, and palliative radiation to the spine from T11-L1. On follow-up, the patient had radiologic improvement in the metastatic pulmonary nodules and bone metastasis as well as clinical improvement of symptoms; however, her CA 15-3 levels continued to rise, reaching up to 144 U/mL. Interestingly, when the patient requested to continue treatment for her past breast cancer, in conjunction with treatment for her current lung cancer, and was started on the adjuvant aromatase inhibitor Exemestane, her CA 15-3 significantly dropped to 29.5, although this is primarily a treatment for breast cancer and not lung cancer. However, exemestane was later stopped due to intolerable side effects of dizziness and fatigue.
Despite the patient initially having radiological improvement in disease while on erlotinib, a CT scan conducted eight months after initiating treatment revealed disease progression in the lung, liver, and bone. Hence, a plasma EGFR test was performed and revealed a new T790M mutation of EGFR, conferring resistance to first-generation TKIs. The patient was then switched from erlotinib to the third-generation TKI osimertinib to treat the T790M-mutated EGFR tumor. Additionally, denosumab was added to treat bone metastasis.
The patient remained clinically and radiologically stable on this treatment regimen for about 14 months until she started experiencing significant deterioration in her mental status. Intracranial imaging revealed leptomeningeal thickening, consistent with brain metastasis; however, a subsequent lumbar puncture did not show any evidence of metastatic disease. Further neurologic workup for paraneoplastic syndromes yielded negative results as well. Given the patient’s poor performance status, a discussion was held with the patient’s family to assign a "do not attempt resuscitation" order and admit her to palliative care. Unfortunately, the patient succumbed to her disease while receiving inpatient palliative care approximately one year later, around three years after the initial diagnosis of lung cancer.