A 64-year-old Hispanic man with traumatic paraplegia presented with a urinary tract infection (UTI). He had a neurogenic bladder and a history of recurrent UTIs but no prior history of psychiatric diseases. On examination, he was noted to have a temperature of 100.7 °F (38.17 °C), blood pressure of 93/56 mm Hg, a pulse of 147 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute. He had labored breathing, suprapubic tenderness, and frank pus in his urine when a urinary catheter was placed. He was emergently intubated and mechanically ventilated because his cardiorespiratory status deteriorated. At the time of admission, our patient’s white blood cell (WBC) count was 16,500/μL (neutrophils 75 %, lymphocyte 12.5 %, and bands 8.4 %). His biochemical parameters were within physiological limits except for his serum creatinine at 2.4 mg/dL (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR], 25 mL/min/1.73 m2) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) at 52 mg/dL. Two sets of blood culture and a urine culture grew Klebsiella pneumoniae (a final report including the culture antibiotic sensitivity was reported on day 4 of his hospitalization). A renally adjusted dose of imipenem-cilastatin was initiated because of his prior history of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) Klebsiella UTIs. Sedatives were discontinued, and our patient was successfully extubated after he demonstrated clinical improvement. Our patient was oriented to place, person, time, and situation after extubation; an assessment using the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) did not demonstrate any delirium. His family noted that he looked better and was conversing normally. The dose of imipenem-cilastatin was readjusted (increased) on his third day of hospitalization owing to the recovery of his renal function. On the fourth day of hospitalization, he was restless and agitated by paranoid thoughts . He reported seeing and hearing people from his church planning to burn him at the stake.
The differential diagnoses entertained at this time were ICU delirium, encephalitis, endocrine dysfunction, structural neurological lesions (possibly stroke), or toxic ingestion. Our patient was oriented to place, person, and time with no new neurological deficits except for the visual and auditory hallucinations. Despite having an acute change in his baseline mental status (Richmond Agitation Sedation Score [RASS] 0 to 1+), he did not demonstrate any inattention (as demonstrated by picking ‘2’s) and, therefore, CAM-ICU was not diagnostic for ICU delirium. When our patient’s laboratory tests were repeated at the time of the psychotic symptoms, his WBC count was 9400/μL (neutrophils 74.2 %, lymphocyte 14.2 %). His biochemistry panel revealed serum creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL (eGFR, 65 mL/min/1.73 m2), BUN of 15 mg/dL, serum sodium of 138 mEq/L, serum potassium of 4.1 mEq/L, serum chloride of 102 mEq/L, and serum bicarbonate of 22 mEq/L. His 8 a.m. cortisol level was 18 μg/dL and his thyroid function was within physiological limits (TSH 1.04 mIU/L, free T4 7.4 μg/dL, and free T3 83 ng/dL). Repeat urine and blood cultures performed while he was experiencing psychotic symptoms were later reported to have tested negative for any infection. Further neurological imaging or invasive neurological procedures were not performed because he did not have any new focal neurological deficits.
Brief psychotic episode was diagnosed as per the fifth edition Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) criteria, and delirium was excluded because inattention could not be demonstrated. All reversible causes of psychosis were sought. The only change in the management of our patient was a change in the dose of imipenem-cilastatin; this was considered to be a possible etiology for psychosis. Objective evidence of a causal relationship between the drug and psychosis was assessed using the Naranjo Probability Scale. Our patient’s Naranjo adverse drug reaction (ADR) probability scale score was calculated to be +7; imipenem-cilastatin was the probable culprit . Imipenem-cilastatin was discontinued, and he was switched to ceftriaxone according to susceptibilities from the blood and urine culture. His mood and behavior improved; all visual and auditory hallucinations resolved by his sixth day of hospitalization. He experienced similar psychiatric symptoms 2 months later when imipenem-cilastatin was initiated empirically for complicated UTI. On this readmission, the Naranjo ADR probability scale score was +9, definite, when he was rechallenged with imipenem-cilastatin. His hallucinations resolved within 48 hours of discontinuing imipenem-cilastatin, as in the first instance. Unfortunately, on both occasions, the levels of imipenem or cilastatin were not estimated owing to laboratory and logistic issues.