A 40-year-old woman complained of menstrual irregularity lasting for 2 years, and the patient reported menstrual periods lasting 3 to 15 days and cycles of 15-60 days. The patient’s menstrual volume varies; at most, it can be 4 times the average. However, the patient has never had periodic abdominal pain. The patient does have a history of two previous CS, and the last CS occurred 12 years ago. No other history beyond the cesarean was noted, and there is no knowledge of any familial genetic disease.
The gynecological ultrasound of the patient showed that the incision at the anterior wall of the uterus had a triangular defect with an accessible base of 0.76 cm and a height of 0.55 cm. A dark area with an inner diameter of about 4.75 cm could be seen in the pelvis, and a grid-like high echo could be seen in the dark area. Notably, Color Doppler ultrasound showed no significant abnormal blood flow signal . Alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19.9, carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), and human epididymis protein 4 were within normal limits.
One month later, the patient returned, and gynecological ultrasound revealed a mixed mass measuring approximately 8.06 × 6.23 × 3.66 cm in the right anterior part of the uterus, with hypoechoic, anechoic, and hyperechoic areas, closely associated with the uterine body incision. Furthermore, Color Doppler ultrasound suggested a slight enrichment of blood flow within the mass . The pelvic CT result showed a spindle shape in the transverse section of the uterus. We observed a solid cystic mass of approximately 5.26 × 4.24 cm with CT values of approximately 17-50 Hu .
Finally, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery. This procedure found a cystic mass at the incision of the anterior uterine wall with a thin tip attached to the anterior uterine wall . The cyst was removed entirely and sent for intraoperative snap-frozen pathology, suggesting endometrium-like glands and minor bleeding visible in the smooth muscle tissue, which was inclined to endometriosis. The gross specimen was approximately 8 × 6 × 4 cm, smooth, with multiple visible cystic cavities, some with clear yellow fluid, some with dark brown fluid, some with thicker brown fluid, and smooth cystic walls. The final paraffin pathology showed endometrial glands and old hemorrhage within the smooth muscle . After the operation, the patient recovered well and was very satisfied with the treatment result. Furthermore, a one-year follow-up showed no recurrence of endometriosis cysts at the CSD.