A 10-year-old boy (weight, 32.1 kg; height, 138.7 cm) in Sichuan province was admitted to the hospital with neurological symptoms of headache, dizziness and vomiting for one day. Physical examination showed left facial paralysis and no rash. His temperature is 36.5 °C, breath is 21 times per minute, pulse is 109 beats per minute, and the blood pressure is 103/72 mmHg. Additionally, he had no previous history of infection for these days.
According to the general medical tests, we found the percentage of neutrophil in peripheral blood increased to a number of 85.2% (reference range 23.6–75%), which suggests the presence of inflammation. In addition, we punctured cerebrospinal fluid for accurate examination. The CSF biochemical examination showed that the protein (136.8 mg/L), glucose (3.85 mmol/L), chloride (127 mmol/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (12 U/L) were all in the reference range. The cerebrospinal fluid cytology (CSFC) tests showed that the CSF was colorless and transparent, containing 25 × 106/L nucleated cells and 13× 106/L erythrocytes. Among the nucleated cells, lymphocytes and monocytes account for 98 and 2% respectively. These results indicated the presence of infectious encephalitis. However, the ink staining, gram staining and acid fast staining of CSF were all negative. Besides the bacteria culture of CSF for 5 days was negative as well. Therefore, the child was suspected to have acute viral encephalitis.
The pathogenesis of acute viral encephalitis involves a variety of viruses. Due to the small volume of CSF in children, the diagnosis of encephalitis related pathogens in CSF is very difficult, especially when the clinical symptoms are not obvious. In this case, we firstly test the IgM and IgG antibodies of herpes simplex virus (HSV), because HSV is the main virus that causes viral encephalitis [, ]. The results of electrochemical luminescence test showed that both antibodies were negative. Therefore, HSV infection was excluded and further experiments were needed to determine the etiology of encephalitis.
Advanced fragment analysis (AFA) is a molecular technique, which provides an alternative method for high-throughput multiplexed quantitative pathogens related gene expression. AFA integrates multiplex PCR and capillary electrophoresis to offer a simple and effective way to analyze dozens of specific genes in a single tube . In this experiment, 300 μl CSF was used for total DNA and RNA extraction (ZD Biotech, China). 18 kinds of common encephalitis related pathogens can be detected at same time, including enterovirus (EV), Cryptococcus neoformans (CN), neisseria meningitidis (NM), Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP), epstein-barr virus (EBV), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (HCMV), tuberculosis (TB), herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2), mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP), Escherichia coli (E.Coli), Listeria monocytogenes (LM), group B streptococcal (GBS), mumps virus (MuV), human herpes virus-6 (HHV-6), Haemophilus influenzae (HI) and acinetobacter baumannii (A.B) . Briefly, for the multiplex PCR, we put 4.5 μl PCR Mix, 0.5 μl enzyme and 5 μl nucleic acid together (Health Gene Technologies, China). All reactions were run on an ABI 7500 real-time PCR system (Life Technologies, CA, USA) using the following cycling parameters: 25 °C for 5 min; 50 °C for 30 min; 95 °C for 15 min; 6 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 65–60 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 60 s; 29 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 60 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 60 s; and a final elongation step of 72 °C for 15 min. For capillary electrophoresis, the SIZE-500 Plus dissolved in Hi-Di formamide was used as the DNA size maker. All reactions were run on 3500Dx (Life Technologies, CA, USA) and the cutoff value is set to 500. Different sizes of PCR fragments represent different pathogens. With the AFA technology, the turn-around time is greatly reduced to 4 h, which is conductive to rapid diagnosis, timely treatment and prognosis of the encephalitis.
Subsequent advanced fragment analysis of the pathogens gene suggested the presence of VZV infection as we found a fragment peak at 160 bp of capillary electrophoresis . It is worth mentioning that the child initially presented with left facial paralysis, but did not appear chicken pox. We know that primary infection with the VZV usually manifests with chickenpox, however reactivation of VZV can present with different clinical manifestations. Reactivation of VZV from the geniculate ganglion, the nucleus of the sensory root of the facial nerve, can cause peripheral facial weakness as well as rash around the ear, known as Ramsay Hunt syndrome . Therefore, even if the patient’s parents denied that the child has a history of chickenpox infection, the child may have latent VZV infection in the genicular ganglion in the past. To verify the above results, on subsequent real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR was used to detect the VZV DNA in both CSF and serum samples using commercial kits at the time of acute disease (Sansure Biotech, China). Briefly, 10 μl of extracted DNA was amplified with PCR super mix reagent in 25 μl reaction volume for 35 cycles using the Life PCR System ABI 7500 (Life Technologies, CA, USA). Results were considered positive when a clear amplification curve of the expected site was obtained (Ct < 40). Consistent with the previous results, VZV DNA was detected in both CSF and serum . As shown in Fig. b, peripheral blood showed high viral load during the acute stage of the disease, though the viral load is less in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Therefore, it is proved that the AFA technology is efficient and fast in detection the etiology of encephalitis.
Taken together, this report outlines the potential difficulties in differentiating and diagnoses pathogens in patients with encephalitis, which has particularly important implications for patient segregation and infection treatment. Our study might be of great importance to explore the application of the AFA technology in clinical diagnosis of encephalitis related pathogens in CSF. Still now, only a few isolated cases of VZV associated encephalitis have been reported.