A 38-year-old male sustained an injury to his right knee while skiing. The patient experienced a twisting of his knee, while a valgus impaction force was applied to the slightly flexed knee. The patient had a dislocated feeling in his knee with severe knee pain and could not stand up. He visited our affiliate hospital on the day of the accident. Physical examination revealed knee effusion and a positive Lachman test with valgus instability in right knee. The patient presented the tenderness at the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and the lateral femoral condyle. The range of motion was reduced to 90 degrees of flexion due to knee pain. Fat droplets were present in the aspirated blood from the knee joint. Plain radiographs showed a huge depression fracture in the lateral femoral condyle . Computed tomography (CT) also revealed a huge depressed lesion of 35 mm × 15 mm in area and 7 mm in depth in the joint surface of the lateral femoral condyle extending to the edge of the condyle . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an ACL and superficial MCL tears combined with a huge depression fracture in the injured knee .
Four weeks after injury, arthroscopy was performed at the same hospital. The arthroscopy revealed that the patient had an ACL rupture, a large cartilage injury, and a huge depression fracture on the lateral femoral condyle. Superficial MCL was repaired with a suture anchor. Eight weeks after injury, this patient was referred to our hospital. We decided a two-staged surgery which was ACL reconstruction with MACI implantation and an iliac bone graft. First, we conducted an arthroscopically assisted cartilage harvest for MACI procedure from the medial edge of the femoral trochlea of the ipsilateral knee joint . Briefly, under general anesthesia, approximately 800 mg of cartilage tissue was harvested. The cartilage tissue was sent to the facility (Japan Tissue Engineering Co., Ltd., Gamagori, Japan). Chondrocytes were isolated from the obtained cartilage specimen and one volume of isolated chondrocytes was suspended into four volumes of atelocollagen solution (3% type I collagen; Koken, Tokyo, Japan). The mixture was put on culture flasks and gelated entirely by incubation at 37 °C. The tissue-engineered cartilage was then cultured in a three-dimension manner in an atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide and 95% air at 37 °C for four weeks. The cultured cartilage had become a jelly-like form with the progress of cultivation [–].
Four weeks after harvest of the cartilage tissue, we carried out a second surgery. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position on the operating room table. First, an arthroscopic anatomic double-bundle ACL reconstruction with a hamstring tendon autograft was performed using the transtibial tunnel technique according to previous study . The harvested ipsilateral semitendinosus tendon was halved and doubled over for graft preparation. A Leeds-Keio Artificial Ligament (Neoligament, Leeds, England) was mechanically connected at an unlooped end of the folded tendon [, ]. Then, an Endobutton CL BTB (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) was tied at the looped end .
Second, the osteochondral defect and depression fracture of the lateral femoral condyle were exposed through the lateral parapatellar approach. The size of osteochondral defect was approximately 20 × 30 mm . The osteochondral lesion was debrided to expose the underlying subchondral plate. Bi-cortical bone block harvested from the right iliac crest was trimmed to reconstruct the normal shape of the lateral femoral condyle. The harvested bone block was fixed to the lateral edge of the lateral femoral condyle with three Poly-L-Lactic Acid pins (PL-Fix, Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN) . The iliac periosteal flap was loosely sutured to the adjacent rim of the healthy cartilage with a polyester thread using a pull-out technique . After half the border of the periosteal flap was sutured, tissue-engineered cartilage covered by atelocollagen gel matrix was placed in the cartilage defect region, then the remaining half of the flap was sutured with a polyester thread and 5–0 nylon .
Finally, the graft for the PL bundle was placed through the PL tibial tunnel to the femoral tunnel with a passing pin. The graft for the AM bundle was introduced in the same way and fixed with 30 N tension to each graft using tensiometers (Yufu Itonaga Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 10° of knee flexion. The 2 tape portions onto the tibia were secured using two spiked staples (Smith & Nephew) in the turn-buckle fashion. The operation time was 231 min.
After 2 weeks of the knee joint immobilization, continuous passive motion exercise of the knee joint was allowed. Partial weight-bearing was started at 6 weeks, and full weight-bearing was allowed from 8 weeks. A functional knee brace was used for a period of 3 months. CT scan taken 12 months after the 2nd surgery showed that the contour of the lateral femoral condyle was reconstructed with the implanted iliac bone graft . Thirteen months later, second-look arthroscopy and staple removal were performed. Second-look arthroscopy showed that the depressed area was covered with smooth cartilaginous tissue with a native cartilage-like hardness . ACL graft had no laceration and an excellent coverage of synovium . A needle biopsy was taken from the center of the grafted cartilage. The grafted cartilage histologically composed of fibrous tissue in the smooth superficial layer and cartilage-like tissue in the middle to deep layer where the extracellular matrix was strongly stained with Safranin O . Implanted tissue had no vascularization and integrated into subchondral bone. The morphology of cells in the middle to deep layer were oval with a pericellular lacuna.
Sports activities were allowed at 18 months after surgery, and he was able to ski once again. The patient returned to his previous skiing activity level without any knee pain. After 4 years, MRI showed that the graft was incorporated into the border zone and the subchondral bone . After a final follow-up, the knee showed a negative Lachman test, a negative pivot-shift test, and had a full range of knee motion. The side-to-side difference in the anterior laxity at 30 degrees of knee flexion measured with KT-2000 was 2.0 mm. Lysholm knee score was 94 points. The objective International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) was determined as grade A. Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) was 82.1, 94.4, 100.0, 50.0, and 68.8 in Pain, other Symptoms, Function in daily living (ADL), Function in Sport and Recreation (Sport/Rec), and knee-related Quality of Life (QOL), respectively.