A 27-year-old woman with a history of thalassemia minor was admitted to surgical ward due to clinical presentation of peritonitis suggestive of acute abdominal crisis with three days history of fever, bloody diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. At presentation, she looked pale without icterus and initial vital signs include: blood pressure of 135/85 mmHg, pulse rate 100 beats/minute, Respiratory rate 32 breaths/minute and axillary temperature 39C. Abdominopelvic computed tomography showed no signs of perforation or obstruction but there was prominent thickening of colonic wall from splenic flexure to rectum- compatible with colitis and evidence of ascites and bilateral pleural effusion ( and ). Peritoneal fluid paracentesis showed light red aspirate with 550/µl white blood cells (70% polymorphonuclears) and 9000/µl red blood cells.
Laboratory data showed the evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA) with considerable schistocytes and thrombocytopenia. During evaluation, she experienced an episode of tonic-clonic seizure. She referred to internal medicine ward to evaluate thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/ hemolytic uremic syndrome (TTP/HUS).
During our physical examination the patient was ill, had periorbital and generalized 2+ pitting edema and was anuric. Further evaluation revealed 4+ proteinuria, rise in plasma creatinine and pericardial effusion (beside ascites and pleural effusion). Her immunologic markers of ANA, anti-dsDNA, Anti-Ro, anti-La and Coombs study were negative and her complement levels showed C3 of 77 ng/dl (normal range: 90-190) and normal C4 and CH50. (the lab data are given in ).
As she had uremic signs, we commenced her hemodialysis with left femoral catheter (only for two successive sections) and with the diagnosis of seronegative SLE, we commenced her intravenous cyclophosphamide and 3 successive days of methylprednisolone pulse. She dramatically responded to treatment but on the 4th day, she developed left common femoral vein thrombosis, therefore anticoagulant started and hemodialysis catheter removed. Antiphospholipid antibody panel was negative.
We performed a renal biopsy and sent her home. Tissue sample was compatible with stage III lupus nephritis (according to WHO classification) and the ANA became positive with 1:320 titer.