Our patient is a 51-year-old male without known past medical history or cardiovascular risk factors who presented himself in the emergency department with severe chest pain in the last 48 h. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs (heart rate 89 b.p.m., blood pressure 136/59 mmHg, peripheral O2 saturation 98% in room air). Cardiopulmonary auscultation was negative for cardiac murmurs or pulmonary rales. The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed pathological Q waves and ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads for which he was brought to the catheterization laboratory for invasive evaluation.
The coronary angiography showed an ostial–proximal thrombotic occlusion of a seemingly large ectatic right coronary artery (RCA) (—, ). The left coronary tree was angiographically normal. Due to persistent symptomology, primary percutaneous coronary intervention was decided. The RCA was engaged with a 7 Fr Amplatz Left 1 guide catheter, and numerous attempts were made to cross the occlusion with a standard workhorse guidewire, without success.
Using intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging as a reference and after increasing guide-catheter support utilizing the buddy-wire technique, a second hydrophilic guidewire was advanced to the distal RCA . We then changed this wire for an extra-support guidewire using a microcatheter and advanced a semi-compliant 3.0/8.0 mm balloon that was able to restore distal TIMI I–II flow after several inflations . Subsequent balloon inflations were not able to further improve coronary flow due to the extensive intracoronary thrombotic content. As such, Excimer Laser Coronary Angioplasty (ELCA) was decided with the intent of vaporizing the remaining thrombus. Using a 1.4 mm ELCA catheter, a total of 10 applications were made (40 mJ·mm−2, 35 Hz—, ) with significant reduction of the thrombotic content in the mid-distal RCA and improvement of distal flow to TIMI III (—, ).
As some thrombus remained in the proximal segment, several inflations were made with increasing balloon diameters (4.0 mm, 4.5, and 5.0 mm) and mechanical aspiration using a guide-catheter extension was performed with angiographical improvement. Given the clinical and angiographical improvement, we decided to stop the procedure and maintain medical treatment with triple antiplatelet therapy (oral acetylsalicylic acid 150 mg i.d. after a single 250 mg dose, oral ticagrelor 90 mg b.i.d. after a single 180 mg dose, and intravenous tirofiban 0.15 μg/kg/min for 12 h) and anticoagulation (subcutaneous enoxaparin 80 mg b.i.d.).
After one week, a scheduled coronary angiography showed significant improvement in intracoronary thrombus content in the mid-distal RCA . An intermediate stenosis in the distal segment (presumably the original culprit lesion) was also found. Intravascular ultrasound imaging confirmed the presence of a stenotic fibroatheroma in the distal segment (minimal luminal area of 4.2 mm2—), the persistence of intraluminal thrombus in the middle segment , and significant ectasia in the proximal segment (mean diameter 6.5 mm—).
The patient’s recovery was uneventful as he continued treatment with double antiplatelet therapy plus anticoagulation for one month after which a third coronary angiography was performed depicting total thrombus dissolution and good distal flow (—, ). Instantaneous wave-free ratio interrogation of the distal lesion was negative (0.94), and stent implantation was deferred. The follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed preserved left ventricular systolic function with hypokinesia of the middle and apical inferior wall.