A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with metastatic renal cell carcinoma in 2016 which was initially treated by local pulmonary surgery (2016, 2017) and 3 years later with local excision of a metastatic lesion of the right thigh (2019). Four years after the initial diagnosis, the disease progressed at multiple sites (2020). Therefore, the patient was enrolled in the study SAKK 07/17 , including a combined immunotherapy with ipilimumab, a CTLA-4 inhibitor, and nivolumab, a PD-1 inhibitor. Ipilimumab was administered every 6 weeks with a dosage of 1 mg/kg body weight intravenously, beginning 2 weeks after the start of nivolumab. Nivolumab was administered every 4 weeks with a dosage of 480 mg intravenously. The administration of ipilimumab could be stopped 10 months after the beginning of the treatment according to the study protocol, as a result of partial response in the CT, and nivolumab was continued. The treatment was well tolerated, and no abnormalities of blood glucose were noted so far in a normal-weight patient (BMI 24.9 kg/m2).
However, 17 days after the last cycle of nivolumab and 14 months after the start of the whole treatment, the patient presented to the emergency department with lethargy, vomiting, blurred vision, polydipsia, and polyuria.
Laboratory testing revealed DKA with a venous blood gas pH of 7.058 and serum glucose of 29.0 mmol/L . The urine analysis was positive for glucose, ketones, and proteins. The level of HbA1c was elevated to a value of 8.7% and C-peptide was low (<50 pmol/L), indicating an insulinopenic DM. The serum titers of anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (anti-GAD) and anti-tyrosine phosphatase (anti-IA2) antibodies were not detectable. The values of amylase and lipase were remarkedly elevated without clinical signs of pancreatitis. The patient had no symptoms of exocrine pancreas insufficiency; therefore, the pancreatic elastase in the feces was not measured. Interleukin 6 was elevated in the context of a normal CRP. There were no signs of hypophysitis or other irAEs. In magnetic resonance imaging of the pancreas, there were no signs of pancreatitis or tumor progression in the pancreas. The findings were interpreted in the context of a new ICI-induced DM with the main symptom of a DKA.
The patient was referred to the intensive care unit (ICU), and intravenous fluids and continuous insulin infusion treatment were immediately initiated. After 1 day, ketoacidosis was resolved and glucose levels were improved; thus, insulin therapy was switched to a subcutaneous administration of insulin glargine (Lantus) and insulin lispro (Humalog). In an attempt to preserve the remaining β-cell function, infliximab (5 mg/kg body weight) was additionally administered on the fourth day of hospitalization with a repetition in the same dosage after 2 weeks. These applications were well tolerated by the patient. The C-peptide values remained low after the second infliximab infusion. Accordingly, the treatment with infliximab was not continued. The patient could be discharged with satisfactory glucose levels with insulin glargine (28 units per day) and insulin lispro (sliding scale). Over the following year, the patient remained on multiple daily insulin injections with unchanged insulin requirement. He received a flash glucose monitoring system and instructions from the local diabetes department resulting in an improvement of HbA1c and fasting glucose levels . Nevertheless, the patient still showed significant glucose fluctuations similar to type 1 DM. Additionally, the C-peptide values remained low .
Two months after the diagnosis of an ICI-induced DM, nivolumab was restarted without destabilizing the diabetic situation. In the recent CT scan, the patient showed persistent partial response. The treatment with nivolumab could be stopped after 2 years of treatment according to the study protocol within a still ongoing partial response in the CT.