We present the case of a previously healthy, now 67-year-old female patient developing vertigo, nystagmus, wide-based gait, and memory loss throughout July and August 1999 (49 years of age at that time). A Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the brain (August 1999) revealed a 35-mm macrolobulated, extraaxial, brightly contrast enhancing mass in the left posterior fossa with extension along the petrous temporal bone, tentorium cerebelli and sigmoid sinus, with cerebellar edema, compression of the fourth ventricle, supratentorial hydrocephalus as well as erosion of the petrous temporal bone. The tumor was radiologically assessed as a meningioma. Subtotal resection (STR) and ventricular drain placement were performed shortly thereafter (Sept 1999). Audiograms prior and after this surgical intervention are currently not available for review. The patient's condition improved after surgery (pre-operative KPS = 70, post-operative KPS = 90). The initial microscopic evaluation proved complex; after major scrutiny, the pathological report described the tumor as a fibroblastic meningioma.
The patient was then lost to follow-up until readmitted six years later (2005) for unilateral progressive hearing loss and pressure like symptoms in her left ear. A clinical examination revealed abnormal bulging of the left tympanic membrane and conductive hearing loss assessed as Gardner-Robertson grade I. A new CT scan and a corresponding MRI (May 2005) showed heterogeneous contrast enhancement suspicious of a local recurrence. The patient underwent a second surgery (August 2005) again assessed as STR. The histopathological examination revealed this time an endolymphatic sac tumor (ELST). Available medical data showed no evidence of von Hippel Lindau (VHL) disease screening prior to both surgeries; to our knowledge, the patient has no known criteria for VHL disease.
Follow-up imaging between 2006 and 2008 showed gradual, but very slow increase in size of a suspected residual/recurrent tumor. A follow-up MRI in February 2009 confirmed a local recurrence in the left sigmoid sinus region and the patient underwent a third surgery (STR) in February 2009. The corresponding pre-operative audiogram is currently not available. The histopathology confirmed an ELST [; Figure , and ]. The microscopic re-evaluation of all samples collected at first surgery (1999) proved consistent with ELST . A post-operative audiogram in August 2009 showed further hearing deterioration (Garden-Robertson II) .
MRI examinations from April 2009 to August 2011 demonstrated no evidence of focal recurrence. Follow-up MRI scans from 2012 to 2013 are currently not available for review. Follow-up MRI in October 2014 showed a local, aggressive recurrence within the lateral limits of the surgical region ; clinical evaluation demonstrated further (partial) hearing loss on the left side without any further cranial nerve dysfunction; unfortunately, the corresponding audiogram is currently not available. A fourth microsurgical intervention was assessed not indicated at this point. Gamma Knife radiosurgery (GKRS) was assessed as the best surgical option. The patient underwent single session GKRS-treatment (Perfexion™ Gamma Knife model) in February 2015 (72 months after the third and last microsurgery). Fixation was achieved using the Leksell® Coordinate Frame G (Elekta AB, Stockholm). Leksell GammaPlan® (LGP)-gross tumor volume (GTV) assessment proved a substantial increase in tumor volume of approximately 15% between the pre-GKRS MRI (4.43 cc - October 2014) and the stereotactic-MRI (s-MRI) at treatment (5.15cc - February 2015). The tumor was best delineated by the fat-saturated T1 contrast-enhanced s-MRI sequence; the peripheral dose was set at 18Gy on the 50% isodose line. GTV margins were equal to clinical target volume (CTV) ; planning target volume (PTV) margins were not required. The overall procedure was well tolerated by the patient.