The patient is an 11-year-old, Japanese girl, with a weight of 38 kg and height of 147 cm (body mass index of 17.6 kg/m2). She was injured when she crashed into a wall after kickboarding down a hill and was brought to the emergency department, where radiographs showed a transverse fracture in the middle of the right femoral shaft with displacement (AO/OTA 32A3b) . The patient also had an epiphyseal injury of the left olecranon, a fracture of the facial bone, and a dental injury, all of which were treated conservatively. She had no specific past or family history. Direct traction was performed after admission, and open osteosynthesis with retrograde insertion of two 3.5-mm-diameter titanium elastic nails (TEN, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, MA) was performed on day 7 after admission . Stability was acceptable; therefore, no external bracing was required postoperatively. At 5 weeks postoperatively, callus was observed , and partial weight-bearing was started, but low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) was also started due to concerns about delayed or absent callus formation. At 2 months postoperatively, the patient was able to walk with full weight bearing, but due to persistent pain and delayed fracture healing, a functional brace was placed on the right femur. At 3 months postoperatively, imaging showed delayed bone fusion , and the patient was followed up with instructions for aggressive weight bearing and continued LIPUS. However, even at 6 months postoperatively, there was no tendency for fusion at the fracture site, with findings of atrophic or fibrotic nonunion . Laboratory tests performed to determine the cause of the pseudoarthrosis showed vitamin D deficiency and vitamin K deficiency . In addition, a pediatrician ruled out congenital endocrine or bone metabolic disorders. Thus, the decrease in biological activity due to vitamin D and K deficiencies was considered to be the main cause of the nonunion, and vitamin replacement therapy (15 mg of menatetrenone three times a day and 1 μg of alfacalcidol once a day) was started. In addition, to improve fracture site stability, the TEN was removed and replaced with a rigid antegrade intramedullary nail (T2 GTN, 10 mm in diameter and 320 mm long; Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) 7 months after the initial surgery . After the TEN was removed, there was mobility at the nonunion site. The entry point for the intramedullary nail was created slightly lateral to the greater trochanter, rather than medial or intra-articular. There was sclerotic scar tissue around the nonunion site, which was adequately reamed. After nail insertion, approximately 5 mm of compression was applied to the fracture site using a special device. Full weight-bearing was allowed postoperatively, and bone fusion was achieved 3 months after reoperation . At 10 months postoperatively, no leg length discrepancy or rotational deformity was observed .