A 64-year-old female patient, with a medical history of axial spondylarthropathy, diabetes mellitus type II, hypertension, morbid obesity and laparoscopic Roux en Y bypass, received a left TKA in 2015 for end-stage osteoarthritis. The surgical procedure and follow-up were uneventful. In May 2021, the patient returned with pain in both shoulders, upper arms, the right wrist and, most prominently, in the left knee. She reported that she had felt ill for a day and had 39 degrees fever nine days before she visited the hospital. The physical examination showed a non-acute ill patient with a large swelling of the left knee, and a heavily impaired function with a flexion of 50 degrees, and extension deficit of 30 degrees. The blood examination showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 156 mg/L and a white blood cell count (WBC) of 13.1 × 109/L per liter. A sterile puncture was performed and samples were taken and analyzed for gram stain, culture and uric crystals, and blood cultures were taken. A rheumatologist was consulted and the aspirate of the knee was analyzed for uric crystals, which were not found. The gram staining was negative but was positive for leukocytes. Initially, the clinical diagnosis was made of reactive arthritis due to systemic infection with an unknown primary location. The patient was hospitalized for close monitoring, while antibiotics were withheld. On the second day of admission, the blood cultures turned positive for a gram-negative rod. Intravenous cefuroxime was started at 1.5 g four times a day. Due to minor clinical improvement with a decrease in knee pain and a drop of CRP to 120 mg/L, no surgery was performed the second day. The third day after admission, the CRP, however, rose to 149 mg/L again, and the patient reported more pain in the knee. Therefore, the decision was made to perform a Debridement, Antibiotics and Implant Retention (DAIR) procedure. Preoperatively, two grams of cefazolin was administered to prevent secondary infections. An open arthrotomy was performed. Perioperatively, there was no collection of pus but cloudy synovium was observed. Four cultures were taken of synovial fluid, periprosthetic tissue, joint capsule and interface tissue around the prosthesis, each with a clean instrument. The prosthesis insert could not be removed due to unavailability of the insert because this type of prosthesis was discontinued by the manufacturer. If it had been available, the insert would have been exchanged for a new insert. Extensive debridement, with all “suspicious” tissues excised, was performed, by using a diathermic knife. The prosthesis and surrounding tissues were then brushed manually with a scrubbing sponge and povidone-iodine for at least two minutes. This was followed by extensive flushing of the knee by pulsating lavage with six liters of 0.9% saline solution. Subsequently, a new extremity drape was placed around the knee, and gloves were changed and the knee was closed in layers using new instruments. Immediately after surgery, the patient improved clinically. A trans-esophageal ultrasound was performed on the request of the infectious disease specialist and showed no evidence of infectious endocarditis. The blood cultures (BD Bactec) became positive after two incubation days and they were cultured aerobically and anaerobically on solid media. The bacteria were seen after five days on blood agar with 5% sheep blood and on chocolate agar media. A Vitek MS matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDITOF) (bioMérieux) was used based on mass spectrometry principle for the identification of the grown colonies, but the identification failed repeatedly. The identification with Vitek MS MALDITOF (bioMérieux) depends on the database of the analyzer which can impose limitations. For this reason, molecular diagnostics using the 16S rRNA gene polymerase chain reaction technique (PCR) were chosen to help the identification and eventually S. moniliformis was found. The knee aspirate was also cultured and after 7 days of incubation. S. moniliformis was also identified in the knee aspirate by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Unfortunately, the susceptibility of S. moniliformis could not be determined despite all the efforts to use microaerophilic conditions and Schaedler anaerobe agar with sheep blood with haemin and vitamin K1 as advised in the literature . Knowing the etiological agent of bacteremia, the antibiotics were switched to ceftriaxone based upon literature review . Supplementary history taking was performed to trace the origin of the infection. The patient reported having no memory of a rat bite, nor living close to rats, nor living close to open water or having eaten spoiled food. She reported having two dogs. Possibly the dogs could have been infected by S. moniliformis by either eating rats, being bitten by rats or by swimming in water polluted by rat feces. Therefore, both dogs were swabbed and samples were taken of their saliva. S. moniliformis could not be cultured and recovered from the dogs. Sixteen days after the DAIR, the patient could be discharged home with intravenous antibiotics in good clinical condition. The CRP at time of discharge was 20 mg/L and the WBC was normal at 3.9 × 109/L. A total antibiotic regimen of twelve weeks was planned according to clinical guidelines . After multidisciplinary consultation with a medical microbiologist, an infectious diseases specialist and an orthopedic surgeon, the following antibiotic regimen was agreed upon: six weeks intravenous ceftriaxone two grams once daily because of bacteremia and another six weeks of oral doxycycline 200 mg once daily to complete the treatment of the PJI . Due to penicillin allergy confirmed with skin testing, the patient could not be treated with oral amoxicillin, which normally would be the oral antibiotic of choice. At three, six and thirteen weeks after surgery, the patient was seen for follow-up. At the most recent follow-up at thirteen weeks when the patient was one week after the last administration of doxycycline, the pain had diminished. The function of the knee was improved to normal walking with a flexion of 120 degrees and full extension to zero degrees. Laboratory results showed CRP < 1 mg/L and WBC of 2.9 × 109/L.