A 7-year-old girl reported to the Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry with the chief complaint of a decayed tooth and difficulty chewing food in the lower back tooth region. The patient's medical history included a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. A previous dental history revealed extraction of a tooth done under local anesthesia using active restraints from a local dental clinic, as reported by the patient's mother. On clinical examination, it revealed multisurface caries with 85 and missing teeth with 75. A periapical intraoral radiograph depicted that the bone coverage over the tooth is >2 mm, and the space for the succedaneous tooth should be maintained for 2 years, which is suggestive of a fixed space maintainer. The management was done with diet counseling, education, and brushing demonstrations for the parents. To build rapport and gain the confidence of the child, the first visit included a tour of the clinic, modeling, and the tell-play-do technique was employed. On the second visit, a picture exchange communication system approach was applied. On the third visit, a single step lower alginate impression was taken and was poured to make a cast. Subsequently, on the following visit, a stainless-steel crown was delivered using the Hall technique with respect to 85.
Initially, an ideal primary cast dentition was poured for a trial design of a 3D printed space maintainer by digital scanning and designing. The retrieved cast was sent to the 3D printing laboratory for scanning and printing for the 3D printed band and loop space maintainer. The cast was scanned using a 3D digital dental scanner (3D shape digital lab scanner), followed by the designing of the band and loop similar to the conventional space maintainer using the partial denture module of 3Shape dental system software as no specific software exists for designing such appliances ( and ). The fabrication took place by DMLS (direct metal laser sintering). The biomaterial used for the fabrication is cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) base alloy as a metal-based band and loop space maintainer . The 3D printer used for the processing was Shinning 3D DMLS printer. Final finishing and polishing are done .
The printed 3D space maintainer was tested in the patient's mouth, and adaptation of the appliance was done and cemented with glass ionomer cement (FX ULTRA, SHOFU). The patient was instructed to avoid hard food and eat and drink for 30 minutes .