A 47-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with a ten-day history of hematuria. During admittance, the patient presented with bloody nasal discharge, dizziness and headache. Paranasal sinus CT and brain MRI scans were performed. The patient denied weight gain or loss during recent years. The cardiopulmonary and neurological examinations were normal. The antithyroglobulin antibody (TGAB) level was markedly increased to 1156 IU/ml (normal range, 0-115 IU/ml). All serum tumor markers were within the normal ranges. A non-contrast CT scan of the paranasal sinus revealed an ill-defined mass (mean CT value, 38 HU) in the sphenoid sinus and clivus, eroding the adjacent bone . The mass did not contain any necrosis, hemorrhage or calcification. Brain MRI showed a heterogeneous mass with hypointensity on T1-weighted images, hyperintensity on T2-weighted images and isointensity on diffusion-weighted images . The mass was 5.8 × 3.6 × 3.7 cm in size, extending both anteriorly into the sphenoid sinus and superiorly into the bilateral cavernous sinuses . The mass was located outside of the sellar turcica, without any continuity with the intrasellar pituitary gland . No obvious deviation of the pituitary stalk was observed. Chordoma was suspected. The patient underwent partial tumor resection via transsphenoidal endoscopy . During the operation, it was found that the mass was grey-white and closely related to the surrounding structure. The sphenoid sinus wall, sphenoid floor and clivus were destroyed to varying degrees, and the nasal mucosa was also invaded. The tumor was partially resected . Postoperative histological analyses demonstrated tumor cells arranged in sheets and nests, with prominent delicate vascularized stroma, confirmed a pituitary adenoma . Immunohistochemistry was positive for synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), neuronspecific enolase (NSE), and adrenocorticotropic hormone(ACTH). The proliferation index, expressed as a percentage of Ki-67 antigen-positive nuclei, was around 3% . Ectopic invasive pituitary adenoma (ACTH-secreting EPA) was confirmed. After the operation, the patient recovered well and symptoms such as headache and dizziness were relieved. The serum TGAB level was decreased to 937 IU/ml (normal range, 0-115 IU/ml). The serum cortisol and plasma ACTH were within the normal ranges. Two months after the operation, she received external beam radiation with a total dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions over 28 days.