A 15-month-old Caucasian girl presented with a 3-month history of regression in motor milestones. She had been previously fit and well, and had been cruising around furniture at 11 months of age. At 12 months she had a bout of chickenpox, and subsequently became lethargic and weak. She gradually lost gross motor skills, becoming unable to walk, stand, or even sit unsupported. Her mother described a persistent low grade fever, and noticed that her eyes appeared puffy. On examination there was marked proximal muscle weakness and hypotonia. She was not able to sit without support, could not roll over, and there was marked head lag when she was pulled to sit from the supine position. She exhibited little spontaneous movement, but when propped up in a sitting position she could play with toys placed in front of her. Her deep tendon reflexes were difficult to elicit. She had periorbital oedema and erythema, but there were no other cutaneous signs. She was miserable. The diagnosis of JDM was suspected, even though her age was young and initial investigations were inconclusive: laboratory investigations revealed only mildly elevated muscle enzymes (creatine phosphokinase 303U/L, alanine transaminase 104U/L, aspartate transaminase 93U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 461U/L), normal inflammatory markers, and normal/negative complement C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and anti-nuclear antibody nerve conduction studies and electromyography were within normal limits; varicella zoster serology was positive. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her thigh muscles was performed, along with imaging of her brain and spine, and further neurometabolic investigations were planned. However, these were not required because the MRI showed marked muscle and subcutaneous oedema, supporting the diagnosis of myositis . Treatment with methylprednisolone was initiated, followed with long-term methotrexate and prednisolone. Subsequently the diagnosis of JDM was confirmed as her heliotrope rash became more pronounced, and she developed Gottron’s papules and nail fold telangiectasia. She made a gradual improvement, and at 9 months post-diagnosis is able to crawl, pull herself to stand and walk independently.