A 63-year-old female patient presented with dyspnea and a large neck mass at the emergency department of our hospital.
Her symptoms were insidious and began one week prior to presentation.
The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension, and was taking anti-hypertensive medication at the time of her presentation. Three days prior, the patient underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) scan and was treated with steroid medication and a salbutamol inhaler, which were unable to relieve her symptoms.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
On physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 37.1 ℃; blood pressure, 140/100 mmHg; heart rate, 122 beats per min; respiratory rate, 25 breaths per min; and oxygen saturation, 95%. Accessory respiratory muscle use was observed, and stridor was heard during inspiration. A hard, non-tender fixed mass with a diameter of 4 cm was found on the left side of the anterior neck. The patient’s vocal cord mobility was normal.
Subclinical hypothyroidism was noted on thyroid function tests [thyroid stimulating hormone, 9.73 µIU/mL; free thyroxin (T4), 1.4 ng/dL; triiodothyronine (T3), 1.22 ng/mL]. No abnormalities were found on routine blood analyses.
A neck CT revealed an infiltrative mass of heterogeneous density, measuring approximately 3.1 cm × 3.0 cm, in the left thyroid lobe and invading the left side of tracheal wall .
Intubation was performed and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. A core needle biopsy was performed at the bedside, and the mass was diagnosed as papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). However, gross invasion of the surrounding structures from the cricoid cartilage to 6th ring of the trachea was observed during surgery . Considering the possibility of PTC with anaplastic dedifferentiation, we performed total thyroidectomy, total laryngectomy, central compartment neck dissection (CCND), and left selective neck dissection (SND; level II, III, and IV). The final pathology reports confirmed the presence of mixed anaplastic (70%) and papillary (30%) carcinomas in the left thyroid gland and metastatic anaplastic carcinoma in the regional lymph node and left level III lymph node, with extra-nodal extension. Anaplastic carcinoma was also observed in the larynx. The BRAF mutation was confirmed by an additional pathological examination. However, no mutations were observed in the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter through next-generation sequencing analysis. The absence of 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake was noted on postoperative positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT), suggesting no distant metastases, and the pathological stage was determined to be IVB (T4aN1bM0) . The patient was discharged two weeks after surgery without any postoperative complications. However, two months post-surgery, a new mass was found in the right submandibular area. A PET/CT showed FDG-uptake at the right level II, and VI, and a pulmonary nodule in the right lower lobe, suggesting distant metastasis . A salvage surgery (right modified radical neck dissection type III and CCND) was therefore performed. Adjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy based on a cytotoxic agent was recommended; however, owing to the patient’s refusal, follow-up was performed without any additional treatment. Recurrence was then observed in the neck, and an additional salvage operation (left SND; level I and II), right upper tracheal lymph node excision) was performed.