A 31-year-old housewife, Han Chinese primigravida patient, had elevated blood pressure to 140/90 mmHg at 14 wk of pregnancy. She was given labetalol 100 mg twice daily, and ASLE was induced after a cold at 21+ wk. One week later, she presented to the Nephrology Department (ND) and the Obstetrics Department (OD) complaining of nasal congestion, sore throat, and stomachache at gestational age of 22+ wk for ASLE with multiple organ damage.
The patient’s symptoms started 1 wk prior to arrival to the ND and OD of Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province in China. She described symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection, nasal congestion, sore throat, and stomachache. She denied any rash (including malar erythema), aphthous ulcers, hematuria, pleuritic chest pain, shortness of breath, fever, or non-specific arthralgias (without swelling) of her wrists, fingers, and ankles. Her laboratory exam was remarkable for significant proteinuria, liver, and renal dysfunction and low C3 and C4 levels . Infectious work-up was negative.
The patient had underlying SLE at age 24, complicated with LN (nephrotic syndrome) . She was on multiple immunosuppressive agent maintenance [methylprednisolone 16 mg once daily, tacrolimus (TAC) 2 mg twice daily, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 0.5 g once daily]. The condition of lupus and renal function were stable with a large amount of proteinuria, 24-h urinary protein fluctuated around 3 g, but the plasma albumin remained above 30 g/L. The patient was seen with her husband for advice regarding planning a pregnancy; drugs were adjusted to azathioprine (AZA, dose: 50 mg once daily), methylprednisolone (dose: 4 mg once daily) at 6 mo before pregnancy, but hydroxychloroquine was not used because of fundus lesions. The fetus was conceived naturally. When consulting during pre-pregnancy, related maternal and fetal risks, such as PE, abortion, preterm delivery, fetal growth restriction, and multiple organ dysfunction were explained to her. The patient’s condition was still in a stable state until 21+ wk of pregnancy.
No abnormalities.
On presentation, the patient’s vital signs were normal: 36.7 °C, heart rate of 96 bpm, blood pressure of 145/96 mmHg, respiratory rate of 20, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. The height of uterus was 18 cm, the abdominal circumference was 104 cm, the estimated fetal weight was 550 g, the fetal heart rate was 140 times per mine, the uterine contraction was not obvious, and the fetal movement was felt.
Initial laboratory testing included a complete blood count and a comprehensive metabolic panel measurement .