A 4.5-year-old girl was transferred to the emergency department of our tertiary care center, with burns covering 40% of her body surface area from boiling water. She received no intravenous fluid administration within 30 h post-scalding and complained of tachycardia, dizziness, weakness, and oliguria. Her physical examination at admission showed that her blood pressure was 98/73 mmHg, her body temperature was 37.3°C, her pulse rate was 164 beats per minute, and her respiration rate was 25 breaths per minute. The pulse oxygen oximeter read 95% on room air. The patient presented with clammy extremities and an increased capillary refill time. While receiving appropriate first aid and wound assessment, she was resuscitated immediately using lactated ringer's injection based on a potential diagnosis of burn shock from her focused history taking, signs, and symptoms. Then, the patient was quicikly and gently transferred to the burn center of our hospital for further treatment.
Laboratory investigations revealed a serum creatinine level of 97.3 μmol/L and an arterial blood serum lactate level of 5.2 mmol/L. These data indicated acute kidney injury induced by hypovolemic shock and confirmed the fluid resuscitation requirement. After resuscitation to correct dangerous deficits in accordance with the Parkland Formula, the patient's vital signs, mental status, capillary refill time, and serum creatinine level improved, and reached a target of 0.5–1.0 ml/kg/h−1 of urine output, indicating adequate fluid resuscitation. Then, the fluid rates were adjusted accordingly based on the monitoring results. The patient's condition improved as expected within the first 2 days. When the patient showed signs of bloating on the 3rd day, a nasogastric tube was inserted, and gastrointestinal prokinetic agents were administered to prevent abdominal over distension. During the aggravation of bloating on the 4th day, the volume of fluid administration was increased in accordance with the trend of decreased urine output. The daily fluid balances are summarized in . On the 5th day of hospitalization, she developed hypoxemia, tachypnoea, hypotension, and oliguria. Blood pressure was 75/53 mmHg, body temperature was 37.2°C, pulse rate was 155 beats per minute, and respiration rate was 45 breaths per minute. The PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 126 mmHg, with 10 L/min oxygen flow delivered by nasal cannula. Her intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) increased to and remained above 15 mmHg as measured from the intrabladder pressure. The central venous pressure increased to a level above 14 cmH2O, the extravascular lung water index increased to >10 ml/kg, and the B-type natriuretic peptide level was >35,000 pg/ml. The urine output was <0.3 ml/kg·h−1, with serum creatinine at 81 μmol/L. The patient was unresponsive to furosemide. These findings indicated the development of secondary abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS), coupled with refractory fluid overload. The patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated immediately, and norepinephrine (1.6 μg/kg·min−1) was administered to maintain mean arterial pressure above 70 mmHg. A neuromuscular blocking agent (cisatracurium besylate) was administered upon sedation and analgesia to improve thoracic and abdominal wall compliance. To manage the increased IAP, a percutaneous catheter was inserted into the abdominal cavity for drainage with ultrasound guidance, and 1,100 ml of fluid was drained within 28 h. The IAP decreased to 11 mmHg, but the clinical condition did not improve. Then, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was performed with an ultrafiltration flow rate of 20–25 ml/kg·h−1. After 40 h of hemofiltration, 5,080 ml of fluid was removed in total. IAP declined to 7 mmHg immediately and then dropped to 5 mmHg. The patient's vital signs subsequently stabilized, the B-type natriuretic peptide level decreased to 5,204 pg/ml, and urine output increased to 1.3 ml/kg·h−1. CRRT was terminated on Day 7, and mechanical ventilation was weaned on Day 8. The trends of the laboratory tests and vital parameters are presented in . After recovering from ACS, the patient continued to improve under routine enteral nutrition support and antibiotic therapy. No significant infections were observed. Skin grafting was performed on Day 17. The patient fully recovered and was discharged from the hospital 34 days after her admission.