A 50-year-old man, with a history of hypertension, presented to the Orthopedic Department of our hospital for non-traumatic acute left knee pain and swelling associated with a warmth sensation 14 mo after TKA.
He had a history of hypertension, but was not regularly taking any anticoagulant or antiplatelet medication.
He had a bilateral knee pain due to end-stage primary knee osteoarthritis for over 10 years and underwent TKA of the left knee in 2013 after failure of conservative treatment. There were no complications intraoperatively. A pneumatic tourniquet was used during surgery at a pressure of 300 mmHg after exsanguination. The implant used was a Press Fit Condylar prosthesis P.F.C.® SIGMA® (DePuy Synthes, West Chester, United States). A single intra-articular drainage without blood recovery system was used, and was removed 24 h postoperatively. The drainage volume was 300 mL. Postoperative rehabilitation was uneventful, and the outcome was satisfactory. Thromboprophylaxis was administered with sodium enoxaparin (6100 IU per day), starting on the day of surgery and lasting 2 wk. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. Clinical tests and radiographs were normal 3 mo after TKA. The range of motion of the left knee was 0° extension to 125° flexion, and the femorotibial angle was 178°. The Hospital for Special Surgery Scoring System (HSS) score improved from 50 points to 96 points (with 30 points of pain, 20 points of function, 16 points of mobility, 10 points of force, 10 points of deformity and 10 points of stability). The Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score reduced from 62 points to 7 points. However, 14 mo postoperatively, the patient experienced acute pain in the left knee while he was sleeping. This onset of pain was associated with immediate swelling of the knee and a sensation of warmth in the area of pain.
Local findings in the left knee showed that the range of motion was limited to 0° extension and 80° flexion, with positive patellar ballottement and no knee instability. The HSS score had decreased to 71 points and the WOMAC score was 55 points.
Aspiration of the knee joint yielded 40 mL of dark, bloody fluid . No organisms were isolated, and culture was negative for bacteria over a 72-h period. Culture was sent only once to microbiology because the patient’s symptoms were disappeared 10 h after non-surgical treatment was implemented.
Radiography showed excellent alignment and no prosthetic loosening . Ultrasonography revealed hydrarthrosis of the left knee.