A 33 years old Sudanese woman with a prominent short stature came to a university hospital, Sudan, with her family after developing epigastric pain for 3 h duration. There was no history of diabetes, hypertension or dyslipidaemia. She has been previously diagnosed with achondroplasia.
Physical examination revealed that the patient looked ill, in pain, and with profuse sweating. Her BP was 100/60, pulse rate 72 regular, oxygen saturation 92% on room air. Her height was 95 cm, her weight was 38 Kg. The extremities have shortening that is more pronounced in the proximal segments, with kyphoscoliosis in her back . Precordial and respiratory system examinations were normal. Blood samples have been taken for investigations and the results showed quantitative serum troponin of 12.9 ng/ml (Normal lab value 0–0.6 ng/ml), HB was 11 g/dl, blood urea was 11 mg/dl and the serum creatinine of 0.8 mg/dl .
Electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in lead II, III, AFV with reciprocal changes in leads 1 and aVL which suggested acute inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) . She was diagnosed as acute inferior STEMI after 10 min of her arrival. So the time from first medical contact (FMC) to ECG and diagnosis was 10 min. The estimated delay from STEMI diagnosis to primary PCI was less than 120 min. Consequently, primary PCI has been decided according to the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines. The final diagnosis was inferior STEMI- ACS. Echocardiogram revealed inferior and infero-septal walls hypokinesia with LVEF of 40% and mild mitral regurgitation, normal other valves. She received Aspirin, Clopidogrel, and the patient was taken immediately for primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The consent has been obtained from her mother after explaining potential risks and safeguards of the procedure. Each one of the previous medical decisions was made according to the ESC guidelines .
Before coronary angiography, right femoral artery approach was chosen regarding the short limbs, elbow angles, and kyphoscoliosis which make the radial approach more challenging. Initially, femoral artery sheath length was compared to the lower limb length to ensure that the limb was long enough to accommodate the femoral sheath. A 5F femoral artery sheath was introduced with keeping the major portions of the catheter and the guide-wire outside the body. Then, a peripheral angiogram was taken to delineate the anatomy of the ileo-femoral system. A guidewire was then passed all the way to the heart in a retrograde fashion. Coronary angiography was done using 5F, JL3.5 catheter although it has been extremely difficult at first to cannulate the left system. The angiogram revealed that the left main stem was long, tortuous and patent. The left anterior descending and left circumflex were normal and patent arteries. There was retrograde filling to RCA. We noticed that the RCA was originating from the left coronary sinus . The course of RCA was non-fatal course and the RCA was not vulnerable to be entrapped between the aorta and pulmonary as shown in video (A high-quality fluoroscopy/angiography is attached). We manipulated the 5F, JL3.5 catheter with gentle rotation to cannulate the RCA which was very easy to engage. The angiogram revealed a total occlusion of the proximal RCA (The culprit vessel) . We decided to proceed for PCI using guide catheter XB –RCA with easy engagement. Then, we have used an intermediate support PCI guide-wire (Bostom) with UFH (3.500 IU intravenously). The lesion was pre-dilated using 2 × 12 mm semi-compliant balloon (Bostom), single inflation up to 10 atm . Drug-eluting stent 2.75 × 20 mm (Promus element plus) was deployed in the distal pre bifurcation RCA segment and inflated up to 14 ATM. Another drug-eluting stent 2.75 × 18 mm (Orsiro) was deployed in the proximal RCA segment and overlapped with the distal stent and inflated up to 13 ATM . The suitable stent’ diameter was estimated by comparing the proximal healthy part of the artery with the diameter of the guiding catheter. The overlapped area was dilated with balloon 2.75 × 18 mm, inflated up to 15 ATM with good final angiographic results with TIMI flow III . No complications encountered. The patient underwent primary PCI of the culprit vessel (RCA), with the whole procedure has taken about 45 min and the total amount of contrast used was about 200 ml including aortography (A high-quality fluoroscopy/angiography attached).
The course in the hospital was uneventful and the patient was discharged in a stable condition on the third day of hospitalization. At discharge, the patient was put on Aspirin, Clopidogrel, Atorvastatin, and beta-blocker. During her last follow up, 1 year after the PCI, she has been free of symptoms, the ECG was normal and the LVEF was 44%. Clopidogrel has been withdrawn from the medications in the last follow up. Timeline of the events has been shown in Fig. .