An 84-year-old male patient was presented to the hospital with abdominal pain for 4 days, which was aggravated for 3 h. The pain was initially located in the upper abdominal area and was a persistent insidious pain. The patient felt unbearable pain accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and fever due to the gradual deterioration of the disease. The patient had a history of valvular heart disease and coronary atherosclerosis for 10 years, but no history of peptic diseases or black feces, weight and appetite loss, hepatitis, tuberculosis, typhoid, smoking, and alcohol consumption.
He does not have a history of familial hereditary disease. A clinical examination revealed a heart rate of 132 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, and temperature of 36.5°C. A physical examination indicated that the patient had pain all over the abdomen, rebound pain, and muscle tension. The liver and spleen were not palpable, and the percussion demonstrated a drumming sound around the umbilicus. The shifting dullness was negative, and bowel sounds were reduced on auscultation. Other systems were normal. There were no palpable lymph nodes in the cervical, axillary, or inguinal regions.
The complete blood count indicated a leukocyte count of 20.01 × 109, with a neutrophil composition of 94.4%, and hemoglobin content of 86 g/L. The biochemical indices were within the normal limits. C-reactive protein content was 255.55 mg/L. The coagulation test was normal. The patient was negative for hepatitis B, syphilis, and HIV. The electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were also normal. An abdominal CT scan revealed a free gas in the abdominal cavity . The patient was diagnosed with peritonitis due to the perforation of the hollow viscus.
After a relevant preoperative preparation, an exploratory laparotomy was immediately performed using the right rectus abdominis incision and the abdomen was opened in layers. Approximately 400 ml of bowel content was found in the abdominal cavity. There were perforations in the ileum that was ~40 cm from the ileocecal region, which were 3–8 mm in size, a segmental distribution was observed, and the intestinal contents had overflowed with purulent moss around the perforation surface . No perforation or tumor was observed in the stomach, liver, spleen, and peritoneum. According to the intraoperative findings, we considered that the small intestinal perforation may have been caused by Crohn's disease, intestinal tuberculosis, or ileotyphus.
We performed a resection of the ileum segment and its mesentery, and an ileostomy in the left lower abdomen. The resected ileum specimen was sent to the Pathology Department for analysis. Ten days post-operation, the histopathological examination of the specimens revealed the features of malignant NHL of the T-cell type, and immunohistochemistry-staining showed that the leucocyte antigen was positive (CD45R0, Bcl-2, CD3, CD5, CD10, CD15, Ki-67, CD138, TIA-1, and CKi67 [40%]) on the tumor cells, and negative CyclinD1, CD56, and CD30 were observed , indicating that the lesion was of a T-cell origin, rather than a B-cell origin or a Hodgkin lymphoma type.
The patient was discharged postoperatively in 8 days in good condition, and had a good spirit and diet, without any special discomfort. The patient was advised to visit the Oncology Department for further chemoradiotherapy.