This is a 2-month-old Saudi female patient referred from Makkah hospital with the diagnosis of purpuras fulminans, respiratory distress, thrombocytopenia, and enlarging hemangioma on her right upper chest, neck, and lower cheek. She was received by the emergency department, resuscitated, and intubated. The patient had a difficult airway due to that her hemangioma was obstructing her breathing. She received midazolam 2 mcg/kg, and fentanyl 2mcg/kg for sedation. In addition, fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, and platelets were given to her due to her low platelet level and abnormal coagulation profile. Based on her laboratory findings and clinical features the initial diagnosis was Kasabach Merritt Syndrome. Computed Tomography Angiogram (CTA) of the patient revealed scalp hematoma overlying her right parietal, temporal, and occipital bone with no underlying skull fracture. With further examinations and investigations of the patient, a diagnosis of kaposiform hemangioendothelioma complicated by Kasabach Merritt thrombocytopenia was done based on the clinical triad of thrombocytopenia, bleeding tendency, and the presence of a vascular tumor. Her management included propranolol (0.6 mg/kg/d), methylprednisolone (2mg/kg/d), vancomycin, miropinam, and flagyle, with daily evaluation of platelets and transfusion as needed. Vincrestine, a chemotherapeutic drug was started with a dose of 0.05 mg/kg/week for the desirable effect of hemangioma regression, an effect that was noted a few days later. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) embolization of the external carotid artery was done after stabilization of the patient with complete resolution of hemangioma. Later, she was weaned off steroids, extubated, and started feeding again. However, days later the patient deteriorated with high fever, signs of sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and rebound of hemangioma with airway obstruction. Initial management done was by intubation, transfusion of platelets, fresh frozen plasma, and cryoprecipitate. She also received vitamin K, meropenem and vancomycin. Her blood cultures revealed the growth of serratia marcescens. She received pulse methylprednisolone and was started again on vincristine with a weekly dose. A second embolization was later done, and the patient was stable again. shows micro catheter introducer (Merit MAK™️) femoral access 2.1 F catheter Headway DUO (microvention headway duo microcatheter 156cm) using maximum 4ml/kg contrast, revealed artialized soft tissue tumor supplied mainly by branches of right external carotid artery. Good penetration by 1 ml liquid embolic materials (PHIL) lead to complete obliteration of soft tissue tumor's arterial supply. Residual filling via left ophthalmic artery, no peri procedural complications. shows details of the chest wall involvement in addition to an incidental finding of hemangioma.