An 82-year-old male patient without any symptoms was referred to our institute due to an abnormal shadow detected by chest X-ray in his annual health examination. An enhanced computed tomography showed a homogenous round-shaped mass 3.8 × 2.4 cm in diameter located in left middle mediastinum . However, no inflammatory changes or mass lesions were detected in abdominal organs, such as the pancreas, biliary system, and lung fields in the preoperative computed tomography. Medical examination of the whole body, including neck and inguinal lymph nodes, salivary glands, and skin was performed; however, no abnormal physical findings were detected. He did not have any significant medical history, including malignancy and any other autoimmune disease. Because his serum markers of anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor were within normal range, we suspected malignant metastatic lymph node of unknown origin, Castleman’s disease, solitary fibrous tumor, or lymphangitis due to tuberculosis. Therefore, we performed a thoracoscopic surgery to obtain a diagnosis and initiate treatment. Intraoperatively, it was an elastic encapsulated tumorous mass , which was removed from the aorta and vagus nerve with comparative ease. Operation time was 129 min and bleeding amount was 60 mL. The macroscopic cross section was yellowish white with well-encapsulated . A storiform fibrosis, lymphoid follicles with IgG4-positive plasma cell infiltration (a ratio of IgG4/IgG ≥ 40%), and an obliterative phlebitis were observed microscopically . Based on the above findings, we highly suspected that the pathological diagnosis was IgG4-RD. Postoperatively, we confirmed that his serum IgG, IgG4, IgA, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels were within the normal range. Data were as follows: IgG, 1302 (normal range, 870–1700) mg/dL; IgG4, 50 (≤ 134) mg/dL; IgA, 129 (110–410) mg/dL; and IL-6, 1.0 (≤ 4.0) pg/mL. A possible diagnosis of Castleman’s disease with elevated IL-6 level was suspected; however, the present case had normal range of IL-6.
We evaluated the pathological and serological findings, imaging results, and physical examinations according to the Comprehensive Diagnostic Criteria for IgG4-RD, and the patient’s condition (normal serum IgG4 level; histopathology IgG4 + /IgG + cells, > 40%; and IgG4 cells/HPS, > 10) met the criteria of a “probable” case of IgG4-RD . Furthermore, we investigated the exclusion criteria of serological examination according to ACR/EULAR classification criteria for IgG4-RD . Based on the criteria, additional serological findings were as follows: white blood cell, 4,200 (normal range 3500–8500/µL); platelet count, 16.0 × 104 (14–34 × 104); eosinophil count, 172 (21–252/µL); myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), < 0.5 (< 3.5 IU/mL); anti-Scl-70 antibody, < 1.0 (< 10 U/ mL); anti-Ro/SSA antibody, < 1.0 (< 10 U/mL); and anti-La/SSB antibody, < 1.0 (< 10 U/mL), which did not meet the exclusion criteria. Therefore, the diagnosis was probable IgG4-RD. He was discharged at 6 postoperative days uneventfully. He is now followed at outpatient clinic without additional treatment for over a year, and an enhanced computed tomography does not show any recurrence or any other malignancy. The survey for possible another systemic disease using F-18–2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography computed tomography postoperatively did not detect other affected organs from IgG4-RD nor autoimmune diseases .