Sixty six years old female patient, underwent PAIR, in operating theater, for her two type 1 hydatic cysts (each was 8 cm in diameter) on the 9th of July . Six days after the PAIR (15th of July), she was admitted to hospital with abdominal pain, jaundice, hematemesis and melaena. Her pain was recurrent and colic in character. At physical exam, she had tachycardia (110/min), jaundice, tenderness in right upper quadrant of abdomen and melaena at rectal digital examination. She had a hemoglobin value of 8 gr/dl. She had been accepted to intensive care unit (ICU), a central line was attained and 3 units of erythrocyte suspension were administered with appropriate fluid and electrolyte resuscitation. Hemobilia was detected by abdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticography (MRCP) . By performing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) and endoscopic sphincterotomy, blood degradation products were cleaned from the common bile duct. After the patient stayed hemodynamically stabled, she was discharged from the hospital in 21th July.
One day after the discharge, the patient was admitted to hospital with hemobilia again. She was accepted to ICU and IV fluid and electrolytes had been administered. On 22nd of July an ERCP was performed and with the help of balloon the hematoma filling the common bile duct was removed . Beside the fluid and electrolyte treatment, 2 units of erythrocyte suspension was administered. The patient stayed stable hemodynamically; therefore we did not make any intervention for hemorrhagia. During the following three days, patient was stable, fed orally. When the laboratory findings decreased to normal values, the patient was discharged on 26th of July.
Four days after the discharge (30th July), the patient was admitted to the hospital again with the complaints of fever, palpitations, loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting. The patient had the clinical laboratory finding of infected hydatic cyst and pneumonia . The two hydatic cyst cavities had turned into abscess formation and they had been drained percutenously.
She stayed at 3rd degree ICU and had mechanical ventilation support for 8 days because of severe pneumonia. Culture results of both two abscess and sputum revealed acinetobacteria and enterococus. According to those culture results and suggestions of infectious diseases specialist, she had been under therapy with sulbactam-sulpherazon (2 × 1 go), amikacin (2 × 500 mg) and vancomycin (4 × 500 mg). After the infectious clinic had been recovered, on the 19th of August blood drained from the drainage tube located in cyst cavity in left hepatic lobe and she had melaena for two times. Besides, she did not need any blood transfusion and two days later her stool was normal. Dynamic liver computerized tomography revealed no reason such as vessel abnormality or aneurysm that can explain the hemorrhage. We prepared for arterial embolization; however, there was no need for this intervention. After the drainage tubes had been removed, the patient was monitored for one week and the antibiotheraphy continued. After one week monitorization she had no problem and was fully healthy. She was discharged from the hospital on the 31st of August. Two weeks later on the 16th of September, at the first control visit, she was healthy. At plain chest x-ray athelectasia at right lower zone and radiological recover at left lung was detected . At abdominal ultrasonography the hydatic cyst in the right lobe of liver was smaller.
At her control visit on the 22nd of November, at abdominal ultrasonography cyst cavity at right lobe was disappeared and postoperative changes were seen. The cyst at left lobe was measured 56 × 40 mm in diameter. She gained 4 kg after her last discharge.