The 8-year-old boy first presented in January 2012, having been referred by the family dentist, to the Department of Orthodontics at the Medical Center of the University of Göttingen for a routine orthodontic control and evaluation of treatment need . The clinical examination of the asymptomatic patient showed no extra- or intraoral pathological findings. The medical history of the boy included a mild pulmonary valve stenosis and a secundum atrial septal defect with a left-right shunt. He showed a good physical and cardiac fitness and a normal nutritional status. The family history was positive for maxillofacial anomalies: the boy's older sister had been previously diagnosed with a dysplastic fibroma, a rare benign fibrovascular defect in the mandible, and a resection of the affected area in the mandible had been performed. His father and paternal grandmother had a positive history of odontogenic cysts as well as basal cell carcinomas, although the family history of OKCs was negative. The radiological examination showed three suspicious hypomineralisations visible as radiolucencies in the panoramic radiograph associated with the retained teeth 13 and 23 and the ectopic tooth 27 . The young patient was referred to the Department of Maxillofacial Surgery for a surgical examination of the radiologic anomalies.
The operation was performed under general anesthesia. The suspected pathological area around teeth 23 and 13 showed no visible intraoperative pathological signs. A bone and soft tissue biopsy for histological examination was taken. In the area of tooth 27, a well-marked membrane was revealed, filled with a viscid fluid and fully enclosing the dental crown. The clinical aspect was consistent with a follicular cyst. During the radical cystectomy, tooth 27 was removed due to massive attachment loss. The histopathological biopsy showed a fibroosseous lesion in the area of teeth 13 and 23. The biopsy from region 27 showed an odontogenic connective tissue cyst wall with intramural odontogenic cell islands. On request of the surgeon, samples were sent for further diagnosis to the Bone Tumor Reference Center of the Swiss Society of Pathology at the University Hospital in Basel, Switzerland. The initial histological diagnosis was corrected to an OKC of the parakeratin variant. Microscopically, the cyst shows a squamous epithelium. The basal cells are palisading, with hyperchromatic nuclei (HE staining, 5x magnification) . Due to the high recurrence of OKCs, a radiological control interval of 6 months was indicated . Furthermore, orthodontic treatment was initiated.
In August 2014, during a regular radiological control, a new radiolucency was detected, associated with the retained and displaced teeth 47 and 48 . The surgical removal of the cystic lesion and tooth 47 was performed under general anesthesia. The pathological finding was consistent with an OKC.
The regular control examinations were interrupted by missed appointments, so the next evaluation took place one year later, in October 2015 . New radiolucencies were detected in the panoramic radiograph associated with the retained teeth 18, 17, 37, 38, and 48 as well as an evident enlargement of the radiolucency around the crown of tooth 13. A cone beam computer tomography scan was performed and showed well-defined radiolucent areas, associated with the retained teeth. Details of the surgical enucleation of the cysts with the extraction of teeth 18, 17, 13, 37, 38, and 48 are shown below. The postoperative radiological examination is depicted in . Clinical and radiological examinations were then performed every 6 months.
We describe the surgical enucleation of the cystic lesions using the example of the third operation (2015). This was performed under general anesthesia; the affected regions were exposed after lifting a mucoperiosteal flap. After a careful removal of a thin bone cortex, the cystic capsule was found and separated from the bone with an obtuse instrument. The aim was to leave no epithelial remnants on the trabecular bone. All four lesions were associated with a retained tooth, which was only loosely anchored in the alveolar bone. Due to the high recurrence rate of the cystic lesions in this particular case, all affected teeth were extracted. In the area of the mandible, the use of Carnoy's solution was not indicated because of the exposure of the lower alveolar nerve . Due to their large size, the cystic cavities were filled with a collagen graft, which stabilized the formation of a coagulum. No reconstruction with iliac crest bone or allogenic bone grafts was attempted. Subsequently, the mucoperiosteal flap was reverted back to its original position and fixed by sutures.
By October 2016 and August 2017, bone remodeling of the affected area had been detected and no new lesions were observed .
Due to the recurrence and the appearance of new lesions, Gorlin-Goltz syndrome was suspected in the patient. After genetic counselling at the Institute of Human Genetics of the University Medical Center of Göttingen, molecular genetic analysis of the genes PTCH1 and PTCH2 was performed in 2015. Sanger sequencing revealed the heterozygous germline variant c.2779_2793del (p.Ser927_Val931del) in the PTCH1 gene. This variant leads to an “in-frame” deletion of 5 amino acids between amino acid positions 927 and 931 of the protein. This variant is listed neither in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) nor in the Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD). However, a pathogenic effect of the variant seemed likely as many pathogenic variants have already been described in this region of the PTCH1 gene, even several in-frame deletions [, ]. Since the boy's father had shown similar symptoms (odontogenic cysts, basal cell carcinomas) that could be in line with a Gorlin-Goltz syndrome, he, too, was tested for the PTCH1 variant and resulted to be carrier of the variant.
In summary, clinical and molecular data together with the positive segregation analysis led to the classification of the variant as “probably pathogenic” and being responsible for Gorlin-Goltz syndrome in the patient and his father. The importance of talking precautions (e.g., sun protection due to the high risk of basal cell carcinomas) and regular medical surveillance (e.g., regular orthodontic care and annual dermatologic examinations) was emphasized.