A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with a 16-cm bulky HCC in the right lobe with PVTT in the main trunk . We attempted curative surgical resection initially, but collateral vessels in the hepatoduodenal ligament were noted intraoperatively. Substantial hemorrhage was assumed; therefore, the treatment for the primary tumor and the PVTT was converted to high-dose hypofractionated PBT for a total dose of 66 GyE in 10 fractions, which were administered in another hospital . There was no acute toxicity exceeding grade 1. After 5 months of PBT completion, the outcome of the primary HCC, including the PVTT, was graded as a complete response (CR), according to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors . However, a 1-cm solitary pulmonary nodule was noted in the right upper lobe on computed tomography (CT). Therefore, daily oral sorafenib (800 mg) was administered as molecular-targeted drug therapy.
About a month after the initiation of sorafenib, the patient complained of heartburn. Upper endoscopy revealed mucosal inflammation in the lower esophagus , and a proton-pump inhibitor was started for reflux esophagitis. After 1 more month, the esophageal lesion progressed to a severe ulcer. After hospitalization, sorafenib was discontinued, and the patient was placed on nothing per orem. On day 7 after the admission, the esophageal ulcer progressed to full-thickness necrosis , and CT revealed a wall defect on the right side of the lower esophagus . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as necrotic perforation of the lower esophagus.
He underwent emergency thoracoscopic esophagectomy in a prone position. Intraoperatively, the right lower mediastinal pleura and diaphragm around the irradiation field were noted to have thickened and developed a yellowish-white color, indicating ischemic changes . The right pleural cavity contained serous pleural effusion. The right lower esophageal wall above the diaphragm showed full-thickness hypovascular necrosis , and both crura of the diaphragm were inflamed and strongly adherent to the esophagus. We performed subtotal esophagectomy combined with partial diaphragmatic crus resection. Since the necrotic changes in the serosa extended into the gastric cardia, simultaneous resection of the upper stomach was unavoidable. A gastric conduit was made using the macroscopically intact region and was pulled up and through the subcutaneous route. We decided to avoid performing simultaneous esophagogastrostomy, considering the poor general condition, the effect of PBT to the remnant stomach, and the sorafenib use. Finally, external esophagostomy was created in the neck, followed by placement of a gastrostomy tube for drainage and a jejunostomy tube for postoperative enteral nutrition on the subcutaneous gastric conduit. The postoperative schema is shown in Fig. .
Two months after the first surgery, anastomosis of the remnant cervical esophagus and the gastric conduit was performed as a two-stage operation. Minimal anastomotic leakage was observed on postoperative day (POD) 18 and was successfully managed by conservative therapy. The patient was discharged on POD 44 without other complications.
To date, the HCC with PVTT has been maintained on prolonged CR for 51 months after the PBT, and the pulmonary nodule has remained stable.