The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of his information.
A 60-year-old man diagnosed with esophageal adenoma (high-grade dysplasia) was scheduled for ESD under general anesthesia. He was 169.9 cm tall and weighed 69.2 kg. He had underlying hypertension, with normal preoperative laboratory and chest radiography findings. He had no history of pulmonary disease.
As premedication, 0.2 mg mobinul and 2 mg midazolam were administered intramuscularly. His initial vital signs before anesthesia were as follows: blood pressure (BP), 170/100 mmHg; heart rate, 100 beats/min; and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2), 99%. As induction agents, 150 mg propofol, 50 mg rocuronium bromide, and 50 µg fentanyl were administered. Mask ventilation was provided for 3 min with 8 L/min oxygen for preoxygenation, and intubation was performed with an 8.0-mm endotracheal tube. Anesthesia was maintained with 6 vol% desflurane, 1.5 L/min N2O, and 1.5 L/min O2. Mechanical ventilation was set at pressure control and volume guarantee mode with a tidal volume of 600 ml and a respiratory rate of 12 beats per min. During the procedure, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and his peak inspiratory airway pressure (PIP) was maintained at 25 cmH2O.
The patient’s PIP suddenly increased to 35 cmH2O 30 min after the operation. His vital signs were as follows: BP, 160/110 mmHg; heart rate, 80 beats/min; SpO2, 100%; and end-tidal carbon dioxide, 27 mmHg. To decrease the PIP, the tidal volume setting was reduced to 500 ml from 600 ml; however, the PIP increased to 40 cmH2O within seconds. The endotracheal tube was confirmed to be intact but extensive subcutaneous emphysema was observed around the neck and chest areas. N2O was stopped and 8 L/min O2 was supplied using a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0. The operator suspected a mid-esophageal perforation. Within a few minutes, the patient’s actual tidal volume had decreased to < 100 ml.
The surgeon stopped the procedure and repositioned the patient in the supine position from the lateral decubitus position. Breathing sounds were barely heard in both lungs during manual ventilation. Portable chest X-ray (CXR) and arterial blood gas analysis showed the following: pH, 7.22; PaCO2, 61 mmHg; PaO2, 86 mmHg; HCO3-, 25.0 mmol/L; and SaO2, 94% for a FiO2 of 1.0. While waiting for the CXR to be uploaded (approximately 10–20 min in our center), the patient’s lung was scanned using ultrasound (Sonosite Edge, FUJIFILM Sonosite Inc., USA) with a multi-frequency linear array transducer probe (HFL38x, 13–6 MHz, 6 cm, FUJIFILM Sonosite Inc.). The lung sliding sign (to-and-fro movement of the pleural line) was not observed in the B-mode and parallel lines, termed barcode or stratosphere sign, were identified in the M-mode at the right third intercostal space and mid-clavicular line, indicating a suspected pneumothorax . Additionally, lung pulse and B-lines were absent and real images, such as consolidation or effusion, were not present in the sonographic evaluation. Despite the presence of broad subcutaneous emphysema, the emphysema depth did not significantly hinder identification on the sonographic image. However, the lung point was not clearly identified with the probe sliding laterally and inferiorly.
Even with a FiO2 of 1.0 before ultrasound scanning, the patient’s SpO2 decreased and facial cyanosis was apparent. Within minutes, his SpO2 decreased to 52%, and his systolic BP decreased to 70 mmHg. Immediately after this vital sign instability, an 18-gauge needle was inserted into the right second intercostal space at the mid-clavicular line for needle thoracostomy, and an emergency doctor was called for chest tube insertion. Immediately after needle thoracostomy, the patient’s SpO2 and systolic BP increased to 96% and 100 mmHg, respectively. The CXR was uploaded after needle thoracostomy and the diagnosis of bilateral (right-dominant) tension pneumothorax was confirmed . After chest tube insertion on the right side by the emergency doctor, the patient’s vital signs stabilized within minutes. As the patient was stabilized, the medical providers decided to transfer the patient promptly to the intensive care unit for further evaluation and management. Using the endotracheal tube, the patient was ventilated with an Ambu bag with oxygen supply during transfer. However, while being transported to the intensive care unit, his SpO2 and systolic BP decreased to 89% and 80 mmHg, respectively. A left chest tube was inserted while the patient was in the intensive care unit, and his vital signs recovered soon after. Three days later, video-assisted thoracoscopic esophagectomy and esophagogastrostomy were performed. After a successful operation, the patient was discharged without further complications.