A 50-year-old man of Indian descent, known to have mild, chronic hepatitis C, presented with a two week history of diffuse abdominal pain. Six weeks prior to the onset of the pain, he had a gradual onset of anorexia and a 20 pound weight loss. Our patient noticed darkly coloured urine and pale stools beginning around the time of the onset of pain. He had not received treatment for his hepatitis C infection. He had intermittent and occasionally heavy alcohol consumption on weekends. He had also been taking methandrostenolone: 10 mg orally twice a day, five days a week for three weeks and then three times a day, five days a week for the next five weeks, for a total of eight weeks immediately prior to presentation.
When he presented, his white blood cell count was 9.8 giga/L (normal range 4.0-11.0 giga/L), his hemoglobin level was 172 g/L (normal range 135-170 g/L) and his platelet levels were 378 giga/L (normal range 150-400 giga/L). His lipase level was 785 U/L (normal range 0-393 U/L), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) level 24 U/L (normal range 15-80 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level 154 U/L (normal range 50-160 U'L), total bilirubin level 922 μmol/L (normal range 0-18 μmol/L), with direct bilirubin 804 μmol/L (normal range 0-5 μmol/L), alanine aminotransferase level (ALT) 56 U/L (normal range 25-80 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level 61 U/L (normal range 10-38 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase level 242 U/L (normal range 90-210 U/L). His international normalized ratio was 1.1 and serum albumin level was 35 g/L (normal range 34-50 g/L). He was also noted to have an element of acute renal failure with a serum creatinine level of 200 μmol/L (normal range 60-115 μmol/L) . He had no previous history of renal disease. He was admitted to our hospital for supportive management and further investigations.
A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen was performed shortly after admission which showed mild fatty infiltration of the liver. There was no evidence of inflammatory fat stranding around his pancreas or kidneys. An ultrasound of his abdomen performed 48 hours later showed mild hepatic enlargement with his liver measuring 17.1 cm in length with a coarse, echogenic texture. There were no focal hepatic lesions or intra-hepatic duct dilatation. There was a small amount of sludge in his gallbladder but no stones. His common bile duct was of normal caliber at 2 mm in diameter. His pancreas was well seen and unremarkable. His renal parenchyma was echogenic and measured at the upper limits of normal size which was in keeping with medical renal disease.
Within a couple of days of admission, our patient began to experience worsening nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. His serum lipase level declined over the first three days, but it later began to rise and peaked on day nine at > 3000 U/L, while his ALP level also peaked on day eight at 206 U/L. His ALT and AST levels remained only mildly elevated. Our patient's creatinine level rose to a peak of 299 μmol/L on day nine.
Serum auto-antibodies, serum protein electrophoresis and cryoglobulins were all negative. Human immunodeficiency virus antibodies were negative however, as anticipated, his hepatitis C viral RNA was qualitatively positive. His fasting serum lipid levels were low with the exception of triglycerides which were mildly elevated at 3.25 mmol/L (normal range 0.60-2.30 mmol/L). Our patient's clinical picture was most consistent with acute pancreatitis and thus, a non-contrast (due to renal failure) CT scan of his abdomen was obtained on the tenth day. This showed a bulky pancreas with adjacent inflammatory fat stranding which was interpreted as consistent with pancreatitis without a focal drainable abscess. There were also no signs of chronic pancreatitis.
Our patient went on to have a liver biopsy which revealed grade 2 portal and lobular inflammation, stage 2-3 fibrosis consistent with hepatitis C viral infection, moderately severe acute cholestasis consistent with anabolic steroid use, and mild pericellular fibrosis consistent with alcohol abuse but without evidence of steatosis or steatohepatitis . A renal biopsy was also performed which showed acute tubular injury of uncertain etiology. His glomeruli were normal and there was evidence of desquamation of his tubular epithelial cells. Therefore, acute tubular necrosis was confirmed as the etiology of his renal failure.
With supportive therapy, our patient's pancreatitis began to resolve and he was asymptomatic at the time of discharge. One month after discharge, his renal function had returned to normal and his amylase (46 U/L), lipase (270 U/L), GGT (17 U/L), and ALP (128 U/L) levels had all returned to normal. His total bilirubin level remained mildly elevated at 50 μmol/L and his ALT (84 U/L) and AST (67 U/L) levels were also mildly elevated in keeping with his chronic hepatitis C infection.