A 41-year-old Saudi woman, para 7+0, presented to our gynecological clinic with abdominal pain and abnormal vaginal bleeding for the last six months. Her menstrual history was unremarkable. She had a history of a cesarean section three years previously and appendectomy performed a year ago. On examination, a palpable pelvi-abdominal mass was detected. Her hemoglobin was 10.1g and random blood glucose was 80mg. liver and renal function test results were within normal limits. An ultrasound study of her abdomen showed a normal-sized uterus displaced to the right side by a left ovarian mass, 8cm at its maximum dimension. No free fluid was seen. The initial clinical diagnosis was one of left ovarian cyst. The rest of her abdominopelvic sonographic examination was normal. Peri-operatively the mass resembled a hemorrhagic solid tumor. The left ovarian mass was sent for frozen sectioning, which revealed it was an undifferentiated neoplasm based on one frozen section; whether it was of benign or malignant nature could not be ascertained. The final specimen sent for histopathological examination consisted of a left salpingo-oophorectomy and incisional biopsy of the right ovary. Grossly, the left ovarian mass measured 7.0×6.0×2.0cm and was brownish and hemorrhagic, with solid and cystic areas. Permanent sections of the left ovarian mass showed a vascular neoplasm with adjacent compressed ovarian parenchyma at the periphery showing vasoformative arborizing channels of variable sizes and shapes lined by atypical endothelial cells . The capsule was intact. Areas of necrosis were seen along with fused anastomosing solid vascular area . The mitotic count was four to five mitotic figures per 10 high power fields The results of special stains for glycogen and mucin were negative. No teratomatous element was identified. The tumor cells tested positive for CD31 , CD34, factor VIII and vimentin and negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and low molecular weight cytokeratin. The proliferative index (Ki-67) was approximately 20 percent to 30 percent. Our patient was diagnosed as having an angiosarcoma, intermediate grade, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IA. A section of the right ovarian cyst wall showed a benign cyst with inflammation, extensive hemorrhage and fibroblastic proliferation. The results of a postoperative investigation for metastatic disease and evaluation for other possible primary sites were negative. Our patient was referred to our oncology center for further management, and subsequently lost to follow-up.