In 2014, a 60-year-old male patient presented with a noticeable bulge in his neck, which resembled an enlarged lymph node. An excisional biopsy was performed, but subsequent pathology tests yielded reactive lymph node, failing to ascertain the cause of the bulge. Over the following years, the patient experienced a range of symptoms, including anemia, abdominal bloating, and a gradual weight loss of approximately 6 kg. In 2017, he reported nocturnal headache and neck swelling. Further investigations were conducted on that time, including a comprehensive computed tomography (CT) scan covering the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The CT scan revealed diffuse lymphadenopathy in multiple areas, as well as the presence of soft tissue density masses around the abdominal aorta, pericardial effusion, and left-sided pleural effusion. Echocardiography showed mild pericardial effusion and mild pericardial thickening. A pleural fluid tap was performed, and tests for tuberculosis and non-tuberculosis infections returned negative results. Furthermore, cervical lymph nodes were excised, and pathological examination revealed reactive lymph nodes. As the results remained inconclusive, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was conducted to obtain more detailed information. The PET scan revealed numerous faintly/non-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) avid lymph nodes in the cervical, thoracic, retroperitoneal, and pelvic regions, along with FDG avid infiltrations observed in the gastrohepatic and left para-aortic regions. Following this, a biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass was performed. Immunohistochemical study of the biopsy sample indicated dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with IgG4 positive plasma cells and storiform fibrosis. Subsequent measurement of serum IgG4 level showed a more than fivefold increase than the normal range (730 mg/dl).
The biopsy and serologic results established a definitive diagnosis of IgG4-RD. The patient's treatment approach was adjusted accordingly, and he underwent a four-month course of prednisolone(40 mg/day) and two doses of 1000 mg at 2-weekly intervals, and four doses of 375 mg/m2 at weekly intervals of rituximab, continued with a maintenance dose of prednisolone(5 mg/daily) combined with azathioprine (75 mg/daily) and methotrexate (2.5 mg,6 tablets per week). This therapeutic regimen significantly improved his symptoms, reflecting a positive response to the treatment.
In follow-up contrast enhanced chest CT scan in 2020, mild pericardial effusion with diffuse pericardial thickening was seen containing scattered foci of calcification. Also there was periarterial soft tissue infiltration with areas of calcification around the coronary arteries. Diffuse mediastinal infiltration with foci of calcification and calcified soft tissue mass in upper abdomen were also observed. As it is evident, the appearance and pattern of involvement in the cardiac and mediastinum were similar to the biopsied retroperitoneal lesion.
Despite the initial positive response to treatment, in 2023, the patient experienced dyspnea and leg edema. The serum IgG4 level was 295 mg/dl which had decreased compared to the time of diagnosis, but was still higher than the normal level. Echocardiography revealed pericardial effusion with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, biatrial enlargement, and septal bounce, and the patient was referred for Cardiac Magnetic Resonance imaging (CMR) for further evaluation.
The CMR revealed small bi-ventericular size (LVEDVI = 36 ml/m2, RVEDVI = 48 ml/m2) and ejection fraction (LV EF = 45%, RV EF = 37%). In Cine and Short tau inversion recovery images, there was a diffuse subepicardial infiltrative lesion with increased T2 weighted signal intensity. In late gadolinium enhancement images(LGE), there was a diffuse subepicardial enhancement in both LV and RV myocardium, suggesting non-ischemic myocardial injury . There was mild diffuse thickening of the parietal pericardium and infiltrative irregular enhancing thickening of the visceral pericardium. Moderate circumferential pericardial effusion was also evident. Evidence of constrictive physiology was observed as septal bouncing and respiratory phasic interventricular interdependency. Furthermore, diffuse infiltrative thickening of the bi-atrial walls and periarterial infiltration around the coronary arteries were also observed. No valvular abnormality was found.
These findings point to diffuse involvement of the pericardium and myocardium, suggesting a combination of constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy, all occurring in the context of IgG4-RD.
The CMR also revealed mediastinal infiltration involving vascular structures, indicating the spread of the disease to the surrounding tissues. Furthermore, the CMR demonstrated significant extracardiac manifestations of IgG4-RD, including bilateral pleural effusion, mass-like lesions in both cardiophrenic angles, ascites, and retroperitoneal infiltration resulting in hydronephrosis and atrophic changes in the left kidney. .
These findings underscore the multisystem involvement and relapsing nature of IgG4-RD, even after initial treatment. The CMR results are valuable for guiding further management and treatment decisions to address the complex and widespread effects of the disease.