A 43 year-old-female was found to have an anterior mediastinal mass while being worked up for an intermittent cough in 2009. Further workup with computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax and CT guided percutaneous biopsy showed a benign cystic teratoma with negative tumor markers. The patient subsequently underwent yearly surveillance CT scans. A surveillance CT Thorax done in 2014, showed the anterior mediastinal mass to measure 5.2 × 5.0 × 5.5 cm and composing mostly of fat with some mural calcification and a thickened capsule . Subsequent surveillance scans showed a stable mass for which, she presented to our clinic in 2018 for cessation of surveillance. However, repeat CT thorax showed the mass to have enlarged (5.4 × 4.8 × 6.2 cm) with a new lobulation extending to the right of the initial lesion, measuring 15 mm . Due to the further increase in size of the mass and new lobulation (15–19 mm) there was a concern for malignant degeneration, as such, the plan was for surgical excision of the mass.
The planned procedure was a robotic-assisted thoracoscopic resection via right lateral approach. The patient was brough to the operating room, placed supine, and general anesthesia was started. A single lumen ET tube was initially used to intubate the patient in order to decrease operative time, and minimize the complications associated with a dual lumen ET tube and general anesthesia. In addition, on pre-operative CT thorax, there were no overt signs of lung and mediastinal structure invasion that would have precluded the use of double lung ventilation. The thorax was then entered via standard thoracoscopic incisions and a total of 3 8 mm ports were used (6th intercostal space in the anterior axillary and mid-clavicular line, and the 4th intercostal space in the anterior axillary line). Upon initial inspection, the mass was adherent to the right upper lobe and the right phrenic nerve. Dissection began medially with a combination of blunt dissection and electrocautery. The mass was dissected from the anterior chest wall but found to be abutting the innominate vein and densely adhered to the superior vena cava (SVC). The mass was meticulously dissected free from the anterior pericardium, innominate vein, and aortic arch . The right phrenic nerve was found to be circumferentially encapsulated by the mass and was sacrificed . Anterior dissection continued until it was deemed difficult to assess the full extent of anterior lung and SVC involvement. The decision was then made to change the patient position to left lateral decubitus and utilize single lung ventilation.
The robotic instruments were removed from the patient and the robot was undocked. The single lumen ET tube was exchanged for a double lumen one to facilitate single lung ventilation. The patient was then placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Four additional 8 mm ports were placed along the 7th intercostal space and dissection continued posteriorly and laterally. The mass was attached to portions of the right upper and middle lobe, for which 2 wedge resections were done to free the mass from the respective lung lobes . The tumor was found to be too adhered to the SVC, as such, a tangential resection of the mass with the SVC was done with a vascular load using the robotic stapler . After the mass was freed circumferentially, it was removed by a specimen bag. After specimen retrieval, a right robotic diaphragmatic plication was done and a 28 French chest tube was left in place.
On gross examination, the tissue specimen was tan-pink in color with a cystic cavity filled with tan-gray gummous material as well as a fatty nodule. Histopathological examination revealed a mature cystic teratoma with an extensive cystic component with negative margins. The patient had an uneventful post-operative course and was discharged on post-operative day 3.