A 21-year-old Chinese woman was admitted with a seven-month history of unilateral severe hematuria. In March 2008, urine analysis revealed that the patient had asymptomatic microscopic hematuria. She was given oral antibiotics but, after one week of treatment, the patient's symptoms persisted. In a follow-up after four months, the patient still had hematuria. In July 2008, cystoscopy showed blood oozing from the left ureteric orifice. Real time ultrasonic imaging (duplex scanning) showed that the angle between the abdominal aorta and superior mesenteric artery was uncommonly sharp. The posterior wall of the superior mesenteric artery was very close to the anterior wall of the aorta. The inside diameter of the left renal vein, at the point where it crosses the aorta and SMA, was less than 2.0 mm. The highest peak velocity was detected at this point. The inside diameter of the left renal vein was 9.0 mm with lower peak velocity. The location of both kidneys at erect position was 30 mm less than that of the decubitus position. A CT was used for detecting the anatomical relation of the LRV with the aorta and SMA. The left renal vein was swelling and was compressed at the point where it crossed between the aorta and SMA, while the distal part of the point was strikingly expanded . An IV urogram showed that the shape of both the renal pelvis and renal calyces were clearly visible. No pelvic or ureteral notching was identified. An excretory phase image showed that the left proximal ureter was laterally displaced . A retrograde pyelogram showed lobulated filling extravasate in the calyx at the lower pole of the left kidney . A CT angiography showed the acute angle between the aorta (A) and superior mesenteric artery (S) of this patient .
The operation was performed with the patient under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in a prostrate position with an 8 cm, oblique incision in the left lower quadrant as the site for autograft. The autograft was taken out through a retroperitoneal tunnel after the laparoscopic nephrectomy was completed. Muscular layers of the incision were sutured and the wound was temporarily protected by membrane in order to maintain the normal pressure of CO2 pneumoperitoneum.
Then the patient was turned over and placed in a lateral decubitus position. A laparoscopic donor nephrectomy was conducted as described previously . A 2 cm incision on the posterior axillary line across the twelfth rib costal margin in the left lumbar region was the first point. The peritoneum was pushed away by finger to expose the perirenal space. A balloon device for dilation of the retroperitoneum was inserted into the perirenal space, and 800 mL of air was pumped into the balloon to enlarge the perirenal space. After creating the pneumoperitoneum, a 25° laparoscope was inserted above the midaxillary line, across the spina iliaca. Additional working ports (5 mm) were placed under the anterior axillary line across the eleventh rib costal margin . The kidney was exposed by opening Gerota's fascia. The adrenal, lumbar, and gonadal branches in the left renal vein were clipped and transected. Along the inferior pole of the kidney, the left ureter was clipped and transected until left ureter was exposed over 12 cm long. The renal pedicle was dissected to expose the left renal artery and renal veins. Then, the renal artery was clipped by hem-o-lock and transected. A similar maneuver was performed with the renal vein, wholly freeing the kidney.
Donors received subcutaneous heparin after the operation. However, systemic anticoagulation was not employed before clamping the renal vessels. After the resected kidney was extracted through the oblique incision pre-prepared under the retroperitoneal tunnel, it was placed immediately on crushed ice and flushed with iced UW solution at 4°C. The kidney specimen was freed from all adjacent fatty tissues. Following reconstruction of the renal vessels, an autograft was transplanted retroperitoneally into the left iliac fossa. End-to-side anastomosis of the renal vein and the left external iliac vein using 5-0 polypropylene suture and end-to-end anastomosis of the renal artery and the divided left internal iliac artery using 6-0 polypropylene suture were completed, respectively. Ureteric anastomosis was carried out by formal antirefluxive implantation to the bladder as an extravesical onlay over a double J stent.
From incision to final wound closure, the overall time of the surgery was nearly 200 minutes. The retroperitoneal laparoscopic nephrectomy took almost 80 minutes. The renal autotransplantation took 60 minutes. The hot ischemia took 5 minutes, while the cold ischemia took 60 minutes. Total blood loss, as calculated from anesthesiology charts, was less than 100 ml.
Two days after the operation, the patient's symptoms subsided. Preoperative and postoperative serum creatinine was 53 mmol/L and 55 mmol/L, respectively. The average length of stay was eight days. Three months after the operation, an ultrasonic inspection and intravenous pyelography studies revealed that the autograft functioned normally, while a nephrogram indicated a normal infusion by level of a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of autograft.