A 32-year-old man was referred to an ophthalmologist for the evaluation of ocular complications related to diabetes mellitus. Thirteen years prior to the first visit to our department, he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus at the age of 18 years. Initially, we prescribed an oral hypoglycemic drug, but due to poor glycemic control, subcutaneous insulin was introduced 11 years prior to his referral. Over the subsequent years, he visited the hospital once or twice annually, exhibiting poor adherence to treatment, maintaining inadequate glycemic control, and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of 14–16%. One month prior to presentation, he was referred to the Department of Diabetology at our hospital for comprehensive examination and intensified treatment, prompted by the presence of anemia and declining renal function. Glycemic control was very poor, evident by a blood glucose level of 374 mg/dL and glycoalbumin of 34.5%. He was subsequently referred to our department for a thorough evaluation of ocular complications. Notably, there were no noteworthy details in his ophthalmologic or other systemic histories, aside from his diabetes, allergies, alcohol consumption, and a smoking habit of 10 cigarettes per day over the past 12 years. There were no hypoglycemic episodes. At the first visit, there was a marked improvement in glycemic control, with HbA1c 7.3%, a blood glucose level of 90 mg/dL, and a glycoalbumin level of 30.3%. He was taking diuretics, had hypertension with a blood pressure of 181/94, and had no dyslipidemia. The corrected visual acuity in both eyes was 20/20, and the intraocular pressure in both eyes measured 15 mm Hg. No evident abnormalities were observed in the anterior segment or the intermediate translucent bodies. However, fundus examination revealed multiple scattered retinal hemorrhages and hard and soft exudates in both eyes; then he was diagnosed with PPDR (shown in a, b). Additionally, optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging showed macular edema and subretinal fluid in both eyes (shown in c, d). An internal examination revealed that the anemia was renal in origin, and the decreased renal function was end-stage renal failure due to diabetes. His macular edema was thought to be affected by not only diabetic maculopathy but also poor renal function. Considering the possibility of improvement of macular edema with medical treatment, the patient was temporarily followed up on macular edema. In response, the ESA darbepoetin alfa (darbepoetin alfa®, 30 mg once a week, Kyowa Kirin, Tokyo, Japan) was started to address renal anemia, following the guidance of the diabetes physician. This intervention commenced 14 days after the first visit. Subsequent fundus examination revealed a reduction in retinal hemorrhage in both eyes (shown in e, f). The patient was then transferred to another hospital for internal medicine and ophthalmology. On day 74, the patient underwent a transition from darbepoetin alfa to an HIF-PH inhibitor, roxadustat (Evrenzo®, 100 mg three times a week, Astellas Seiyaku, Tokyo, Japan), and simultaneously commenced artificial dialysis. By day 88 (14 days after the start of roxadustat), there was no notable change in the retina of the left eye, whereas a fresh retinal hemorrhage was observed in the right eye (shown in a, b). Macular edema improved, and central macular thickness was 232 μm in the right eye and 260 μm in the left eye. At this juncture, the patient’s HbA1c measured at 6.4%. No obvious neovascularization was observed, but it was thought to have progressed to PDR. The patient was scheduled to undergo panretinal photocoagulation, but his medical visits were interrupted due to his lack of understanding of his condition. On day 132 (58 days after the start of roxadustat), the retinal hemorrhage worsened further, and a new preretinal hemorrhage was observed in both eyes (shown in c, d). Macular edema did not recur, and central macular thickness was 235 µm in the right eye and 261 μm in the left eye. Roxadustat was discontinued, and the patient was switched to darbepoetin alfa (30 mg once a week). By day 181 (49 days after the cessation of roxadustat), there was an improvement in the retinal hemorrhage (e, f). Macular edema did not recur, and central macular thickness was 234 μm in the right eye and 255 μm in the left eye. The HbA1c on day 181 was 6.2%, leading to a reduction in darbepoetin alfa dosage to 15 mg once per week because of increased hemoglobin levels. On day 201, the fundus hemorrhage further improved, OCT revealed no macular edema or subretinal fluid, and the retina was generally thin (shown in a–d). Fluorescein angiography, however, indicated the presence of multiple neovascular vessels, active fluorescein leakage, and extensive avascular areas in both eyes (shown in e, f). Consequently, the patient underwent pan-retinal photocoagulation. Darbepoetin alfa was continuously administered, and his visual acuity was maintained throughout the course of treatment. On day 358, his corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 20/20 and in the left eye was 20/25. Fundus examination revealed hard/soft exudates in both eyes and recurrent retinal hemorrhage in the left eye.