An elderly female patient, aged 73-year-old, was admitted to our hospital for unexplained acute abdominal pain and bloating after the occurrence of vomiting. Upon admission, the patient was observed to have an abdominal bulge and total abdominal tenderness accompanied by rebound pain and muscle tension. The patient had a medical history of total colectomy in combination with an ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) for the treatment of functional chronic constipation or chronic idiopathic constipation (CIC) 2 years before hospital admission.
General physical examinations were as follows: heart rate: 120 bpm; blood pressure: 85/50 mmHg; Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 17 × 109 / L, and lactic acid (LA) level of 6.3 mmol / L; Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed dilation, as well as gas and liquid accumulation in the distal portion of the small intestine, ventral to the distorted stomach. It was observed that a segment of the small intestine was prolapsed via the defected lesser omentum, passing the retrogastric lesser curvature to enter the ventral part of the stomach. CT images in the abdomen also revealed a hypodensity in some fragments of the small intestine, liquid accumulation around the liver and spleen, as well as pelvic effusion .
Based upon the abdominal CT findings, the patient was diagnosed with having a lesser omental hernia complicated with intestinal obstruction, acute diffuse peritonitis, and septic shock.
The patient was immediately treated with an emergency laparotomy. During the procedure, ascites, of approximately 1500 ml liquid with blood, were observed. Notably, a fragment of the small intestine protruded from the lesser retrogastric curvature of the stomach into a defected lesser omentum and appeared necrotic and black. The defected omentum was approximately 3 × 4 cm in size , with the necrotic fragment of the small intestine measuring approximately 200-cm in length. The necrotic portion of the small intestine was resected, anastomosis was performed, and the defected lesser omentum was closed. The patient was subsequently transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). The tracheal intubation was removed 2 days after the operation, and the patient was transferred to a local hospital for further treatment.
The risks and benefits of the surgical procedures were explained to the patient, and written informed consent was obtained.