A 46-year-old Asian male (height, 148 cm; weight, 69.4 kg; BMI, 31.7 kg/m2) with NF1 presenting with post-syncope, abdominal distention, and low blood pressure (heart rate, 99 beats/min; systolic/diastolic blood pressure, 88/45 mmHg) was referred to our hospital for further management. He had been diagnosed with NF1 30 years earlier, and the benign neurofibroma on his left buttock was monitored by the Orthopedic Department of our hospital every 3 months. The patient had a history of recurrent bilateral hip dislocation and osteoarthritis. Two years earlier, he underwent observational treatment for ascending colon wall hematoma of unknown cause. The patient was conscious and alert on arrival and his blood pressure was quickly restored by infusion therapy. However, while hospitalized for follow-up, his blood pressure dropped again. Blood tests revealed anemia, with a hemoglobin level of 6.5 mg/dL (normal range; 13.5–17.6) and an elevated lactate level of 3.5 mmol/L (0.5–1.6). The remaining blood test results were normal. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed active bleeding from the left internal iliac artery with a huge hematoma in the retroperitoneum . Emergency transarterial embolization (TAE) was performed by a radiologist after intubation. Once the left internal iliac artery had been blocked with a coil and N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, the patient was hemodynamically stable. The hematoma was large enough to compress the intra-abdominal organs, creating an intra-abdominal pressure of 20 mmHg and decreasing the tidal volume of the ventilation. There was a risk of re-bleeding from the blocked artery; however, because of concerns about the potential for abdominal compartment syndrome and respiratory failure, it was surgically removed using a retroperitoneal approach.
Although the patient’s postoperative course was initially favorable, on postoperative day 9, he complained of right upper quadrant pain and, on day 10, of bloating, nausea, and emesis. His blood pressure was maintained at 134/87 mmHg, but he was tachycardic, with a heart rate of 139 beats/min. Blood tests revealed elevated levels of inflammatory markers, a white cell count of 16.4 × 10−9/L (3.9–9.8), and a C-reactive protein level of 26.9 mg/dL (0–0.5). There was a mild reduction in his blood clotting capacity, with a platelet count of 65.7 × 10−9/L (131–362), a fibrinogen level of 719 mg/dL (181–378), prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (PT/INR) of 1.24 (0.91–1.14), and a bilirubin level of 1.3 mg/dL (0.1–1). CT revealed fluid collection and distended gallbladder with high-density contents . The patient was taken to the operating room for an initial attempt at laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute hemorrhagic cholecystitis with consideration of his hemodynamic tolerance for laparoscopic surgery at the time. Laparoscopy revealed a significant amount of blood in the abdominal cavity exuding from the gallbladder; however, there was no clear evidence of perforation. Due to its fragility, the gallbladder was easily ruptured by surgical manipulation and bled from the ruptured wall. After conversion to open surgery because of continuous bleeding and significant blood loss, a subtotal cholecystectomy was chosen for the risk of further bleeding and bile duct injury due to biliary tissue fragility. The patient’s blood pressure was maintained after that. No gallstones were found in the gallbladder. The total operation time was 2 h and 34 min and blood loss was 3837 mL, including bloody ascites. Four units of red blood cells were administered during surgery. During the postoperative course, paralytic ileus was observed on postoperative day 1 but spontaneously recovered. Six days after surgery, the patient’s intra-abdominal drainage tube was removed with no bile leakage. He was transferred to another hospital on postoperative day 17 for the additional rehabilitation required for his preoperative disability in both legs.
The ruptured gallbladder fragments were collected, formalin-fixed, processed for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, and examined pathologically. Multiple erosions and ulcers were found to have developed in the gallbladder wall, and neutrophilic and eosinophilic infiltrates with fibrin deposits were present, indicating acute cholecystitis. Some abscess formation, tissue lysis, and necrosis were also found. In the back wall of the gallbladder, diffuse myxoid stroma with varying amounts of collagen fibers was apparent. Bland spindle cells with small oval or wavy nuclei extended from the smooth muscle layer to the subserosal layer (rarely seen in the mucosa) and had diffused across the subserosa rather than the muscle layer. These cells were immunohistochemically positive for the S-100 protein but negative for desmin, CD117 (KIT), and CD34. Therefore, they were presumed to be Schwann cells. Cellular atypia and mitotic figures were scarce, and the Ki-67 labeling index was less than 5%. Based on these cytological and immunological phenotypes and the diffuse growth pattern with no apparent tumor nodule formation, we diagnosed the gallbladder lesion as a diffuse neurofibroma with an NF1 background. Some of the peripheral nerve fibers in the gallbladder wall were swollen due to the proliferation of neurofibroma cells, which presented as plexiform. The gallbladder wall also contained many vessels in which neurofibroma tissue surrounded a thin, irregular smooth muscle layer. Some of these vessels had ruptured walls, bleeding, and thrombus formation .
Although the series of treatments was lifesaving and the patient was able to return to everyday life, he was brought to our emergency room in cardiac arrest due to a subarachnoid hemorrhage 6 months later. Surgery was not indicated due to severe bleeding and coma, and he died the next day.