A 59-year-old Japanese male (height 171 cm, weight 69.2 kg) was scheduled to undergo LDRT from his brother under general anesthesia. He had been treated for chronic kidney disease due to polycystic kidney disease, and he had begun hemodialysis 21 years ago. He had also been taking medications for atrial fibrillation (Af) and MR for 9 years, and he underwent a percutaneous coronary intervention to the left anterior descending artery for angina pectoris 5 years ago. There had been no history of heart failure symptoms or associated hospitalization since then.
The blood test revealed decreased kidney function with a serum creatinine of 10.49 mg/dL and blood urea nitrogen of 51 mg/dL, and mild anemia with hemoglobin of 10.0 g/dL. The patient’s brain natriuretic peptide value was 971 pg/mL. Transthoracic echocardiography before the LDRT showed severe MR and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at 30%, with low cardiac output. Coronary computed-tomography angiography showed no stent stenosis but three-vessel disease was suspected, which led to the conclusion that cardiac dysfunction was due to ischemic cardiomyopathy. Restrictive pulmonary dysfunction with vital capacity of 2.7 L (65% of predictive value) was also observed. The priority of surgery for the patient’s severe MR or for his ESRD was discussed, and it was concluded that further preoperative assessment was required to determine the indications for surgery.
Transthoracic echocardiography and right heart catheterization were then conducted to evaluate the impacts of a preload reduction induced by arteriovenous shunt obstruction and of a dobutamine infusion on the patient’s cardiac output (CO) and pulmonary artery pressure. The preload reduction resulted in no changes in pulmonary hypertension or the severity of the patient’s MR, and a continuous intravenous dobutamine infusion increased his CO and pulmonary artery pressure . The patient’s mitral valve had no mechanical abnormality, and the MR was secondary due to cardiac ischemia. Based on these findings, we decided to perform LDRT before cardiac surgery with restrictive fluid management and a close monitoring of the patient’s cardiac function.
Oral midazolam 10 mg and roxatidine acetate 75 mg were administered as an anesthetic premedication 1 h before the LDRT surgery. In addition to the standard ASA monitoring, the patient’s invasive artery pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, and CO were measured. Anesthesia was induced and maintained with propofol, ketamine, and fentanyl. After an administration of rocuronium 50 mg, the trachea was intubated without any complications. The end-tidal carbon dioxide was maintained at 35–40 mmHg. A continuous infusion of dobutamine 1 μg/kg/min effectively increased cardiac index from 2.6 to 3.4 L/min/m2 and maintained the urine outflow after graft anastomosis. The intraoperative data were as follows: 1570 mL crystalloid fluid administration, 450 mL colloid fluid administration, 327 g estimated blood loss, and 810 mL urine output; duration of surgery, 225 min; duration of anesthesia, 304 min. After the patient’s tracheal tube was displaced in the operating room, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for the observation of cardiac and renal function. At 3 days post-LDRT, the serum creatinine level had decreased to 1.27 mg/dL, and although the patient gained 2 kg, his hemodynamics were stable without complaints.
During the postoperative course, the patient’s cardiac and renal function and anemia were dramatically improved . As his cardiac function remained stable after the LDRT, cardiac surgery for his MR has been unnecessary .