A 51-year-old female presented with a pancreatic mass found incidentally on the abdominal computed tomography for routine health examination. The mass was located in the body of the pancreas and was ill-defined with faint inhomogeneous low density at both the arterial and the venous phases of computerized tomography (CT) scan . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography showed mild indentation and slight irregularity of the neck portion of the main pancreatic duct suggesting extrinsic compression of the main pancreatic duct. The patient underwent distal pancreatectomy.
The sectioned surface of the resected pancreas revealed a non-encapsulated, partially lobulate, whitish gray ovoid firm mass with 2.5 cm in its greatest dimension. The mass was predominantly solid with some cystic spaces, which contained mucinous fluid . The mass was not communicated with pancreatic ductal system. Microscopically, the tumor was circumscribed with focal entrapped normal pancreatic acini in the periphery of the tumor. Glandular or small cystic structures were scattered in the predominant stroma, which created the tumor's solid appearance . The glands or cysts were lined by a single layer of tall columnar epithelial cells, which revealed basally located nuclei and abundant intracellular mucin that was positively stained on periodic acid Schiff and alcian blue. The subepithelial stroma was cellular and composed of bland looking spindle cells mimicking ovarian stroma . The columnar epithelia contained occasional goblet cells and endocrine cells and revealed abundant pseudopyloric metaplasia . Some cysts were lined by bland looking polygonal or ovoid stratified cells suggestive of benign transitional epithelia . The stroma adjacent to transitional epithelia was hypocellular and densely hyalinized compared to that adjacent to the columnar epithelia. As a whole the stroma was composed of cytologically bland looking spindle cells, which had variable cellularity, areas of extensive stromal hyalinization, no cytologic atypia and no mitoses.
Immunohistochemical studies were performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections by the avidin-biotin peroxidase complex method. The primary antibodies used were as follow as; Pancytokeratin (1:50, AE and AE3, Zymed, San Francisco, USA), high molecular weight cytokeratin (1:100, 34betaE12, DAKO, Denmark), cytokeratin 7 (1:50, OV-TL 12/30, DAKO), cytokeratin 20 (1:40, Ks20.8, DAKO), calretinin (1:50, polyclonal, DAKO), estrogen receptor (1:40, 6F11, Novocastra, Newcastle, UK), progesterone receptor (1:80, 1A6, Novocastra), chromogranin A (1:200, LK2H10 and PHE5, NeoMarker, Fremint, CA, USA), CD34 (1:40, QBEnd 10, DAKO), vimentin (1:50, V-9, Biogenex, san Ramon, CA), α-smooth muscle actin (1:50, α-sm-1, Novocastra, Newcastle, UK), desmin (1:100, D33, DAKO), S-100 protein (1:150, B32.1, Biomeda, Foster city, CA), CD99 (1:100, HO36-1.1, NeoMarker, Fremint, CA), CD99 (1:100, HO36-1.1, Neomarker), c-kit (1:300, 104D2, DAKO). Both mucinous and transitional epithelia were diffusely immunoreactive to pancytokeratin and cytokeratin 7, but not reactive to cytokeratin 20 except for goblet cells. Transitional epithelia were diffusely reactive to high molecular weight cytokeratin , whereas mucinous epithelia were not reactive to it. Scattered endocrine cells were highlighted by positive reactivity to chromogranin A . The stromal cells were diffusely positive for CD 34 and vimentin, and focally positive for calretinin and progesterone receptor , while negative for estrogen receptor, alpha-smooth muscle actin, desmin, c-kit, CD99, S100 protein and cytokeratin.