A 58-year-old woman complained of left knee pain. At 6 months of age, she had fallen behind the Japanese Irori fireplace in her house and sustained severe and extensive deep burns of the left lower extremity. Because of a wide burn scar on the left knee, during childhood, she developed a left knee contracture and severe varus deformity, internal torsion, and posterior knee dislocation. There was a large burn scar that extended from the proximal medial to distal anterior side of the left knee . She walked with a limp and frequently fell because of leg length discrepancy secondary to the severe knee contracture and complex deformity. As she became an adult, the varus deformity and left knee pain worsened . She was also a high-risk candidate for general anesthesia because of severe heart failure. In addition, her bone strength was low secondary to long-term non-weight bearing because of severe knee deformity and pain. Baseline dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed that her left femoral neck bone mineral density was 0.30 g/cm2 before surgery.
We initially performed soft tissue reconstruction with a combined gastrocnemius flap and popliteo-posterior thigh fasciocutaneous island flap to treat the very wide burn scar [–]. Eight weeks after reconstructive surgery of the soft tissue, we performed knee joint-bridging circular hexapod external fixation of the femur and the tibia [–]. Finally, gradual correction was carried out .
Pre-surgical planning started from the quantification of the angular deformity, followed by computer simulated correction and, finally, a rehearsal surgery on 3D printed bone models for TKA [, ].
There was thin and atrophic soft tissue of a wide burn scar in the knee joint. We evaluated preoperative angiography and Doppler flowmeter results to evaluate the presence of the nutrient artery that may be used to guide the procedures safely . We initially performed soft tissue reconstruction with musculocutaneous flaps of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle and the posterior aspect of the thigh. After creating the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle flap, a leaf-shaped flap extended from the popliteal region to the gluteal sulcus. The incision was initially made parallel to the long axis and was carried down through the subcutaneous tissue and the deep fascia of the thigh. A distal incision was made and the distal end of the flap was gently turned upward. The islanded popliteo-posterior thigh fasciocutaneous flap was then elevated and transposed to the defect [–]. The flap was engrafted 2 months after soft tissue reconstruction.
Alignment adjustment of TKA and gradual correction were carried out in advance, to avoid circulatory disturbance and neuropathy. A fluoroscopy machine was positioned on the contralateral side of the table and used throughout the case to guide external fixation pin positioning. The deformity of the knee joint was fixed using knee joint-spanning circular hexapod external fixation using a four-ring construct [–]. Every two rings were positioned orthogonal to the mechanical axis of both the femoral and tibial segments. Every femoral ring and tibial ring was fixed using multiple wires and one or two half-pins as dictated by bone quality. The left lower limb was not weight-bearing for a long period, and the bone was osteoporotic. To avoid straight thin wire cutout, multiple wires were fixed rigidly. The straight thin wires were inserted in the thick parts of the cortical bone as accurately as possible to prevent cutting of the osteoporotic bone .
The deformity of knee joint was gradually reduced postoperatively, fixed with 6 telescopic struts, and residual correction was performed postoperatively to achieve desired alignment using the circular hexapod external fixation software. At a pace of 1 mm daily, the tibia was pulled down by 50 mm, the anterior translation of 20 mm and 30° varus deformity was progressively corrected. The joint space was widened, and the alignment was corrected. The nerves, blood vessels, and soft tissues, including those around the knee were extended gradually. Postoperative long bilateral legs standing radiographs were obtained to assess mechanical alignment. Adequate correction was obtained without cut-out of osteoporotic bone for 4 weeks.
We used a 3D-printed bone model to increase accuracy in the correction of the complex deformity [–]. Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a complex deformity with varus, posterior knee dislocation and internal torsion of the left knee. The pre-surgical planning of TKA included quantification of the angular deformity, followed by computer simulated correction, and finally a rehearsal surgery using a 3D printed bone model of modular rotating hinge component of TKA .
We performed hinge component of TKA using a medial para-patellar approach. Filling of bone defects was carried out using cement. Postoperative radiographs revealed successful correction of the deformity. Eight-week, 12-week, and 6-year postoperative follow-up examinations showed resolution of her lameness and knee pain. The patient obtained significant improvements in functional outcomes. The Knee Society Score (KSS) increased from 19 to 71/100. At the most recent follow-up, 6 years after TKA, she was fully weight-bearing without walking aids and had no knee pain. The patient had no progressive radiolucent lines with loosening on X-ray . She was treated with teriparatide for 2 years after surgery and was taking denosumab for osteoporosis at the time of this report.