A 57-year-old gravida 6, para 3, Asian Taiwanese woman presented to our hospital for scheduled surgery due to endometrial cancer. At admission, her body temperature was 36.8 °C, pulse rate 78 beats/minute, respiratory rate 20/minute, and blood pressure 136/98 mmHg. Her family and environmental history were unremarkable. She did not receive surgery before nor take any medication for systemic disease, such as diabetes mellitus or hypertension. She was a housekeeper. She did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. On physical examination, she had normal breathing sound, without wheezing or crackle, and a regular heartbeat without murmur. Her abdomen was soft with normoactive bowel sound on auscultation. Her extremities were freely moveable without edema. She exhibited severe morbid obesity (body weight, 128.4 kg; height, 155.7 cm; BMI, 52.9 kg/m2). Her daily activities were independent most of the time, except for some episodes of exertional dyspnea. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a ventral hernia with a large fascial defect . There were no clinical symptoms, such as abdominal pain or tenderness. She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and ventral herniorrhaphy with Goretex mesh (GORE DUALMESH®).
Her early postoperative course was smooth. She consumed water on postoperative day (POD) 3, a clear-liquid diet on POD5, and a semi-liquid diet on POD7. She began bedside ambulation, and half of her stitches were removed on POD10. However, progressive dyspnea was noted after bedside ambulation. Intra-abdominal free air with elevation of right-side hemidiaphragm was noted by chest X-ray on POD14. There was no abdominal tenderness or rebounding pain, but there was moderate abdominal distension. She was kept under close observation and began nil by mouth (NPO) for possible visceral perforation.
Two days later (POD16), severe dyspnea and extensive abdominal distention were noted. Her respiratory rate was elevated to 26/minute with accessory muscle use. Arterial blood gas analysis (under simple O2 mask, 10 L/minute) showed: pH, 7.42; partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2), 44.8 (mmHg); partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2), 86.2 (mmHg); bicarbonate (HCO3-), 28.5 (mmol/L); blood oxygen saturation (SpO2), 96.7%; and blood pressure, 102/75 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis with a white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,900/uL, hemoglobin (Hb) 12.6 g/dL, and platelet count 310,000/uL. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated at 165.7 mg/dL. Serum creatinine was 0.99 mg/dL, while serum sodium was 131 mmol/L, and potassium was 3.9 mmol/l. A physical examination showed severe abdominal distension without rebound pain. A pelvic examination demonstrated good healing of the vaginal cuff without leakage. CT showed a large amount of intra-peritoneal free air with little ascites . Because clinical visceral perforation was less likely, under the impression of pneumoperitoneum, in this emergent situation, an 8-Fr. pigtail catheter was inserted under CT guidance for decompression. A massive amount of gas was drained. Subsequently, her dyspnea and abdominal distention dramatically subsided. She re-started oral intake on POD20, and the abdominal pigtail catheter was removed on POD24 after no more free air was revealed by chest X-ray. No further abdominal distention was noted, and she was discharged on POD28. The clinical course of the endometrial cancer and repaired hernia were well at the 1-year follow-up.