A 20-year-old female, unmarried, was admitted via the emergency department of our hospital on 11th December 2013 with complaints of generalized weakness since 2 weeks, difficulty in swallowing since 2 weeks, and loose stools since 5 days. The generalized weakness was gradual in onset and more marked in legs, so much so that she was unable to rise from the bed. She also felt difficulty in swallowing and in subsequent days, difficulty even voiding urine. She also complained of loose stools 4 to 5 times a day, semisolid in consistency. No mucous and no blood was noticed. However, these were associated with occasional abdominal cramps. In systemic inquiry, she did not complain of fever, sore throat, rashes, joint pain, swelling, cough, chest pain, dysuria, hematemesis or backache.
In the past history, she experienced similar episodes intermittently over the last five years. During these episodes, she used to develop generalized weakness, more of lower limbs, vomiting, and sometimes muscle cramps. With these complaints, she often visited doctors and also required admission in private hospitals, where she was given intravenous (IV) fluids with potassium and her weakness improved. Then she was discharged on potassium containing tablets which would relieve her symptoms. After recovery from the episodes, she used to discontinue oral potassium supplements. She used to remain well for 6 to 8 months before she developed another similar episode and treated similarly. In this way, she recalled 4 to 5 admissions. Record of some investigations seen showed that the predominant abnormality was low potassium level in the serum with normal renal functions.
Drug history was remarkable for tablet NeoK, capsule Esomeprazole, multivitamin syrup and tablet motilium. She is the only daughter with two brothers who enjoy good health. No family history of similar disease was elicited. Parents were non-consanguineous. She studied till ninth class and then left study due to the recurrent illness. She was not addicted to narcotics. She had adequate appetite and sleep.
On examination, she had short stature, lean built, and looked wasted and sick. Her pulse was 88 beats per minute, blood pressure (BP), 90/60 mm Hg, temperature, 98.6°F and respiratory rate, 20 breaths per minute. She was not pale looking, icteric or cyanosed. No koilonychia or clubbing was noted. Dehydration was positive, and muscles were wasted.
Her abdomen was soft, non tender, with palpable bladder but no other visceromegaly. The chest was clear. Both heart sounds were audible in all four areas. No added sounds were noted. In central nervous system (CNS) examination, Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was15/15; power was 3/5 in both lower limbs, 4/5 in upper limbs with intact sensation. Deep tendon reflexes were diminished in all 4 limbs.
A clinical differential of malabsorption, periodic hypokalemic paralysis, or salt-losing nephropathy was contemplated.
On laboratory investigations, serum urea was 73 mg/dl; creatinine, 1.72 mg/dl; sodium, 127 mEq/L; potassium, 1.4 mEq/L; chloride, 101 mEq/L; and bicarbonate, 09 mEq/L. Her hemogram showed hemoglobin (Hb) of 15.1 g/dl; total leucocyte count (TLC), 37.4×109/L; and platelets, 494×109/L. Urine analysis revealed pH of 7.00; albumin, 2+; pus cells, occasional; and red blood cells (RBCs), numerous. Corrected anion gap was 22. Further biochemical tests showed serum calcium, 6.4 mg/dl; phosphorus, 3.2 mg/dl; serum albumin, 1.8 g/dl; total bilirubin, 0.86 mg/dl; direct bilirubin, 0.08 mg/dl; alkaline phosphatase, 50 IU/L; serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), 14 IU/L; serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT), 6 IU/L; and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), 7 IU/L.
Ultrasound abdomen showed both sided normal size kidneys with mild pelvicalyceal dilatation bilaterally. Bladder was distended with approximate volume of 430 ml. Chest X-ray was done, which was unremarkable . Electrocardiography done showed flattening of T waves with occasional inversion in some leads, findings typically seen in hypokalemia .
She was catheterized, rehydrated with isotonic saline with KCL, and IV antibiotics started on suspicion of urinary tract infection (UTI) as TLC was high. She maintained good urinary output (>1500 ml). By admission day 5, diarrhea had settled. Repeat laboratory tests at this time showed: serum urea of 47 mg/dl; creatinine, 1.6 mg/dl; potassium, 2.5 mEq/L and sodium, 127 mEq/L.
Further investigations showed serum magnesium of 1.02 mg/dl. IV magnesium sulphate was administered daily with modest elevation in serum levels during subsequent days. Potassium requirement remained high and was administered by oral and IV routes. On admission day 10, her serum creatinine was 0.85 mg/dl; potassium, 2.6 mEq/L; and magnesium, 0.95 mg/dl. The temporal changes in serum magnesium and potassium are shown in . The 24-h urinary metabolic study on day 10th of admission showed potassium, 44 mmol/24h; magnesium, 50 mg/ 24 h; calcium, 108 mg/24 h (normal range: 100 to 300 mg/24 h). Fractional excretion of magnesium was 27.3%. In the face of low serum magnesium, fractional magnesium excretion should be less than 2%.
Her gastrointestinal (GI) workup was also done including upper GI endoscopy and sigmoidoscopy. Upper GI endoscopy revealed normal mucosa, with mild antral erythema. Sigmoidoscopy showed normal mucosa. Tissue biopsies were also obtained. The duodenal biopsy showed mild stunting of villi with slightly increased intraepithelial lymphocytes; the antrum showed mild chronic nonspecific gastritis and the rectosigmoid, mild nonspecific colitis.
Anti-trangultaminase antibodies and anti-deamidated gliadin-derived peptide antibodies were negative. Final diagnosis was made of GS along with changes of tropical sprue on duodenal biopsy. Genetic testing could not be done due to non-availability of the test.
She was discharged on third January 2014 on tablet spironolactone 25 mg, once daily, increased subsequently to 50 mg; tablet Neok, 2 tablets, 8-hourly, capsule magnesium chloride 1 capsule, 8-hourly, tablet folic acid 5 mg, once daily, tablet Ciproxin 250 mg, 12-hourly. Laboratory tests on 2-week follow up showed serum urea of 15 mg/ dl; creatinine, 0.4 mg/dl; sodium, 142 mEq/L; potassium, 3.6 mEq/L; chloride, 102 mEq/L; bicarbonate, 30 mEq/L; calcium, 8.8 mg/dl; phosphorus, 3.8 mg/dl; albumin, 3.1 g/dl; and magnesium, 1.9 mg/dl. She is on regular follow-up and doing well at seven months of follow-up.