A Caucasian 39-year-old 30-week pregnant woman presented with dyspnoea, cough, and fever. She was severely hypoxaemic, and a diagnosis of influenza B infection by real-time polymerase chain reaction was made. After a course of oseltamivir and amoxicillin-clavulanate, no improvement was found in the pattern of hypoxaemia and hypocapnia. A pulmonary embolism workup, including a computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram and a ventilation/perfusion lung scan, was carried out and was negative. Following an elective caesarean delivery at 33 weeks, hypoxaemia requiring supplemental oxygen persisted.
Her past medical history was significant for arterial hypertension and hypothyroidism during the current pregnancy. Her family history was remarkable by the death of a sister at a young age.
On admission, she denied chest pain, syncope, haemoptysis, and prior smoking. On physical examination, she was slightly dyspnoeic and hypoxaemic [oxygen saturation (SaO2) with supplemental oxygen at 4 L/min 99%]. There were bibasilar lung crackles but no peripheral oedema, and no skin, finger, or nail changes.
The initial investigation showed severe hypoxaemia [PaO2 59 mmHg with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 21%] with hypocapnia, but with a good response to oxygen therapy . The biochemical and autoimmunity studies were unremarkable . The chest radiography did not reveal pleural or pulmonary changes . Pulmonary function testing revealed normal spirometry volumes, but a low diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO)—56.9%. High-resolution CT excluded lung parenchymal involvement .
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a non-dilated right ventricle (RV) and a tricuspid regurgitation velocity gradient of 3.0 m/s (, Video 1). A bubble study excluded an intracardiac or intrapulmonary shunt. Finally, a right heart catheterization (RHC) was performed and revealed severe resting hypoxaemia (SaO2 86%) and mild, pre-capillary pulmonary hypertension (PH), partially reversible with 100% O2 .
Taking into consideration the relative disproportion between the severity of the hypoxia and the mild PH, a surgical lung biopsy was performed. The main finding was a non-specific pattern of chronic bronchiolitis . As the findings did not support the diagnosis of pulmonary vascular disease (PVD), the patient was discharged under oxygen therapy without specific medication.
During the next 10 months, a progressive and spontaneous improvement in SaO2 was seen, leading to oxygen supplementation withdrawal. Conversely, fatigue worsened, prompting the performance of a cardiopulmonary exercise test. Although no desaturation at rest or peak exertion was noted, it revealed a decreased peak oxygen consumption (VO2 16.4 mL/min/kg; predicted value >25 mL/min/kg), a VE/VCO2 slope of 32.9 (predicted value 22–28), and a marked increase of arterial lactate level upon exertion. Additionally, as the breathing reserve was not exhausted, pulmonary limitation to exertion was not an issue. TTE repetition showed de novo mild dilatation of the RV and an increasing tricuspid regurgitation velocity of 3.5 m/s (, Video 2). These findings led to a new RHC that confirmed PAH . Later on, the patient recalled that the death of her 17-year-old sister, 20 years ago, was due to an unspecified pulmonary disease, leading to the performance of genetic testing of PVD-related genes and the identification of a pathogenic heterozygous variant in BMRP2 gene [c.647dup p.(Val217Serfs*3)]. A diagnosis of HPAH was then made, based on haemodynamic and genetic grounds. Sildenafil 20 mg t.i.d. and bosentan 125 mg b.i.d. was initiated, leading to a marked clinical and functional improvement. Eighteen months later, despite clinical stability and normal cardiac biomarkers, the follow-up RHC revealed a low cardiac index , and selexipag 200 mg b.i.d. was promptly added to the initial therapy.