A 3-year-old girl suffered cervical spine injury after a motor vehicle collision while sitting in the car without wearing a seatbelt. ATLS protocol was performed on the patient at a local hospital and she was referred to the emergency department at author’s hospital within 12 h of the injury. The pediatric surgeon and our orthopedic team re-evaluated that the status of the patient showed head injury with alteration of consciousness, intubation, cervical spine protection with hard collar and first rib fracture without pneumohemothorax. The emergency radiographs x-ray and CT brain including cervical spine showed no intracerebral hemorrhage but the cervical spine suffered unilateral cervical C4–C5 facet dislocation. Radiographic features showed anterior dislocation of the affected vertebral body less than the vertebral body in anterior posterior diameter, discordant rotation above and below involved level, facet within intervertebral foramen on oblique view, widening of the disk space and “Bat wing sign” appearance of the overriding facet . The patient was taken to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for resuscitation and closed monitoring after hemodynamic was stable. The patient was evaluated by MRI for preoperative planning, and no spinal cord injury was visible. In the next 24 hours, the patient’s neurovascular status examination was fully conscious and no neurological deficit (Frankel grade E) then extubation followed. The team discussed with her parents treatment plan and complication. Her parents then denied surgery. The authors applied closed reduction maneuver with minerva cast under sedation. The patient was in Frankel grade E without complication after closed reduction and the cervical spine had good alignment in radiographs . The minerva cast was removed at 8 weeks, at which point neck muscle stretching rehabilitation program started. At one-year follow up, the child was asymptomatic, had full active cervical motion and good function. The cervical spine showed normal alignment and had healed in follow up radiographs . Her parents were highly satisfied with our effective treatment and outcome.