A 14-years-old girl, with a weight of 68 kg and a history of suicidal thoughts presented in cardiopulmonary arrest following a suicide attempt with ingestion of 3 gram of chloroquine without history of any other substance ingestion. Upon the arrival of the ambulance, she was unconscious with a Glasgow coma scale score (GCS) of 6 (1–1–4), bradypneic and with a trismus. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment changes, with pulseless ventricular tachycardia immediately following. Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation was initiated but despite chest compressions, defibrillation and adrenaline, there was no return to spontaneous circulation. Twelve minutes later, upon arrival at the hospital, she had a pulseless idioventricular rhythm and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was continued. The patient was intubated and external massage was taken over by a Lucas® chest compression system (Stryker Medical, Portage, MI49002 US).
Blood gas revealed severe hypokalemia (potassium 1.8 mmol/l) and a severe mixed acidosis (pH 6.97, pCO2 95 mmHg, glucose 14.5 mmol/l, lactate 7.4 mmol/l, base excess − 9.7 mmol/l, bicarbonate 12.7 mmol/l). Resuscitation was continued with three additional doses of adrenaline followed by continuous adrenaline infusion as well as correction of hypokalemia, administration of an amiodarone bolus, a bicarbonate bolus, fluid resuscitation and intravenous lipid emulsion infusion. Despite these measures, resuscitation was unsuccessful.
Peripheral right femoral veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)ʼ was therefore initiated after 66 minutes of resuscitation to provide full cardiac support. During transfer to our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), she was sedated and paralyzed, ventilated, hemodynamically stable on ECMO with a blood flow of 1.7 L/min/m2 and an adrenaline infusion of 0.1mcg/kg/min, a temperature of 34.9 °C. Cerebral computed tomography scan performed on admission was normal. On arrival in PICU, cardiac ultrasound on ECMO showed left ventricular dysfunction with an estimated ejection fraction of 35 %, no left or right ventricular dilatation and without mitral valve regurgitation. Plasma hydroxychloroquine level taken a few hours after PICU admission (equal to ten hours post ingestion) was 0.06mcmol/L. Urinary toxic screening was positive for THC/cannabinoid, benzodiazepine and opioid (benzodiazepine and opioid being administered during initial medical care) and negative for acetaminophen, amphetamine/metamphetamine, barbiturate, cocaine, methadone, phencyclidine, tricyclic antidepressor.
ECMO blood flow was increased to 2L/min/m2 and adrenaline infusion weaned shortly after her admission, and heparin infusion started with ACT target range of 180–220. Targeted temperature management in the range of 34–35 °C was done for 48 h. ECMO course was uneventful. Cardiac ultrasound 46 hours post event showed recovery with systolic ejection fraction of 52 % and mild right diastolic dysfunction, allowing weaning from ECMO. A few hours later, a poor perfusion of the right lower limb was observed with a vascular doppler ultrasound revealing a significant reduction of arterial flow of the right common femoral artery. Immediate wound exploration revealed right common femoral artery stenosis without thrombosis at the site of the cannula insertion. Consequently, an arterial vascular surgical reconstruction was done with a venous patch. She developed a compartment syndrome of the right leg in the hours following, requiring fasciotomy.
When sedation was discontinued on day 4, the patient showed minimal interaction and no intentional movement. Striatal lesions were described on cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Electroencephalogram (EEG) on day 6 revealed moderate reactive encephalopathy. On day 7, significant neurological improvement was observed, and the patient was extubated. Neurological exam revealed full consciousness, good spatiotemporal orientation, some memory deficit, and no focal neurologic deficit except hypoesthesia L5-S1 of the right foot and a right elevator muscle deficit secondary to right leg compartment syndrome. She was discharged from PICU at day 11 and then transferred from our tertiary center to her local rehabilitation hospital to continue intensive neuro-muscular physiotherapy.