A 43-year-old man visited the outpatient department complaining of palpitations. His height was 174 cm, and his body weight was 66 kg. He had continuously perspired profusely. His blood pressure was 160/95 mmHg. No abnormal findings were noted on physical examination, including the thyroid gland. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation, and the heart rate was 97 beats/min. Endocrinological examination revealed hypersecretion of TSH, free triiodothyronine (FT3), and free thyroxine (FT4); as a result, central hyperthyroidism was in consideration . The thyroid iodine uptake was within the normal range. Other pituitary and adrenal hormones were within normal ranges. A sellar mass with calcification was then observed during computerized tomography (CT) scanning . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a sellar lesion without obvious suprasellar or parasellar extension. On enhanced scans, the tumor showed no enhancement after gadolinium administration . The tumor size was 1.1 cm × 1.3 cm × 1.5 cm. The pituitary gland was compressed backward. The cavernous sinus and optic chiasma were not invaded. Short-term somatostatin analog test was performed , and the serum TSH concentration decreased by 53% after octreotide administration . The examinations of autoantibodies and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were all negative. Ultrasound detection of the thyroid revealed diffuse disorders; the thyroid was swelling without any mass detected, suggesting thyroid hypersecretion. To distinguish the syndrome of pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone (PRTH) (, ), the thyroid hormone receptor genes were examined, and there was no mutation.
To prevent a thyrotoxic crisis during the perioperative period, thiamazole was administered at a dosage of 30 mg/day, and the hyperthyroidism was significantly relieved. After careful preoperative evaluation, endoscopic transnasal-sphenoidal surgery (eTSS) was performed in December 2020. During the operation, a solid yellowish mass full of calcifications was identified in the sellar area . The mass was limited, and it did not appear to invade the cavernous sinus or diaphragma sellae. Total removal of the mass was achieved after eTSS.
Histologic sections of the surgical specimen revealed an abundance of psammoma bodies, and nests of cells were inconspicuous among the psammoma bodies . There was no evidence of pleomorphism, mitosis, or necrosis, suggesting a benign tumor. Upon immunohistochemical staining, only a few TSH-positive cells were detected. Moreover, the cells were negative for all other anterior pituitary hormones except follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), progesterone receptor (PR), P63, P40, and Ki67, but the cells were positive for chromogranin A (CgA), CD56, cytokeratin (CK), and synaptophysin (Syn) .
Postoperatively, normalization of thyroid hormones was achieved with no deficiency of other pituitary hormones. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 12th postoperative day. A follow-up MRI was performed 12 months after eTSS ; no regrowth of the tumor was noted, and the patient’s thyroid function tests were within normal limits.