A 42-year-old male with a systemic right ventricle (sRV) in the context of dextro-transposition of the great arteries (TGA) after atrial switch according to Mustard was evaluated in the outpatient clinic. He had a history of atrioventricular (AV) dissociation and slow nodal escape rhythm and subsequent pacemaker implantation with an epicardial lead on the sRV apex at the age of 2. Two years later, he developed a complicated pulse generator pocket infection with Staphylococcus
aureus that persisted despite antibiotic treatment and led to the extraction of the pacemaker leads and device. The intrinsic conduction restored, consequently, there was no indication for a new pacemaker. At the age of 35 years, the patient was admitted with a cerebral abscess and a baffle leakage was diagnosed during the work-up. He underwent a surgical baffle revision with repair of the leakage and several months later, a percutaneous closure of the residual leakage was performed using an Amplatzer device.
The patient was presented to our congenital heart disease centre for re-evaluation due to symptomatic sRV failure. He was euvolaemic, functioned in New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II and was treated with the highest tolerated dose of valsartan. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a wide QRS of 180 ms with a right bundle branch block morphology (RBTB, ). The patient had an elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) of 700 pg/mL and preserved renal function. He had an exercise capacity of 140 Watt (73% of predicted), VO2max of 16.1 mL/min/kg (46% of predicted) at cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Transthoracic echocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging showed a severely reduced function [ejection fraction (EF) 22%] of the dilated sRV with at least moderate (Grade III) tricuspid valve regurgitation (TR) (Videos 1–3, ). Given the poor systolic sRV function, this TR was thought to have moderate to severe haemodynamic consequences for this patient.