The pediatric patient was a 1-month-old female who came to the outpatient department for the first time due to diarrhea (7–8 loose yellow stools/day) more than 20 days ago. Diarrhea continued after treatment with cefixime and probiotics (Saccharomyces boulardii). She was admitted to our hospital on March 4, 2021. The infant was born by caesarean section at full term and was diagnosed with hypoglycemia and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). She was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics during hospitalization, including cefoperazone, meropenem, piperacillin, tazobactam, sulbactam, fluconazole, vancomycin, and azithromycin.
Clinical examination on admission revealed: temperature, 36.8℃; heart rate, 136 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 35 breaths/min. The infant was conscious and presented pharyngeal hyperemia, mildly swollen tonsils, and coarse breath sounds. The patient did not have fine wet rales and lower limb edema.
Laboratory tests performed on the day of admission revealed the following results: white blood cell count, 26.3 × 109/L; neutrophil count, 11.47 × 109/L; lymphocyte count, 6.87 × 109/L; red blood cell count, 3.36 × 1012/L; hemoglobin, 104 g/L; platelet count, 599 × 109/L; C-reactive protein (CRP), 157.2 mg/L; albumin, 31.4 g/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 355.0 U/L; and procalcitonin, 0.20 ng/ml. Stool routine examination showed a fecal white blood cell count of 99 − 120 per high power field (HPF) and fecal red blood cell count of 15 − 25/HPF (Supplementary Table ). Bone marrow aspiration revealed granulocytosis and thrombocytosis and a granulocytic-to-erythroid ratio of 23%. Stool cultures revealed Enterococci as the main bacteria, with intestinal parasites, rotavirus, and common bacterial intestinal pathogens (Shigella, Salmonella, Pathogenic Escherichia coli, etc.) remaining undetected.
After admission, she was initially diagnosed with neonatal acute diarrhea according to the Textbook of Pediatrics (9th edition, People’s Health Publishing House, 2018) . In this case, a laboratory test revealed elevated white blood cell count and CRP in peripheral blood, bloody purulent stool, and a routine stool examination revealed increased white and red blood cells. After excluding the above intestinal pathogens, the pathogen of this case was considered to be invasive bacteria, and empirical treatment was performed with cefmenoxime and norvancomycin (an analogue of vancomycin). After 3 days of treatment, the frequency of diarrhea decreased to about 4 times/day.
Given the patient’s long-term history of antibiotic use, C. difficile related tests were performed on the 3rd and 7th day of admission. As a result, enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for C. difficile glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) and nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) for toxin genes were positive. Bacterial culture revealed colonies of C. difficile, which were confirmed to be sequence typing 54 by multilocus sequence typing. Based on the above test results, the patient was finally diagnosed with CDI, so cefmenoxime was discontinued and norvancomycin was continued.
After we treated the patient with norvancomycin for 12 days, the infant stool frequency decreased, about 2–3 times/day, and the stool was sticky, with no fever, nausea, or abdominal pain, and was discharged. After discharge, intravenous antibiotics were discontinued and changed to a combination of oral norvancomycin and probiotics.
The patient was treated with three courses of antibiotics with oral norvancomycin after hospital discharge. After the first course (9 days) of treatment, the infant’s stools were viscous with a frequency of about 3 times/day, and routine stool examination shows normal white and red blood cell counts (Supplementary Table ). However, 7 days after treatment withdrawal, the patient began to have frequent loose stools , about 6 times/day. The routine stool examination showed elevated white blood cell count (Supplementary Table ). C. difficile toxigenic culture (TC) and NAATs were positive. The second course of antibiotics was started based on symptoms and test results. After 25 days of treatment, the patient’s routine stool examination and frequency returned to normal (2–3 times/day) (Supplementary Table ). The stool was mushy , and stool culture and NAATs were negative. Ten days after treatment discontinuation, the patient began to have frequent loose, mucus-containing stool , approximately 5 times/day. The routine stool examination showed fecal white blood cell count of 26–44/HPF (Supplementary Table ), TC and NAATs were positive. The treatment period was extended based on clinical symptoms and the recurrence of diarrhea. In the third course, the dose of norvancomycin was adjusted five times sequentially according to clinical status as follows: 0.06 g twice a day for 10 days, 0.06 g four times a day for 29 days, 0.06 g twice a day for 17 days, 0.07 g once a day for 11 days, and 0.07 g once every 2 days for 31 days. Stool frequency returned to normal after the third course of treatment, about 2 times/day, the stool was normal (Supplementary Table ), stool culture of C. difficile, GDH/toxin EIA, and NAAT were negative . The diagnosis and treatment details are shown in Fig. .