A Caucasian 65-year-old man, suffering for a month from a persistent pain in the inferior oral fornix and in the symphysis region of the mandible, was hospitalized. Our patient did not have a relevant medical history: no use of tobacco, no alcohol abuse, no medications, no weight loss. During an oral examination, very poor oral hygiene was observed with severe widespread periodontal disease, dental plaque, and several exposed dental roots, especially in the inferior dental arch. In this context, a severe gingival ulceration extending from the 3.1 to the 4.3 region was observed with mobility of teeth 4.1 and 4.2. The lesion showed granulomatous tissue, and reddened swollen margins . Our patient reported severe pain on palpation. No laterocervical nodes were present. Limited local bone resorption of the alveolar process was observed on standard radiologic examination (panoramic radiography) . His routine laboratory test results were negative. A biopsy was performed immediately and our patient was discharged from the department with antibiotics (clavulanic acid 125mg and amoxicillin 875mg twice a day) and a prescription for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The histological report described a rich inflammatory infiltrate of CD3-, CD4- and CD8-positive small T cells, CD30-positive B cells, and a low number of CD56- and CD57-positive natural killer (NK) cells. The lymphoproliferative foci, CD20+, appeared to have angiocentric necrotizing blasts and high positivity for latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) and EBV protein gene 3, compatible with grade III LYG . Our patient was immediately recalled and a total-body computed tomography (TBCT) scan with intravenous contrast enhancement was performed. The study of the mandible showed osteitis of the anterior arch characterized by thickening of the spongiosa ; it also showed irregular bone resorption at the site of the gingival lesion . The TBCT scan detected a nodular lesion (13×14 mm) in the lower lobe of his right lung, described as a ‘cannonball’, which showed contrast enhancement due to profuse vascularization. No mediastinic nodes were present but multiple nodes were present in his right axillary fossae and peri-iliac veins bilaterally . No pathological enhancement was detected in his central nervous system (CNS). Our patient was evaluated at the Medical Oncology Service and began chemotherapy (ChT) treatment. In the meantime, the gingival ulceration had grown, with bacterial colonization . Our patient also reported several episodes of hemoptysis. According to guidelines [-], rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP), the ChT scheme, was administrated every three weeks for six cycles. A restaging with a TBCT scan was performed, respectively, after four cycles, six cycles and after eight months. The pulmonary nodule and the gingival lesion disappeared . The patient at the time of this writing was disease-free.