A 45-year-old male patient presented to our institution with a 3-week history of diffuse abdominal pain, tenesmus, and over 10 episodes of non-bloody diarrhea per day. The patient did not have nausea or vomiting nor did he report fever, chills, or unintentional weight loss. In the week prior to his presentation, he was assessed by his family physician who had ordered a panel of stool nucleic acid amplification tests which were negative for gastrointestinal infections. He was then trialed on a brief course of proton pump inhibitor as an outpatient with no improvement in his symptoms before presenting to the emergency department.
The only significant past medical history for our patient was a long-standing history of plaque psoriasis for which he was being treated with Ixekizumab. He had previously undergone multiple courses of biologic treatments with adjunctive phototherapy but did not achieve reasonable control of his disease until he was switched to Ixekizumab approximately 9 months ago. The patient did not have a family history of IBD or early onset colorectal cancer. He is a life-long non-smoker and he does not report excessive alcohol use. There was no history of recent travel, blood transfusions, intravenous drug use, or new sexual contacts.
On initial assessment, the patient was hemodynamically stable with diffuse non-peritonitic abdominal pain on physical examination. His laboratory investigations demonstrated marked elevation in his inflammatory marker (C-reactive protein of 388 mg/L) as well as a hepatocellular pattern of liver enzyme elevation (aspartate aminotransferase 234 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 142 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 143 U/L). A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was performed revealing continuous circumferential bowel wall thickening of the left colon from the rectum to the splenic flexure on a background of reactive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy . The patient was admitted to the internal medicine service and our gastroenterology experts were consulted for further endoscopic evaluation.
On flexible sigmoidoscopy, the patient was noted to have punched-out ulcerations in the left colon with overlapping regions of normal mucosa. Given that these endoscopic findings could be in keeping with IBD as well as cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis, the patient was started empirically on oral Mesalamine and IV Ganciclovir while awaiting the results from his endoscopic biopsy. Interestingly, the biopsy showed no viral cytopathic changes and CMV immunohistochemical staining was negative. The specimen did however have non-specific changes of cryptitis, epithelioid granulomas and mixed inflammatory infiltrates with areas of fibrinoid necrosis. Following discussions with our gastroenterology and pathology experts, Ganciclovir was discontinued and high dose corticosteroid therapy was initiated for probable drug-associated colitis in context of his Ixekizumab exposure.
Despite initial clinical response to steroid therapy, the patient developed toxic megacolon 2 days later and was complicated by perforated viscus as evident from the presence of intraperitoneal free air on abdominal X-ray. Following an emergent total colectomy, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for continued support. During his week-long ICU admission, the patient suffered from persistent intra-abdominal sepsis requiring high dose vasopressors which prompted repeated exploratory laparotomies revealing ongoing small bowel ischemia. The patient had further resection of his distal ileum and was successfully weaned from vasopressors before undergoing an end ileostomy. He continued rehabilitation for an additional 2 weeks on the surgical ward before being discharged home with follow-ups to our gastroenterology and general surgery specialists. At 9-months post-discharge, the patient had been progressing well with no recurrence of clinical disease in the absence of any immunosuppressive therapy. Further review of the patient’s surgical and endoscopic specimens revealed the presence of epithelioid histocytes and widespread fissuring ulcerations with intermittent regions of transmural inflammation favouring a Crohn’s-like pattern . Despite features of Crohn’s on pathology, the patient’s unremarkable family history, lack of recurrence disease following surgical interventions, and atypical clinical presentations collectively raise suspicions for drug-associated colitis in setting of the patient’s Ixekizumab therapy.