A 16-year-old Caucasian female with a clinical diagnosis of NF2 presented to the neurosurgery clinic for follow-up of previously identified lesions including bilateral vestibular schwannomas, meningioma status postresection, and an enlarging cervicothoracic intramedullary lesion. At the time of initial diagnosis, the patient presented with bilateral vestibular schwannomas in addition to enhancing tumors involving the anterior aspect of the cervical spinal cord, foramen magnum, and the left cavernous sinus. There was no family history of NF2 or other genetic neurological conditions. Of note, the patient’s family declined germline NF2 testing. The physical exam was significant for postoperative left foot drop following resection of the right frontal meningioma and a right frontal surgical site with well-approximated skin and thick overlying scabbing, but no signs of infection.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed a 4.8 × 1.4 × 0.9 cm [cranial–caudal (CC) × transverse (TRV) × anterior–posterior (AP)] intramedullary tumor extending from the upper C1 to upper T3 level with a small focus of hydromyelia caudal to the tumor at the T3 level and ill-defined patchy enhancement after contrast . There was progressive enlargement totaling approximately 2.0 cm (CC) over the course of 10 months when compared with previous imaging studies over that time period. The lesion caused the spinal cord to completely fill the spinal canal from the C7 level through the T2 level. Of note, there were at least three smaller, clustered intramedullary tumors extending from the C4 level through the C6 level with evidence of enlargement as well. Given the progressive enlargement of the dominant intramedullary lesion, the decision was made to undergo debulking of the tumor for pathological diagnosis as well as possible initiation of treatment.
Subsequently, the patient underwent C7–T1–T2–T3 laminectomies for decompression of the spinal cord and resection of the dominant intradural, intramedullary spinal cord tumor. Pathology examination revealed spinal ependymoma, CNS WHO grade 2 . Immunohistochemistry staining for H3K27me3 showed retained nuclear staining consistent with the normal/wild-type immunophenotype. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of the tumor was performed at an outside reference laboratory, which showed no evidence of MYCN amplification. Chromosome analysis of the harvested spinal ependymoma tumor sample revealed a 46,XX,−6,+7,−22,+mar[16]/46,XX[4] karyotype. Subsequent OncoScan microarray analysis of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor confirmed +7,−22 and clarified that the marker chromosome represents chromothripsis of the entire chromosome 6, involving more than 100 breakpoints, which was visualized as a complex pattern of alternating copy number changes . Microarray also confirmed no evidence of MYCN amplification in agreement with FISH results. The final integrated pathology diagnosis is spinal ependymoma (CNS WHO grade 2) with no MYCN amplification.
The patient made a full, uneventful recovery from surgery. She was also seen by the hematology–oncology team with specialization in neuro-oncology. There have been lengthy discussions regarding possible further treatment options including mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK) inhibitors and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors in which the final decision upon which treatment to initiate has yet to be determined.