A 71-year-old woman was transferred to our institution because of unstable angina. She had been previously diagnosed with aortitis and left subclavian artery (LSCA) occlusion. Her past medical history included hypertension and dyslipidemia. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram showed marked ST-segment depression in the precordial and inferior leads. Contrast-enhanced cardiac computed tomography (CT) revealed severe left coronary main trunk (LMT) stenosis, which had not been detected 9 months previously, right coronary artery (RCA) occlusion which had occurred previously , and porcelain aorta (Supplementary video). Ultrasonic echocardiogram showed severe aortic regurgitation and compromised left ventricular function (LVEF = 40%), which had been normal 9 months ago. Her chest discomfort worsened with time. We decided to perform emergent surgery. The right axillary artery (RAXA) and left femoral artery (LFA) were exposed. Saphenous vein grafts (SVGs) were harvested. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established with RAXA/LFA perfusion and right atrial drainage. A retrograde cardioplegic cannula was inserted into the coronary sinus under transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE) guidance. A left ventricular venting cannula was inserted into the left ventricle (LV) through the right superior pulmonary vein. Systemic cooling was started. During cooling, the distal ends of SVGs were anastomosed to the posterolateral branch and left anterior descending artery, respectively on the beating heart. At an esophageal temperature of 23 °C, circulatory arrest was induced. Unilateral cerebral perfusion (UCP) from the RAXA was initiated (5 ml/kg). The calcified ascending aorta was incised. Antegrade cardioplegia was given from the SVGs. Retrograde cardioplegia was given from the coronary sinus as needed. The aorta was transected 1.5 cm proximal to the innominate artery. A 1.5 cm width of calcified intima was circumferentially removed from the media and adventitia. Teflon felt strips were applied inside and outside the aorta to create the distal anastomotic site . A 22 mm J Graft SHIELD NEO (JUNKEN MEDICAL, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was anastomosed to the proximal aortic arch. Circulation was restored and the patient was rewarmed. The aortic valve was inspected. The NCC was redundant. The aortic valve was replaced with a 19 mm CROWN (LivaNova., London, United Kingdom). The proximal aorta was transected 1.5 cm distal to the sino-tubular junction. The same maneuver used for distal anastomosis was applied to create the proximal anastomotic site. The proximal ends of SVGs were anastomosed to the graft. Weaning from CPB was performed without difficulty with inotropic support. The postoperative course was uneventful. Contrast CT showed that all SVGs were patent . Histopathological examination revealed loss of medial elastic fibers, with replacement by hyalinized collagen fibers. Although monocyte infiltration was found in the perivascular area, polynuclear giant cells were not found . These findings were compatible with the chronic phase of Takayasu’s arteritis. The patient was discharged home without any events on postoperative day 20. She has been followed in the outpatient clinic and her condition is thus far stable at 3 months.