A 30-year-old female presented with a one-year history of progressive right-sided upper back and interscapular pains with no history of fever, night sweating, trauma and radicular pains. She reported exacerbating conditions at night along with coughs and sneezes. She still complained about the pain despite using medicines such as aspirin; nevertheless, her partial response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs had positively affected her sleep patterns. Moreover, the magnetic resonance imaging scan of her thoracic spine performed one year before was reported as normal. Different evaluations ultimately diagnosed her with myofascial pain syndrome. Depo-Medrol plus lidocaine injected into a right rhomboid muscle failed to relieve the symptoms. Four months after the injection, she presented to the physical medicine clinic with severe upper back pains and anorexia-associated weight loss. She reported no history of serious health conditions, including chronic infections, metabolic diseases and malignancies, in either herself or her family. Furthermore, examinations suggested neither deformities nor apparent abnormalities. Her muscle bulk and tone were also found to be normal. A point of tenderness was, however, detected in the midline thoracic spine at the level of T3. Neurological examinations were also unremarkable. Moreover, routine laboratory tests suggested no abnormalities. The patient was then referred to an infectious disease specialist for further workup for mycobacterium tuberculosis, and all the results were reported as normal. The whole body bone scan showed an increased uptake at T3 . In the next step, multiple detector computed tomography (MDCT) scan was ordered, and it revealed osteolytic lesions in the right lamina, suggesting osteoblastoma . The patient underwent surgery and laminectomy. During the operation, the surgeon observed a 25-mm mass involving laminae and facet joints. Histopathological findings confirmed the diagnosis of osteoid osteoma . The patient was found completely pain-free without any evidence of recurrence over the six-month follow-up.