A 64-year-old woman underwent liquid silicone injections for augmentation mammoplasty 42 years previously. Eight years prior to admission, siliconomas were removed due to discomfort. She visited a hospital with the chief complaint of a painful mass in her left breast. The mass was resected and a histopathological examination revealed the tumor to be an invasive micropapillary carcinoma. The surgical margin was positive for malignant cells and she visited the hospital for further treatment. She was a healthy-looking woman. The left breast was craggy and it came in contact with the axilla, which thus made it difficult to palpate the tumors. No breast tumor was palpable on the other side. The laboratory parameters did not show any abnormalities and there was no evidence of distant metastasis. She was not on any medication. She had never taken oral contraceptives nor received hormonal therapy. She had experienced three pregnancies and delivered once. Her family history revealed no malignancies.
A subsequent dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination with Gadolinium (Gd)-DTPA enhancement demonstrated the four tumor shadows with similar enhancement at distant portions. Because it was unlikely that four malignant tumors existed at the same instant, they were thus considered to be coexistent malignant tumors and siliconomas. Ultrasonography revealed masses with an irregular shape and contour, extensive hypoechogenicity or shadowing. The tumors with a heterogeneous internal echo with a slight degree of Doppler signaling were considered to be malignant tumors; those with homogeneous internal hypoechogenicity with no Doppler signaling were considered to be siliconomas.
A left-sided mastectomy and complete axillary lymph node dissection was thus performed. The histopathological findings of the mastectomy specimen were as follows. The siliconomas were observed to be spread around the operational scar. Three tumors were identified, all in immediate contact with the siliconomas as indicated by ultrasonography , which measured 12 mm on the upper side of the breast, 3 mm on the lateral side and 20 mm on the subareolar area. A tumor measuring 9 mm in diameter was located on the medial side, but had no connection with the siliconomas . In each tumor, neoplastic cell clusters floating within clear spaces defined by a network of loose fibrocollagenous stroma were recognized , and the tumors were diagnosed as IMPCs. Scirrhous carcinoma components were also seen in each tumor. The malignant cells of the three tumors had contact with collections of rounded vacuoles of varying sizes . Lipid droplets were contained in these vacuoles along with macrophages and foreign-body giant cells. In addition, lymphatic invasion was observed in all tumors and perineural invasion was seen for the medial tumor. The tumor in the subareolar area reached the fat tissues outside of the gland, the dermis and the larger muscle. Eleven of sixteen axillary lymph nodes showed tumor involvement. The histological grade, based on a modified Bloom Richardson scoring system, was intermediate. The scores for each parameter (tumor tubule formation, number of mitoses and nuclear pleomorphism) were 3, 1 and 2, respectively. Immunohistochemically, the tumors were estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) positive and C-erbB-2 negative. Postoperatively, since the patient consistently refused to be treated with adjuvant systemic chemotherapy, radiotherapy was administered with 50Gy to the chest wall. Subsequently, endocrine therapy was administered using antiestrogens. Three years after the operation, no metastasis was recognized in any organ.