The patient was a 39-year-old woman who presented with left-side abdominal pain after eating, which she had been aware of since 3 years of age. Her symptoms had worsened recently. She visited her local hospital and was referred to our department when a computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a possible esophageal hiatal hernia. The patient, who was 162 cm tall, weighed 75 kg, and had a body mass index of 28.6 kg/m2, had no history of smoking or upper abdominal surgery. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed an enlarged esophagogastric junction (EGJ), and narrow band imaging confirmed Los Angeles grade A gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) (A). During the retroversion maneuver, EGD showed a saccular projection in the gastric lumen from the fornix (B). A comparison of radiographic images of the chest, obtained before the onset of symptoms during late pregnancy and at the time of this presentation, showed an increase in the amount of abdominal gas in the thoracic cavity during the previous 3 years . Enhanced CT imaging of the abdomen showed that the stomach had prolapsed into the thorax from the outside of the left crus of diaphragm (A, B). A continuous membranous structure from the diaphragmatic defect, covering the protruding part of the stomach, was observed and considered to be a hernial sac (B). We could not show the presence of a septum between the hiatus and the diaphragmatic defect. Thus, based on these findings, we diagnosed a parahiatal hernia with a hernial sac complicated by a sliding hiatal hernia, and performed laparoscopic hernia repair.
A small incision was made in the umbilical region, and surgery was initiated using a four-port approach. After the lateral hepatic segment was elevated, the gastric fundus was noted to be protruding through the hernial orifice. Return to the ventral side was straightforward using forceps traction. The content of the hernia was the stomach. The lesser omentum was incised, and the right crus of the diaphragm was exposed. Periesophageal dissection was advanced as far as possible to the ventral and dorsal sides. Next, the peritoneum around the hernial orifice was incised from the left side, and the left crus of the diaphragm was exposed. Dissection of the entire esophagus was completed and taped with a Penrose drain. The esophageal hiatus was mildly enlarged, and a hernial orifice measuring 5 × 5 cm in diameter was found next to the left crus of the diaphragm. The hernial sac had a peritoneal membrane. We diagnosed a parahiatal hernia with a hernial sac, complicated by a sliding hiatal hernia (A). The esophageal hiatus was repaired using two non-absorbable sutures. The orifice of the parahiatal hernia was too large to be closed with sutures. Because of the concern that the esophageal hiatus would open the adjacent parahiatal hernia, we decided to implant a mesh rather than suture the orifice. We performed a Toupet fundoplication for GERD and sutured the right diaphragmatic crus and stomach to prevent migration. A sheet of composite mesh (Symbotex™; Medtronic, Chicago, IL, USA) was trimmed to 10 × 10 cm, inserted in the abdominal cavity, and implanted at the site of the hernial orifice (B). The mesh was fixed using a Multifire Endo Hernia™ stapler (Medtronic). The surgical time was 232 min, with an estimated blood loss of 5 mL. No intraoperative blood transfusion was required.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. After surgery, there was no symptom recurrence for 1 year.