A 50-year-old Caucasian female presented initially with a spontaneously occurring, non-tender, right anterior chest wall soft tissue cystic-like mass in late 2014 . Her past medical history included Waardenburg syndrome (a genetic condition associated with hearing loss and changes to hair skin and eye pigmentation), well-controlled non-insulin-dependent diabetes, learning difficulties and she had 15 surgeries performed on her deformed feet. She also suffered from sideroblastic syndrome since 2002 for which she was receiving blood transfusions three times a week with well-controlled iron overload. A month after developing the right anterior chest wall mass, she developed a non-tender swelling in her left elbow which got progressively larger and uncomfortable . She was seen by both orthopaedic and rheumatology teams, who after reviewing the images suspected that the swelling could be due to an inflammatory reaction rather than infection. She was therefore started on a reducing dose of 30 mg oral prednisolone which she took intermittently for a year. During this time her swelling remained non-tender, however towards the beginning of January 2016 she presented with pain in her elbow joint. Repeat imaging showed worsening of the left elbow joint mass and an enlarging right sternoclavicular mass. She was referred to a specialist centre for biopsy of the right sternoclavicular joint mass for suspected lymphoma. In April 2016, multiple biopsies of her right sternoclaicular joint showed necrotic material and inflammatory cells along with granulation tissue suggestive of osteomyelitis. As no evidence of granulomas was seen, tissue samples were not sent for any mycobacterial cultures. She was started on oral flucloxacillin 1 g QDS to be taken for 4 weeks. At the beginning of May 2016, while on flucloxacillin, she became unwell with signs of sepsis and her left elbow swelling had started to ulcerate. Chest X-ray on admission showed infective changes to the bases of both lungs. She was commenced on IV co-amoxiclav. Microbiology samples from previous biopsies in another hospital showed Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes and scanty growth of Staphylococcus epidermis. Blood cultures grew Enterobacter cloacae. The patient was discussed in the orthopaedic multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting and a week after admission she was taken to theatre for left elbow debridement which showed a completely destroyed elbow joint with frank pus and necrotic tissue. At the same time, incisional biopsy of the right sternoclavicular joint mass showed frank fatty pus. Multiple specimens were obtained from both sites and sent for histology, microbiology and mycobacterial cultures. Post-surgery the patient was commenced on IV vancomycin with no improvement to her condition. Microbiological results showed scanty growth of skin organisms such as S. epidermis. Multiple samples processed for mycobacterial cultures of both right sternoclavicular joint tissue and left elbow were positive for M. kansasii. The identification of the isolate was done by the reference laboratory by using molecular methods. Before mycobacterial culture results were available, the patient became unwell with progressive cough, pyrexia and shortness of breath. She was commenced on IV meropenem along with IV vancomycin. She progressively became septic and suffered a fatal cardiac arrest a week after debridement. In view of this we were unable to commence M. kansasii treatment.