An 80-year-old man was admitted on September 1, 2023, two days after a sudden syncope.
The patient suddenly fainted and fell to the ground while standing up from the chair 9 days ago, with a facial landing and bleeding from a torn lip, accompanied by temporary loss of consciousness. After self relief, there was no obvious discomfort, no limb convulsions, no urinary and fecal incontinence, no foaming at the mouth, no headache or nausea and vomiting, and no palpitations or chest tightness before onset. Come to the emergency department of our hospital for treatment. The emergency blood pressure was measured at 98/56 mmHg, and the head computed tomography (CT) showed no bleeding and the electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation. Go home after being hospitalized in the neurology department for treatment. Now, in order to further treat heart disease, the patient has been readmitted to the cardiovascular department and diagnosed with coronary heart disease and atrial fibrillation.
Has a history of atrial fibrillation and medication is unknown. Have a history of gastric bleeding. Have a history of appendectomy.
Long term alcohol consumption, approximately 100 mL/d. Deny any history of infectious diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis, no history of trauma, no history of food or drug allergies, and no family history of hereditary diseases.
T 36.4 ℃, P 72 bpm, R 18 bpm, BP 145/72 mmHg. Clear consciousness, cooperative physical examination, clear respiratory sounds in both lungs, no dry or wet rales heard, heart rate 76 beats per minute, arrhythmia, atrial fibrillation rhythm. The abdomen is flat and soft, without tenderness or rebound pain, the liver and spleen are not large. There is no edema in both lower limbs. The muscle strength and tension of the limbs are normal, and the pathological signs are negative. Bilateral tendon reflexes exist symmetrically, without obvious sensory impairment, with a soft neck without resistance, and negative Kniger and Brucella signs on both sides.
Cardiac troponin I < 0.03 ng/mL; NT-proBNP: 4391.7 pg/mL.
After admission, a dynamic electrocardiogram showed: (1) Atrial fibrillation; (2) two hundred and thirty-seven premature ventricular contractions; and (3) four hundred and seventy-one long R-R intervals > 2.0 s, with a maximum of 3273 ms during the entire process.
Transthoracic echocardiography suggested: (1) Enlargement of the ascending aorta; (2) left atrial enlargement and right ventricular enlargement; (3) mild mitral regurgitation and moderate tricuspid regurgitation; and (4) arrhythmias.