We describe the case of a 63-year-old woman, affected by FBSS after L5 surgical arthrodesis, with chronic back and bilateral radicular pain, treated for several years with opioids, anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, and GABAergic drugs without clinical outcomes. She underwent two dorsal ganglion pulsed radiofrequency treatments with no durable results. In December 2019, spinal cord stimulation was performed on the patient with the implant of two electrodes. After three weeks of trial, a significant reduction in NRS (Numeric Rating scale), PCS (Pain Catastrophizing scale), and ODI (Oswestry Disability Index) allowed for an IPG permanent implant.
In the second decade of March, she had a fever, ageusia, anosmia, mild respiratory symptoms, dyspnea, and SatO2 95%; thus, she underwent a nasopharyngeal test that showed a positive SARS-CoV-2 infection. After 48 h of isolation therapy at home, only with oral hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/day, Azithromycin 500 mg/day, PEA 1200 mg/day, prednison 25 mg/die, and O2, her clinical conditions worsened, so she was recovered in a sub-intensive care unit where she was subjected to NIV-CPAP ventilation, with consequent optimization of respiratory parameters and improvement of SatO2 from 91% to 97%, and P/F ratio from 130 to 250 mmHg in four days. The most important variation in pharmacological therapy was the administration of Tocilizumab, 8 mg/kg EV bolus in 60 min, for IL-6 increasing in the blood (IL-6 48.3 pg/mL; normal values 0 - 5 pg/mL). After administration, she experienced mild hypertransaminasemia, which promptly returned to normal in four days. After five days, the patient continued therapy only with corticosteroids in isolation in a COVID-19 care unit. She never complained about any problems related to spinal cord stimulation, nor about her previous neuropathic pain, throughout the above-mentioned period.
Just 10 days after tocilizumab administration, the patient reported a new problem on the surgical pocket for the IPG. The pocket was warm, painful, and red, with no fluid to the touch . After a sonographic evaluation, tissue edema without evident effusion was detected. An immunological evaluation was performed, and after evaluating the risks/benefits of performing a biopsy or microbiological sampling, we decided to follow a conservative approach, with laboratory and clinical evaluation of the inflammatory pattern and empirical antimicrobial therapy. She was treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (800/160 mg.day) for seven days. Laboratory tests showed no serious alterations, except for these values: white blood cells (WBC) 12.06 103/µL, ESR (Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate) 60 mm/h, IL-6 4.2 pg/mL, and Procalcitonin < 0.0200 ng/mL. After seven days of antibiotic therapy (17 days after tocilizumab therapy), the pocket area appeared clear and not painful . A new sonographic evaluation of the pocket did not show clear images possibly related to infections and/or fluids.