A 52-year-old male with no past medical history presented to our emergency department (ED) for right-sided buttock pain that started in the middle of the night. He also described dysuria, which progressed to perianal burning associated with an episode of diarrhea and right-sided buttock pain. His pain was severe in nature, waxing and waning and non-radiating. The patient reported freshwater cave diving in north-central Florida 15 hours prior to onset of symptoms. He reported diving to a depth of 100 feet with a slow assent. He experienced no adverse symptoms and reported feeling normal prior to going to bed the night before.
On initial examination, the patient was tachycardic with a heart rate of 109 beats per minute. Remaining vital signs were within normal limits, including a temperature of 37.1° Celsius. He appeared in distress secondary to pain. His skin was pale and diaphoretic. His abdominal exam was benign without tenderness to palpation, rebound or guarding. There was tenderness to palpation over the right buttock approximately halfway between the posterior superior iliac spine and ischial tuberosity. No obvious wounds or traumatic injuries were present, and there was no erythema, warmth or swelling to indicate cellulitis or abscess. Repeat vital signs approximately 3.5 hours after initial evaluation remained unchanged with the exception of a rising temperature to 37.9°C.
Labs in the ED were significant for white blood cell count (WBC) of 22.7 thousand per millimeter3 (K/mm3) (reference 4.5–11 K/mm3) and lactic acid of 4.8 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.4–2.0 mmol/L). Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 16 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (7–18 mg/dL), and creatinine (Cr) was 1.32 mg/dL (0.60–1.30 mg/dL). Urinalysis was significant for small protein mg/dL (reference: negative); small ketones mg/dL (reference: negative); large leukocyte esterase (reference: negative); too numerous to count per high power field (HPF) WBCs (reference: 0–5 per HPF); 30–40 per HPF red blood cells; and moderate hemoglobin (reference: negative).
Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was obtained given concern for abdominal, pelvic or lumbar etiology of the pain and demonstrated “hazy inflammation involving the prostate, rectosigmoid colon and seminal vesicles, which likely represents a prostatitis with possibly associated proctitis. The seminal vesicles also appear inflamed.” The patient received a 30 milliliter per kilogram (mL/kg) normal saline fluid bolus and intravenous cefepime. He was admitted to the inpatient service for continued treatment of sepsis likely secondary to prostatitis/colitis. Urology was consulted as an inpatient.
On day one of hospitalization, he developed acute urinary retention requiring Foley catheter placement. Prostate-specific antigen returned elevated at 8.36 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (reference 0.0–4.4 ng/mL) and urine cultures grew Aeromonas hydrophila/A caviae. Urine culture was unable to provide further speciation distinguish between Aeromonas hydrophila and A caviae. Cefepime was continued for four days based on antibiotic sensitivities with significant clinical improvement. The Foley catheter was removed on day three and the patient was able to void successfully. His WBC count improved to 5.9 K/mm3, BUN was 7 mg/dL, and Cr was 0.92 mg/dL. He was discharged on day four with ciprofloxacin 500 milligrams (mg) twice a day for two weeks.