A 26-year-old man with unremarkable medical history presented with an abnormal shadow on routine chest radiography . Computed tomography (CT) showed herniation of a large volume of the omentum to the left thoracic cavity through an orifice in the left dorsal diaphragm . This was consistent with a diagnosis of Bochdalek hernia.
Despite being asymptomatic, the risk of incarceration of the prolapsed organs still exists. Hence, hernial repair was planned. A combined laparoscopic and thoracoscopic approach was preoperatively selected due to the large volume of the prolapsed omentum and the possibility of adhesion to the left thoracic cavity.
During the surgery, the patient was placed in the right semi-lateral position. Four trocars were placed: (1) one 12-mm trocar at the navel, (2) one 12-mm trocar at the left abdomen, (3) one 5-mm trocar at the epigastric region, and (4) one 5-mm trocar at the left 7th intercostal space mid-axillary line . The pressure in the abdominal and thoracic cavities was maintained at 10 mmHg. On laparoscopy, the omentum prolapsed into the left thoracic cavity through the hernial orifice at the dorsolateral diaphragm . On thoracoscopy, there was no adhesion seen on the omentum in the thoracic cavity and the hernial sac .
The omentum was laparoscopically drawn out from the thorax to the abdominal cavity with simultaneous observation by thoracoscopy . The hernial orifice was estimated to be 4 × 3 cm in size . After moving the omentum, the orifice was laparoscopically closed by direct sutures using 3-0 V-Loc (Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) and 2-0 Prolene for reinforcement (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) . The intraperitoneal pressure was reduced to 5 mmHg and there was no air leakage found from the sutured part. A 16-Fr chest drain was inserted via the left 7th intercostal space mid-axillary line. The operating time was 66 min and the total blood loss was 1 g. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 6th day after surgery. No recurrence was observed one year after the surgery .