A 4.5-year-old Caucasian boy without a previous medical history presented to the pediatric outpatient clinic of a local hospital with a fever of 40.1 °C without clear focal symptoms. He was reported as being less active. He refused to walk and reported mild myalgia, but did not complain about joint pain. His parents reported that he had had a painful throat 2–3 weeks prior to presentation. At that time, no doctor was consulted. Two weeks prior to presentation his parents noticed peeling of the skin on his fingers, which recurred 1 day prior to presentation. A timeline of this case is shown in Table . Our patient was vaccinated according to the Dutch National Immunization Program.
A physical examination at presentation revealed a left-sided torticollis and edema of both hands and feet. Our patient was irritable, without clinical sings of meningitis. The rest of his physical examination, including an inspection of his ears, nose, and throat, was normal. His vital signs were normal. An ultrasound evaluation demonstrated bilateral enlarged cervical lymph nodes, not noted on palpation during the physical examination. Because lymphadenopathy of a bacterial origin was suspected, treatment was started with an intravenous course of amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and diclofenac. A blood test revealed an anti-streptolysin O titer of 7590 U/ml, suggestive of a prior streptococcal infection. Despite this treatment, his fever persisted. Owing to the combination of fever, edema of hands and feet, mild conjunctivitis, cervical lymphadenopathy, and irritable behavior, Kawasaki disease was considered and he was referred to our university hospital for further evaluation 3 days after presentation.
On cardiac ultrasound evaluation, no involvement of his coronary arteries was observed. A biochemical evaluation showed an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (127 mm/h) and low CRP (9 mg/l). Although our patient did not meet the diagnostic criteria for Kawasaki disease, given that his fever had only persisted for up to 4 days, he was treated twice with 2 g/kg bodyweight of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) for possible incomplete Kawasaki disease. Treatment with IVIG, however, did not result in clinical improvement. The enlargement of his cervical lymph nodes decreased over time as evaluated by ultrasonography.
Our patient then developed migrating joint pains in his neck, arms, and legs 8 days after presentation. Diclofenac, but not acetaminophen, was effective in treating these arthralgias. Diclofenac treatment (12.5 mg thrice daily) was started 9 days after presentation and his arthralgia resolved within 2 days of treatment. He also developed finger contractures: both active and passive straightening were affected. Furthermore, an antalgic gait was observed. He did not have any clinical signs of arthritis. During his hospital stay, our patient developed hypertension (highest blood pressure 130/93 mmHg; above the p90 for sex and age). Because he did not improve clinically over time and no infectious cause could be identified, an autoimmune disease or a malignancy with paraneoplastic arthralgias was considered. Results of laboratory investigations are shown in Table . To exclude a possible malignant cause or to detect any infectious or autoimmune focus, an FDG-PET/CT scan was performed.
Increased FDG uptake was observed in multiple large joints, without profuse effusions on the low-dose CT , and in multiple tendons, such as the tendons of the distal tibialis anterior and the ischiopubic ramus . These findings suggested active polyarthritis and polytendinitis. Furthermore, the FDG-PET/CT showed multiple bilateral metabolically active cervical lymph nodes, probably due to a previous upper respiratory tract infection . A diffuse, slightly increased FDG uptake in his spleen was observed, possibly in the context of an inflammatory response. A long, stretched FDG uptake in the medial part of his right lower leg was due to FDG stasis after intravenous injection at that site.
Subsequently, our patient was referred for ultrasound evaluation of all joints because of the discrepancy between the findings in the physical examination (no arthritis) and on the FDG-PET/CT (polyarthritis). This ultrasound examination (with power Doppler), however, did not show hydropses, synovitis, or other signs of arthritis in any joint. The dermatologist was involved during admission because our patient showed minimal petechiae in the popliteal area. No skin biopsy was performed at that time.
Treatment with diclofenac led to clinical improvement. Without establishing a diagnosis, our patient was discharged on diclofenac treatment thrice daily. Evaluation at our outpatient clinic the next week revealed the presence of multiple purpura on his lower limbs and buttocks. These skin lesions had been present for 1 day. A skin biopsy, taken from an area with active lesions on his lower leg, showed a leukocytoclastic vasculitis with positive IgA depositions, which confirmed the diagnosis of Henoch-Schönlein vasculitis.
The day after his visit to the outpatient clinic, our patient presented with bloody stools and abdominal pain. An abdominal ultrasound did not show any signs of invagination or thickened intestinal walls. His arthralgia and antalgic gait were still present. Owing to the severity of his clinical symptoms (pain and bloody stools), treatment with prednisolone was started and diclofenac was discontinued. Results of a urine evaluation at that time were normal. Our patient improved rapidly after starting prednisolone treatment; the dosage was therefore lowered 10 days later. After 15 days of treatment, our patient was free of symptoms. One month later a relapse in joint pain and abdominal pain occurred and he developed renal manifestations (hematuria and proteinuria). The dosage of the prednisolone was increased again. Finally, prednisolone treatment was stopped 2.5 months after starting, when our patient was completely free of symptoms.