In October 2017, a 47-year-old man had presented to a local hospital with cough and weight loss. He tested positive for HIV and a chest CT scan indicated a cavity in the right upper pulmonary lobe (Additional file ). His CD4+ T cell count was 78 cells/μl and his sputum smear was negative for tuberculosis. He was diagnosed as HIV positive with tuberculosis infection (smear negative) and started antiviral therapy with tenofovir, lamivudine and efavirenz after 2 weeks of anti-tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide.
In December 2017, the patient presented to the same hospital after having urinary retention for 2 weeks. He had no other symptoms such as headache, fever or cough. His prostate was found to be enlarged, and the doctor suggested continuing anti-tuberculosis treatment and inserted a urinary catheter to relieve the patient’s urinary retention. Given that the urinary retention had deteriorated for two weeks before this visiting, the doctor uggested the patient attend the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University for better solution. After admission, physical examination revealed no significant clinical findings except for the presence of the urinary catheter. The sputum culture, smear and interferon-γ release assay were all negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Lumbar puncture indicated a nearly normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile and the CSF was negative for cryptococcal antigen, so urinary retention as a result of central nervous system infection seemed unlikely. A CT scan indicated a cavity with effusion in the upper right lung . Bronchoscopy was performed, and a lateral flow immunoassay and culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were both positive for Cryptococcus neoformans. Enhanced MRI of the prostate revealed an abnormal patchy signal in the central gland of the prostate that was isointense on T1-weighted imaging (WI), high intensity on T2WI, and no signal on diffusion-weighted imaging. The signal of T2 W1 was reduced in the seminal vesicles and peripheral zone of the prostate, and T1 W1 in the peripheral zone was enhanced . An haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain of the ultrasound-guided prostatic biopsy showed granulomatous inflammation; periodic acid–Schiff staining of the biopsied tissue was positive, Mayer’s Mucicarmine stain was negative, Gomori-methenamine silver staining was positive, and Ziehl-Neelsen staining was negative . Culture of the prostatic tissue grew Cryptococcus neoformans. The patient was diagnosed with AIDS with pulmonary cryptococcosis and cryptococcal prostatitis. Oral voriconazole (200 mg bid) combined with oral flucytosine (100 mg/kg/d) for 2 months and then oral fluconazole (600 mg/d) for maintenance treatment for 4 months that relieved the cryptococcal prostatitis and urinary retention (Additional file ).