A 65-year-old female patient consulted our neurologist and complained of slow movement for more than four years and bending while walking for more than one year.
The disease began in 2017. The initial manifestations of the disease were slow mobility, resting tremors in the right lower extremity, strained face, and shouting while sleep. Additionally, there was no noticeable loss of smell or apparent constipation. She went to the local hospital for treatment. Physical examination showed "face stereotyped, no joint action reduction, forward gait, right lower extremity resting tremor, and muscle tone is indicating lead-pipe rigidity". The electromyography results showed that “the 4-Hz group discharge position could be seen when the right tibial anterior muscle was resting”. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging revealed paraventricular white matter ischemia on both sides, and the patient was diagnosed with PD. The physician administered 375 mg of madopar orally each day. The patient then reported that the effect began 30 min after taking it, lasting 3 h each time. Two years prior during consultation, the right finger flapping test and bilateral leg flexibility test scores were low, and the muscle tone of the right limb increased. Furthermore, the posterior pull test was three steps back, and the Hoehn-Yahr (HY) stage (off-stage) was 2.5. Pramipexole was added to control the symptoms of PD. After six months of regular administration, the above symptoms were not significantly relieved. Selegiline and amantadine were added at the second visit. No obvious side effects were observed during drug administration. The patient reported that the phenomena of dropping her head and bending her waist while walking or standing disappeared when lying down one year ago. During the course of the disease, the duration of the drug effect gradually extended to approximately 1 h. At present, the patient can still walk. However, when she walks, she bends over and drops her head more substantially than before. Before she was admitted to our hospital, she was treated with madopar (500 mg/d), pramipexole (1.5 mg/d), amantadine (0.2 g/d), or selegiline (10 mg/d). Since the onset of the disease, the patient has had a normal mental state and sleeps regularly. She has had no considerable change in weight. Furthermore, she urinates and has bowel movements.
She denied a history of a similar disease. She described lumbar interbody fusion and posterior pedicle screw internal fixation for lumbar spondylolisthesis in 2016 and provided us with a full spine X-ray (see Figure ).
The patient had no family history of PD.
The patient had clear speech and few facial expressions. Executive neurological function tests were good. We used the Graded Manual Muscle Test (GMMT) to evaluate patient trunk strength. Upper and lower extremity muscle strength were graded as 5, cervical extensor 1+, rectus abdominis 2, abdominal internal and external oblique muscle 3, lumbar back muscle strength 1+, and bilateral gluteus muscle strength 1+. Muscle tone increased in the right extremity, and resting tremor was observed in the right lower extremity. There were no abnormalities in the depth or superficial sensation of either limb. The bilateral finger-nose test and heel-knee-tibia test were stable. The bilateral Babinski sign was negative. The sitting balance was graded as level 3, and the standing balance was graded as level 2. The trunk was bent forward while walking during postural gait examination. The swinging action of both upper limbs was reduced.
The HY stage was grade 3 (off-stage). The CC severity score was 14/32 points. The BBS was 21/56 points. The MBI score was 89/100 points. The patient needed moderate assistance while walking up and down stairs. The Lawton IADL score was 16/27 points. The rehabilitation physician and physiotherapist evaluated the gait and recorded three periods of step frequency, step length, step width, and stride length. We analyzed the improvements in these parameters through this process and through horizontal comparisons with standard values. We used the Neuro Posture App to measure the forward flexion angle of the patient's spine according to the methods used in the literature.The AC angle was 98.2°, the upper CC was 71°, and the lower CC was 62°. Chasing and scanning in vision function was normal. There was a compensatory saccade in the head-shaking experiment, which showed abnormal vestibular function.
No evident abnormalities were detected.
The anterior-posterior/lateral X-ray findings were unremarkable.