A 31-month-old girl was admitted to our pediatric emergency room because of fever and a skin lesion in her the left axillary region. The patient’s mother suggested that she might have bitten by a mosquito 2 days previously. Her initial vital signs were stable: blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, heart rate 100 bpm, body temperature 37.6°C. She complained of pain in the axillary area, and her level of consciousness was alert. She appeared dehydrated and slightly subdued. A full blood count on admission demonstrated a total white blood cell count of 3,400/ μL and a neutrophil count of 329/ μL. Her medical history revealed that she had been hospitalized several times because of pharyngitis and bronchiolitis. Most of these admissions lasted fewer than 6 days. Unusual neutropenic events were noted during her previous hospitalizations, which raised the suspicion of CN. A pediatrician recommended a further evaluation to confirm this diagnosis, but her parents refused.
She was hospitalized, and both antibiotics (piperacilin plus tazobatam) and fluid therapy were commenced to treat the suspected cellulitis. Within 8 hours, however, she had deteriorated, requiring inotropic support and intubation for the management of respiratory failure. At that point, the patient was referred to a pediatric surgeon for a consultation regarding the axillary legion.
On physical examination, the lesion was swollen, edematous, and showed crepitant skin with a bluish area at the center . With a diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis, extensive surgical debridement was undertaken. During surgery, massive debridement of necrotic tissues and copious irrigation were performed, combined with the application of external drainage catheters . Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus hominis were isolated from exudates of the wound, and P. aeruginosa was isolated from the blood as well. In the intensive care unit, she was managed with broad-spectrum antibiotics (cefepime with imipenem) and parenteral nutritional therapy. The isolated Pseudomonas was resistant to ampicillin and cephalosporin, but susceptible to imipenem. Staphylococcus hominis was resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics and susceptible to vancomycin. The antibiotics were changed to vancomycin with imipenem according to the antibiotics sensitivity report of these organisms.
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was also administered because of the strong suspicion of underlying CN. The neutropenia normalized 2 days after the G-CSF treatment. She underwent daily surgical wound debridement and irrigation to control the source of infection. The sepsis was not controlled, moreover, the inflammation spread to her chest wall and neck area. Computed tomography 5 days after the initial surgery showed diffuse swelling of the left lateral chest wall and axilla, indicating further spread of the inflammation . Five days after the initial treatment, we applied negative-pressure wound therapy (V.A.C., KCI, San Antonio, TX, USA) after surgical debridement . The negative pressure was gradually increased to 100 mmHg, and the wound dressing was changed every 3 days. Several days later, her clinical symptoms dramatically improved, and she was transferred to the general ward. Granulation tissue grew so rapidly that she did not require mesh grafting or skin grafting to repair the wound . One month after admission, she was discharged with a completely recovered wound.
Considering her past history and clinical course, her underlying disease was suspected to be CN. Serial measurements of absolute neutrophil counts for hospitalizations, including laboratory data from the outpatients department, showed neutrophil count oscillations with a 21-day periodicity and neutropenia at the nadir of the cycle. We evaluated the patient to rule out other diseases that cause severe neutropenia. Laboratory tests for immunologic, hematologic and other genetic disorders were performed with no abnormal findings. Therefore, we recommended that her parents to take a family consultation for genetic analysis. The family history revealed that her mother had suffered from recurrent infections and was diagnosed with CN 4 years previously at another hospital. In addition, her grandmother died in her fourth decade as a result of a presumptive diagnosis of hematologic malignancy. The patient’s ELANE gene was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction analysis and direct sequencing. A heterozygous sequence variation was noted in exon 4 of the ELANE gene at codon 125 (c.373G > T, p.Gly125Trp). After a genetic analysis, the same mutation was detected only in her mother . This variation was not found in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) .