A 33-year-old male presented to our hospital reporting impaired vision in his right eye.
The patient reported no accompanying symptoms such as headache or eye pain and had no known disease. He denied rheumatic immune disease; infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome were excluded by routine examination after admission.
Unremarkable.
The patient denied a family history of genetic disease, had no history of pet feeding, eating raw meat, working in a farm or slaughterhouse, and no family history of Toxoplasma infection. His parents were not consanguineous.
No anterior segment abnormalities were found on slit lamp examination. Under the ophthalmoscope, vitreous hemorrhage and off-white raised retinal lesions were observed below the right optic disc. Proliferative membranes on the lesion surfaces resulted in superficial retinal detachment and tortuosity and occlusion of peripheral blood vessels. A horseshoe-like tear in the temporal periphery was surrounded by retinal detachment.
On ophthalmic examination, the patient’s best corrected visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, and intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye (1 mmHg = 0.133 kpa). The patient underwent vitrectomy on his right eye on January 5, 2022. During the procedure, vitreous fluid was collected to test for the following pathogenic microorganisms: Bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and other pathogens (including mycobacterium and mycoplasma/ chlamydia). Test results were negative. Other cytokines and antibodies were detected in vitreous fluids . Interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-6 were in the normal range, with only a slight increase in IL-8, excluding uveitis. Basic fibroblast growth factor (which can stimulate cell mitosis and promote collagen production in fibrocytes) and its receptors are present in proliferative vitreoretinopathy, proliferative membranes and vascular endothelial cells. In this case, increased BEGF content in vitreous fluid corresponds to the formation of proliferative film on the lesion surface. Vascular endothelial cell adhesion molecules are associated with blood-eye barrier breakdown, and moderately elevated titers indicate moderate intraocular tissue edema.
Fundus photography of the right eye showed vitreous hemorrhage and off-white elevated retinal lesions just below the optic disc, with irregular edges protruding into the vitreous cavity. Proliferative membranes observed on the surface of the lesions had resulted in superficial retinal detachment and tortuosity and occlusion of peripheral blood vessels. A horseshoe-like tear about 1 disc diameter in size was seen in the temporal peripheral retina, surrounded by a small area of retinal detachment . Optical coherence tomography revealed retinal thickening at the focal site with retinal structural disturbances indicated by areas of high and low reflectance . Color ultrasound of the right eye showed retinal thickening at the lesion, stretching and uplifting of the proliferative membrane, moderate strength patchy echo at the edge of the optic disc, and sound shadow behind the echo . Twelve days after the surgery, fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) was performed and revealed vascular lesions of about 1.5 disc diameters below the optic disc of the right eye, with surrounding pigment disorder and atrophy, twisted blood vessels below the optic disc and fluorescence leakage. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed persistently low fluorescence below the optic disc . These features led to the diagnosis of CHRRPE.