A 14-year-old boy (height, 124 cm; weight, 25.2 kg) with GSD Ia was scheduled for a maxillary cystectomy under general anesthesia. He exhibited no abnormal physical and mental development except short stature; however, but had frequent epistaxis. To prevent hypoglycemia, he had been taking, in addition to his three regular meals, frequently a formula for GSD treatment (low-fat milk with lactose and fructose removed) and uncooked cornstarch, except during sleeping. Preoperative chest radiography showed an elevated diaphragm because of hepatomegaly. Laboratory data were remarkable for aspartate aminotransferase of 94 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase of 98 IU/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase of 154 IU/L, triglyceride of 1203 mg/dL, and total cholesterol of 272 mg/dL.Infusion of 5% glucose solution was started 21 h before surgery through his peripheral vein, with 1.3 mg/kg/min of glucose, which was increased to 4 mg/kg/min before 9 h of surgery when preoperative fasting was initiated. Blood glucose level before entering the operating room was 119 mg/dL .
After entering the operating room, an infusion of Ringer’s acetate solution containing 5% glucose, corresponding to glucose 3.3 mg/kg/min, was initiated. Anesthesia was induced with remifentanil, thiamylal, sevoflurane, and rocuronium, followed by orotracheal intubation, and maintained with sevoflurane and remifentanil. Blood gas analysis immediately after anesthesia induction revealed severe lactic acidosis with pH of 7.194 and lactate of 7.5 mmol/L, which was not corrected by infusion of sodium bicarbonate or an increase of glucose infusion rate to 6 mg/kg/min. Intraoperative ventilation was set in the pressure-controlled ventilation mode with a tidal volume of 170–300 mL, peak inspiratory pressure of 15–17 cmH2O, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, and rate of 12–16/min in the head-down position. Arterial carbon dioxide tension was 45–52 mmHg. On completion of surgery, the tracheal tube was removed after full recovery from anesthesia, and the patient was transferred to the ward.
Once in the ward, glucose was continued at 4 mg/kg/min. Two hours after surgery, in addition to glucose administration, he resumed intake of uncooked cornstarch and the special formula. Thereafter, the glucose dose was gradually decreased. Immediate postoperative blood gas analysis showed improvement in acidosis. Lactate levels rose to 12.5 mmol/L on the morning of the first postoperative day but then gradually decreased. No hypoglycemia was observed in the postoperative period.