A 72-year-old man was incidentally diagnosed with a 7-cm retroperitoneal mass immediately behind the IVC and bilateral renal veins by CT and visited our institution. He had no history of hypertension or subjective symptoms and no family history.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a hypervascular tumor located immediately behind the IVC and bilateral renal veins, on the ventral side of the right renal artery and on the right side of the abdominal aorta .
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a heterogenous retroperitoneal mass with high intensity on the T2-weighted image, and a paraganglioma was suspected. Hormonal study revealed urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine levels of 4.89 mg/day (reference range, 0.04–0.18 mg/day) and 4.11 mg/day (reference range, 0.04–0.28 mg/day), respectively.
123I-MIBG scintigraphy showed a high level of accumulation in the retroperitoneal mass . On the basis of the above results, we diagnosed the tumor as a paraganglioma.
For preoperative preparation, doxazosin was gradually increased to 16 mg in an attempt to increase the circulating blood volume.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed in the left lateral decubitus position. Port placement is shown in Figure . After mobilizing the ascending colon and duodenum, the tumor was found to be squeezing the IVC from the posterior side .
After detaching the tumor from the lower side of the liver, the tumor was dissected from the right renal vein, left renal vein, right kidney, and abdominal aorta, respectively. No adhesion was present between the liver and right adrenal gland or between the liver and tumor. The right renal vein and left renal vein were secured with vascular tape to avoid injury. At this time, we identified two drainage veins from the tumor flowing into the IVC and cut it. While the abdominal aorta and tumor were being separated, two arteries supplying the tumor were observed and cut with a sealing device. When all these dissections were completed, the mobility of the tumor increased and dissection from the IVC became possible.
While dissecting the tumor from the IVC, the latter was squeezed to the left side by an assistant using gentle manipulation. After release of the tumor from the IVC, it became possible to flip the tumor from the head side. The right renal artery was then recognized on the back of the tumor, and the tumor was finally completely removed from the surrounding tissue . The intraoperative blood pressure transiently increased to 180/60 mmHg, but this was not sustained, and no hypertensive crisis occurred. All other circulatory parameters were stable. The operation time was 231 min, estimated blood loss was 200 mL, and the weight of the removed tumor was 61 g.
The tumor cells showed strong positive immunohistochemical staining with chromogranin and synaptophysin, and the sustentacular cells at the periphery of the zellballen stained with S100. These findings were compatible with the characteristics of paraganglioma. The tumor cells showed intermediate cellularity, and the Ki-67 labeling index was 1–2%. Thus, the Grading system for Adrenal Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma score was 2.
No perioperative complications occurred. The urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine levels normalized after surgery. No obvious recurrence was observed 1 year postoperatively.