We report the case of a 2-year-old Hispanic girl with HI/HA (OMIM 606762) who presented at 2 months of age with a history of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), patent foramen ovale, peripheral pulmonic stenosis and dysmorphic features. She was the product of an uncomplicated pregnancy and born at 39 weeks’ gestation by vaginal delivery with a birth weight of 1.9 kg (<first percentile) and a length of 42.18 cm (<first percentile). She had a wide anterior fontanel, widely spaced nipples, posteriorly rotated and low-set ears, poorly defined philtrum, blue sclera and double posterior hair whorls. A chromosomal microarray analysis (Affymetrix 6.0) revealed a normal female with a high density of noncontiguous regions of homozygosity. She had multiple short runs (1 to 10 Mb) of allele homozygosity throughout the genome, consistent with limited outbreeding . Her family history was unremarkable except that consanguinity was suspected as both parents were from a small village in Mexico.
At 8 months of age, she was admitted to our hospital with new onset seizures. Her seizures were described as episodes of unresponsiveness and staring. She had associated cyanosis with most episodes and body stiffness occurred with some episodes. An electroencephalogram showed poorly organized and slower than expected for age cerebral activities, and epileptic discharges in her left centroparietal region. The findings were consistent with encephalopathy and indicated predisposition for partial onset seizures. A non-contrast brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities or pathology.
She was found to be hypoglycemic (39 mg/dL). Her hypoglycemia workup revealed an insulin level of 6 μU/mL (relatively elevated for a blood glucose of 44 mg/dL), negative urine ketones, low beta-hydroxybutyrate, and hyperammonemia (150 to 200 μmol/L). She was managed with dextrose and required a glucose infusion rate >8 mg/kg/minute. She was given a trial of Buphenyl (sodium phenylbutyrate), but her ammonia did not normalize and she remained asymptomatic for hyperammonemia. HI/HA was suspected and sequencing of her GLUD1 was ordered. Initially, her hypoglycemia responded well to 10 mg/kg/day of diazoxide, and her seizures were controlled with levetiracetam. She was discharged home on a protein-restricted diet, and she was referred to the state’s Early Steps program for evaluation of developmental delay. Results from the GLUD1 sequencing showed a C to T mutation at position 1519 resulting in an amino acid change of histidine to tyrosine at position 507. This mutation has not been described previously in the literature; however, it was predicted to be deleterious by SIFT and PolyPhen-2.1.0 programs. Parental DNA testing confirmed the mutation to be de novo, supporting the diagnosis of this autosomal dominant metabolic disorder. Functional studies of the gene were not performed as we thought that the patient’s phenotype (HI/HA) would only be possible if said mutation was in fact deleterious.
At 18-months old, she presented to our emergency department for seizures and hypoglycemia (19 mg/dL). In our hospital, she did not respond to diazoxide and required a high infusion rate of dextrose administered intravenously to maintain a normoglycemic state. She responded to an increase in diazoxide to 15 mg/kg/day, given as a fractional dose every 8 hours. She continued to have hyperammonemia but was asymptomatic. She remained non-responsive to dietary management.
Global developmental delay was apparent. She sat at 8 months, started walking at 30 months, and at 30 months she vocalized but spoke no specific words other than “mom” and “dad”. She was also having behavioral problems: hitting and biting. She is currently on a regimen of a protein-restricted diet, diazoxide 15 mg/kg/day, and phenobarbital 8.5 mg/kg/day. She has had recurrent hypoglycemia, particularly during intercurrent illness. She was started on cornstarch, without improvement in her blood glucose levels. Noncompliance was ruled out by measuring her diazoxide level. Nifedipine 0.5 mg/kg/day divided three times daily was added with some improvement in her hypoglycemia. The dose has recently been increased to 0.8 mg/kg/day. Somatostatin analog therapy will be considered if higher doses of nifedipine are not tolerated and hypoglycemic episodes persist.