A 47-year-old male patient presented for his first coronary allograft vasculopathy surveillance angiogram after undergoing an orthotopic heart transplant with bicaval anastomosis 14 months prior. He had undergone routine EMB as part of his cellular rejection surveillance, with his last biopsy being 5.5 months prior to the current evaluation. At his current presentation, he had no complaints and was without functional limitations, and the physical exam was unrevealing.
The patient was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in childhood and had failed medical therapy and progressed to end-stage heart failure complicated by severe pulmonary hypertension requiring transplantation. In the immediate perioperative period, he underwent repair of the superior vena cava-right atrial anastomosis following the development of super vena cava syndrome due to central venous catheter-associated superior vena cava thrombus. Following hospital discharge after his transplant, he had been doing well. His immunosuppressive regimen was a combination of mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus since transplant, with regular monitoring of his levels. He did not have any angina, heart failure symptoms, or arrhythmias. He took all of his medications including his immunosuppressive regimen without major adverse effects.
As part of routine institutional post-transplant rejection surveillance, he had undergone regular EMB with a 9-Fr Scholten Novatome (Scholten Surgical Instruments, Inc., Lodi, CA, USA) without any complications (see Timeline). There was no obstruction at the level of the previous superior vena cava-right atrial anastomosis repair, and therefore biopsies were done predominately from a right internal jugular vein approach, with two performed via right femoral vein access based on operator preference. Pathology did not reveal any acute cellular rejection in any of the biopsy samples in the immediate post-operative period. His last biopsy was 9 months post-transplant and did show mild focal acute rejection (Grade 1A/1R); however, his immunosuppressive regimen was not changed, and there was preserved allograft function at this time. There had been no immediate complications following any of the previous biopsies, and post-operative echocardiography was routine. During each biopsy, up to eight specimens were obtained from the interventricular septum using fluoroscopic guidance and provocation of premature ventricular contractions to ensure a septal location for each biopsy. Pathology from all specimens revealed myocardial tissue and no samples contained adipose tissue or fibroadipose tissue consistent with an epicardial site of biopsy, nor were there were any reports of vasculature within the pathology specimen. There had been some biopsy specimen that showed signs of the previous biopsy.
Prior to transplant, there was no known coronary artery disease of the allograft, and at transplant, the specimen showed no disease nor coronary calcifications.
The patient underwent a scheduled coronary angiogram, which revealed an aneurysmal, dilated left anterior descending artery (LAD) with evidence of fistula formation to the right ventricle (RV) in the mid-segment . The left circumflex and right coronary arteries were free of coronary artery disease.
Following the angiogram, a right heart catheterization was performed, which showed a superior vena cava oxygen saturation of 70%, a right atrial oxygen saturation of 70%, and a right ventricular oxygen saturation of 84.5%. The aortic oxygen saturation was 97.8%. A step-up in oxygen saturation from the right atrium to the right ventricle confirmed the diagnosis of a left-to-right fistula into the right ventricle, and Qp:Qs was 1.4. Computed tomography coronary angiogram confirmed the diagnosis of an aneurysmal LAD with an LAD-RV fistula.
Given his lack of chest trauma, normal coronary arteries in allograft prior to transplantation, and multiple previous biopsies taken from the interventricular septum, it is exceedingly likely that the fistula is a late sequela of repeated endomyocardial biopsies.