A 29-year old male Caucasian patient presented with delusions of persecution and reference, auditory hallucinations, and negative symptoms, including avolition, flat affect, and social withdrawal (and symptom-duration of more than 3 months), and was diagnosed with paranoid-hallucinatory schizophrenia (ICD-10: F20.0). The patient had a previously unremarkable medical history and no history of substance abuse. The childhood developmental stages had been uneventful, but since adolescence he had been increasingly introverted and socially insecure. At the age of 29 years, he reported having had no previous relationships or sexual experiences. There were no psychiatric or neurologic diseases in the family history. On neuropsychological assessment, he presented mild cognitive deficits (i.e., impairment in concentration, attention, working memory, and executive function). A thorough diagnostic workup, including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), cerebrospinal fluid analysis, electroencephalography, hematological investigations, and toxicological screening, was normal. The patient received antipsychotic treatment with risperidone (initially 5 mg/day orally, later switched to risperidone depot 37.5 mg/2 weeks intramuscularly). His symptoms improved rapidly, and at discharge, a complete remission of the psychosis had been achieved. Due to sleep disturbances, which the patient attributed to risperidone treatment, he decided to discontinue the medication directly after discharge. Seven months later, he was readmitted to the hospital with recurrent delusions of persecution, tactile, and visual hallucinations. Due to the severity of clinical presentation, he was administered haloperidol (20 mg/day orally), which led to complete remission of positive symptoms within 2 weeks. After thorough consideration of treatment options, a switch of treatment to olanzapine was decided (initially 15 mg/day orally, later switched to olanzapine depot 405 mg/4 weeks intramuscularly). In parallel to olanzapine titration, haloperidol was gradually tapered-off and eventually discontinued. One and a half months later, the patient was urgently admitted to the acute psychiatric ward with CSB having been charged with exhibitionism. Police records reported that the patient had sexually harassed several women in the preceding days (i.e., kissing them against their will or touching their genitalia). On admission day, the police reported that the patient had undressed himself and masturbated in public. On clinical examination, he showed uncontrolled sexual urges, overfamiliarity, and hypersexual behavior (e.g., with fixation on masturbation, sexual propositioning, harassment of non-consenting nursing and medical staff). Recurrent episodes of public exhibitionism were also recorded. Concurrently, he presented with disorganization, delusions of control (e.g., experiencing his body as being externally controlled) and delusions of telepathic communication skills, but no hallucinations were noted. There were no signs of akathisia. The patient had no prior arrests, indictments, or convictions, and his hypersexual behavior was in marked contrast to his premorbid personality of being shy and introverted. He reported having had increased libido and irresistible urge to masturbate during the preceding few weeks. There was no evidence of other substance abuse. The serum concentration of olanzapine was within the therapeutic range (29.1 μg/l). Because the CSB developed shortly after initiation of olanzapine, a causal relation to SGA treatment was suspected, and olanzapine was withdrawn. Treatment was changed back to haloperidol (20 mg/day orally) and initially supplemented with lorazepam (4 mg/day orally). Under this regimen, the hypersexual behavior diminished rapidly and disappeared after 1 week. The patient consented to rechallenge with risperidone (initially 5 mg/day orally, later switched to risperidone depot 37.5 mg/2 weeks intramuscularly), while haloperidol and lorazepam were tapered-off and eventually discontinued. Under treatment with risperidone, the patient developed a secondary hyperprolactinemia (prolactin 46.9 μg/l) and a decreased libido was suspected. To ensure treatment adherence, the combination of risperidone with low-dose aripiprazole (5 mg/day orally) was decided. Two weeks after initiation of aripiprazole, the patient presented with a severe CSB relapse with uncontrolled hypersexual behavior. Aripiprazole was immediately withdrawn and additive treatment with haloperidol (20 mg/day orally) and lorazepam (4 mg/day orally) was initiated. The hypersexual behavior diminished rapidly and disappeared after 1 week, while treatment was gradually changed to monotherapy with haloperidol (at discharge 75 mg/2 weeks intramuscularly with further scheduled tapering). The libido level of the patient remained normal, and no recurrence of psychotic symptoms was noted till his discharge from hospital, 5 months later.