A 15-year-old male presented to our outpatient department with complaints of multiple bony deformities, short stature, and difficulty in walking since childhood. His parents told that at the time of birth, there was a shiny adherent membrane all around his body which shed off over 2 weeks revealing reddish pink skin following which a frequent cycle of scaling and shedding of the skin occurred. Parents also noticed the development of multiple deformities involving all extremities and spine as he began to walk which worsened as the child grew. He was unable to walk long distances, play with friends and had to drop out of school due to the nature of deformities and poor cosmesis. The child was using skin creams and medications intermittently for skin condition. He has one sibling who does not have such complaints. He had not received any orthopedic management for correction of his skeletal deformities.
On physical examination, the child had a height of hundred and 22 cm and weight of 24 kg, both these parameters were below the third percentile of the Indian Academy of Pediatrics chart for height and weight for boys. Cognitive and speech functions were intact.
Examination revealed brown scales all over the body, including the scalp, flexural surfaces, and external auditory meatus. The scales were large in size and odorless, adherent to the skin. Thin hair was noted on the scalp with entangled fine scales. Abnormal dentition and missing teeth were also noted. There was fixed kyphoscoliosis with convexity to the right side. The right forearm showed bowing and the right upper limb appeared “S” shaped. Pronation and supination were severely restricted on the right side due to old malunited fracture in the forearm. There was anterior bowing of the right femur and lateral bowing of the left femur as well as anterolateral bowing of bilateral tibia and lateral dislocation of the right patella . Plain radiographs showed multiple bony deformities in the lower limbs . Skin biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of lamellar ichthyosis. Oral Vitamin D supplementation was started at 5000IU daily dose along with oral calcium supplementation , oral tretinoin and topical emollients were given for skin disease.
Once biochemical parameters were normalized, he was planned for a staged correction of all lower limb deformities to prevent postoperative infection due to poor skin condition. We first performed a right-sided distal tibia corrective osteotomy. As there were no immediate signs of surgical site infection with good healing of surgical wound, after 1 week a right-sided supracondylar femoral osteotomy was done. Following this procedure, the patella spontaneously relocated. A third osteotomy procedure was performed after 3 weeks for correction of the left distal tibia. We followed standard pre and post-operative protocol for all procedures. All surgical sites healed without any complications and at 6 weeks follow-up assisted walking was started as the osteotomy sites were uniting on radiograph .
We continued Vitamin D supplementation on a monthly basis. At 18 months follow-up, we observed improved gait mechanics, decreased pain and fatigue while mobilizing. His scaling and cosmetic appearance also improved and biochemical parameters were within normal limits .