We present the case of a 31-year-old male who underwent mitral valve repair, tricuspid valve repair, and atrial septal defect (ASD) closure using bovine pericardium in the setting of alpha-gal syndrome. Patient consent was obtained.
The patient presented for evaluation of three months of worsening dyspnea on exertion, weakness, and fatigue. His medical history is significant for an allergy to beef and pork, lyme disease, cardiomegaly, and a heart murmur. He was admitted and underwent an extensive cardiac workup which showed severe mitral regurgitation with mitral valve prolapse and a large atrial septal defect (ASD) with dilated cardiac chambers and signs of pulmonary hypertension . A CT coronary angiogram revealed no obstructive coronary disease and cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for consideration for surgical mitral valve repair and ASD closure. Operative planning for this patient included a possible replacement with a bovine or porcine prosthesis in the event that mitral repair was not possible. It also included ASD closure with a bovine pericardium in the event that the pericardium was not usable.
Additional consultation was therefore obtained from the allergy/immunology team due to the patient’s beef and pork allergy. The patient denied a history of anaphylaxis to meat. His reported symptoms following red meat consumption were pruritus and facial redness. Pre-operative serum testing included serum IgE, alpha-gal, beef, pork, and lamb IgE. The results were 182 kU/L (ref: ≤ 114 kU/L), 1.71 kU/L (ref: <0.10 kU/L), 0.62 kU/L (ref: <0.10 kU/L), 0.20 kU/L (ref: <0.10 kU/L), and < 0.10 kU/L (ref: <0.10 kU/L), respectively. To ensure that the patient was not allergic to heparin, testing was also performed on the specific heparin lot to be used during the surgery. Heparin skin prick testing was negative, as well as the intradermal testing in 1:1000, 1:100, and 1:10 concentrations. The allergy specialist therefore recommended pre-medication with diphenhydramine 50 mg, fexofenadine 360 mg, prednisone 60 mg, famotidine 40 mg, and montelukast 10 mg the night before and one hour before surgery. The patient was then taken for surgery and underwent mitral valve repair, tricuspid valve repair and ASD closure.
During the operation and upon entry into the thoracic cavity, the patient’s own pericardium was noted to be inflamed and thickened which deemed it not usable as a patch. A decision was made to proceed with using a glutaraldehyde-fixed bovine pericardial patch to close the ASD instead, due to its availability, an adequate premedication regimen, and assessment of a clinically mild alpha-gal allergy. The patient was placed on CPB after administration of 23,000 units of heparin and an activated clotting time (ACT) greater than 480 s. The mitral valve was repaired using a 34 mm physioII annuloplasty ring (Edwards Lifesciences Corp, Irvine, CA, USA) through the opening of the large ASD. The ASD was then closed using a 3 × 2 cm bovine pericardial patch (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA) and the tricuspid valve repaired using a 28 mm physio tricuspid band (Edwards Lifesciences Corp, Irvine, CA, USA). Postoperative TEE showed no residual mitral regurgitation and no flow across the atrial septum . The patient was successfully weaned from CPB and his heparin was reversed with protamine.
The postoperative period was complicated by bleeding from the patient’s chest tubes requiring take back to the operating room after which he recovered well and was discharged home on postoperative day four.
On his follow up one year following surgery, the patient continued to do well. He has not had any allergic sign or symptom and his follow-up echocardiogram revealed an improved EF, stable mitral repair with no regurgitation. The ASD patch was in an appropriate position with no evidence of dehiscence or degeneration on echo. . Testing for alpha-gal IgE 15 months after surgery showed an elevated value of 7.59 kU/L.