A 64-year-old woman who had been diagnosed with pulmonary valve stenosis (PVS) in childhood underwent open surgical commissurotomy and infundibulectomy at the age of 35. Significant residual pulmonary regurgitation (PR) was documented at follow-up. After remaining asymptomatic for years, she was referred to our centre following rapid progression of exertional dyspnoea and recent onset of effort-related chest pain.
Physical examination revealed good general condition, mild hypertension (147/81 mmHg), heart rate of 80 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation of 98%. There were no signs of heart failure and the cardiovascular examination showed a short, low-pitched diastolic murmur over the left upper sternal border.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, right bundle branch block, and frequent supraventricular premature complexes. A chest X-ray revealed signs of dilated right heart and a prominent PA .
Our differential diagnosis included progressive PR with right ventricular (RV) failure, RV restrictive physiology with diastolic dysfunction, exercise desaturation in the presence of a patent foramen ovale, progressive PH with RV failure, and LMCA or compression of the left mainstem bronchus by PA dilatation.
To evaluate these potential diagnoses, we first performed an echocardiogram that showed moderate right ventricle and atrial dilatation with normal RV systolic function (TAPSE of 19 mm and fractional area change of 43%), significant PR with diastolic retrograde flow from the main PA, pressure half-time of 209 ms and a PR index (ratio of PR duration/diastole duration) of 80%, normal RV outflow gradient (see , Videos S1 and S2), mild tricuspid regurgitation with an estimated RV systolic pressure of 34 mmHg, and a normal-sized inferior vena cava. No evidence of RV restrictive physiology was observed.
We then performed cardiopulmonary exercise testing. The patient did not develop any symptoms and oxygen saturation remained constant throughout the test, but functional capacity was poor, achieving 1.2 METS. Age-predicted maximal heart rate attained was 65%, and percent-predicted peak oxygen consumption was 23%. During the test, she developed frequent exercise-induced ventricular premature beats. Consequently, we performed a 24-h Holter monitor, which showed frequent atrial and ventricular premature beats and a short run of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) .
We next performed a coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) to evaluate potential mechanical complications caused by PA dilatation. No compression of the left main bronchus was seen. Coronary artery anomalies and significant coronary artery disease were ruled out. However, the CCTA showed extrinsic compression of the proximal segment of LMCA caused by an enlarged PA (60 mm diameter in systole) , and a takeoff angle of the LMCA of 26° (defined by a line parallel to the border of the left coronary sinus and a line parallel to the LMCA) . A coronary angiogram confirmed the diagnosis and the right-sided heart catheterization showed normal PA pressure (see , Video S3).
The patient underwent surgical PAA repair along with pulmonary valve replacement with a conduit constructed intraoperatively composed of a 25 mm bioprosthetic Carpentier-Edwards valve within a Dacron tube graft. As complete decompression of LMCA was visually documented intraoperatively, coronary revascularization surgery was unnecessary. Intraoperative findings showed a thickened, trileaflet pulmonary valve, and the anatomopathological examination of the PA wall showed changes suggestive of cystic medial necrosis.
A second CCTA, performed 2 weeks after surgery, showed the PAA had decreased in size and LMCA compression had disappeared . An exercise stress test performed 4 months after surgery showed functional capacity had improved, and no ventricular premature beats were observed. Over a 9-year follow-up, the patient has remained asymptomatic and functional capacity is good.