A 55-year-old man was involved in a helmeted “all-terrain vehicle” (ATV) roll-over accident. He had a loss of consciousness and a prolonged extrication, since his body was pinned to the ground by the ATV. The patient was found to be comatose and in respiratory arrest, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3. He was endotracheally intubated at the accident scene and transferred to a local hospital in the Rocky Mountain region. On arrival, he was found to be hypotensive and tachycardic, with a blood pressure of 82/54 mmHg, a heart rate of 136 bpm, and SO2 of 96% (on 100% FiO2). The initial laboratory work-up showed a hemoglobin level of 8.2 g/dL, INR of 1.2, PTT of 30.1 s, pO2 of 35 mmHg, base excess of 1.1 mEq/L, and lactate of 1.6 mmol/L. Chest radiograph revealed bilateral pneumo-hemothoraces, which were managed by placement of bilateral chest tubes, prior to airlift evacuation to our level 1 trauma center. After initial assessment and management by ATLS® protocol in our emergency department , the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for ongoing resuscitation and ventilatory management. After radiologic workup by conventional films and “total body” computed tomography (CT) scan, the patient was diagnosed with the following injury pattern :
Severe chest trauma with bilateral “flail chest” with serial segmental rib fractures (C1-8 on right side, C1-10 on left side), bilateral pulmonary contusions, and bilateral hemo-pneumothoraces, a displaced transverse sternum fracture with 3 cm diastasis, bilateral midshaft clavicle fractures, and an unstable T9 hyperextension injury.
The unstable T9 fracture was associated with a chronic hyperostotic ankylosing condition (“diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis”; DISH) of the thoracic spine, as revealed in the sagittal CT scan reconstruction . An MRI of the T-spine was obtained to further assess for an associated disc or ligamentous injury, and to rule out the presence of an epidural hematoma, any of which may alter the surgical plan and modality of spinal fixation or fusion.
After resuscitation in the SICU, and adequate thoracic pain control by epidural anesthesia, the patient was taken to the OR on day 4 for fracture fixation. A decision was made for surgical fixation of bilateral clavicle fractures, the sternal fracture, and the T9 spine fracture, in order to achieve adjunctive stability of the thoracic cage and to allow early functional rehabilitation without restrictions. The patient was placed on a radiolucent flat-top operating table in supine position. The technique of positioning, preparation and draping, aimed at addressing both clavicle fractures and the sternum fracture in one session, are depicted in Figure .
The bilateral comminuted clavicle fractures were fixed through an S-shaped subclavicular approach, using two 10-hole 3.5 mm reconstruction plates (Synthes, West Chester, PA), which were applied in bridging technique . This was followed by a median approach to the transverse sternal fracture. The sternum had a diastasis of about 3 cm through which the mediastinal fat pad and pericardium was evident . The video clip in the Additional file shows the beating heart behind the sternal fracture. A 2.5 mm unicortical hole was drilled on each side of the fracture, to allow placement of a pointed reduction tenaculum for anatomic reduction of the sternal fracture . The fracture was then fixed with two 8-hole 3.5 mm third-tubular locking plates (Synthes), using unicortical locking head screws. This technique was used to avoid screw penetration across the far cortex, with the risk of a delayed arrosion of the pericardium .
After wound closure, the patient was carefully log-rolled into a right lateral decubitus position on a pre-positioned beanbag, for operative fixation of the unstable T9 vertebral fracture. Two-level spinal fixation from T8-T10 was performed using a titanium locking plate system (THOR™, Stryker, Allendale, NJ), through a less-invasive postero-lateral approach, as previously described . A tracheostomy was performed in the same session, due to the requirement of prolonged ventilation in the SICU. The postoperative chest radiographs demonstrates the plate fixation of bilateral clavicles, sternum, and thoracic spine . The patient tolerated the surgical procedures well and remained hemodynamically stable throughout the case. He was weaned from mechanical ventilation, and the chest tubes were appropriately removed. The patient was transferred to an acute rehabilitative facility on postoperative day 16.
The patient was readmitted three weeks later, 6 weeks post injury, for acute fever, chills, and night sweats, in conjunction with increased oxygen requirement. A right-side chest drain was placed which showed purulent drainage, and the patient was diagnosed with a pleural empyema, likely related to a retained hemothorax. He underwent a video-assisted thoracoscopic pleural decortication. Two 32 French pleural chest drains were placed intraoperatively. The patient recovered well from the procedure, and he was treated with adjunctive antibiotics. The chest drains were removed prior to discharge within a week of surgery.The patient was discharged home in good condition.
All surgical wounds healed uneventfully, and there were no further complications. Within three months after the accident, the patient had returned to exercising without restrictions and was able to hike a mountain with altitude above 14,000 ft, with minimal subjective shortness of breath. At 6 months follow-up, X-rays revealed a fully healed sternal fracture, T9 vertebral fracture , and bilateral clavicle fractures . The patient had a full range of motion in bilateral shoulders and in the T- and L-spine, and a normal neurovascular status in all four extremities. He was released to full activity without restrictions, and scheduled to follow-up as needed.