A 3.5-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was referred for investigation of
a 6 month history of progressive weight loss (40% from 2 years prior) and marked
polyphagia. Hunting and eating of prey, and scavenging of human food (meat, fruit,
vegetables), including from refuse and directly from the owner, was a feature.
Vomiting was infrequently reported, comprising foam or liquid. Faeces were reported
to be normal, and there was no history of flatulence or borborygmus. Other than
altered appetite, the cat’s behaviour was considered to be normal. The cat had
limited outdoor access and was fed a complete commercial dry diet (Iams Adult with
Chicken; Procter & Gamble). The cat was fully vaccinated and had received
anthelmintic treatment (unknown product) within the 6 month period prior to
referral.
The cat had a prior history of osteopenia resulting in femoral and vertebral folding
fractures at 6 months of age. The cat was managed with a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory (meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg q24h PO [Metacam 0.5 mg/ml oral suspension
for cats; Boehringer Ingelheim]; discontinued after 3–4 days once comfortable),
exercise restriction, and calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation (elemental calcium
120 mg/kg, cholecalciferol 2 µg/kg [Pet-Cal; Pfizer]; discontinued after 6 months).
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism was excluded as a cause of the osteopenia;
however, dietary information was not available at that time and full
characterisation of the underlying aetiology was not performed. No further skeletal
problems were reported.
On presentation the cat was quiet, alert and responsive. General clinical examination
revealed markedly reduced body condition (score 2/9; weight 1.83 kg) with poor
muscle mass, and palpably small kidneys. The remainder of physical examination,
including assessment of the mucous membranes, eyes, skin and coat, was unremarkable.
On abdominal palpation no discomfort was noted and the intestines were
unremarkable.
Routine haematology and serum biochemistry revealed: a mild normochromic–normocytic
anaemia; a mild mature neutropenia and eosinopenia; mild azotaemia; moderate
hypoproteinaemia due to mild hypoalbuminaemia; marked hypokalaemia; and a mild total
hypocalcaemia with normal ionised calcium levels ( and ). Serum folate and cobalamin analysis
revealed a normal folate level and a marked hypocobalaminaemia. Coagulation
assessment was unremarkable . Urinalysis revealed a urine specific gravity of 1.020, a mild
proteinuria, and small numbers of erythrocytes, scant leukocytes and bacteria noted
on sediment examination; however, urine bacterial culture was negative .
Abdominal ultrasonography (Siemens Acuson S2000 using a 14L5 linear transducer)
revealed marked changes to the gastric fundus (ventrally), body and pylorus . The dorsal part of
the fundus appeared normal. The mucosa was markedly thickened (up to 14 mm; normal
overall gastric wall thickness reported to be 1.7–3.6 mm) and contained multiple 2–3 mm diameter, round, anechoic cyst-like structures.
The gastric submucosa, muscularis and serosa were normal in appearance. The stomach
was devoid of content, with a collapsed lumen and no evidence of rugal folds. Both
kidneys were small (left 27 mm; right 31 mm [normal 30–45 mm]), slightly irregular in outline and contained multiple small calculi. The
remainder of the abdomen was unremarkable.
Following correction of the hypokalaemia with potassium-supplemented intravenous
fluid therapy (compound sodium lactate, with additional potassium 60 mmol/l; 4
ml/kg/h), an exploratory coeliotomy was performed. The gastric wall was visibly, and
palpably, extremely thickened and irregular . No gross lesions affecting the
liver, spleen, pancreas, intestines, kidneys, lymph nodes or omentum were observed.
Full-thickness gastric, duodenal, jejunal and ileal biopsies were collected for
histopathological analysis. The small intestine was biopsied with a 3 mm punch,
closing with a single layer of PDS sutures. An incisional biopsy of the stomach was
performed, removing a single 1 cm2 section, closing with a double layer
of polysorb. Both the small intestinal and stomach biopsy sites were
omentalised.
During recovery (1 h postsurgical closure) the patient developed severe hypotension,
hypothermia (34°C) and severe anaemia, which was refractory to crystalloid and
colloid fluid boluses, ephedrine, norepinephrine and type-matched whole blood
transfusion. The cat was subsequently euthanased owing to further decline in its
condition. The owner declined a post-mortem examination.
The predominant histopathological finding was of gastric mucosal hypertrophy , with variable,
often marked, dilatation of some gastric glands affecting various levels of the
mucosa. These dilated gastric glands were lined by poorly differentiated cuboidal
cells; other gastric glands were normal or atrophic. In one area of marked glandular
change there was mild interstitial fibrosis and inflammation, with infiltration by
small numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells. In other areas of mild interstitial
inflammation there was atrophy or loss of glandular tissue. Occasional small
clusters of lymphocytes and plasma cells were present in the superficial lamina
propria adjacent to relatively normal mucosal tissue. The superficial gastric pits,
muscularis and serosa were normal. There was no evidence of neoplasia. Small
intestinal histopathology was unremarkable.