A 75-year-old Caucasian man was referred for consideration of systemic therapy after being diagnosed with HCC. Prior to this diagnosis, he had been fit and well. Past medical history was notable for type 2 diabetes mellitus diagnosed a year earlier, for which he took metformin. He initially presented jaundiced, which cleared spontaneously. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ECRP) was normal. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated three large liver lesions, with the largest measuring under 5 cm in diameter, biopsy of which confirmed HCC.
He was well with performance status (PS) 0, and a Child-Pugh score A, AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) 604 ku-L. His BCLC staging was B (Intermediate). A study of sorafenib versus placebo was discussed with our patient and he was entered into the trial in September 2005. He was started on a trial medication at a dose of 400 mg twice a day. The initial side effect experienced was grade I diarrhea managed with loperamide. CT scans a month into treatment demonstrated stable disease. Our patient was reviewed monthly. He remained well with stable disease. Nine months after commencing therapy he presented with a rash. This was initially a dry scaly, itchy rash, showing signs of early lichenification, mainly over the lower half of the abdomen . It gradually spread from the trunk to the arms within six weeks, and became pustular. Topical emollients were commenced with onset of the rash but their effect remained moderate after four months. At this point the rash flared up with some multiple ulcerations over the trunk and arms .
He was reviewed by a dermatologist and a working diagnosis of eczematous drug reaction was made. Biopsies were taken and the histology was reported as being in keeping with a drug reaction . Our patient was prescribed Fucibet cream (containing betamethasone 0.1%, fucidic acid 2%) to be applied twice daily for a week. The rash improved on subsequent reviews.
Fourteen months after commencing treatment (November 2006) our patient presented with a further rash of common toxicity criteria (CTC) grade 2 over his trunk and limbs. Study medication was stopped at that point. Four weeks later the rash had resolved so the trial medication was recommenced at a reduced dose of 400 mg daily. Our patient remained stable on monthly reviews. Four months later he developed a similar rash as previously; pruritic, mainly on the trunk, but worse on the back. Dermovate (clobetasol propionate 0.05%), diprobase creams and Piriton (chlorphenamine) provided little relief so the trial drug was suspended. Within two months the rash resolved but our patient was not recommenced on trial medication. In spite of that, he again presented a new rash two months later (four months after stopping trial medication). A dermatologist suspected nodular prurigo. Biopsies were taken of the new rash. Histological findings were consistent with nodular prurigo. This was managed with 1% menthol in aqueous cream and 1:4 betnovate ointments and the rash improved to CTC grade 1.
On the 2nd August 2007 our patient agreed to resume treatment with sorafenib at a dose of 400 mg on alternate days. The rash continued to improve and completely resolved by 30th June 2008 . His latest CT scans at that time continued to show stable disease, almost three years after commencing treatment.