A 53-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) of a district general hospital having deliberately ingested ∼200 berries from the European yew tree. Her past medical history included depression (treated with olanzapine) and two previous episodes of deliberate drug overdose with suicidal intent. She was brought to the hospital by ambulance having informed her family of the overdose. She denied co-poisoning.
On arrival at the ED, she had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 12 and was agitated and combative. Her chest was clear on auscultation. Her distal limbs were ice cold on palpation. Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring showed rapid cycling between a bizarre irregular rhythm with broad slurred QRS complexes which likely represented atrial fibrillation with abnormal ventricular conduction and ventricular tachycardia with a pulse (with variable rates from 130 b.p.m. to 210 b.p.m.—), interspersed with short episodes of asystole (during one episode, she received 20 s of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)—terminated due to signs of life). Non-invasive blood pressure was recorded as 50/30 mmHg.
An initial venous blood gas revealed metabolic acidaemia (pH 7.31, H+ 48.5 nmol/L, HCO3− 20.5 mmol/L), hyperlactataemia (lactate 4.9 mmol/L), and hypokalaemia (K+ 3.1 mmol/L).
A focused bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed chaotic biventricular activity with occasional ejection (as assessed by pulsed-wave Doppler in the left ventricular outflow tract—), a competent aortic valve and mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation with no pericardial effusion. Following admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) a PiCCO line (Edwards Lifesciences, CA, USA) was inserted, and cardiac output was estimated at 1.5 L/min using a bolus thermodilution method.
The patient was discussed with a consultant toxicologist at the National Poisons Information Service and a consultant electrophysiologist at a local tertiary cardiology centre. Initial management in the ED focused on anti-arrhythmics (summarized in the Timeline); however, this was challenging given the patient cycled between tachy- and bradyarrhythmias, with a resultant heart rate at times as low as 13 b.p.m.
Intravenous adrenaline was administered in 5 mcg boluses to support her blood pressure until a noradrenaline infusion was established via central venous access.
The regional ECMO service for respiratory failure in adults was contacted for consideration for the initiation of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) with V-A ECMO. A retrieval team were promptly dispatched. The patient was initiated on V-A ECMO in the ICU using a 21 Fr multistage drainage cannula sited in the femoral vein and a 15 Fr return cannula sited in the femoral artery. The patient was slim with excellent sub-costal windows for TTE, therefore a sub-costal bi-caval view was used to ensure correct guidewire placement. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation commenced ∼6 h after the patient first presented to our hospital.
Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation resulted in an almost immediate improvement in systemic blood pressure, allowing for discontinuation of vasopressor support and a degree of cardiac rhythm stability. She was transferred to the regional ECMO centre for ongoing management.
For the first 48 h following ECMO initiation, arrhythmias continued, including periods of asystole. A TTE at the time showed left ventricular impairment with biplane left ventricular ejection fraction of 49% and regional wall abnormalities including hypokinesia of the anterior septum. Coronary angiography was performed, revealing unobstructed coronaries. After 4 days of V-A ECMO, the TTE was entirely normal, implying recovery of cardiac function and she was weaned from MCS. She was repatriated to her local hospital and weaned from mechanical ventilation on day 7.
She remained stable and following assessment by psychiatric services and initiation of ongoing community mental health follow-up she was discharged home 12 days after presenting to the ED. She made a full recovery with no neurological deficit but required ongoing anti-coagulation due to a linear thrombus within the inferior vena cava, presumed to be related to the ECMO drainage cannula.