Written informed consent was obtained from the patient before publication of this case report.
A 45-year-old male (height, 168 cm; weight, 69 kg) presented to our neurology outpatient clinic complaining of an unknown-onset headache without a history of trauma. The headaches began in the morning. The pain, rated as 5 on the visual analogue scale (VAS), was in the fronto-occipital region and radiated to the posterior neck. Headache was described as a continuous dull ache, relieved by lying down and aggravated by sitting or standing. The patient experienced nausea and vomiting. Neurological examination revealed no focal neurological deficits. The subsequent laboratory tests revealed no significant abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain was performed to rule out cerebral hemorrhage, which revealed no significant abnormalities. With no specific findings, the patient was discharged and prescribed naproxen.
The following day, the patient presented to the emergency department with a worsening headache. The VAS score had increased to 7. A repeat brain CT scan was recommended; however, the patient declined further evaluation because he had an outpatient neurology appointment scheduled the next day and was discharged from the emergency department after receiving tramadol 50 mg intravenously.
The next day, the patient was admitted to the neurology outpatient department for reassessment and treatment of headache. A detailed post-admission questionnaire confirmed the patient’s history of lumbar disc herniation and that he had undergone repeated nerve block at a local pain clinic. In particular, he had last undergone a spinal pain procedure at the clinic 26 days before the onset of his headaches; he reported that it was uneventful and that he had no headaches or other abnormal symptoms after the procedure. However, it is unclear which spinal pain procedure the patient underwent. Based on the patient's statement that he received a single injection under C-arm guidance for the painful area (left) and the clinical context, it was assumed that he received a transforaminal nerve root block at the lumbar level. Laboratory tests performed after admission showed no abnormalities in C-reactive protein levels or white blood cell counts. For conservative management of the patient's headaches, bed rest and hydration with 0.9% saline 80 ml/h and oral acetaminophen/tramadol were prescribed.
However, the pain persisted, and the patient was referred to our pain clinic for further evaluation and management. Considering the patient's injection history and characteristic postural headache simultaneously, the possibility of PDPH was raised; however, given that the interval between the injection treatment and the patient's headache was 26 days, we considered the likelihood of a direct association between the procedure and headache to be low. Therefore, we initially considered the possibility of SIH and, performed a bilateral greater occipital nerve blockade, which is a good therapeutic alternative to improve headache resulting from SIH . The patient was referred for a spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and the need for EBP for persistent symptoms was explained to him. In the evening, the patient underwent MRI of the entire spine, which revealed extensive thickening and enhancement of the epidural space extending from the cervical spine to the sacrum, with concomitant engorgement of the epidural veins and a CSF leak in the left lateral recess at the L4/5 level around the L5 nerve root . The results showed a CSF leak at the left L4/5 level .
The following day, the patient underwent EBP at the pain clinic after providing informed consent for the procedure. Two sterile fields were created for the two operators, one for the blood draw and the other for the epidural procedure. An epidural needle was inserted at L4/5 interspinous space using the loss of resistance to saline to identify the epidural space. A syringe containing autologous venous blood was drawn by a second operator using aseptic techniques. Finally, 15 ml of autologous blood was slowly injected through the epidural needle. Immediate and complete symptomatic improvements were observed after EBP. The postural headache improved from a VAS score of 7 to 0, and the patient was discharged the following day. The patient showed complete improvement with no headache at subsequent outpatient visits after 2 weeks