A 79-year-old man presented with upper abdominal pain. He was diagnosed with gastric cancer and referred to our hospital. Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an elevated tumor on the side of the lesser curvature from the middle of the gastric body to the cardia. The length was approximately 5 cm . Pathological examination of a biopsy specimen revealed moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) positivity. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a massive PVTT extending from the left gastric vein to the portal trunk (size: 28.7 x 16.9 mm) . There were no other distant metastases. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and alpha-fetoprotein levels were high, 108 ng/mL and 36 ng/mL, respectively. Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were normal. The patient had no liver diseases.
The treatment regimen mainly consisted of chemotherapy: capecitabine (3000 mg/body/day, oral, days 1–14, followed by 7 days of rest), oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2, intravenous, day 1), and trastuzumab (initial dose 8 mg/kg, subsequent doses 6 mg/kg, intravenous, day 1). After 3 cycles of the regimen, the primary gastric lesion was flattened and the PVTT shrank to 19.7 x 12.0 mm . Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed abnormal uptake only in the primary gastric lesion and PVTT . The therapeutic effect was evaluated as partial response (PR) according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1. 1. Since the patient experienced grade 3 anorexia and diarrhea based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 5.0 during the chemotherapy, it was hard for him to continue with this chemotherapy regimen. Therefore, after obtaining informed consent from the patient, robotic total gastrectomy with regional lymphadenectomy and thrombectomy was performed after the three courses of chemotherapy.
We used the da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Inc., CA, USA). Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in a head-up tilt position (15°). A 3-cm incision was made at the umbilicus and a wound retractor was placed. The first port (8 mm) for the camera was inserted through the wound retractor (Hakko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Five additional ports were inserted as follows: 12 mm port for the robot in the right hypochondrium, 12 mm port for the assistant surgeon in the right upper abdomen between the 12 mm port for robot and the umbilicus, 8 mm port for the robot in the left hypochondrium, 8 mm port for the robot in the left upper abdomen between the 8 mm port for the robot in the hypochondrium and the umbilicus, and 5 mm port for the assistant surgeon (AirSeal®, ConMed, Largo, FL, USA) in the epigastric region. The first, second, third, and fourth robotic arms were docked on the 12-mm right hypochondrium, camera, left upper, and left hypochondrium ports, respectively . Peritoneal and liver metastases were not detected. Intraoperative cytodiagnosis of ascites fluid was negative. Lymph node dissection was performed according to the criteria in the gastric cancer guidelines of the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association [, ].
We firstly start to perform lymphadenectomy at the lymph nodes along the distal portion of the stomach (no. 4sb, 4d, 5, 6) followed by resect duodenum. Next, the lymphadenectomy is performed at the left side suprapancreatic nodes (no. 7, 9, 11p, 11d). The dissection of the right side suprapancreatic nodes (no. 8a, 12a) are performed at the time of the thrombectomy.
Regarding thrombectomy, the common hepatic artery, proper hepatic artery, gastroduodenal artery, PV, superior mesenteric vein, and left gastric vein (LGV) were definitively identified and labeled with vascular tape . The precise extent of the PVTT, from the LGV to the portal trunk, was identified with intraoperative ultrasonography . After PVTT identification, the portal trunk was clamped above and below the tumor thrombus with vascular clips . The membrane on the anterior wall of the portal trunk around the LGV bifurcation was carefully incised with da Vinci Scissors. The incision was gradually extended along the tumor thrombus . The tumor thrombus was completely enucleated without separation . The incised part of the portal trunk was reconstructed with continuous 5-0 synthetic monofilament nonabsorbable polypropylene sutures . After removing the vascular clamps, we made sure there was no leakage from the PV and no tumor thrombus remnants with intraoperative ultrasonography .
After the thrombectomy and PV reconstruction, the lymphadenectomy of the paracardial nodes (no. 1, 2, 3, 4sa) are performed and resect the esophagus. Total gastrectomy and D2 lymphadenectomy are the same as previously described [, ]. After the resection of the stomach, it was removed from the abdomen along with the tumor thrombus.
Roux-en-Y anastomosis was performed. A side-to-side jejunojejunal anastomosis was created approximately 30 cm from the ligament of Treitz with the linear stapler. The entry hole for the jejunojejunal anastomosis was closed with a continuous 4-0 synthetic monofilament barbed suture. A side-to-side esophagojejunal anastomosis was created approximately 35 cm from the jejunojejunal anastomosis with the linear stapler. The entry hole of the esophagojejunal anastomosis was closed with the linear stapler . The total operative time and console time were 418 and 398 min, respectively. The estimated blood loss was less than 5 ml. The operation was performed by a surgeon (T.O.) who had experienced more than 100 robotic gastrectomies.
The patient resumed oral ingestion of water on postoperative day (POD) 2 and porridge on POD 3. Follow-up CT showed no PV obstruction. The drain tube was removed on POD 4. There were no complications. The patient was discharged on POD 9.
Pathological examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (solid type) with invasion of the subserosa, perigastric lymph node metastases, and PVTT . The effectiveness of preoperative chemotherapy was pathologically diagnosed as Grade 2a, which means viable tumor cells remained in 1/10 to less than 1/3 of the neoplastic area, according to the tumor response criteria in the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma [, ]. PVTT appeared resolved on CT . The patient had received trastuzumab, and no recurrence had been observed for 14 months after surgery. However, the lesion suspected of recurrence was detected at the dorsal side of anastomosis along the hemiazygous vein by CT and PET on the 14 months after surgery. Therefore, nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (nab-PTX) plus ramucirumab were given as the second regimen (nab-PTX, 80 mg/m2/day, intravenously, day 1, 8, 15; ramucirumab, 8 mg/m2/day, intravenously, day1, 15, followed by 7 days’ rest). He has been received nab-PTX plus ramucirumab and has remained alive for 30 months after surgery.