A 64-year-old man presented with dyspnea on effort. Cardiomegaly had been diagnosed 6 years previously, but had been left untreated until he became symptomatic. A chest X-ray film revealed a huge mediastinal tumor . Chest CT demonstrated a well-circumscribed mass in the anterior mediastinum measuring 36 cm × 18 cm × 10 cm that was compressing the lower lobe bilaterally. The tumor comprised mostly fatty tissue but contained two solid areas . The results of blood chemistry studies, including tumor markers, were within normal ranges. Percutaneous echo-guided needle biopsies of the lesion revealed that the fatty component was an atypical lipomatous tumor and that both solid components comprised necrotic tissue. Surgery was performed via a clamshell incision via bilateral fourth intercostal thoracotomies extending 20 cm from the midline and a transverse sternotomy. The internal thoracic arteries were ligated and divided in the process. A good field of view was achieved with the help of multiple retractors . The tumor was dissected off the pleurae, pericardium, and great mediastinal vessels and mobilized from the mediastinum. As expected, the left brachiocephalic vein was circumferentially surrounded by tumor and was resected en bloc. After resection of the left brachiocephalic vein, further mobilization of the tumor was achieved. The phrenic and vagus nerves were preserved bilaterally. After completion of resection, the collapsed lungs were re-expanded by positive pressure ventilation. Because pulmonary edema did not develop after re-expansion, steroid therapy was not required. The chest was closed with two chest drains, sternal closure using steel wires, and sutures for the spread intercostal spaces. The operation time was 223 min and the total blood loss 620 mL. The tumor weighed 3500 g and measured 36.5 cm × 18.5 cm × 10 cm . Histological examination revealed a biphasic tumor comprising grade III de-differentiated liposarcoma and non-adipocytic sarcoma according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of soft tissue tumors . The chest drains were removed on the 13th postoperative day after ensuring that the pleural effusions were resolving. Postoperative chest X-ray films demonstrated progressive re-expansion of both lower lobes, which had been collapsed preoperatively. The patient was discharged on the 21st postoperative day. Although left phrenic nerve paralysis persisted, his dyspnea on effort improved considerably. When last seen at his 20-month follow-up visit, he reported a good quality of life and there was no evidence of recurrence.