The patient, C. L., a 34 year old male, was a bricklayer born in Sicily (Southern Italy), but had lived in the province of Florence (Tuscany region, Central Italy) for the past 10 years. He was admitted in our ward following the ultrasonographic detection of a cyst-like ovular mass (13 × 8 cm) which contained several small cystic formations. The cyst was in the adductor magnus muscle of the left thigh, and it was later confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The patient had been complaining for approximately one month about a painful mass growing on his left thigh. Therefore, his physician prescribed imaging examinations, and eventually referred him to us. Our physical exam revealed a palpable mass with hard consistency, and no signs of erythema. The patient reported neither fever nor systemic symptomatology. The blood cell count was normal except for a relatively slight hypereosinophilia (white blood cells 6700/mmc, eosinophils 8.9%). Abdominal ultrasonography and chest X-ray were normal, and the serological tests for hydatidosis were negative (Echinococcosis IHA, Fumouze Diagnostics, Levallois Perret, France: 1:80, n.v. <1:160; Echinococcus granulosus IFA, Bios GmbH Munchen, Germany: negative). The same tests were repeated 10 days later and the results showed a weak increase in the antibody titre (IHA 1:320; IFA 1:40, n.v. <40). The patient was evaluated for, and then submitted to the surgical ablation of the lesion, while receiving chemoprophylaxis with albendazole 400 mg bid. Ten days after the surgical excision the patient stopped the perioperative prophylaxis. At a first glance, the excised material resembled a big cyst containing more than 60 translucent daughter cysts immersed in a clear liquid . The subsequent histopathological examination showed "an inflammatory tissue reaction surrounding a parasite-like cyst". Additional serological tests and bio-molecular diagnostics were then used to further examine the two available serum samples and the excised material respectively, with the aim to define the nature of the lesion. Enzyme immunoassay for specific IgG (EIA Echinococcus Ab, Cypress Diagnostics, Langdorp, Belgium) and reversed-enzyme-allergo-sorbent-test for specific IgE (REAST Allergyzen IgE, ZenTech, Angleur, Belgium) resulted positive only on the second blood sample. Whereas the Western Blot assay (WB), for specific E. granulosus proteins, corresponding to the band of 7 and 26–28 Kda (WB Echinococcus IgG, LDBIO Diagnostics, Lyon, France), resulted positive on both serum samples. As for the bio-molecular analysis, genomic DNA was extracted (Wizard SV Genomic DNA Purification kit, Promega, USA) from the cyst wall and from its liquid. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) protocol was applied which amplified a 373 bp fragment of the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene common to almost 12 Cestoda species, E. granulosus included . Amplification products were gel-purified (Immolase DNA Purification Kit, Bioline, UK), and sequenced (MWG-Biotech AG, Germany). The sequences obtained were assembled using the program MEGA 3.1 . A comparison with sequences available in the GenBank was made to identify genetic similarities with already known cestode sequences. Molecular diagnostics identified E. granulosus DNA, genotype G1 (98% homology). All five serological tests of the 8-week-after-surgery follow-up exam were negative. The patient underwent follow-up visits within the next 12 months without any occurrence of post-surgery complications.