In November 2009, a 25 years-old man, having situs inversus and suffering from mitral stenosis was referred to Chamran Heart Hospital for PTMC. The patient presented with shortness of breath NYHA class I. His initial examination findings were unremarkable. The left sided electrocardiograph (ECG) showed reduction in the R wave voltage across the chest leads . Moreover, this demonstrated an inverted P wave in leads I and aVL, an upright P wave and R wave in aVR. Chest x-ray showed dextrocardia .
Transesophageal and transthoracic echocardiography evaluation showed 0.6 cm of mitral valve area. Mitral Valve (MV) was dome shape and severely stenotic with mild mitral regurgitation (MR). He had Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) score of 8 and his pulmonary artery pressure was significantly dropped. Dextrocardia, arteio-ventricular (AV) and ventriculo-arterial (VA) were present. Right atrium (RA) and left atrium (LA) pressure was 12 and 45 mmHg, respectively. Moreover, normal left ventricular (LV) size and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of about 40% was revealed. Both groins were prepared for vascular access. Femoral arterial and venous punctures were made on the left side. However, the left femoral artery and vein were cannulated with a 5F arterial and 6F venous sheaths. A 5F pigtail catheter was passed retrograde into the aorta and taken to the left ventricle. No mitral regurgitation was seen. The pigtail catheter was then withdrawn and parked in the aortic root on the top of the aortic valve. A 0.032” guide wire was then passed up the femoral vein into the inferior vena cava (IVC) and up into the left sided superior vena cava (SVC) via the left sided ‘right atrium’. An 8 F Mullins sheath was passed up on the guide wire, into the left SVC. For septal puncture, the patient was imaged in left anterior oblique (LAO) 40° projection. The Brockenbrough needle was oriented to 9 o'clock position in the SVC. Septal descent was done by withdrawing the needle and the sheath in tandem into the heart with the needle pointer in 7–8 o'clock position. The puncture point was chosen to be the point one disc space below the horizontal line stretching across the lower level of the pigtail; and the point was roughly midway between the posterior wall of the LA and the imaginary line drawn vertically from the pigtail catheter's shaft. A ‘loopy’ wire was then passed through the sheath and the latter was withdrawn leaving the loopy wire inside. The 14F dilator was then used to make the entry point wider. The balloon was then threaded over the loopy wire to enter the LA. The balloon was flushed and simultaneous LA/LV pressures were taken. Now, the J-wire was used to guide the balloon into the LV. For withdrawing this balloon while still keeping the wire in the LA, the balloon shaft was cut 20 cm from the proximal hub and removed it without any hassle. No MR was documented by checking the LV angiogram.