A 36-year-old gravida 4 para 2-0-2-2 female, who had a history of ovarian cysts and cervical cancer with prior total laparoscopic hysterectomy without oophorectomy three months prior, presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of lower abdominal pain. The patient reported severe lower abdominal pain that started earlier that day after intercourse. The pain radiated to the right upper quadrant and was worse with deep inspiration. The pain was associated with nausea and vomiting. The patient denied any fevers, chills, chest pain, shortness of breath, dysuria, vaginal bleeding, or vaginal discharge. She had taken acetaminophen prior to ED arrival without any improvement. On presentation the patient was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 129/85 millimeters of mercury, a heart rate of 76 beats per minute, and temperature of 36.7° Celsius. Physical exam was significant for lower abdominal and right upper quadrant tenderness. A point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) of the right upper quadrant was performed initially, which revealed free fluid and an unremarkable gallbladder.
Given the presence of free fluid in the upper abdomen, and because the patient was a female of childbearing age who reported lower abdominal pain as well, the sonographer expanded the exam to evaluate the lower abdomen. In the right lower abdomen, a heterogeneous structure was visualized in the right adnexa surrounded by complex free fluid . Transvaginal POCUS was then performed showing a right adnexal echogenic structure with surrounding vascularity and complex free fluid concerning for a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. A beta human chorionic gonadotropin was ordered after performing the ultrasound given the high clinical suspicion for an ectopic pregnancy.
Laboratory values showed no evidence of anemia with a hemoglobin of 12.8 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 11.5–15.5 g/dL) and a mild leukocytosis of 12.4 kilo per microliter (K/uL) (3.8–10.5 K/uL). The human gonadotropin level returned at 173.2 milli-international units per milliliter (mlU/mL) (negative: < 5 mIU/mL). Obstetrics was consulted and took the patient to the operating room. The patient was found to have a ruptured right fallopian-tube ectopic pregnancy with approximately 200 mL of intraperitoneal blood. In the operating room she received bilateral salpingectomy with removal of the ectopic pregnancy. The patient had an uneventful recovery after the procedure and was discharged home the next day without further complications.