A 59-year old Vietnamese-born man received an ABO-incompatible orthoptic liver transplant for liver failure due to hepatitis B reactivation. Complications following transplant included acute kidney injury due to biopsy confirmed severe BK nephropathy of the native kidney with considerable interstitial inflammation. He had concurrent biopsy-proven cytomegalovirus colitis, and T-cell mediated rejection. Throughout the post-transplant course, relapsing normocytic normochromic anaemia occurred.
Diagnosis of biopsy-proven BK nephropathy occurred twenty-two months post-transplant with 754 976 copies/mL, which was previously reported in Transplantation . At diagnosis, creatinine was 297 mg/dL with an eGFR of 19 mL/min/1.73m2; and the haemoglobin was 73 g/L. After treatment of BK virus with reduction in immunosuppression and a 12-week course of cidofovir at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg, and treatment of CMV colitis with 7 days of intravenous ganciclovir followed by oral valganciclovir at a renally adjusted dose, haemoglobin improved to a baseline of 100 g/L. His renal function also improved to a creatinine of 220 mg/dL and eGFR of 27 mL/min/1.73m2, which has been sustained since.
Two months later, five doses of intravenous methylprednisolone were administered for biopsy confirmed mild acute T-cell mediated rejection, and tacrolimus was increased. Following this increase in immunosuppression, BK viraemia rose to 26 342 copies/mL and anaemia recurred with a haemoglobin of 60 g/L. His anaemia was treated with transfusion of one unit of packed red blood cells, and haemoglobin increment was sustained with a second course of cidofovir and commencement of monthly methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta. Mycophenolate was then changed to everolimus.
Our patient had a stable course for ten months, during which tacrolimus was ceased and mycophenolate was reintroduced to reduce the risk of calcineurin inhibitor nephrotoxicity.
Three years post-transplant, our patient was admitted after routine bloods revealed a haemoglobin of 38 g/L. There was a four week history of fatigue and shortness of breath, though no symptoms of blood loss. Examination did not show hepatosplenomegaly. The immunosuppressive regime was everolimus 2 mg bd and mycophenolate 1 g bd, and he remained on monthly erthropoietin stimulating agent. Investigations demonstrated no abnormality of other cell lines, and renal and liver function were at the patient’s baseline. BK viraemia had recurred at 12 700 copies/mL. There were no signs of haemolysis, myeloma screen was negative, CD59 + expression was normal, parvovirus IgM was negative and there was no CMV viraemia. Bone marrow biopsy showed moderately hypocellular bone marrow with moderately reduced erythropoiesis and mild dysplastic features, reduced granulopoiesis, and dysplastic megakaryocytes thought to be due secondary to either drugs, infection or inflammation. Retrospective staining for BK virus on the bone marrow aspirate was negative. The cytogenetics on the bone marrow were normal. The anaemia was treated with blood transfusion, four doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, and a third course of cidofovir, and continuation of erythropoietin stimulating agent. The haemoglobin incremented to 118 g/L and mycophenolate dose was reduced. On completion of this course of cidofovir, the haemoglobin was 121 g/L and BK titre reduced to 5980 copies/mL. BK virus quantification from transplant to present is seen in Fig. , and the relationship of BK viraemia following initial diagnosis to degree of anaemia is shown in Fig. .