A 19-year-old White Non-Hispanic female student with no underlying health conditions and no past psychiatric illness attending a Midwestern public university moved to campus on 17 August 2020 to begin the 2020–21 academic year. All students were required to take two saliva virus (PCR) tests weekly. The timeline of testing, symptom onset, isolation, and retesting is shown in Fig. . She had two negative results during her first 7 days on campus and first tested positive on 24 August with no symptoms. She isolated in an apartment with three female friends who also tested positive (creating an isolation “Pod”). During isolation (25 August–3 September), she reported mild physical symptoms consistent with viral infection (headache, aches and pains, fatigue, shortness of breath, chest pain, and diarrhea). She reported that her Pod peers experienced worse physical symptoms than herself. Her symptoms resolved by the end of isolation, and she resumed testing. She consistently tested negative twice weekly from 8 September until 5 October, when she received her second positive result. Two days prior to her second positive test, she began exhibiting many of the same symptoms she experienced with her first infection. Compared with her previously mild symptoms, her reinfection symptoms were moderate to severe and included more impacts (severe: coughing and loss of appetite; moderate: stuffy nose, fatigue, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and loss of sleep; mild: shortness of breath and difficulty thinking). She began self-isolation on 6 October (e.g., stopped sharing a bathroom with roommates) and isolated in a hotel 7–14 October. Her physical symptoms resolved during isolation except for a persistent cough.
The participant provided written consent to be part of this case study and for the findings to be published. The UIUC Institutional Review Board confirmed the case study status of this work.
Saliva for each test was collected via an observed self-collection, in which the participant would drool into a 50 mL conical tube. A direct saliva RT-qPCR process was used for detection . All positive samples were retested, and results were reviewed by laboratory personnel. Any positive results following isolation were also reviewed by the ordering physician to confirm reinfection as opposed to recurrent noninfectious positive results.
The interview was conducted via video conferencing by a trained mixed methodologist. A semi-structured interview protocol was used to ensure major topics were discussed including: timing of testing and positive results; degree of symptom severity (scale: none, slight/mild, moderate, severe, very severe) at first infection and reinfection; information sources; self, peer, and family members’ perceptions, attitudes, and behaviors; mental health concerns; and advice for peers, family members, older adults, health officials, and others. The 90-minute interview was audio recorded and transcribed.
The case study—an inductive qualitative analytic approach—is justified given the exploratory nature of this contemporary and real-time wicked problem [, ]. The goal of this case study is to describe and explain the lived experience of COVID-19 reinfection. A holistic analysis was conducted. First, the case context is described regarding chronological events. Then, themes emerging from the case are detailed. Last, the themes are interpreted, and parallels are drawn to other public health epidemics. Two researchers independently read the transcript and initially identified major and subthemes. Through an iterative process of reviewing summaries and discussions, the final version of themes and descriptions were agreed upon [, ].