We report a 63-year-old Caucasian man diagnosed with a tumor of the right side of the scrotum in September 2002. He was operated through an inguinal incision. The aspect and histologic pattern were indicative of a tubulopapillar, malignant and well differentiated mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis testis . Resection margins were invaded, thus a second surgical procedure was performed, with both a scrotectomy and an orchiectomy. A staging work-up, with thoraco-abdominal CT scan and standard blood chemistry showed no abnormality. The patient was then referred to our occupational medicine clinic. No exposure to asbestos was found, but he had a prolonged history of tobacco exposure for 30 years, until 1994. In August 2003, he experienced weight gain and generalized edema which regressed with furosemide and spironolactone diuretics. He was then referred to our institution for evolution of retroperitoneal lymph nodes on whole-body CT scan. The clinical examination was uninformative and there was no hypertension. The only abnormalities on the CT scan were 18 mm transversal inter aortico-cava and retro-cava lymph-nodes. Major biological abnormalities were seen in routine laboratory tests: low total serum protein (48 g/l), low serum albumin (9·7 g/l) and elevated cholesterol (5·59 g/l). However, serum creatinine was normal at 70 umol/l; liver enzymes, serum ionogram and triglycerides were within normal limits. Proteinuria was 9 g/24 hours without microscopic hematuria. The diagnosis of pure nephrotic syndrome led to performing a percutaneous renal biopsy in October 2003. It showed minimal change disease with neither immunoglobulins nor complement deposits . Other etiologies of nephrotic syndrome were eliminated: antibodies against hepatitis B and C viruses and against HIV, antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Serum levels of C3, C4 and CH50 were normal. Oral prednisolone administration was initiated at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. Furosemide was continued at a dose of 40 mg/day. His proteinuria disappeared in December 2003, so the prednisolone dosage was progressively decreased. While the nephrotic syndrome became controlled, retroperitoneal disease progressed both in size and localisation. A control CT scan performed in February 2004 showed increased lombo-aortic lymph nodes, with a suspicion of extension to the retrocrural area. A percutaneous retroperitoneal lymph node biopsy showed tissue invasion by mesothelioma. As the nephrotic syndrome was well controlled by treatment, the strategy was to perform radical bilateral retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. There was no peritoneal involvement. The histologic aspect was epithelioid mesothelioma with necrosis and invasion of both the capsule and small vessels. A recurrence of the nephrotic syndrome was observed 10 days after the surgery. Prednisolone was then increased to 1 mg/kg/day for 1 month, and then decreased to 0.75 mg/kg/day, and then 0.5 mg/kg/day to allow for postoperative healing. In May 2004, a CT scan showed a disease progression with suprarenal lymph nodes of 20 mm maximal diameter. A combination of cisplatin 75 mg/m2 and pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 was initiated. Six cycles were given from June 2004 to September 2004. In June 2004, the renal function was normal, with a normal proteinuria, total serum protein of 59 g/l and serum creatinine of 75 umol/l. A slow decrease in prednisolone dosage over 6 months was decided. In September 2004, an elevated blood pressure was observed for the first time (systolic at 150 mmHg and diastolic at 95 mmHg), and serum creatinine levels increased to 125 umol/l. This was attributed to cisplatin renal toxicity, and then prednisolone decrease was continued. In October 2004, the CT scan showed disease progression in the retroperitoneum; FDG-PET examination revealed a unique site of radio-isotope fixation on the eleventh dorsal vertebra. A percutaneous biopsy showed involvement of mesothelioma, but the histologic pattern of the lesion was undifferentiated. Radiotherapy on the lumbar area was then decided. In November 2004, the renal function was normal and the nephrotic syndrome did not recur while he was receiving a daily dose of 0.1 mg/kg prednisolone. In February 2005, he developed disease recurrence with ascites. Cytological examination of the ascites showed mesothelioma involvement. Performance status declined, palliative treatment was given and the patient eventually died of disease progression in March 2005.