A 67-year-old woman presented to our hospital with symptoms of progressive angina pectoris on exertion, which relieved with rest and with the use of sublingual nitroglycerine tablets. She was planned for elective CAG. She had a medical history of stable coronary artery disease. Seventeen years earlier a chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the intermediate branch, and generalized atheroma without substantial stenosis in the left anterior descending (LAD) artery were found during CAG. The right coronary artery (RCA) and the circumflex artery (CX) did not show abnormalities. The CTO was left untreated after dobutamine stress-echo was not suggestive for ischaemia. Furthermore, the patient had a history of Type 1 diabetes, hypertension, and adenocarcinoma of the left breast—adequately treated with subsequent lumpectomy, axillary node dissection, and chemo radiation. She was allergic to beta-lactam antibiotics and intolerant to statins. Neither the patient nor her family had a history of adverse reactions to iodinated contrast medium. Upon admission her prescribed medication included acetylsalicylic acid, atenolol, sublingual nitroglycerine, metformin, insulin, and anastrozole.
Prior to the current admission, a perfusion cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan was made to assess the potential amount of myocardial ischaemia. Left and right ventricular function and dimensions were normal with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 61% and mild hypokinesia at the apex and anterior wall. A perfusion defect in five segments of LAD artery was observed, without late-gadolinium-enhancement . Therefore, the patient was scheduled for elective CAG with the option for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
Upon entering the catheterization laboratory, the patient had a normal level of consciousness. Physical examination included a pulse rate of 84 b.p.m., blood pressure of 114/75 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 15/min, and 97% oxygen saturation. Cardiac and pulmonary auscultation was unremarkable. Pre-procedural electrocardiogram and laboratory results were normal. Estimated glomerular filtration ratio at baseline was 66 mL/min. A loading dose of 300 mg clopidogrel, 5000 international units of unfractioned heparin, and because of anxiety prior to the procedure, 2.5 mg of diazepam were administered prior to CAG. Contrast medium used during CAG was iodixanol, an iso-osmolar type of iodinated contrast (290 mOsm/kg H2O). CAG revealed a normal dominant RCA and a normal CX. There were serial severe stenoses of the proximal, mid- and distal LAD artery with an occluded second diagonal branch. The previously known CTO of the anterolateral branch could be observed with modest collateral filling from a small CX.
During the switch from diagnostic to guiding catheter, the patient showed a sudden decline in her level of consciousness. At that moment a total of 100 mL of contrast medium had been injected. No air embolus could be observed on CAG. She was unresponsive to verbal commands and painful stimuli, left-sided hypertonia of the arm was observed and there was a bilateral pathological plantar reflex. There were no jerks or twitches and the brainstem reflexes were unremarkable. Her blood pressure was 160/85 mmHg, and all other vital functions were normal, as well as the blood glucose level. An adverse reaction to diazepam could not be excluded, and therefore, 0.5 mg of flumazenil was administered, which did not improve the neurological state. An initial computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed right-sided hypodensities in the watershed regions, suggestive of ischaemia, which did not fully explain the neurological state . Computed tomography cerebral angiography showed a normal basilar artery, excluding brain stem stroke. For further observation and treatment, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). The snoring respiration continued at a rate of 20/min and with a decline in level of consciousness to a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3 a secure airway could not be guaranteed, and therefore, the patient was subsequently intubated. Four hours after the initial CT scan of the brain, a repeat scan now interestingly showed diffuse bilateral cerebral oedema with complete loss of gyral patterns. The acute onset of neurological symptoms after contrast medium administration and the diffuse cerebral oedema as seen on the CT scan led to the diagnosis of CIE.
At the ICU, the patient was deeply sedated with propofol and treated with loading dose of 50 mg of intravenous dexamethasone, followed by 8 mg of dexamethasone twice a day. Neurosurgical intervention was not deemed useful because the oedema was bilateral. Due to atypical jerking of the arms, brief treatment with levetiracetam was initiated, but the electroencephalography did not suggest epilepsy, so it was discontinued. One day later, a notable improvement with a decrease of cerebral oedema and no signs of ischaemia was seen on a repeat CT scan. Consequently, treatment with dexamethasone was no longer required, and therefore, discontinued.
After 58 h of coma, sedation was terminated and the patient showed marked neurological recovery. She remained somewhat bradyphrenic and disorientated and had a mild left-sided hemiparesis. She was transferred back to the cardiology ward.
In a multidisciplinary meeting with cardiologists and cardiac surgeons, a novel CAG or PCI was abandoned due to the preceding event with iodine-containing contrast media. Coronary artery bypass grafting was considered, but it was concluded that surgical intervention would not lead to complete revascularization and total relief of symptoms. Optimal medical treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy, captopril, metoprolol, isosorbide mononitrate, and ivabradine was continued. Contrast-induced nephropathy did not occur during hospital stay. The patient was discharged 23 days after the incident—including 4 days in the ICU—to a neurological rehabilitation centre. A follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain after 3 weeks showed complete resolution of all previous abnormalities, including the right-sided hypodensities, thereby excluding ischaemia . Upon follow-up in the outpatient clinic, there were no focal neurological deficits.