A 21 yrs old single, nulligravid lady presented with excruciating vulvar pain and swelling of 3 days associated with itching and difficulty of walking. She had also thick discharge from the site of the swelling, dysuria and frequency.
The lady noticed a progressively increasing vulvar swelling since 4 years before her current presentation which initially was painless. But since a year back she had had recurrent episodes of sudden increases in size of the swelling with itching and pain which were subsiding after spontaneous ulceration followed by extrusion of thick ‘sand-like’ discharge from the swelling. She used to take non prescription antibiotics from pharmacies.
The lady underwent circumcision (infibulation) at the age of 8 years. Her menstrual cycles were unremarkable. She had no abdominal pain or vaginal discharge. She had no history of genital trauma or any similar swellings in other body parts. She had no known medical illnesses.
On physical examination she was acutely sick looking with difficulty of walking. Her vital signs were stable. The remarkable findings were on genital examination which revealed swollen & glistening vulva with scattered areas of dark tiny old scars on the skin. The labiae were completely fused having only a small (1 cm) opening just above the posterior fourchette. There was a palpable 4 cm by 3 cm sized, irregular, hard mass located in the midline along the fused labiae with a thick non offensive discharge extruding through pin pointed defect on the overlying skin at the cranial end.
The laboratory tests were unremarkable except for pyuria on urinalysis. With a clinical diagnosis of super infected vulvar tumour, possibly infected post circumcision vulvar cyst, she was started on therapeutic cloxaciline and was counselled on surgical management with concurrent defibulation for which she consented. Under local (lidocaine) infiltration, incision was made on the mass which revealed thick walled biloculated cyst containing two discrete stones . Extraction of the stones, complete excision of the cyst wall and defibulation were done. The lady had marked improvement on her 7th post operative day visit, with healed labial wound . The histopathology examination revealed a keratinized inclusion cyst of the vulva with no dysplasia. Chemical analysis of the stones was not done because of facility constraints.