A 22-year-old female presented with complaints of restriction of movements in her left hip and left elbow. She had history of head injury due to road traffic accidents 2 years back. She was in coma for 2 months. When she recovered to ambulatory status, she developed stiffness in her left hip and left elbow. Gradually, stiffness increased to an extent of inability to squat or sit cross-legged. Examination revealed loss of all movements at hip. Hip was ankylosed with flexion deformity of 30 degrees, external rotation deformity of 20 degrees, and abduction deformity of 20 degrees. On palpation, a well-defined bony mass was felt in the femoral triangle. It was non-tender and fixed to underlying bone. There was no local rise of temperature. There was a 20degree postural flexion deformity at ipsilateral knee. On examination of the left elbow, non-tender, and bony mass was present on anterior aspect of arm. Bony mass was fixed to underlying bone. Flexion deformity of 50degree with further flexion up to 80degree was present. X-ray of the left hip showed bar of mature bone connecting the lateral part of superior pubic ramus to the lesser trochanter . There was no bony destruction or periosteal reaction. Computed tomography (CT)angiography and three-dimensional reconstruction of CT images showed femoral artery tenting over the bony mass and complete extent of mass over left hip, respectively. Bony mass had dimensions of length 8.3 cm × 4 cm . X-ray of the left elbow showed bony mass arising from anterior aspect of humerus directed distally with length of 9.3 cm . On hematological examination, serum alkaline phosphatase was normal (117 U/L). The excision of bony mass at hip and elbow was planned in two stages. In the first stage, the left hip was operated. Subinguinal approach was used for excision. The femoral neurovascular bundle was carefully separated from the mass. The bony mass was detached from pubis and femur with an osteotome . After complete excision of mass, full range of hip movement was possible under anesthesia. The mass was sent for histopathological examination and MO was confirmed. Full weight-bearing mobilization was started from 1stpost-operative day. Intermittent active and passive exercises of hip were performed. Oral indomethacin was given for 3 weeks to avoid recurrence. At 2-year follow-up, the patient had 120 degree of flexion, 30 degree of abduction-adduction, and 20 degree of internal and external rotation. The patient could perform all activities of daily living comfortably. X-ray taken at 2-year follow-up showed no recurrence .
In the second stage, 3 months after hip surgery, stiffness in the left elbow was addressed. Alkaline phosphatase levels before elbow surgery were 135 U/L. The anterolateral incision was taken over the lateral margin of biceps. Biceps belly was retracted and brachialis was split. The bony mass was detached from the anterior aspect of humerus with the help of osteotome. Elbow arthrotomy was done through lateral approach and anterior capsule was excised. Articular surface was examined. Above elbow splint was given in full extension during 1stpost-operative week. Oral indomethacin was given for 3 weeks. Full range of movement was started after 1 week. At 2-year follow-up, elbow range was 0–120 degree of flexion, 80 degree of supination, and 60 degree pronation. The patient could perform all activities including heavy daily activities. X-ray at 2-year follow-up showed no recurrence and serum alkaline phosphatase levels were 90 U/L .