The patient is a 58-year-old woman who 18 years prior (1998) was the driver in a severe motor vehicle accident (MVA) during a routine work commute in which her vehicle flipped end-over-end at interstate speed. She lost consciousness for several minutes and experienced cervical and upper thoracic pain, but otherwise appeared uninjured. Imaging studies of her head and spine were unremarkable, and she was discharged the same day with a cervical collar. Four months later, she began to experience tremor in her left hand and was seen by a neurologist. Repeat magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed small hyperintensities in the left temporal and anterior frontal lobes, hippocampus, amygdala, and putamen, which were thought to be posttraumatic. Over the ensuing months, she developed more dramatic left upper extremity tremor and left-sided bradykinesia with decreased arm swing and shortened left stride. She then developed right upper extremity involvement and bilateral cogwheeling, masked faces, hypophonia, unstable, shuffling gait, and freezing. With the development of these symptoms, the patient reported episodes of anxiety and depression as well as occasional passive suicidality. She also experienced rigidity and pain in her neck and upper back and found it difficult to catch her breath. This exacerbated her anxiety, and she became preoccupied that she might lose her ability to breath and she became terrified of being alone. Prior to the accident, the patient had no psychiatric or medical history. Her family history was also unremarkable. She did not smoke, and while she was a mild social drinker, she had no experiences with drugs of abuse. Lumbar puncture, heavy metal screening and serum ceruloplasmin tests were negative. As her symptoms were not consistent with idiopathic PD, she was diagnosed with post-traumatic Parkinson’s syndrome.
The patient was given trials of antiparkinson agents, but found the side effects intolerable. Modest effects were seen with a low dosage of carbidopa/levodopa, but the patient reported that this and other medications often made her symptoms worse. Moreover, she demonstrated a poor response to non-pharmacological interventions such as homeopathy, meditation, herbal medicine and physiotherapy. Four years after the accident, neuropsychological evaluation demonstrated reduced encoding of non-verbal material as well as reduced motor speed and dexterity. In addition, she lost details on copying and had lower than average cognitive proficiency. However, testing revealed no abnormalities in verbal information retention, verbal fluency, language and academic skills, attention, recall, reasoning, and executive functioning.
In 2005 (7 years after her accident) the patient was evaluated for DBS and stimulating electrodes were placed within the subthalamic nuclei bilaterally. Her implantation surgery was performed awake with microelectrode recording, test stimulation, and CRW stereotactic frame guidance. She tolerated the procedure without any perioperative complications or adverse events. Her PD symptoms improved substantially following the initiation of therapeutic stimulation. She was able to return to a nearly independent level of functioning. Her first battery change was in 2008 without incident, and DBS continued to be effective in treating her parkinsonian symptoms. Her mood remained stable, and her anxiety was better controlled, particularly with the relief she experienced in her rigidity.
In March, 2010, her Kinetra pulse generator was replaced with a PC unit to allow for more programming options. While battery replacements are typically performed with local anesthesia and conscious sedation, the patient requested that minimal sedating medication be used. During the battery replacement procedure, the patient reported a rapid onset of uncomfortable tingling sensations and anxiety upon placement of the battery within the surgical pocket. The pulse generator was immediately retrieved, turned off, and re-implanted once the patient’s discomfort resolved. The therapy was re-initiated in the operating room without incident. Given the concern over the event, she was observed overnight as an inpatient. The following day, she reported experiencing numerous brief “surges” followed by periods of anxiety and panic. No loss of consciousness or change in mental status were associated with these events, and no neurologic signs were noted. She was then discharged home with her husband. After recovery from surgery, the patient was left with ongoing episodes of anxiety and within 24 h she developed severe depressive symptoms including sadness, agitation, hopelessness, an impending sense of doom, and morbid suicidal thoughts. While anxiety and depressed mood predominated, the patient reported experiencing brief episodes of “giddiness” every 1-3 days.
Multiple programming sessions failed to impact her condition and there was concern that the pulse generator was malfunctioning. However, a repeat scan revealed that her intracranial leads had not shifted, and they were indeed appropriately placed . Lead integrity was evaluated through x-ray imaging and electrical impedance testing of all possible combinations, and there was no evidence of abnormalities. After eliminating all other possible explanations, the patient was brought back to the operating room and her PC pulse generator was replaced by a new Kinetra. Her depression and anxiety persisted, however, and she reported having intrusive thoughts, insomnia, anorexia, and constant feelings of dread. Five days later, overwhelmed with a sense of hopelessness, the patient attempted suicide by overdosing on diazepam and zolpidem. After stabilization as an inpatient, she began receiving care from a neuropsychiatrist to address her psychiatric symptoms in the context of her neurological disease. The patient was exquisitely sensitive to medications and only very low doses were tolerated. She was given unsuccessful trials of benzodiazepines, antidepressants, mood stabilizers, and antipsychotics. After a failed trial of valproate, the patient showed some improvement with lamotrigine. Escitalopram was then added with equivocal success. The patient showed only modest improvement after 1 year of medication trials, psychotherapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), as well as alternative medicine interventions, including acupuncture and therapeutically-induced dissociation (TID, Cunningham, unpublished). With her then existing battery losing its charge, and with persisting suspicion of battery malfunction, in 2011, her Kinetra battery was replaced again. Although her parkinsonian symptoms were adequately treated, her severe mood disorder was unrelenting after ongoing medication revisions with continued psychotherapy and CBT. Her stimulation parameters were adjusted numerous times in an attempt to attenuate the mood symptoms while maintaining control over her movement disorder. Neither these adjustments nor turning off the stimulation entirely, had any beneficial effect on her anxiety and depression.
The patient was then educated on the efficacy of ECT for DBS patients with depression . While initially resistant and fearful, she reconsidered and agreed to proceed with ECT. She underwent 8 bilateral ECT treatments, three times per week. For each treatment, her DBS was interrupted and the stimulator voltage was set to “0” as previously described . The stimulus was given with a MECTA machine at 0.8 mA, PW 1 ms, frequency 40 Hz, and durations from 3 s to 4 s. In the recovery room, the stimulator parameters were returned to their original settings (left: 2.9 V, PW 60, 130 Hz-; right: 2.5 V, PW 60, 130 Hz). After the third ECT treatment, the patient began to show a reduction in anxiety and depression. However, after her forth ECT treatment, she experienced mild short-term memory problems and the duration of ECT was decreased from 4 to 3 s. Over the course of ECT and 1 week subsequent to treatment, she demonstrated complete resolution of depression and experienced minimal anxiety. She also experienced a modest improvement in her parkinsonism, notably feeling nimbler with a more fluid gate. Her Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology scores dropped from 11 to 4 at the end of her ECT treatment course. Her parkinsonism continued to be controlled and she remained euthymic without medications for 10 months. Progressively however, she began to experience sleep disturbance, worsening anxiety, onset of depression and intrusive thoughts, and vague suicidal ideation. Still intolerant of medications, she underwent another course of ECT following a similar procedure as her first course. She received 8 bilateral ECT treatments, but with a slightly modified bifrontal placement of electrodes (0.8 mA, PW 1 ms, frequency 40 Hz, and duration 3 s). After each ECT treatment the stimulator parameters were reset to their original settings (left: 2.5 V, PW 90, 190 Hz-; right: 2.3 V, PW 90, 190 Hz). Again, the patient experienced a complete resolution of depression and anxiety with notable improvement in her parkinsonism lasting approximately 3 months. Her Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology scores dropped from 17 to 4 at the end of this ECT treatment course. She has since demonstrated a near-yearly cycling into depression after a course of ECT. Having now received three courses, the patient is being placed on a maintenance ECT schedule to prevent relapse. See Fig. for patient’s course of events.