A 5-years-old female child presented to our outpatient department with facial asymmetry. On examination, she had flattening of the forehead and elevation of the eyebrow on the left side . Clinical diagnosis of left-sided unilateral coronal synostosis was made. 3D computer tomography scan confirmed the diagnosis and revealed a bulged region over the diagonally opposite occipital bone. There were no features suggestive of raised intracranial tension. The child had no associated deformities.
Based on the 3D computer tomography picture a virtual 3D model of the skull was made using the software INVIVO 5 and the model was imported to a virtual clay modeling design software in a haptic based environment, Freeform Geomagic. (3D Systems, Rock Hill, SC) .
First, the left fronto-orbital bar was measured preserving the supraorbital and supratrochlear nerve . Second, the deformed hemifrontal triangle was marked enclosed by point 3, 4, 5 making angle of 43.6 degrees with median plane . Third, a contralateral hemioccipital triangle was reconstructed enclosed by point 6, 7, 8 making an angle of 40 degrees with the coronal plane . This triangle was then transferred to the frontal region. Minor adjustments were made till there was optimal matching between the occipital triangle and frontal area. The occipital triangle was measured from fixed bony points and the measurements noted.
After obtaining clearance from the anaesthesia team and written informed consent from the parents, patient was taken for occipitofrontal switch under general anaesthesia. Patient was placed in the supine position. Bicoronal incision was made which provided adequate exposure to the defective left frontal bone and the planned donor area on the right side occiput. Scalp flaps were raised. The markings obtained from the virtual 3D model were applied to the skull in the defective frontal area and the donor occiput region. Occipital triangle was harvested first followed by the frontal triangle. Curved bone obtained from the hemioccipital triangle was placed over the defective frontal region and secured with biodegradable plates and screws. The flat bone obtained from the defective frontal region was placed over the occipital region and similarly secured . Symmetrical correction was obtained in both frontal and occipital regions. The left fronto orbital bar was reconstructed by a biodegradable reconstruction plate using the template from the opposite side . Scalp flaps were sutured back. The surgery was completed in 150 min. Patient did not need blood transfusion or postoperative ICU care. There were no complications in the postoperative period. Patient was discharged on the 5th postoperative day.