A 32-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of a bulge in the left inguinal region. He had no pain and no urinary symptoms. Physical examination revealed a non-tender, reducible bulge in the left inguinal region. His body mass index (BMI) was 19.0 kg/m2. Laboratory data were all within the normal range. Computed tomography (CT) performed 5 years before admission for other disease showed a left indirect inguinal hernia. In addition, a small protrusion of the adipose tissue into the left femoral canal and a portion of the bladder pulled to the left femoral ring were observed retrospectively . Preoperative imaging studies were not performed. Based on a diagnosis of left indirect inguinal hernia, we planned for TAPP.
The patient was placed in the supine position under general anesthesia. A urinary catheter was inserted before the operation. A 10-mm port was placed for the laparoscope at the umbilicus and two 5-mm ports were placed at each flank. Laparoscopy and intraperitoneal observation revealed a left indirect inguinal hernia with sliding of the surrounding tissue. There were no other peritoneal indentations . We incised the peritoneum and dissected the preperitoneal space toward the Retzius space along the vesicohypogastric fascia. We found a mass covered with the vesicohypogastric fascia that was pulled into the femoral ring . The mass was confirmed to be a portion of the bladder; the mass expanded when we injected saline through the urinary catheter . We first dissected the protruding bladder all around from the preperitoneal tissue sliding with the bladder because the protruding bladder had developed severe adhesion to the hernial orifice. Then we reduced the protruding bladder carefully without causing injury. The length of the herniated bladder in the femoral canal was about 1 cm. The diameter of the femoral ring was 1 cm. An aberrant obturator artery was observed . After additional dissection, we repaired the left myopectineal orifice with ULTRAPRO Partially Absorbable Lightweight Mesh (15 × 10 cm, Johnson & Johnson, Cincinnati, OH) . Operative time was 101 min. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 1 without complications. No recurrences or symptoms were noted at the 12-month follow-up.