A 46-year-old military man sustained multiple shrapnel injuries to the soft tissues of the face, chest, hands, and legs, along with a penetrating abdominal injury and lacerations of the intestines during enemy shelling in the Donbass region. In the initial surgical treatment at a mobile field hospital, a laparotomy was performed to explore the peritoneal cavity, suturing the intestinal lacerations, and conducting primary surgical debridement of the soft tissue wounds. No retroperitoneal injury was detected during laparotomy. The immediate post-operative period was uneventful, with the patient receiving pain medication and broad-spectrum antibiotics. The abdominal wall wound and numerous smaller soft tissue wounds healed through primary intention. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to a civilian hospital for further non-surgical treatment and rehabilitation.
Sequential survey X-rays and CT scans were conducted, revealing multiple round-shaped fragments with metal density in the soft tissues of the abdominal wall, retroperitoneal fat, pelvis, and both thighs. Superficially located shrapnel fragments were removed under local anesthesia, while deeper fragments were left in place.
On the 35th day after the trauma, the patient, who had been relatively well, complained of sudden paroxysmal pain in the left lumbar area, radiating to the groin, accompanied by frequent urination and weakness. An ultrasound examination revealed dilatation of the collective system of the left kidney and the proximal part of the left ureter. Subsequent CT scan with IV contrast enhancement confirmed impaired left kidney function due to the presence of a metal foreign body in the lower part of the left ureter . Additionally, minimal contrast extravasation was observed at the level of the middle third of the left ureter . Laboratory results showed an elevated serum creatinine level of 148 μmol/L and the presence of red blood cells in the urinalysis.
After a brief preparation, which involved prescribing painkillers (dexketoprofen 50 mg), antispasmodics (drotaverine 80 mg), an antibiotic (levofloxacin 500 mg), and proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole 40 mg), the patient was brought to the operating room. Under spinal anesthesia, a rigid ureteroscope Karl Storz (Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted through the urethra and urinary bladder, reaching the left ureteral orifice. In the lower third of the left ureter, a 4 mm round-shaped metal shrapnel, partially encrusted and brown in color, was found . The shrapnel was safely extracted using a 3.2Fr captura helical stone extractor (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA). Subsequent examination revealed a small 6 × 7 mm defect on the anterolateral wall of the middle third of the left ureter . No other pathologies or traumatic defects were identified during a thorough examination. After removing the ureteroscope, a double-J 5Fr stent (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was inserted into the left ureter. The correct positioning of the stent was confirmed through survey X-ray.
The postoperative period proceeded without any complications. A follow-up ultrasonography performed 3 days later revealed no signs of fluid in the pelvis or left flank, and there was no dilatation observed in the collective system of the left kidney. The stent was successfully removed after 1 month. Due to small size of contrast extravasation at the site of ureter injury (less than 1 cm according to initial CT scan), no ureterography or ureteroscopy were considered to be reasonable after stent removal. Ultrasound examination of the left kidney revealed no signs of hydronephrosis after 3 months.