A 54-year-old Caucasian man sought care because of a 2 weeks history of jaundice and intermittent fever (up to 39 °C), not responsive to antibiotics and antipyretics. His past medical records included arterial hyperthension and a left vertebral artery dissection. Upon admission, he was pyretic, jaundiced, tachypneic and lypotimic. No cutaneous lesions were present. Neurological examination was normal. Laboratory tests showed low blood oxygen concentration (pO2 62 mmHg, pCO2 22 mmHg, HCO3 18.8 mmol/L, pH 7.55), anemia (Hb 10.2 g/dL), leukocytopenia (3.100/mcL) and thrombocytopenia (62.000/mcL). Atypical circulating lymphocytes were absent. Increased levels of transaminases (ALT 1374 u/L; AST 654 u/L), gamma-GT (802 u/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH 2998 u/L) were present. Serum microbiological tests were negative. Computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed hepato-splenomegaly and diffuse ground-glass opacities in both lungs without interlobular septal thickening. No lesion was detected in the upper aerodigestive tract. Despite oxygen therapy, the clinical conditions rapidly deteriorated leading to death 3 days after admission. A severe, generalized sepsis was suspected. A total-body autopsy was performed.
Gross examination revealed pericardial, pleural and peritoneal effusions. The lungs were heavier than normal (right lung 910 g; left lung 930 g) with multiple foci of consolidation. The spleen was enlarged (610 g) as well as the liver (1920 g), without focal lesions. No lesions were found in the skin, oral cavity or oropharynx. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detected about 2 millions copies of EBV DNA on pleural effusion and lung tissue.
Histology revealed atypical lymphoid cells filling and expanding the lumina of small and medium blood vessels in virtually any organs (heart, lung, kidney, spleen, liver, brain). A sinusoidal involvement occurred in bone marrow, with about 10% of neoplastic infiltrate. Features of hemophagocytosis were also evident in bone marrow. The lymphoid cells, strikingly confined to the blood vessels lumina, were large-sized with hyperchromatic nuclei and expressed at immunohistochemistry: CD3 , CD2, perforin, CD56 , granzyme B , showing a T and cytotoxic phenotype. CD20, CD79alfa, PAX5, CD4, CD8, CD5, ALK1, CD16 were all negative. Either external or internal positive controls were used to validate the assay for each immunohistochemical staining. The proliferative index (Ki67) was high (approximately of 80%). EBV encoded RNA in situ hybridization (EBER) was diffusely positive . Polymerase chain reaction identified a clonal T-cell receptor gamma gene rearrangement . The final diagnosis was EBV positive intravascular NK/T-cell lymphoma with multisystem involvement.