A 3-year-old boy presented to the emergency department with an episode of melena and black tarry stools. He had experienced similar symptoms a year prior and had undergone several examinations, including colonoscopy and Tc-99m pertechnetate scintigraphy . The colonoscopy findings were normal, and scintigraphy revealed nonspecific findings with some parts of the small intestine enhanced but not spotted. We suspected it was a small intestinal hemorrhage. The patient was discharged from the hospital and scheduled to undergo esophagogastroscopy and capsule endoscopy to identify the root cause. After readmission to the emergency department, his blood analysis revealed a hemoglobin level of 9.6 mg/dL (from 13 mg/dL), leukocyte count of 9.2 × 109/L, and creatinine level of 0.28 mg/dL, and a urea nitrogen level of 20.7 mg/dL. Enhanced abdominal CT revealed an edematous small intestine with extravasation into the lumen of the small intestine . Although angiography via the femoral artery was performed immediately and the hypervascular lesion was detected in the area consistent with that on the enhanced CT, the extravasation resolved by that time . The patient received an overnight transfusion of 240 mL of red blood cells (RBCs), but his hemoglobin level did not increase. We performed trans-anal double-balloon enteroscopy under general anesthesia because the hypervascular lesion was located in the ileum on the enhanced CT. Although no specific findings were observed from the Bauhin valve to the 100 cm ileum on the mucosal side, the poor operability of the endoscope indicated that an extramural disease could be present. Exploratory laparotomy was immediately performed through an umbilical incision. The tubular duplication was adjacent to a 40- to 200-cm portion of the small intestine and connected at one end . The relation between the duplication and the normal intestine and the length of the intestines were checked from both directions: from the Treitz ligament to terminal ileum and terminal ileum to the Treitz ligament, and the normal intestines without the duplication were 40 cm jejunum and 130 cm ileum . The classifications of the relationship to the mesenteric vessels and duplication were mostly type 1b, with some types 1c and 2a . We first encircled the mucosa of the center of the type 1b duplication and dissected the oral side with incisions to the mesentery and the muscular layer of the duplication . The mucosa of the 2a duplications (10 cm) was cored from the same incision without mesenteric injury. The remaining intestine was dissected along the anal side. For the type 1c duplication, we resected the duplication with the adjacent intestine (5 cm) and performed end-to-end anastomosis using simple interrupted sutures because it was challenging to preserve the adjacent intestine . The operative time was 6 h (without endoscopy), and there was 200 mL of additional blood loss. The transfusions included RBCs (150 mL) and fresh frozen plasma (FFP; 140 mL). The pathological findings indicated that most duplications involved the gastric mucosa . The type 1b duplication site was dissected on the submucosal layer . The anal side of the duplication was connected to the adjacent intestine, and an ulcer was located at the center of the two orifices . The ulcer contained a ruptured arterial vessel, similar to a Dieulafoy ulcer . The patient was extubated on postoperative day (POD) 0, and normal feeding was started on POD 4. The hemoglobin level remained stable at 13 mg/dL. No surgical complications were observed, and the patient was discharged on POD 7. Two months postoperatively, follow-up found that the patient had no symptoms or complications.