A 69-year-old female with a history of anxiety, hypothyroidism, and at least 32 pack-year smoking history with no pertinent family history who presented with sudden onset of headache and lethargy while away from home. The patient subsequently drove home with evidence of multiple collisions en route. She presented to the hospital where her initial blood pressure was 173/98 mmHg and physical exam was notable for mild encephalopathy, dysarthria, left facial droop, and left arm weakness. Patient was not on any anticoagulation or antiplatelet agents at the time of the event.
Non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) was obtained which demonstrated irregular hyperdensities along the right basal ganglia, contiguous along the anterior commissure (AC) and extending into the contralateral globus pallidus . Intraventricular extension into the third ventricle, bilateral foramina of Monro, and fourth ventricle were noted. CT angiogram was also obtained without evidence of vascular malformation or aneurysm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained which demonstrated hemosiderin staining and vasogenic edema along the white matter tract of the AC . The distribution of edema seen on sagittal T2 images appeared restricted to a circular area of encased white matter. MR venogram was also obtained without evidence of cerebral venous occlusion. No vascular lesions were identified on subsequent catheter cerebral angiogram.
The patient was admitted and observed. Systolic blood pressure goals were less than 140 mmHg and the patient was resumed on home medications. Work-up was negative for coagulopathy or toxicologic etiology. At the time of discharge, the patient exhibited slightly decreased strength in the left upper extremity with a persistent pronator drift. At the time of last neurological exam 7 months post-hemorrhage, she exhibited a mild strength deficit in left elbow flexion and mild left upper extremity dysmetria. Follow-up imaging at 7 months demonstrated resolution of the BGH and intraventricular extension .