A 50-year-old female patient went to the hospital for an annual physical examination in July 2017. Chest CT revealed a giant pulmonary cyst of approximately 79 × 63 × 23 mm in the posterior basal segment of the left lower pulmonary lobe. Its upper wall was relatively uniform in thickness of about 1.6 mm and its lower wall fitted the diaphragm. This lesion had a clear and smooth interface with lung parenchyma. No emphysema and other abnormal lesions were found in the remaining lung fields. The follow-up chest CT obtained in 2019 showed the lesion was enlarged into a measurement of approximately 86 × 61 × 37 mm, and the upper wall thickness reduced to 1.4 mm . Over the past two years, no chest discomfort was reported. In 2020, the patient had to go to Tibet, northwest China, on business. She accepted a chest CT scan at a local hospital, which also revealed a lung cyst of similar size in the left lower lobe (no images provided). After the business trip in November 2021, another chest CT demonstrated the cyst airspace was shrunk significantly to only 13 × 12 × 6 mm with an eccentric solid mural nodule of approximately 10 × 6 × 5 mm in the posterior wall . The patient received minimally invasive thoracoscopic surgery on the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe due to the suspicion of lung cancer 2.5 months after the latest chest CT. The postoperative pathology showed hyaline degenerated granuloma with lung cyst wall structure on the lateral side .
The patient reported in detail after the operation that she had a high-altitude trip after accepting chest CT at the local hospital. On the first day, when she reached the campsite at an elevation of 3000 meters, she developed severe chest pain in the left lower chest after picking up a kettle. The pain was relieved two hours later without cough, sputum, hemoptysis, and difficulty breathing. On the next day, the patient arrived at an altitude of 4000 meters for sightseeing. She did not feel uncomfortable even jumping there. Therefore, based on the significant shrinkage of the lung cyst and postoperative pathological manifestations, it was believed that the original lung cyst ruptured and shrank to a small cyst with the mural nodule.