A 64-year-old man was admitted to hospital with left-sided weakness, dysarthria, and expressive aphasia after initiation of rituximab therapy for presumptive IgG4-related disease.
His past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, Crohn's disease, and dysplasia-associated lesion or mass (DALM), which had been treated with proctocolectomy and ileostomy. He had also undergone local radiation for prostate cancer 5 years prior. On admission, he appeared chronically unwell and cachectic. He had no lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, rashes, or active joints. Neurological examination was notable for ataxia, expressive aphasia, and dysarthria. Laboratory investigations revealed marked elevation of inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate) and thrombocytosis.
On detailed history, the patient had had protean signs and symptoms for a number of years. Four years earlier, as part of an investigation (at another hospital) for a parastomal hernia, the patient was incidentally discovered to have bilateral sclerotic bony lesions in the femoral heads and tibial and ischial bones. Computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy revealed nonspecific fibroinflammatory infiltrates. A year later, he was hospitalized with right-sided weakness, aphasia, and dysarthria and was diagnosed with left middle cerebral artery stroke. He had a complete spontaneous recovery only to present 2 years later with recurrence of similar albeit transient neurological signs and symptoms.
The following year, as part of surveillance CT for his metastatic prostate cancer, the patient was found to have bilateral perinephric thick rim-like soft tissue densities with significant infiltration into the parapelvic spaces and all around both kidneys. The infiltrative process encased the aorta and bilateral renal veins and caused mild compression of the inferior vena cava. Pathological analysis of a needle core re-biopsy of the retroperitoneal lesion demonstrated fibrofatty tissue with focal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates, consisting of small lymphocytes, (polytypic) plasma cells, histiocytes, as well as number of eosinophils. CD68/PGM-1 stain highlighted a number of histiocytes, including a small focus of foamy histiocytes (which at the time was interpreted as nonspecific), negative for S-100. We counted a maximum of 27 IgG-expressing plasma cells per high-power field and a maximum of 5 IgG4+ plasma cells per high-power field (2.7 on average), with a maximum IgG4/IgG ratio of 50% (22% on average). The pathologic diagnosis of retroperitoneal fibrosis was made, raising the possibility of IgG4-related disease, and the patient was started on rituximab 375 mg/m2.
During the current admission, extensive investigations were performed. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple scattered punctate foci consistent with acute end-vessel infarcts in the middle cerebral artery territory. As part of the stroke workup, transthoracic echocardiography revealed intracavitary echoes, suggestive of a possible right atrial myxoma. This was further characterized by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging as a lesion in the lateroposterior wall of the right atrium, extending to the pericardium and distally surrounding the superior vena cava. Cardiac CT showed extensive epicardial soft tissue infiltration that extended around the right atrial appendage into the right atrioventricular groove, partially encasing the right coronary artery. The same tissue density was also localized adjacent to the proximal aspect of the left anterior descending and left circumflex artery. CT of the thorax revealed concentric infiltration of the aortic arch wall and origins of great vessels. The patient was discharged and continued on rituximab therapy.
He was readmitted a week later with acute coronary syndrome. During the hospitalization, his neurologic symptoms recurred. A coronary angiogram revealed triple vessel disease and the patient underwent successful angioplasty to the left anterior descending and right coronary arteries. CT angiogram of the head revealed mild atherosclerotic disease, but predominantly severe narrowing of vertebral arteries at the artery origins, bilaterally, with an appearance that was atypical for atherosclerosis. Aggressive treatment with 1 mg/kg (M1) of prednisone for presumptive IgG4-related disease was initiated. Repeat CT of the abdomen 2 weeks later revealed progression of the retroperitoneal, periaortic and perirenal infiltrative processes.
The absence of clinical and radiological response to high-dose steroids prompted us to consider diagnoses alternative to IgG4-related disease, including Erdheim-Chester disease. Suspicion for that possibility was strengthened by integration of new information about the patient's radiological history of symmetrical long bone lesions and the previously underinterpreted small focus of CD1a–/CD68+ foamy histiocytes in the second of the patient's two retroperitoneal biopsies (as aforementioned). DNA amplification (from this and the initial needle core biopsy formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material) and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction demonstrated the BRAF V600E mutation. Baseline fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed prominent FDG activity in the region of the right atrium, mild activity in the perinephric soft tissue infiltrates, multiple FDG-avid scattered sclerotic bone lesions, as well as uptake in the sella turcica.
Given the identification of BRAF mutation, the patient was started on vemurafenib, 960 mg twice daily. Steroids were slowly tapered off. After 1 month of therapy, the patient showed dramatic clinical recovery in functional status, with normalization of gait and speech. Follow-up FDG PET/CT scan demonstrated excellent metabolic response at 1 month. Considering the efficacy of this treatment, vemurafenib was reduced to 480 mg twice daily.
The patient tolerated therapy extremely well, with only minor grade 1 cutaneous toxicity, affecting his feet. Another FDG PET/CT, performed at 3 months into targeted therapy, confirmed ongoing remission . For comparison, note the intense uptake near the right atrium, which resolved with treatment , and the osseous uptake in the bones of the pelvis and femurs (white arrowheads), which also resolved. Follow-up cardiac CT showed a substantial decrease in the size of the cardiac pseudotumor, while CT of the abdomen revealed improvement of the perinephric fat stranding. A third, fourth, and fifth PET/CT after 9, 15, and 21 months on vemurafenib (reduced to 720 mg daily after 6 months and to 420 mg daily after 15 months) confirmed sustained complete metabolic response. Publication of these results occurs with written consent of the patient.