A 51-year-old female was admitted to the hospital with “abdominal pain for 1 month.” According to the patient, she had abdominal pain after eating before January; the pain was paroxysmal dull pain with short duration and relieved spontaneously after about 5 min; she had no fever and chills, no nausea and vomiting, no obvious radiating pain, and no cessation of anal venting and defecation; the patient was not treated at that time so the symptoms were not relieved; hence, she came to our hospital for treatment. The following was observed upon physical examination: T 37.2°C, P 95 times/min, R 19 times/min, BP 126/95 mmHg, abdominal bulge, left lower abdominal tenderness, no significant rebound pain, no muscle tension, intestinal sounds 3–4 times/min, and negative shifting dullness. The following was observed upon laboratory examination: white blood cell 8.6×109/L, neutrophils 88.2%, hemoglobin 76 g/L, ultrasensitive C-reactive protein 2.8 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 0.08 ng/ml, albumin (ALB) 32.5 g/L. Imaging examination shows the following: enhanced CT of the abdomen suggested a lipoma in the left lower abdomen in the small intestine with proximal intussusception (, ). The patient’s past history indicated that she was in good health.
Because the patient has no obvious contraindications to surgery or anesthesia, laparoscopic exploration was performed on the second day of admission, which showed a small amount of ascites in the abdominal cavity, a small intestine–small intestine-type intussusception about 20 cm from the ileocecal area. An incision of about 5 cm in length was made above the mass to dissect it into the abdomen layer by layer, and the diseased intestine was dislodged from the abdominal cavity with oval forceps. After observing, the color of the intussusception was slightly red and no obvious necrosis or rupture was seen. Then, the intestine was reduced by hand and observed for half an hour after reduction, and the blood circulation and peristalsis of the intestine were found to be still sound. The intestine was opened concurrently at 2 cm from the upper and lower margins of the mass and closed with a linear anastomosis, and the common opening was closed with a linear anastomosis using 3-0 absorbable thread to reinforce anastomosis intermittently. The final examination of anastomosis showed its patency and sound blood supply. The specimen was cut open, and a yellow swelling of about 2×4 cm was seen . The patient developed anal discharge and was given a liquid diet on the second postoperative day; on the third postoperative day, the patient developed anal bowel movements and was given a semiliquid diet; and on the fifth postoperative day, the patient was discharged from the hospital after resuming a normal diet. Postoperative pathology suggested localized adipose tissue neoplastic hyperplasia in the intestinal wall, consistent with a lipoma . Immunohistochemistry and oncogene examination shows the following: S-100(+), SOX10(−), β-catenin(+), P53(+), Ki-67(+,5%), CD34(+), ERG(+), SMA(+), Desmin(+), Vim(+), PCK(−), CD68(+), and CD163(+). The recovery was good, with no complications at the 2-week postoperative follow-up by telephone.