A 65-year-old man was diagnosed with IgG4-RD nine years prior to the presentation based on multiple sites of arterial aneurysm (infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm and left common iliac artery aneurysm), retroperitoneal fibrosis and high serum IgG concentration (5470 mg/dL, normal value 800–1700 mg/dL). Since then, he has been treated with prednisolone and azathioprine. After being diagnosis of IgG4-RD for 4 months, a follow-up CT scan showed a partially thrombosed saccular aneurysm of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA), 5.3 cm × 5.4 cm × 6.4 cm in size and enhanced soft tissue in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCX) suggesting lesions due to vasculitis . The patient has never had angina. Coronary angiography (CAG) showed 70% diameter stenosis of the mid-LAD, total occlusion of the proximal RCA, and mild disease of LCX. Right coronary artery aneurysmectomy was performed together with coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery using a right radial artery (RA) graft to the distal RCA and a left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to the distal LAD. Histopathology of the RCA aneurysm showed fibrosis with extensive lymphoplasmacytic inflammation in the tunica media and adventitia supporting the diagnosis of IgG4-RD. Six years prior to the presentation, a follow-up coronary CT scan showed patent RA to distal RCA but occlusion in the LIMA to LAD. Multiple small fusiform aneurysms with periarterial soft tissue lesions were noted proximal to the mid LAD, proximal LCX to 2nd obtuse marginal branch . Two years prior to the presentation, endovascular stent was implanted at abdominal aorta. The follow-up CT scan showed complete thrombosed of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm.
At the index event, the patient presented with acute infero-lateral wall ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Emergency CAG showed total occlusion of the 2nd obtuse marginal (OM) branch and mid-LAD CAA . The RA graft to the distal RCA was patent. After balloon angioplasty was performed in the 2nd OM branch, the CAA was found just distal to the culprit lesion with a thrombus in the aneurysmal sac . Dual antiplatelet therapy was planned for 12 months.
Two months after the index event, the patient had recurrent chest pain 2 h prior to admission. The patient was taking a prescribed beta-blocker, his blood pressure at presentation was 77/46 mmHg, and pulse rate was 64 beats per minute. Cardiovascular examination showed regular rhythm, normal cardiac auscultation and negative pulsus paradoxus. The chest radiograph demonstrated ill-defined soft tissue density at the left heart border . Echocardiography showed mixed echogenic large loculated pericardial effusion above the right ventricle free wall causing cardiac tamponade . Emergency CAG showed giant CAAs at the mid LAD and the 2nd OM branch (, ). No active extravasation of contrast media to pericardial space due to slow blood flow in CAAs was seen. However, there was a suspicion of rupture of CAAs from the acute cardiac tamponade. The patient was immediately transferred to the operating theatre. Intra-operative notes reported a rupture of the LAD CAA but no evidence of leakage from the 2nd OM branch CAA. The LAD CAA was repaired using bovine pericardium and the sac being filled with cryo-acrylate glue. Coronary artery bypass graft surgery was performed using a saphenous vein Y-graft to distal LAD and 2nd OM branch. The patient was extubated on post-operative Day 3 and discharged from hospital on Day 19.
Three months after surgery, the follow-up coronary CT scan showed an increase in size of the CAAs in both the mid LAD and the 2nd OM branch . Discussion among the heart team resulted in an agreement to treat both CAAs with coil embolization. Reasons for the choice of technique were: (i) avoidance of open-heart surgery due to the possibility of injury to SVG and (ii) it was not feasible to repair the CAA in the 2nd OM branch CAA using surgical techniques due to its anatomical position. The procedure was performed via the right femoral approach using the 6 Fr delivery system. Selective angiography of the CAAs was performed using an extension catheter to evaluate the extent of the aneurysm and confirm the size of the neck of the CAA . The pre-operative CT angiographic image showed the proximal LAD aneurysmal neck size, measuring 4 mm in diameter and 2nd OM aneurysm neck size 2 mm in diameter . The use of the detachable microcoil was planned due to its adjustability and facility for precise placement. Measurements from intravascular ultrasound confirmed the neck of LAD and LCX CAA were 3.5 mm and 3.0 mm, respectively. The size of the first coil for framing was determined by 10–20% oversizing of the aneurysm neck. Three vascular coils (size 5 mm × 8 cm, 4 mm × 8 cm, and 3 mm × 6 cm) were implanted via Renegade STC 18 microcatheter to the proximal LAD. Two vascular coils (size 4 mm × 8 cm, 3 mm × 6 cm) were implanted into the 2nd OM branch. Details of the procedure are shown in . The final angiogram showed fade antegrade flow of both aneurysms . The follow-up angiogram at 2 weeks showed total occlusion of the mid LAD CAA and near occlusion of the 2nd OM branch CAA (, ). The follow-up coronary CT scan at 6 months showed completely thrombosed mid LAD and 2nd OM CAA but increase in overall size (LAD from 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm to 2.9 cm × 3.2 cm; LCX from 3.3 cm × 3.2 cm to 3.7 cm × 4.8 cm, ). All grafts from the last CABG operation were patent . The patient currently takes prednisolone 5 mg once daily.