A 23-year-old Thai man, who reported cannabis use for 2 years and discontinued for 3 months, restarted smoking two bongs (2 g equivalence) of cannabis. Besides cannabis, he reported drinking five cups of coffee per day. He denied depressed mood or manic symptoms, alcohol consumption, other substance abuse, or previous self-harm. He denied any underlying disease, previous psychiatric treatment, nor a family history of psychiatric condition. Two hours later, he had a penile erection without sexual stimulation, felt a severe persistent sharp pain in his penis, and reported that his glans looked distorted. Intending to eradicate the pain, without command hallucination, he decided to trim the penile skin several times and completely amputated his penis himself using scissors. He reported awareness throughout the process. After 2 hours, the bleeding had not stopped. He was brought to a primary care hospital, where he was given intravenous cloxacillin, tetanus prophylaxis, and referred to our emergency department. On arrival, he was hemodynamically stable and cooperative. There was active bleeding at the penile base and a 5-cm lacerated wound at the scrotum. The remaining penile stump was 2 cm in length with loss of the whole penile skin. The amputated distal part of the penis was contaminated with ants and had fragile dorsal veins . Urine immunoassay was positive for delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC).
A urologist was consulted for surgical intervention. The distal penis was deemed too dirty and fragile for reconstruction. The patient was transferred to the operating theater for emergency surgery. Bleeding was controlled, the penile stump irrigated and debrided, and scrotal urethrostomy was performed. He was admitted to the surgical ward. A psychiatrist diagnosed the patient with substance-induced psychotic disorder. His mental status examinations found he had visual and auditory hallucinations, such as seeing moving shadows, hearing birds chirping or insects buzzing, depressed mood, and restricted affect. He was coherent and delusional, with no suicidal ideas. Supportive psychotherapy and 2 mg/day of risperidone were initiated. After admission and cannabis discontinuation, his delusions and hallucinations subsided. He stayed in the hospital for 14 days. The dosage of risperidone was adjusted to 6 mg/day at discharge. The brief psychiatric rating scale (BPRS) showed a score of 28 before treatment compared with a score of 18 after treatment. After 2 weeks, the patient was able to void in a sitting position, without wound infection. He denied visual or auditory hallucinations. Second stage penoplasty with a scrotal flap was planned, however, the patient was not available for follow-up and further management as he had relocated.