A 1-year-old boy was referred to our hospital for repeated vomiting and poor weight gain. He was born full-term term, weighed 3,030 g at birth, and was delivered without asphyxia, but he vomited frequently after birth. His medical check-up at 1 month showed normal findings; however, his parents visited a pediatric clinic because of continued episodes of vomiting. Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis was ruled out by the pediatrician based on the symptoms, and it was considered that vomiting was accompanied by aerophagia. Non-pharmacology treatment, such as positioning therapy, parental guidance, education, and support, was provided to both the child and his parents. At 6 months of age, he was referred to the pediatrics department of a secondary hospital because of poor weight gain [5,490 g, −2.8 standard deviation (SD)]. He was in good general condition and was on breast milk, milk, and baby food. The frequency of vomiting was approximately five times a day, and defecation frequency was once a day. His blood tests, including endocrine function test, showed no abnormalities, and abdominal ultrasound, abdominal computed tomography (CT), and head magnetic resonance imaging scans showed normal findings. He was administered histamine 2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs) and Tsumura-Kampo Rikkunshito, a Japanese herbal medicine that has been attracting global attention and is under extensive research , both of which contributed slightly to decreasing the frequency of vomiting and aided in weight gain. However, he soon stopped gaining weight and presented with bloody vomiting; he was then referred to our hospital at 1 year of age.
At the time of his first visit to our hospital, his height was 70.4 cm (−1.8 SD) and his weight was 6.88 kg (−2.6 SD), indicating failure to thrive. presents his clinical course, including examinations and invasive treatments. Abdominal enhanced CT indicated no esophageal wall thickening, but it revealed the presence of enlarged lymph nodes around the esophagus . His upper gastrointestinal (UGI) series revealed no obvious esophageal narrowing or dilatation but a hiatal hernia was noted . No problems were observed in the outflow of the contrast medium from the esophagus to the stomach and duodenum, and the C-loop formation in the duodenum (shape from the descending limb of the duodenum to the Treitz ligament) was also normal. During UGI examination, reflux from the stomach to esophagus was observed. A 24 h impedance pH monitoring test showed abnormal values for both acid reflux (12.1%; normal range < 1.1%) and nonacid reflux (12.7%; normal range < 1.4%). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) confirmed the hiatal hernia and also revealed severe mucosal erosion from the lower esophagus to the upper esophagus along with ulcer formation in some areas of the esophagus . No obvious abnormality was observed from the stomach to the duodenum. The patient was then diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) associated with a hiatal hernia of the esophagus. He was administered a proton pump inhibitor (PPIs) via intravenous drip; thereafter, he was switched to a potassium-competitive acid blocker (P-CAB). After a confirmed decrease in vomiting episodes and increase in weight, he was discharged from our hospital on the 9th day after admission. His progress after discharge was fairly uneventful, and he gained some weight and only vomited once a day.
At 3 months after the initial hospitalization (i.e., at 1.5 years of age), the patient had one episode of defecation with black stool and his hemoglobin level dropped to 6.2 g/dl, indicating anemia; thus, he was readmitted to the hospital. UGI revealed no obvious esophageal narrowing or dilatation, but a hiatal hernia was noted again. Enhanced abdominal CT revealed thickening of the esophageal wall with enlarged lymph nodes around the esophagus, but these nodes were smaller than those observed in last examination. EGD revealed that the hiatal hernia had neither worsened nor improved. The erosion and ulcers in the esophagus began to improve, but scarring and subsequent pseudodiverticulum formation due to inflammation were noted. Several bleeding spots were observed on the mucosal surface within the hernia but without any active bleeding. Meckel's diverticulum scintigraphy was performed to look for the source of bleeding but no abnormality was noted. Red cell concentrate transfusion was conducted, following which it was confirmed that there was no progression of anemia. The patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital. Even after discharge, no black stool was observed, the frequency of vomiting decreased to approximately once a week, and the patient gained weight. It was concluded that this anemia was caused by gastrointestinal bleeding from within the hernia.
At 3 months after the second hospitalization (i.e., at the age of 1 year and 9 months), the vomiting frequency of the patient suddenly increased from once a week to three times a day. Subsequently, P-CAB, sodium alginate, and ecabet sodium was reinitiated. UGI revealed obvious esophageal narrowing but EGD did not indicate any worsening of the hiatal hernia . Moreover, ulcer formation was observed in the esophagus at the same location where scarring had been observed in the previous EGD , and a stricture had appeared . The cause of this recurrent episode of vomiting was considered to be esophageal stricture from the scarring from GERD caused by a hiatal hernia. In this case, medical treatment was considered to be ineffective, necessitating surgical intervention. Accordingly, the patient was referred to a pediatric surgery hospital.
Three months later (i.e., at 2 years of age), laparoscopic fundoplication using Toupet method and gastrostomy were performed for the hiatal hernia at the surgery hospital. Further, 1 month later, esophageal balloon dilation was performed successfully under general anesthesia, and the esophageal stricture was successfully dilated . Subsequent EGD revealed that the hiatal hernia had properly reduced . Oral food intake was gradually started, and no vomiting was observed. UGI at 1.5 years after the surgery (at 3.5 years of age) showed no esophageal stricture. Moreover, no inflammation, scarring, stricture, or hiatal hernia of the esophagus was observed on EGD. Currently, the patient has reported no gastrostomy and vomiting, and his weight has returned to normal.