A 69-year-old man was referred to our hospital with abnormal findings on prostate MRI and 18F-FDG PET/MRI. He underwent thorough private medical check-up at another hospital, and 18F-FDG PET/MRI was included in the program. PSA was 2.85 ng/ml, and his other blood test results were normal. He had dysuria with pyuria, and body temperature of 38℃ three months prior and treated at another hospital. Results of urine test and urine culture were not available. The patient had neither additional medical history nor family history of prostate cancer. He had smoked twenty cigarettes a day for 40 years (Brinkman Index = 800) and ceased when he was 60-years old. He drinks a glass of wine four times per week.
MRI showed low-intensity signals in the left peripheral zone on T2-weighted images . The lesion showed slightly high-intensity signals on diffusion-weighted images , and low values on ADC . The ADC score was 453 mm/s2. The PI-RADS score was 3. PET/MRI showed 18F-FDG uptake in the same lesion .
The patient underwent a transrectal prostate biopsy. The result of urine test before biopsy was as follows; pH 6.5, proteinuria (−), glycosuria (−), occult blood (−), red blood cells 1–4/high power field, white blood cells <1/high power field. The prostate was stony hard in the left lobe and had a smooth surface on digital rectal examination. Ultrasound sonography examination revealed low echoic lesion on the left peripheral zone . The prostate size was 19.7 cm3. The PSA density (PSA value divided by the prostatic volume) was 0.144. Ten systematic biopsies and two additional target biopsies of the left peripheral zone were performed. Isepamicin sulfate 200 mg were injected into muscle prior to biopsy, followed by oral administration of tosufloxacin tosilate hydrate 450 mg a day for 3 days.
Histologically, epithelioid cell granulomas with caseous necrosis and scattered Langhans giant cells were observed only in the cores from the left peripheral zone . Carcinoma was not found. By immunohistochemistry, epithelioid cells were positive for CD68 (histiocyte marker) , and negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (epithelial marker) . Microorganisms were not detected on special stainings.