A 59-year-old man was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of an inappropriate TSH level that had been detected at local clinic during a workup for dementia due to recurrent memory loss at local clinic. He complained of chronic fatigue, recently decreased visual acuity, and loss of libido. The thyroid function test revealed an increase in serum TSH level to 5.41 μIU/mL (reference range: 0.4–4.8), despite elevated level of free thyroxine (FT4) 3.21 ng/dL (reference range: 0.8–1.71 ng/dL) and total triiodothyronine (T3) 289 ng/dL (reference range: 6o–160 ng/dL) levels. Thyroid autoantibody tests, including of the anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, anti-thyroglobulin antibody, and TSH-binding inhibitory immunoglobulin, were negative. He had no signs or symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, and a physical examination revealed no goiter. He had no significant medical history, including thyroid disease or head and neck irradiation. His elder brother had thyroid cancer, but thyroid function was normal before the surgery.
Additional hormonal and imaging studies were performed to distinguish between TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma and thyroid hormone resistance syndrome. The serum α-subunit level was 1.88 mIU/mL (reference range: 0–0.8 mIU/mL) and sellar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 7.0 cm, multi-lobulated heterogeneously enhanced pituitary mass with invasion of the cavernous sinuses and supra-sellar extension . Thyroid hormone receptor-beta gene mutation was not detected. A pituitary basal hormone study showed an elevated level of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) 478.61 ng/mL (age-matched reference range: 71–263 ng/mL); the other pituitary hormones were within normal limits (Supplementary Table ). A GH suppression test with 75 g oral glucose revealed no suppression of GH (GH nadir, 1.3 ng/mL). He was diagnosed with a TSH/GH-secreting pituitary adenoma. An ophthalmological examination revealed bitemporal hemianopsia (Supplementary Fig. ). Surgical resection was considered the best treatment option; however, curative pituitary surgery, which the patient refused, was impossible due to invasion. We decided to start long-acting octreotide to control the abnormal TSH and GH secretions.
Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed to screen for malignancy associated with the overproduction of TSH and GH; it showed benign hepatic cysts up to 3.5 cm and 18F-fluorodexoyglucose (FDG) avid lesions on the thyroid gland and sigmoid colon. Thyroid ultrasonography (US) revealed a 0.5 cm spiculated hypoechoic nodule with microcalcification, and fine needle aspiration revealed PTC. We decided to closely observe the thyroid cancer without surgery due to the small sized tumor (< 1 cm), no suspicious lymph nodes on US and staging neck CT, and our concerns for potential rapid growth of the pituitary tumor after surgical removal of the thyroid gland. Follow-up thyroid US at 11 months revealed an increase in tumor size from 0.3 × 0.5 × 0.4 cm to 0.7 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm so, surgery was considered. The patient underwent total thyroidectomy with central lymph node dissection; BRAF V600E-positive multifocal PTCs and metastatic cervical lymph nodes (LNs; 7 of the 11 resected LNs) were confirmed pathologically. A metastatic paratracheal LN measuring 8 mm in the largest diameter had extra-nodal extension. The final TNM stage was pT1aN1aM0 (stage II). After surgery, it was impossible to suppress the TSH sufficiently, despite 400 μg levothyroxine, to achieve a goal of the middle to upper half of the reference range for free T4 in a short period immediately after surgery. Furthermore, the TSH level increased insufficiently after levothyroxine withdrawal in preparation for RAI therapy (TSH, 12.22 μIU/mL). On RAI therapy with dose of 180 mCi, off-Tg level was less than 1 ng/ml, and post-treatment scan showed strong RAI uptake in anterior neck, both thyroid beds, and right upper mediastinum. After RAI therapy, levothyroxine (200–250 μg/day) replacement was continued and there was no PTC recurrence during the next 47 months.
Sellar MRI, performed at the 6-month follow-up after octreotide LAR therapy (before thyroid surgery), revealed a reduction in the size of the pituitary adenoma to 5.6 cm. Additionally, GH and IGF-1 levels were controlled to 0.15 ng/mL and 217.74 ng/mL, respectively. However, the size of the tumor increased to 6.4 cm, and serum GH and IGF-1 levels increased to 44.34 ng/mL and 507.77 ng/mL, respectively, 6 months after RAI therapy. Despite continued long-acting octreotide therapy, his symptoms worsened. Decompressive pituitary surgery was attempted, but the tumor removal was impossible due to the hard and fibrotic nature of the tumor and excessive bleeding. Pathologic specimen confirmed the diagnosis of Pit-1 positive TSH/GH secreting pituitary adenoma . The somatostatin analogue therapy was maintained for 2 years after surgery and cabergoline was added on, but GH and IGF-1 levels remained in high range with continued tumor growth. The patient was lost to follow up 3 months after discontinuance of somatostatin analogue therapy. The changes of serum TSH and GH levels during treatment of the patient are described in Figs. and .