In November 2019, a 37-years-old male was diagnosed with a grade 2 Follicular Lymphoma, with stage IV/high risk, according to the Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index, with bulky disease at onset. The patient was refractory to anti-CD20 (Obinutuzumab)-CHOP (Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin, Vincristine and Prednisone) and anti-CD20 (Rituximab)-DHAP (Cisplatin, high-dose Cytarabine and Prednisone). A post-therapy lymph node biopsy revealed a diagnosis of DLBCL, germinal center B-cell (GCB) like, with the expression of CD19 and CD20 pan-B-cell antigens . The patient underwent bispecific anti-CD20 X anti-CD3 antibody (RGN1979), which however turned out to be ineffective in controlling the disease. Due to the anti-CD20 refractoriness above reported, the patient was referred to our Center to proceed with Tisagenlecleucel therapy. The fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan at screening showed multiple supra and sub diaphragmatic adenopathies and an extensive skeletal involvement . After lymphocyte-apheresis, the Ifosfamide-containing bridging therapy yielded a partial disease control. After lymphodepletion (LD) with fludarabine (25 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (250 mg/m2), a single infusion with Tisagenlecleucel was administered. Forty-eight hours after infusion, the patient experienced a grade 1 cytokine release syndrome, which spontaneously resolved after 24 hours. The PET/CT scan at day+60 revealed a stable disease with a response in some lymph nodes, but higher FDG-avidity in others, in comparison to the PET/CT performed at day+30. At day +75 after CAR-T cell infusion, the patient underwent a PET-guided biopsy of the abdominal lymph nodes . The diagnosis was of Hodgkin-like B cell lymphoma, with a defective B-phenotype due to the lack of CD20 and CD19 expression . Moreover, a population of atypical CD30 positive lymphocytes, a strong PD-L1 expression in tumor cells, concomitant to the up-regulation of PD-1 expression in the tumor microenvironment were observed (, see for comparison). The PET/CT scan at day +90 revealed a progression disease and at day +100, the patient received the first dose of PBZ (200 mg flat dose) showing a rapid resolution of symptoms the patient complained before starting therapy, such as abdominal pain, serotine fever and fatigue. Nevertheless, two months later, the patient experienced a clinical progression confirmed by PET/CT scan that showed FDG-uptake in multiple lymph nodes, right anonymous vein thrombosis and bilateral pleural effusion . Due to the CD30 expression and the Hodgkin-like phenotype, the patient was finally treated by Brentuximab-Vedotin. The schedule was 1.8 mg/kg every 21 days. The PET/CT scan performed after the 4th cycle of therapy in October 2021 showed a complete response .
Before PBZ treatment, the entire compartment of circulating CAR+ T cells was set up by a population of terminally differentiated (CD45RA+ CD62L-), senescent (CD28-CD57+), exhausted (PD-1+) CD8+ cells . Notably, PBZ treatment did not modify the percentages of neither exhausted nor senescent CAR+T cells . In the non-CAR cell compartment, a remarkably high percentage of CD8+ T cells showed exhausted (69%) and senescent (40%) phenotype at pre-PBZ time point . At variance to CAR+ cells, PBZ treatment caused a decrease in the percentage of non-CAR CD8+PD-1+ T cells at day+21, that was paralleled by the resolution of clinical symptoms. However, the percentage of non-CAR CD8+PD-1+ T cells increased again at day+42 , when PET/CT scans showed signs of disease progression (see ). Noteworthy, the percentage of senescent non-CAR CD8+ T cells increased upon PBZ administration . Finally, out of a total of 18 mutations detected in the circulating cell free (ccf) DNA at day +42, at least 4 mutations (in KDR, TP53, ARID1A and KMT2C loci) were almost undetectable in the ccfDNA at the LD timepoint, when a total of 16 mutations were detectable .