A 72-year-old non-smoking Hispanic woman was initially diagnosed as having a large right breast mass measuring 11×7×11cm on physical examination, and axillary adenopathy. A core biopsy of the right breast and axillary lymph nodes revealed infiltrating lobular breast carcinoma with metastasis to the axilla. The tumor was both estrogen-receptor and progesterone-receptor positive (ER+/PR+) with Allred scores of 8 and 3, respectively. Immunostains for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu were negative. Aside from the breast and axillary masses, the remainder of her physical exam was unremarkable. A subsequent staging bone scan and computed tomography scan did not demonstrate any evidence of distant metastases, and she was therefore clinically staged as T3, N2 M0. She was given pre-operative endocrine therapy with exemestane (25mg) daily. Our patient tolerated exemestane well with a clinical reduction in the size of the breast mass. After approximately six months after starting exemestane, our patient underwent a right modified radical mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection. Histological examination revealed extensive tumor (ypT3ypN3) with 17 out of 20 lymph nodes involved with metastatic disease.
Due to the estimated 10-year risk of recurrence of approximately 80 percent, a decision was made to treat our patient with adjuvant chemotherapy. Due to her age and the increased risk of cardiac toxicity with anthracycline-based chemotherapy regimens, our patient was treated with TC chemotherapy (docetaxel 75mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600mg/m2) once every three weeks for a total of four planned cycles .
Our patient had no other medical problems prior to her diagnosis of breast cancer aside from gastro-esophageal reflux. Her surgical history, aside from the mastectomy and lymph node dissection, included a prior appendectomy for appendicitis and complete resection of a basal cell carcinoma from her right leg. Our patient had no known prior history of pulmonary or cardiac disease. She worked as a phlebotomist, and there were no known occupational exposures to industrial chemicals that would have given her a greater risk of developing pulmonary disease.
Our patient had no major toxicities or issues related to chemotherapy, aside from fatigue (grade 1 to 2) and nausea and emesis (grade 2) with the first two cycles. However, approximately two weeks after receiving the third cycle of chemotherapy, our patient developed rapidly progressive dyspnea, and a non-productive cough, and went to the emergency room at an outside medical facility. She was found to have mild hypoxemia. A computed tomography (CT) angiogram was performed, which was negative for evidence of a pulmonary embolus, but did reveal the new onset of peripheral, subpleural fibrotic changes not present on pre-treatment scans .
An attempt to pursue a needle lung biopsy at the outside hospital was complicated by a pneumothorax that required chest tube placement. Our patient was then transferred to the University of Miami hospital, for a thorascopic-guided wedge biopsy. Microscopic examination of the lung tissue revealed subacute interstitial pneumonitis evolving into areas of chronicity characterized by the presence of widening of alveolar septae with mild mononuclear infiltrates, collections of eosinophils, and pneumocyte injury . The latter was manifested by the presence of conspicuous Mallory body-like inclusions in hyperplastic pneumocytes. Areas of honeycombing were seen in the subpleural spaces. There was no evidence of any associated malignancy. Our patient was started on corticosteroids with rapid improvement of her dyspnea. Approximately one month later after her presentation to the emergency room, she no longer required supplemental oxygen, and had minimal dyspnea with exertion. Our patient was not given any additional chemotherapy, and was then referred for post-mastectomy radiotherapy. A CT scan performed approximately three months later showed improvement of the previously seen pulmonary infiltrates .