Our case is of an 82-year-old female with permanent atrial fibrillation treated by rate control and direct oral anticoagulant agents. Past medical history included non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy with partially recovered left ventricular ejection fraction on maximal medical therapy and Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Defibrillator as well as underlying chronic kidney disease. Her prior medical therapy included rivaroxaban at a lowered dose of 15 mg with a proton pump inhibitor (omeprazole).
She has been admitted repeatedly in the previous months due to symptomatic anaemia with an urgent admission to the surgical department due to major gastrointestinal bleed. She was treated with blood products and anticoagulation was stopped. She underwent a full endoscopic evaluation and computed tomographic imaging that did not reveal an obvious source of bleeding.
Due to a concern of a high thromboembolic risk (CHA2DS2VASC = 5), she was referred for left atrial appendage closure (LAAC).
On the day of the procedure, her physical examination was unremarkable. Haemoglobin level was stable at 11 g/dL, coagulation profile was normal, and creatinine level was similar to baseline value at 2.2 mg/dL with no electrolyte abnormalities. The procedure was performed under transoesophageal echocardiographic (TOE) guidance. There was no left atrial appendage thrombus. Transseptal puncture was performed by the Brockenbrough technique using a 71 cm BRK-1™ XS needle and Swartz™ SL1 transseptal guiding introducer (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St Paul, MN, USA). However, during the TSP, no clear tenting of the septum was visualized under TOE guidance.
Following the TSP, intraprocedural TOE showed that perforation into the ascending aorta had occurred, with the sheath placed in the ascending aorta. This was confirmed with aortic pressure signals and contrast fluoroscopy (Video 1). The patient was haemodynamically stable and there was no evidence of a pericardial effusion on TOE. A dose of protamine sulphate was administered.
A heart team discussion was held immediately. As the patient was haemodynamically stable with the transseptal sheath in situ, which allowed temporary sealing of the puncture, it was decided to seal the atrial-aortic puncture percutaneously.
An Amplatzer™ Duct Occluder (ADO) 8/6 mm (St. Jude Medical, Inc.) was percutaneously inserted via the Swartz™ SL1 transseptal sheath and pulled back into position at the aortic puncture site ( and Video 2). Fluoroscopy and TOE confirmed that the duct occluder was well placed between the right atrium and ascending aorta, with no residual leak (Video 3 and ). During the procedure, a thrombus was visualized by TOE at the tip of the 0.35-inch wire positioned via the transseptal sheath in the ascending aorta . Heparin was re-administered immediately. Soon thereafter, ST-elevation was noted in the anterior electrocardiogram leads. Coronary angiography was immediately performed and showed a thrombotic filling defect in the middle left anterior descending artery . This was treated with balloon dilatation and aspiration thrombectomy, with a good angiographic result and Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 3 restoration of flow. Inotropic support was used during the procedure and an intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted. Due to the intraprocedural complications, LAAC was aborted.
The patient stabilized within a few hours, the intra-aortic balloon pump was removed. She was discharged within a few days.
Following the procedure, the patient was treated with 3 months of clopidogrel therapy at a dose of 75 mg daily, together with long-term low-dose Apixaban (2.5 mg twice daily). Five months later the patient was re-admitted due to generalized weakness. Her haemoglobin had remained stable and an echocardiogram showed the ADO in situ. She was diagnosed with a metastatic lymphoproliferative malignancy and died shortly thereafter.