An 83-year-old white woman with a background of mild dementia, hypothyroidism and a resected gastric carcinoma 20 years earlier was found collapsed on the floor of her house. It was difficult to exclude loss of consciousness reliably, but when she was seen by her GP a right hemiparesis was reported, which had resolved by the time of admission to hospital. Her premorbid functional capacity had been good, and she could mobilise independently with the aid of a Zimmer frame and had required minimal assistance with activities of daily living.
On arrival to the stroke unit, the patient's Glasgow Coma Scale score (GCS) was 15 out of 15 and she had normal power in all four limbs and no sensory loss. Her most striking clinical feature on examination was severe impairment of visual acuity. She was walking into objects and was clearly blind. Despite an objective diminution of her vision, our patient maintained she was able to 'see' things around her. Pupillary reflexes were intact (suggesting an intact anterior visual pathway), with fundoscopy unremarkable. The only other neurological finding was a mild receptive dysphasia.
A computed tomography scan of the patient's brain demonstrated evidence of acute infarction in the right occipital and left occipito-parietal lobes, on a background of generalised periventricular ischaemia, consistent with a diagnosis of cortical blindness. Her receptive dysphasia resolved early in the course of her hospitalisation, but during her rehabilitiation she nonetheless continued to deny any loss of vision and showed signs of confabulation. When asked to comment on the doctor's tie, she was quick with an answer, but one that was incorrect. Interestingly, towards the end of her admission, she asked a nurse to "light up some candles" because she felt the room was dark, suggesting a degree of light perception that was not present on admission. She required assistance in mobilising safely in view of her visual impairment, and required help for most activities of daily living. Although she was, for example, unable to see her meals, she would feel for the utensils on the tray when it was placed in front of her, and if left to her own devices she would start eating the food, but assistance was required to help her finish the meals and avoid spillage. Although she would deny visual deficit, she would accept such assistance.
Subsequently, she returned home to live with a family member, but she required carers visiting regularly to assist in activities of daily living such as washing and dressing. Her general condition, such as nutritional status and physical strength, improved. About 4 weeks after initial presentation it was reported by our patient's family that they believed she was now able to follow shadows, although this may have been due to 'blindsight'. However, she still required significant carer involvement some months later. Although there had perhaps been a slight improvement, the likelihood of a marked recovery in visual acuity remained low.