A 25-year-old African obese woman with a history of two cesarean sections was referred to our clinic with 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation, frequent increasing abdominal pain and 3 days of vaginal bleeding. She had a regular menstrual period before the symptoms. In her medical history there was no record of use of an IUD, endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease. This was her third spontaneous pregnancy and there was no abortion. Her general condition was good and her vital signs were normal: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse 70 beats per minute (bpm), temperature 36.5 °C. A physical examination showed minimal tenderness in all sides of her abdomen with an increase in right lower pelvic section. A speculum examination showed a small amount of cervical bleeding, a palpable mass in rectouterine cavity and increased temperature and tenderness at right adnexial region. Transvaginal ultrasonography (USG) showed empty uterine cavity with 11 mm thickness. However, her rectouterine cavity was observed to be filled with heterogenous liquid including septations and hyperechogenic areas which were thought to be a coagulum. An ectopic gestational sac and yolk sac seemed to be inside her right ovary, and were identified close to the midline, which correlated with her 6 weeks’ delay of menstruation . The fetus and fetal heart beat were not clearly seen. Vascular proliferation called ‘ring of fire’ which is typical for ectopic ovarian pregnancy was detected around the gestational sac . Her left ovary and tubal structures seemed to be normal. She declared her previous menstrual periods were regular but that her last period was 2 months ago. Laboratory analysis showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 11,600/mm3, red blood cell count (RBC) of 400000/mm3, hemoglobin (Hb) of 12.3 g/dl, hematocrit (Htc) of 36 %, beta human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) of 6580 and normal urine results. She was diagnosed as having an ectopic ovarian pregnancy and was hospitalized. She and her family were informed about the stability of the condition and in view of her history of two previous cesarean sections, medical treatment of MTX was planned. A single dose of 90 mg intramuscular MTX was administered. She was stable. A progressive decrease in her beta HCG levels (4310 at fourth day, 2190 at seventh day, 210 at 14th day) as well as a diminishing of intraabdominal liquid and significant regression of her right ovarian sac were observed and she was discharged with weekly beta HCG test control advice. At the third week after the MTX treatment her beta HCG level was below 5 and her intraabdominal fluid had nearly disappeared .