On 15 December 2010, a 45-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with primary complaints of numbness in the upper limbs and weakness in the lower limbs, persisting for 5 months. Neurological examination revealed that the Medical Research Council (MRC) grade for the upper limbs was normal, while the MRC grade for the lower limbs was grade 2. Deep-tendon reflexes across all four limbs were weak. She had a medical history of nephrotic syndrome but no family history of hereditary conditions or infectious diseases.
Electromyography (EMG) results indicated demyelinating alterations and axonal damage in motor and sensory nerves, along with F-wave prolongation . CSF analysis revealed a protein concentration of 1,310 mg/L and a white blood cell count of 2 × 106/L.
Following the European Federation of Neurological Societies/Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on the management of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (2010) , the diagnosis of CIDP was considered. After treatment with intravenous prednisolone, the patient’s symptoms improved, leading to her discharge.
Eleven years later, the same patient was readmitted to our hospital with numbness and weakness in all four limbs, accompanied by tremor. She required assistance to walk and could not use chopsticks or a pen.
The physical examination revealed bilateral upper limb tremors (Video 1). The MRC grade for the proximal strength in both upper and lower limbs was grade 4, while the distal strength in all four limbs was grade 2. There was noticeable sensory disturbance, including deep sensory disturbances, in the extremities. Tendon reflexes in all four limbs were absent. The patient was unable to perform the finger–nose test and the heel–knee–tibia test successfully. The Babinski sign was absent.
No abnormalities were detected in blood routine tests, coagulation function, interleukin 6 levels, thyroid function, vasculitis testing, or immunoelectrophoresis (blood and urine). CSF analysis showed a protein concentration of 1,344 mg/L and a white blood cell count of 5 × 106/L. The serum immunoglobulin G4 level was 1,283.4 (reference value, 39.2–864).
This time, testing for peripheral ganglioside antibodies and antiparanodal antibodies was conducted. The serum CNTN1 antibody [confirmed by Cytometric Bead Assay (CBA)] tested positive with a titer of 1:1,000+. Additionally, anti-GT1a and anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies in serum were also positive. All tests were performed at Jiangsu Simcere Diagnostic Laboratory (Jiangsu Simcere Diagnostics Co, Ltd, Nanjing 210002, China). Brain MRI, brachial plexus, and lumbosacral MRI showed no evident abnormalities. Electromyography (EMG) indicated worsened demyelinating and axonal damage .
The patient was diagnosed with CNTN1 antibody-positive nodopathy. Following plasmapheresis therapy, the MRC grade for distal strength in all four limbs improved to 3. However, she remained unable to walk without assistance. Two months post-discharge, no significant improvement was observed.