A 46-year-old man with a smoking history of 15 pack-years presented with cough and dyspnea. He had been treated for a malignant mediastinal germ cell tumor, the original part of which had been surgically resected with part of the left lung and the left phrenic nerve 10 years earlier, resulting in paralysis of the left diaphragm. He had also undergone treatment for bilateral iliac metastasis with chemotherapy and heavy ion radiotherapy 5 years before and metastasis to the right lung with surgical wedge resection 6 years before. Nine months before the outpatient visit, the patient had undergone stereotactic body-radiation therapy with 56 Gy of radiation in seven fractions to treat another right lung metastasis measuring 3.5 cm in diameter and located close to the right hilum . On presentation, computed tomography revealed right bronchial stenosis over the range of previous radiotherapy . Bronchoscopy showed broad necrosis of the right bronchus, ranging from the right main bronchus to the orifices of the bronchi of the middle lobe and the superior segment of the lower lobe . Pulmonary function was low with 2.6 L of vital capacity and 1.7 L of forced expiratory volume in one second. He was repeatedly treated with bronchial debridement of the necrotic tissue, culture of which revealed infection with Aspergillus fumigatus and other various bacteria. Bronchoscopic biopsies were performed several times, showing no malignancy but only fungal hyphae. Despite intensive antibiotic therapy with voriconazole and repeated debridement, the necrosis was progressive. Neither balloon dilatation nor stenting seemed to be an option because of the fragility of the bronchial wall and serious concern regarding formation of a bronchopulmonary arterial fistula. The patient eventually developed sepsis and renal failure, which necessitated urgent surgical removal of the necrotic bronchus. However, he was unable to endure right pneumonectomy because of his low respiratory function caused by left phrenic nerve paralysis. Preoperative pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy using technetium-99m-labeled macroaggregated albumin showed moderate-to-severe decrease of blood flow into right upper lobe, and flow volume into right lung was 47%. We therefore performed right lung autotransplantation with preservation of the right basal segment, the orifice of which appeared to still be viable .
During the surgery, we first prepared a pedicled omental flap through an upper median laparotomy in the supine position. We continued the surgery in the left decubitus position, and right lateral thoracotomy was performed through the fourth intercostal space. Right pneumonectomy was performed with staplers placed on the right main pulmonary artery and right pulmonary vein, while the right main bronchus was trimmed to the carina because of the broad bronchial necrosis. On the back table, we removed the upper and middle lobes and the superior segment of the lower lobe, then flushed the remaining basal segment anterogradely and retrogradely using extracellular-type trehalose-containing Kyoto (ET-Kyoto) solution in the same manner as in our living-related lung transplantation protocol. Next, we implanted the basal segment by direct anastomosis of the bronchus to the carina, followed by end-to-end anastomoses of the pulmonary arteries and anastomosis of the basal pulmonary vein to the superior pulmonary vein . The arterial anastomosis was technically challenging because of the distance and extensive dissection of the main pulmonary artery centrally behind the superior vena cava was necessary, while the venous anastomosis was easy after dissecting the pericardium around left atrium in the same manner as regular lung transplantation. We also wrapped the bronchial anastomosis with an omental flap to facilitate bronchial healing and lower the risk of a bronchopulmonary arterial fistula . The operation took about 18 h due to extensive tight adhesions derived from the previous treatment, refractory bleeding from adhered regions and anastomosis of pulmonary artery, and repetitive bilateral lungs ventilation. The back table surgery took about 2 h and graft ischemic time was around 5 h. After operation, the bronchial mucosa of the transplanted basal segment appeared pale distal to the bronchial anastomosis .
On postoperative day 9, the patient developed left-sided pneumonia and required temporal support with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for 2 weeks. One month later, minor bronchial dehiscence at the bronchial anastomosis was observed and was successfully treated with antibiotics and nutritional support. Three months after the operation, the right bronchial anastomosis showed stenosis due to overgrowth of granulation tissue, which was treated with repeated bronchoscopic dilatation and eventual placement of a silicone stent . The patient was discharged home 5 months after the operation in a stable condition. At discharge, his pulmonary function was even lower with 1.26 L of vital capacity and 0.88 L of forced expiratory volume in 1 s although he was free of supplementary oxygen.
Three months after discharge, however, the patient developed massive hemoptysis. He was resuscitated on venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and hemostasis was obtained. Because he had fully recovered from the condition, we started discussing further surgical intervention to segregate the bronchial anastomosis and pulmonary artery. Regrettably, however, he soon developed a second massive hemoptysis episode and died.