. A 27-year-old woman and her 31-year-old husband attended VUHSK the Centre of Obstetrics and Gynecology (COG) Santaros Fertility Center (SFC) in September 2018 with a referral by a gynecologist due to the male’s infertility after trying to conceive for 4 years. In a previous relationship, the woman got pregnant spontaneously, but decided to terminate the pregnancy. The husband had no children. Patients were informed about scientific impact of this case, asked to sign a VUHSK confirmed Informed Consent for the publication of results, and they signed it.
During the medical examination of the infertile couple in VUHSK COG SFC, unfavorable results for conception were found. First of all, the transvaginal ultrasound for the woman revealed a low antral follicle count of 7 (3 on the right ovary and 4 on the left ovary) on the third menstrual cycle day, and her anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) level was 0.78 ng/ml, also. These clinical criteria predicted probable poor ovarian response. Interestingly, the woman did not have any known risk factors for diminished ovarian reserve and was of a young reproductive age. Additionally, she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism due to high thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level – 4.785 mU/l. So, levo-thyroxine treatment was started immediately after the endocrinologist consultation. Other laboratory and instrumental examination results were without pathologies.
For the man, abnormal semen analysis results were observed in a few recent years: oligoasteno-spermia (in January 2016; sperm count – 6x106/ml, progressively motile spermatozoa – 33%), oli-goastenoteratospermia (in February 2016; sperm count – 4x106/ml, progressively motile spermatozoa – 25%), azoospermia (in July 2018). Due to these results he was advised by a urologist to receive hormonal treatment, but it had no effect. After the performing of a sperm test in the VUHSK OGC Division of Fertility Technologies and Germ Cell Bank, the husband was diagnosed with severe oli-goastenospermia: sperm cell count was 1x106/ml, only immotile spermatozoa were found. All sperm analysis were evaluated according to the World Health Organization reference 2010 [, ].
The couple was referred to genetic counselling. Chromosome analysis of G banded metaphases showed normal female karyotype for the woman (46,XX) and male karyotype with balanced chromosomal rearrangement – Robertsonian translocation between 13 and 14 chromosomes for the man (45,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10)) .
After interdisciplinary medical team counselling, an IVF procedure with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) to be followed by PGT-SR for embryos was suggested.
. IVF stimulation cycle was started for the woman with TSH concentration <2.5 mU/l. After that, on the third menstrual cycle day, she underwent controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with GnRH antagonist stimulation protocol with dose of 300 IU/day of recombinant follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) for 11 days. When the largest follicles reached ≥18 mm, recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a dose of 10000 IU, was provided and 36 h later the transvaginal oocyte retrieval was performed. A total of 13 oocytes were collected, and mature oocytes (in metaphase II) were injected, resulting in viable embryos. After the oocyte retrieval procedure, the luteal phase support with appropriate medications was started.
. On the day of IVF under controlled ultrasound ovarian punction using local anaesthesia 13 oocytes were aspirated and directly transferred into FertiCult IVF medium (FertiPro, Belgium). The oocytes were incubated until the processing in 5.5% CO2 and 37°C incubator (Astec, Japan,). 4 hours after aspiration, the oocytes were prepared for ICSI procedure: denuded using 135 mikrom Denuding pipette (Gynetics, Belgium) and 10% Hialuronidase (FertiPro, Belgium). After denudation, only 8 methaphase II (MII) oocytes were injected under an inverted Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope (Nikon, Japan) using RI Integra TM 3 micromanipulator (Research Instruments, UK) and 35° Injection and 35° Holding micropipettes (Reproline, Germany). 6 out of 8 injected oocytes were fertilized after ICSI: the two-pronucleus stage was stated 24 hours after the ovarian punction. Embryos were cultivated in 50 mikrol drops in the one step SAGE medium (Origio, Denmark) under the mineral oil (Irvine Scientific, USA). On day 3 of the embryo development (3-6 blastomere stage, A, B, C, D), the embryo biopsy using RI Saturn laser (Research Instruments, UK), 50 mikrom Biopsy pipettes (Reproline, Germany) and RI Integra TM 3 micromanipulator (Research Instruments, UK) was performed. RI Viewer program (Research Instruments, UK) was used to select and cut the single blastomere ( E). The single blastomere was transferred into the 0.2 ml microtubes and directly transported on ice to the VUHSK CMG.
. In the CMG, genetic chromosomal analysis of the embryos was performed by Next Generation Sequencing (on the Ion PGM™ System, Life Technologies, USA) using The Ion ReproSeq™ PGS View Kits (PGT-SR) (Life Technologies, USA). The method is based on whole genome amplification and low-pass whole genome next generation sequencing to detect chromosomal aneuploidies, unbalanced chromosome arm events (>48 Mb) from a single cell.
Four embryos were analysed. Three embryos (1st, 3rd and 4th) showed a chaotic chromosomal constitution. One embryo (2nd) had a normal diploid karyotype with a 46,XX karyotype without any unbalanced chromosome rearrangements >48 Mb . The median absolute pairwise difference (MAPD) value was 0.210. MAPD is an estimate of coverage variability between adjacent genomic tiles. The productive reads count of a low-pass whole genome next generation sequencing was 128 610. The copy number variation (CNV) call at a MAPD <0.300 and the productive reads count >100 000 are classified as accurate. The PGT-SR analysis result of the 2nd embryo was normal. The diploid 2nd embryo was transferred to the uterus.
. After performing PGT-SR, only one embryo with no unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements (embryo No 2, see B) was identified and transferred to the woman on day 5 using Cook Access Nano embryo transfer catheter (Cook, USA).
. On the 14th day post oocyte retrieval (POD), the first serum β-hCG test result was received at concentration 39.5 mIU/mL. After this result, periodically performed serum β-hCG tests showed a steadily increasing serum β-hCG level: on POD 17 serum β-hCG test result was 154 mIU/mL, on POD 19 – 367 mIU/mL, on POD 21 – 912 mIU/mL. The normal gestational sac at 5 weeks and 3 days was confirmed by ultrasound examination. During the first pregnancy trimester, the woman was followed up in VUHSK OGC SFC with regular ultrasound examinations, treatment correction, and consultations.
Gestational diabetes was diagnosed at 12 weeks of pregnancy; the special meal plan and regular physical activity were prescribed. Every month, the pregnant woman was consulted by a perina-tologist and endocrinologist. The management of gestational diabetes was effective. At 38 weeks of pregnancy due to prelabour rupture of membranes, the women was admitted to the obstetrical department. There was a vaginal birth of a healthy girl with a weight of 2820 g. The Apgar score was 10/10. All screening tests of the new-born were in normal range. On the fourth postpartum day the mother and healthy new-born were discharged from the hospital.