A 20-year-old woman (154 cm tall, weighing 50 kg), who had been under long-term prednisolone treatment for dermatomyositis and autoimmune hepatitis, was hospitalized with acute liver damage. On the 11th day of hospitalization, her prothrombin time (PT) activity was 25% and NH3 level was 113 μg/mL. She was diagnosed with acute liver failure and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Plasma exchange (PE) was conducted and steroid pulse therapy was started. On the following day (ICU day 2), HF-CHDF was started because the NH3 plasma concentration was elevated and she was diagnosed with coma II hepatic encephalopathy. Thereafter, HF-CHDF was mainly used in combination with PE and continuous plasma filtration with dialysis (CPDF; a combination of slow, continuous PE and hemodiafiltration ) to replenish coagulation factors and to control the NH3 level.
On ICU day 6, the patient developed fever at night, and piperacillin/tazobactam (PIPC/TAZ) treatment (4.5 g, every 6 hrs) was started for suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia (Culture result: ). On ICU day 7, cervical rigidity was observed, and PIPC/TAZ was changed to cefepime (CFPM) (2.0 g, every 12 hrs) for suspected meningitis. On ICU day 8, PE with HF-CHDF was changed to CPDF, and the antibiotic therapy was switched to VCM with meropenem (MEPM) (2.0 g, every 8 hrs) to achieve distribution to the cerebrospinal fluid . At this time, accurate assessment of renal function was difficult because serum creatinine was removed by the dialysis, and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was more than 150 mL/min/1.73 m2. Since urine output was maintained (> 0.5 mL/kg/hr), and renal function before admittance to ICU was preserved (eGFR> 100 mL/min/1.73 m2), a loading dose of 30 mg/kg and maintenance dose of 20 mg/kg VCM every 12 hrs were adopted, according to the TDM Guidelines for Antibiotics 2016 (Japan, The Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and the Japanese Society of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring).
On ICU day 9, due to elevated NH3 and prolonged disturbance of consciousness, dialysis was switched from CPDF to HF-CHDF again (flow rate: see Table ), and PE was performed simultaneously for approximately 2 hrs. Meningitis was ruled out by spinal fluid examination, but fever and high inflammatory response persisted. VCM administration was continued because we could not rule out ventilator-associated pneumonia or catheter-related bloodstream infection associated with gram-positive cocci. On ICU day 10, the initial TDM for VCM was performed, and the blood level was under the detection limit (< 3.0 μg/mL), presumably due to the effects of HF-CHDF and PE. At the same time, the onset of anuria due to hepatorenal syndrome was noted. It was decided that a living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) would be performed 2 days later (ICU day 12), and HF-CHDF would be continuously performed until the day of LDLT. To maintain the VCM concentration in the therapeutic range prior to LDLT, the VCM dose was increased to 20 mg/kg every 6 hrs from the evening of ICU day 10 (MEPM was changed to 1.5 g every 6 hrs). The trough blood concentrations before the 3rd, and 4th (ICU day 11), and 7th (ICU day 12) VCM administrations were 9.5, 12.6, and 11.1 μg/mL, respectively. On ICU day 12, after the 7th administration of VCM, LDLT was conducted as scheduled and VCM administration was discontinued after the LDLT. No infection was apparent during VCM administration.