An 18-month-old white girl underwent resection of a small, round subcutaneous lump (1.5×1.3×0.8 cm) of the abdominal wall in her right hypochondriac region. The tumor was connected to her skin and had the macroscopic appearance of a pilomatrixoma (epithelioma of Malherbe). Surprisingly the histopathology was compatible with yolk sac tumor, showing a microcystic reticular pattern with positive staining for cytokeratin 8 as well as cytoplasmic granular staining of αFP . The resection borders were not completely clear from tumor tissue: stage II according to the Pediatric Oncology Group (POG)/Children’s Cancer Study Group (CCG) staging for malignant extragonadal GCT . Her αFP was 57 ng/mL 3 weeks after resection and dropped to 15 ng/mL 1 month later; her beta subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (ßHCG) was normal. An magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her abdomen was normal. The surgeon decided to observe and follow our patient’s αFP closely because of the lack of radiological evidence of the presence of a tumor and the decline in her αFP. Her αFP remained stable in the first months. One year after resection a local recurrence (1.1 cm, Fig. ) appeared with an increase in her αFP to 29 ng/mL. An MRI of her head, neck, thorax, and abdomen did not show any other masses. The surgeon performed a wide resection of the lesion. The pathology report confirmed the previous findings; the borders were free of tumor tissue. Because the tumor was completely removed with normalization of her αFP (on the day of surgery her αFP was 58 ng/mL, 10 days later 12 ng/mL, 1 month postoperative 8 ng/mL) and there was no evidence of any other tumor masses, the management was expectative. The first year post-resection was uneventful without clinical signs of local recurrence and with normal monthly αFP level. An abdominal ultrasound, 1 year after resection, did not reveal a recurrence. Follow-up continued measuring αFP on a regular basis with gradually extending intervals (every 3 months in the second year, every 6 months in the third year and once a year in the fourth and fifth year). Clinical evaluation and abdominal ultrasound 5 years after the second resection showed a full tumor-free remission . She was discharged from systematic follow-up.