We report on a 56 year old male patient diagnosed with an esophageal carcinoma located in the middle of the esophagus with a subtotal stenosis at 32 cm from the incisor teeth. Endosonography performed preoperatively revealed a locally advanced tumor (uT3, N+). Following the oncological recommendations the patient underwent neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy with a total of 50 Gy and a 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based chemotherapy (5-FU 15 mg/kg body weight on days 1–5, cisplatin 75 mg/qm on day 7, repeated in week five). Thereafter, a subtotal esophageal resection combined with mobilization of the stomach through midline laparatomy and of the esophagus through the fifth intercostal area was done. The esophagogastric anastomosis was performed with a 25 mm stapler. Histological evaluation of the resected specimen revealed complete response of the esophageal carcinoma to the neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy with no tumor tissue detectable (ypT0, ypN0, ypMx). Increasing concentrations of acute-phase reactants in line with a dramatically decreasing general condition of the patient indicated a leakage that was confirmed by a gastrografin swallow demonstrating a anastomotic leak with gastrografin effusion into the left mediastinum . After lavage of the mediastinum and abdomen both were drained by a chest tube. Additionally, total parenteral nutrition as well as broad spectrum antibiotics were given. However, this nonoperative management to close the leak was unsuccessful and endoscopic stent implantation was planned.
The endoscopic examination showed a wide leak in the anastomosis located 25 cm from the incisor teeth . Because of the excellent prognosis of the patient, we initially used a Polyflex self-expanding covered plastic stent (Willy Rüsch GmbH, Kernen, Germany; stent dimensions: 25 mm flare with 21 mm body, length 120 mm) placed 2–3 cm distal the upper esophageal entrance to close the leakage (three weeks after the esophageal resection). Clinical change for the worse was suspicious of stent migration, but the endoscopic examination revealed that the polyflex stent was placed correctly. However, the caliber of 21 mm was undersized to attach tightly to the mucosa of the esophageal wall enabling running of fluids through the anastomotic leak . Without a commercial available esophageal stent with a larger inner diameter on hand a resection of the esophageal remnant and a hand made cervical esophageal anastomosis was performed six weeks after the first operation.
Unfortunately, a leak in the hand made anastomosis was detected again. To close the leak we decided to use for the first time a covered colorectal Hanarostent (MTW Endoskopie, Wesel, Germany) (stent dimensions: 30 mm body, length 60 mm) which was placed four weeks after the second operation. This stent is designed for colorectal applications. The unique structure of the membrane connects the several separated segments made of nitinol wire to increase the flexibility of the stent and to prevent migration and tumor growth.
This stent was placed without complications. Control endoscopy demonstrated a close seat of the stent to the gastric tube with complete covering of the anastomotic leak . Thereafter, the general condition of the patient increased continuously in line with a decrease of the acute-phase reactants. One week after metal stent implantation, oral feeding was restarted and the patient could be discharged from the hospital after another three weeks. Sixteen weeks after the second stent implantation, the stent was extracted and follow up endoscopy and gastrografin swallow indicated complete mucosal healing of the esophageal leak .