A 73-year-old male patient was referred to the Rheumatology outpatient clinic with complaints of pain in the pretibial area, pain and swelling in both ankles joints and the right fırst Metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint. In her past history, 3 months ago he had applied to physician because of dry cough, malaise and weight loss, and solid mass in the lung were detected on radiologic investigations (thorax CT and PET-CT, Figs. and ). Endobronchial Ultranosonography (EBUS) biopsy was performed, and lung adenocarcinoma with nodal metastases was diagnosed on histopathological investigation. Pembrolizumab was started on the patient who applied medical oncology specialist. The patient had good response to pembrolizumab treatment regarding lung adenocarcinoma. Unfortunately, he was referred to the rheumatology clinic with the locomotor system complaints which started after receiving two infusions of pembrolizumab. Physical examination revealed both ankle arthritis, mild edema in the pretibial region, tenderness in the muscles and arthritis in the right fırst MCP joint. Laboratory examinations showed mild acute phase reactants elevation; Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR): 37mm/h(normal 0-20mm/h) C-Reactive Protein (CRP): 13mg/dl(normal 0-5mg/dl). Complete blood count, liver and kidney function tests, routine urinalysis, muscle enzymes were found to be in normal ranges. In serological tests; Rheumatoid Factor (RF), Anti-Nuclear Antibody (ANA), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP), Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody (ANCA), anti-dsDNA were found to be negative. Lower extremity cruris MRI was taken; diffuse edema in both gastrocnemius muscle and fascia, and abnormal facial signal intensity and enhancement were reported; these findings were compatible with fasciitis . Degenerative changes were detected in the hands and sacroiliac joint graphy. A primary rheumatic disease was not considered to explain the patient's complaints. Pembrolizumab-related fasciitis and seronegative arthritis were evaluated. Low dose corticosteroid (prednisolone 16mg / day) was started. In the clinical follow-up, a significant regression was observed in the patient's complaints. The general condition of the patient is good, and the follow-up of the rheumatology and oncology outpatient clinic continues.