A 27-year-old, Swiss–German man presented himself at the emergency service during night hours. After a sports competition during the day, he noticed a movement-dependent, stabbing pain in his left chest. Fearing an ACS, he recorded multiple, repeated, single-lead ECGs with his Apple watch. The patient purchased the smartwatch to monitor his “cardiac health” and check for arrhythmias after media coverage of a Danish soccer player experiencing cardiac arrest during a match . Prior to the event, the patient had never experienced palpitations or arrhythmias.
The ECG app attested a “normal sinus rhythm” for each of his multiple ECG recordings. The Apple watch regularly indicates, during ECG recording, that it cannot detect heart attacks. Yet the stabbing pain persisted. Despite the automated warnings that the smartwatch cannot diagnose ACS, the patient developed anxiety and began online research for ECG changes in ACS. He came across a description of hyper-acute T-waves as an indication of ACS and interpreted the pronounced T-wave on his single-lead ECG as such. He felt significantly worse, uneasy, and developed difficulty breathing. Upon consultation at the emergency department, the patient was extremely worried and described worsening symptoms of anxiety and panic, including tachycardia, palpitations, and perspiration. He had not taken any pain medication for the motion-dependent pain.
The young man was fit and healthy, a university student living with his girlfriend, reporting recreational use of tobacco. His history was unremarkable for preexisting medical or mental diagnosis, regular medication, further cardiovascular risk factors, or a family history of cardiovascular or mental conditions. There was no relevant surgical history. He described that he sometimes “gets stuck in his head” when he worried about something, but he was always able to calm and control himself. He never required professional psychotherapeutic support. The man denied the use of recreational or performance-enhancing drugs. The physical examination was unremarkable.
A 12-lead ECG in the emergency department showed a sinus rhythm of 88 bpm with normal conduction times and no indication of ischemia. The morphology and amplitude of the T-waves were normal in all 12 leads.
Due to the low pre-test probability, the unremarkable history, and the clinical presentation, no further diagnostic tests were justified. There was no other evident cause for the anxiety besides the over-interpretation of the single-lead ECG in combination with his post-exertional musculoskeletal pain. After administration of 500 mg of paracetamol (acetaminophen) and 1 mg of lorazepam, the movement-dependent, stabbing pain subsided, and the patient felt substantially better.
After discussing the limited value of a single-lead ECG for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction and the presentation of the different T-wave morphologies in the 12-lead ECG, the patient was discharged from the emergency department in symptom-free condition. Further recommendations were given in case of recurrent chest pain or anxiety and panic. Consultation with the family doctor was suggested to evaluate (a) the need for cardiological evaluation or (b) specific psychotherapy. We also encouraged him to stop smoking.
In a follow-up telephone interview for this report, the patient reported an unremarkable cardiological evaluation in private practice, as well as a consultation with an osteopath to improve the mobility of his torso and learn breathing techniques. He stopped smoking in the meantime. He feels fit and healthy and continues his competitive sportive activities. The patient did not use his Apple watch again.