A 67-year-old naturally healthy woman was admitted to the department of general medicine for a 2-week history of fever, malaise, sore throat, and elevated hepatobiliary enzymes. An antibiotic regimen was started for suspected acute cholangitis; however, her fever persisted and acute kidney injury occurred. On day 7, she was transferred to the department of nephrology on suspicion of vasculitis. She had no smoking history or was not taking daily maintenance medications. On examination, her body temperature was 38.5 °C and she had slight bilateral cost vertebral angle tenderness. She already had elevated serum creatinine (sCr, 1.56 mg/dL), proteinuria (2+), and microscopic hematuria (3+) on day 0. On day 7, sCr increased to 4.95 mg/dL. Serum anti-GBM antibody titer was 990 U/mL (negative < 3), whereas ANCA and antinuclear antibodies were negative. She was diagnosed with anti-GBM disease after a renal biopsy performed on day 8. It showed diffuse cellular crescents in glomeruli (65%, 22 out of 34) with fibrinoid necrosis, neutrophil infiltration, and ruptured Bowman’s capsules and GBMs , also with global sclerosis in 2 glomeruli (6%). There were interstitial edema and mononuclear cell-predominant cellular infiltration .
Hemodialysis was started, and thereby, she was treated with methylprednisolone (MP) pulse (1 g/day for 3 days) followed by oral prednisolone (PSL; initial dose, 60 mg/day) and plasmapheresis. Cyclophosphamide was not administered due to the absence of pulmonary hemorrhage and the low possibility of renal function recovery both clinically and pathologically .
On day 25, she developed pancytopenia that required frequent red blood cell and platelet transfusions. The respective minimum values were 4.0 × 103/μL, 7.1/μL, 6.6 g/dL, and 9.0 × 103/μL for platelets, neutrophils, hemoglobin, and reticulocyte, respectively. Initially, drug-induced pancytopenia was suspected, but pancytopenia persisted even 1 month after terminating trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and esomeprazole prescribed to prevent PSL side effects. Hemolysis, vitamin/iron deficiency, and viral infections were excluded. A bone marrow examination performed on day 62 was hypocellular with markedly decreased granulocytes, erythroblasts, and megakaryocytes. No abnormal infiltration or fibrosis was observed . Plasma thrombopoietin was 704 (> 320) pg/mL, ruling out myelodysplastic syndrome . No peripheral erythrocytes of the paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria type or chromosomal abnormalities were identified. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with severe acquired AA . Further examination for HLA phenotypes revealed that she had A2/24, B48/52, Cw8/12, DR15/15, and DQ6/6.
After the secondary MP pulse, the PSL dose was increased from 20 to 30 mg/day. CyA was added keeping the trough level at 150–200 ng/mL . CyA administration caused slight finger tremor, but the patient tolerated the treatment and was discharged home on day 80, after recovering from pancytopenia. Serum anti-GBM antibody titer became negative 16 months after the diagnosis of anti-GBM disease. After another 11 months, she received a living donor kidney transplant from her husband and has had no recurrence of anti-GBM disease or pancytopenia since then. .