A 61 year old Hispanic male with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, hepatitis C treated with ribavirin and interferon, and ethanol and tobacco abuse presented to our clinic with a complaint of 2 months of progressing dysphagia starting from solids then liquids, unintentional 15 lb weight loss and occasional nausea and vomiting with noted streaks of blood on vomitus after prolonged retching. Dysphagia was first noted when he started eating mainly cold drinks followed by cold trays. He felt that food was getting stuck in his mid-esophageal region and has constantly pounded his chest with his fist to make the food go down. On physical examination, the patient was noted to have the following: cachectic features of the face and body, a painless and firm 2 cm nodule along the left zygomatic crest and a firm and fixed ∼1 cm nodule of the right base of tongue. On further questioning about the nodules, the patient took notice of only the left cheek nodule which had been present for about 5 months, but did not notice if it progressed in size. The patient was then initially scheduled for an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) but was lost to follow-up until presentation at the emergency room about 1 month after due to weakness, fatigue and decreased oral intake secondary to progressive dysphagia. The patient was afebrile and his vitals were stable. The complete blood count, metabolic count, liver function tests, coagulation studies were within normal limits.
The patient initially underwent fluoroscopy which showed a 3 cm distal esophageal mass followed by computed tomography (CT) soft tissue neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis with contrast. The CT soft tissue neck revealed a 1.8 cm mass in the left anterior face at the level of the left nare without cystic components or inflammatory fat stranding, a 1.2 × 1.7 × 1.3 cm soft tissue density nodule of the right floor tongue root adjacent to the geniohyoid muscle, a 9 mm hyper dense nodule of the left rectus capitis muscle, a 7 mm hypodense nodule of the left trapezius muscle, a 5 mm enhancing nodule of the right rectus capitis and a more superior 7 mm nodule of the right rectus capitis that is better visualized on delayed images . CT thorax showed an eccentric circumferential thickening of the right distal esophageal wall that is ∼1.8 cm in thickness with a length of 4.6 cm and an 8 mm lymph node adjacent to the distal esophagus . CT abdomen/pelvis showed a liver with a 6.9 cm enhancing dome more likely from a perfusional defect but, over-all, with normal contour, a left adrenal gland that was diffusely enlarged and enhancing, several scattered areas of hyper-enhancement of the right iliopsoas with the largest measuring ∼1.8 cm, multiple left para-spinal musculature nodules about ∼1 cm in size, and several subcutaneous nodules measuring up to 0.6 cm of the left flank . Per initial radiologists' discussions, the chest findings showed an esophageal mass that was highly concerning for malignancy. The face and neck findings raised the possibility of soft tissue metastasis from the esophagus which was unusual; thus, a possible second primary such as melanoma was in the differential. The abdomen/pelvis findings of the left adrenal gland was concerning for metastasis, the multiple nodules were nonspecific but still suspicious for metastasis and once again, a secondary primary such as metastatic melanoma was in the differential along with metastasis from an esophageal primary.
An EGD was then done which showed the following: Barrett's-like features in the mid and distal esophagus, a large fungating and ulcerating mass which bleeds on contact in the lower third esophagus that was partially obstructing and circumferential involving two-thirds of the lumen circumference, and a large hiatal hernia . Biopsies of the esophageal mass were then sent for evaluation, and revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with squamocolumnar mucosa showing Barrett's and dysplasia. The tissue biopsy was microsatellite stable, p40– and HER2/NEU+ (verified with ERBB2/HER2 FISH). The esophageal brushing also revealed findings consistent with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Oncology was then consulted for further recommendations and requested to for a sample of the left cheek nodule. A fine needle aspiration of the left cheek nodule was then performed which also revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma favoring metastasis from the esophageal primary per pathologists' consensus after reviewing the esophageal biopsy and reviewing its cytomorphology. Immunostains of the left cheek nodule were noted to be CK7+ and p40–.
During the course of his work-up, within a few weeks' span, the patient started mentioning new sub-centimeter nodules on the left and right forehead and scalp, left shoulder and flank and right thigh which were painful to palpation. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head with and without contrast was then done which revealed a well circumscribed homogeneously enhancing 2 × 2 cm lesion of the left pre-maxillary soft tissue, a 1 × 1.7 cm lesion of the left lateral pterygoid muscle, a 7 × 1.4 cm lesion of the right genioglossus muscle adjacent to the root of the tongue which all correlated with past CT findings . Additional findings showed an enhancing 10.9 mm left parietal scalp and 11.8 mm right frontal scalp lesions with possible extension into the right calvarium, an enhancing 0.8 × 1.6 cm lesion of the right spinalis capitis, and an enhancing focus in the left occipital bone which correlated with the fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperinstensity suspicious for calvarial metastasis . Per radiologists' consensus, findings were concerning for metastasis that were more likely from an esophageal primary due to prior pathology findings.
Dermatology was also consulted to get a biopsy of the left shoulder and left flank nodules. Per histopathology, a tumor was identified in the deep dermis with no relation to the overlying epidermis. The tumor was composed of atypical epithelial cells, with focal gland formation. Immunohistochemistry showed tissue to be CK7+, diffusely, on all cells, CK20– and p40–. The profile was consistent with metastasis from the esophageal primary, a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. HER2 immunostaining was also done and was positive. Due to this, per discussions, the patient's findings such as nodules in the subcutaneous areas of the face, within the base of the tongue, neck muscles, paraspinal and iliopsoas musculature were deemed to be more likely metastasis from the EC primary.
A tumor board discussion was held, and due to the patient's over-all performance status and social circumstances, it was decided that hospice with palliative radiation therapy was the best course of action. The patient agreed to the plan and was made DNR/DNI. The patient then underwent esophageal stenting and started receiving daily fractions of radiation treatment for his esophageal mass. The patient started experiencing continuous nausea without vomiting and had a mechanical fall without head trauma. During this time, the patient also started refusing his oxygen and requested to be switched to comfort measures. He expired one night from cardiopulmonary arrest.