In 2016, a 71-year-old white French man presented with a 2-week history of bilateral blurry vision, recurrent epistaxis, and nausea. The patient was retired from his job (forester). His physical examination revealed that he was pale and had cardiac arrhythmia and mild basal pulmonary hypoventilation. He had no palpable hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy. The result of his neurological examination was normal (no neurological focalization, vertigo, headache, or hearing loss). His blood counts showed anemia (hemoglobin, 90 g/L) and normal leukocyte and platelet levels. His laboratory investigations showed normal liver enzymes with normal coagulation tests. We observed acute renal failure with serum creatinine 414 μmol/L (clearance, 12 ml/min according to the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate based on creatinine and patient characteristics [MDRD]) versus 88 μmol/L 1 month before (clearance, 75 ml/min), as well as potassium 5.1 mEq/L. His total proteins were 105 g/L with albumin 22.8 g/L and β2-microglobulin 10.73 mg/L. Serum electrophoresis and immunofixation revealed IgM-kappa paraprotein (50.2 g/L). The patient had proteinuria with 1.72 g/24 h. Urine immunofixation confirmed the excretion of monoclonal kappa light chains (1 g/24 h). The result of his cryoglobulin screen was negative. A computed tomographic scan (without contrast) showed the absence of lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, but a rectus sheath hematoma was present, probably owing to anticoagulation for chronic fibrillation and a recent myocardial infarction.
Because of the patient’s hemorrhagic syndrome, no kidney biopsy was performed. A bone marrow biopsy showed 95% interstitial infiltration by lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma . The MYD88 (L265P) mutation was detectable with allele-specific PCR on isolated bone marrow mononuclear cells. Bone marrow mononuclear cells presented as a CD19+, CD20+, CD23low, CD10− CD5low phenotype . Chromosomal analysis on the bone marrow sample demonstrated an abnormal karyotype with monosomy 8 . The patient’s ophthalmoscopic examination showed bilateral scattered retinal hemorrhages and venous tortuosity, with macular edema. A WM-associated nephropathy and hyperviscosity syndrome was diagnosed according to the International Prognostic Scoring System for Waldenström macroglobulinemia , and the patient was treated with RCD (cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone and 1 week later rituximab to avoid symptomatic IgM flare) without plasmapheresis because of a favorable evolution within the first week.
Unfortunately, 4 weeks after beginning RCD, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for oliguria, confusion, blurred speech, and severe skin and mucosal bleeding. The result of his physical examination was similar to the one at the first admission (no hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy and no neurological focalization). His funduscopic examination revealed bilateral retinal vein dilation and tortuosity, with retinal hemorrhage. His blood counts still showed anemia (hemoglobin, 100 g/L) and normal leukocyte and platelet levels. Laboratory investigations still showed normal liver enzymes with normal coagulation tests. The patient’s plasmatic creatinine increased to 769 μmol/L (clearance, 6 ml/min according to MDRD). The serum protein immunofixation assay showed prominent monoclonal bands against IgM and kappalight chain antiserum (47.3 g/L).
Plasmapheresis and hemodialysis were promptly started. Because of the patient’s acute renal failure as well as an acute coronary syndrome (treated with antiplatelet agents a few weeks before this presentation), treatment with idelalisib 150 mg twice daily was started. We quickly observed an improvement in the patient’s clinical status along with the viscosity decrease. Five days after the first plasmapheresis, the patient was discharged from the ICU and hemodialysis (serum creatinine, 437 μmol/L; clearance, 12 ml/min according to MDRD). Four months later, the patient’s laboratory test results showed a good response, with serum creatinine 173 μmol/L (clearance, 34 ml/min according to MDRD), total proteins 82 g/L, and gamma-globulins 28.1% (21.5 g/L). Serum immunofixation identified monoclonal IgM-kappa (19.4 g/L). With the decreases in creatinine rate, serum monoclonal IgM level < 90%, and an absence of new complications from WM, we concluded that the patient had a partial response according to the Owen et al. criteria . The response was maintained over the 4-month duration of treatment. Unfortunately, idelalisib had to be stopped because of a cutaneous complication. The patient developed a psoriasiform dermatitis, which partially improved 1 month after interrupting idelalisib. Idelalisib was restarted after dermocorticoid treatment at 100 mg twice daily, with controlled psoriasis. The patient’s evolution was unfortunately poor, with frequent hospitalizations for Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia treated with ciprofloxacin or piperacillin and tazobactam.
Eight months after his first admission, the patient was admitted to the ICU for septic shock with P. aeruginosa with extended-spectrum β-lactamase bacteremia. Unfortunately, the patient had severe hypotensive episodes during dialysis and presented seizures complicating antibiotic use (imipenem). The patient and the family clearly expressed their wish that the patient not receive invasive procedures or cardiopulmonary resuscitation. He died of septic shock and iatrogenic encephalopathy attributed to carbapenem. No autopsy was done according to the wish of the family.