The case was a 13-month-old baby with 9.7 kg, which was 3.5 kg at birth, and second male child of a family habitant in a village in Ardabil, Iran. He was referred to the hospital because of undescended testis (UDT) with a testis in the abdomen and one inguinal canal that was detected by ultrasound. Because the case was infant, the family history was asked to examine the problem in more detail. Accordingly, there was UDT history in the family, where the baby’s old brother also underwent orchiopexy surgery 4 years ago for UDT. During the pregnancy, the progesterone was injected to the mother for Hemorrhage every day for a week. The pregnancy was healthy and the baby is born by cesarean section.
Because of complete similar appearance to testis as the images show, we did not perform biopsy fearing of primary testicular delicate perfusion impairment. The baby referred to our centre because of bilateral UDT and nonpalpable testicle on the right side. However, sonography revealed both testicles in the proximal inguinal canal. The scrotum was not grown, HCG therapy had been started by pediatrician, and Other clinical signs were typical.
Surgical intervention was considered for the patient. Before surgery, four HCG 1200u injections were administered to the patient in four times at 1 month (one for per week) for testicular descent. However, the intervention did not completely resolve the problem, and there were no more diagnostic challenges. The patient underwent surgical procedure with general anaesthesia to diagnosis and as a final treatment stage. It was diagnosed that the testicles were on the left in the proximal inguinal canal and the sac hernia was ligated parallel to the inner ring. The left testis was a small component in the proximal without the epididymis. Two testes were closely connected in the lower part by a common epididymis, which all of them were situated in the left scrotum .
Also, two testes in the proximal inguinal canal were connected by a long epididymis with the incision in the right inguinal region. We did not remove supernumerary testis, which lacks vas or epididymis, because of afraid of impairing to main testis delicate artery.
However, we do not perform genetic evaluations because of cost lacking. We played ultra-sonography before surgery. The patient was followed and examined by a urologist for placement of testis in the scrotum sac within 48 h, 10 days, one and 3 months after the surgery. We accomplished scrotal sonography after surgery and detected all five testicles with two main testicles in standard size rendering to age and also supernumerary ones in smaller sizes. Finally, the 12 months later, sonography results in the testicles showed that there were no problems, and the intervention was uncomplicated according to the baby age .