A 95-year-old woman was referred to the cardiology from orthopaedics with acute pain of the left leg 1 day after surgery of a femoral neck fracture. She had no prior exposure to heparin before this admission. Nevertheless, after admission, she had been treated with intravenous antibiotics with a diagnosis of aspiration pneumonia for 8 days until 3 days before surgery, together with heparin flush twice a day. Of note, no intra-/post-operative heparin was administered, no cell salvage device, central venous, nor arterial catheters were used. She started feeling pain and coldness at rest from the early morning on post-operative day (POD) 1. Initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 153/71 mmHg; heart rate, 70 b.p.m.; body temperature, 37.0°C; and oxygen saturation, 100% at room air. The patient was in mild distress but awake and alert. Her wound was clear without signs of infections; however, her left lower thigh, calf and foot were cyanosed, cold and paralysed, her infra-inguinal arteries were not palpable, and the sensation was reduced. She had regular heart rhythm, no extra-sound and no murmur. Abdominal and neurological examinations were unremarkable, except for the left lower limb.
Her medical and surgical history comprised resection of colorectal cancer and insomnia. Her regular medication included magnesium-containing antacid and benzodiazepine. She had never smoked, had no other medical conditions predisposing to peripheral vascular disease, had no history of allergy to any drug.
The electrocardiogram revealed a normal sinus rhythm. In addition, complete blood count revealed leucocytosis, with the white blood cell count of 13 600/μL [normal range (NR) 3500–9900/μL]. Platelets were 39 000/μL (NR 120 000–400 000/μL), which was dropped from the baseline value of 309 000/μL at admission (timeline; ). The patient had marginally increased creatine kinase level [468 IU/L (NR 35–200 IU/L)]. The clotting test revealed the following: international normalized ratio of prothrombin time, 1.19 (NR 0.85–1.15); activated partial thromboplastin time, 46.6 s (NR 24–39 s); fibrin degradation products, 79.3 μg/mL (NR 0.0–5.0 μg/mL); and d-dimer, 28.4 μg/mL (NR 0.0–0.9 μg/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the lower limb exhibited multiple thrombotic occlusion at the left iliac artery, superficial femoral artery (SFA), and tibial arteries (TA); CT also showed calcification of infra-renal aorta but not showed a lot of thrombus nor significant atherosclerotic plaque .
The initial assessment was acute limb ischaemia (ALI) because of disseminated intravascular coagulation after surgery. Initially, we performed thrombectomy using the Fogarty catheter for SFA and TA . Then, thrombectomy for the iliac artery was also attempted; however, the Fogarty catheter could not pass the iliac artery occlusion . As we suspected that the iliac lesion was atheromatous chronic total occlusion (CTO), endovascular therapy (EVT) using 0.018-inch wire system and implantation of a bare-metal stent (Express SD 7.0/37 mm; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was performed. Finally, patency was established through to the end of the TA . During thrombectomy and EVT, 5000 IU heparin was used as an anticoagulant. One day after thrombectomy (POD 2 after orthopaedic surgery), the platelet counts further dropped to 17 000/μL, and the symptom of ALI relapsed. The patient exhibited reocclusion of the left superficial femoral–popliteal arteries on CT scanning. The diagnosis of HIT was suspected, which aroused discussion on the use of argatroban; however, the severe thrombocytopenia and bleeding signs, such as subcutaneous bleedings, discouraged the use of it. The patient and her family refused reattempting invasive therapies; consequently, the patient continued to worsen and died on POD 3. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibodies (IgG/IgA/IgM) measured on POD 2 by latex agglutination turbidimetry were later known to be positive with an optical density of 2.20 (strongly positive).