In 2005, a 30-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Endocrinology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, with uncontrolled hypertension and obesity. On physical examination at admission, the patient was 163-cm tall and weighed 87 kg, with a body mass index (BMI) of 33 kg/m2. The mean arterial pressure in daily measurements was 140/105 mmHg. In the clinical examination, Cushing syndrome was suspected. In the hormonal evaluation, elevated cortisol concentration with the normal circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion was found.
Nevertheless, in a dexamethasone suppression test, the patient presented an elevated cortisol concentration after administration of 1 mg of dexamethasone . Serum and diurnal urine concentration of Na, K, Ca, and phosphates were normal. The serum glucose profile is presented in .
Among the complications of hypertension, the patient revealed a hypertensive retinopathy of stage I/II.
We also performed dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry: T-score at L1–L4 lumbar spine was −1.57, and the patient was diagnosed with osteopenia.
Due to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-independent hypercortisolemia, we performed diagnostic imaging; an adrenal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of moderately enlarged left gland presenting homogeneous absorption with no focal changes, whereas the right adrenal gland appeared normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not confirm any lesions in the pituitary gland. The biological and radiological data were highly suggestive of ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome. Surgical removal of the left adrenal gland was performed. Histopathology results showed micronodular adrenal hyperplasia. The patient was prescribed indapamide 1.5 mg once daily and perindopril 5 mg once daily. Moreover, sodium and potassium, calcium, and vitamin D3 supplementation were prescribed.
Despite surgical treatment, in 2010, the patient was admitted to the hospital due to recurrent uncontrolled hypertension. Her BMI was 35.8 kg/m², and mean arterial pressure in daily measurements was 155/120 mmHg. Skin hyperpigmentation was observed. The hormonal profile is presented in and the patient’s blood glucose level before treatment in 2010 is presented in .
Adrenal angiography did not show any focal changes. MRI of the sella region was therefore performed, revealing a hypointense pituitary tumor of 5 mm in diameter located in the left anterior pituitary lobe. These MRI findings were highly suggestive of pituitary microadenoma.
Trans-sphenoidal total resection of the pituitary tumor was performed. Upon immunohistochemical examination, the resected pituitary microadenoma cells exhibited positive staining for the ACTH antibody. The patient was prescribed perindopril 5 mg once daily, losartan 50 mg once daily, spironolactone 50 mg once daily, bisoprolol 5 mg once daily, indapamide 1.5 mg once daily, acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg once daily, desmopressin 0.1 mg twice daily, and hydrocortisone 20 mg–10 mg–0 mg daily.
Subsequently, in 2011, the patient was admitted to the Department of Surgery for a scheduled strumectomy due to multinodular struma, which had been diagnosed in 2010. During the physical examination, an enlarged and fibroelastic thyroid was identified. The serum concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (fT3), and free thyroxine (fT4) were normal, indicating euthyreosis. The hormonal profile is presented in .
Ultrasound imaging demonstrated multiple nodules in both thyroid lobes, with the biggest solid nodule with calcification and hypoechoic outline measuring 1.17 × 1.82 cm.
The patient underwent a total strumectomy. Histological sections from the left lobe showed features of papillary thyroid carcinoma. The lesion was 1 cm in diameter with hyaline-fibrous capsule and calcification inside. Histopathology also revealed a multinodular struma of the right lobe. The patient was prescribed levothyroxine 100 µg (1 × 1), and she was qualified for iodine treatment.
In 2018, the patient was admitted to the Department of Gynecological Endocrinology Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, due to irregular menstrual cycle.
In the transvaginal ultrasonography, multiple small uterine fibroids were revealed. The endometrial thickness was 7 mm. The right ovary was enlarged by a cystic-solid, unilocular tumor with a size of 97 mm × 69 mm with central blood flow. There were no abnormalities in the left ovary revealed in the ultrasound examination.
Additionally, a hormonal analysis was performed .
Due to ultrasound features and elevated Risk of Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm (ROMA) results, the patient was qualified for surgical treatment. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and retroperitoneal tumor excision were performed. Histopathology results have shown uterine glandular polyp (0.5 cm), serous superficial papillomas and superficial endometriosis in both ovaries, and female adnexal tumor of probable Wolffian origin (FATWO) located in the broad ligament of the uterus. The FATWO was 8 cm in diameter, contained a variable admixture of diffuse, solid, and sieve-like cystic areas filled with blood. Macroscopically, the tumor was soft and uncapsulated. Immunohistochemical examination revealed an interesting profile of this tumor: ER(+), PgR(+), AR(+), GATA3(+), calretinin(+), HBME(+), WT1(+), cytokeratins AE1/AE3(+), CK7(+), CKAE 1/3 (+), melan A(+), α-inhibin(+), CD99 (+), CEA mono(−), PAX8(−), TTF1(−), RCC(−), CK20(−), CD117(−), S100(−), EMA(−), HMB45(−), and Ki67 (5%).
Due to a history of multiglandular diseases: micronodular adrenal hyperplasia, pituitary adenoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, and ovarian tumor, the patient was referred to genetic testing for mutations associated with multiple gland malignancy. We performed an analysis of 83 genes deletion/duplication (Invitae Multi Cancer Panel) in the whole blood sample. The Invitae Multi-Cancer Panel analyzes 83 genes associated with hereditary cancers across major organ systems, including: breast and gynecologic (breast, ovarian, uterine); gastrointestinal (colorectal, gastric, pancreatic); endocrine (thyroid, paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma, parathyroid, pituitary); genitourinary (renal/urinary tract, prostate); skin (melanoma, basal cell carcinoma); brain/nervous system sarcoma and hematologic (myelodysplastic syndrome/leukemia) cancers: AIP; ALK; APC; ATM; AXIN2; BAP1; BARD1; BLM; BMPR1A; BRCA1; BRCA2; BRIP1; CASR; CDC73; CDH1; CDK4; CDKN1B; CDKN1C; CDKN2A; CEBPA; CHEK2; CTNNA1; DICER1; DIS3L2; EGFR; EPCAM; FH; FLCN; GATA2; GPC3; GREM1; HOXB13; HRAS; KIT; MAX; MEN1; MET; MITF; MLH1; MSH2; MSH3; MSH6; MUTYH; NBN; NF1; NF2; NTHL1; PALB2; PDGFRA; PHOX2B; PMS2; POLD1; POLE; POT1; PRKAR1A; PTCH1; PTEN; RAD50; RAD51C; RAD51D; RB1; RECQL4; RET; RUNX1; SDHA; SDHAF2; SDHB; SDHC; SDHD; SMAD4; SMARCA4; SMARCB1; SMARCE1; STK11; SUFU; TERC; TERT; TMEM127; TP53; TSC1; TSC2; VHL; WRN; and WT1 gene mutations. We received positive results—pathogenic variant, exon 4. c.470T > C (p.Ile157Thr) heterozygous, with low penetrance identified in CHEK2, and a variant, exon 17. c.2484C > T (silent) heterozygous, of uncertain significance identified in KIT. Both mutations are not associated with MEN1 or MEN2 syndromes.