A 17-year-old male patient presented to the ophthalmology outpatient department with complaints of headache and diminution of vision for the last 20 days. There was no history of fever or trauma. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. The vitals were within normal limit. The clinical evaluation revealed relative afferent pupillary defect in the left eye with evidence of bilateral papilledema on fundoscopy. The patient was advised MRI of the brain to rule out any cerebral pathology. MRI revealed communicating hydrocephalus with no evidence of any space occupying lesion. No lesion could be identified on plain MRI. The MRI was reviewed due to a high index of clinical suspicion, and the possibility of a very tiny nodule in the fourth ventricle was raised, which necessitated further imaging with with constructive interference in steady state (CISS) sequence . A ring lesion with an eccentric scolex in the fourth ventricle with no evidence of post-contrast enhancement was seen. Thus, an imaging diagnosis of isolated fourth ventricular NCC was made. The patient was started on albendazole and ventriculoperitoneal shunting was done to alleviate hydrocephalus for symptomatic relief of the headache. There was immediate relief of the symptoms with recurrence of severe headache on the left side within few days. Repeat MRI with CISS sequence was done which showed an intraventricular cystic lesion in the 3rd ventricle which was extending through the foramen of monro into the frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle with dilated left lateral ventricle . No lesion could be identified in the fourth ventricle suggesting intraventricular migration of the cyst. Ventriculoperitoneal shunt in situ was noted in right lateral ventricle, which was not dilated. The patient was referred to neurosurgery for endoscopic retrieval of the cyst. However, due to limited resource setting, the patient was referred to a higher centre for endoscopic removal of the lesion, which was uneventful. The patient is now doing well and was last seen at 3 months follow-up.