A 56-year-old Chinese man with a two-month history of cough and hemoptysis was admitted to our hospital in September 2010. He was a nonsmoker and had no remarkable past medical history. Lung adenocarcinoma of left lower lobe with cerebral metastasis was diagnosed by bronchoscopic biopsy and imaging.
Chemotherapy with paclitaxel (135 mg/m2) plus carboplatin (AUC 6 mg/ml·min) was administered on September 15, 2010 and the patient was discharged 2 days later.
A routine blood analysis after a week showed a moderately decreased white cell count (WCC) of 2,660/ul with 67% neutrophils. No specific treatment was given because of the absence of symptoms. The patient visited a local hospital on October 2, 2010 because of a sore throat and mild fever. Blood analysis showed a WCC of 3,440/ul with 67% neutrophils and a platelet count of 7.4 × 104/ul. Although prophylactic antibiotic was administered, the pharyngodynia continued and a spiking fever was observed 4 days later complicating with joint pain involving bilateral knees and shoulders. The patient was referred to our department on October 10, 2010.
Physical examination on admission showed remittent fever of up to 39.6°C, peaking in the post meridiem; decreased breath sounds in the left lung, which may be due to the primary tumor. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. Arthritis was not apparent until the body temperature rose. Peripheral blood tests showed a leukocytosis of 13,470/ul with 87% neutrophils, and a platelet count of 7.2 × 104/ul. The C-reactive protein was 88.1 mg/l and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 22 mm/H.
Considering the history of chemotherapy for lung cancer and previous leukopenia of this patient, a latent infective disease was suspected and intravenous Moxifloxacin (0.4 g/day) and Cefepime Hydrochloride (2 g/12 h) were administered for 5 days. However, no improvement of the symptoms was achieved. Evanescent maculopapular rash appeared on the right side of his back on the fifth hospital day. Blood analysis showed an increased level of WCC (15,400/ul) with 87% neutrophils and an abnormal hepatic function without hepatosplenomegaly, including elevated alanine aminotransferase (213 IU/l), aspartate aminotransferase (128 IU/l) and alkaline phosphatase (309 IU/l). The rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies were both negative. No infectious agent was isolated from the blood, sputum, pharynx swab or urine cultures performed. Abdominal ultrasonography and electrocardiogram were normal. Neither a contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan nor a position emission tomography-CT scan found any infective or inflammatory sign except the tumors in lung and brain which were of the same size as previously detected. So the antibiotic treatment was stopped. An injection of 40 mg methylprednisolone was administered. The body temperature turned normal temporarily and increased to 39°C again about 40 h later. A remarkable elevated level of serum ferritin (2,000 ng/ml, reference range 13 ~ 200 ng/ml) was noticed.
Based on these findings, a potential diagnosis of AOSD was strongly proposed. Then oral nimesulide (100 mg/12 h), a neotype of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), was started and the temperature decreased gradually to normal in 5 days, together with improvement of other symptoms. The levels of both WCC and transaminases of peripheral blood returned to normal range. The performance status of the patient was notably improved. So another cycle of chemotherapy with pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) plus cisplatin (75 mg/m2) was performed on October 29, 2010 without any apparent adverse effect observed.
Treatment with nimesulide was continued for about 3 weeks with no fever or any other symptom recurrence afterwards. Then nimesulide was stopped and a second cycle of pemetrexed-cisplatin chemotherapy was administered. A repeat CT scan after two cycles demonstrated a significant reduction in size of the lung mass. Routine peripheral blood tests and liver function tests stayed normal. Rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies were negative all along. Repetitive blood tests showed rapid reduction of serum ferritin levels (483.7 ng/ml and 394 ng/ml after the first and second cycle of chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin, respectively). Four more cycles of chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin were then administered every 21 days with good tolerance achieving partial remission of disease. No AOSD-like manifestation occurred till now. Although a prompt clinical response to NSAID was achieved with resolution of fever, a diagnosis of PNS mimicking AOSD was finally made considering the persistent remission of the clinical manifestations to the effective chemotherapy.