A 28-year-old female patient presented to our department due to blurry visual acuity for 10 years especially in the right eye with deterioration for 5 months. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right and left eyes was 5.0 and 5.1 (logmar visual acuity chart), respectively. The intraocular pressure (IOP) in the right and left eyes was 17 mmHg and 18 mmHg, respectively. No abnormalities were observed in the anterior segment of both eyes. Fundus examination showed that the optic disc was normal, while the remarkable diffuse pinpoint or drusen-like speckle yellow white lesions affected the posterior fundus, with varying degrees of retina/retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)/choroid atrophy around the disc. The fovea light reflex was not clear . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan showed extensive hyperreflective thickening beneath the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE, Fig. ). Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) assumed that RPE/choroidal disorder was featured by “honeycomb” appearance . Visual field showed defect in the temporal sides . Electrophysiological examination findings (e.g. ERG, EOG, and VEP) were normal.
Her 22-year-old brother showed BCVA of 5.0 (logmar visual acuity chart) in both eyes. Fundus examination showed diffuse pinpoint yellow white deposits throughout the macular and peripapillar area with honeycomb-like pigmentary changes around the disc . OCT scan showed a hyperreflective thickening beneath the pigmentary epithelium accompanied by wavy uplift .
Her 54-year-old mother complained of poor visual acuity for at least 20 years, especially at nighttime. The BCVA of the right eye was FC/10 cm, and the left eye was 4.0 (logmar visual acuity chart). She had corneal opacity in both eyes , and the fundus could not be observed clearly. Corneal scan of OCT showed granular cloudiness, and corneal endothelium detachment in the peripheral part . Color Doppler ultrasonography of eyeball showed thickening in the posterior wall of both eyeballs.
Her father showed no history of ocular diseases. He would not come to our hospital for the ocular examinations due to personal reasons.
After signing the informed consents, venous blood was collected from the female patient, her mother and her brother, respectively. Gene sequencing was performed by MyGenostics (Peking, China). Gene sequencing revealed heterozygous mutations in EFEMP1 gene, which was consistent with the DHRD/ML. The study protocols were approved by the Ethical Committee of Hainan General Hospital. For the gene sequencing, single heterozygous mutation (c.1033C > T) was observed in each of the three blood samples. This missense mutation triggered p.R345W .