A 33-year-old white man presented to our hospital with sudden onset pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea of 1 day’s duration. The chest pain started when he was lifting a heavy trash bag and described the pain as sharp, constant, and radiating to his back. He also complained of diffuse body aches and chills but denied any fever, cough, hemoptysis, or weight loss. He denied any history of dental caries, recent travel, or exposure to sick contacts. He had no significant past medical history and was not taking any routine medications. He smoked half a pack of cigarettes a day for the past 10 years and denied any alcohol or illicit drug use. He worked as a waste collector in a garbage disposal firm.
At the time of presentation, he was: alert; oriented in time, place, and person; afebrile with a temperature of 37.06 °C (98.7 °F); tachycardic (heart rate of 110 beats/minute); and tachypneic (respiratory rate of 18/minute) with a blood pressure of 126/78 mmHg. An oral examination revealed normal dentition. A cardiopulmonary examination showed normal S1 and S2 with no murmurs and clear lung fields to auscultation bilaterally. An abdominal examination revealed a soft, non-tender abdomen with no organomegaly. A neurological examination showed intact cranial nerves and sensory system, and his muscle strength was 5/5 in all limbs with normal tone. Deep tendon reflexes were normal. An initial laboratory workup showed mild leukocytosis with white blood cell (WBC) count of 13,700 cells/mm3, elevated inflammatory markers of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 48 mm/hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) 84 mg/dl, and moderately elevated serum transaminases of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 634 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 326 U/L. A basic metabolic panel was within normal limits. Three sets of cardiac enzymes done 8 hours apart were normal. An electrocardiogram was obtained which showed sinus tachycardia and diffuse ST segment elevations. A chest radiograph showed normal bilateral lung fields and normal cardiac silhouette. Computed tomography (CT) of his chest ruled out aortic dissection but showed pericardial effusion. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular systolic function with ejection fraction of 55% and a small pericardial effusion with no signs of tamponade physiology.
He was diagnosed as a case of acute pericarditis with minimal pericardial effusion. He was discharged home on indomethacin and was asked to follow up in the out-patient clinic. Two weeks later, when he was seen in our out-patient clinic, he complained of worsening dyspnea and chest pain. He was readmitted to hospital and an urgent transthoracic echocardiogram was obtained, which showed moderate to large pericardial effusion and tamponade physiology with right ventricular diastolic collapse and dilated inferior vena cava . An emergency pericardiocentesis was done and approximately 550 ml of purulent pericardial fluid was drained. The pericardial fluid was sent for culture, cell analysis, and cytology. Pericardial fluid WBC count was 15,376 cells/mm3 with 98% segmented neutrophils. A Gram stain of the pericardial fluid showed Gram-positive cocci in chains. He was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics with intravenously administered vancomycin (dosed on trough concentration) and piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 g every 8 hours). Pericardial fluid cultures grew alpha hemolytic streptococci which were characterized as S. intermedius by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF MS). S. intermedius was susceptible to penicillin and ceftriaxone. Anaerobic, fungal, and acid-fast bacilli cultures were negative. Pericardial fluid cytology was also negative for any malignant cells. Extensive workup with CT abdomen, CT chest, urine analysis, urine culture, and blood culture to look for source of infection failed to identify any other focus of infection. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and tuberculosis QuantiFERON testing were negative. Antibiotics were deescalated to intravenously administered ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 hours) as per culture sensitivity.
His hospital course was complicated with the development of a pulmonary embolism for which he was started on an intravenously administered heparin infusion. However, within a few days of starting heparin, there was a steady decline in his platelets count. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) was suspected and heparin infusion was stopped. Our patient was started on argatroban infusion at a rate of 140 mcg/minute. HIT antibodies and serotonin release assay were sent which came back positive. He was subsequently transitioned to orally administered warfarin with target international normalized ratio (INR) range of 2 to 3. However, with the course of time, he did not have complete resolution of symptoms with persistence of chest pain and dyspnea. Hemodynamic and echocardiographic features were consistent with development of constrictive pericarditis. Surgical pericardiectomy with median sternotomy approach was performed which revealed thickened pericardium . He reported improvement in his symptoms after pericardiectomy. He was discharged home in a stable condition and received a total of 7 weeks of intravenously administered ceftriaxone. Six months post-discharge he reported complete resolution of his symptoms. A repeat echocardiography was normal and showed resolution of pericardial effusion.