A 51-year-old male was admitted in the emergency department for jaundice with 7 days of evolution. Personal history of sporadic consumption of alcohol was identified. At physical examination, mucocutaneous jaundice was found. Blood samples revealed elevation of liver cytocholestasis markers (aspartate transaminase 6,688 U/L; alanine transaminase 6,223 U/L; gamma-glutamyltransferase 243 U/L; and alkaline phosphatase 188 U/L), liver dysfunction (INR 2.6; total hyperbilirubinemia [TB] 27.12 mg/dL; and direct bilirubin 19.53 mg/dL; factor V 46.6%; ammonia 219 μg/dL), and mixed alkalemia (pH 7,47; PaCO2 32.5 mm Hg; HCO3 23.7 mEq/L; lactate 1.7 mmol/L). An abdominal-pelvic computed tomography scan showed an expansive lesion in the left kidney, grade IV of the Bosniak classification. No changes related to the liver, bile ducts, spleen, or pancreas were described. In the etiological study performed, positive AgHBs, AcHBc IgM, and AcHBe with low viral load (VL) HBV of 41,100 IU/mL were found. Serology for hepatitis D virus was negative.
A diagnosis of severe acute hepatitis B and probable solid neoplasm were assumed. The patient was transferred to the ICU and started on N-acetylcysteine and entecavir at a dose of 1 mg/day. After 48 h in the ICU, ALF criteria were met. Progression for grade IV HE motivated orotracheal intubation. Preventive measures of cerebral edema were instituted, and monitorization of intracranial hypertension was initiated with the measurement of the optic nerve sheath. Concomitantly, liver tests worsened, with a maximum TB of 60.59 mg/dL and direct bilirubin of 37.78 mg/dL; INR of 7.9; hyperammonemia of 423 μg/dL; and hyperlactacidemia of 2.3 mmol/L. No other organ failure was identified.
Although the Kings College and Clichy criteria for LT had been met, the probable malignant neoplasm represented a contraindication. Due to the persistent neurological dysfunction and worsening of liver tests, the team decided to start HVPE. A filter membrane was chosen and 8 L of plasma was infused in each of the 3 sessions. The median duration of each session was 8 h. The replacement volume was equal to the treated volume. To reduce the risk of bleeding and infection, the replacement volume consisted of 5% human albumin and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) in a ratio of 1:1. During HVPE, AKI was identified, with creatine 1.51 mg/dL, and terlipressin was started.
At the end of the third HVPE session, worsened AKI (maximum creatinine 3.26 mg/dL and urea 74 mg/dL) and hyperammonemia (325 μg/dL) led to the initiation of cvvHDF. An effluent dose (ED) of 50 mL/kg/h was programmed, without losses. There were no identified any classic indications for CRRT. After 4 days of cvvHDF, the ammonia level was under 100 μg/dL, and CRRT was suspended.
Figures , , show the evolution of liver tests, ammonia, lactate, and sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score. After three HVPE sessions and 4 days of cvvHDF, ammonia levels and liver tests achieved sustained improvement. FFP administration is a confounding factor for the factor V elevation.
The mortality predicted by the SOFA score achieved the maximum value of 95.2% on the 5th day in the ICU, as shown in Figure . After discontinuing cvvHDF, the predicted mortality decreased, following the evolution of liver tests and ammonia, as shown in Figures , , .
On the 10th day in the ICU, a ventilator-associated pneumonia was diagnosed, and a second maximum value of predicted mortality was achieved. Concomitantly, hyperammonemia occurred, but ammonia level normalization was observed without invasive measures.
After 3 days without cvvHDF, the patient was extubated. Clinical and analytical improvement was noticed. The patient was submitted to robot-assisted left radical nephrectomy on the 22nd day in the ICU. The histology of specimen revealed a clear cell renal carcinoma, grade 2 of grading system ISUP/OMS.
The patient was transferred to an internal medicine ward for continuity of care on the 31st day in the ICU. At that time, he had a Glasgow coma scale score of 15 points without sequels beyond ICU-associated myopathy. Analytically, he had cytocholestasis markers within reference values; TB 5.75 mg/dL; INR 1.4; lactate 0.7 mmol/L; creatinine 1.66 mg/dL; urea 30 mg/dL; and a HBV VL 51 IU/mL. Four months after hospital admission and a complete program of physical rehabilitation, the patient has fully recovered his autonomy.