An 80-year-old Chinese lady with symptomatic left medial knee osteoarthritis confirmed on weight-bearing knee radiographs presented to our outpatient clinic.
Having failed a period of conservative treatment, she subsequently underwent a left medial OUKA successfully. A cementless size XS femoral implant and a cementless size AA tibial implant with a 5 mm mobile bearing insert were used. Post-operative recovery was uneventful, and radiographs done showed satisfactory prosthesis positioning with no evidence of periprosthetic fractures . The patient managed to ambulate well on the 1st post-operative day and was transferred to a step-down facility for further rehabilitation.
The patient underwent further therapy in the step-down facility and showed good progress and recovery with tolerable levels of knee discomfort. However, 2 weeks on, she started complaining of worsening knee pain with decreased ambulatory distances while still being able to weight bear and ambulate. There were no preceding instances of trauma or injury. A repeat plain radiograph showed a displaced proximal tibial periprosthetic fracture . She was immediately placed on a non-weight-bearing status and transferred back to our hospital for further management. A pre-operative computed tomography (CT) scan was deemed unnecessary as the periprosthetic fracture was of a simple fracture pattern and clearly defined by the orthogonal plan radiographs.
She was counseled and underwent left revision TKA with fixation of the tibial plateau fracture. Intraoperative findings include a medial tibial periprosthetic fracture with the fracture originating from the keel slot of the cementless tibia implant . The implants were revised to a cemented size 2.5 Depuy Synthes Press Fit Condylar femur and size 2 Mobile Bearing Tibia tray and 29 mm femur sleeve . Post-operative full weight-bearing ambulatory physiotherapy was permitted and tolerated well. A dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry bone mineral densitometry, performed to assess the density of the bone architecture as a risk factor for the periprosthetic fractures, showed osteopenia.
On discharge, the patient was reviewed regularly in the outpatient clinic and at the latest review at 6 months post-surgery, she was noted to be walking well with satisfactory range of motion of 15–95°.
Verbal consent was obtained for the patient for the purpose of this case report.