A 70-year-old Chinese male was admitted to the General Surgery Department of Shengjing Hospital (an affiliate of China Medical University) due to a 3 month history of fever and progressive swelling and pain in the left lower extremity in the absence of trauma or infection. The patient attended his local hospital when the symptoms began. There, a Color Doppler US examination showed dilated deep and intramuscular veins of the left lower extremity, with slow blood flow; therefore, intramuscular venous thrombosis of the calf was suspected. US examination revealed decreased echogenicity of the muscles of the medial and posterior compartments of the left thigh and the muscles of the posterior compartment of the calf, with a diffuse increase in vascularity. Blood tests showed an elevated D-dimer level, white blood cells were 8.04 × 109/l, monocytes were 11.90%, neutrophils were 76.30%, red blood cells were 3.61 × 1012/l, and hemoglobin was 95 g/L. The diagnosis was suspected left calf intramuscular venous thrombosis, possibly due to cellulitis. The patient was given anticoagulation and parenteral antibiotics, including 800,000 units penicillin G sodium qd (i.v), 110 mg dabigatran ester bid (i.v), an antipyretic, and nutritional support. The swelling, pain and fever worsened, with a maximum temperature of 42 °C.
The patient was transferred to our institution. He had no relevant medical or family history, and he reported no history of weight loss or change in appetite. General physical examination was unremarkable. There were no signs of hepatosplenomegaly or abdominal, respiratory or cardiovascular disorders. On clinical examination, a hard, non tender, ill-defined mass was present in the left inguinal region. The left lower extremity was obviously swollen and tender, and the skin was dark red in color and warm to touch . Neurological examination was normal. Routine blood and liver function tests were normal. Laboratory tests showed serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was 292.0 mg/L (normal 0–8), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 58 mm/h (normal 0–15), ferritin was 993.7 ng/ml (normal 11–336.2), CA125 was 66.32 U/mL (normal 0–35), β2-microglobulin (b2-MG) was 9.42 mg/L (normal 0.7–1.8), and lactic acid dehydrogenase (LDH) was normal. IgG and IgA levels were decreased.
US examination of the left lower extremity revealed large ill-defined hypoechoic regions within the muscles of the medial and posterior compartments of the thigh and the muscles of the posterior compartment of the calf, which were diffusely swollen, with preservation of the underlying muscle architecture. The regions were located at the margin or on one side of the muscles, irregularly infiltrating normal muscle tissue, with texture resembling muscle fibers retaining continuity with the surrounding muscles. Adjacent anatomical structures and tissues preserved their normal architecture. Color and power Doppler US showed hypervascularity within the regions , but no evidence of thrombosis of the deep or superficial veins of the left lower limb. An enlarged lymph node was detected in the left inguinal area. On ultrasound, the inguinal lymph node had a thick hypoechoic periphery, a hyperechoic central region, and a clear distinction of the border of the cortex and medulla. Lymph node vascularity was increased and had a branch-like distribution. Increased echogenicity in the subcutaneous tissues indicated edema. The provisional diagnosis was an intramuscular lesion.
Subsequently, MRI and CT were performed. Contrast-enhanced CT was used to evaluate the pelvic cavity and lower abdominal cavity, while MRI was used to evaluate the lower leg lesions. MRI of both calves showed diffuse swelling that infiltrated the muscles of the posterior compartment of the left calf. The distal aspect of the gastrocnemius and soleus had a minimally heterogeneous hypointense signal on T1-weighted images and a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted and fat suppression sequences , with an ill-defined margin. Muscle fibers could be seen in some lesions, but they were indistinct. CT scans were performed on the lower abdomen and bilateral thighs. Non-contrast CT showed diffuse swelling of the muscles of the medial and posterior compartments of the thigh. The muscles were enlarged, and contained patchy hypodense regions, with indistinct margins. Fat planes between muscles were lost. After intravenous contrast administration, enhancement of the involved muscles was slightly patchy, and mild. Attenuation after contrast administration did not appear to be substantially different from other muscle groups when compared to the contralateral side or the quadriceps muscle or gluteal bellies on the same side. The vessels enhanced as they normally would and probably appeared more conspicuous as compartmental compression impairs blood flow . Abdominal and chest CT scans were normal.
The patient was provisionally diagnosed with intramuscular lesions; however, it is challenging to base a pathological diagnosis on imaging characteristics alone. Extensive patchy lesions and elevated inflammatory markers were consistent with inflammation, while a tumor that irregularly infiltrated the muscle suggested a different diagnosis, necessitating imaging-guided biopsy. Consequently, percutaneous US-guided core needle biopsy was performed under local anesthesia (2% lidocaine) using a 16 gauge needle. The hypoechoic solid-appearing parts of the regions within the gastrocnemius were targeted, while large blood vessels and nerves were avoided . Four cores were obtained after four passes, without any immediate complications.
Biopsy specimens were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, processed, and embedded in paraffin. Microscopic examination revealed small round lymphoid cells arranged in diffuse sheets. On immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for CD20, CD19, vimentin, Bcl-2, Bcl-6 and MUM-1, scattered positive for CD5, cyclin D1 and P53 protein, and negative for CK, CD21, CD23, CD3, CD10 and desmin. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 90%. In situ hybridization was positive for Epstein-Barr encoded RNAs (EBER). The histopathological diagnosis was non-Hodgkin DLBCL .
A staging whole body fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) was performed to identify other sites of disease. F18-fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT (F18-FDG PET/CT) demonstrated avid uptake in the left obturator externus muscle, the muscles of the medial and posterior compartments of the thigh, and the posterior and peroneal muscles of the calf (maximum standard uptake value [SUVmax] = 10.2) . Enlarged lymph nodes with increased FDG-uptake were observed in the left inguinal region. Bone marrow biopsy was normal, showing no evidence of lymphoma.
The patient was referred to the Haematology Department for chemotherapy where he was started on rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP). To date, the patient has received four cycles (21 days each) of R-CHOP according to the following protocol: Day 1, 600 mg rituximab qd (quaque die) (intravenous pump); Days 2–4, 700 mg cyclophosphamide qd (intravenous drip); Day 2, 20 ml doxorubicin qd (intravenous drip); Day 2, 5 mg vincristine qd (intravenous drip); Days 2–6: 15 mg dexamethasone qd (intravenous drip). The patient achieved a satisfactory initial response, and the swelling of the left lower extremity gradually subsided. After the fourth cycle of R-CHOP, the swelling in the left lower extremity was completely resolved, but the skin remained pigmented . US revealed obvious regression of the hypoechoic regions in the muscles of the medial and posterior compartments of the left thigh and the gastrocnemius, and on Color Doppler US, vascularity was decreased compared to the initial examination . At the end of treatment, the patient underwent another US examination, which showed the size of the hypoechoic regions had decreased and the vascularity of the affected muscles was substantially reduced and only slightly greater than normal peripheral muscles. The patient is receiving regular follow-up. Eighteen months after the initial presentation in August 2019, the patient was considered clinically well and showed no signs or symptoms of lymphoma.