A 53-year-old male presented with a 3-year history of progressive cough and dyspnea on exertion. His past medical history included osteoporosis, gastroesopageal reflux, moderate obstructive sleep apnea and dyslipidemia. Physical exam was notable for grey hair, which had started in the fourth decade of life, and clubbing. No systemic features of connective tissue disease were noted. Family history was notable for pulmonary fibrosis in the patient’s father, who passed away in his seventh decade with autopsy findings suggestive of acute interstitial pneumonitis. The patient is a life-time non-smoker with no relevant exposures.
Pertinent investigations included pulmonary function tests demonstrating a restrictive process with severe reduction in diffusion capacity. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest demonstrated an interstitial lung disease with moderate-severity fibrosis in keeping with an alternative diagnosis to IPF, according to current guidelines . The overall appearance and distribution of the disease, notably the presence of ground-glass opacities and mosaic perfusion with air-trapping was suggestive of fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Imaging of the abdomen demonstrated splenomegaly and a nodular liver compatible with hepatic cirrhosis. Isolated thrombocytopenia was also identified. Connective tissue disease work up revealed an elevated ANA 1:160 in a homogenous pattern, and was otherwise unremarkable.
After multidisciplinary review, the interstitial lung disease (ILD) was considered to be consistent with an alternative diagnosis to IPF, due to clinical and radiological discordance, and a surgical lung biopsy was performed . Histologically, there was chronic active pneumonitis with extensive architectural remodelling and areas of microscopic honeycombing, reminiscent of usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern; however, the presence of more widespread active disease, prominent centrilobular involvement, moderate inflammatory infiltrate away from areas of remodelling, and patchy alveolar hemorrhage were not in keeping with UIP. The pattern was interpreted as indeterminate for UIP.
A subsequent liver ultrasound demonstrated evidence of cirrhosis with splenomegaly and portal hypertension. The patient had significant desaturation on ambulation out of keeping with the degree of fibrosis seen on imaging; therefore, a Transthoracic Contrast Echocardiogram was done (Additional file ). It demonstrated clear intrapulmonary shunting which was consistent with a diagnosis of Hepatopulmonary Syndrome (HPS).
Given the presence of significant inflammation in the biopsy and worsening hypoxemia, the patient was started on Mycophenolate 500 mg BID and Prednisone 10 mg daily resulting in stability in his lung function. He was subsequently referred for both lung and liver transplant assessment.
In light of the family history of pulmonary fibrosis and clinical features of accelerated aging including early greying, osteoporosis, cirrhosis and pulmonary fibrosis, we suspected this patient may have a genetic predisposition to pulmonary fibrosis secondary to STS. Peripheral blood was sent for Flow-cytometry FISH which demonstrated granulocyte telomere length below the 10th percentile for the patient’s age, consistent with a diagnosis of STS in this clinical context. A medical genetics consult was obtained and a next generation gene sequencing panel for ILD containing several autosomal dominant genes that cause short telomere syndrome (including SFTPA1, SFTPA2, TERT, TERC, TINF2, RTEL1, PARN, NAF1) was sent. While testing of pathogenic variants in these 26 genes known to be associated with interstitial lung disease was negative, it was also ackownledged that the full spectrum of mutations resulting in this disease are largely unknown at this time.
The patient ultimately developed progressive respiratory failure and underwent double lung and concurrent liver transplant 18 months after the initial diagnosis was made.