A 27-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 2 para 1, booked at 13 weeks gestation. An ultrasound scan confirmed an estimated date of delivery of April 19, 2007. She was a fitness instructor, and had no significant past medical history, aside from a chest infection prior to this pregnancy that was treated with antibiotics by her General Practitioner. A smoker since the age of 17 years (approximately ten cigarettes per day), she had stopped six months previously.
The index pregnancy proceeded uneventfully until she presented with haemoptysis to her local hospital at 25 weeks gestation. A chest x-ray suggested a possible right-sided pneumonia. She was prescribed a course of antibiotics, and discharged home.
When seen in the antenatal clinic at 28 weeks gestation, she reported further episodes of haemoptysis. She was therefore admitted immediately for investigation. The working diagnosis was pulmonary embolism and as such she was fully anticoagulated with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). Arterial blood gases breathing air were within normal limits (pO2 92.5 mmHg, 12.3 kPa; pCO2 33.6 mmHg 4.47 kPa), and sputum cultured normal upper respiratory tract flora. A chest x-ray demonstrated a small right basal pleural reaction and some right basal atelectasis, which may indicate pulmonary embolic disease. A perfusion lung (V/Q) scan gave an indeterminate risk of pulmonary embolus. Nevertheless, despite several days of adequate treatment with LMWH (post dose Factor Xa 0.6), she had continued haemoptysis and a respiratory opinion was therefore sought. As a pulmonary embolus had as yet not been confirmed and the condition of the patient appeared to be worsening despite adequate therapy, bilateral leg Doppler's and a computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) were performed. The former showed no evidence of a deep vein thrombosis. The latter revealed no pulmonary embolus but rather a cavitating mass of 4 cm in diameter within the right lung, immediately posterior to the hilum and occluding the lower lobe bronchus .
LMWH was discontinued and an urgent flexible bronchoscopy was performed 24 hours later. The view was obscured by active bleeding, and although a large tumour was seen in the right lower lobe bronchus it was not possible to undertake a biopsy. The woman was therefore discharged home and readmitted within the week for a scheduled rigid bronchoscopy. Biopsy was performed and unfortunately histopathology indicated a probable well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma.
Subsequent management was discussed in a Multidisciplinary Team Meeting, involving obstetrician, respiratory physician, cardiothoracic surgeon, radiologist and histopathologist. The possibility that there may be blastamous foci was raised. The need for appropriate staging, including abdominal computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) scan, with right pnuemonectomy should the tumour be localised, was agreed. As the safe use of PET in pregnancy has yet to be evaluated, it was decided that the baby should be delivered first.
Given that the woman was then 31+ 4 weeks gestation it was decided that she should receive corticosteroids over the following 48 hours (betamethasone 12 mg IM 24 hours apart), so as to encourage fetal lung maturation, with a view to delivery during 32 weeks of gestation. As there were some concerns as to whether Valsalva during second stage (that is active pushing) might precipitate significant haemoptysis from an apparently vascular tumour, an elective caesarean section was considered. However, following discussions with the woman, who was very keen to avoid such surgery, it was agreed that an induction should be attempted. Fortunately, following two does of prostaglandin, an amniotomy was possible. After that, she went on to deliver a male infant weighing 1970 gm.
Four days following delivery, a PET scan suggested that the tumour within the right bronchus was confined to the right lower and middle lobes of the lung.
Within ten days of delivery she was admitted for right lower and middle lobectomy. Several large sub-carinal glands were also removed. Surgery went well without event and the patient recovered rapidly and was discharged within a week.
Subsequent histology confirmed a well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung with one microscopic focus of blastoma, which appeared after sectioning the entire tumour. The mediastinal glands were not involved but tumour was present at the bronchial resection margin. As this tumour is not usually radiosensitive, it was decided that the remaining right upper lobe should be removed in order to affect a possible cure with the least possible chance of recurrence.
Again surgery was uneventful, and she made a quick recovery. However, histology from the completion pnemonectomy suggested the possibility of microscopic residual disease around the area of the stump of the right main bronchus. The clinical oncologists suggested treatment with radical external beam radiotherapy to try to prevent disease recurrence around the bronchial stump, which she underwent with minimal side effects.
A year following diagnosis, the patient is well and recurrence free. She does, however, report a persistent dry cough and breathlessness on severe exertion.