A 71-year-old man with fever and malaise as initial symptoms underwent PCR testing 4 days after symptom onset and was diagnosed with COVID-19 on the following day. He was prescribed favipiravir and methylprednisolone (125 mg/day) and was administered oxygen at 7 L/min via a face mask. Owing to gradual worsening of oxygenation, the patient was transferred to an emergency center 7 days after the onset.
The patient’s medical history included hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, total gastrectomy, and splenectomy. His vital signs were stable at admission, except percutaneous oxygen saturation of 95% at a low rate of 15 L/ min oxygen via a reservoir mask. In breath sound assessment, fine crackles were found to extend in both lungs. Several laboratory findings including lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, C-reactive protein, and D-dimer levels showed values beyond the normal range . In contrast, the lymphocyte counts were below the normal range. Blood gas findings indicated hypoxemia.
On day 2 after admission, due to the worsening of oxygenation and reduced level of consciousness, mechanical ventilation via tracheal intubation was performed (FiO2, 0.8 cmH2O; Positive End Expiratory Pressure (PEEP), 10 cmH2O) along with the initiation of steroid pulse therapy (1000 mg methylprednisolone for 3 days). The chest radiograph showed increased bilateral diffuse mixed consolidation and ground-glass opacity. His oxygenation gradually worsened, with fever, increased inflammatory response, and increased tracheal secretions. The SOFA score was 4 on admission but increased to 11, suggesting progression to organ failure. In addition, Staphylococcus species were detected in surveillance cultures. Ventilator settings were then changed to the following: FiO2, 1.0; P/F, 88 and PEEP, 12 cmH2O. Prominent hypoxemia was also observed. Seven days after admission, VV-ECMO was introduced (Murray Score: 2.5) (venous drainage through the right internal jugular vein with a 23-Fr cannula, venous reinfusion through the right femoral vein with a 19-Fr HLS cannula [Maquet Getinge, Rastatt, Germany], MERA NHP Exelung HPO-23WH-C [Senko Medical Instrument, Tokyo, Japan]). VAP and CRBSI were suspected due to an increased inflammatory response and decreased P/F ratio; thus, meropenem and TEIC were prescribed.
High-dose loading of TEIC was performed according to the dosing regimen (therapeutic administration regimen) of the intensive care unit . TEIC (800 mg) was administered four times every 12 h, followed by a maintenance dose of 600 mg of TEIC every 24 h. The serum creatinine and albumin levels at the beginning of VV-ECMO were 0.65 mg/dL and 2.4 g/dL, respectively. Renal replacement therapy was not performed during VV-ECMO. On day 3 after initiating VV-ECMO (before the 5th administration of TEIC), the serum TEIC concentration reached the target level (19.5 μg/mL). Serum TEIC concentrations were measured from different sites (radial artery, before and after oxygenation) at 0, 10, 30, 60, and 120 min after TEIC administration to determine the presence of adsorption by ECMO for three days from day five to day seven (during TEIC maintenance administration) .
The serum TEIC concentrations before administration of the maintenance dose were not significantly different among the three sites. The serum TEIC concentration peaked at 30 min post-administration. Although the concentration decreased over time, the serum TEIC level remained in the therapeutic range (15–25 mg/mL) without decreasing below the effective range. Even after the introduction of VV-ECMO, an elevated inflammatory response was observed, and the involvement of CRBSI and VAP was suspected. However, we determined that ECMO weaning was difficult until respiratory status improved and TEIC was continued. However, since MRSA was not identified from sputum culture and blood culture, TEIC was terminated after 14 days.
VV-ECMO and prone positioning therapy were effective, and the patient showed an improvement in oxygenation. VV-ECMO was discontinued 17 days after admission (11 days after the introduction of VV-ECMO). However, the patient persistently presented with intractable diarrhea caused by cytomegalovirus and died 42 days after admission due to multiple organ failure caused by VAP.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for the publication of this case report, with the preservation of the patient’s anonymity.