A 92-year-old man was referred to our center for syncope due to a complete atrioventricular block . His medical history includes coronary atherosclerotic heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Coronary angiography was performed on account of effort angina 3 years ago . Prior coronary angiography revealed a diffuse lesion (percent diameter stenosis 70–80%) in the middle segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) branch . However, he refused to receive revascularization or medication treatment. During hospitalization, he had no finding of heart failure, and the transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed minor mitral insufficiency and normal LV contraction (ejection fraction: 55%).
We performed dual-chamber PM (HeartTone LD300D, LifeTech Scientific Corporation, Shenzhen, China) implanted via the left subclavian vein on the next day after admission. The implantation procedure can be summarized as follows: under local anesthesia, after a successful puncture of the left subclavian vein, the patient was implanted with a common sheath. Although a superior vena cava stenosis might exist, we did not replace the common sheath with a long sheath. Thus, the manipulation of active fixation leads was very difficult; we attempted to fix RV lead at the RV septum, but it was not as successful. Finally, two active fixation leads were, respectively, placed at the RV apex (SureScan 5076; 58 cm, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and the right atrial appendage (SureScan 5076; 52 cm, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with excellent pacing parameters (intraoperative RV lead impedance and threshold were 1,300 Ω and 1.4 V, respectively). There were no abnormalities or complications during the implantation procedure. X-ray fluoroscopy image immediately after implantation showed that the RV lead was fixed properly . Electrocardiogram immediately after implantation showed the left bundle branch block pattern .
However, on the second postoperative day (POD), the patient complained of unrelenting chest pain and syncope. A subsequent immediate chest X-ray identified that the RV lead tip migrated to the region outside the left cardiac margin . A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that the RV lead passed through the interventricular septum and the left LV free wall, and finally reached the left of the pericardial cavity. Furthermore, as the thoracic CT scan also showed a small amount of left pleural effusion and there were no obvious symptoms of pericardial tamponade , we deduced that the lead had already penetrated the pericardium. Electrocardiogram and interrogation showed loss of ventricular capture .
The subsequent patient’s management was thoroughly debated. Patients may not tolerate surgical lead extraction due to the variety of severe chronic diseases and advanced age. Therefore, on the 5th POD, we performed transvenous lead extraction under transesophageal echocardiography monitored and cardiac surgery backup. depict and describe the entire procedure in detail. Transvenous lead extraction was uncomplicated and did not have any hemodynamic instability, and intraoperative ultrasonography monitoring showed no increase in pleural effusion and pericardial effusion. The original RV lead was refixed at the lower RV septum to reduce the risk of perforation and consequent tamponade. Subsequent electrocardiogram and PM interrogation revealed the PM functioning normally with excellent pacing parameters (intraoperative RV lead impedance and threshold were 1,020 Ω and 1.0 V, respectively) . On the 10th POD, the patient was discharged, and the subsequent 6 months of follow-up were uneventful.