A 12-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with a four day history of initially central acute abdominal pain, now localised in the RIF. She described the pain as constant and associated with anorexia. She denied any urinary symptoms and is pre-menarchal.
Her background surgical history consisted of a left inguinal hernia repair at the age of 11 months. She was on no medications and had no allergies.
Her family history revealed her to be one of five sisters, and their mother known to be a carrier of androgenic insensitivity syndrome. The oldest sister aged 21 years had been diagnosed with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS). The second oldest sister aged 17 year is well and has normal menstrual periods. The third sister aged 14 years has primary amenorrhea but has not been tested for CAIS. The youngest sister aged 11 years is also pre-menarchal and has not been tested for CAIS.
On examination she was apyrexial and noted to have mild RIF tenderness without any guarding. There was no abdominal distension and bowel sounds were present. She was phenotypic female, weighing 51.1 kg and her height measured at 1.67 m. Her breast development was at Tanner stage II (breast buds formed, with small area of surrounding glandular tissue).
Bloods tests showed normal range of white blood cell count and C-reactive protein concentration. The urine dipstick was clear. She went on to have an ultrasound scan of her abdomen and pelvis which did not visualise the appendix. No free fluid was noted, however her uterus was noted to be small sized, and her ovaries could not be visualised.
She was admitted to the hospital for observation. On examination the following morning her RIF tenderness was more marked and associated with guarding. After discussion with the patient and her parents about the possibility of acute appendicitis and its risks, a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed.
During laparoscopy, the following findings were made: macroscopically dilated appendix, right and left gonads ( respectively) at the internal opening of the inguinal canal (appearances consistent with intra-abdominal testes), empty pelvis with a rudimentary uterus on the right side . No evidence of fallopian tubes or connection of uterus to the vagina and broad based, non-inflamed Meckel's diverticulum An intra-operative pelvic examination by a gynaecology consultant confirmed a short, blind-ending vagina with a mid-line band and the absence of a cervix.
Laparoscopic appendectomy was performed, with the histology confirming acute appendicitis.