In 2013, a 44-year-old woman with a history of JAK2V617F positive polycythemia vera was referred to the National Institutes of Health due to history of a right-sided pheochromocytoma, diagnosed and resected at age 42. The patient had been diagnosed with absolute erythrocytosis of unknown etiology at age 37 after presenting with classic clinical symptoms of aquagenic pruritus, facial plethora, excessive sweating, joint pain, fatigue and headache. Initially she had been treated with recurrent phlebotomies, and it was not until 2013 that JAK2 genetic testing was performed. In 2011, she developed recurrent episodes of elevated blood pressure, palpitations, diaphoresis, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Initial diagnostic workup revealed elevated levels of urinary norepinephrine, dopamine and normetanephrine. Subsequently, a 4.5 cm lesion was identified in the right adrenal gland on computed tomography (CT) .
The patient underwent an uneventful surgical resection of this mass, confirmed to be pheochromocytoma on pathology. Per patient, her polycythemia symptoms and hematocrit levels, continued to worsen over the years from 2007 to 2011, with an increased frequency of phlebotomies. Postoperatively, until early 2013, the patient’s hematocrit levels remained within the normal reference range and she did not require phlebotomies. EPO levels were not investigated prior to surgery and remained within the normal reference range postoperatively. The patient later developed mildly elevated hematocrit levels ranging between 46.4 and 48.9% [35–45%] with EPO in the normal reference range, requiring phlebotomies every 3–4 months . Serum iron, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), transferrin and ferritin results did not demonstrate iron deficiency. Additionally, recent testing in 2017 revealed only 2.11% of JAK2V617F mutated clone in whole blood DNA. Of note, patient’s family history in the mother is significant for multiple thrombotic episodes of unclear etiology that led to a lethal pulmonary embolism despite being on prophylactic doses of warfarin. Laboratory and genetic testing results from the mother are not available.
Herein, the blood DNA from the patient was screened using our 54-gene panel, and no pathogenic mutations were detected. In tumor tissue, we identified an indel mutation of IRP1 (c.267-1_267delGGinsTA) at the exon 3 splicing site, which is not present in the patient’s blood DNA . No mutations were detected in HIF2A, PHD1/2 and the VHL gene in tumor specimen. The exon 3 splicing site of the IRP1 gene was highly conserved on multiple sequence alignment, indicating that this splicing site plays a vital role in IRP1 gene splicing . FISH demonstrated loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) of IRP1 in chromosome nine in the patient’s tumor tissue . The splicing site prediction algorithm (Human Splicing Finder) showed that the IRP1 mutation either cause splicing site breakage or form a new splicing site, suggesting loss-of-function of the IRP1 protein .
To further confirm the effects of this mutation on splicing efficiency, we constructed minigenes consisting of exon 2 and 3 and intron 2, using the exon trapping vector . In the minigene and splicing site assay, the mutant minigene did not produce an exon skip transcript . Sanger sequencing of PCR products from the wild type and mutant minigenes demonstrated that the mutant minigene has two base pair deletion in exon 3, which cause a frameshift mutation from exon 3. Furthermore, the frameshift mutation led to a premature stop codon and truncated protein (p.V95*), causing a loss of 794 amino acids . Immunohistochemistry revealed that an anti-C terminal antibody of IRP1 could not detect the protein in patient tumor, while anti-N terminal antibody could bind to the protein, indicating that the protein was truncated as a consequence of the IRP1 mutation, consistent with the sequencing results of minigene. HIF2α, which is negatively regulated by IRP1, was increased in the patient’s tumor tissue, compared to the normal adrenal medulla and wild-type IRP1 pheochromocytoma tissue. EPOR protein expression and EPO level were notably increased in the patient’s tumor tissue as well .