An 80-year-old woman with a past medical history of recurrent right cheek nodular melanoma and new lung metastasis previously on immunotherapy presented for worsening dysphagia and odynophagia for one month.
The patient initially developed dysphagia, odynophagia and associated malnutrition after 6 cycles of pembrolizumab. Immunotherapy was discontinued, and patient was started on prednisone slow taper with initial improvement of symptoms. However, after 2 mo, the patient developed throat swelling with hoarseness and new oxygen requirement.
The patient initially had a right cheek skin pigmented lesion diagnosed as nodular melanoma in July 2015. She subsequently underwent tumor resection, and sentinel lymph node biopsy showed 0/4 positive lymph nodes. She was then started on active surveillance. In December 2016, the patient noticed a lump near the right parotid gland, and positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed 1 cm fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid nodule in the subcutaneous tissue of her right lower cheek consistent with malignancy and a new 1 cm FDG avid right upper lobe lung nodule with a standardized uptake value (SUV) max of 4.5. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of right lower cheek subcutaneous nodule revealed metastatic melanoma. The patient underwent right superficial parotidectomy, modified radical neck dissection, and excision of the right subcutaneous peri-mandibular facial mass in January 2017. In February, local radiation therapy and adjuvant Ipilimumab immunotherapy were started. However, the patient developed severe diarrhea and rash after 2 doses of ipilimumab, so ipilimumab was discontinued, and she resumed active surveillance again. In March 2018, PET/CT showed an increased right upper lobe lung mass of 3.5 cm × 3 cm with SUV max of 17.3, pembrolizumab and radiation therapy to right lung were initiated. Near resolution of right lung metastatic lesion was noted after 3 doses.
In October 2018, PET scan revealed metabolic activity in the right supraglottic area . The patient was hospitalized and underwent direct laryngoscopy with biopsy which showed a developed posterior supraglottic mass with inflamed mucosa encroached over posterior supraglottic airway and generalized inflamed mucosa throughout lower pharynx. Biopsy showed friable purulent debris with focal multinucleated giant cells without any evidence of fungal, bacterial, acid fast organisms or melanoma cells, indicating a diagnosis of immunotherapy associated mucositis. Pembrolizumab was held and patient was started on prednisone 40 mg oral daily with improvement of symptoms, and she was discharged home with prednisone slow taper.
Past medical history was significant for depression, diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension.
Height: 5’4.9” (165 cm); Weight 199.3 Lbs (90.4 kg); Body Mass Index 33.2 kg/m2. Physical examination detected copious amount of thick mucus in the oropharynx.
CT neck showed near complete occlusion of the airway due to tissue thickening of epiglottis and larynx .
Direct laryngopharyngoscopy with biopsies of pharyngeal, supraglottic, and glottic mucosa showed impending airway obstruction with massive swelling of posterior supraglottic larynx and diffuse inflamed granular mucosa involving majority of supraglottic larynx and lower larynx.
Histologic analysis of tissue biopsies demonstrated fibrinopurulent exudate and granulation tissue with acute and chronic inflammation in left and right arytenoid tissues of the larynx and also epiglottic tissue .
Tissue culture with Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Grocott-Gomori’s methenamine silver (GMS) stain, gram stain, Fite, Kinyoun, and Wright-Giemsa stains were negative for typical and atypical bacteria, acid-fast bacteria (AFB), and fungi.