Our patient is a young, 24 year old male, diagnosed with extensive colitis of Ulcerative Colitis in mid- 2020. He had defaulted treatment and not attended to the routine clinic after three months following the diagnosis. However, he had been in clinical remission for almost a year. He was initially treated with oral prednisolone, sulfasalazine and azathioprine. This time he presented with clinical features suggestive of a relapse of severe ulcerative colitis. There was no evidence of toxic megacolon or other detrimental complications. Cessation of smoking was identified as a potential precipitating factor in addition to the poor compliance. He did not have any concomitant extra intestinal manifestations. There had been a marked unintentional weight loss of about 31% from his baseline body weight within a month. One week prior to admission he had noted difficulty in walking but was able to mobilize with support.
He had marked bilateral lower limb edema with general unwellness. He was afebrile and did not have tachycardia, hypotension or a tender abdomen. Lower limb examination revealed bilateral symmetrical proximal more than distal weakness with diminished reflexes and preserved sensation without sphincter involvement. There was no significant muscle wasting or fasciculations. Also, he had symmetrical proximal more than distal upper limb weakness with diminished reflexes and all sensory modalities were intact. His cranial nerves, higher functions and cerebellar examinations were normal. He had a weak neck muscle power and cough effort but was not in respiratory distress. He maintained his vital parameters with no desaturation or fluctuation of blood pressure or pulse rate.
Full blood count revealed a moderate hypochromic microcytic anemia of 9.9 g/dl (reference value 12–15 g/dl). His inflammatory markers such as CRP was 115 mg/L (reference value 0–5 mg/L) and ESR was 45 mm/hr (reference value 1–13 mm/hr).The albumin level was very low of 1.3 g/dl (reference value 3.5–5.5 g/dl). His renal functions were normal and urine full report did not reveal albuminuria. He had a mild hypokalemia and thyroid functions were normal. Fecal calprotectin was positive. Stool cultures excluded other enteric infections and Clostridium difficile toxins were not detected. Flexible sigmoidoscopy revealed severe mucosal inflammation (Mayo score of 3 on endoscopic appearance as shown in Fig. ) and histology excluded concomitant CMV colitis and confirmed Ulcerative Colitis flare. Nerve conduction study as in Table revealed Acute Motor Axonal Neuropathy type of Guillain–Barré Syndrome. CSF analysis confirmed protein cell dissociation with absent cells and protein of 62 mg/dl. Covid 19 infection was safely excluded as well as other viral aetiologies as CMV, EBV, HIV.
The relapse of Ulcerative Colitis was managed with intravenous hydrocortisone of 100 mg every 6 hourly, subcutaneous enoxaparin as for DVT prophylaxis, intravenous fluids and albumin. He showed a significant clinical improvement by day 3 along with a rapid decline of CRP being less than 45. Subsequently, he was managed with oral prednisolone and later on with sulfasalazine 1 g bd and azathioprine 50 mg daily. Since he had many poor prognostic factors such as young age of onset, extensive colitis requiring hospitalization, low albumin, high CRP, Tofacitinib 10 mg twice a day was commenced as he was not a suitable candidate for TNF alpha blockers due to concomitant GBS and other biological agents as vedolizumab or ustekinumab were not available.
Guillain–Barré Syndrome was managed with IV immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg for five days by which his lower limb proximal muscle weakness improved. His vital capacity and other vital parameters were monitored daily. He received regular chest and limb physiotherapy. By day five there was an improvement in the proximal lower limb weakness.His hematological and biochemical test results too improved as depicted in the following Table . He was followed up at the clinic and Ulcerative Colitis was in remission with Tofacitinib, prednisolone tapering regime, sulfasalazine and azathioprine.