A 52-year-old woman presented with complaints of dysphagia and hoarseness of voice in December 2003. She was diagnosed to have an advanced moderately differentiated oesophageal adenocarcinoma for which adjuvant chemotherapy was started. In May 2004, she underwent a transcervical oesophagectomy and gastric pull up followed by postoperative chemotherapy. The postoperative interval was uneventful. Staging CT scan performed in April 2005 revealed a 2 × 2 cm left adrenal mass. Half body positron emission tomography (PET) scan with 18F-2-fluoro-D-deoxyglucose (FDG) with CT anatomical image fusion performed in April 2005 and again in February 2006 revealed an increasing left adrenal mass measuring 3 × 3 cm in size. The left adrenal gland showed an intense abnormal FDG uptake . This metabolically active lesion was suggested to represent either a metastasis or possibly a primary adrenal tumour. FDG PET scan showed no other foci of metabolically active disease. The endocrine work-up showed that the adrenal tumour was hormonally non-functioning. Left adrenalectomy was performed and the specimen was sent for histopathological evaluation. Preoperative needle biopsy was not performed.
The adrenal gland measured 6 × 3.5 × 3.0 cm in size and weighed 23 grams. On slicing, the adrenal gland contained a mottled spherical lesion measuring 3 cm in diameter . Histopathological examination revealed a well circumscribed tumour composed of clear cells arranged in a nesting pattern, separated by thin fibrovascular stroma. Compressed normal adrenal gland parenchyma is seen at the periphery . There was no evidence of necrosis, mitosis or nuclear pleomorphism. The tumour cells stained for Inhibin, Melan A, Calretinin and Neuron Specific Enolase and are negative for Chromogranin, Neurofilament and S100 protein. The features were consistent with an adrenocortical adenoma. In addition, the adenoma showed multiple deposits of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . The neoplastic glands stained for AE1/AE3, Cytokeratin 7, Cytokeratin 20 and Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). The overall features were consistent with metastasis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, from a known primary in oesophagus, to an adrenocortical adenoma.
The follow-up of the patient was uneventful for 6 months following surgery.