A 67-year-old woman was scheduled for cataract surgery under general anesthesia. Her only medical history was of arterial hypertension for 25 years that was treated with nifedipine 40 mg/day. The choice of general anesthesia was a request from the patient, as she was too anxious for a topic anesthesia. After induction of anesthesia with propofol 150 mg, sufentanyl 15 mcg and cisatracrium 8 mg, oral intubation was performed without difficulty (Cormack 1) using a 6.5 cuffed preformed orotracheal tube (MALLINCKRODT®, Hazelwood, USA) without stylet. The cuff was accidentally overinflated with 20 ml of air. The first obtained cuff pressure was 90 mmHg. The cuff was immediately partially deflated until obtain a pressure of 25 mmHg. The cuff pressure was then monitored during all the surgical procedure. Anesthesia was maintained with sufentanyl and sevoflurane. The entire surgery lasted approximately 40 min. Four hours after extubation, the anesthesiologist was requested because the patient had suddenly developed subcutaneous emphysema of the facial, bilateral laterocervical and upper anterior chest. She had chest pain but no dyspnoea. The chest X-ray did not present any abnormal signs. The results of the arterial blood gas were pH = 7.37 PCO2 = 40.9 mmHg PO2 = 69.2 mmHg HCO3 = 23 mmHg and SpO2 = 93%. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed severe and diffuse soft tissues emphysema from the anterior thoracic region to the neck , mediastinal emphysema, both anterior and posterior , and a slightly irregular right lateral outline of the trachea at its medial-distal third . No pneumothorax was observed. Traumatic TR was suspected, and emergency tracheobronchial fiberendoscopy confirmed the diagnosis. It showed a posterior tracheal transmural rupture 4 cm long and located 2.5 cm above the carina, that opened in inspiration . Thoracic surgical opinion was that it could be a typically lesion of overinflation tracheal cuff. The location of the lesion and the features of the patient favoured conservative treatment with antibiotic cover (cephalosporin and aminoglycoside) and monitoring in the intensive care unit. Mechanical ventilation, bilateral endobronchial intubation and surgery were available but not necessary. The patient improved, and three days later, the chest CT showed markedly less mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema. After height days, tracheal fiberendoscopy showed that the lesion was healing. After six more days in a general medical ward, the patient was discharged home in good condition, fourteen days after the initial injury.