A 17-year-old uneducated girl from poor socio-economic background residing in an overcrowded locality came to our OPD with a complaint of a lump on the right side of the neck in the supraclavicular region. She first noticed the swelling 4 months ago, which gradually increased in size without any pain. The detailed family history revealed that her mother suffered a case of pulmonary tuberculosis and was on anti-tubercular treatment. The patient had only been involved in household work without any engagement with pets. She was on mixed diet with normal appetite without any history of weight loss or fever. Clinical examination of the lump revealed a uniform non-tender, cystic swelling of around 5-6 cm with slight fluctuation as well in the right supraclavicular region .
There were no signs of erythema and echymosis. A presumptive diagnosis of tubercular cold abscess was made on the basis of her family history. Complete blood count was normal except for slight eosinophilia. Mantoux test was negative and chest radiograph was absolutely normal. Absolute eosinophil count was raised (850 cells/microlitre).
Ultrasonography of the neck showed a thick walled cystic lesion having internal septations and echoes with peripheral vascularity in the subcutaneous plane in the right supraclavicular region. Due to the USG findings, aspiration of the swelling was performed under aseptic conditions using an 18G needle. The aspirate in the syringe was clear watery fluid and was sent for cyto-chemical analysis. The fluid was reported to be acellular with some proteinaceous content. The swelling completely regressed after aspiration. Because of the clear fluid aspirate, the differential diagnosis of hydatid cyst was considered. Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed no abnormality.
On the 5th post aspiration day, the patient presented with a tense and tender swelling in the same region. Again aspiration was done and pus came out in the syringe. Despite all our aseptic precautions, the swelling got infected during the first aspiration. Intravenous antibiotics were initiated and contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the neck and thorax was planned. CECT showed a heterogen- eously enhancing lesion at the level of the thoracic inlet just posterior to the lateral aspect of the right clavicle. Medially the lesion was abutting and causing erosion of the transverse process of T1 vertebra and the first rib .
Posteriorly the lesion was abutting the scapula and subscapularis muscle with maintained fat planes. Overall CECT showed an infected nodal mass or complex cystic lesion. Bilateral lung fields were clear on CT. Surgical excision of the cyst was planned under general anaesthesia using supraclavicular skin crease incision. Surgical exposure revealed a thick walled cystic mass with numerous small lymph nodes and areas of fibrosis around it. The entirety of the mass was excised and sent for histopathology . Since we were keeping hydatid cyst as one of the our probable diagnosis, the wound was irrigated with hypertonic saline (20%) and betadine. Closure was done in three layers.
Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis for hydatid cyst by showing the presence of three classical layers: the innermost germinal layer, middle laminar membrane, and outermost thick pericyst . During the post-operative period, Albendazole 400mg/day was given for 2 months and the patient was regularly followed up without any signs of recurrence.