A 36-year-old woman with no past medical history presented at the hospital with a mass on her right thigh that had increased in size over 2 months. The patient complained of discomfort and swelling of her right lower leg and mild claudication (Stage II in Rutherford classification), which were aggravated after exercise. Physical examination revealed a palpable, pulsating mass on her right thigh. The patient’s vital signs were stable; blood pressure was 119/68 mmHg and heart rate was 79 b.p.m.
The patient had no history of trauma in her right leg. She started playing golf 3 months prior with over 2 h of hard training daily. She noticed the right leg was swollen and uncomfortable when wearing tight pants from 2 months before her visit. Due to no improvement of the symptoms, she visited the clinic of anaesthesiology and pain medicine. The doctor performed radiographical examination of her right leg but found no abnormality and, therefore, prescribed physical massage therapy twice a week. As there was no significant improvement in the symptoms, she visited an alternative medicine clinic and was treated with acupuncture therapy and extracorporeal shock wave therapy on the right leg. This resulted in worsening of the symptoms. Finally, hospital bed-side ultrasonography enabled the detection of a 3.4-cm sized SFA aneurysm .
Angiography with computed tomography on her lower extremities revealed a 4.3-cm by 3.3-cm sized aneurysm at the right mid-to-distal SFA . Aortic angiography with computed tomography and brain angiography with magnetic resonance imaging did not show any aneurysmal change in other arteries.
As for the aetiology of her condition, the patient had no risk factors for SFA aneurysm. The patient was a never smoker and had no previous medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or hyperlipidaemia. The patient had no history of infection including syphilis or tuberculosis, with negative results for rapid plasma regain test or interferon gamma release assay. The antinuclear test was also negative.
Invasive peripheral angiography revealed a true aneurysm of SFA, and a covered stent graft (LIFESTREAM®, diameter 7 mm, length 58 mm, C.R. BARD, Inc., NJ, USA) was implanted, followed by adjuvant ballooning with a 7-mm sized balloon (MUSTANGTM, Boston Scientific, MA, USA) . The final angiography revealed good positioning of the stent graft with no endovascular leakage. The procedure ended without any complications, and the patient was discharged with a course of dual antiplatelet medication. After discharge, the patient is followed for >3 months without complications.