A 49-year-old male patient presented to the emergency room with eyestrain and a foreign body sensation in the eye after overhead drilling without wearing protective glasses. The patient suspected a corneal foreign body. During the eye examination conjunctival hyperemia in the right eye was observed as well as corneal deposits in both eyes . No subjective visual impairment was reported nor any known ophthalmologic disorders or eye injuries in the past. The patient reported hypothyroidism, which was treated with L-thyroxine. He was on no additional medication, and apart from hypothyroidism, the medical history was unremarkable. Particularly, no weight loss or chronic infections were reported. Serum electrolytes, liver enzymes, hemoglobin concentration, platelets and white blood cell counts, lactate dehydrogenase as well as renal function as determined by the estimated glomerular filtration rate and serum creatinine levels were normal. Urine dipstick, sediment, and proteinuria were not performed initially. Cystinosis, which often presents with corneal deposits, could be ruled out via measurement of cystine content of peripheral blood leukocytes, which was only slightly elevated at 0,3 μmol/g protein (< 0,2 μmol/g protein). A molecular analysis showed no mutation in the CTNS-gene. Serum electrophoresis revealed a mildly elevated gamma globulin fraction of 19% (11.1 – 18.8%) with an extra peak within the fraction. For a more detailed evaluation, an immunofixation of the serum and urine and a serum free light chain assay were ordered. Immunoglobulins G1, G2, G3 in the serum were elevated as well as kappa light chains with 28.6 mg/l (3.3–19.4 mg/l) with a pathologic kappa/lambda ratio of 2.38 (0.26–1.65; range for normal renal function). Bone-lesions were ruled out by whole-body computed tomography. In a synopsis of these findings, MGUS was diagnosed. No bone marrow biopsy was performed at this time so that a differentiation between smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM) and MGUS could not be made. The patient was discharged from the hospital. Regular hematologic follow-ups were scheduled.
Four years later the patient was admitted with increasing proteinuria on a regular follow-up visit. He reported no additional symptoms, particularly, no edema. Renal function and serum electrolytes did not show any relevant abnormalities (see Supplemental Table ). Free kappa light chains had increased compared to measurements 4 years ago to 60.6 mg/l (3.3–19.4 mg/l) with a pathologic ratio kappa/lambda of now 4.01 (0.26–1.65). Proteinuria of 1203 mg/g creatinine (< 70 mg/g creatinine) with albuminuria of 972 mg/g creatinine (< 20 mg/g creatinine) was present. An elaborate workup of a potential Fanconi syndrome was not conducted, dip stick analysis, however, ruled out overt glycosuria, and there was no hypophosphatemia, hypouricemia, nor features consistent with renal tubular acidosis. On ultrasound examination, the kidneys were of normal size with regular parenchymal structure and unobstructed. To elucidate the cause of proteinuria, an ultrasound-guided transcutaneous renal biopsy was performed. Pathologic examination revealed severe light chain podocytopathy, focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), and minor light chain proximal tubulopathy (LCPT). Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for kappa light chains without amyloidosis-type amorphous deposits upon Congo red staining. There was no staining for lambda light chains . Podocytopathy was confirmed by staining with methylene-azure-blue . Proximal light chain tubulopathy was confirmed by scarce crystalline inclusions like those much abundant in the podocytes. They were visible in the semi-thin sections stained with methylene-azure-blue and confirmed by electron microscopy as intralysosomal crystals . No fibrils were seen. FSGS was judged to be secondary to the light chain podocytopathy.
During the course of the disease, bone marrow biopsy was performed and revealed 10% bone marrow plasma cells. According to the revised 2017 IKMG criteria, smouldering myeloma with renal complications as in this case should be classified as MRGS to justify cytotoxic therapy . First and second line therapies with bortezomib/dexamethasone and lenalidomide/dexamethasone did not achieve a lasting reduction in proteinuria while free kappa light chains remained fairly low. Ultimately, lytic bone lesions were detected on a routine CAT-scan, and multiple myeloma was diagnosed. The patient is currently scheduled for high dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation.