A 55-year-old Caucasian German man with known ischemic heart disease presented in our emergency room, with an acute inferior myocardial ST-elevation infarction. Three years before stenoses of the proximal left anterior descending and the proximal right coronary artery were treated by PCI and implantation of two bare metal stents, followed by PCI and implantation of a sirolimus-eluting stent (Cypher®) of an In-stent restenosis in the right coronary artery one year later. Afterwards no relevant cardiovascular events or hospitalizations occurred until the current admission. Clopidogrel (75 mg/d) was withdrawn 12 months after implantation of the sirolimus-eluting stent, while aspirin (100 mg/d) was continued. Known and treated cardiovascular risk factors were hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and diabetes mellitus.
As hobby beekeeper the patient was used to bee stings and never reported of any related symptoms, except local reactions. One hour before admission he was stung by 5 wasps. Just a few minutes after being stung he started complaining of chest pain and called an emergency physician. ECG revealed an acute myocardial infarction with inferior ST-segment-elevation , blood pressure was 140/85 mmHg, heart rate was 59/minute. The patient showed no signs of anaphylaxis or shock, neither any other complains. Aspirin (500 mg) and heparin (5000 IU) had been given by the emergency physician, chest pain improved after treatment with morphine.
Immediately after admission to the emergency room, coronary angiogram was performed showing a thrombosis in the two year old sirolimus-eluting stent of the right coronary artery occluding the vessel sub-totally. PCI was successfully performed with good angiographic result . Therapy with tirofibane (Aggrastat®, MSD, Germany) was started during intervention in a weight adjusted dose and had been continued for 24 hours. 600 mg clopidogrel were admitted following PCI, oral therapy was continued with 75 mg/day. Post interventional clinical course was uneventful, the patient recovered quickly, echocardiography showed left ventricular function within normal limits (fractional shortening 34%) without any regional wall-motion disturbances. The patient was discharged 6 days after myocardial infarction on a regime of aspirin, clopidogrel, bisoprolol, ramipril and simvastatin.