The patient was a 28-year-old man who presented with a 2-week history of subtle personality changes, expressive aphasia, and severe headaches with nausea and vomiting. Imaging revealed a large mass in the left frontal lobe with significant surrounding vasogenic edema . He underwent gross total resection and pathology was consistent with a high grade neuroepithelial tumor with brisk mitotic activity and necrosis . The tumor was found to be IDH1 and TP53 mutant by amplicon-based next generation sequencing (NGS) targeting the hotspot regions of 27 cancer associated genes (not including ATRX), and had monosomy 1 and 19q loss by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array . A diagnosis of anaplastic oligodendroglioma was favored based on histologic appearance of the majority of the tissue with features suggestive of an oligodendroglioma in addition to preserved ATRX immunoreactivity, and atypical alterations in chromosomes 1 and 19. Treatment options were discussed including participation in the CODEL trial (NCT00887146), but ultimately started standard of care treatment with radiation therapy with plan for adjuvant procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy following radiation. Unfortunately, after resection and prior to starting radiation he developed somnolence, an intense headache, and diplopia. MRI of the brain revealed evidence of tumor regrowth in the original location and signs of impending herniation. He was started on dexamethasone and underwent emergent surgical decompression with tumor debulking. Pathology was again consistent with a high-grade IDH1-mutant glioma. His symptoms improved and he received intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) with a cumulative dose of 5940 cGy over 33 fractions. MGMT promoter methylation was tested upon recurrence and was found to be present.
Approximately two weeks after completing IMRT he experienced two focal seizures with secondary generalization resulting in right hemiparesis. Repeat MRI of the brain showed evidence of disease progression with interval development of a new enhancing lesion outside the radiation field involving the paramedian left parietal-occipital lobe extending to the superior surface of the left cerebellar tentorium . Due to newly reported low back pain, he underwent MRI of the spine which demonstrated extensive bony metastases. A whole-body 18Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET-CT scan was obtained and revealed innumerable hypermetabolic lesions throughout the patient’s body including lytic lesions virtually involving his entire skeleton and innumerable lesions in the liver, right lung, and left kidney. His clinical condition rapidly deteriorated and developed a clinical picture consistent with tumor lysis syndrome. Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated on admission at 5206 U/L (normal range 118–273 U/L) and increased to a peak level of 15,080 U/L. He became hyperuricemic (peak of 12.7 mg/dL; normal range 3.5–7.2 mg/dL) and hypophosphatemic (1.1 mg/dL; normal range 2.7–4.5 mg/dL) with evidence of acute kidney injury (creatinine from 0.6 mg/dL on admission to a peak of 1.9 mg/dL). Rasburicase was administered to treat his hyperuricemia. A biopsy of one of the liver masses in the right hepatic lobe (3.6 cm) was performed to rule out the presence of an independent neoplastic process given the very unusual aggressiveness of the cancer and widespread metastatic disease. The tissue sample showed prominent cellular necrosis with rare clusters of neoplastic cells, IDH1-mutant protein positive, consistent with metastasis of the patient’s known brain primary.
In addition to tumor lysis, the patient rapidly became thrombocytopenic (179 K/cu mm on admission to a nadir of 35 K/cu mm by day seven) and anemic (14.5 g/dL to a nadir of 5.8 g/dL), likely due to bone marrow infiltration of his cancer. Different chemotherapy regimens were considered and the choice was for temozolomide, as it is typically effective in diffuse gliomas and is able to cross the blood-brain barrier with even higher concentrations systemically. Five doses were planned (150 mg/m2) but the patient was only able to receive two administrations.
Unfortunately, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate. He developed worsening renal failure, hypotension, and acute respiratory failure. He was intubated and mechanically ventilated, requiring vasopressor support. The patient developed cardiac arrest, was resuscitated and eventually transitioned to comfort measures. He was terminally extubated and passed away. An autopsy was declined.
Further analysis of the patient’s tumor tissue using a targeted, capture-based next generation sequencing panel covering the full coding regions of 644 cancer associated genes showed the presence of a number of additional genetic alterations , including an ATRX missense mutation, and amplification of MYCN, MET, and CDK4. There were no mutations in CIC or FUBP1. Other chromosomal variations, including gain of 7p and loss of 2q, 10p, 11p, 21q, and whole chromosomes 12 and 14 were also noted (Additional file : Table and Figure S3).