An 83-year-old Japanese woman underwent laparoscopic low anterior rectal resection accompanied by bilateral lymph node dissection for rectal cancer without neoadjuvant chemotherapy at a domestic general hospital in June 2018. Preoperative diagnostic imaging that included chest to pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed no high-density spots in the rectal tumor and no distant metastasis. The histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was rectal adenocarcinoma, T4aN0M0, stage IIB, consisting of high-to-low differentiation grade. After the surgery, she presented with anastomotic leakage and underwent temporary ileostomy; the leakage healed 3 months after the rectal resection. Considering the tumor stage and the patient’s advanced age, adjuvant chemotherapy was not applied. She underwent closure of the ileostoma in January 2019. In July 2019, she was diagnosed with a metastatic brain lesion 20 mm in size on the left prefrontal cortex with cerebral edema and a metastatic right axillary lymph node enlarged to 20 mm in size without small high-density spots by CT (Supplement ). She was treated with gamma-knife therapy with a total of 20 Gy of irradiation, and the metastatic brain tumor and cerebral edema disappeared. Because of the recurrence, the previous surgeon reconsidered the policy for adjuvant chemotherapy and applied chemotherapy consisting of oral S1 (composed of tegafur and gimeracil, the latter being an inhibitor of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase) for the metastatic right axillary lymph node in August 2019. The patient moved to the city of Tsuruga with her family and was referred to the Tsuruga Medical Center in October 2019. She presented a round-shaped, swollen solitary lymph node in the right axillary region that was not fixed to the adjacent structures. The serum levels of epithelial tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 12.5 ng/ml), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9; 187.7 U/ml), and cancer antigen 125 (CA125; 41 U/ml), were elevated. Plain CT (64-row multidetector CT, Aquilion, TSX-101A, Toshiba, Japan) showed a solitary swollen lymph node in the right axillary region, 37 × 33 mm, with small high-density spots in the peripheral region . We performed lymph node resection under the tentative diagnosis of right axillary lymph node metastasis with calcified deposits from rectal cancer in November 2019. The patient showed an uneventful recovery, and chemotherapy consisting of tegafur-uracil/calcium folinate (UFT/UZEL) was initiated 10 days after the operation; she was discharged on the thirteenth postoperative day. She was admitted to the internal medicine section of our hospital for acute pneumonia in January 2020. Chest CT revealed acute pneumonia and swollen right axillary lymph nodes (42 × 34 mm and 24 × 18 mm in size) without high-density spots (Supplement A, B). The pneumonia progressed rapidly, and the patient died 4 days later. An autopsy was not carried out because her family did not provide consent.
The rectal tumor was cut and opened. The resected specimen consisted of a polypoid tumor accompanied by an ulcer with a fungating polypoid mass, measuring 48 × 46 mm and occupying two-thirds of the circumference of the lower to middle rectum . The distal margin was 10 mm.
The primary tumor was mainly composed of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, and in a portion of the tumor, well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and poorly differentiated carcinoma components were found . Scattered lymphatic and venous invasion and perineural invasion were noted. Ossified areas were not seen in the primary tumor. In the lymph nodes resected with the primary rectal tumor, metastasis was not found.
The axillary lymph node contained metastatic adenocarcinoma that was D-PAS and alcian blue positive; the primary lesion also stained positive, but there was no retention of mucin in the interstitial tissue . Most portions of the lymph node were occupied by metastatic tumor cells. Extensive necrosis was observed in the central region of the node and was accompanied by interstitial fibrosis; the metastasized tumor cells were directly adjacent to necrosis . The metastatic adenocarcinoma was a poorly to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with a trabecular and cribriform pattern. In the peripheral region of the lymph node, four small ossified lesions were found, and the metastasized tumor cells were directly adjacent to ossified nests . Osteocytes were observed inside the osseous matrix; however, osteoblast-like cells were not found around the heterotopic osseous lesion , and hematopoietic fatty marrow was not observed.
Staining with Azan revealed collagen-rich stroma in the metastatic lesion . Immunostaining for neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin A and synaptophysin showed negative staining in the metastatic lesion as well as in the primary lesion. (The immunostaining protocol is described in Supplement .) Positive staining for caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2) was observed in both the primary tumor and metastatic lymph node , suggesting that the lymph node lesion was a metastasis of rectal cancer. The tumor cells were negative for CD56 (an osteoblast marker) and CK7 . Cells positive for CD68 (a macrophage cell marker) were observed around the osseous lesion . CD68-positive cells were also seen in the primary tumor .
Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) was observed to be weakly positive in the tumor cells in the metastatic lymph node , the luminal membrane of the primary tumor , and adjacent normal mucosa ; the primary tumor was judged to be negative for BMP-2. The metastatic tumor cells were also positive for osteonectin , osteocalcin , cytokeratin AE1/AE3 , transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) , transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene protein 2 (Gli2) , and phosphorylated Smad2/3 (pSmad2/3) but were negative for nestin , murine double minute 2 (MDM2, data not shown), and cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34, data not shown). Figure o showed AE1/AE3-positive osteocytes in the HO lesion. BMP-2 and TGF-β1 expression was observed in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells, whereas Gli2 and pSmad2/3 expression was observed in the nucleus of the tumor cells. The expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was observed in fibroblasts surrounding the osseous nests .