A 23 year old Caucasian American female with a known diagnosis of XLHR presented with symptomatic hypercalcemia and tertiary HPT. As a child, she had been treated with high dose phosphate and calcitriol supplementation which resulted in renal insufficiency and subsequent hypertension. Recently, she developed bone pain in her back and lower extremities, with increasing fatigue. She was found to have a calcium level of 10.7 mg/dl (normal range 8.5-10.5) with a PTH of 997 pg/ml (normal range 12-65) and was diagnosed with tertiary HPT.
Additional past medical history was significant for a left femoral osteotomy performed for bowing deformity at the age of eight. She underwent a Cesarean section when she was 20, and her pregnancy was complicated by pre-eclampsia. She had no prior fractures or kidney stones.
Her medications included labetalol, losartan and 500 mg oral phosphorus. She had been taking 0.25 mcg calcitriol daily, which was recently discontinued. Her family history was significant for multiple family members with XLHR , including her 3 year old son.
On physical examination, she was 162.5 cm in height, 85.3 kg (BMI 31.5). Heart rate was 72 beats per minutes and blood pressure was 150/110 mmHg. She had no band keratopathy. Her thyroid was normal in size with no dominant nodules and she had no cervical lymphadenopathy. She had bilateral bowing of the lower extremities. Serum calcium and PTH levels were 10.7 mg/dl and 1126 pg/ml, respectively. The remainder of her laboratory values were within normal limits including phosphate 2.7 mg/dl, 25-hydroxyvitamin D 25 pg/ml, 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D 22 pg/ml, TSH 3.161 µIU/ml, and T4 7.8 µg/dl. A recent bone density study demonstrated low normal values of bone density for her age.
Preoperative evaluation included Technetium-99 m Sestamibi SPECT imaging as well as a complete thyroid and parathyroid ultrasound. The Sestamibi scan showed focal intense tracer uptake on delayed images in the right tracheoesophageal groove, as well as increased tracer uptake suggestive of an enlarged left sided gland . Ultrasound revealed a normal appearing thyroid gland, with bilateral enlarged superior parathyroid glands in the tracheoesophageal groove. Neither inferior parathyroid gland was visualized .
A bilateral parathyroid exploration with subtotal parathyroidectomy was planned. Baseline IOPTH was 1298 pg/ml (normal <65 pg/ml). Intraoperative findings correlated with preoperative imaging, with two large superior parathyroid glands and moderately enlarged inferior parathyroid glands . Approximately 100 mg parathyroid tissue was sent for cryopreservation, and approximately 40 mg of the most normal-appearing lower parathyroid was left as an intact remnant. Ten minutes after removal of the last specimen, the PTH level was 114 pg/ml. Of note, the surgical pathology report (supplemental figure) describes all four parathyroid glands as “enlarged and hypercellular”.
As anticipated, she developed symptomatic postoperative hypocalcemia and was initially maintained on an intravenous calcium drip. Her calcium level nadir was 5.7 mg/dl, but slowly corrected over 72 hours to 8.7 mg/dl. She was also treated with oral calcium (2 g calcium carbonate four times daily for 72 hours, then three times daily) and vitamin D supplementation (calcitriol 0.75 mcg daily). She was discharged on postoperative day six with no symptomatic hypocalcemia. Two weeks post-operatively, her calcium level was 9.3 mg/dl, and she had complete resolution of all preoperative symptoms. At follow-up both six and ten months later she remained asymptomatic and her calcium and phosphate levels were normal (9.0 and 2.8 mg/dL, respectively), suggesting no recurrence of tertiary hyperparathyroidism. She had a mild elevation of her PTH (136 mg/dL) in the setting of chronic renal insufficiency (creatinine 1.9).