A 66-year-old woman was generally well without known systemic disease or operation history. She visited emergency department due to post-menopausal vaginal bleeding for days. Transvaginal ultrasound revealed a pelvic mass about 7 cm in diameter, and computed tomography (CT) reported late-stage cervical cancer and bilateral hydroureteronephrosis from possible bladder invasion. The patient also complained of decreased urine output and her serum creatinine increased from 1.2 to 2.2 mg/dL. After admission, cystoscopy revealed tumor invasion into the bladder trigone and both ureteric orifices could not be identified. Biopsy of bladder trigone later proven to be invasive squamous cell carcinoma favoring cervical origin, which indicated a Stage IVA cervical cancer. As retrograde insertion of ureteric stent was not feasible, bilateral PCN with 6 Fr. Cope catheters and subsequent antegrade placement of 4.7 Fr. Double-J ureteric stents was performed by the radiologist under CT-guidance . Bilateral supracostal approach of PCN was implemented to access more dilated renal calyces in higher-positioned kidneys, and antegrade ureteric stenting was performed 2 days later after hemostasis and verifying the patency of PCN by nephrostogram. In follow-up images the right PCN catheter was found to be entangled with the ipsilateral ureteric stent, and thus the patient underwent cystoscopy again during removal of the bilateral PCN catheters to confirm that the bilateral ureteric stents were in place .
Four days after PCN catheter removal, the patient complained of severe right back pain accompanied by oliguria and dyspnea. A physical examination revealed right costovertebral angle tenderness. A chest CT showed the tip of the ureteric stent within the right basal pleural cavity, indicating intrathoracic migration of right ureteric stent which resulted in massive right urinothorax . Reposition of the right ureteric stent was initially planned with cystoscope. However, only the left ureteric stent remained within the bladder and neither the right ureteric stent nor the ureteric orifice could be identified. This finding was compatible with upward migration of the right ureteric stent and it was not possible to perform a ureteroscopy. A thoracic surgeon was consulted for thoracoscopic management, and the intrathoracic ureteric stent was removed from the pleural space along with more than 2600 mL of bloody effusion. A chest tube was placed for drainage. The chest tube was removed a week later after resolution of the patient’s pleural effusion. Right PCN was performed again for persistent right hydronephrosis. The patient was then discharged after regaining normal renal function with right PCN and a left ureteric stent in place.